Pulpit-Popery, TRUE POPERY: BEING AN ANSWER To a BOOK Entitled,
PULPIT-SAYINGS: AND IN VINDICATION OF THE APOLOGY for the PULPITS, AND THE
STATER of the CONTROVERSY against the REPRESENTER.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
THE whole Controversy is resolved into the Author himself. Page 1. The
Unreasonableness of charging Misrepresentation on the Pulpits. p. 2. None more
guilty of Misrepresentation than those of the Church of Rome, and our Author in
particular. p. 3, 4. Our Author's mistake in framing Characters. p. 6.
Character I. About the Popish-Plot. p. 7.
Character II. About the Murder of K. Charles the 1st, with an Answer to the
Challenge. p. 8.
Character III. About the Fire of London. ibid.
Character IV. Of Popish Emissaries. p. 9.
Character V. Of the Divisions and Fanaticism in the Church of Rome. p. 12, 15.
Character VI. Of a proper Propitiatory Sacrifice in the Sacrament. p. 17. Mr.
Thorndike Vindicated. p. 18. Of a Sacramental Presence, and breaking of a true
Body. p. 20.
Character VII. Popery puts out the understanding of those of her Communion. p.
21. The Difference betwixt the Severity of the Church of England and Rome. p.
23. The Absurdity of Auricular Confession. p. 24. In Transubstantiation they
renounce their Senses. p. 25. The Popish-Plea, That Hearing is for
Transubstantiation. ibid. The Pope alone cannot Err, and all others cannot but
Err. p. 26.
Character VII. Of Praying and Prophesying in an Unknown Tongue. p. 27. Of the
Sense of Prophesying. p. 29. Of the ill Use made of Auricular Confession. p. 30.
Character IX. Of Saints Canonized for Money and Treason. ibid. Of Praying to a
Crucifix. p. 31. Auricular Confession tends to the debauching Laity and Clergy.
And of Confession in the Church of England. p. 32.
Character X. The Churches Interest, the Center of their Religion. p. 33.
Character XI. Of the Legends in the Church of Rome. p. 34. Of the turning
Sacraments into Shows. p. 37. Of Preaching Purgatory instead of Repentance. p.
38. And Faction instead of Faith. p. 39. Of the Preachers in the Holy League.
p. 40.
Character XII. Of Alms in the Church of Rome. p. 40. Of Exorcisms. p. 41. Of
the Difficulty of knowing the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. p. 42. Of
compounding for unforsaken sins, p. 43, 45. Dr. T. Translation of Poenitentia
Vindicated, p. 44. Indulgences for Thousands of years to come, p. 46.
Indulgences not a Relaxation of Canonical penances, p. 48.
Character XIII. If a Papist be false and deceitful, yet Euge, etc. p. 49. No
man can be a Papist but he that is blinded by Education, etc. p. 50. About
Picturing the Divinity, ibid. Of Praying to an Image, p. 52. Of Worshipping
Bread and Wine as God, p. 53. Of the Passion of Christ taking away the guilt
and not the punishment, ibid. Of the Non-necessity of Repentance till the point
of death, ibid. Bare saying of Prayers without attendance to what they say, is
sufficient to Divine Acceptance, p. 54. Of Prayers in an Unknown Tongue, and
the Translation of the Mass Book, p. 55.
Character XIV. They take away the second Commandment, p. 56. It Is not
necessary to be sorry for the sin, but the penance, p. 57. An Indulgence serves
instead of a Godly life, ibid. Auricular Confession the great Intelligencer, p.
58. Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, ibid. They must submit to an Infallible
Judge, so as to believe Virtue to be bad, and Vice good, p. 59. Their Clergy
must lead a single life, whether honestly or no, it makes no matter, p. 60. Of
the several Artifices used by our Author, p. 64. Of his Reply to the Answerer
of his Reflections, p. 65. His appeal to the Lives of Papists amongst us,
showed to be impertinent, ibid. A further Account of his Artifice, p. 67. His
Answers all along insufficient, p. 70. Of his insincerity in the offers he
makes to receive us into his Church upon the Representing Terms, and detesting
some Principles and Practices charged upon the Church of Rome, p. 71, 72.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TRansubstantiation contrary to Scripture; or the Protestant's Answer to the
Seeker's Request.

The Protestant's Answer to the Catholic Letter to the Seeker: Or, a
Vindication of the Protestant's Answer, to the Seeker's Request.

An Apology for the Pulpits; being in Answer to a late Book, Entitled, Good
Advice to the Pulpits. Together with an Appendix, containing a Defense of Dr.
Tenison's Sermon about Alms; in a Letter to the Author of the Apology.

ERRATA.
Page 22. l. 5. r. 15. p. 33. l. 35. r. in terminis, p. 41. l. 6. a bringing.
p. 43. l. 2. r. says he.

Pulpit-POPERY, True POPERY: IN ANSWER TO Pulpit-Sayings.
WHEN the Author of the Pulpit-Sayings first appeared in the World, he
undertook to show what the Papist is not, or how he is Misrepresented; and what
he really is, and how he is to be Represented. The first, he tells us, Papist.
Misrepr. pref. Doctr. and Pract. p. 11.
He exactly described according to the Apprehension he had, when a Protestant:
And the latter he represents according to his own private Opinion, when a
Papist, as he is told. So that in the issue the whole is resolved into himself.
Thus it was, and thus he still maintains the Humor; for what are the
Characters he gives of a Papist, but for the most part, the fruits of his own
Imagination? And what does he bring to confirm it, but, it is the Papist I am?
What course does he take to confute his Adversaries, to confront their
Authorities, but, if that be a Papist, I am none, Pulpit-Sayings, p. 55. Epist.
to the Reader.
I profess I renounce such Popery. Nay, as if he acted sub sigillo Piscatoris,
and had by Deputation the Authority of the Chair, to determine and renounce;
and the Keys of St. Peter to bind and loose, to let in and out of their
Communion, as he sees fit; he assures us, that whoever will be a good Papist,
Ibid.
must disclaim every point that is here set down by the Pulpits as Articles of
Religion. And again the Papist Represented I own it, it is the Papist I am; P.
55.
and whoever assents to that Character in that very Form [of the Papist
Represented] has done what is required, as to those particulars, to be made a
Member of our Communion.

So that if I declare, I profess I renounce on one side; and I am, I do own, on
the other, is sufficient to determine the Point, and will be taken for an
Answer by his Adversaries, there is no more to be said.

But though our Author may suitably enough to the temper of the Church he is
now of, be thus assuming and dogmatical, and may for ought we know, thus
expound, transform, and determine with Allowance; yet there is no reason why he
should prescribe to the Church he has forsaken, and that his Apprehensions be
taken for the Apprehensions of all of that Communion. This he now thinks a
little unreasonable, and could be content for once to own it, if his present
Undertaking be allowed to come in the place of it. P. 55.
For thus he says, If any make Exceptions against the Character of a Papist
thus disguised, as 'twas drawn there, [in the Papist Misrepresented] I Will never
quarrel upon that score, let that be razed out. --

But however, tho he thus drops his own Apprehensions, (as well as he had his
37. Points of Representation) and at once gives away half his Labor; yet like
a true Master of Defense, he mounts the Stage again, and renews the Fight; for
by the help of some Pulpit-Sayings, he thinks he has given life to his
otherwise dying Cause. Let that, says he, be razed out, and these others take
place, which it is likely are more Authentic. What! more Authentic than his
own Apprehensions! To the Reader.
O yes, for its such a Popery, and such a Papist as is described by Ministers
in their Pulpits. -- In which there are many things charged upon them, without
either Truth and Sincerity; and consequently, it is not without grounds they
complain of Misrepresenting.

1. But why the Pulpits? Are not the same things in Books of Controversy; and
are they not there more fully explained and debated? Thither therefore in
reason we ought to be sent to understand how the Protestants Represent the
Papist. But then our Author had not had the opportunity of exclaiming against
those high Places (as he Phrases it) from whence, it seems, they have received
no little Damage; or which is worse, he had been engaged in a Dispute, which is
not his Province, as he tells us ( p. 28.)

2. But if some Pulpits have misrepresented them in some cases, what is that to
the Pulpits in general? What is that to our Church? He has been already told,
Doctr. and Pract. p 9, 10.
that we are far from defending such Misrepresentations, if such there be. That
which we adhere to, is the Doctrine and Sense of our Church, as it is by Law
established; and what Representations are made agreeable thereto, we undertake
to defend, and no other. Can he think we are any more concerned in the mistakes
or infirmities of others, then he thinks himself to be in the loose and
extravagant opinions of their own Doctors, Schoolmen, To the Reader; and p. 56.
and Casuists? And is it not reasonable he should allow the same Law to others
he is forced so frequently to plead in his own defense?

3. But further, supposing that some of the Pulpits have Misrepresented the
Papist in some points, and in those points he disclaims; yet are there no
points besides they differ in? And if these were set aside, would the Church of
England and Rome be one? What thinks he of the many points I find in the same
Sermons he quotes, that he civilly passes by? Such as these, That the Church of
Rome is alone the Catholic Church out of which is no Salvation. That the Pope
is the Universal Head of that Church. That that Church is Infallible? What
thinks he of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Communion in
one kind, Divine Service and Scriptures in an Unknown Tongue, Merit and Works
of Supererogation, the Worship of Images, Implicit Faith, Indulgences,
Deposition of Princes, etc.? Lastly, What thinks he of the great point he all
along omitted (as he is charged) that a Papist does not only believe the
Doctrines defined in the Council of Trent to be true, but also to be necessary
to Salvation? Doctr. and Pract. p. 12.
Are not these the Doctrines of the Church of Rome? And are not the Pulpits as
much employed in confuting these, as those of praying to Images, and putting
their trust in them, and the other Follies and Abominations (as he calls them)
charged on his Church? And do not the Protestants think as ill of those points
he owns, as of those he disclaims?

4. But how come they of the Church of Rome to start this charge of
Misrepresentation, who are of all Churches in the world the most guilty of it?
Or how comes our Author to continue it, who neither durst so much as vindicate
others or himself when convicted of it? The learned Author of the View entered
the Field, and threw down the Gantlet, View, p. 106. to 119.
but our Author fairly slinks aside, and leaves his Brethren to sink under the
imputation of the soulest Misrepresentations. P. 61.102, 103.
And this is not to be wondered at, when he has not one word of Reply to all
the Accusations of that kind there produced against himself. And yet to give a
further Specimen how far this disingenuous quality has prevailed upon his
temper, he still proceeds in the same course, and to be quit with the Pulpits,
which he says, are forward in making characters of the Papists, To the Reader.
he is as forward in making characters of the Pulpits. The business of so many
Pulpits [ten thousand, open every week he saith] is chiefly to make exceptions,
pick holes, quarrel, ridicule: and the more excellent they are at their work,
Pulpit Sayings, p. 10.
the more they gain upon their Auditory. And that he may not be wanting, he
will be at his Plots too, and follow what he calls Oat's Divine way of
Information. Good Advice to the Pulpits p. 67.
He had tried once before to form a design of this kind, when he would have
Sermons preached many years ago against Popery to contain severe reflections
upon his present Majesty. But that he was soon made sensible of, Apology for
the Pulpits, p. 3.
and has not a syllable to excuse. And yet he will be again at his Innuendo's,
for thus he lays the Scene, Methinks the Pulpits, says he, should be more
tender of their Sovereign than to venture upon the same Method (which he before
charges them with) with the Son, Pulpit Sayings, p. 43.
which proved so fatal to the Father, and dangerous to the Brother. But I fear
the excess of jealousy for their Religion, puts them upon being too bold with
their Prince; and that by a just judgment of Heaven, they are blindly
practicing the very principles they have so often charged upon the Papists,
making their Churches Interest the center of their Religion, Preaching Faction
instead of Faith, etc.

Such expressions as these are not thrown out at all adventure; and we may soon
guess what they tend to, and it is a fair warning.

Thus far for the Pulpits; but to show what a Talent he has at
Character-making, he will furnish us also with that of the true Son of the
Church of England, Page 6.
viz. A Genuine Son of the Church of England, is to have a good stock of this
implicit Faith by him, and to believe and speak, though he knows nothing at all.

Again, This is to the Protestant Tune, If a man cannot tell how to run down
Popery, though he knows nothing of it, he is no true Son of the Church of
England. So that quarrelling and ridiculing is the work it seems of the
Preachers, and a delight in it, the temper of their Auditors; and to speak all
at once, Ignorance and Arrogance, Slander and Impudence are in his opinion the
Ingredients of a true Son of the Church of England. This is the faithful
Representer, the soft Adviser, the prudent Cautioner, the impartial
Character-maker, the Preacher of Charity, the Detecter of Impostures and
disguisements, and the great undertaker of setting every thing upon its proper
Basis, and bringing it into its true place and order.

5. But what if after all, this Pulpit-Popery is true Popery; and that nothing
is charged upon them as a Principle, but what the Pulpits learned from
themselves?

But, says some Body, hold your hand, and make no such attempt, for can that be
done after all his Detestations, Renouncings, To the Reader.
Disclaimings, Abborrings, and Abominatings? Does not he declare that these
Doctrines as here set down by the Ministers, Page 54.
and charged upon the Papists, he not only abominates, but that if that so to
believe, be a Papist, he would be a Turk as soon as a Papist.

But these Rhodomantado's come so often in, that I perceive they are words of
course with him; and shall therefore file them up with his Anathema's in his
Papist Represented and Misrepresented, till I find due place for a further
Animadversion; and so pass on to the Examination of this his Vindication of his
Good Advice to the Pulpits. For the better grace of which his performance, he
has distributed his matter into fourteen Characters of a Pulpit-Papist.

But what is become of the former method observed in his Good Advice? What of
the five Cautions? What of the twenty-eight Assertions extracted out of the
Sermons, as instances of their foul Misrepresentations? Certainly had he in
earnest intended to have given a just Answer to his Adversary, or was conscious
to himself of having performed it, he would have kept as much as might be to
his former Method, which the Apologist carefully followed him in, that the
whole might lie fair before the Reader's eye, and he might lay his finger upon
the point in debate betwixt them. But that was not to his purpose; he thought
he might give the matter a more clever turn, if he slid off from his Cautions
and Assertions, and disposed the whole into Characters. Assertions are
dangerous points, and require proof and debate; and it would be expected the
matter should in that way be brought to an issue. But for Characters, a Writer
may go on eternally, it requires only a little skill in Representation, and the
work is done. Pulpit-Saying, Page 13.
And it requires but a spark of confidence to tell his Reader that he proceeds
to this Examen [of the Apology] in the Method of the Good Advice to the
Pulpits, and presently his Characters fall back into Cautions and Assertions,
by the Figure of making two things to be one, and of denying and affirming
without a contradiction. But if he will be at his Characters, how come
particular matters of Fact to belong to a Character? Or how is it that what
belongs to a particular fort, is applied to the whole? Would it not be very
ridiculous to describe a Papist after the way taken by our Author, and to tell
the world, A Papist is one that was engaged in an execrable Plot to take away
the Life of his late Majesty. Ibid. Character, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. p. 13, etc.
A Papist is one, that had a Hand in the Horrid Plot of the Murder of King
Charles the First. A Papist is one that fired London. A Papist is one that has
his Emissaries up and down to preach Schism and Sedition. A Papist is one,
What? why, the different Orders of Religion are so many Sects of Religion. And
yet, thus it must be, if Characters are Characters. Did ever the Pulpits talk
at this loose and senseless rate, so as to draw Characters from a particular
Fact? And might it not as well be said, A Papist is one that writes
Representations, and Good Advices, and Pulpit-Sayings? This is a way peculiar
to our Author, for ought I have observed, among Writers of Characters; and I Will
assure him he was very secure, when he offered this Proposal, P. 5.
Let them take this Pulpit-draught along with them, and compare it with all the
Papists they know, or can hear of; let them see, whether they answer that
Character. Would it not be more proper if we were to give the Character of a
Papist, and will proceed upon Particulars, to resolve them into a General, and
to see whether, for example, they have not such Principles in the Church of
Rome, as not only have put them upon, but do oblige them to some Practices too
near a kin to some of these before spoken of: And for an instance of which I
shall refer him to Doctrines and Practices, p. 102 and 163, and to a Papist not
Misrepresented, p. 49. Now the producing the Anathema's of his Church against
these Points, and an Authoritative Abrenunciation of them, would do more to
remove the occasion of our so many years Disturbances, To the Reader.
and to wipe off the Scandals urged against them from the Pulpit, or elsewhere,
than all the Tracts that he was published; and is as much a Satisfaction they
owe to the World, as any he would prescribe to the Pulpits in his first
Character: when we hear of this, I dare assure him there shall be no want in
the other. But however it is but reasonable to give him the hearing.

First Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
The Papists in the Year 1679. etc. were engaged in a Horrid Execrable Plot,
etc.

In these Colors, says he, were the Papists set out by the Pulpits. And why
not set out by the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament? Why not by the
Highest Courts of Judicature? Did the Pulpits take the Depositions and
Examinations? Did the Pulpits set forth Proclamations? Did the Pulpits pass
Votes, and make Acts, and sign Narratives? Did the Pulpits Try, Condemn, and
Execute? Did the Pulpits, lastly, ordain Fasts, and require public Solemnities
to be observed? Or are the Pulpits to enquire into all Facts, and to give no
Credit to the Reports, or no Obedience to the Orders of Superiors concerning
them? If this was the case of the Pulpits, then the Title of this his Chapter
would not be amiss; but he knows for what reasons it better deserves another;
and in reason ought to be the Character of a -- Papist.

Second Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
The Popish Jesuits had a hand in that horrid Plot of the Murder of King
Charles I. etc.

But if it were Popish Jesuits that were thus challenged by the Pulpits, then
why is the Title, the Character of a Pulpit-Papist? Since I hope all the
Practices of the Jesuits can no more be charged upon the Papist, than every
Papist will be content to be a Jesuit. And therefore it is very wide from the
Sayer's purpose, to show this to be impossible, because of the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commonalty, that fought and lost their Lives in Defense of his
Majesty. For it has been no strange thing for many of all Conditions to go one
way, and yet the Jesuit to go another. The times of Henry 3. and 4. of France,
will give us instances enough of this matter. I could wish that he had kept the
Challenge to himself, for having made it, he has made it necessary to answer
it. It Is this, The Challenge has been made to all sorts of Protestants, P. 16.
to produce even Ten Papists, I may say Two, that in all that Confusion of
Civil Wars, ever drew Sword against him. I shall not here offer him the
Instances of Capt. Tho. Preston, and Capt. Wright, mentioned in Foxes and
Firebrands, Fox's etc. Part 2. p. 88. and 91.
both because they served under Oliver; and also, because it is one of his
Street-Pamphlets (as he calls them) but shall lay before him undeniable
Authorities. Such is that of the Royal Martyr himself, who in a Declaration of
his, Exact. Collect. p. 647. Land. 1643.
says, All men know the great number of Papists which serve in their Army,
Commanders and others. We are confident a far greater number of that Religion
is in the Army of the Rebels than our own. The other shall be that of Rob.
Mentet de Salmonet, L'Histoire des Troubles de la Grand Bretagne, p. 165.
a Secular Priest, who in his History of the Troubles of England, says, That
at the Battle of Edgehill, several Priests were found slain on the Parliament
side: For although in their Declarations they called the King's Army, a Popish
Army, thereby to render it odious to the people; yet they had in their Army two
Companies of Walloons, and other Roman- Catholics. The Book perhaps may not
lie in every ones way; but the passage is transcribed into Sir William
Dugdale's View of the late Troubles in England, P. 564. An. 1642.

As for the Authority of the French- Preacher, let it be as it will; but I
think it would have been a greater satisfaction to the World, if they had
accepted his Challenge Printed and Reprinted, and questioned him for it when
alive, rather than after his death, to appeal to Protestants whether it be not
a Fable.

Third Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
The Papists were the Instruments in the Fire of London, etc.

This he charges upon the Preacher as an Aggravation of his Misrepresentation,
That he should vent this almost Twenty years after, [1683] when the whole
matter had been thoroughly considered: And tho there were no other grounds
whereon to build this charge, besides the clamor and affected jealousies of
the people, and the confession of a distracted man, whose Religion was not much
of any kind, but still professedly a Protestant; Yet upon these grounds, etc. I
am not so well acquainted with the History of this, as to know when this whole
matter was througly considered; And it is likely the Preacher was as ignorant as
I am: Nor do I know upon what grounds he proceeded; but tho it might be (as our
Author says) That the distracted Man's Religion was not much of any kind, yet
I have been assured upon good grounds, that he did not dye a Protestant.

Fourth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
The Papists have their Emissaries up and down to preach Schism and Sedition
into the Peoples ears. By such Arts as these, they insinuate themselves among
the poor deluded People of our separate Congregations, and joining with them in
their Clamours against the Church of England, crying it down for Superstitious,
and Popishly affected, they pass for gifted Brethren, and real Popery is
carried on by such Disguises.

Here our Author first of all inveighs against the thing, and then against the
Pulpits for charging it upon them. Here, says he, the Papists are set forth in
a Sermon before the Honorable the Judges, as great Hypocrites, Religious
Cheats and Impostors. -- A foul Crime! and if true, sufficient to cast the
Papists [he should say, such spiritual Factors] out of the number of
Christians; but if false, and not as here set out, as sufficient on the other
side, to bring the Pulpits under that as black Character of Misrepresenting.
This is indeed to come up to the point, and I shall readily close with him upon
it.

The Apologist to shorten his Work, and to take down the Confidence of the
Adviser without bearing too hard upon the Party, contented himself with
pointing his Adversary to three or four Authors for Information in this Case;
such as the Quaker Unmasked, the New Discovery, the false Jew, and Foxes and
Firebrands. Now to this he replies, Who would not have expected that the
Answerer would have spent a few Lines in making good such Authorities, and
proving them to be Authentic beyond Exception? -- And then after his manner,
breaks forth into a wonderful Exclamation, Good God! that Men should pretend to
teach their Auditory the Gospel, and when they are thus challenged in a
particular of this Moment, then to fly to Foxes and Firebrands, and laying by
the Scripture, take Refuge in Libels and Street-Pamphlets! Now who would not
have expected that he would have spent a few Lines in disproving these
Authorities? If he could have done this; he had done somewhat; but it is easier
to call a thing a Libel, than to prove it. Well! What is the proof he expects?
That it be Authentic beyond Exception? But when shall it pass for Authentic
beyond Exception? Nothing less, it seems, than Scripture, is sufficient. For,
says he, when they are thus challenged, laying by the Scripture, they take
refuge in Libels and Street-Pamphlets. Here I must ingenuously confess, that we
are at a loss, and that we read no more in the Scripture of such Emissaries, as
Faithful Commin, and Thomas Heth, than he does of the Miracles of Xaverius, or
the Revelations of St. Bridget, and the Ecstasies of Magdalen de Pazzi. But did
ever any man in the World, before our Author, put a case upon this issue, and
require Scripture Proof for matters of Fact, or charge his Adversary with
laying aside Scripture, because he brings not Scripture to prove it?

But supposing they have as good Authority, as what they can produce for the
Legends of their Church; will it not be as Authentic? Let us therefore proceed
(as he calls it) to the Examen. The first Book (which he has a particular pique
against) is what is called Foxes and Firebrands; which is full of Relations of
this kind. Foxes and Firebands, Pt. 1. p. 14, etc.
There we read of one Faithful Commin, a Dominican, who (in the year 1567. came
over to England, pretending to be a Protestant) refused to be present at the
Prayers of the Church, alleging that they were but the Mass translated; had a
separate Congregation, prayed for hours together with much Groaning, and many
Tears; and in his Sermons, spoke as much against Rome, and her Pope, as any of
the Clergy (as he pleaded before the Queen and Council.) And yet all this while
acted a part, to delude the People, and do Service to his Church.

This Narrative is an Extract out of the Memorials of the Lord Cecil, and was
transmitted to Bishop Usher; and among his Papers came into the hands of Sir
James Ware, late one of His Majesty's Privy Council in Ireland, and published
by his Son Robert Ware, Esquire.

In the next year 1568. Ibid. p. 31, etc.
there was another of our Author's Impostors detected, The Copy of this was
taken out of the Registry of the Episcopal See of Rochester.
Thomas Heth a Jesuit, who pretended much to spiritual Prayers declaiming
against Set-Forms; and when brought before the Bishop of Rochester, said he
thereby endeavored to make Religion the purer, -- and that he labored to
refine the Protestants, and to take off all smacks of Ceremonies, that in the
least do tend to the Romish Faith; and the better to conceal himself, spoke
against the Jesuits, and declared that he was fallen from that Society. And yet
all this while was as much theirs, as ever, and did all by Allowance. For he
was discovered by a Letter dropped out of his Pocket in the Pulpit at Rochester,
and written from one Samuel Malt a Jesuit of Note; which, after Directions
given to him, how to govern himself in these matters, thus concludes: This we
have certified to the Council and Cardinals, That there is no other way to
prevent People from turning Heretics, and for the recalling of others back
again to the Mother Church, than by the Diversities of Doctrines. There was
besides, found in his Boots, a License from the Jesuits, and a Bull dated the
first of Pius Quintus, to teach what Doctrine that Society pleased, for the
dividing of Protestants. And in his Trunk were several Books for denying
Baptism to Infants, etc. This was a Cause openly heard, and he openly punished
for it; and in our Author's Opinion very deservedly; for as he well observes
upon this occasion, Pulpit-Sayings, Page 20.
Tho Dissimulation and Delusion be abominable every where, yet never more than
in spiritual Matters, and concerns of the Soul.

So much for this Book, and its Authority. Proceed we to the next, the False
Jew; this Book contains the History of one Thomas Ramsey, Son to Doctor Ramsey,
Physician to the King, who being bred up in the Jesuits College in Rome, and
well instructed in the Hebrew Tongue, was sent forth, and became a pretended
Jew under the name of Joseph Ben Israel (having been also Circumcised) and
coming for England, at Newcastle professed himself a Christian Convert; but
soon struck in among the Anabaptists, and was baptized by them at Hexham. The
whole cause, after the Discovery, was heard before H. Dawson the Mayor, 1653,
where this was partly proved against him, and partly confessed. The Narrative was
published by the Ministers of Newcastle at that time.

The two other Books, The Quaker Unmasked, and the New Discovery, were published
by Mr. Pryn 1656. In which he gives an account of one Coppinger a Franciscan,
that with others of the same Order were chief Speakers among the Quakers; this
was deposed upon Oath. If our Author is curious this way, I shall soon furnish
him with other Authentic Testimonies of this kind: But I suppose this may be
more than he desires: For if this be true, how will he reconcile this to
Christianity? and who are they that in his opinion deserve to be cast out of
the number of Christians? As for his long Excursion about Legends, I shall
reserve it to its proper place.

Fifth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
The different Orders of Religion amongst the Papists, are neither better nor
worse than so many Sects, and several Casts of Religion; only they have that
advantage in managing their Divisions, which we have not; to pack up their
Fanatics in Convents and Cloisters, and so bring them under some kind of Rule
and Government.

Here the Apologist had charged the Adviser with a Falsification, but he is so
kind to himself as to pass it over, and truly so will the Apologist in
consideration of the kindness he has now done, in giving him a further account
of the Sermon here quoted, which (for want of direction as to Author or
Bookseller) he could not procure. The Preacher being desirous, says our
Author, to take off that foul blemish of so many Sects and Divisions rending
the Protestant Church (it seems there is now in his opinion another Church) of
England inconsistent with the unity of Christ's true Church, and so often
objected against them by Catholics, falls into that common Topic of covering
the defects of his own Church, by calumniating that of his Neighbor, and
therefore he boldly makes up to his Auditory, and tells them, That the Unity
the Papists boast of in their Communion, is but a pretense, whereas they have
really more Divisions in their Religion, than they charge ours with; and then
goes on in the words of the Character above cited.

Out of this Discourse of the Preacher, our Author draws three Particulars,
page 27.

1. That in the Church of Rome there are more Divisions than they charge ours
with. 2. That their Religious Orders are neither better nor worse than so many
Sects and several Casts of Religion. 3. That they have their Fanatics packt up
in Convents. And he should have added another from the Apology, 4. That thus to
pack them up in Convents, is an advantage their Church makes of it.
Our Author having thus drawn out the sense of the Preacher, and made what he
will of the sense of the Apologist, concludes, He must give me leave to set
down these three Assertions of the Pulpit for so many clear Instances of most
foul Misrepresenting. But by his leave I shall review his account of this
matter. I am not obliged in strictness to concern my self in the first Head,
being neither charged upon the Preacher in the Good Advice, nor so much as
mentioned in the Apology; but yet he shall find me a fair Adversary, and not
willing to stand upon my Terms, but take the work as he has cut it out for me.

1. The Unity the Papists boast of, is but a pretense; whereas they have really
more Divisions in their Religion than they charge ours with. This our Author
says is a Calumniating of them; and is one of his Foul Misrepresentations. And
yet after all, I doubt it will return upon himself: For if there be a real and
perfect Union, it is surely to be seen in their present obedience to the same
Church Authority, as our Author words it, page 26. or in a perfect Union of
Members among themselves, in charity. Or in being of the same belief, as our
Author suggests. And yet if we come to examine it in this Method, we shall find
Breach upon Breach. For,

(1.) What Schisms have there been in that Church Authority? no less than
thirty (as Onuphrius reckons) in the Papacy, some of which continued ten, some
twenty, and one fifty years?

(2.) What actual Disobediences to that Authority in the times of Innocent 4
th. Urban 8 th. and at this season are in the Gallican Church?

(3.) What infinite Quarrels betwixt the Bishops and the Friars, the Friars and
Parish Priests, in the times of Gregory 9 th. Innocent 4 th. Alexander 4 th.
Martin 4 th. Boniface 8. Clement 5 th. Benedict 10 th. etc. from age to age,
even to that infamous one in the last age here betwixt the Seculars and
Regulars? One Pope revoking another Decrees, and oftentimes annulling their
own, as did Innocent, Martin and Boniface, etc.

(4.) Come we to their Union in Doctrine, and we shall find that but a
pretense. For where have there been sharper conflicts than among them about the
Seat and Extent of Infallibility, Predetermination, and the Immaculate
Conception, etc? Each charging the other with Heresy: as the Jesuits and
Jansenists about the First; the Dominicans and Jesuits about the second; the
Franciscans and Dominicans about the third. Thus far therefore we are not
agreed with our Author; for if actual and material Divisions betwixt Head and
Head, Head and Members, Members and Members, will make a plea to Union to be
but a pretense, then so it is with them.

2. Their Religious Orders are neither better nor worse than so many Sects and
Casts of Religion. This, says our Author, is an absolute Falsehood; and the
Vindicator that undertakes to defend the Preacher, is in his opinion no better
than a vain Trister, in publishing such an idle Apology. But why so? Because
when the Preacher had said, that the Orders among the Papists are so many
Sects, the account he gives of it is, that they are so many distinct Bodies,
that having different Founders-, Rules, Habits, and Opinions, by which an
Emulation is begot betwixt Order and Order, they become divided among
themselves, and when occasion is offered, do actually war upon one another in
their way. Now, says our Author, would not a Schoolboy have been scourged for
such a sleeveless frivolous excuse? which he says, may be as well applied to
our Colleges in the Universities, as to their Convents. But was this all the
Apologist undertook? and did he thus conclude his defense of the Preacher?

When he had thus shown what is meant by their Orders, and how Emulations and
Quarrels might arise, and what occasions were given for them in point of Rules,
Habits and Opinions, did he not proceed to show of what sort these Differences
were in the very next words after those quoted by the Sayer? Surely he might in
his Transports have so far condescended, as to touch upon those points, and
showed a little of his skill in proving the Differences betwixt the Franciscans
and Dominicans about the Immaculate Conception, to have been no other than a
School-opinion in our Colleges; and that notwithstanding all the Feuds betwixt
the Jesuits and Dominicans, the Franciscans and the Jesuits, there mentioned,
they are (as he would have it) only different parts, not dividing but making up
the whole. He complains of the Preacher that he so worded it, that no
Protestant of his Auditory but must receive this Notion, that as in England, so
likewise in the Church of Rome, there are different Sects of Religion, and
Fanatics to divide it. And let any Protestant or other read the History of
their long contentions about the size of their Hoods, and the Immaculate
Conception, and he will read a notable Comment upon the Preacher's words, and
see that he has not misrepresented them. I would fain know of our Author what
he thinks of a Controversy that has filled Kingdoms, Cities, Universities,
Cloisters, with Tumults and Disorders; Pulpits and Schools with contentions,
Invectives and Revilings; that has concerned Kings, Popes and Councils in
composing; and at last grew to that height, that after 300 years bickerings,
Popes themselves, though solicited from time to time not only by the Heads of
the Faction, but by Princes themselves, yet either could not, or thought it not
safe and advisable to determine it?

Let me sum it up in the Words of the King of Spain's Ambassador to the Pope,
to move him to come to a Resolution upon it. Legatio Philippi, 3. and 4. Paulo
5. and Gregor. 15. per Luc. Wadding. p. 89.
Consider the loss of many Souls, the Discord of the Church, the Dissentions of
Cities, the great Dangers that hang over the Kingdom. Let our Author consider
this, and tell me for what reason he took no notice of this case laid before
him, or how he could, after he had read it, charge the Preacher with an
absolute Falsehood?

For this, I shall refer him further to a late Book called, The Virgin Mary
Misrepresented by the Roman Church,. 3, and 4.

But here our Author relieves himself, That this may be seen in the Queen
Dowager' s Chapel, in which officiate Monks, Friars, Dominicans, Jesuits, and
Clergy, that is, so many different Orders of Men, and yet without any
difference in Religion, or disagreement in Faith. But will he say, there are no
differences between the Friars and Dominicans, the Jesuits and the Clergy in
those Cases, when they charge each other with Heresy? or because they seem to
agree, or do there agree, there is then nothing of this between Order and
Order? This is much such an Argument, as if one that had seen the Fox and the
Sheep, and other Creatures quietly sitting upon one and the same Hill in the
West, when drove thither by a sudden Inundation, should from thence conclude,
and would persuade others to believe that these were all at a perfect Accord,
and that there was no Enmity in their Nature, nor had ever been in Fact. I
shall conclude this with what Antoninus, A.B. of Florence, says in this case.
Let every one take heed of preaching on this matter [the immaculate Conception]
before the People, with a charge upon the contrary Party, because it is
Scandalous to (...) People; and accordingly it was forbidden by several Popes.

Another of the Falsehoods charged upon the Preacher is, the asserting, they
have Fanatics packed up in their Convents. The best Answer I can give to the
Sayer upon this, is to set before the Reader, an account of the Method taken by
the Apologist in handling this Argument.

1. Who showed what Fanaticism is, and that it is a general Name, comprehending
in it Superstition and Enthuasiasm. The former is the placing Religion in those
things, which Religion is not concerned in. The latter is when Persons are
acted and governed by some supposed Communications from Heaven, by Revelations,
Visions, Inspirations, by Raptures and Illuminations, and unaccountable
Impulses.

2. He showed there was such Fanaticism amongst them, and in their Convents; of
the former sort, he instanced in their Monkish Orders, Habits, Rules and
Privileges granted to them, and depended upon. To which our Author gives not
one word of Reply.

To the latter [ Enthusiasm] the Apologist refers.

(1.) The Institution of their Orders, which with their Rules they say, were
first instituted by the Holy Ghost. (2.) Many of their Doctrines, as Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, and the Immaculate Conception, etc. (3.) Many of the things
defined and observed in the Church, as Sacraments, Festivals, Canonizations,
etc. for which they plead Revelation.
3. He showed further, that these Revelations, were only supposed, not truly
so. And that 1. Because it derogates from Divine Revelation. And 2. Because
they agree not amongst themselves. Of which there is given a notorious Instance
in the case of the Immaculate Conception, where Revelation is pleaded on both
sides; and each side charges the other with Imposture about it.

But here our Author is wholly silent. However something must be said upon this
Head, and that amounts to this.

1. That those in Convents in the Church of Rome embrace a retired Life,
dedicate themselves to the Service of God, in Praying, Fasting, etc. some
according to the Institution of St. Benedict, others of St. Francis, etc. And
what follows? therefore they are not Fanatics, therefore they are not
Superstitious and Enthusiasts, that is, they are not Fanatics, because they
are not. Surely no Fanatic could have fallen into this account, without the
assistance of such a Representer.

2. He adds, Religious men in Convents, are Fanatics, forsooth, because they
are acted by some supposed Revelations, Visions, Raptures, etc. What
Controversial Stuff is this! Why at this rate, he might make Fanatics of all
the Patriarchs and Prophets, of St. Joseph, St. Peter, and St. Paul, and the
rest of the Apostles; and most of all St. John, whose whole Book of Revelation,
is nothing now, it seems, but so much Fanaticism. Surely our Author is here
driven to some Extremity, when he has no other Refuge, but by making the Case
in dispute betwixt us parallel with the Case of the Prophets and Apostles; and
that when the Apologist calls those of the Romish Church, Supposed Revelations,
Visions and Raptures, it is as Criminal as if he had said as much of the Divine
Writers. At this rate, says he, he might make Fanatics of all the Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles. At what rate? What, because he says those pretended to
in the Church of Rome are supposed? will it follow therefore that those of the
Prophets and Apostles are supposed too? No surely, no more than it will follow,
because the Revelations of the Prophets and Apostles are Divine, therefore
those alleged in the Church of Rome are Divine also. Our Author says of the
Apologists account of Fanaticism, What Controversial stuff is this! But I may
with good reason return it, What impious stuff is this! that will make the
Inspirations of Magdalen of Pazzi, and the Revelations of St. Bridget, and
Catharine of Siena (how fond and contradictory soever) to stand upon the same
foundation with the Revelations of St. John: And those which some of their own
Authors call Humane Dreams, Fantastic Visions, and others call Impostures, to
be as much from God, as the Visions of Ezekiel, and the Dream of Joseph, etc.

4. That the Church of Rome disposes her Fanatics into Convents for advantage,
is another Charge produced against them by the Preacher, and insisted upon by
the Apologist; but that our Author, for reasons best known to himself, left as
he found it.

Sixth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 6.
In the Roman Church the Sacrament must now be no longer a Representative, but a
Real Propitiatory Sacrifice; And Christ's Natural Body must be brought down
upon a Thousand Altars at once, and there Really broken -- and his Blood
actually spilt a Thousand times every day. Here the Apologist charges our
Author with altering the sense of the Preacher, when he makes the Preacher to
declare that was a positive Assertion of the Papists, which was an Argument and
Consequence of the Preacher's from their Assertion; and that for this purpose
he had left out the words Now, and must be, that were the Indications of it.
All that our Author has to reply to this Charge is, that it is a Nice point the
Vindicator is reduced to, to bring off the Preacher: But it is not so Nice as
it is evident that our Author's account of it is a Foul Misrepresentation. If
the Preacher had charged it as a Doctrine owned by the Papists, then so far as
they disown it, it had been a Misrepresentation; but as it is an Argument
against them (as it is plain it was) then it is no more a Misrepresentation, than
it is false, and that belongs not to Representation, but Dispute. And therefore
so far as an Argument of the Preacher against the Papists, differs from a
Concession and Assertion of the Papists, so far has our Author misrepresented
the Preacher; when he says, That the Protestants awkard Reasoning is set out
for their Doctrine. Well at length however it shall be owned for Reasoning and
Inference; and though it is not his Province (he says) to examine the truth of
such Reasoning, yet he fancies that it is easily reconcilable with Reason and
Scripture, and so intelligible -- that the Sacrifice of the Altar is
Representative of that upon the Cross: That is, if he will speak to the
purpose, That though the Sacrament be a Real and Propitiatory Sacrifice, yet
it is still Representative. But how will he prove it? His Argument is this,
Christ really present in the Sacrament may be offered to God upon the Altar by
the Hands of the Priest, in Remembrance of the same Christ offering himself a
Victim upon the Cross for the Redemption of man: and consequently, the
Sacrifice of the Altar is Representative of that upon the Cross. Where I would
only ask him, what is the difference betwixt Christ's being really present in
the Sacrament when offered, and the Sacrifice of the Altar? What again is the
difference 'twixt the being offered in Remembrance of Christ's offering himself
upon the Cross, and the Representative of that upon the Cross; and
consequently, whether he has not proved what he intended after this manner,
that the Sacrifice of the Altar is Representative of that upon the Cross,
because it is Representative? Methinks he might have shown some little respect,
when he is on the Arguing part, to what the Apologist had offered against this.

But however, though his Argument may signify little, yet he hopes Mr.
Thorndike's may be of some Authority, who, he says, never scrupled the least
at this; Epil. to Trag. l. 3. c. 5. p. 11.
expressly owning the [ Elements changed into the Body and Blood of Christ, to
be truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and to be both Propitiatory
and Impetratory] and yet never denied it to be performed in Remembrance of
Christ crucified. But here our Author has grossly injured Mr. Thorndike. For,

1. Mr. Thorndike owns no such thing (as I can find) that the Elements are
changed into the Body and Blood of Christ. But he speaks things plainly
inconsistent with it, as he says, N. 1. The Sacrament containing Mystically,
Spiritually and Sacramentally (that is, as in and by a Sacrament) tendreth and
exhibiteth, not the Body of Christ, much less turned into it. Nay further he
says, The Eucharist is Nothing else but the Representation here upon Earth of
what is done in Heaven. N. 4.

2. Neither does he say, the Elements are truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, but the Eucharist, and the Eucharist as Representing. For thus he
says, N. 10. Not the Elements, but the breaking, pouring forth, distributing,
dealing, are all parts of the Sacrifice, as the whole action is that Sacrifice
by which the Covenant of Grace is confirmed. N. 10. And further, the Eucharist
[that is as thus administred] is the same Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross.
How? As that which represents is truly said to be the thing which it
represents? That is, so far as the Representer of the thing may be said to be
the thing Represented, so far is the Eucharist the same Sacrifice.

3. When he says, the Eucharist is Propitiatory and Impetratory; he does not
in the least own that it is after the same manner that the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross was Propitiatory and Impetratory.

(1.) Because he says, Whether the Eucharist in regard of the Oblation, so in
regard of the Consecration, may be called a Propitiatory Sacrifice, is a
Question among some of the Church of Rome. N. 6. (2.) He refers it wholly to
the Participation of it. If men, says he, did but consider, that the Eucharist
had never been instituted but to be participated, they would find it
impertinent to alledg any reason why it should be a Sacrifice, that tends not
to the participation of it; which is directed against the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome. N. 10. (3.) He most peculiarly makes the Propitiation and
Impetration in the Sacrament to respect the Prayers of the Church there offered
up. N. 11. For thus he concludes, Is not the Sacrament a Propitiatory and
Impetratory Sacrifice by virtue of the Consecration, though in order to the
Oblation and Presentation of it by the Prayers of their Church? So that the
Case remains still where it was; if it be a Real Propitiatory Sacrifice, it is
not Representative, for the one implies the Presence, the other the Absence of
the same thing; the one implies it is the thing, the other implies it is only the
sign or resemblance of it; and so a thing can be no more the Representative of
it self, than it can be it self and not it self at the same time.
But he undertakes further, that the other is not more difficult to be
conceived, viz. How Christ's Body may be Really present in this Sacrament, and
yet his Body not really Broken there, nor his Blood actually spilt. Here the
Apologist took up the Cause after this manner: Something is really broken and
actually spilt, if it be a Real and Propitiatory Sacrifice; something is really
broken and actually spilt, as our senses tell us, and as they acknowledge: And
now that the Body and Blood should only be there, and yet that not be the Body
that is broken, nor that be the Blood that is spilt, is next to the affirming,
that it is broken, and not broken, spilt and not spilt. But our Author here
unties the knot, as he presumes; For, says he, all this may yet be, that his
Body may be there, and his Body not be broken, etc. Since it is not present
there Corporeally, but Sacramentally only; which manner of presence is no more
consistent with real Breaking or Spilling, than are Spirits, or the Glorified
Bodies of the Blessed, which though Real and Substantial Bodies still, are
notwithstanding not at all susceptible of those Corporeal Accidents.

In answer to this, let us consider,

What is that Body of Christ which is said to be Really present in the
Sacrament. And that is the same Body which our Savior lived in, and that hung
upon the Cross, and which the Elements are turned into by Consecration. But
will he say the Question is not concerning the nature of the Body, which is
granted to be a proper Body consisting of Flesh and Blood; but the presence of
that Body, which is not Corporeal but Sacramental only, which manner of
presence is no more consistent with real Breaking, etc. than the Glorified
Bodies of the Blessed, which though Real and Substantial Bodies, are not
susceptible of those Corporeal Accidents.

But to this I answer,

1. That the Body we speak of, is not a Glorified Body, but the same Body which
hung upon the Cross, which consisted of Flesh and Blood, and had Flesh that
might be broken, and Blood that might be spilt.

2. As to the Sacramental Presence of a Substantial Body consisting of Flesh
and Blood, Bones and Sinews (which they grant the Body in the Sacrament to
have) whatever our Author thinks, is surely one of the most difficult things to
be conceived in the world. For it is to suppose a thing to be without being
that thing which it is; to suppose a Body to be there, and yet to be divested
of all the Properties belonging to that Body. Nay it is to suppose that which is
a Real and Substantial Body to be only representatively present, and by way of
Signification; which is as much as to say, the Body is not present, for the
same thing cannot be the thing, and the Representation of the thing.

3. There is no more reason for this Sacramental Presence of a Real Body, than
there is for its being a Sacramental and not a Substantial Body: For what is
the reason why they ascribe a Sacramental Presence to a Real Body, but because
they know there are none of the Tokens belonging to such a Presence; and then
why should it not be a Real Body, but Sacramental, when there are none of the
Properties belonging to a Real Body to be discerned, or existent in it?

4. To this I add; therefore there can be no such thing as what he calls a
Sacramental Breaking and Spilling of Real Body and Blood. For such as the Body
is, such is the Presence, such the Breaking and Spilling; and why he should
argue from a Sacramental Presence to a Sacramental Breaking and Spilling, and
not argue from a Substantial existence of a Body to Real Presence and Real
Spilling, is a thing may not be difficult to our Author, but is surely in
reason not to be conceived. If the Absurdities be gross, let them thank
themselves for it, for they are no other than they first offer to the world,
and it is no wonder the world returns them upon them with advantage.

Seventh Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 7.
Popery puts out the Understanding of those of her own Communion, and tears out
the Hearts of all others: whom she cannot deceive, she will destroy. The
Absurdity of Auricular Confession is endless, where a man unlades himself of
all his sins, by whispering them into the Priests ears. Likewise
Transubstantiation, where men must renounce all their Five Senses. The Pope's
Infallibility keeps a good decorum with the rest. He alone cannot err, and all
others, without some of his assistance, cannot but err.

Upon this our Author says, their Religion is attacked only by the Unchristian
Artifices of passion and imposture. But why only? For supposing Popery puts not
out the understanding of others; or that in Transubstantiation men don't
renounce all their five senses, etc. yet is there no Implicit Faith, no
Transubstantiation, no other Principles owned by their Church, that the
Protestants do attack?

He says further, that in this Character there are as many Calumnies as Lines.
And that remains to be tried according to the Particulars he breaks it into. As,

1. It asserts that Popery puts out the Understanding of those of her own
Communion. This Assertion was not introduced here either by the Adviser in his
Assertions, or by the Apologist. But it was particularly handled in the
Apology, Assert. 14. p. 29. and Assert. 25. p. 48. where it is proved, (1.) That
in their Church, to believe the Church, without a reason, is not only safe, but
meritorious; and that whoever thus implicitly believes, is a good Catholic.
(2.) That Ignorance is in their Opinion the Mother of Devotion. (3.) That it is
a mortal sin so much as to doubt, and so no room is left for enquiry. (4.) That
they take away the Key of all Spiritual and Divine knowledge, the Holy
Scriptures. Now instead of an Answer, our Author has in his Sayings wholly left
out Assert. 14. and blows off all that is said in Assert. 15. with this one
word, it is a great Calumny, p. 51. And what he now offers upon this Head, is,
(1.) that they have many Books, Catechisms, etc. I wish he could say the
Scriptures, to be ignorant of which is to be ignorant of Christ, says their
Canon Law, Did. 38. Si juxta; but That the people are not allowed so much as a
Summary of. And the time was in the Reign of Implicit Faith, and before Heresy
disturbed the peace of its Empire, that persons have been burnt for teaching
their Children the Creed and the Lord's-Prayer in the Vulgar Tongue. (2.) He
says, There Is none but knows, that whoever will be a Christian must submit his
Understanding to such Mysteries that are above it. Therefore will it follow, he
must not so much as enquire what those Mysteries are, and whether they are of
that kind, as he must submit his Understanding to; whether, that is, they are
of the Doctrines of our Savior, or of men?

2. Popery tears out the Hearts of all others out of her Communion; whom she
cannot deceive, she will destroy. This, says our Author, is false. How so?
(1.) because though Catholics are bound to go and teach all Nations, yet when
men are so obstinate as to reject all Instructions, they are taught to go
elsewhere, and only to pity and pray for such blind souls, but not to destroy
them. Witness the course they took in the West Indies in the Conversion of the
poor Natives, a course that made them abhor Christianity, as Bartholomaeus
Casas, a Bishop of theirs present, relates, to whom I refer our Author.

(2.) He answers, It Is true, in the Catholic Church care is taken to preserve
all such as are her Members, firm in her Communion, and there are not wanting
Threats to keep the inconstant from being misled into Error; as likewise
punishments to reduce such as leave her, and blindly run after false Guides. A
fair Concession! And which will lead us into an examination of the case, and
teach the world what they are to expect. For if all within her Communion are
exposed to their Threats and Punishments, we know how large a share of the
world, according to their computation, is to be taken in, since they claim a
Jurisdiction over all Christians and Churches. But,

(3.) He says, If for this reason [such Punishments] she must be said to tear
out their Hearts, and destroy such as she cannot deceive; what is to be the
Character of this Preacher's Church, which by the consent of Bishops is fenced
with such Laws as punishes with loss of Goods, Imprisonment and Death, not only
those who leave her Communion, but likewise those who were never members of it?
But we are not concerned for the present so much to understand what the
Preacher's Church is, as that Church which the Preacher is not of. Was there
never no Tearing or Destroying elsewhere? Yes surely, somewhat looks that way;
I cannot say, says our Author, but that rash Zeal, headlong Revenge, or
detestable Avarice, may have hurried some of ours upon such barbarous attempts.
But certainly never did any Christians deliberately and with counsel thus
deeply engage themselves in Blood. So that if he is to be credited, if there
have been Barbarous Attempts, it was only rash zeal, etc. but not deliberate,
not with Counsel and Law. And it has been only some that have been thus hurried
to such attempts, but not a considerable Body among them; and much less such as
have had the Supreme Regiment in their Church. As for the Laws the Preacher's
Church is fenced with, our Author surely knows from what occasion they arose,
and whose practices they were that gave birth to them; and he ought to know
again, that the Laws in their Execution never produced such Barbarous Attempts,
as what he calls their own rash Zeal, Headlong Revenge, and Detestable Avarice.
So that if Law and no Law be compared, the state of no Law (if such it was) has
been far more mischievous than that of Law. But were there never any Christians
that did thus deliberately and with counsel engage themselves in Blood, as, he
says, the Preacher's Church has done? What thinks he of the Church of Rome?
are they not Christians? And were there never any such things deliberately and
with Counsel perpetrated amongst them? Have they no Councils, no Laws that
touch upon this point? And were there never any Christians engaged in Blood
upon pursuance of those Laws? Is there no such thing as Excommunicating and
Anathematizing Heretics among them? No delivering over persons so convicted
and condemned, to the Secular Power? And is there no such thing as compelling
such Secular Powers to exterminate those Heretics out of their Dominions? Is
there no Confiscations of Goods, Imprisonment, no Death for such as are
obstinate? And were there never Persons, Families, Countries that suffered
under Crusado's issued out against them, in obedience to such Laws, Canons and
Decrees? Surely our Author is much to seek in the state of his present Church,
if he is ignorant of this, and a thousand times more than I shall now tell him;
and is very ignorant in the state of the Preacher's Church he has left, if he
thinks his New Mother falls short of the old, as he says. But if he says one
thing and thinks another, how fit he may be to be a Member of the Church he is
now in, I know not; but surely he could be no fit Member then of the Church he
left. For a Conclusion of this, I shall crave our Author's patience to turn to
the Lateran Council under Innocent the Third, Can. 3. and he will see I have
not said this without Book, or wronged his Church, however he may have wronged
the Preacher's Church in his account of it.

3. The Absurdity of Auricular Confession is endless, where a man unlades
himself of all his sins, by whispering them into the Priests Ears. Of this, he
says, it is a Calumny and Misrepresentation; since no Catholics teach that
Only whispering sins in the Ears of a Priest is sufficient for their Remission.
Nor does the Preacher say that only whispering is sufficient, for he must needs
know that there is the making up their Cross, and saying Mea Culpa, and many
other things to be done. Where then is the Calumny and Misrepresentation? Is it
in the Vnlading? But why is not that as fit as expiating, which is the phrase
used by their own Catechism, where they are taught that the Faithful ought to
be in nothing more solicitous than to take care to expiate their Soul by
Confession? De Sacram. Poenit. Sect. 70.
Is it because it is called whispering? For what then serve their Boxes, and why
is it called a Seal? Is it because of the easiness of it? That is the case at
the last. For, says he, every one will see how insincere this Preacher was in
saying, that a man unlades himself, etc. To make his Followers believe the
Papists to be so sottish as to think their sins forgiven by a whisper only? He
may e'ne turn his anger upon his own Church for teaching this Doctrine, for
from thence the Preacher learned it, which says, The Sacrament of Confession
was graciously instituted on purpose to supply the place of Contrition. Ibid.
Sect. 46.
For further proof of this, I remit the Reader to the Apology, Assertion 21.

4. Of Transubstantiation, where men must renounce all their Five Senses at
once. Here the Apologist charged our Author with a small Falsification, which
indeed he has now mended, but not acknowledged. But he will make up that defect
by the force of his Argument; for now he seriously undertakes to prove that in
Transubstantiation they don't renounce all their Five Senses. As for three of
them he has nothing to say; but then Sight and Hearing are so far from being
against, that they eminently serve for the proof of it. As how! If, says he,
we follow our Hearing, which is the sense by which Faith comes, we are obliged
to believe it. Christ's words expressly signify and declare the Sacrament is
his Body. These words we hear delivered by those whom he has appointed to Teach
and Instruct the Flock, to wit, the Pastors of the Church; these words we see
likewise, and read in Holy Scripture. So that if we follow our Ears and our
Eyes directed by the Word of God, we are bound to believe this Mystery, and
consequently do not Renounce all our Five Senses at once. Well! but do we hear
Christ thus declaring? No, but we hear the Church. Has the Church then such an
Organical voice to speak, as we have Ears to hear? No, but the Church teaches
by its Pastors. But are the Pastors we hear, all Infallible in their Teaching?
And are we to believe them, although they teach contrary to sense and reason?
There indeed he has lost the Case. But however he brings in Sight to his
relief. For these words, says he, we see likewise, and read in Holy Scripture.
-- And whilst we let both our Senses and Reason be immediately directed by
God's Word, which is Infallible, we more reverence the Scriptures, and believe
upon better Grounds than the Protestants. Thus we are at last led to a Private
Spirit, and the Protestant way of resolving Faith into the Scriptures, without
need of any Infallible Interpreter. For it is but letting our Senses and Reason
be immediately directed by God's Word, which is Infallible, and we may soon be
satisfied. I heartily thank our Author for this free Concession; for these are
the Grounds Protestants do believe upon. But yet he will needs have it, that
they believe upon better Grounds than the Protestants. This I am apt to think
he will no more be able to prove, than that they Reverence the Scriptures more
than Protestants. However this he attempts and gives this reason for, that
Protestants let natural Objects, ever about Mysteries of their Faith, have the
direction of their Senses, in which they are so often deceived, rather than the
Word of God, which cannot deceive them. But where has the Word of God taught us
that we are not to judge of Natural Objects by those Senses which he has given
us to judge of Natural Objects by? Will he undertake to prov^ this also? When he
himself acknowledges that to frame a judgment of the nature or substance of a
thing, we must depend upon the information of sense, and that the common and
natural way is to judge according to the relation the senses give, from the
external and natural accidents of the thing. And now is not a Wafer a Sensible
Object, and are we not to judge of it according to the Relation the Senses give
of it, and from its external and natural accidents? How will our Author salve
this difficulty? That he proceeds in after this manner: But if we desire to
frame a true judgment [as if the other was a false one] of what is the Nature
and Substance of such an Object, not according to a Natural Being, but
according to the Divine Power, and what it may have of Supernatural; the Senses
ought not to be laid aside, but we must consider here too the information these
give, not now from the Natural Accidents, but from the Word of God. I should
have thought the Conclusion to be inferred from hence would rather be, the
Senses ought to be laid aside, forasmuch as we are not in such case to judge of
the Natural Accidents according to what they report. For I must confess he is
one of the first I have met with that has improved the Argument this way, and
that appeals to the Senses for the proof of Transubstantiation, which their
Church so cautiously warns them against in this matter. But he will illustrate
this by an instance in another matter. A Friend, says he, sends me a
transparent Stone, of which when I would make a judgment, I cannot do it
without the information of my Senses. These may inform me two ways, either by
looking upon the thing it self, or by reading the Letter, sent along with it,
or the report of the Bearer. If I take the information of my Senses from the
view of the Stone, I judge it to be a pebble; if from the Letter (wrote by an
excellent Artist) and the Bearer (a skilful Jeweller) I judge it to be a true
Diamond, upon their authority and greater skill. Now in which judgment of these
ought I to acquiesce? Certainly in this last, and yet in so doing I hope I
should not renounce all my Five Senses at once. -- So since my Senses assure me
from Scripture and the Pastors of God's Church, that the Sacrament is Christ's
Body; I am bound in reason to judge of it so, rather than from the Natural
Accidents, to judge it to be Bread: So that in thus believing this Mystery, we
do not renounce, but follow our Senses.

But his Instance reaches not the Case:

1. Because the judging, whether a Transparent Stone be a Counterfeit or a
Diamond, is not a matter of mere sense, but judgment, skill and experience, and
belongs to an Artist. But Sense will teach every one whether it be a Stone or a
Pea, hard, or soft, transparent, or opacous. But now the Case before us is,
whether what we see is a bit of Bread, or the Body of a Man; whether it is
broken or whole, etc. And therefore to put the case right, and make it
parallel, he must suppose the Stone to be a known Diamond, as known to him it is
sent to, as to him that sent it; and that the Letter and Bearer both affirm
this small Stone which he now holds betwixt his fingers, and knows by his
Senses to be a Stone and not a Man, is yet the great Mogul in person, and so is
every Diamond besides that comes over, and yet that Prince is still in his own
Country. Must that person now, because of their Authority and greater skill,
think himself bound to acquiesce in their judgment against the testimony of
sense; or must he not renounce his senses to do it?

2. He supposes further, that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is as plainly
contained in Scripture, as it is in the Letter that the Transparent Stone then
sent is a Diamond. But that he knows we deny; and when he can find these or the
like words, This Bread is turned into my Natural Body, or is upon Consecration
my true Substantial Body, it will be time enough to prepare a further Answer
for him. The Question being not, whether what God teaches is not to be
believed; but whether he has so taught. So that it still remains true what the
Preacher charged upon him, that in believing Transubstantiation, a man must
renounce his five Senses at once, even hearing it self, which will not only
teach us to distinguish betwixt the Host's, and the Priest's falling into the
water (though we are blindfold) but we must in their way renounce that Sense to
believe it, when we hear all Mankind concurring in it, that the report of Sense
is to be believed, and that in our Author's words, To frame a judgment of the
nature or substance of a thing, we must depend upon Sense.

5. The Pope alone cannot err, and all others without some of his Assistance,
cannot but err. Here are two Propositions: 1. The Pope cannot err. This our
Author now calls an Opinion of some School-Divines, whereas the Apologist
showed it to be the prevailing Opinion of their Church, whether in respect of
number or authority. It Is the most common opinion of almost all Catholics, as
Bellarmin. It Is the Catholic Truth, and what all Catholic Doctors teach in
these days, says Suarez. But to this not a word. (2.) All others cannot but
err. Here our Author is guilty of a new Misrepresentation. It is charged upon
us, says he, because we believe the members of our Church to be fallible, that
therefore they cannot but err. Where he changes the Proposition into a
Conclusion, by foysting in the word, Therefore, and then running it down as a
most Illogical and absurd consequence; but let him answer for the faults of it,
whose conseqeunce it is. The consequence then be to himself, and let the
Proposition be the Preacher's, that all others without some of his assistance
cannot but err. This is absolutely false, says our Author, and so say I too;
but it is true Popery.

Let their Catechism decide the Case, Catech Trid. Art. Symb. 9. Sect. 19.
Edit. Lugd. 1676.
to that I appeal, which thus delivers the sense of their Church upon it, But
as this one Church (which the Pope of Rome is at the Head of, Sect. 15.) cannot
err in delivering the Doctrine of Faith and Manners, seeing it is governed by
the Holy Ghost: So all the rest, which assume to themselves the name of a
Church, must of necessity be engaged in the most pernicious Errors of Doctrine
and Manners, as being led by the spirit of the Devil. Now here is the whole
Calummy at large. If men submit to the Pope, and are in his Church, they have
the benefit and assistance of his Infallibility, and are under the Guidance of
it as secure as in the Ark of Noah; but if they leave it, they are drowned in
error and perdition. And surely, while they are in actual Error, they cannot
but err, according to the known Axiom, Quicquid est quamdiu est, necesse est
esse. Because the Apologist before was modest, and having not seen the Sermon
it self, and so not fully understanding the sense of it) would neither too
hastily condemn or acquit, but after he had said what he thought fit upon it,
concludes, If the Preacher went beyond this, what Author or Authors he had for
it, I know not, they do not at present occur to me; our Author begins to exult,
saying, It Is such a Consequence as the Apologizer himself knows not how to
justify, (nor need not as a Consequence, for that is his own) and yet he has
not goodness enough to acquit us from so foul a Calumny. The matter it seems is
foul, and is proved upon them, let him now she his goodness in confessing the
Charge, or more of his strength to prove it a Calumny.

Eighth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 8.
He is professedly edified in ignorance by his Church, Praying and Prophesying
in an Unknown Tongue. They make no other use or account of Confession, than
what professed Drunkards do of Vomiting.

The first shall be considered in another place, Char. 14. As to the second,
The Apologist showed what is the sense of the word Prophecy in the 1 Cor. 14.
which the Preacher there referred to, viz. that the Apostle there understands by
it the expounding the Articles of the Christian Faith, and of the Scriptures
that contain it. But here our Author grievously mistakes him when he adds, and
to be the same as Preaching. For that he affirmed not, as well knowing that the
Apostle is to be otherwise understood than of Vulgar Preaching. (1.) Because
the Apostle there distinguishes it from Doctrine, v. 6. (2.) Because of the way
it was exercised in, when one spoke after another; agreeably to the custom of
the Jewish Doctors in their Synagogues, of whom Philo says, that one read the
Bible, Lib. Omnem probum esse liberum.
and another of the more skilful (...), passing through places not understood,
exp^und^d them. (3.) Because it was an extraordinary gift by Revelation, v. 29,
30, 31, 32. and reckoned as such amongst them, c. 12.10. -- 13.2.9.

2. The Apologist showed farther, it was not reasonable to fix this sense upon
the Preacher, because he must needs know it to be otherwise. To this our Author
briskly returns, Marry, if they never Preached contrary to what they knew, this
would be a good Rule. And he has found it by woeful experience to be a hard task
to discover it; though it has been plainly made out that some write contrary to
what they know.

3. He showed farther, that the Preacher was speaking about Worship, and so
consequently it must be what is so accounted; and therefore that this must be
rather the Reading of Lessons out of Scripture and Hymns (which are sometimes
called Prophecy, 1 Chronicles. 25.1.) and which are in their Church Service in an
Unknown Tongue. This our Author passes by, as also the Challenge following it.

But yet he will have it a Calumny, whilst he asserts a thing of the Papists,
which in the common acceptance of the word is absolutely false. But what if it
was the common acceptance of the word, if not the acceptance the Apostle
takes it in, in that place which the Preacher refers to? But what if it be not
the common acceptance of the word, but that it is taken vulgarly for
foretelling things to come? Who then is the Calumniator?

2. They make no other use of Confession, than what professed Drunkards do of
Vomiting. Our Author says, This is a most putid Calumny, and that the
Vindicator dares not defend, but only that so it is in the practice of many of
their Church. This he complains of, and with good reason; but then what shall
be said of one that after he has told a story of one that declaimed against the
Papists, for a Generation of Vipers, and a profligate sort of men, knowing but
two Families, and those good men; from thence takes occasion to exclaim, But
this is to the Protestant-tune: if a man cannot tell how to run down Popery,
though he knows nothing of it, he is no true Son of the Church of England. This
is Case for Case.

But was this all the Apologist had to say in defense of the Preacher? did not
he produce Authorities of their own as to the General practice? Did he not
refer to their Doctrines and Penances, and the Taxa Camerae Apostolicae in
confirmation of it? This had more become him to have answered, than to put a
Case.

Ninth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 9.
It consists of three Paragraphs: 1. He pays his Devotions to Saints Canonized
for Money and Treason. Here the Apologist charges the Sayer with an alteration
of the Preacher's words, from which he would bring himself off by saying it is
an insinuation, which to the Hearers is as good as an Assertion; whereas the
corruption was, that he turned a Particular into an Universal.

Here our Author observes against the Apologist,

1. That he proves first it may so happen, which is as much to the purpose, as
for one to say the Church-of-England- men are corrupters of God's Word, because
it is possible they may be so. But the case is far otherwise; for if there be no
certainty, but that the Pope may Canonize a Rebel for a Saint, then there is no
certainty but that the Saint may be no Saint. And then what become of the
Devotions of the Supplicants, Somners Antiq. of Canterb. p. 248.
as those to Thomas a Becket, at whose Shrines were more Offerings made, than
to Christ himself?

(2.) He says it has been done, and in the next line comes in with an
instance, where it had like to have been done. The instance was of Maria
Visitationis, where indeed it was not done; but that it was not, was more from
the King of Spain's Jealousy, than the Pope's Sagaciousness, who sanctified
her by Letters under his own hand. Our Author, I perceive, dares not so much as
name this Instance.

(3.) As for the Instance of Thomas a Becket, he says he was Canonized not for
Rebellion, and because he adhered to the Pope against his Prince, but for his
Virtuous Life and Martyrdom, and the attestation of his Sanctity by undeniable
Miracles. Not for Rebellion! as if that would be expressed in the Reasons for his
Canonization! I have read it was a Moot question, Whether he was damned for
Treason, or Glorified as a Martyr. Caesar. Hist. Memor. l. 8. c. 69.
I think it not worth the while to decide it, but leave our Chronicles and our
Author to struggle about it. But it minds me of a story told by Bellarmin, of
one that was worshipped for a Martyr, De Purgat. l. 1. c.
and yet appeared afterward and told them, he was damned.

2. They pray to a Crucifix of Wood or Stone, as well as to Christ himself, and
attribute as much satisfaction to it, as to the Blood of Christ. Our Author
rejoyns, that This is every word an Infamous Falsehood. And continues, Though
the Vindicator appeals to the Words and Forms of some of our Prayers, and then
says, That [ if words will make it plain, the Preacher was not mistaken] yet
this is so childish a plea, that methinks it ought to be beneath a Divine,
especially a man of conscience, to charge so gross an abomination upon such a
frothy pretext. And then he gives his reason. I must confess that if the
Vindicator had only the Words and Forms of their Prayers to plead in
Vindication of the Preacher, without attending to the sense and reason of the
thing, that it might be as childish and frothy as he represents it; and he
would have Deuteronomy. 32.1. and the Benedicite used in our Church against him, as
our Author argues. But if he had read on, he would have found that it was the
words as necessarily including such a sense, and that the Apologist did
covertly refer him to the Papist Represented and not Misrepresented. Our Author
now confesses himself to be the same that wrote the Papist Misrepresented and
Represented; and should be therefore concerned to have defended it against the
forecited Answer. In which was shown:

1. That the Cross in the Church of Rome as it is Representative, Pap. Repres.
and not Misrepres. Chapter ^.
so is Consecrated by an Office on purpose composed for it. 2. That at the
Consecration of it they pray that the Lord would bless the Wood of the Cross
that it may be a saving remedy to Mankind, a stability of Faith, an increase of
good Works, and the Redemption of Souls; and that Christ would take this Cross
into his hands; and that all that offer it, may by the merit of this Cross be
delivered from every Sin they have committed. 3. That it is esteemed upon
Consecration to have those Virtues communicated to it. 4. That they adore it
even with Latria, the Worship they give to God, and direct their Prayers to it.
5. That those Prayers are without a Figure, and in a proper Sense applied to
the Material Cross. This the Author of that Book proved (1.) as that
throughout, Chap. 2. p. 7, 10.11.
the Cross is distinguished from Christ, because they pray to Christ to bless
the Cross, and that he would communicate such Virtues to it. Chap. 3. p. 7, 9.
(2.) From their own Authors, Chap. 2. p. 12.
such as Soto, Catharinus and Aquinas. (3.) From the severe Censures of those
who held otherwise, as was the case of Johannes Aegidius Canon of Sevil, Chap.
2. p. 8, 12. and Chap. 3. p. 8.
and Imbert of Bourdeaux, and the Curate of Pomyrol. Our Author talks of a
Forehead, of these that make up against them; it is a Word I am not used to, but
he must have somewhat like it, that allows this Practice to be worse than
Heathenish, and a gross Abomination; and yet lets all this to this day lie
unanswered, and thinks to put us off with the same crude Replies that stand
there confuted. In Conclusion, it appears to be no more true, that they are
defamed by the method used in the Church of England, than that the Church of
Rome is the Mother Church of the Church of England (as our Author suggests.)

3. Making a particular Confession of our Sins to Men, instead of keeping up
wholesome Discipline, is the way to corrupt it, and tends to the debauching
both Laity and Clergy. Here our Author spends what he has to say, both against
Preacher and Vindicator, in showing special Confession to be allowed in the
Church of England, and in exclaiming against his Adversaries for falling foul
upon what he calls the best of Institutions: As if either of them were against
that which their own Church encourages, and which the Preacher himself calls a
wholesome Discipline. But the beginning of the Paragraph shows what Confession
the Preacher thus Censures, viz. Auricular Confession, as it is practiced in
the Church of Rome at this day; P. 45.
that Confession, which the Apologist elsewhere describes from themselves, that
requires beforehand a diligent Examination of the Conscience about all and
singular mortal Sins, even the most Secret, with all their circumstances, so
far as may change the nature of the Sin, and then to discover all those they
can call to mind to the Priest, from whom they expect Absolution, and without
which Absolution is not to be expected; nor can they have any benefit of the
Absolution. It Is of this the Preacher says, That the Consequence of it, is to
run an apparent hazard of being undone in many Cases by Knaves for Interest, or
by Fools out of Levity and Inconstancy, and a blabling Humor, that lets them
into the Secrets of Families, etc. Besides, instead of keeping up a wholesome
Discipline, it is the way to corrupt it, and tends to the debauching both Laity
and Clergy, in as many ways as there are Sins to be committed, when the
Confessor and the Penitent begin to discover and understand one another. And
this the Apologist confirmed from the Complaints made by good Men of their own
Communion, from the shameful Cases to be found in their Casuists, from the
Bulls of Popes, Contra solicitantes in Confessione. Histoire de'l Inquisition
de Goa, Chap. 4.
And of which I find a late Instance.

Tenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 10.
The Churches Interest is the Center of their Religion, and their Consciences
turn upon the same Pin. Every thing is Pious, Conscientious and Meritorious,
that makes for their Cause. What is said, as to the first of these, by the
Apologist, That the Churches Interest is the Center of their Religion: Our
Author has not thought fit to recite, and much less to confute. As to the
latter, the Apologist produced a Constitution of the Jesuits; but this the
Sayer says, is a wrested Interpretation, contrary to its plain meaning. But,
why then did not our Author venture to assign this plain meaning of it; and to
show the meaning the Apologist thought belonged to it, to be thus wrested? Who
without doubt would have thought one good Argument of much better Authority,
than a hundred bare Affirmations, tho never so positive. But he has two things
yet in reserve.

1. That after all, the Apologist can say, He cannot but own it to be a
received Maxim among all, even the loosest of our Divines and Casuists, That [
no Evil is to be done, that God may come of it.] To speak ingenuously, I do not
find him so forward to own it; but if he did (as we cannot think they will
interminis run so counter to the Apostle) yet the Question is, what is Evil and
Good? and whether that is not Good, which makes for their Cause? or whether the
making for the Cause, makes not that which was Evil to be Good. And if so, our
Author does but beg the Question.

2. He appeals to his Catholics of this Nation, who quitted all rather than do
an ill thing, take Oaths, Tests, or go to Church against their Conscience. The
main part of this lies in the last words, against their Conscience, for else
that many of them did take Oaths, go to Church, receive the Sacrament, is, I
suppose, out of Question.

Eleventh Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 11.
This he breaks into four parts.

1. He changes Scripture into Legends. Hereby the Apologist showed was
understood either that the Legends are of as good Authority in the Church of
Rome as Scripture; or that in their public Offices, they used Legends, where
they should have used the Scripture. He shows there is too much occasion given
for the former amongst them, as when they own in their public Offices, that
St. Bridget's Revelations came immediately from God to Her. But here our Author
interposes, and says, How does the Papist change the Scripture into Legends,
when he is commanded by his Church to own the Scripture, as the Word of God? But
if he owns the Scripture as the Word of God, because it is commanded by his
Church; then, wherein is the difference, if he be commanded by his Church to
believe a Legend to be of Divine Revelation? Our Author would have done a kind
part if he had set us right in this matter between Divine Revelation and Divine
Revelation, between the Revelation for Scripture, and the Divine Revelation for
the Legends. But he says, for all this, a Person is not alike obliged to
assent. No! although the Church requires it? But that, says he, the Church does
not; for tho he may read Legends if he pleases, yet he is not bound by his
Church or Religion to give assent to, or believe any one passage in any one
Legend whatsoever. If he has no better Authority for the latter Branch, than
the former, for he is not bound to assent; than, for he may read them if he
pleases; his Cause is incapable of his support. For, how can he be at Liberty,
whether he will read [hear] them if he pleases, when they are inserted into the
Body of their Church Service; and are Lessons chosen out for their Instruction?
And he can as little say, they are not obliged to Assent to them, when the
Church it self says in its public Office, They come immediately from God. Is
it at last all come to this, that when things are instituted by Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, as the Orders of St. Benedict, Apology, p. 13, 14.
and were received from the Holy Ghost, as the Rules of those Orders; and that
the Popes were moved by the Holy Ghost, as in ordaining some Festivals, and
declared others to be divinely inspired, as St. Brigit, and St. Catherine; and
to come immediately from God, as their Offices; Is it all, I say, come to this,
that he is not bound to give assent to, or believe any one Passage in any
Legend whatsoever? Nor so much, as to believe any one to be a Saint, their
Church has Canonized; no, not St. Brigit, St. Catherine, nor even the Great
Xaverius* Sayings, p. 21.
For tho some pretended Reformers (as he calls them) have been so easy and
forward (it seems) as to have judged those things worthy of Credit, which he
was Canonized for; yet no Member of the Church of Rome is bound to assent or
believe, but he may believe, as well as read the Legends of them, if he
pleases; and if he pleases he may forbear and suspend. And this our Author does
abundantly confirm, by approving what the Apologist produced out of Bellarmin
and Canus, That all things contained in the Lives of the Saints, tho mentioned
even in the Canonization, depend upon human Testimony, as to matters of Fact,
and consequently are subject to Error. This, says he, proves they are not
bound to believe: I grant it as far as that goes; but then they are not bound
to believe what their Church Representative does declare to be of Divine
Revelation, and to come immediately from God. Let him take which he pleases, if
that will content him. But if in the mean time, their Church contradicts her
self, and owns that at one time to be Divine Revelation, which at another time
has only human Testimony, is the Apologist bound to reconcile her to her self?
Surely that is an Office becoming our Author himself. And till he has done it,
he must excuse us if we a little doubt of the certainty of Faith so much
magnified in their Church. Here our Author concludes this matter; but the
Apologist went on to the latter Branch, that in their public Offices they
often use Legends instead of Scripture, and have put out Scripture to bring in
Legends. This he proves from the design of Cardinal Quignonius, who in the
Reformation of the Breviary, put Scripture instead of Legends; but that was
condemned, and the Office so far brought back to its former state. This was so
full a proof of what the Preacher suggested, that our Author thought it best to
let it drop. But if he will see the Character of the design, against he writes
again, let him peruse the Cardinal's Preface, or consult Espencaeus, in Tom. 1.
Digress. l. 1. c. n. p. 156. which thus concludes of the former Breviary, That
many of the Histories of the Saints were so ill chose, that sometimes they
begat Contempt and Laughter at the reading of them.

This puts me in mind of a debt I am in to our Author at his fourth Character,
P. 21, 22.
who there tells us, that he cannot but admire some Protestant Preachers,
Writers, and otherwise sober Laymen of late, who take upon them to ridicule,
and slightingly to wonder at the Papists for this their fond credulity,
forsooth, in relation to old Legends, and Modern Lives of the Saints. -- This I
admired at in him, because I find some Popish Preachers, Writers, and otherwise
sober Laymen, that are as hard to believe as the Protestants, and think as
meanly of them. L. Vives ad Calcem Libri de Corruptis Artibus. Espencaeus ut
supra.
Attend we to Ludovicus Vives ( a man, as I have heard, (says Espencaeus when
he quotes him) out of all suspicion of an irreligious mind) who says, In
writing the Lives of the Saints, every one writ as he was affected; so that his
Inclination, not Truth, did draw out the History. How unworthy of the Saints,
and Men, is the History of the Saints which they call the Golden Legend, since
it is writ by a man of an Iron Mouth, Lib. 5.
and a Leaden Heart? And again, There have been men who esteemed it for a great
piety to devise little Lies for Religion. But here this good man needs a little
correction; for if a good end be in prospect, Sayings, p. 21, 22.
inventions of men (how incredible soever) may in our Author's opinion be
allowed (as he suggests). For, says he, there is scarce any thing in all those
Books objected upon this score against the Papists, whether Ancient or Modern
Legends, but however incredible it may appear, yet generally is all in order to
a good end, and the working Christian effects in the Reader. Here is now a Gate
of Mindus sufficient to let in the whole Shoal of not only the Mendaciola of
Vives, but all the Heroical Fictions of Ecclesiastical Quixotism, and to make
them to become Authentic. But because our Author is so grave upon this
Argument, that I doubt he may be in earnest, let me for once recommend to him
some few instances, for an Exercise of his Talent this way, to show how they
serve a good End, and raise the Admiration of God's Power, Goodness and Mercy.
Doubtless he will quit himself exceeding well, if he can inform us where the
great spiritual Advantage is in the Relations of St. Aldern's and Deicoala's
hanging their Garments upon the Sunbeams; of St. Kentigern's setting a Robin
Red-breasts Head to its Body; of St. Odoaceus's turning a Pound of Butter into
a Bell; of St. Mochua's hindering by Prayer the poor Lambs from Sucking their
Dams. I might run into a Volume upon this Theme, if it were worth the while:
But I suppose these may serve for the present to entertain his thoughts, and to
show the Reader how impertinent his Vindication of their Legends is. These are
of the number of those which Quignonius says, are the Subject of Scorn and
Contempt; but here are others which are so inconsistent with true Religion,
that their Dri^do concludes they were devised by Heretics, De dogmatibus and
libris Apocryphis, l. 4. c. 1. and Espencaeus ut Supra.
as when the Saints are said in the Agony of Death, to have warned or required,
that when translated out of this World, they should be worshipped, and be
invoked in Afflictions and Dangers. It being not likely that these holy Men
while in this World, should be solicitous of these Humors, who should rather
pray with David, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord.

2. He changes Sacraments into Shows, Priests into Puppets. Of this the
Apologist produced his Instances, as 1. When they show the Cup to the Laity,
but suffer them not to partake of it. 2. When in their Solitary Masses, the
Priest alone Communicates, and the People are only Spectators of the Solemnity,
a Practice that the Council of Trent approves of, and commends. 3. When the
Host is elevated at Mass for Adoration. 4. When it is carried about in public
Processions. In which cases the Sacrament is only showed to the People, and is
contrary to the end for which it was instituted. For as it was to be in
Remembrance of Christ, so it was to be partook of, and by partaking of which,
we do show forth his Death, 1 Cor. 11.26. But to show the Sacrament, and not to
partake of it, is to change the Sacrament into a show. To this our Author
replies, Might not a Jew here step in, and with this Argument pretend, that
Christ crucified was another show upon Calvary? but all this is nothing but a
method to teach Atheists, how to make the greatest Mysteries of Christianity
ridiculous. As if Christianity in its first Institution was a ridiculous thing;
and he that will bring it back to its first State, and have the Sacrament only
so Administered, and used only to those ends for which it was ordained, must
expose the Mysteries of it to the Scorn of Atheists. Cannot Christianity
subsist, or the Mysteries of it be sacred, without we depart from the
Simplicity and Purity of it, and set up new Institutions, or give new Ends to
those Institutions? And because we are for partaking of it, and not making it
an empty show; because we are for the People's partaking of it, as well as the
Priest; and for their partaking of it in both Kinds, and not in one, according
to the Primitive Institution; Must we teach Atheists a method, how to make the
Mysteries of Christianity ridiculous? And because we declare against their
Elevations, and exposing the Sacrament in their public Processions, and their
Adoration of it; may, by the same reason, A Jew step in, and with this Argument
pretend that Christ crucified was another show upon Calvary? But may not the
Jew and the Atheist both step in, and deride the Mysteries of Christianity,
when they are thus dressed up for the Stage, and are turned into empty Shows?
When they pretend to show our Savior as upon Mount Calvary, and that concludes
in showing the Host; and when the Sacrament is called a Communion, and it
concludes in the Elevation, Procession, or Sacerdotal Participation only? I am
loath to return him his own words, Those who make a show of this, are within one
step of the unbelieving Jews. It had certainly better become our Author to have
vindicated the Practice of his Church, in the Charge exhibited against them,
and proved it absolutely false; or tho it was true, that they do not change the
Sacrament into a show, by advancing other ends than it was instituted for, and
neglecting those that were proper to it.

3. He preaches Purgatory instead of Repentance. Our Author here replies, It Is
absolutely false, inasmuch as in the plain import of the Words, it imprints
this Notion in the Hearers, viz. That the Papists don't preach Repentance to
the People, but instead of this they preach Purgatory. But our Author may
remember, that when it was said upon occasion, Sayings, p. 37.
that [if Words will make it plain, the Preacher was not mistaken] it was put
by with this, that it was a Childish Plea. And why should not this Privilege be
allowed of retorting in the same way? But how comes this to be more the plain
import of the Words, than what immediately precedes? For would it not equally
follow, that when the Preacher said [ They change Scripture into Legends,
Sacraments into Shows, Priests into Puppets], That the plain import of the
Words is, they have no Scripture, but Legends; no Sacraments, but Shows; no
Priests, but Puppets? But if there be no reason to take the Words in that Sense
in the three former, there is none to take them so in the last. And therefore,
the meaning of the Preacher is no other than that, whereas they should preach
Repentance sincerely, according as the Gospel teaches, they preach Purgatory,
which invalidates it (as the Apologist showed). This our Author says, is a
mincing the Matters; but however it is the true Representation of it. But if we
so take it, it is yet, he says, False in it self. Here I expected a smart
Answer to the Apologist, who undertakes the Proof of what he asserted four
ways. 1. As the Doctrine of Purgatory takes People off from one of the most
powerful Arguments to Repentance, which is the fear of Hell. 2. It makes them
more studious of what will set them safe, than what will make them happy. 3. It
makes them defer their Repentance, because of a further Allowance of time in
another state. 4. As they may be delivered thence by the Masses, Alms, and
Prayers of the Living. Surely these are points of some Consequence, and if they
are truly inferred, do shrewdly shake the Foundations of a Purgatory: If false,
it would have been some gratification to have the Proof of it attempted. But
our Author is here silent; and falls to the proving it false in it self,
forasmuch as he himself has heard many Sermons of Repentance, and Purgatory
never so much as mentioned, unless it were to show the insufferable Torments of
the place, and how great the hazard is, even of getting thither. But how does
this Answer the Apologist's Arguments to the contrary? He adds further, a
Challenge to the Apologizer, to find out one Sermon of Spaniards, French, etc.
in Latin, that sets out Purgatory to the People, as to make them neglect
Repentance. But this is to beg the Question; for the Point in dispute is,
whether the Doctrine of Purgatory does not invalidate Repentance, and dispose
People to neglect it. And then the preaching Purgatory, as it is set out in the
Roman Church, is the preaching People into a neglect of Repentance.

4. He preaches Faction instead of Faith. If either the Preacher, or the
Apologist thought it worth the while to write a Comment upon this, and to
enlarge upon the subsequent Discourse in the Sermon, Volumes might be filled,
beginning at the Apostolical Chair, (as it is called) and so descending to the
parts belonging to that Communion; but the Apologist contented himself with a
bare mentioning of the Pope's Jurisdiction over Princes, and the Power be
challenges of deposing them. But here instead of relieving his Church, our
Author carries the War amongst his Neighbors, always serving himself of a
point, which he knows he may be safe in. However at length he appeals to their
own Sermons, and fairly offers, As for the Faction they can discover in our
preaching, let them do their best, to find even half so much; we freely give
them a thousand years to review, for to match these four of theirs. And I will
dare to return the Challenge, to find even half so much said for Obedience and
Loyalty to Princes in all their Sermons for a Thousand years as in the Sermons
of those Four years preached amongst us. We find among them Sermons upon
Sermons, ab^^^ the Exaltation of the Pope's Power, and the Power of Holy Church
over Princes; but as to Allegiance and Fealty to Princes, whether of their own
or of another Religion, it is a difficult Theme, and rarely handled. But for
that, says he, Let them take in likewise the Sermons that are now preached in
our Chapels; as if they would there preach up Faction, when it is to preach
against themselves. But if we would know what their Zeal can do that way, let
us look back to the blessed times of Hildebrand; nay, but step over Sea, and
review the times of an Holy League; and there we may see it venting it self in
a Torrent of Disloyalty against their Princes in the Sermons of Poncet,
Prevost, B^ucher, etc. and without doubt had it been for the Glory and Quietof
the Church to have had them published, we should have found some glorious
things of this kind in the Sermons, Maimburgs History of the Holy League, l. 1.
p. 79. l. 2. p. 95. l. 3. p. 428. l. 4. p. 806.
even of Bellarmin himself, who we are told was employed as a Preacher in that
busy time of the League. As for what he would fix upon the Sermons at present
amongst us, if he could find any Disloyalty of that kind, he would not be put
to the hard, but his common Shift of saying, They make unworthy Reflections
upon the Religion of their Prince, and insinuate Fears and Jealousies into the
People.

Twelfth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 12.
There is a great noise of Alms made in his Church; but the Scope they too
often vainly aim at, is the blessing of a presumed Saint; security from the
external force of evil Spirits, by the Charms and Spells of Monkish
Conjuration, a sort of Ecclesiastical Magic. Nay, sometimes the Scope is that
very wicked one of compounding with Heaven by their liberal Alms, for their
unforsaken Sins; and here in this Nation (whilst the Island was enchanted with
Popery) there were granted Indulgences, even for what they call deadly Sins,
for many thousand years to come.

Here our Author inveighs against the Doctor for writing in a strain becoming
rather a Play than a Sermon; because he describes their Practices too much like
what they are in themselves, and which he has rather fallen short of, than set
forth according as they deserved. As for instance, What are their ways of
Exorcising, but Conjurations sanctified, and bring that into the Church, which
should be by an Anathema thrust out of it? Being such as a very valuable
Person, could not reflect upon without the highest Indignation: and who after
he had described it from the Ordo Baptizandi, cum modo visitandi; the
Pastorals, Rituals, Bp. Taylor's Disswasive from Popery, Sect. 10.
the Treasure and Manual of Exorcisms, Mengus' s Flagellum Demonum, etc. he
thus concludes, This is the manner of their Devotion for the use of their
Exorcists, in which is such a heap of Folly, Madness, Superstition, Blasphemy,
and ridiculous Guises, and playings with the Devil, that if any man amongst us
should use such things, he would be in danger of being tried at the next
Assizes for a Witch or Conjurer; however, certain it is, what ever the Devil
loses by pretending to obey the Exorcist, he gains more by this horrible
Debauchery of Christianity. By this the Reader (he appeals to) may see whether
the strain the Doctor wrote in, was not becoming the Subject. But why would not
our Author leave the Reader to be judge, whether the Doctor had justly
complained of him for his Omissions of what belonged to the same Argument? Why
did he not insert the Motives and the Means, as well as the Ends? Why was it
omitted, that this Ecclesiastical Magic is what those wicked Spirits invent
and encourage? Why did he not insert the Avoidance of Anathema's, a deliverance
from the imaginary Flames of Purgatory; and their Bessarion's Character of
their Canonization? Why said he nothing of the Alienation of Alms hereby from
their proper uses, the increase of Superstition, and the maintaining of an
Universal Usurper? Why is there not a word of the Catalogue of the things
hereby purchased, viz. Shrines, Images, Lamps, Incense, Holy Water, Agnus
Dei's, Blessed Grains, Roses, Pebles, Beads, Relics, Pardons, etc. all the
goodly Inventory of Superstition? Was it out of favor to the Doctor, that this
was not repeated? And does he think the Doctor obliged, rather to give him
thanks, than quarrel, for his not inserting this part of his Discourse? Or have
we not Reason to think there was somewhat in it, which the Doctor suggests,
that this (...) too Particular for the purpose of Men, Defense, p. 3.
who deal in Generals, which admit of less Discovery. Whether the Doctor ows
him thanks, we have reason to question; but the Public have, because he gave
an occasion for that good Defense; and for the publishing another Edition of
that useful Sermon. But after all his pretended tenderness for the Doctor, he
tells of another Champion that draws him out to the full; but what he has
done, I neither know, nor am concerned; but if I may judge of his performance,
by his Copartner we have to deal with, there is not much to be expected. But
how exact and full soever that may be, yet our Author in abundance of Humility,
resolves at last to throw away a Page upon the Doctor's twenty, in the Examen
of his Vindication; which, he says, he no sooner cast his Eye upon, but he
sees that now a Doctor, he understands no more their Doctrine and Practices,
than when a Child he knew Gubbard from a Jesuit: A very pretty Flourish, and a
Comparison not amiss; for as in those days, it was no easy matter to know a
Gubbard from a Jesuit (tho possibly one and the same) when Gubbard could be the
Jesuit, and the Jesuit be Gubbard, as occasion served: So it is now in the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is so habited and managed by men of Art,
that like an Almanac that is calculated for the Meridian it is to serve, it is
modeled according to the Time, Place, Circumstances, and Service it is to
respect. For in our Forefathers days it was true Popery, and spoke as a Dragon;
but in our days it comes forth with Exposition and Representation. Exposition
of the Doctrine of the Church of England, Preface.
If it is likely to be for the Conversion of Heretics, then it shall have the
Permission even of the Pope himself, to show it self abroad in this new Attire;
but if a private hand shall attempt it, he shall with Imbert be an Heretic,
and be punished as such. If it be at Rome, and a Cardinal is to speak his own
Sense, then the Honor paid to an Image is Divine, and for the sake of the
Image. If it be for the Service of France, and a particular Case, then the same
Cardinal can subscribe to Exposition, and it is not so much the honoring the
Image, as the Apostle, or Martyr in the presence of the Image. If it be to be
suited to the humor of a great Marshal, then it is not the Image, but Christ,
as the Bishop of Meaux words it; if it be for the Villagers, then it is the
Image and Christ, as Imbert's Curate. So that it seems the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome is one while a Gubbard, and another while a Jesuit, varying,
with Proteus, its Forms, and taking with the Camelion its Color and
Complex^^n, from the Objects and Occasions it meets with. It Is no wonder then,
if the Doctor, when a Doctor, can no more understand the Doctrine of their
Church, than when a Child he could know Gubbard from a Jesuit. But however,
here is Doctrine and Practice joined together; and for once we will try whether
the Doctor has not indeed understood both too well for our Author to thank him.
But why does not the Doctor understand their Doctrine or Practice? It Is because
he said,

1. Sometimes the Scope is, that very wicked one of compounding with Heaven by
liberal Alms, for their unforsaken Sins. Our Author grants then, that if this
be the Scope they direct their Alms to [ to compound by them for their
unforsaken Sins], it is a very wicked one. But this says, He was without one
word of proof; and now the Doctor in his Defense only proves at large the
Practice of Indulgences, but not a word of their being given for unforsaken
Sins. We own the Power of Indulgences, but that this can or may be done, either
with Money, or without, for unforsaken Sins, this we look upon as Abominable
and Absurd, in the sight both of God and Man.

But has the Doctor proved nothing but the Practice of Indulgences? Has he not
also proved beyond Exception, that Gain is made of them? and that there was too
great Reason for that Complaint in Matthew Paris, That Christ's Blood although it
be sufficient to save Souls, In Hen. 3.
yet the same without Satisfaction applied by the Pope, is not sufficient,
Romanorum loculos impregnare, to fill their Coffers at Rome? Has not the
Doctor further proved, that by this course, they compound with Heaven for their
Sins? But will he say, What is this to the purpose? Yes, it is to him that
says, Indulgences are not for forgiveness of Sins. But he persists still,
there is not a word of their being given for unforsaken Sins. Not a word! What
is there then amongst all that List of Pardons (as he calls it)? There is not,
he says, that the Doctor can pretend, makes for this intent, excepting that of
Boniface 9; which too has nothing in it for his purpose, besides his own false
Translation, and the perverse Construction be puts upon it. The Author quoted
for this by the Doctor, is Theodorick Niem, who says, That Boniface the 9th,
De Schismate l. 1.c. 68. p. 73.
(who was an Insatiable Gulf, and had none like to him in Covetousness) not
being content with the Offerings at the Jubilee, which by the Death of Urban,
he entered upon, although they rose to a vast Sum, sent his Collectors with
Indulgences to many Countries, offering them thereby the same spiritual
Advantages, which they should have reaped by coming to Rome, upon the
depositing so much Money, as would have born their charges thither; in which
they prospered so well, that by the vending of them in one Province, they
carried away above a hundred thousand Florins, Quia omnia peccata sine
Poenitentia ipsis con^itentibus relaxa^unt; because (as the Doctor translates
it) he gave (by them) Indulgence for all Sins without Repentance. This, says
our Author, is a false Translation, and perverse Construction. But why so, does
not Poenitentia signify Repentance? Or is Penance truly any other than
Repentance? If it be, then why do the Rhemists translate (...), by Penance,
Matthew. 3.8, etc? But he says, Poenitentia here signifies Penance, and not
Repentance, which is indispens^bly implied in their Confession, Sayings, p. 35.
which cannot be rightly performed without Repentance. What he says upon
another occasion, may with a little Alteration be fitly returned to him. Marry,
if Confession was never performed among them, but when it was rightly
performed, this would be a good Reason. But if Confession among them be
performed without Repentance, (as shall afterward be shown in Char. 14.) then
this is no Reason. But besides, this is not to the purpose. For when he says,
That Poenitentia here signifies Penance, and not Repentance, he is to fetch his
Reason for it from the Author, whose Sense is in dispute, and to consider the
Circumstances of the place that is quoted; but of this he has not one tittle;
so that all that he says, amounts to no more than this, that Poenitentia here
signifies Penance, and not Repentance; because it so signifies: Which makes me
think that he never looked into the Author; or if he had so done, he would have
seen what Reason the Doctor had for his Translation. For 1. It Is plain from the
History, that the Business in hand was to utter the Pardons to the best
Advantage; that in Matthew Paris's Phrase, they might thereby impregnate the
Pope's Coffers. 2. That there were no other Conditions required for obtaining
the Pardon, but Confession, and paying what it might have cost them in a
Pilgrimage to Rome; Repentance being not so much as intimated to be any part of
the Condition. 3. It Is farther Evident from the very next Clause, where it is
said, Super quibuslibet irregularitatibus dispensatur interventu pecuniae, That
provided there was Money, they were dispensed with all sorts of irregularities;
telling the People that they had in this matter all the Power of binding and
lo^^ing, which Christ gave to Peter. 4. This is produced by the Historian, as a
gross Abuse; but what was there extraordinary in it, if the Indulgence was (as
our Author holds) only for the Relaxation of the Canonical Penances due to Sin,
upon Repentance? 5. This is conformable to what other Authors observe in the
like Cases. Vspergensis (as was showed in the Apology, p. 44.) relates, that
upon the plenary Indulgences then sent forth, they said, Let me act what
wickedness I will, I shall by these be delivered from Punishment. And
Espencaeus says, In Tit. Digress. 1. 11. Turpilucri.
That it was evident from their proceedings, That they rather sought their
Money, than their Repentance.


By this time, I hope the Doctor is cleared from false Translation, or perverse
Construction

However our Author says, That there is not one Pardon the Doctor can pretend
makes for his intent, besides that of Boniface. But if this be for his intent,
there needs no more; yet methinks there are others look broadly this way. What
thinks he of the Indulgence granted to him, that says or hears, Defense, p.
8.
or bears about him, the Prayer (which is there said to be showed to St.
Augustine, by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost) that What he asks of God, he
shall obtain, if it be to the Salvation of his Soul; and when his Soul shall
depart from his Body, it shall not enter into Hell? Here is mention made only
of hearing, or reading, or bearing about him that Prayer. And because he may be
assured, that it shall not so be with him, as not to hear or read it; it is
there said further, that he shall not dye of sudden Death; and that no
expedient be wanting, if he but bears it about him, he is sure to escape
Damnation.

What can we think again of the Prayer (which they tell us St. Bernard daily
said, Ibid. p. 11.
and was written in a Table that hang near to the high Altar in St. Peter's
Church at Rome) which, Whosoever devoutly and daily says with a contrite heart
(and we know what was meant by that in those days) if he be that day in the
state of Eternal Damnation, then this Eternal Pain shall be changed him into
Temporal Pain of Purgatory, etc. and all his Sins shall be forgotten and
forgiven, through the infinite Mercy of God. And how backward soever our Author
is to acknowledge it, yet this was no strange Doctrine in those merciful days;
for so Clement 6. Bulla Clem. 6. Ultraject. A. D. 1653.
grants a plenary Indulgence to all that died in the way to Rome, and commands
the Angels of Paradise, to carry the Soul immediately to Heaven.

Before I leave this, I shall offer these Considerations in Confirmation of
what the Doctor asserted. (1.) That Sin is unforsaken, which is unrepented of.
That Sin is not repented of, for which, according to them, due Satisfaction has
not been made. Defense, p. 6.
Due Satisfaction has not been made, when for a Million of years of Punishment
due (according to our Author's notion) the reciting of three Prayers shall be
sufficient for Pardon. (2.) That Sin is not forsaken, which a Person commits in
hope of an Indulgence, and which notwithstanding he Sins in the Expectation of,
he shall not forfeit his interest in it. (3.) That Sin is not forsaken, which a
Man dies in; and which he is encouraged to live in, from the hopes of that
Indulgence: Such was the state of those in the Maccabees (as Bellarmin salves
it). De Purgat. l. 1. c. 2. Sect. Ad quintum. Bull. to. 4. p. 86.
And such Indulgences have been often granted to Persons at the Point of Death,
as Clement the 10 th did give plenary Indulgence to those, that in that hour
called upon any of those five Saints he had newly Canonized. (4.) Sins cannot
be presumed to be truly repented of, or forsaken, or could it be thought
necessary so to forsake them, when they encouraged themselves to it, from an
Expectation of an Indulgence; as Vspergensis relates. (5.) Indulgences do not
suppose Sins to be forsaken, or that therein Persons are enjoined to forsake
them, when they respect the time to come. Which brings me to the 2 d Branch of
his Charge.


2. They have granted Indulgences, even for what they call deadly Sins, for
many thousand years to come. Here are two things asserted by the Doctor. 1.
That Indulgences were granted for what they call deadly Sins. 2. That they were
granted for many thousand years to come. Here the Doctor complains of our
Author, for leaving out the Proof that he produced in his Sermon for it, from
the Horae B. Virginis; but our Author has here forgot to give any recompense to
the Doctor for that Injury. However, upon this Argument it must be confessed,
that he has acquitted himself beyond all Contradiction, having produced no less
than three Indulgences out of that very Book, for deadly Sins, totiens
quotiens, (as the words are). What Reply does the Sayer make to this, for his
own, or his Friend Mr. Pulton's, or his Church's Vindication? The matter is
dropped, and the Charge therefore stands in full force upon Record against them.
Pass we therefore to the next.

2. Indulgences were granted for many thousand years to come. Here the Doctor
insists upon the same Authority, and produces Instance after Instance, of
Indulgences granted for such a term of Years, as that of Pope John 22. for 3000
years for deadly Sins, and 3000 for Venial. That of St. Peter, and thirty other
Popes, for 6000 years; of Alexander the 6th, for 10000 years; of Sixtus 4. for
32755 years; and another of John 22. for 1000000 years. And what is this, but
for years to come.

To this our Author replies.

1. This looks like an asserting of the Vulgar Reproach, to wit, That [the Pope
can give the Papists leave to Sin for many years to come]; and is the thing he
seems willing to imprint on his Readers in all the Instances he has brought, by
the way that he handles them. But here the Doctor imprints no more on his
Reader, than the Instances themselves will imprint, for they are in order
nakedly proposed. But supposing he did assert that Vulgar Reproach; our Author
was once asked, and I don't remember he ever answered it, Doctrines and
Practices, c. 8. p. 64.
What mighty difference is there, whether a man procures with Money a
Dispensation, or a Pardon? For the Sin can hurt him no more, than if he had a
Liccense to commit it. If a Malefactor be sure of a Pardon, after he has
committed the Crime, it is as to himself the same, as if he had a Dispensation
beforehand for it? And so it has been determined among themselves, That he
that willingly commits a Sin in hope of a Jubilee, or an Indulgence afterward
to be granted, does not lose the benefit of it. This is a case proposed by
Bellarmin, L. 1. c. 10. de Indulg. Sect. Altera.
and which like a cautious Person he would not interpose in. Here our Author
declares, This is most contradictory to the Doctrine we are taught, and to the
received Notion of Indulgences amongst Catholics, who are so far from
presuming upon leave to Sin, upon the grant of Indulgences, that they don't
think that any one Sin that is past, can be forgiven by an Indulgence. But this
is protestatio Contra factum; where he has been taught his Catholic Doctrine,
I know not; but the time has been, when his Catholics were taught otherwise;
Or else, what needed it to have been complained of? Review du Concile de Trent
l. 5. c. 1. Gravam. Ger. n. 3.
Thus we are told that the Popes both have given, and their Pardoners have thus
told the People, and the People have thus believed, that Indulgences were as
well for the time to come, as the time past. And surely the Bulls of the Popes,
Paul 3. and Julius 3. to the Fraternity of the Sacrament of the Holy Altar,
Paris, 1550.
contains what is Equivalent to it, in which it is provided, that the Brethren
may have a dormant Faculty for a plenary Pardon to be used when they please.
But for all this, if our Author be to be credited, They don't think that any
one Sin that is past, can be forgiven by an Indulgence. And in Confirmation of
this, he says, Indulgences are only for the Relaxation of Canonical Penalties
due to Sin, which being assigned by the Church, may likewise by the same
Authority be released. The whole of this matter will be determined by
considering what Indulgences are, and to what ends they were designed, and are
esteemed to serve in their Church.

But here I observe, that the Account given by our Author of Indulgences, is
the same that is owned by Luther and Calvin, and the rest of the Heretics, De
Indulgent l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 4. Propositio, etc.
who, says Bellarmin, held, that an Indulgence amongst the Ancients, was
nothing but a Relaxation of the Punishment which the Church commanded. And
which he therefore disputes against by several Arguments; as 1. There would be
no need of the Treasure of the Church. 2. That then an Indulgence would be
rather hurtful than profitable, and the Church would deceive her Children. 3.
That they could not be granted for the dead. 4. That many of them, who receive
Indulgences, do often, and are sometimes obliged to undergo Canonical Penance.
5. The form of them proves it. This I remember has formerly been put to our
Author, Doctrines and Practices, c. 8. p. 66.
and I should be glad to find him to confute Bellarmin, or to reconcile
Bellarmin to him. To this I may add, 6. That Relaxation of Penances, and
Remission of Sins, are distinctly provided for in the Indulgences. So in the
Bull of Urban 8. Bullar. To. 3. p. 74.
is a grant not only of Relaxation, but Remission.

But here our Author interposes, and says, That they are so far from presuming
upon leave to Sin, that they don't think any one Sin that is past, can be
forgiven by an Indulgence. And for this he will be giving a Reason, because
says he, We are taught that no Sin is forgiven, even in the Sacrament of
Confession, without a sincere Repentance. Whether the latter be true, will
remain to be considered under the next Character; but what will a Reason
signify against Matter of Fact? For it is still a question, whether Sin is not
pretended to be forgiven by Indulgence? And what more common in Indulgences,
than a promise of Remission, and plenary Remission? As for that, says he,
Whoever considers, that they were many times forgiven for many hundred years;
nay, as the Doctor has it [and surely he has it from themselves] for many
Thousand years to come, he must soon conclude that this could not be giving
leave to sin for so long time to come, which so far exceeds the term of man's
life. But though it gives not leave to sin, it is sure a pardon for sin; and he
can no more have a pardon for a Thousand years past, who has lived but fifty or
sixty, than have an allowance for a Thousand years to come. And the Doctor said
not that they grant by Indulgences leave to sin for many Thousand years to
come, but that they granted Idulgences for many Thousand years to come. But
what says our Author to these prodigious numbers of years? It Is, says he,
only the releasing of Penances, which being assigned in proportion to the sins,
for some sins three years penance; for others five; might with some careless
Christians amount to that degree, that for fifty years of life, they might
possibly have 5000 years penalties due to their sins. And we shall add for him,
the 32000 of Sixtus the 4 th. and the ten hundred thousand of John the 22 th.
Well, supposing this account of it to be right, and that an Indulgence is only
a relaxation of such Penances as are due to the offense: Yet, what a leave, or
at least encouragement is here given to sin, when a man that has deserved to
undergo 5000 or 30000, or ten hundred thousand years of Penance, shall by a
Bull of a Pope be discharged from all this for saying three short Prayers, or
five Pater-Nosters, five Aves, and a Credo? But supposing the Sinner is so
careless also, that after that he has run up the score to so high a sum, he has
not procured such an Indulgence, and that the 5000, and the ten hundred
thousand years Penalties remain due, where is it that he is to undergo these
Penalties? And where is it that the Church in his notion, appoints, assigns,
and inflicts them? After all, methinks he had better have said, with some of
their own Church, that the Relaxation does not avail, as far as is promised,
but it is so declared, that the Faithful might be excited to give, and the
Church deceives them. Altisidor. Sum. l. 4, etc.


Thirteenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist.
Char. 13.
This he distributes into nine Particulars:

1. If he be false and deceitful to Mankind, yet Euge bone serve, all is well,
and he in an instant is thought worthy of a better Kingdom. This he says is
absolutely false. For this he gives two Reasons, 1. That Falsehood and deceit
are no where recommended or taught by his Church. As if his Church would
directly establish such Propositions. And yet the Council of Constance comes
near it, when it asserts, Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. 2. He says,
I am certain no man of what Church soever so guilty, can have admittance there,
but by a sincere repentance and restitution. This is the received Doctrine of
his Church, and I hope in their dealing they practice it as much as any. Here
he turns off the case in hand from the public to the private state of affairs,
and has not one word in vindication of what the Apologist laid to their charge,
especially in that notorious instance of the Pope's solemn Oration made in the
Conclave in commendation of the Assassination of Henry the Third of France.

As our Author has here broke one sentence of the Preacher's from another, and
set in the midst what belongs to the Sermon of Alms: So he has wholly omitted
Assertion 14 th. in the Apology, viz. If the Pope and his Emissaries say the
right hand is the left, the Papists are bound to believe it; which is there
made good by four several Arguments. But here our Author is modest, and has
left it to shift for it self, and his Church under the heavy charge of it.

2. No man can be a Papist, but he whose eyes are blinded by Education, or he
who puts his own eyes out by Atheism. It Is in the Sermon, No man Therefore can
be a Papist, etc. which refers to what was there before said, and the
description the Preacher had given of Popery, viz. 1. That the Pope can
dispense with the Laws of Nature, and against the Old and New Testament. Sermon.
p. 31, 32, 33.
2. That the Word of God is a Nose of Wax, a Dumb Judge, and dead Ink. 3. That
the Pope is another God upon Earth, and that if he declares the right hand is
the left, we ought to believe him. And then follows, No man therefore can be a
Papist, but, etc. The Question here is not about the Lives of Papists (as our
Author would have it) but about the character of Popery: And then it remains to
be considered, whether the Preacher was right in his representation of it, and
in the Authorities he produces for it. But instead of bringing the case to an
issue, our Author in his Good Advice, left out what went before, and the
Marginal Quotations of what he cited from the Sermon, and now has offered no
manner of Reply to, nor so much as taken notice of the Apologist's Argument.

3. The Council of Trent expresses its allowance of picturing the Divinity it
self, and accordingly the Pictures of the Trinity are ordinarily to be beheld
in the Popish Churches. This is a new point our Author has substituted; perhaps
thinking this look's somewhat better than an Answer to that he has omitted; but
yet I shall take it in my way. Here the Preacher, 1. Appeals to their Doctrine,
and for which he quotes the Council of Trent.

2. To their practice and use.

As to the first, our Author says, it is false, since the Council delivers just
the contrary, taking care that if it happens that the Histories of the Holy
Scriptures be painted or figured, that the people be taught, the Divinity is
not therefore figured or painted, as if that could be seen with corporeal eyes,
or represented in colors. Sess. 25.

Now here I observe, 1. Our Author represents the case as if the Picturing of
God and the Trinity in their Churches was much like what Aaron pleads for the
Golden Calf, I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf; as if it
was what they find in their Churches, have been placed there by they know not
whom, and are like those that are to be seen, it seems, in the frontispiece of
some Bibles and Common-Prayer-Books of the Church of England, that come from an
obscure uncertain hand; but what they themselves do not regard. If it happens,
etc. says the Council; thus far indeed our Author goes with the Council, but
why did he leave out what immediately follows, and why did he not read it as
the Council reads it? If it happens that sometimes the Histories and Narrations
of Scripture be Painted or Figured (when that shall be expedient for the
unlearned people.) So that it is not an accidental thing, but designedly done,
as an Expedient for instructing the unlearned people.

But however the Preacher says that of the Council, which the Council denies,
that they picture the Divinity it self; but does he say, that they picture what
they themselves believe to be the Picture of the Divinity? No surely, then he
had contradicted the Council, and made them downright Anthropomorphites; but he
lays it to their charge that they picture and make Representations of the
Divinity and Trinity it self, as well as of Saints, that is, not sparing even
the Divinity. O but, says the Council, these are only Histories of the Holy
Scriptures. But is there any History of Scripture that tells us God did so
appear in any Form, otherwise than in a Prophetical Scheme? And is not even
that forbidden when an Image of God is forbidden, because God cannot be
described in any way but by what he is not; and so is a reason against Images
in all, as well as any one Instance; and of which none can be proposed but what
fall under the same condemnation? As for what he has seen in the Frontispiece
of some Bibles and Common Prayer Books, they belong no more to our Church, than
the Temple of Pallas to the Roman Church, though existent in it. If indeed they
were as commonly to be seen in our Churches, were allowed, were set up by
order, and adored; if he could find it defended, and the benefit they are of to
the people, set forth in the Articles and Catechism of our Church, then he had
something to say; but till that, he is guilty of a gross Misrepresentation, and
in his common phrase, of an Absolute Falsehood, that says, that the Preacher's
Exclamation of, O hateful sight! may be as properly applied to any thing of
that nature in our Churches.

4. He prays to Images. This, says he, is false too, for several Reasons: (1.)
Because they are taught to pray to God alone, but to none else. Is that all? It
must be acknowledged they go a little further, for they desire the Intercession
of such holy persons as are acceptable to God, whether in Heaven or Earth? But
do they no otherwise desire the Intercession of Holy persons in Heaven, than
they do those in Earth? Do they ask, suppose, of a Confessor to be delivered
from the chain of their sins, Entretiens de Philalethe, etc. p. 2. p. 160, etc.
Orat. Propr.
to be preserved from spiritual maladies, and Hellfire, and to be prepared for
Heaven, etc. as they ask of the Saints? Or do they so much as pray to God, that
he would grant that by the Merits and Prayers of their Confessor, as well as
St. Andrew, they may be delivered from the Fire of Hell?

(2.) He says, For Images, we confess them to be nothing but wood and stone.
Will he be so bold as to say this, nothing but wood, after they are
Consecrated? Let our Author consult Papist Represented and not Misrepresented,
Chap. 1. And will he deny that they are Representers, and to be applied to as
if the Objects Represented were present? If he does, why has he not bestowed a
little of his pains in chastising the Apologist? But it seems the Apologist
however has laid himself open in going farther, for he speaks of leaving
prayers with an Image. And why not as well as pray to them? Let him state the
matter, and confute this, and I Will promise him the Apologist shall then give up
the former. But what is become of the Christus in Imagine, in Curtius? Surely
the City of Lucca will take it ill at his hands, that he has not a word to say
in behalf of their famous Image, and the veracity of their Historian. Here I
shall refer the Sayer to what has been already said, Char. 9. n. 2. I shall
take his excuse that he makes; for his perversion of the Preacher's sense,
though it had been a little more sincere, if he had positively acknowledged his
fault, rather to come off with an If, when the case is evident.

5. He worships Bread and Wine, not as Representations of God, but as God
himself. This, says he, is false, since we worship only God himself, and not
the Bread and Wine, which we believe not to be in the Blessed Sacrament. And
then he comes in with his charge of Misrepresenting, and gravely adds a good
Rule from a worthy hand. But all is spoiled for want of proof that the Preacher
does charge it upon them, that t^^y believe first of all the Bread and Wine to
be in the Sacrament: and yet worship it as God himself. But the Preacher speaks
not of what they believed, but what they did, as is plain by the Negative he
inserts, viz. Here you see the Bread and Wine are worshipped by them, not as
Representations of God, which the Bread and Wine are, but as God himself. The
Preacher shows the grossness of their practice, that what is indeed but Bread
and Wine in their Substance, and a Representation of our Savior, they worship
as God himself. The former is what the thing is in it self, the latter he
charges upon them as their practice. And therefore the Sayer first mistakes the
case, and then proceeds to spend a censure upon it.

6. He is taught, that the Passion of Christ takes away only the guilt of
Mortal sins, but not the eternal punishment. Here the Apologist took some
little pains to state the Case, and proceeded upon these Heads, to show in
their way, 1. That the Guilt may be taken away, when the punishment is not. 2.
That the Guilt may be taken away by one cause, and the eternal punishment by
another. 3. That the Passion of Christ only takes away the Guilt of Mortal
sins, but does not take away the eternal punishment. Here it might be expected
our Author would have entered into the Merits of the Cause, but instead of
that, says, it is false; gives us a short reason or two, and dismisses the
point, and leaves the Apology without a word of Reply.

7. He is taught the non-necessity of Repentance before the imminent point of
death. This is another new point scor'd up to the account of the Preachers, and
was none of the twenty eight Assertions in the Advice. But however, I shall try
whether the Preacher had not Authority for it.

Here our Author offers two things: 1. That it is absolutely contrary to the
Doctrine and general practice of their Church, whose Members are obliged to go
to Confession once a year, which cannot be performed without a beauty
Repentance. 2. We hear nothing so much discoursed of in our Books and Sermons,
as deferring Repentance to the last. I will not undertake for their Sermons,
for I am not so conversant in theirs, as he is in ours; but in their Books we
find, 1. That they are taught that they are not bound to repent but in the
danger or point of death. Enchir. c. 1. n. 31.
So Navar, who affirms it to be the sense of all. 2. That though the Church
calls upon them to repent at solemn times, as Easter, yet the Church is
satisfied in the Ritual performance of it, Reginaldus de Contrit. l. 2. c. 4.
and that true inward Repentance is not thereby required. 3. That to defer our
Repentance, is but a venial sin. Soto in 4 Sent. Did. 17. q. 2. Art. 6. Concl.
2 a.
4. This is conformable to the Doctrine of the Church, which teaches that
Absolution with Attrition is equivalent to Confession. Of this see Char. 14. n.
2.

8. The bare saying of Prayers, without either minding what he says, or
understanding it, is sufficient to the Divine acceptance.

9. So he is to appear before God dumb and senseless, like one of his Idols.

Our Author observes here, that it seems by the Apologizer this saying of the
Preacher is not charged upon us as a professed Doctrine of ours, but only as a
consequence of his own Head; and from whence does he draw it? From this
supposed principle, viz. the Romish Church enjoins the saying Prayers in a
Language unknown to the Generality of the people. The Chain as here
represented, is wholly a Fiction. For after the Apologist had charged him with
a partial Relation of the Preacher's sense, he thus concludes, So that what the
Adviser quotes is (not a consequence inferred from a principle, as he says,
but) a particular of the foregoing General, the Preacher telling his Auditors,
that mere Works done in Acts of Devotion in the Church of Rome is, in the
opinion of that Church, sufficient to Divine Acceptance; This he fortifies with
an Instance, as it is in bare saying of Prayers without either minding what
they say, or understanding it. And he goes on: And agreeably hereunto the
Romish Church enjoins the saying them in a Language not understood, etc. So far
is it either from our Author's consequence, or a principle from whence it is
inferred. But here our Author slips away from the Argument of the Apologist,
which brought him to the exigence of owning himself a Falsifier as to his
charge against the Preacher; or a Deserter and Condemner of his own Church. But
why does he now call [ the enjoining of a Prayer in a Language unknown to the
People] a supposed Principle? Is it not enjoined? There he is silent. But what
if the Priests do not understand? So it has been; so Nic. Clemangis says, We
see Priests almost universally have much ado to read, C. 16. In Cassandri
Liturg.
without understanding the Sense or the Words; so Billet, etc. And what if the
Priests do understand it? Is it therefore understood by the People? But why
does he instance in Missals translated for Vulgar use? That sure he should be
cautious in, for it is an attempt stands reprobated by a great Authority, as the
Seed-plot of Disobedience, Collectio quorundam Auth. cum decretis Par. 1661.
Sedition, Schism, etc. Now which is in the right, Pope Alexander the 7 th, who
thus condemned and forbad it; or our Author, who says, The People have the
same in English; and what will become both of Priests that allow it, and People
that use it, when the Anathema of the Council of Trent is also against it, In 1
Cor. 16. Disp. 30.
(as Salmeron, and others declare) I shall leave as I find it. From thence our
Author runs to the Mass, which he says, being a Sacrifice rather than a
Prayer, the Attention and Devotion of the People does not so much consist in
the Words, said by the Priest, as in what is done by him. But is there in the
Mass nothing but the Oblation, nothing but Action? Are there no Prayers? That
he dares not say, he only softens, it is not so much, it is rather. And what does
this signify to these parts of the Service, which are not of that kind? Where
then is the Devotion and Attention, when there is no Understanding? Where the
Acceptance, when there is neither Attention or Devotion? Let him consider what
the Apologist said, p. 37, 39. and then he will find his Appeal to their
Practice to be of no Service to him. When all is said, he has lost the Argument
about the Acceptance of Prayer not understood, and which the Apologist offered
him Authorities for. But here he supposes he has him at Advantage; and tho he
lets go Tolet and Salmeron, yet he charges him home with somewhat worse than
Ignorance, for making the Representer an Abetter of such unreasonable Doctrine,
[ that to say Prayers well and devoutly, it is not necessary to have Attention
not on the Words or Sense] when he has left out the following Words, [ But
rather purely on God.] It Is an Omission, I confess, a fault frequent with
himself. I heartily wish our Author as clear of Abetting what he calls the
unreasonable Doctrine, as the Apologist is of Contrivance; who may therefore
justly return his own words in a charge somewhat worse, I can assure him, 'twas
not design, Sayings, p. 47.
but mistake only. In justice to him, let us put it in, yet I don't see the
case at all amended; Attention purely on God, being a distinct thing from
Attention on the Prayers. And if he says his Prayers without attending to the
Words or Sense, whether he thinks purely on God, or thinks on any thing else,
yet he is no more at these his Prayers with his mind, than if he were not at
Prayers. For what are Prayers in public but the Words and Sense? And what
makes them our Prayers, but Attention to the Words and Sense? So that Prayers
without Attention, are much at one with Prayers without Understanding: And
those are Prayers without Attention, where the Words and Sense of the Prayers
are not attended to. Well, this says our Author, is unreasonable Doctrine,
That to say say Prayers well and devoutly, it is not necessary to have Attention
on the Words and Sense. And I hope it is unreasonable Doctrine then, that to say
Prayers well and devoutly, it is not necessary to understand either Words and
Sense. And yet this is approved Doctrine in their Church; Sum. par. 3. tit. 13.
for says Salmeron, Prayers are like the Words of a Charmer, they prevail even
when they are not understood. I hope again, it is unreasonable Doctrine, that in
Prayer, Instruct. Sacer. c. 13. n. 5, 6.
it is not necessary to attend to the Sense; nor so much as to consider he is
present before God: And yet no less than Cardinal Tolet so determines. By this
time, I hope both Preacher and Vindicator are set right in our Author's good
Opinion as to this matter. Proceed we.

Here I expected a round Charge against Assertion 20 th, that they avowedly
allow what God positively forbids. It Is blunt and home, and what the Apologist
makes good; but this is a dry Doctrine, and so he substitutes a new one in the
place.

Fourteenth Character of a Pulpit-Papist. Char. 14.

Under this are reduced seven Particulars.

1. To cover his Idolatry he commits Sacrilege, steals away one of the Ten
Commandments, and by their Index Expurgatorius, blots the two Tables themselves.

This is a new Charge, brought to the Account, but I shall give it some
Consideration. This Charge, he says, is not sincere. 1. Because they have the
Ten Commandments in their Bibles and Catechism. 2. If they are set short in
some little Abstracts of Christian Doctrine, it is in Compliance to the Weakness
of some Memories and Capacities, setting down only the Words of the Precept,
without the Addition of Threats, Promises or Explications.

In the first of these he would insinuate, as if the 2 d Commandment is never
expunged by them, which he dares not stand to. If it be expunged elsewhere, to
what purpose does he refer us to the Bible and Catechisms? For if it be in the
Bible and Catechisms, but not in the Offices of the Church, it is still a true
Charge against them. And I remember it was both showed, that it was not in
several of their Offices, and it was put to him, Doctrines and Practices, c.
25. p. 123.
to show in what public Offices of their Church it is to be found. But
however, it is in their Bibles, but what is this to those that have not the use
of the Bible permitted to them? However, it is in their Catechisms. Surely our
Author is not sincere. Pap. Misrep. c. 25.
For he once confessed it to be left out in their short Catechisms; or if he is
improved since that time in his Confidence, I will produce Catechism after
Catechism, where it is not; such as the Child's Catechism, 1678. And as for the
Abstracts, even in those the two first Commandments are thrust into one, and
often there is nothing at all of the second, but an etc. in the place, as in
the Abstract of the Scripture Catechism, An. 1675; which I suppose is that
which he himself refers to, p. 57.

2. For his Absolution, it is not necessary he should be sorry for his Sin, but
only for the Penance. Here I presumed our Author would have expatiated upon the
point, and have cleared their Church (if he could) from the Imputation charged
upon them by the Preacher, and maintained by the Apologist, who showed from the
Council of Trent, their Catechism, and the Practice of their Church, that a
Sorrow for the Penance alone (or Attrition) with Confession to the Priest, is
sufficient without Contrition; but to all this, our Author gives no Reply.

3. If this should fail, it is but being at the Charge of an Indulgence, or
Pope's Pardon; that is, to purchase so many pennyworth of other men's Merits:
And this is what is required instead of Regeneration, Sanctification, and a
Godly Life. This, says our Author, involves an absolute Falsity; whilst it
supposes that a Papist, who is sorry neither for his Sins, nor the Punishment
that attends them, has no more to do than to procure the Pope's Pardon; and
that this is sufficient instead of Repentance. This is a most abominable
Doctrine in it self, and most injuriously charged upon us. And yet as
abominable Doctrine as it is, it is found and proved upon them by the Apologist,
from the Indulgences granted in their Crusado's, and upon other Occasions. But
says our Sayer, The only ground for it, is the Practice of some prostigate
Men, in the number of which he must then place several of his Popes. But to all
the Evidence for this, our Author says not a Word. Of this, let the Reader see
before, Char. 12.

4. Auricular Confession, their great Intelligence, and Leiger Nuntio, is the
main Curb of the Laity, whereby the Clergy holds them in aw, in being admitted
to all their Secrets of States and Families, thereby to work their Purposes and
Plots: it is a matter of mere Interest; and were there no gain in it, they would
be ashamed of it.

Of this, he says, It Is a most odious Character of an Institution allowed,
even in the Church of England. What, is their Auricular Confession, as it is
described from the Council of Trent in the Apology, an Institution of the
Church of England? Does the Church of England hold it necessary, jure Divino,
to Confess to the Priest, all and singular mortal Sins, even the most Secret,
whether Acts, Thoughts or Desires, with all their Circumstances, so far as may
change the nature of the Sin; and without doing which, no Absolution is to be
given? He may as well say, Transubstantiation is the Doctrine of the Church of
England, because they own the Eucharist, as their Auricular Confession is an
Institution of our Church, because it allows and approves Confession in some
cases. But, what says our Author to the Charge? What to the use made of it in
intruding into the Secrets of States and Families, and to work their Projects?
What to the Allegations from their own Historians? Here the old Refuge is made
use of, Silence. Of this, see before, Char. 9. n. 3.

5. Ignorance is the Mother of their Devotion, which they are bound to by Vow,
and under the severest Penalties. This, says our Author, is a great Calumny,
and an empty Consequence of the Preacher. Methinks our Author should not be so
brisk upon this Sermon, which he has made so extremely bold with, sometimes
mollifying the Sense of it, (when it looks two broad upon them) at other times
sharpning it, leaving out and altering, as it was here, when he made the
Preacher say before, they are bound to vow Ignorance. This, he says, the
Apologizer pretends to make out. But if it be but Pretense, why has not the
Sayer exposed him, and run down the Instances of St. Benedict, Francis,
Ignatius Loyala? I acknowledge the Learning of many of their Friars and Monks,
but they are not beholding to their Vows and Rules for their Learning: For the
more they keep to them, the less Learned they will be; or else I know not why
the Jesuits are not as strictly tied up to their Hours, etc. as the
Benedictines. But what is become of Assertion 25. Their avowed Principles are
to keep the People in Ignorance? Where are we to expect the Answer to what the
Apologist there produced in Confirmation of it? That Is reserved to a more
convenient time. See before, Char. 8.

Here again, we want an Answer to what was said on Assertion 26. They teach
their People better Manners, than to rely upon the all-sufficient Merits of
Christ. All which the Apologist did undetake to prove upon them.

But instead of that, our Author throws in a new Instance to make up the
Defect, viz.

6. They must wholly submit their Reason to an Infallible Judge, even so far (if
one of their greatest Authors say true) as to be bound to believe Virtue to be
Bad, and Vice to be Good, if it shall please his Holiness to say so. This,
says he, is a gross Abuse of Bellarmin. But first of all, what says he to the
general Proposition, That they must wholly submit their Reason to the
Infallible Judge? Is that an Abuse of their Church? And setting aside Bellarmin
for the present; Is there none of his gross Doctrine to be found elsewhere?
What thinks he, if the Pope should declare the right Hand is the left, are they
bound to believe it? This was once called a Misrepresentation in the Preacher,
but their own Lyra was beforehand with him (tho our Author had the good manners
to leave out the Quotation). What thinks he of the Rule of Ignatius, That if
the Catholic Church define that to be black, which appears to be white, they
are bound to account it to be black? What Is think he of meriting by believing an
Heretical Proposition taught by his Bishop? These are Cases resolved by them in
the Affirmative, as the Apologist showed in the place quoted by our Author; but
tho nothing could be objected against those, and the like Evidences, yet it
seems this is a most gross Abuse of Bellarmin, an inexcusable Aspersion, a
Forgery of the Preacher. But, why all this? Because, says he, these words are
not his Assertion, but an Inconvenience he argues from, in proof of what he had
before asserted, that the Pope is Infallible. But if it be an Inconvenience,
it is what he is contented should be taken for an Assertion. It Is plainly a case
he puts, The general Proposition in proof indeed was, that the Pope could not
err in things of themselves good and evil, as it is a matter of Faith (the
Catholic Faith teaching Virtue to be good, and Vice to be evil.) The next
Proposition in confirmation of it is, that the Church is bound to believe
according to the Pope's Resolution of the case, Unless she would sin against
conscience.

The next is, supposing that the Pope should command Vice and forbid Virtue;
then says he, the Church is bound to acquiesce in his judgment in all doubtful
matters, to do what he commands, and not do what he forbids; and lest perhaps
she act against conscience, she is bound to believe that to be good which he
commands, and that evil which he forbids. That the Pope cannot err, is the
Principle he holds to; but yet to secure the duty of the people, he breaks off
the Argument; and lets it all issue in the point of the Churches obedience and
submission, lest they should at last find his Holiness has thus erred. Well,
says he, however if it should be so, Sect. ac ut rem.
yet, as he said before in another case, it belongs not to Subjects to doubt of
these things, but simply to obey. And how timorous soever our Author is to own
it, how solicitous to bury it under the rubbish of Abuses, Aspersions, and
Forgeries; yet others are not so bashful. Even Bellarmin himself elsewhere does
admit it, with some little qualification, C. 13. in Barklaium.
In a good sense, says he, Christ gave to Peter the power of making sin not to
be a sin, and of what was not sin, to be sin. Bellarmin indeed saw further than
our Author: he know well, that these Metamorphoses had been practiced by the
Papal Authority, and if they were bound to believe that to be good which he
commands, and approve that which he decrees, when what was in it self unlawful
was made lawful by his determination, there was no disputing. Of this we have a
notable instance in Pope Martin the Fifth, Antonini Summa.
who after mature consultation, did dispense with one that had taken his Sister
to Wife, because of the Scandals that otherwise must have happened upon their
Separation.

7. Their Churchmen must live a single life, whether honestly or no, it makes
no matter. Our Author after his wonted manner, declares this to be utterly
false; it being no indifferent thing in our Church whether the Clergy live
honestly or no. In this Assertion the Apologist observed there were two Points
contained: 1. That the Clergy in the Church of Rome must and are obliged by the
Order of their Church, and their own Vow, to lead a single life. 2. That there
is more care taken that they live single, than that they live honestly. But
this says our Author is to fall much below the Preacher; but why so, what
mighty difference is there betwixt saying, as the Preacher, that whether they
can do it honestly, it makes no matter; or more care is taken that they live
single, than that they live honestly? For certainly not much matter is made of
that, which they take no reasonable care in. But however he will not allow the
proof of it offered in the Apology; Which, says he, is this chiefly, because
the punishment for a Clergyman that marries, is much greater than for one that
keeps his Concubine. The matter of fact he allows, and indeed it was undeniably
proved against them. But this, he says, is not to the purpose, it being as if
I should say, that according to the Principles of the Church of England, it
matters not, whether her Members turn Turks, or no: And then should bring this
for proof, because she has severe penalties, even of death it self for such as
become Papists, but none at all for those that turn Turks. But this is far from
the case; for Laws are made according to the state and exigence of Affairs, and
the Cases that fall out, or probably may fall out, and the damage done thereby
to the Community: But where there is no danger or damage in prospect, it is a
ridiculous thing to make a Law. The danger here was from the Papists, and their
practices against the Government, which was the reason of those Laws: but there
is no danger of the Members of its Church turning Turks, which is the reason
why there is no Law against it. And his Argument would be much as if it should
be said, That according to the Principles of the Greek Church it matters not
whether her Members turn Heathens; and then should bring this for proof of it,
because she has severe Penalties, even death it self for those that turn Turks
(for they that so turn are not received into the Church without as openly
renouncing, as they professed Mahometism, which is death) but none at all for
those that turn Heathens. If he had put the case right, it should have been
thus, That by the Laws of England it is death to turn Papist, and a Fine of 10
s. to turn Turk, in the same circumstances of danger; then it had looked
speciously enough that they took more care that they should not turn Papists,
than Turks. And so we have brought the case home. For if when a Clergyman is
found married, he must be separated or deprived; but if he keeps a Concubine,
he is Fined but 10 s; it is evident, which is the worst crime in the opinion of
the Church of Rome. Our Author says, This was the chief Argument of the
Apologist; and if so, methinks when he had dismissed this by a comparison, he
might at once have blown off what remains. But though he has not thought fit to
set the rest before the Reader, yet I shall offer them to his Consideration. In
further confirmation of this Charge, the Apologist appealed to their
Allowances, as Priests Marriage is absolutely forbid without any Relaxation or
Dispensation, but Concubinage has been openly allowed and licensed; it is
further confirmed by their Resolution of the Case, when they account
Concubinage and Fornication a less sin in a Priest than Marriage. These, it
seems, were inconsiderable; so neither the Argument, nor the Authorities
vouched for them, deserved an Answer. And for company our Author has dismissed
also Assertion 28. viz. The reason why the Clergy are bound to live single, is
for fear lest having Wives and Children they should give the State security of
their Obedience to their Sovereign.

I have now done with our Author's 14 Characters, which consist partly of
matter of Fact and Observation, partly of Doctrine of their own, and partly of
Inferences from, and Arguings upon them. In the two former of which (which are
the proper Subject of Representation) I have showed there has been nothing
charged upon them by the Preachers as to Principle, Practice or Fact, which
they had not good Evidence for; and was so far from being a Fiction of their
own, that they condemn them out of their own mouths. As for the latter, it
belongs not to the Case before us; but yet that nothing might be wanting to
give our Author satisfaction, the Arguments produced by the Preachers against
the Church of Rome have been considered, and justified. So that in Conclusion I
may here challenge him to show that there is any Principle or Doctrine, which
is not a Principle of theirs; or a Practice, which is not a Practice; or a
Consequence which is not truly inferred from them. I do not think that a
Misrepresentation can be justly chargeable upon a mere Mistake, no more than it
is upon the inconsequence of an Argument: But it is a Wonder to me, that amongst
the Ten thousand Pulpits, (as he reckons them) and the multitude of Writers in
the Church of England, and under all the Provocations they have met with, and
in the heat of Argument, there can be nothing material produced against them,
notwithstanding the utmost diligence could be used, and the reading of Volumes
of Sermons on purpose to make a Discovery.

Were they indeed guilty of Misrepresentation, and that there was No praying to
Images in the Church of Rome; No compounding with Heaven for Vnforsaken Sins;
No worshipping Bread and Wine, as God himself; No saying Prayers without
Attention; No Divisions among themselves; No renouncing their Senses, etc. Yet
we know where these would be matched, when our Adversaries tell us, The
Protestants have no God, no Faith, no Religion; but are mere Atheists, and
worship the Devil, as Possevine and Prateolus teach. See the View, p. 106, etc.
That to run down Popery, tho he know nothing of it, See before, p. 4.
is to be a true Son of the Church of England. That Interest and Passion puts
the Preachers upon arguing in Defiance to their own Conscience, Sayings, p. 53.
(which our Author, it seems, knows better than themselves). Or as a late
Author, That Libertinism is the sole Profession, and the very soul of all
Sectaries; [that is, The Mirror of Truth, p. 10, 12, etc. 1688.
those that are not in Communion with the Church of Rome] That the false Church
[that is, all but themselves] and Religion, has no other but vile Hypocrites.
That it Professes the broad and large way leading to Destruction, granting
Libertinism to the highest degree of Wickedness in one kind or another. Into
which, whoever enters, for saking the true, begins presently to leave all
Goodness, and becomes an outcast and scum of the Earth, as to all Wickedness
and Profaneness. That it enjoys no true Spirituality, but brainsick Fancy; and
there was never any sound Spiritual Book written by them. They have the Lord in
their Mouth, but their hearts are far from him. That by reason of its wicked
Obstinacy and Libertinism, it brings all the Professors thereof to
Disobedience, and takes away all neighbourly Love and just Dealing one with
another, and hereby bringing Ruin and Confusion upon all Commonwealths, etc.

If so much had been said of the Church of Rome; what a rout had here been?
What a mustering up of Misrepresentations, Calumnies and Abuses? What arguing
in Defiance to their own Conscience? But I will here excuse the Author of the
Mirror, for he that can be so ignorant, as to tell us, that the Creed of Pius 4
th (which he at large rehearses) was the constant Profession of Faith in the
days of Austin the Monk, An. 596. Mirror, p. 15, 17.
and can quote that Monk's Letter to Pope Gregory for it, may, for ought I
know, think as he writes, and so his Representations of the Sectaries, and of
the Profession of Pope Gregory's Faith be equally true, and what he equally
understands.

But our Author is not alike excusable: For whatever he may know concerning the
Days of Austin the Monk, I know not; but what he writes about, belongs more to
his own, and so if he falls in with Misrepresentation, his Conscience must be
the more concerned: And which after all he is so far from making good, that he
is forced to use all the Shifts that one conscious to himself of infirmity, and
subtle enough to conceal it, can contrive; which for a Conclusion to the whole,
I shall now a little enquire into.

1. The first Artifice he uses, is Disclaiming and Renouncing, after this
manner, Epistle to the Reader.
If to be a Papist, is to be that which is described in these Characters; I
declare, I am none, and that I am so far from undertaking Apologies for men of
such Practices and Belief, that I here profess a hearty Detestation of all such
Engagements. -- If this was so, I concluded I had certainly fallen into the
very mouth of Hell-Doctrines, Sayings, p. 54.
I as much abhor, as Hell and Damnation it self. If this be to be a Papist;
then certainly, to be a Papist, is to be the worst of Men. -- And it is so far
from being a doubt, whether he be a Christian, that it is certain he can be
none; and that if he be bound to believe and live according to the Principles
here laid down, he can have no right to Salvation. P. 56.
-- Whatever Church would receive him with the Profession of all those
scandalous Doctrines the Pulpits charge against us, I would be sure to be no
Member of it; and if there were no other, but that Church amongst Christians, I
would then begin to look toward Turkey. To the Reader.
Nay, he advances further, Whoever will be a good Papist, must instead of
assenting to, disclaim every point that is here set down by the Pulpits, as
Articles of his Religion. Let us now try our Author, in some one of these
Scandalous and Abominable Doctrines, who comes thus armed Cap-a-pie, with
Detestations, Abhorrencies, Disclaimings, and see whether he be invulnerable.
What thinks he of the first of those, he calls, Follies and Abominations, To
the Reader.
viz. praying to Images, and attributing Satisfaction and Expiation to a
Crucifix of Wood and Stone? What does he think of the Office of Consecration,
where it is prayed that God would bless the Wood of the Cross, See before Char.
9.
that it may be a saving Remedy to Mankind, a Stability of Faith, the
Redemption of Souls, etc? How would he behave himself in the Company of
Cardinal Capisucci, who maintains that the Worship is to the Image? How in the
presence of the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who defended the Curate's, to the
Word, the Wood, against Imbert's, to Christ, and not to the Wood? Could he bear
up to them, and tell them it is Infamous, that they are no Christians, and have
no right to Salvation? Which does he think would there be the Misrepresenter,
our Author that Dooms this to the Pit of Hell, or those that defend it? Of this
Artifice, see the View, p. 51.

2. Another Artifice is to confound the Consequences drawn by the Protestants
from their Principles, with their Principles, and to make the Consequence to be
their Principle. This he was formerly taxed with in Doct. and Pract. and View,
p. 63. And yet he proceeds still in the same order. So because they are accused
of Idolatry, therefore he makes that to be part of the Character of a Papist,
and then disavows it. Thus he says, To the Reader, p. 9.
Were Popery so foul as it is in the Opinion of the Vulgar; did it teach Men
Idolatry, to worship any Creature for God, to neglect the Commandments, I would
choose rather to be a Jew, Turk, or Infidel, than a Papist. All which signifies
nothing, unless the Papist should believe himself to be an Idolater.

3. We must beware again, that we follow him not too close, or think after all
these Disclaimings and Abhorrings, that he is plainly to be understood; for
there are certain Reserves and Expositions carefully couched in, that he may
retire to upon occasion. Such as these, A Papist is bound to disclaim every
point here set down, To the Reader, p. 1, 2, 3. P. 54.
as Articles of his Religion, and as they are obliged to the Profession of
them, so to believe and live -- according to the Form asserted in the
Characters, as here set down. So that tho they are never so plainly proved upon
them; yet if they are not Articles of his Religion, nor what they are obliged
to believe and do, or agree not precisely with the Form, and as set down in the
Characters, he may safely abhor, detest and damn them.

4. If he be pressed home, and the Authorities come thick, or the Practice and
use be urged a little too close; he has yet a relief. I found, says he, a
great number of Matters of Fact, as Massacres, To the Reader, p. 11, 12.
Usurpations, Murders of Princes, Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies, Persecutions,
and other such unwarrantable Practices, charged against the Members of this
Church [of Rome.] I found again the vicious and scandalous Lives of some of her
chief Prelates, their Pride, Covetousness and Luxury, laid home, as likewise
the ill Examples of other Ecclesiastical Dignitaries, as of Cardinals, Bishops,
Priests; their Ignorance, Simony, Oppression, Cruelties, Excesses, etc. Then
the loose and extravagant Opinions of many of her Doctors. Lastly, many
Superstitions and Abuses found amongst the People, their being imposed upon by
some with idle Inventions, the noise of Relics and Miracles, and being
Priest-ridden a thousand other ways. This is in truth a Charge, as he says,
laid home. It Is worth attending, how he brings himself off; why, Here, says
he, I began to lay aside all Trouble and Scruples concerning my Religion, being
now well satisfied; How, that all this was false? Not so quick, but that the
frightful Character, which surprised me before, (the matter of which it seems
is true) was not taken from her Faith and Doctrine, but only from the Vice and
Wickedness of such, who tho perchance in her Communion, yet followed her
Direction: And that 'twas rather a black Record of as many villainous Practices,
as ever had been committed by any of her Members, shamed upon the People. What,
as false? That he dares not say; but for a draught of such things the Church
taught, encouraged and approved. What work is here for a Protestant
Representer? A Bedroll of Abominations! But says our Author by way of
Prevention and Alleviation, It Is a Character taken from the Vice and Wickedness
of such, who were perchance in her Communion. How! Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
Priests, but perchance in her Communion. Has our Author at last got possession
of the Keys of the Inquisition, and can he bring even Popes, etc. before his
Bar? That may sound a little too harsh; therefore the result is, that it is
shamed upon the People, for such things the Church taught, encouraged, and
approved. So that, let the Doctrine prevail never so much, the Teachers be
never so many, the Practice never so bad, yet here is a Shield, The Church has
not taught, etc. I remember it was once put to him, and I find it not answered,
Doctrine. and Pract. p 13.
We are often blamed for charging particular Doctrines upon their Church, but
we desire to know what it is makes a Doctrine of their Church. He tells us, we
are not to charge upon them every Opinion of Authors, To the Reader. P. 56.
for the professed Religion of Papists, -- Not the loose and extravagant
Opinions of many of her Doctors; Not the different Opinions of School-Divines,
nor the Niceties a Parson designedly enters amongst; but if we come to set
Authority against Authority, I know not why an Aquinas, a Bellarmin, a Suarez,
etc. may not vye with our Author, and as soon be heard. And why a Profession of
his own, P. 57.
That I have declared nothing as an Article of Faith, but what has been thus
positively determined by the Church Representative, or is so acknowledged by
the whole Body Diffusive, (which it seems he has consulted) should bear down
the Authority of many of her Doctors and School-Divines, when they both have
come forth with the Approbation of their Church, and never were condemned by
it, for teaching against it. And now the Controversy is depending betwixt them,
and we are to attend which gives the most faithful account of the Doctrine and
Practices of the Church of Rome; the Schoolmen of old time, or the Representers
of this.

5. When all other helps fail, he has one yet in reserve, for the ending of
this Controversy, which is a Challenge he throws out to the Author of the
Answer to the Representers Reflection upon the State and View, and not to him,
but to all the Ministers; nay, to all the Protestants of this Nation: [ Show us
the Papists to agree with those Characters, that have been given them out of
the Pulpits.] This is the Sum of no less than ten Pages he has wrote in Reply
to this. But now, besides the uncharitableness of this Course, which is to
enquire into the Lives of those of his Communion, and to make Descants upon
them; and which when he appeals to, he gives a Provocation not to be very
overly in: Besides this, it is of no use here; For,

1. It Is an Argument that is contingent, and (1.) which any sort of People may
venture at. Thus the Turks may Challenge the Christians, whether they be the
People the Christians represent them. Let them come and see (may they say)
whether we are not as Temperate, as Just, etc. as the Greeks among whom we
live; and if Religion were to be judged of, as to its truth and goodness by
such a comparison, whether we might not as well pretend to it as the other. And
if they find us in all things like the rest of Mankind, P. 5.
without more horns and heads, then who are the Misrepresenter? And yet, thus
our Author argues. This the Protestants may turn upon the Papists after this
manner, Show us the Protestants that agree with the Papists Character of them.
There are few Papists, but have some Relations, P. 3.
Neighbors, Correspondents, Acquaintance, or Conversation with some
Protestants. What I require of them then, is to compare these Protestants they
know, with the Ideas, Notions, and Characters of a Papist-Protestant, that is,
with the Notions that have been taught them by their Priests, Pulpits, and
Books. Let 'em tell me upon due Consideration, whether they are mere Atheists,
and worship the Devil, and act in defiance of their own Conscience; and Profess
the Broad way leading to Destruction, and grant Libertinism to the highest
degree of Wickedness, etc.

(2.) It Is Contingent, as the same Persons and People may be good and bad,
better and worse in diverse States and Circumstances. If this be a good
Argument, it will always be so in all Ages and Cases; and go where you will,
and take them where you will, you will always find the Papist to answer our
Authors Character, and never to come up to the Pulpit-Character of him. But I
dare say, our Author will not allow this to be a fair Method of proceeding; and
that for Example, a Protestant should describe a Papist according to the great
number of Matters of Fact, which with our Author he may find by Writers of
their own, To the Reader, p. 1^.
charged upon them, such as Massacres, Usurpations, Murders of Princes,
Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies, Persecutions; the vicious and scandalous Lives
of some of her chief Prelates, [Popes] their Pride, Covetousness and Luxury; as
likewise, the ill Examples of other Ecclesiastical Dignitaries, as of
Cardinals, Bishops, Priests; their Ignorance, Simony, Oppression, Cruelties,
Excesses, etc. And I may add, the dissoluteness of manners prevailing
throughout the Papal Dominions in some Ages. Was ever this the State of the
Papacy? If it was, as our Author cannot deny, then why may not we take the
Character of a Papist from such an age, as well as the Age or Place where we
live? Or, why not from another Country, as well as from our own? This indeed
our Author sometimes refers to. For, says he, To the Reader, p. 8.
This [That it is only mistake and passion makes Popery so deformed a Monster]
every one will conclude to be true, who has taken a prospect of Holland, and
those Towns of Germany, in which Papists and Protestants live together in one
Corporation, under the same Laws, and making use in some places, even of the
same Churches too; and this with such Freedom, Amity and good Correspondence,
that their different Communion cannot be easily discovered; and a man that
should come out of England, with his Head glowing with our Pulpit-Popery, would
not be easily convinced of the being of any Papists there. Now it is certain,
the Papists here and there are of the same Church, Principles and Faith, and
it is no Difference in this kind, makes them there like other Men, and here like
Monsters; but it is because there the Papists are what they are, and here they
are made to be what they are not, but what their Maligners please to render
them.

I might here show how far our Author is out in matter of Fact, that tho these
live together, yet it is with great difference. However, supposing what he
says to be true, yet that is no fit way to judge of their Religion by; since
whatever Freedom, Amity, and good Correspondence they have or exercise, is not
from their Church, Principles and Faith, but from other reasons which are
Political, such as Interest and Self-preservation, etc. For if it was from
their Church, Principles and Faith, Popery would be all over the World the same
Popery as it is in Holland, and the places of Germany he speaks of. But there
is a vast difference betwixt Popery and Popery; betwixt Popery when it is
alone, and Popery when it is diluted with Protestantism. And if we would know
what it is, the fairer way to judge of it, is where it is alone; not as in
Holland, and Germany, or England, but as in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and I may
add now in France. For there is the Church, Principles, and Faith, in puris
naturalibus; and if we are to be referred to judge of what it is, by the Lives
and Practices of its Professors, thither in reason we are to go; pass we over
the Alps, and the Pyrenean Mountains, or indeed the narrow Seas, and there we
may take a better View and Prospect, than in a few Converts here; who yet I
doubt will generally be found without being rigorously observed, not to have
changed their Lives for the better, Sayings, p. 7.
no more than their Religion.

2. After all, this is not to the purpose. For the Question is, what is Popery,
and whether the Pulpits have truly represented it or not? And Popery certainly
was not there described from the Lives of the present Professors of it in this
Nation; but from its Principles, and the Practices of their Church in
Conformity to those Principles. Our Author surely will acknowledge that Popery
is always the same, that it is what it has been, and it has been what it is;
and if so, his way must conclude against it self; unless he will say in all
Ages, and all Countries, Men of that Religion have lived alike; and therefore,
to know whether the Pulpits have represented Popery aright or no, we must go
not to the Lives of any Age or Place alone, nor to the Refinements and
Expositions of a new Generation, but to the Authorities the Preachers went
upon. But this is a troublesome task, and what suited not our Author's temper
or design; and so he quitted the one for the other. It Is a pleasant
Entertainment to write a Character, or a Representation; the Pen runs smoothly
along, when it has Comparison before it, and all the business is to describe,
invite, or inveigh; but when there are Breaks and Interruptions; when it is to
argue closely, to manage an Argument, or to Answer it, it requires another sort
of Talent; and what our Author warily avoids. And if he is beat out of his
Road, and the Artifice has been detected, yet it shall go hard, if he finds not
out some Retrenchments to secure himself.

Thus has he proceeded from Representation to Reflection, from Reflection to
Protestation, from Protestation to Accommodation, from Accommodation to
Reflection again, from Reflection to Caution, from Caution to Character; and at
last, for the ending of this Controversy, to prospect; that is, from the
Principles and Practices of the Papists, he appeals to their Lives amongst us.
This is his last Refuge, and if that fails him, it is but to find a new Title
or Method, and then he appears without Wound or Scar. And he may in the
Conclusion of his Book, tell the World what Feats he has done, Sayings, p. 57.
what Religious Frauds he detected, and how unsuccessful he rendered them in
his first Book. So that if his Reader be as credulous as he himself is
confident and secure in his own good Opinion, this may be a Windingsheet to the
^ontroversy, and his Adversaries be eternally silenced. But if the Reader casts
his Eye a little back, Answer to the Representers Reflect. on the View, p. 67.
he will see from Point to Point, how he has left the Cause to shift for it
self. And whereas, now it had become him to have discharged himself from so
gross an Imputation, we must be contented to have one answer to that, and all
the rest, that they are too impertinent to deserve any. Sayings, p. 12.
Such we are to account the Charge of his Representing by halves; Answer to the
Repr. Reflect. p. 28, etc.
of continuing his Misrepresentations without Replying to the Answers; of his
not answering the View; of his common, but vain Allegation, that we pretend to
know Popery better than they themselves; of his abusing Mr. Montague; of his
Insincerity, particularly, when he offers to receive us into the Church of Rome
upon his Representing Terms; and when he professes to detest some Doctrines and
Practices charged upon the Church of Rome, etc. But here he will say, I make
too much haste, for the two last Points he has replied to in the Close. But
truly it is after such a manner, and so faintly, as if he hoped 'twould be
overlooked.

As for Example. Sayings, p. 55.
As to the first he Replies, This offer may be said to have been answered over
and over. But the matter of Fact defeats all those Answers, and is a
Demonstration that they are nothing but shuffling. Now what is this matter of
Fact, and where is this Demonstration? That follows For whilst a man may be
received upon those Terms, and yet cannot be received unless he assents to the
Faith of the Church, it is evident, that in that Character, the faith of the
Church is truly Represented.

Any one that reads this, would be apt to think that the matter of Fact had
never been questioned, or had been proved to a Demonstration, beyond
possibility of Reply. But besides what has been before answered to it over and
over, as he confesses, it was particularly considered by the Answerer to his
Reflections, Answer to Reflec p. 32.
and the offer, 1. showed to be a ludicrous one, made without good Faith, and
with no other meaning than to put some color upon his deceitful Characters of
a Papist.

2. It was replied further, that suppose we could accept, and should be
accepted upon the Terms he propounds, yet we have no security that when we are
in, this Representer either can, or will, if he could, save us from being pressed
to profess and practice that Popery which he either denies or conceals. And
that because on the one hand we are certain that the prevailing part of his
Church holds that, which he either rejects from his Faith, or says nothing of,
and that agreeably to their Councils and public Offices. And on the other
hand, we have no reason to believe his Authority in the Roman Church to be
considerable enough to carry on his Representation, when the turn is once
served.

Here the Answerer appeals to the case of Imbert, of the Physician at Goa, and
last of all to that of the poor Citizens of Orange, p. 39.

The Answerer shows further, that we have not any good reason to trust him, he
having not given us any reasonable assurance that himself rejects that Popery,
which he exclaims against.

And last of all he puts this question, Whether he would refuse us, if we
desired to come into the Roman Communion, with that which we call old Popery.

To all which our Author replies after this manner:

1. Our new Adversary has one cavil here to put in, viz. [ That the Character
of the Papist represented, is not a good Character, because the Faith of a
Papist as stated under each Article, is not All his Faith.] Our Author has been
so unkind as not to refer us to the Page for these words he pretends to quote
from the Answ^^; and I think after a careful perusal, I may safely lodge them at
his own door, as an instance of his Misrepresenting Faculty. Any one that knew
the Answerer, and is conversant in his way of writing, knows well he had too
clear a head to express himself in so insipid and nonsensical a way as our
Author would fasten upon him, and so as to argue against the truth of the
Character, because the Faith of a Papist, as stated under each Article, is not
all his Faith. But however the Argument is not so obscure, as his Answer to it
is impertinent, as might be shown, were it to the purpose before us.

2. He proceeds, This man has still another scruple, Sayings, p. 56.
That (if he should come into our Church upon the terms I have proposed,
whether I will be security, that he shall not be pressed to profess and practice
that Popery, which I have either denied or concealed) To this our Author
answers after a surprising manner: Marry (says he) if he means by that Popery,
the Pulpit-Popery, I Will give him the same security I have my self, viz. the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost promised to his Church, which will never permit it
to lead her members into such Abominations. He may have the security too of a
good conscience, which cannot be pressed to the profession of so much evil.

But what is his security worth; or how can he plead the Holy Ghost's
Assistance for not being led by her into such Abominations, when she pleads it
for their belief and practice? Our Author would be understood, that he calls
not an Image or Crucifix out of its name when he says it is an Image of wood or
stone; and that he speaks consonantly to the sense of his Church, when he says
the Image is not adored or prayed to, but Christ or the Saint in the Image. And
yet the French Physician was clapped up in the Inquisition for the former; and
the Condomian Imbert was imprisoned for the latter. And surely the Inquisitors
of Goa, and Archbishop of Bourdeaux are themselves of that Church which he
says has the promise of the Holy Ghost, etc. And who shall decide this case,
or what security have we against (...) ^^^^tians fate, if at Goa, or of
Imbert's, if in the Diocese of Bourdeaux? Well, but however, says he, a man
may have the security of a good conscience, which cannot be pressed to the
profession of so much evil. How not be pressed? What is pressing if the Dragoons
of Orange be not? What, if not the Prison of Bourdeaux? What, if not the
Inquisition at Goa? O, but Conscience cannot be pressed to the profession of it.
A very comfortable inducement to comply with the Terms of the Representer; For
you may come into the Church upon them; and if when come in, the Church will
oblige you to, profess abominable things; however Conscience is free, and the
Inquisition it self cannot force it; and if you be sincere, you will never be
pressed by that or any external violence, to the profession of so much evil. It Is
well our Author is not at Goa to have his sincerity tried.

But yet he has not done. For he adds,

3. In this (the Answer above given) he may see his other Material Question
answered, [Whether he may be admitted into our Communion, with that which he
calls old Popery?] For if his old Popery be the Pulpit-Popery, he sees we
reject it; and I tell him, that whatsoever Church would receive him, with the
profession of all those scandalous Doctrines the Pulpits charge against us, I
would be sure to be no member of it.

Here our Author slinks away from the Case. For as soon as ever the Answerer
had put the Question, Page 35.
he proceeds* Will the Representer take us by the hand and present us to his
Church, if we should come with the Lateran Popery about deposing Sovereigns for
Heresy, and with the Trent- Popery about the Worship of Images, as it is
understood by Bellarmin, or rather by Capisucchi, and as it is practiced by the
Tartuffs of the Roman Church, and with all that old Popery, which the former
Answerer gives an account of? Why has not our Author laid the case as it was
put to him? Why not the old Popery of Lateran, Bellarmin and Capisucchi, as
well as Pulpit-popery? And when he has thrown the Cover of Pulpit-Popery over
it; yet why must he needs add, with All the scandalous Doctrines the Pulpits
charge? For surely if there be such abomination in them, any one of them should
be sufficient to an honest soul to fly the Communion, where the belief or
practice of it is required. Well, let Schoolmen and Cardinals, Aquinas and
Scotus, Bellarmin and Capisucchi, let old Missals and Rituals, nay let
Councils, the old one of Lateran, and the new one of Trent, be called in, they
are but Tartuffs; for Exposition and Representation are now the Standard of
Romish Doctrine. And if the Tartuffism of Deposition of Princes, and Adoration
of Images, and the rest of the once old and new Pulpit-Popery be part of its
Faith and Doctrine, we have our Authors word for it, I would be a Turk as soon
as their Papist. A very gross affront sure to those Venerable Heads; Page 54.
and if he has not some reserve, and somewhat of the Art of Cardinal
Capisucchi, may throw him into bad circumstances, and he would do well to keep
from Goa or Bourdeaux, left a Recantation or somewhat worse be the effect of
such a frank declaration.

But it seems after all the Protestations, and Abominations, the Answerer was
not satisfied in our Author's sincerity, and would bind him to hard Terms,
which is to tell us in particular what those Monstrons things are that he so
frequently declares against; which because our Author answers only in general
to, I shall remind him of, and conclude. Its this, Here I challenge you to
declare what those particulars are, Answer to Reflect. p. 37.
Those Monsters, Those Doctrines and practices which you do detest and
abominate; And if you refuse so to fasten upon you the mark of insincere and
juggling, for offering that all be received into the Church of Rome without
them.

FINIS.

