A VINDICATION OF THE CASE OF Indifferent Things, USED In the Worship of God:
IN ANSWER TO A BOOK, ENTITLED, The Case of Indifferent things used in the
Worship of God, Examined, Stated on the behalf of the Dissenters, and calmly
argued.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Fincham Gardner at the White-Horse in
Ludgate Street, 1684.

A VINDICATION OF THE CASE OF Indifferent Things, USED In the Worship of God.
AMONGST some Tracts published within the year for the resolution of such
doubts, as the Dissenters from our Church plead for refusing Communion with it,
there was one that respected the use of Indifferent things in the Worship of
God. This some one of our Brethren chose to examine and to begin his debate
with; Case examined, p. 2.
in the management of which whether he has dealt closely and ingenuously to
use his own words) p. 16.
I shall take the liberty to enquire, and must leave others to judge.

I confess I was not alittle surprised, that before he had set one foot
forward, page 2.
he should thus assault me, If that R. person had been pleased to have
determined who is to be Judge of things Indifferent, as to a man's practice,
whether his own conscience or his Superior etc. he would (in our opinion) have
made the matter in dispute much fitter for an argument, whereas the most
Dissenters judge, that as he has stated it, he has but begged the Question. If
the dispute had been betwixt Protestant and Papist, there might have been some
color to have spent 4 pages in 40 upon this Argument; though even betwixt such
there may be 20 cases controverted in which this Demand would be impertinent:
But to put it upon this issue when both sides are in the main agreed (as it is
betwixt Protestant and Protestant) is a running the Question out of its wits,
and an hearty begging it, before he puts it. It Is to possess the unwary Reader
with prejudice, to puzle the cause, and is the way to make every little Tract a
Volume. In matters of Controversy there are always some principles supposed,
and to put an Adversary upon the proof of them, shows a design rather to cavil
then to end the dispute, and is a shrewd sign that the person so doing is
either diffident of his cause, or his own ability to defend it; but to return
his own complement, we will not presume any thing so absurd or disingenuous of
so worthy a person. p. 10.


But how remote soever this Question is to the business in hand, yet because
our Author asks it with some kind of seriousness, I shall direct him where he
may have satisfaction, and that in a Judicious Tract lately published The
difference of the Case between the separation of Protestants from Rome, etc. p.
42, etc.
; or if he has the patience to compare the things, as I have done, he may find
it resolved by himself, in his Case examined. p. 36, 37. n. 4. 38.
But in my mind there is a much nearer way to end controversies, which is not
by disputing who shall be Judge? But by enabling men to judge for themselves in
a clear stating of the case, and setting sorth the nature of the things
disputed: As in the case before us, the ready way, one should think, is to show
what is the nature of Things Indifferent, and that things thus Indifferent may
be lawfully used in Divine Worship, and because they may be abused, to enquire
how we are to apply them.

This was the way I took, and if I did manage it as it should, I am pretty
confident that the Question was not begged, though I never thought of coming
near his Question, who shall be the Judge?

But that is the thing to be disputed, Whether the case was rightly stated and
proved, and this brings me to the consideration of what he has offered against
it. Before I enter upon which, Case of Indifferent things.
I shall only remind the Reader, that in the little Tract concerned in the
present dispute, the Question undertaken was;

Q. Whether things in their own nature Indifferent, though not prescribed in
the Word of God, may be lawfully used in Divine Worship?

In answer to which;

1. I enquired into the Nature, and stated the Notion of Indifferent Things.

2. Showed that Things Indifferent may be lawfully used in Divine Worship.

3. Considered how we might know what things are Indifferent in the Worship of
God.

4. How we are to determine our selves in the use of them.

To most of these our Author has somewhat to say, to some more to some less;
but to the First, he says, There is none of the Dissenters, but agrees with
this Author in his Notion of Things Indifferent, p. 3.
that they are such things as by the Divine Law are neither enjoined nor
forbidden.

Now before I proceed I shall observe that this concession of his will bereave
them of some of the common and most considerable arguments that they use in
this controversy; As,

If Things Indifferent are such as are neither enjoined nor forbidden, Conclus.
1.
it must follow that things are not unlawful in Divine Worship because they are
not commanded.

The consequence is plain and undeniable: For if the Nature of Things
Indifferent be, as abovesaid, what are neither commanded nor forbidden, there
is nothing can make this or that to be unlawful but the being forbidden: But
now if the being not Commanded is the same with the being Forbidden then the
notion of Indifferent Things cannot consist in this that they are neither
Commanded nor Forbidden. So that either they must quit the Argument, and grant
that the being not Commanded, does not make a thing unlawful in Divine Worship;
or they must alter the notion of Indifferent things, and indeed utterly
exterminate them, and leave no such middle things in nature, and say that there
is nothing else but Duty or Sin.

Now after our Reverend Author has so frankly granted this, I cannot
understand how he can say that the doing of a thing in Gods Worship, not
Commanded, is guilt enough: p. 25.
nor why he should take such pains to oppose what I have offered in confutation
of that principle. For what can he plead for the unlawfulness of things not
Commanded, who has granted that the being not Commanded is a branch of such
things as are Indifferent: And if he will maintain it, he must do it upon no
less absurdity, than the saying a thing Indifferent is forbidden; or (which is
the same) that Indifferent things, are such as are either forbidden, or not
forbidden.

But let us abstract the Case of things not Commanded from this consequence,
Case of Indifferent Things p. 20.
and take it as it is in the Tract aforesaid, an Objection and Answer, and yet
then we shall see what an imperfect account our Author gives of it.

He says, Case Examined, p. 25.
What our Author says is no more than has been many times said, viz. [that by
things not Commanded are meant things forbidden] and has nothing to prove it
by, but only that the things mentioned in Scripture to which that phrase is
applied were things forbidden, as Idolatry, etc.

Though what he produces out of the Case be sufficient, Case of Indifferent
Things, p. 20.
yet he extremely forgets himself when he says, nothing, but only; since in
the page he quotes, there are two arguments, that are sooner flip'd than
answered. But however what has he to reply to that which has been many times
said? He grants, It is true.

And is this nothing toward the proof of it? What fitter way have we to find
out the meaning of a phrase, than to consider the several places where it is
used? Or to ascertain the sense of it, than to show that it is always alike
applied to such a case, or thing?

But in answer to this, he asks, Why are such things expressed to us in this
phrase, as, Not Commanded only?

1st. I answer, they are not thus expressed, as, Not commanded Only. For the
things said to be not commanded, are either in their own nature, or in
Scripture absolutely Forbidden (as I have showed, and he grants) and therefore
to limit the phrase, as if there was no more intended in it than that the
things are not commanded (as the Word Only implies) and not also forbidden is
to thwart Scripture, as well as my reasoning from it.

2ly. If we take the Phrase as it is, yet there his Question, Why are they thus
expressed, and not commanded? is of no Importance; for supposing we could give
no Reason for such an use of it, that would not be sufficient to question the
Thing, as long as we find it constantly so used and applied. But,

3ly. Was there no Reason offered, no account given of it? Let him peruse the
Tract he opposes, (as sure he did) and he will find it expressly undertaken,
and two Reasons given for it; Case of Indiff. Things. page 23.
as, 1. Things forbidden are called not commanded, because all things
prohibited are by consequence not commanded, and not e contra. 2. It Is by way
of Meiosis, etc. But these, though to the purpose in hand, were not, I am
afraid, to his.

Well! Let us consider,

4ly. What Account our Author himself gives at last of this.

1. Says he, Things forbidden in Scripture are said to be not commanded, To
let us know the doing of a thing not commanded in God's Worship, is Guilt
enough. Case Indiff. Things. page 20.
Surely not so great, as to do a thing notoriously forbidden, (as I there
showed.) Surely it can be no Guilt at all to do a thing not commanded, if not
also forbidden, because (as he owns) there are Indifferent Things in the
Worship of God; and what are indifferent Things, but Things not commanded, as
well as not forbidden?

2. He says, it was so expressed, because the Guilt of the Sin of Idolatry and
Superstition lay in this, that it was a thing not commanded: had God commanded
those things, they had been a true Worship, and acceptable.

In which assertion of his, he grossly mistakes. First, as to the nature of
Idolatry and Superstition, when he says, the guilt of them lay in this, that
they were things not commanded: Whereas it is evident that they were Sins,
because forbidden. For what is Superstition but the dreading of that which is
not to be dreaded? (as the Greek word shows;) Such as the Signs of Heaven,
Divinations, and Demons, and even the unreasonable and inordinate fear of God
himself. Jer. 10. ^.
When we fear offending him, in what is not offensive to him. And what is
Idolatry but the giving Divine honor to that which is not God, or prohibited
honor to the true and only God? These are things manifestly forbidden.

Secondly, It Is yet a grosser Error, which is contained in the reason he gives
for it, viz. That had God Commanded those things, they had been a true Worship
and acceptable. An assertion, First, that confounds the Nature of things, that
makes Vice and Virtue alike, and no otherwise discriminated but by Gods written
Law, as if Idolatry and Superstition were not Evil antecedent to all
Revelation, and which are so where Revelation is not, as well as where it is.

Secondly, From hence it follows that those things may be acceptable to God,
which in their own nature do tend to drive Religion out of the World; and that
may be true Worship, which will unavoidably debase the Deity in the thoughts of
Mankind. For so do Idolatry and Superstition.

As for the Instances he there takes notice of, I shall reserve them to a more
convenient place.

Conclus. 2. Conclus.
If things Indifferent be such as are neither Commanded nor Forbidden, and that
things are not unlawful because not Commanded, then things thus Indifferent and
not commanded are not additions to the Word of God: Case of Indiff. things. p.
24.
and the places usually insisted upon must be understood, according to the
sense I gave of them; and which may serve as a sufficient reply to what he has
said upon that Head. Case examined. p. 26.
But yet because he has offered somewhat in a another place that looks like an
Argument, I shall here consider it. He argues thus;

If obedience be wanting the Salt is wanting to the Sacrifices of our God, Page
4.
which (as we humbly conceive) leaves no more room for perfective than
corruptive Additions to Divine Worship etc. What can be an act of Obedience to
God but what he has commanded, whether he has forbidden it or no? If we bid
our Servant go a mile, and he goes two (possibly hoping to do us Service in
it) we hope his going the Second mile is no act of obedience, though we did not
forbid him. In matters of this Nature no act of Supererogation is allowable,
because it can be no obedience. In answer to which, it will be necessary to
resolve this Question:

Q. Whether the doing of any thing in the Worship of God without a command be a
sinful addition to the Word of God?

I answer that if the Question is understood of the proper and essential parts
of Worship (if I may so speak) then we grant it, and say, that he that shall
institute any thing in that kind without Divine Institution, does challenge
Gods prerogative to himself; and because the rule is sufficient, all such
perfective are corruptive additions (as he speaks) to both Rule and Worship. It
is as if a Servant when bidden to go a mile, he goes two (possibly hoping to
do Service in it) for in matters of this nature no Supererogation is allowable.
Thus far his comparison holds, as to matters of the same Nature, and designed
to the same end: and esteemed to be of the same use. As the going of two Miles
for one, with an intent to do as good Service, and be as well if not better
approved for so doing. But if the question be understood of such things as are
Adjuncts to Divine Worship, that are not used upon the score of any of the
reasons aforesaid, then we are not to expect a command, nor do we Sin if we act
without it. As for example, a Servant is required to go a Mile upon some
service, and he uses a Coat or a Cloak, takes an Horse or goes on Foot, puts a
string about his Finger to remember him of what he is to do; Or if to carry a
Message, considers what to say, and Writes it down, that he may be the better
fitted to deliver it; In such cases his Master would think him impertinent to
ask Directions, and it is no Disobedience nor Supererogation to act, as he sees
fit, without them. And this is the case with us, as I shall afterward show.
This said there is way made for the next inference.

Conclus. 3. If things Indifferent are neither commanded nor forbidden,
Conclus. 3.
and things are not unlawful because not commanded, it follows that it is no
Derogation from the Sufficiency of Scripture to maintain the lawfulness of
using such things in Divine Worship, as are not therein commanded. It Is
somewhat a Specious way of arguing which this Author uses, the Scriptures have
determined whatsoever may make us wise to Salvation, p. 2^.
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good Works. Now if the Worship of God be a
good work, and the right doing of it has any tendency to make us perfect, they
must have a sufficiency to direct us in that. And he concludes, If there be not
a Rule for all things belonging to the Worship of God (except as before
excepted, etc.) then the Scriptures are not able to make us wise, etc.

By this way of arguing and a challenge he immediately subjoyns, viz. If our
Author can show us any Act of Worship, etc. It may be thought he is a Champion
for the perfection and sufficiency of Scripture, and we the derogators from it.
And that without any more ado he would have brought unanswerable arguments for
that kind of Scripture-sufficiency which we deny. If says he, our R. Author
can show us any Act of Worship for the performance of which in such a manner as
God will accept, Page 29.
we cannot show him direction of Scripture. Well! where is it? Scripture, with
the addition of such circumstances as are naturally necessary to all Humane
Actions, or evidently convenient for an action of a grave and weighty Nature,
for the obtaining the ends of it, or appearing to any Common Judgment to be so
decent, that without them the performance would be sordid. Scripture with the
practice of the first Guides of the Church; Scripture with the light of Nature
shining out in every reasonable Soul, etc. Scripture with the exceptions before
excepted, page 21.
in his Book.

Suppose then we put it to the question, Is Scripture alone a sufficient Rule
for matters to be used in the Worship of God? He readily answers, Yes. If you
take in the Nature of the thing, the light shining in every reasonable Soul; if
you take in Common Judgment, convenience, and decency; Lastly if you take in
the practice of the first Guides of the Church; that is, it is, and it is not.
Now how he has all this while pleaded for that Sufficiency of Scripture which
we deny. And why he should so loudly exclaim against all Supplements and
Additions, page 38.
to that, and against Reason and Authority, as a Supply: or what difference he
has conceived betwixt Authority and the Guides of the Church; or betwixt
Reason and the light of Nature Shining out in every reasonable Soul, page 29.
so as to deny to the one what he grants to the other, I am not able to
understand? Yet for all this there must be a difference betwixt him and us, and
somewhat shall be said to make it out. For the Sufficiency of Scripture, is a
very great argument. page 28.
And so indeed it is; and it has been an old argument against the practices of
our Church, and is not to be easily parted with: But yet what to give, and what
to take, and wherein the difference is betwixt what we hold and he is forced to
grant, he knows not, or has not been so kind as to discover.

But however when all this is pastover, he concludes as to one part, we cannot
possibly agree with our R. Brother in this thing, viz. That we have no such
particular directions for Worship under the Gospel as they had under the Law*)
Case of indifferent* things. page 30.
This indeed I touched upon, to show that the faithfulness of Christ and
sufficiency of Scripture consist not in giving as particular directions for
Worship as they had under the Law; and in proof of this I set Baptism against
Circumcision, the Lord's Supper against the Passover, and Prayers against
Sacrifices.

Now let us consider, what are the reasons why he cannot possibly agree?
Certainly if ever controversy was like to be ended, we may now expect it
because it is about plain matter of Fact. But in this case he strangely fa^ls of
performance: For whereas the deciding the case depends upon the comparison
betwixt the Law and the Gospel, he does not so much as offer any thing about
the latter. But let us consider what he says of the former, and as much as we
can, make up his defect in the latter. page 31.
First, he says, As to Circumcision, what particular direction had the Jews?
Their Rule extended no further than to the Act and the time. Here I must
confess there is nothing but the time that is determined; But since there is
nothing of that kind in Baptism prescribed, the Law is herein more particular
than the Gospel. 2ly, As to the Passover, he acknowledges they had a Rule, but
then he adds* What Rule, had they to determine them to a Kid or a Lamb? But was
not that a Rule to determine them, when it must be a Kid or a Lamb, and no
other Creature; and is not Two to all the Beasts in the world a determination
as well as one to two? But was there nothing else determined? (as his cautious
way of expressing it would imply) Let him consult the Text, Exodus 12. etc.
and he will find that the Creature was not only thus to be one out of two, but
it was to be a Male, kept the 14th day, and to be killed at even, without a
bone broken, to be roasted, to be eaten in the house, and with unleavened Bread
with bitter Herbs, and none left to the morning. And they were to eat it
standing (as our Author acknowledges p. 32.) with their loins girt, etc. And
with several other rites too long to enumerate.

But in the Lord's Supper, there is nothing specified or required but the
Elements, and the breaking and pouring out; nothing said of the kind of the
Bread or Wine, nothing required of the time or posture, or number, etc.

As for their Sacrifices, page 32.
he says, the Rule was sufficient and perfect, we hope, though one Jew brought
a Bullock, another a Goat, etc. I may confidently say it was not sufficient if
so they did, for God was pleased to require more (who is the most competent
Judge of the perfection of his own Law) For there was a particular prescription
not only as to the kinds of the Beasts, but as to the disposing and ordering of
them in Sacrifice, what was to be eaten, and what not; whether the blood should
be poured out or sprinkled, whether upon the Altar or at the bottom of it, etc,
one would think that a person that talks so loosely of these things, had never
read the Book of Leviticus.

But now as to Prayers in the Christian Church, we have only a general Form
given us and direction to Pray in the Name of Christ, but nothing as to Words,
Time, Posture, Company, etc.

So that what can be more manifest then that there is no such particular
direction given in Worship, as they had under the law? And therefore however it
comes to pass that this Author has here so bewildre'd himself, yet it is what
he has granted before, when he was fain to make exceptions, as to things
naturally necessary, etc and of which he says in the beginning of this
argument, that for such it is impossible there should be a Rule; Page. 8
though there, I conceive, he has as much erred on one side as he did before
on the other, when he says it is impossible; for then it had not been possible
to assign time, posture, place, etc, under the Law. Had he said in some not
possible, in others not fit, he had been much more in the right: However (to
let that pass) in either way he grants that there is no expectation of
Scripture-Authority for such things, nor does the sufficiency of that or the
faithfulness of Christ suffer by such an opinion.

I suppose I may now close this Argument: For, as for his Or's and, Alias's
(which this Author so much depends upon) I shall consider them in another place.

Conclus. 4. Conclus. 4.
If things indifferent are neither commanded nor forbidden; and things are not
unlawful because not commanded, then the doing of such things as are not
commanded is not contrary to the second Commandment; Case examined page 27
The contrary to this is maintained by our Author, who says, that the doing of
such things in Acts of external Worship as are not commanded, is indeed a
violation of the second Commandment. For which he offers this reason, because
as in the 6th Commandment it is agreed, that all injuries to our neighbor's
person is forbidden under the highest species of such Acts: and in the 7th all
species of uncleanness are; so in the 2d commandment all errors in the matter
of external Worship are forbidden under the species of Idolatry.

The answer to this depends upon the understanding of his phrase, Matter of
Worship, (which he has given us no light in) which either signifies parts of
Worship, and then we yield it, that all such instituted by men are forbidden in
this commandment, for it is false worship: but then we deny that we are
concerned in it, or that any thing not commanded and used by us is a part of
Worship. And if he thinks otherwise he is (as upon other reasons also)
concerned to take up the cause of Dr. Ames that he says, he is not concerned
in.

If by matter of Worship he means the administration and ordering of it, Page
27.
then I deny the parallel, that all errors in Matter of Worship areas much
forbidden in the second commandment, as injuries by the 6th, etc. For injuries
are of the same Species with Murder, and Acts of uncleanness are of the same
kind with Adultery; but errors in the administration of Worship are nothing
akin to Idolatry.

2. I deny that the doing of things not commanded in the Matter of Worship are
so much as errors in his sense, since forbidden by no Law, as I have showed.

The Second point undertaken in the Case of Indifferent Things was to show,
Sect. 2. Case of Indiff. Things, p 4. etc.
that there are things Indifferent in the Worship of God, and that such things,
though not prescribed, may be lawfully used in it.

Of this, Case examined p. 19, 20.
says our reverend Author, none (that we know of) ever doubted; and again, as
it is stated in that Tract, none in his wits did ever deny it.

I do not think my self obliged to answer for some men's understandings; but if
that be true, what must we think of those whom Mr. Baxter writes of, that will
have a Rule for every thing; Defense of the principles of love, part 2. p. 97.
and adds, take heed of them? What of such, that when they grant Things
Indifferent to be neither commanded nor forbidden, will yet say, that things
not commanded are forbidden? What of such, that when they have granted (and so
it is then granted on both sides) that there are Things Indifferent in the
Worship of God, Case examined p. 15.
will yet say, that the Indifferency of actions to be done while they are
employed in the Worship of God is all the Question? Lastly, What of those that
when they have yielded that things Indifferent, though not prescribed, may be
lawfully used in Divine Worship, will have it put to the Question, Whether
things not necessary to all human actions may be used in it? Who they are, or
how far they are concerned in the foregoing Character, I leave to this Reverend
persons Consideration.

But although none in his Wits did ever deny the Question as stated by me, yet
because it may be of use toward the clearing of the matters hereafter to be
discoursed of, I will briefly consider the case as it was then stated and that
will appear from the things considered in the state of it, and the ways taken
to prove it.

1. It was granted that things naturally necessary to the Action were excluded;
since generals act but in their particulars; and if some of the kind must
accompany the Act, then this or that particular of the kind is lawful to be
used, as it is in time place, habit. This he grants, Page 7.
but only adds, that Habit surely is not necessary, we read of none before the
Fig Leaves were sown together, Genesis 3.

But (1.) We indeed read of no habit before the Fall, but is there nothing
natural to man since the Fall? What does our Author think of the Apostle's
Natural Body, 1 Corinthians. 15. 44.
etc as opposed to Heavenly, or of the description he gives of the state of
mankind, when he says, we are by Nature Children of Wrath: Ephesians 2. 3.
We read of no such Body or state before the time of the Fig Leaves. And yet
the Apostle makes bold to call them Natural, as belonging to man in his present
fallen State.

(2.) Therefore we have a further notion of Natural given us, and that is when
any thing is suited to the Nature or State of the thing or person. Thus Ames and
others tell us of Natural Ceremonies, Fres^ Su^^ p. 1. c. 4. and. 5.
as lifting up the eyes to Heaven in Sign of Devotion, (which by the way is not
so Natural; Luke. 18. 13.
but that casting them down in Worship is a sign of it too, as in the
publicans.) And so habit is Natural to man, as belonging and suited to his
present condition. But, says he, it is not Natural, for a person may Pray
naked; and so he may pray blindfold, and yet will any one say, sight is not
natural to man. But how may he pray naked in Regious assemblies (for we are
speaking of public Worship) can he say it is suitable to the Solemnity? And so
going naked is as little suitable to the nature of man.

(3.) Again that is natural, which is the effect of Nature, though not born with
us. And I am apt to think that did our Author live within the Circle of the
Frigid Zone, he would without any Tutor, without the knowledge of what is the
custom of Civilized Nations, without any moral reason, have thought upon the
benefit of Frieze, or somewhat of the like use with that. But suppose I am
mistaken, how has he mended the matter? He tells us, that by the custom of
Civilized Nations some habit is necessary. Genesis 3. 21.
But then what becomes of the Fig Leaves, what of the coats of Skins God
clothed Adam with. Now to say it came from custom before custom was, (for it
was in the beginning) I think, is much more absurd than to say that Habit was
natural.

But it is time to pass on to a more profitable argument.

2. It was proved that all things, which in general and for kind are morally
necessary are also lawful in their particulars. This was made evident from a
parity of reason 'twixt what is naturally, and what is morally necessary, and
therefore he that grants the particulars of what is naturally necessary, to be
indifferent, must also grant the particulars of what is morally necessary to be
indifferent. And as it follows this Time or that, this Place or that, this
Habit or that is lawful and indifferent, because Time, Place and Habit are
necessary: So it also follows this Method or that, this Form or that, this
Order or that is lawful, and may be used, because Method, Form, and Order are
necessary. And therefore we need look no more for an institution for a Form,
Case examined page 18.
than, as he says for a Bell to call to Worship, or for a Gown or Cloak to
preach in, etc. For what Naturally necessary is to the particulars of its kind,
that is Morally necessary to its particulars: And one is no more unlawful for
want of an institution or command, than the other. This our Author also yields
to, Page 14.
We, says he, having agreed that there are some circumstances of Humane
actions, in Gods Worship, not only Natural, common to all actions, but of a
Moral nature too, relating to them as such actions, which God having neither
commanded nor forbidden, may be used, are not much concerned, in what our
Author says upon his second Head.

3. It was further showed in the aforesaid Treatise, that such things in Divine
Worship as were agreeable to the Rules of the Apostle, and served for Order,
Decency, and Edification, were also lawful, though they were neither Naturally
nor Morally necessary; nor did necessarily arise from the nature of the Thing,
as Method and Form, etc. do; that is, that there are a certain sort of things
that are ambulatory and contingent, Case of indifferent things p. 8, 12, 13.
that vary with circumstances, ages, places, and conditions, etc. As, the being
covered or uncovered in Worship; such and such fixed hours of Prayer; The
Love Feasts, and Holy-kiss, and besides, several Civil usages transferred from
secular affairs into the Service of Religion; which were used therein not as
mere Civil Rites; as I there showed.

This argument taken from Civil usages our Author endeavors to avoid several
ways.

1. He says, Case examined. page 18.
If we do not mistake, the reason why Dr. Ames and others do think that Civil
usages may be used in Acts of Worship, is because they are either necessary to
the action, as Humane, or convenient, comely or grave, etc. And because I had
said Case of indifferent things. page 14.
that if the being Civil usages did make them lawful in Divine Worship, then
there is nothing in Civil cases but may be introduced into the Church, though
never so absurd, he says, Case examined, page 19.
he cannot apprehend the consequence, because what is granted about Civil
usages is to be applied to grave actions and none other. But to this I answer,
Grant they are thus to be understood of such Civil usages as are grave, yet
then it is not so much because they are Civil as because they are grave, that
they may be used, and provided that they were grave, they might be used if they
were not Civil, as well as if they were, and are not the sooner to be used,
because they are Civil. And then what becomes of their argument for such and
such practices and customs that they were Civil? And what have they got when to
avoid the force of what we say from the Love Feasts, etc. plead, as he does,
that they are Civil usages. So that when he and his brethren grant, Page 18.
that such usages which may ordinarily be used in other Humane actions of a
grave nature, may be used in Acts of Worship (which is more than we dare say;
for then standing crosses may be introduced into Worship, which are used to
very grave purposes in Civil matters, as to distinguish Christian from
Heathenish or Turkish Dominions, etc.) I know not what they can deny.

2. He gives a very partial account of Civil usages, when he tells us of
Orators Pulpits, and Seats, and Bells, Gowns and Cloaks: But in the mean while
forgets that there are Civil usages, that are of a Ceremonial Nature, and that
are used by way of signification, distinction, etc. As now a garment is (I may
still say) Naturally or (as he will have it) Morally necessary, but when in a
particular case it is required that it be White or Purple, it is a Civil usage,
and is by way of signification; and so the signification is transferred with it
from a civil to a sacred use, which how consistent it is with their principles
I leave it to his consideration.

3. He takes no notice of the Argument used by me, that if civil usages without
institution may be lawfully used in Divine Worship, this (with his concessions
before about Natural and Moral circumstances) will justify most, I had almost
said, all the practices of our Church, as I instanced in the Surplice, since
White was used as a badge of Royalty and Dignity, of joy and innocence, V.
Brightman in Ames Fres^ Suit, part 2. p. 505, 510.
in Civil cases, and so may be used by way of signification in Religious; and
so of the rest. All that he has to say about the Surplice is, that it is tied
to Worship, which is remote from the case in hand, and shall afterward be
considered.

To this I may also add the Cross* which he says, Page 15.
they do not stumble of making upon a pack of Cloth or Stuff, or upon a Sheep
for note of distinction, and may be, and is used for graver purposes in the
like way of signification in Civil matters as I have observed) and so may be,
by this Argument transferred into the Service of Religion.

4. It was further maintained in the stating of the Case, Case of Indiff.
Things, p. 5, 6.
that the ordering and administration of the things relating to Divine Worship,
was left to Christian prudence. To this our Author says, Case examined, p. 7.
It is very true, these must be determined by human prudence, but that they
must necessarily be determined by the prudence of the Superior, and may not be
determined by the prudence of the agents, is another Question. Who ever
affirmed it? That they are left to human prudence to fix and determine, is all
that I maintained; but how far Superiors may determine, and how far Inferiors
must submit to things so determined, is another Question, and belongs to
another place.

From what has been said, it may appear whether no man ever doubted of the
truth of the Case as I have stated it, when he himself speaks so dubiously and
uncertainly about it. But because I have not stated it to his mind, page 19.
and that it is not the Dissenters position, but only a position, which their
adversaries have imposed upon them without any ground, as he says; let us see
how he states the Question, which is thus:

Q. Whether things, Ibid.
the doing, or not doing of which God has not prescribed, being neither
necessary to the action as an human action, nor convenient for it (with
reference to those that perform it) for the ends of it, nor naturally, nor in
common judgment such, without which it cannot be done decently, may be lawfully
used in the Worship of God by all persons, or by any persons, who judge that
God has forbidden the part to which they are by men determined, either in the
letter, or by the just reason, and consequence of Holy Writ, as forbidding all
useless and superfluous things, in so sacred actions, or things not necessary,
and used ordinarily in Idolatrous and Superstitious services, or judging that
in Worship every man is sui juris, and ought not to be deprived of the liberty
God has left him, may be universally and lawfully used?

This he has elsewhere formed into a position, page 23, 24.
and from thence does declare, that it lies upon his Adversary to prove, that
those things which he would have all Dissenters conform to are,

1. Things naturally necessary to all human Acts. Or,

2. Things convenient for them as human acts. Or, with reference to the true
end of such acts: Or,

3. Such as Nature shows to be comely for all human acts, or such grave acts at
least, or which common judgment so judges. Or,

4. That men may do what they reasonably judge sinful. Or,

5. That there is no reason to judge useless, and superfluous actions in the
Worship of God sinful. Or,

6. No reason so to judge of the things not necessary to be used in Gods
Worship, and which have been, and are ordinarily used in Idolatrous Worship. Or,

7. That there is no reason to judge, that Christians in matters of Worship
ought to be left at liberty in things when God has so left them.

Whether this be indeed the Dissenters position he best understands (as I
should think but whether it be their position explained, page 19.
(as he says) or confounded, page 24.
I leave to the judgment of others. This only I am sure of, that for as much as
I can understand of it, I may turn his own words upon him, and whereas he says
of the Case as I have stated it, None in his wits did ever deny it, I can say
as it is stated by him, None in his wits did ever affirm it. For who in his wits
will ever affirm that it is lawful to use such things in the Worship of God,
that are sordid and indecent, disorderly and confused, idle, useless, and
superfluous, hurtful and pernicious?

And yet (according to him) this must he do, that will undertake to prove, that
things that are not comely, convenient, or edifying, may be admitted thereinto.
For this Author tells us, page 11.
that by Decency we can understand nothing but what is opposed to sordidly,
etc. And if it be not decent by his rule, it must be sordid: And so of the rest.

Again, Who in his wits will affirm that men may do what they reasonably judge
sinful? And yet these things must they affirm that will attack this position of
our Authors: By which stating of the Question and mingling things of a
different nature together, he has provided well for his own security, and may
without fear of being conquered, page 25.
or so much as opposed, fling down the Gantlet, with, If our R. Author has
taken the position, as here stated, and argued it, we shall consider what he
has said; if not, we shall lightly pass over what he has said, etc. and
expect till he has justified all or any of the last Seven mentioned
particulars.

But I shall not so lightly pass over what he has said without clearing what
may be cleared, and reducing the Case into its proper principles, though it be
what he has taken no care to explain or prove.

If we review his seven particulars, we shall find that the V. case of a
scrupulous Conscience, Dr. Calamy's Sermon on that subject.
4th. and 6th. the case of Symbolizing, and the defense.
belong not to this case, and are otherwhere resolved: And of the Five
remaining Four of them are reducible to one argument, which come now to be
considered; and the last of Christian Liberty, I shall treat upon in the close
of this Discourse.

In treating upon the Four that belong to one argument and have for their
subject Human Acts; I think it may be done by putting and resolving the
following Question.

Q. What is it that does make things in themselves lawful and indifferent, to
be unlawful in Divine Worship?

This is the main seat of the controversy; it being agreed that there are
indifferent things in the Worship of God; But since we afterward divide upon it
and say that notwithstanding this there are some things of that nature, that
are by circumstance unlawful, it is sit to understand, how this Question is
resolved by one and the other.

If We state the case, we say the Rules we are to guide our selves by, are
those of the Apostle, of Decency, Order, and Edification. And we trouble not
our selves nicely to consider whether the Decency arise from the nature of the
thing, or from common usage, or prescription, or institution, since we think
that decency may arise from any, and it matters not from what cause the thing
proceeds, nor how it came to be Decent, when it is now thought and found to be
so. And as little curious arewe about the first reasons of Order and
Edification, for we are so little speculative in matters of practice, that we
think the peace of the Church, and Unity amongst Christians, are much more fit
to determine us in these cases than all the accuracy in Metaphysics.

So that if a thing be found to be decent, orderly and for Edification, though
we were assured it did Spring from Humane Institution, we think it to be
lawful, and that Humane Institution cannot make that unlawful; which is found
by use and experience to be for Decency and Order.

Again we think that those things which in kind are necessary to Humane Acts in
all cases, and comely and grave in Worship as well as out of it, may be
appropriated to Worship: and that the appropriation of Places, Time and Habit
to Worship, does not therefore make such Places, Times, and Habits, unlawful to
be used.

And if things indifferent in themselves are unlawful in Worship, we conclude
it must be when Divine Institution is pretended for what is Humane, and when
the things suit not the Nature, Case of indifferent things. p. 24, etc.
or defeat the ends of Divine Worship; or for the like reasons which I in the
controverted Tract did insist upon.

But now on the contrary, by what may be Collected from him, it appears to be
the Sense of his position,

1. That nothing of Humane Institution is to be admitted or may lawfully be
used in Divine Worship. For thus he says, they must be things necessary to all
Humane Acts, or convenient for them as Humane Acts, or comely for all Humane
Acts, etc.

2. That nothing, though nccessary, or convenient, or comely, ought to be used
in, and much less be appropriated to the Worship of God; for they are to be
considered in Worship only as they have a reference to such Humane Acts.

In the consideration of these I shall

1. Consider how he attempts to prove it.

2. Endeavor to discover the mistake; and vindicate the arguments and
instances, produced in the case of Indifferent things to the contrary, from his
Exceptions.

These are the chief things that all his discourse is founded upon, and that
are scattered through it: But though they are rather supposed than proved by
him; and therefore (to use his own Words) I may lightly pass them over, and
expect till he has justified them: yet because I would make somewhat of it, I
shall collect from the Hints he gives, what it is that he does think may be
said for them.

As for the first of these, Prop. 1.
that nothing is to be used in Divine Worship that is merely of Humane
Institution, his arguments are fetched from the Nature of the things pleaded
for them, viz. Decency, order, edification. As, says he,

1. We cannot apprehend it in the power of Man to Create a Decency. Page 11.
The greatest Emperors wearing an Antic Habit, would not make it Decent, till
it could prescribe, or had obtained a common consent. This I the rather
mention, because it is an argument much in vogue amongst those that would
artificially handle this matter. But here let me ask them what it is creates a
Decency? He says, the Law of Nature and prescription, common consent and the
guise of Countries. But how began that Prescription, whence arose that consent
whether from chance or institution? Or what is it whence it arises, if it be
found to be decent? Certainly if it began in one of these institution is the
more noble of the two, and the less disputable: And then it would be hard to
conceive how that which came by chance should be lawful, and that which came by
Institution should be unlawful.

But (2.) If Prescription, and Common Consent, and the Guise of Countries be
the measure of Decency, may not these things also be the measure of it in the
Church, and in things relating to Divine Worship? And is not the custom of the
Churches of God a reason as sufficient to conclude us in this matter as the
grave and Civil customs of a Nation? Or (3.) Is there any Church on this side
Rome that by a Sic volo does stamp a decency upon its Institutions, without
respect to prescription and the custom of Churches? Or that can do it? By his
way of expressing himself, he would make the Argument great, as if to Create a
Decency was an invasion of God's Prerogative; We cannot apprehend it in the
Power of man to Create a Decency. The greatest Emperor, etc.

But if a Decency arise from the Guise of Countries, and Prescription, and
Common Consent, it might be questioned, whether according to him, God himself
can then Create a Decency, and by his authority make that to be at once which
requires time and Custom (as he says) to produce and form it? So high does the
power of a little School-subtilty and Imagination sometimes transport men, that
their Arguments vanish out of sight, and are lost to all those that converse
with what is gross and tangible.

But supposing it is not in the power of man to Create a Decency, yet Order may
be Order without those dilatory reasons of Custom and Prescription; and
therefore what holds against establishing Decency by institution, will not
hinder but that order may be thereby established. Therefore,

2. He further argues from the Nature of Decency and Order, that things of mere
Humane Institution are not capable of that plea. Ibid.
We can understand, says he, nothing, by orderly, and according to order, but
without confusion. By Decency we can understand nothing but what is opposed to
sordidly; nor can we think of any action that is not Decent, if the contrary to
it be not indecent. So then nothing ought to be done in the Worship of God, but
what may be done without Confusion, etc. of which Nature can nothing be that is
idle and superfluous, etc.

I was at a great loss at first to find out the drist of all this, but upon
consideration I think it contains these things: (1.) That it is unlawful to
ordain or use any thing superfluous in the Worship of God. (2.) That whatsoever
is not for Order, Decency and Edification is superfluous. (3.) That nothing is
Decent, if the contrary to it be not indecent. It Is the last of these we are
now concerned in; which by the help of the great managers of this Argument,
Ames's Fresh Suit, and answer to Bp. Morton. Jean's Uniformity in answer to Dr.
Hammond.
may be better understood. And it amounts to this, that Decency and Indecency
are contraries (rather privatives says Jeans) And if one of them be not
Indecent, the other cannot be Decent: And if the Action may be performed
decently without what is called Decent, then that which we call so is not
Decent. As suppose it is pleaded that a Surplice is Decent, but if the contrary
be not Indecent, and the Service may be performed decently without it, then
that Vestment is not Decent.

In answer to which I shall not concern my self in a tedious and nice dispute
about the nature of Contrarieties and Privatives, but readily grant the
opposition which they insist upon betwixt Decent and Indecent; And yet
notwithstanding shall make bold to deny the whole they infer from it: And that
for this reason, because our Dispute is not about the Nature of Decency and
Indecency, but about things Decent and Indecent: And although Decency and
Indecency be opposed as above said, yet it is not so in the things
controverted, but that things different may be both of them, Decent.

As for Example, he grants that it is comely and grave to preach in a Gown, Page
18.
and that they look therefore for no Institution; but now by this way of
arguing it could not be so: For if a person may preach decently without a Gown,
then it cannot be Decent to preach with it, because Decency and Indecency are
contraries, and if the contrary be not Indecent, (as it is not to preach
without it, must he say,) then to preach with it is not Decent.

So again, what Decency is to Indecency, that is Reverence to Irreverence: But,
he says, that kneeling at the Sacrament is Decent, Page 36.
(for says he, no Dissenter refuses to receive the Sacrament kneeling because
it is not Decent) and Reverent. Page 13.
But it can be neither of these by his argument, for they also affirm that it
may be Decently and Reverently received, though they do not kneel; and
therefore the contrary to kneeling being not Indecent, kneeling cannot be
Decent. And thus I might run on in infinitum; and the like may be argued from
the account he gives of Order.

The ground of his and the others mistake is, that they argue from the kind to
the individuals of the kind, as if one individual was as much opposite to the
other as kind to kind, whereas the individuals are mutable things, which the
guise of Countries, and custom, etc. alter; and two things different in use or
figure, or the like, may be both of them Decent, as to wear a Cloak or a Coat
in Secular business; a Cloak, Gown, or Surplice in Religious Solemnities,
(according as the custom is.)

Therefore the Brethren at the Savoy let this curious (...), Proceedings at the
Savoy, p. 62.
and grant, there are some things Decent and orderly, when the opposite species
is not undecent or disorderly. And a greater than they said it was comely, with
respect to the then state of the Church, 1 Cor. 7. 35.
not to marry, and yet without doubt it was not thought uncomely to marry too;
which yet the Apostle could not have said, if our Authors way of arguing had
been of any force.

After all this pert discourse against things instituted we are little
concerned, not only because there is nothing like things merely instituted by
men in our Church except the Cross, (which Lay-Communion is not concerned in)
but also because even that and all things that can be forced to look this way
are not now instituting, but are received as having been so long before, and
are not the subject matter of Institution, but of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Command betwixt which there is a vast difference, Against Dr. Hammond. page 80.
as, Mr. Jeans rightly observes; There is difference 'twixt Institution, and
Commandment or Appointment; for though every Institution be a Commandment or
Appointment, yet every Commandment or Appointment is not an Institution. And
hence a Church in a place may command and appoint the uniform observance of
Ceremonies, instituted unto its hand by the Church in former ages.

As for such particular things as were owing to mere Institution (which I
produced in the above said tract) in respect of their use and signification, I
shall keep them in my eye, though I lay them a^ide for the present to come to
his next head.

Nothing, Prop. 2.
though necessary, or convenient, or comely, ought to be used in, and much less
appropriated to the Worship of God; being all such things are to be considered
therein only as they have a reference to humane acts. This he asserts not only
in the Propositions which he draws from his general position, but also
elsewhere; so he says, that they comply with mere necessary, Page 23.
or convenient circumstances either of Actions, or such or such Actions,
considered abstractly from any Religion. And therefore he concludes.

1. They must not be used in Religious Worship. So he says, Page 15.
Those who stumble at the Surplice (as not many do) or the Cross, or kneeling
at the Eucharist, scruple to do it in an Act of Worship. So again, The Minister
must wear his Surplice in his Acts of Worship, and sign with the Cross within
the complex Act of Worship, (for he after it with prayers concludes the
Action.) The People must kneel in the act of Receiving. What then? Why then
they are unlawful Now how the things that are necessary in general (as Posture,
Habit, etc.) can be used without particulars, or how those particulars can be
used in Worship lawfully, and yet be unlawful, because used in Worship, I
understand not. For then sitting would be unlawful, if alike required, and a
Gown be unlawful, and the Ring in Marriage unlawful, and the laying the hand on
the Book unlawful, (at the former of which is a prayer annexed, and at the
latter it is implied,) and all Civil Usages in Worship would be unlawful: And
then what will become of what he has elsewhere said? Dr. Ames and others do
think that such usages which may ordinarily be used in other humane actions of
a grave nature, Page 18.
may be used in Acts of Worship; and being so used are no more than appendants
to the Action, etc.

But being sensible that this will not do, and that unless he can make the
being used in Worship to be the same with Worship, to be an act or a part of
it, he cannot make it unlawful, and that if he should attempt it, (...) to
disparage the cause, (...)

2. That which is appropriated to Worship is unlawful. Page 12.
Some of them cannot but look for an Institution for a Garment [meaning the
Surplice] which they must be tied to use in the Worship of God, and restrained
from the wearing of at other times. Now because this would open a gap too wide
for him to stand in, and would condemn Places, as well as Habits, and make it
as unlawful to use a Church as a Surplice, he therefore cautiously begins it
with Some of them: But yet however he gives us a reason for it, viz. Because
the appropriation of it to the Religious act, speaks something of Religion and
Homage to God in it. Elsewhere he expresses himself after the like manner, We
think they (civil usages) must not have any thing of the nature of Worship in
them, but may as well be used in merely Civil actions, as in Religious Duties.
If there be any thing of Homage to God in them they are Worship which must have
an Institution. But, First, What does he mean by appropriation, does he thereby
understand that what is for the present appropriated to a Religious use and
Service cannot be omited, nor altered, nor upon any reason whatsoever be
applied to any other use? This our Church does not hold. Homilies Sermon of
good works pt. 2 Sermon of Prayer. pt. 2. Article. 34.


Is it that out of a Reverence to Divine Ordinances, it is not fit that the
things used in or at Divine Worship be prostituted to vulgar use, that what are
Churches for an hour or two on the Lord's day be not Stables all the week
after; nor the Tables and Plate used in the Lord's Super, be employed, in the
service of the Taverns? This we agree to, and think our selves well able to
defend against any arguments we have yet seen to the contrary. 2ly. Does
appropriation necessarily employ homage to God; may not things be thus
separated, for Order and Uniformity, for Gravity and Decency, for Reverence and
Respect to the Solemnities of Religion? And may not this Reverence and Respect
we show to the solemnities of Religion, and the Devotion we show in external
Worship redound to God himself?

Indeed what are all the outward acts of Reverence but expressing of Homage,
Veneration and Adoration to God? I do not think the Holy Psalmist forgot
himself when he said, Ps. 95. 6.
Come let us Worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker: Or
that our Author himself said amiss, Page 29.
when he maintains, that Nature teaches us to Worship God in the most decent
manner we can. Page 13. and. Jean's answer to Hammond.
For though Adoration be to be given to God alone, Page 21.
yet Reverence (as our Author distinguishes) is due to all things relating to
him, and to that Worship we pay to him: And as there are several Acts of
Worship due to God; So there are some things due to his Worship, by which his
honor is advanced and devotion furthered. Case of Indifferent things. Page 29.
But for this I refer him to what was said otherwhere, which he was pleased to
take no notice of.

But to bring all to an issue I shall now consider the several arguments, and
instances I produced to prove that things indifferent, though not prescribed,
may be lawfully used in Divine Worship.

This I proved from the old Testament and New, from the practice of the
Primitive and Modern Churches, and from their own Concessions.

1. The instances I chose to give from the Old Testament were David's Temple,
the Feast of Purim, and the Synagogal Worship: To these he answers at once,
that they are answered long since by Dr. Ames in his Fresh Suit. Case examinea.
Page 25.
And perhaps may be answered by him after the manner he defended the objection
taken from the second Commandment, Page 2^.
which our Author himself gives up: But if his Arguments are of force, I
suppose, we shall find it in our Author. And he first begins with David's
Temple, Page 26.
of which he says, David indeed designed a Temple for God without a command,
But God checked him for it for this very reason, 2. Sam. 7. 7. and though he
approved his generally good intention, yet he restrained him as to his Act, as
may be seen in that Chap.

This being matter of Fact the Text must determine it, and from thence I
observe.

1. That God had at no time given a command concerning building a Temple. So in
the Text quoted, in all the places with all the children of Israel spoke I a
word with any of the tribes, 2 Samuel 7. 7.
etc. saying, why build ye not me an house of Cedars?

2. David in designing it went upon rational grounds (1.) as God had given him
rest, and so it became him to do it in point of gratitude, and because he had
an opportunity for it. Verse. 1
(2.) From comparing his own house with God's, See now I dwell in an house of
Cedar, but the Ark of God dwells within curtains.

3. It was no rash act, Verse. 2.
for it seems he had at that time made ready for the building, having it a long
time before in his thoughts. 1 Chronicles. 28. ^. 3.
Or this see Dr. Lightfoot, Temple c. 40.

1. From all which I infer, that neither David in designing, nor Nathan in
approving what he designed, thought it absolutely unlawful to do what was not
commanded in the Worship of God, or that what was not commanded was forbidden.
This must be granted by our Author, that says, God approved his generally good
intention, now what was his intention generally but to do somewhat in honor to
God, and for the solemnity of his Worship? Thus much Mr. Pool does yield, The
design being pious, and the thing not forbidden by God, Nathan hastily approves
it. Now if he approved it because not forbidden by God, then they did not think
that what was not commanded, was forbidden; nor does that of our Author appear
to be reasonable, that God checked him for it, because it was without a command.

2ly. Supposing that particular Act condemned, yet it is not reasonable to
suppose it to be for the general reason, given by our Author, that nothing must
be done without a command, but because in a matter of that consequence, the
Prophet did not advise about it, and that he did too hastily approve it, as Mr.
Pool says. But,

3ly. It Is evident that the particular Act was not condemned. 1. Because God
commended him for it, thou did well 1 Kings* 8. 17, 18.
. So Mr. Hildersham, Though the Lord would not let David build him an House,
yet he commends his affection for it, etc. Laect. on Job. Lect. 28.
2. God rewarded him for it, for upon it it was promised, 2 Samuel 7. 11.
He will make thee an House. 1 Chronicles. 17. 10.
So Mr. Pool, For thy good intentions to make him an House, he will build thee
an House. 3. He presently gave order upon it for the building such an House;
and as a mark of approbation, and a further reward of David's good intention,
did both reveal what he would have built, and how 1 Chronicles. 28. 19.
; And appoint his immediate Successor for the building of it 2 Samuel 7. 13*
. 4. Though God did deny this Privilege to David, yet it was not without giving
him good reason for it, and that was (1.) because things were not settled. So it
was before with the tribes, therefore God says he walked with them 2 Samuel 7.
6, 7. verse. 1.
: And so it was with David, for though he had at that time rest, (which was
about the 10th, or at most the 20th, of his Reign;) Yet it was far from a
settled Peace, and therefore Mr. Pool reads it as the Margin, v. 11. I will
cause thee to rest. (2.) It was not fit for David, Because he had been a man of
War, and shed much blood. 1 Chronicles. 22. 7, 8, 9. 28, 3.
Now in opposition to this (1.) God says, I will ordain a place for Israel,
and plant them, etc. 1 Chronicles. 17. 9
(2.) Of Solomon, he says, He shall be a man of rest, and I will give him
Peace 1 Chronicles. 22. 9
.

So that it appears that it was not unlawful for David to design a Temple nor
unacceptable to God that he did design it, but it was deferred for the reasons
before given, and because it was unseasonable.

Now because the Author has referred me to Ames, I will send him back thither,
and let him see whether he has answered all this or no. Ames Fres^ Suit part
2.. 6. and 7. Case examined p. 26.


As for the Feast of Purim, This Reverend person says, It lies upon our
Author to prove, the Feast of purim was kept as a Religious Feast. There is no
order for any Religious Acts to be performed in it. If it were, it was
generally commanded under the precepts of giving thanks for public mercies.

I shall therefore undertake to prove it a Religious Feast. But before I
proceed I shall 1. observe, That the lawfulness of Religious Feasts and Fasts
admit of the same general proof, and if I prove one I prove the other. 2. I
observe that the Jews did think it lawful to institute Religious Feasts and
Fasts, both occasional and anniversary. Of the latter sort (which is the matter
in dispute) were the Fasts of the 4th, 5th and 10th Months, instituted in the
time of the Captivity Zech. 8. 19.
.

Such was the Feast of Dedication instituted by the Jews in the time of the
Maccabees 1 Mac. 4* 59.
, And kept to the time of our Savior John 10, 22.
, nay to this very day amongst them Euxtorf. Synag. Jud.
. And so Mordecai and Esther did establish this Feast of Purim, and the Jews
took upon themselves to keep it Est. 9, 20, 27, 29.
. Now that it was a Religious Feast will appear,

1. As it was a day of thanksgiving to God for that great deliverance. Thus
it is called a day of gladness, a good day C. 8. 17. 9. 18, 19, 22.
, which Mr. Pool thus paraphraseth, a time of feasting, rejoicing and
thanksgiving On c. 8. 17. Chapter 9. 27.
. This further appears from the reason given for the celebration of it. It was,
says the Text, That the memorial of their deliverance should not perish: or as
Mr. Pool, Because they had seen and felt this wonderful work of God on their
behalf. C. 9. 2^, 31.
It appeared further from the circumstances of it, it is said They sent portions
one to another, and gifts to the poor. C. 9, 22.
Which, says Pool, they used to give upon days of thanksgiving, of which see
Neh. 8. 10.

And I may add, that it is impossible to conceive that persons of such signal
piety as Mordecai and Esther, should institute, and under the present sense of
such a deliverance, as the Jews were, should observe this Feast, only as a day
of Civil Joy, without respect to God that wonderfully brought it about.

2. It was as much a Religious Feast, as their Fast was a Religious Fast; So
the Text makes them parallel, They confirmed these days of Purim, etc. As they
had decreed for themselves and for their seed the matters of the fastings and
their cry. C. 10, 31.
But what their Fasting was, the nature of the thing, as well as the Cry here
spoken of does declare. So to go ye and fast, Pool adds, and pray, which was
the main business, to which fasting was only an help. On. c. 4. 16, and 9, 31.
But our Author says; There is no order for any Religious Acts to be performed
in it. As if they did not know what became them to do upon such a gracious and
wonderful deliverance. But we read of no order for such Acts on their days of
Fasting, were they not therefore Religious? Nay we read not of the name of God
in the whole Book, or or any duty to him plainly expressed, and shall we
therefore esteem it not to be Religious and Canonical?

But says our Author, If it were a Religious Feast, it was generally commanded
under the precepts of giving thanks. And I desire no more: For in one Breath he
has yielded all. So that now we have gained, that fixed and anniversary
festival days set apart for Commemoration of God's Mercies to us, are not only
lawful, but what we have a command for. And thence it follows, that a Church
has Power to determine them, as they did. And further that things not
commanded may be used in Divine Worship.

The next thing is the Synagogal Worship.

To this he replies, The Worshipping of God in Synagogues wanted no special
Command; Being but a Circumstance convenient, if not necessary to public
Worship considered as an Humane Act. A Multitude of people could not meet to
Worship God together without a fit place. But First why did not Synagogues want
a Special Command as well as the Temple which he contends for?) For, which is
worse, to build a more convenient place for one already instituted, a Temple
for a Tabernacle; or to build places for which they had (as he yields) no
special command, as the Synagogues? But suppose they needed not a Command for
Synagogues, because a Multitude could not meet together without a Fit Place;
yet how will that be a reason that the Worshipping in Synagogues wanted it not?
That place is a circumstance convenient, and that Synagogues were fit places
for a Multitude of people to Worship in, we grant; and we will grant that this
may be a reason to justify the building and using such places without a special
Command; yet what is that to the Worship so and so ordered in those places?
What is that to Days and Hours, which the Scripture speaks of, and he contends
against? What is this to the Forms used in their Service, which the Jews do
write of?, If these are not to be justified though they wanted a Special
Command, how was it that our Blessed Savior and his Apostles did not only
frequent the places, but the Service, as our Savior's Customary Preaching in
them does show? What is this to the Ritual Observations our Savior complied
with, such as the Passover Cup, and their posture at it, which he showed his
approbation of in his taking the materials of his last Supper from the Rites
used in the Passover, as learned men have observed; of which Casaubon says,
Hoc primum observare juvat, quomodo Filius Dei umbras Legis ad veritatem
traduxerit.

This he will by no means hear of, and therefore uses several evasions (for
they are no better). Thus when it is recorded that our Savior told the
disciples, with desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I
suffer: and in prosecution of it, that he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and
said, Divide it among your selves, for I will not Drink of the Fruit of the
Vine, etc. he irreverently represents it as if it was no more than if he drunk
only to satisfy Nature. Case examined.
For so he says; Page 14.
Before Christ did eat the paschal Supper, he drank a Cup of Wine, and
doubtless at it he drank also, though it be not recorded. People need no
Institution to drink while they are eating.

As if the Evangelist had no more to do than to tell us Christ drank a Cup of
Wine with his Meat. Surely there is a better account to be given of this
matter; The Text it self shows it. And the Jewish Authors and others that write
of their customs, do sufficiently inform us. In which he must be very ignorant
or incredulous, that will say (as he does) that no more is signified by it than
that every one might drink as his appetite required; Case examined.
and no less irreverent that can think that what is recorded of our Savior's
taking the Cup, and blessing, Page 32.
and drinking in the Passover, was only to serve that end.

The next thing I insisted upon was our Savior's compliance with them in the
posture used by them at the Passover, Page 3.
contrary (as he owns) to what was used at the first Institution. Of this, he
says, Our Savior used the Jewish posture in eating the passover, Page 84
being a posture no where, that we know of, used by Idolaters, nor being any
posture of Adoration, but their ordinary posture of eating Meat. 2. He says,
that every one might use the posture which was most convenient for the Nature
of the Action: and that he does not see any reason to conclude they would have
shut out any that because of the institution desired to eat it with his loins
girt, etc. 3. That, if they did use any uniform posture, yet it was because
they agreed it among themselves. In all which there is hardly any thing said
but is full of mistake. As,

1. He says, the posture used by our Savior was no where, that he knows of,
used by Idolaters, nor was a posture of Adoration. I cannot tell how far our
Author's Learning may extend in this matter, but that the posture of discumbing
was used at festival Solemnities from ancient times, by the Grecians, Medes,
Persians, Indians, Romans, and Jews, etc. and from thence translated to their
Sacrifical Feasts, which the Heathens did very anciently observe Herodotus, l.
1. c. 31.
, is sufficiently known Casab exercit. 16. c. 22
insomuch that the whole Solemnity was called amongst the Romans Lectisternium
Rosini antiq. l. 4. c. 15.
. This is Confirmed by Scripture. So Amos. 2. 8. They lay themselves down upon
Clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, etc. That is, the Beds which they used
in the Temples of their Gods, says Casaubon, Ibid.
from the Jews: So Ezekiel. 23. 41. For satisfaction in which I refer this
Reverend Author to others Buxtorf. Exercit. xxxv. and xxxviii.
.

And whereas he says this was no posture of Adoration, he must needs be
mistaken, if he grants what they did in those Solemnities in Honor to their
Gods to be Adoration. And this they did, for it was an entertainment made for
them, the heathens conceiving that the Gods did then feast with them; hence the
Poets phrase of Horat. l. ^. i. ode. 37.
ornare pulvinar Deorum dapibus. So the Apostle calls their Table, the Table of
Devils? 1 Cor. 10. v. 21.
and their lying down there an having fellowship with Devils. v. 20.
Having said thus much, I shall not need to proceed, and show how sitting, as
well as discumbing, has been also used in Idolatrous Service, both amongst
Heathens of old and Romanists now, Falkner's Libert. Eccles. part. 2. c. 3.. 4.
n. 10.
especially since I have it sufficiently proved to my hands in a book I suppose
our Author well acquainted with.

As for what he further says, If the Jews did use one uniform posture, etc.
there needs not many words to show how precarious or false it is. For what more
precarious than to speak doubtfully (If they did) of that which yet is clearly
evident they did observe? Or affirm, that if they did, it was because they
agreed it among themselves, which is to suppose the reason of the thing to be
certain, when the thing it self according to him is uncertain? Or what more
false since whether it was by agreement among themselves, or by the Authority
of the Church, that there was this Uniformity of posture is not so certain, as
it is that there was this Uniformity, and that they were universally obliged to
use and observe it? For it was required that discumbiture should be used in all
Religious Feasts, but especially at the Passover by all without exception in
the first part of the Solemnity. Lightfoot.
For which I refer our Author to one well-versed in these matters.

So little Truth, or certainty is there in what our Author asserts, that every
one might use the posture which was most convenient; and that there was no
reason to conclude they would have shut out any from their paschal Societies
that desired to eat it with his loins girt, etc. or standing.

The next instance produced in the abovesaid Case of Indifferent things, and
objected against by our Author, is the Hours of Prayer, which were observed
amongst the Jews, at Morning, Noon, and Evening. Act. 2 15. c. 10. 9. c. 3. 1.

Of these our Author gives this account: Case Examined, p. 15.
Thus the Apostles used the hours of Prayer, which also they might have
changed, if they had pleased. That the Jews sent any to Goals, or
excommunicated any for not keeping to those hours we do not find. There is
nothing of Religion in the time, more then in any other part of time. Thus St.
Paul used Circumcision and Purification.

Thus: How is that? Did the Apostles use the hours of Prayer only as necessary
circumstances of Humane actions, or such without which the light of Nature, or
Common usage shows the thing cannot be done, Page 1.
or conveniently or comelily done, Page 14.
as he says? Or rather did they not use them as they found them instituted and
observed in the Jewish Church? And not for his Thus, and the reasons given by
him? Will those reasons justify those very hours of the day, or the just
number of three hours? Or however, how will they Justify the Prayers used at
those hours; But whatever exceptions he had against the time, he it seems found
nothing to say to the Service, Case of Indifferent things. P. 11.
which yet was pleaded as well as that.

But he says, There is nothing of Religion in the time. If so (as is granted)
then it is in the power of a Church to institute and determine it, where there
is no other Religion in the Time, than as it is thus separated to the Service of
God.

Lastly he says, The Apostles might have changed the Hours of Prayer, if they
had pleased. How might they have changed them? Might they do it as Apostolical
Persons, or as Private Members of the Jewish Church? As to the former I find
not they did exercise any such Power within the Jurisdiction of the Jewish
Church, nor that they had any Commission so to do. As for the latter, I deny
it. For if it lay in the power of Private Members of a Church to alter the
Hours in which the Church is to assemble, it is in their power to Dissolve the
Assembly, and there could nothing but Confusion issue from it. I must confess
he seems to be at a perfect loss what to say as to this matter. And it appears
so when he dares not so much as touch upon the Prayers used. In those hours,
and applies his Thus to St. Paul's using Circumcision and Purification, as if
they also were necessary circumstances of Humane action; or such without which
the light of Nature or Common Usage shows the thing cannot be done, etc. which
were things of pure Institution at the first, and what though peculiar to the
Jewish Church, the Apostle complied with them in for a time.

The next instances produced in proof of the Proposition were, Washing the
Disciples feet, Love Feasts, and Holy-Kiss which he joins together, and of
which he says,

1. It Is impossible to prove, Page 12, 15, 16, 19.
that they were any more than Civil usages, etc.

2. They were not used in Worship.

Whether it is impossible to prove the first or no, does not rest upon our
Author's authority, Case of Indifferenc things. P. 13.
and yet that is the only thing which he has thought fit to confront what I
produced in proof of it. That they were Civil rites is granted, but that they
were used by Christ and the Apostles as no more than Civil, is (I may safely
venture to say) impossible to prove. First, Because there is the reason of the
thing against it, as they were instituted and used for Spiritual ends, and in
token of Christian Humility and Charity (as I then showed). Case of Indiff. p.
9. 12.
Secondly, Because of the great Difference there was betwixt them when used as
merely Civil, and as used by our Savior and the Apostles. What this was as to
washing the feet, Hor. in Joh. c. 13. 5.
I then showed where he might be Satisfied and to Buxtorf I may add the Learned
Dr. Lightfoot.

It appears further they were not merely Civil from the Character given to the
kiss of Charity, being called the Holy Kiss. But This was (says he) because
the Apostle commanded Christians to use it in a Sober, Temperate, Chaste, Or
holy manner. But if this was the reason, then all Kisses, and all Feasts would
be holy: But now Holiness stamps somewhat peculiar upon the thing it is applied
to and signifies that by Some act, end, or use, it is Separated from the rest of
the same kind. And for this reason was it more likely the kiss was called Holy,
from its end, use and signification (as it was a Testimony of that Holy and
entire love, which was or ought to have been amongst Christians) rather than in
respect of the manner; for what reason was there for that, when it was betwixt
persons of the same, and not a different, Sex. Besides, if it was a mere Civil
rite, and designed for no Religious end, could we think the Apostle would
require it, and close his Epistles so frequently with it? Lastly, it appears
they were not used as mere Civil Rites, because they were used in Religious
Assemblies, and some of them annexed thereunto. Page 16.
Of this (he says) he can never prove, that while Our Savior was Worshipping
his Father he stepped aside to wash his Disciples Feet: Or that the Primitive
Christians were either Kissing or Feasting one another in the Time or Act of
Worship, as Praying, etc. It would have become our Author rather to have
removed the proofs given of this, than to call for more: which if he had
considered he would have expressed himself with more caution and reverence.
That washing the Disciples feet had a Spiritual signification, I have showed,
and so was not unfit for a Religious Solemnity; and that it was used in such,
the Apostle shows, Joh. 13. 4. for a further account of which I leave him to
the Learned Casaubon; Exercit. 16. n. 22. and 24.
How and when the Holy Kiss was used, and how it was called the Seal of Prayer
and reconciliation, I then showed, Libertas, l 2. c. 1.. 3.
and is so fully proved by Dr. Falkner, that there needs no more to be added,
till that, at least, be refuted. That the Love Feasts were joined to, and used
at the same time as the Lord's Supper, not only the Apostle's discourse upon it
shows; but also the change of Names, and the giving of one to the other does
confirm it. 1 Cor. 11. 20.
For Theophylact supposes that the Apostle calls the Love-Feast by the name of
the Lord's Supper: And on the contrary Tertullian declares that from hence the
Lord's Supper came to be called (...). Apel. c. 39.
It were easy to heap up Authorities in this kind, but that is done to my hand
by such as write upon this Custom. V. Vines on the Sacram. c. 2. p. 25, etc.


After I had proved that things Indifferent, though not prescribed, might be
used in Divine Worship from the practice of the Jewish Church and that of
Christ and the Apostles: I further confirmed it from the incapacity we should
be in of holding Communion with any Church (if it were otherwise) whether
Ancient or Modern.

But our Author does endeavor at once to overthrow it. Case examined Page 21.
For says he, that every particular Christian must practice every thing which
the Churches practice which he has Communion with, or be concluded to have no
Communion with it, is to us a New Assertion. And so it is to me, Case of
Indifferent things. Page 15.
who only did maintain these two things, That there was no Church or Society
but would be found guilty if things uncommanded were unlawful; and if the
having such uncommanded things would make Communion with a Church unlawful,
then no Church could be Communicated with. So that all that I affirmed was,
there could be no Communion Lawful to such as held it unlawful to commun^cate
with a Church for the Sake of things uncommanded. And who are concerned in this
our Author very well knows; such I mean, as plead this as an argument for their
present Separation. But though the Assertion, as he words it, is neither mine,
nor true; yet I dare affirm there are some things uncommanded which every
particular Christian must practice, or else he can be said to have no Communion
with the Churches where such things are practiced; Such are Forms of Prayer,
and receiving the Sacrament in the Forenoon, and without sitting, where there
is no provision made for them that would use that posture, as well as where it
is not allowed.

And this was the case in the ancient Churches. To which he replies, Their
practices are great uncertainties, and their writings depraved, or, it cannot
be made appear, that none could have any Communion with those Churches, unless
he did eat the Lord's Supper fasting, or prayed toward the East. That their
writings are depraved is very true, But that they are so depraved as that there
is nothing certainly theirs, is what no one will assert. And that they are not
depraved in the passages or things I quoted from thence, is very evident from
the concurrence of the Fathers therein, and the general consent of learned men
of all sides. As to what he says that it does not appear that none could have
Communion with them, unless, etc. It were easy to refute it, and to show it in
the Instances I gave; and to make it out in one for all, viz. That of receiving
the Lord's Supper Fasting; of which St. Austin says thus, Liquido apparet,
Epist. 118. ad Januar.
etc. It plainly appears that our Savior and his Disciples did not receive it
Fasting, but shall the Universal Church be therefore reproached, because it
receives Fasting? And this pleased the Holy Ghost, that in Honor of so great
a Sacrament, the Body of Christ should First enter into the mouth of a
Christian. For therefore is this custom observed through the universal Church.
And more to the same purpose may our Author read in that Epistle.

Now when this was the practice (as they say) of the Universal Church, and that
they so practiced upon the score of an Apostolical Precept, as St. Austin there
says, (how truly is not my business to enquire) can we think that it was not
required? Or that there could be any Communion with those Churches, if any did
otherwise? I added to the ancient Church, the State of the Reformed Churches
abroad, and showed how they do use things uncommanded in the Worship of God,
and how impossible it is upon the principles of those that dissent from our
Church to hold Communion with theirs. To this he replies, we have not heard of
any thing used among them in Worship, etc. but what is prescribed, excepting
only some Forms of Prayer relating to the Sacrament. 2. None of these receive
the Sacrament kneeling. 3. They compel not any to receive Standing or Sitting.
I would be loath to charge our Author with want of diligence or integrity, but
how reconcilable this is to it that he says, I must leave to the impartial
Reader. Supposing however the first to be true, yet if they have some Forms
they have somewhat not prescribed. But have they only some Forms relating to
the Sacrament? What then shall we say to Capellus, These. Salmur. part 3. p. 307.
that says diverse of them have set Forms of Liturgies? What to their
Formularies, as those of Holland and Switzerland? What to the Bohemian Churches
that have also Forms in Singing of Humane Composure? Comen. de bono unit.
Annot. cap. 3.
Have they nothing but Forms of Prayer, what then thinks he of Anniversary
Festivals observed in the Helvetick and Bohemick Churches? Confess. Helvet.
Comen. ibid. c. 7. c. 3.. 2.
And of Godfathers in Baptism? As much mistaken is he when he says, None of
these receive the Sacrament kneeling, Case of Indiff. Things, p. 9.
as appears from the Petricovian Synod, that I quoted in the foresaid Tract.
Case examined, Page 13.
But to this he answers, it is not at all to be wondered that the Lutherans in
that Synod, should determine as they did, etc. Does he hereby mean that there
were none but Lutherans in that Synod, or that the Lutherans, in that Synod,
only determined it? Which way soever he would be understood it is a wretched
mistake. For the Synod was composed of those of the Helvetick, Augustan, and
Bohemick Confession, and subscribed by all of them, and was indeed but one of
several Synods they held in Common together. If he had but looked into this
Synod, all this discourse might have been saved, and he might have answered his
own Question, We desire to know what more receive Sitting except the Lutheran
Churches? What he produces the 3d. for, I cannot well understand, for it is all
one if those Churches forbid any one particular posture as if they required
another. V. Case of Kneeling. p. 14. 15.
And yet some do forbid Sitting, as the Synod above quoted, and one Church
Kneeling.

I proceeded further to show that they themselves could not then be
Communicated with, since they do things without prescription; as in
administering the Sacraments, conceived Prayer, Swearing, and Church-Governments
and order. He says, we do not make Sitting necessary; but that is not the
point in dispute, for he by his principles should show where it is commanded.
For conceived Prayer he argues, How this is prescribed, he and others have been
told elsewhere, and those that have told it, have had a sufficient answer.

Laying the hands on the Book, he says, is a civil, no sacred usage; as if the
invoking God, and a solomn testimony of our so invoking him by some external
Rite, were merely civil. Such then was lifting up the hand, which was anciently
used in swearing, and so appropriated to it, that it was put for swearing it
self, Genesis 14. 22. Ex. 6. 8. They that can affirm such things as these, may
affirm any thing.

As for the things relating to Church Order, he says, Ten times more is
allowed to matters of Government than Worship. But he undertakes not my
argument taken from the parity of reason betwixt the Kingly and Priestly
offices of our Savior: Vindicat. of Presbyt. Gov. p. 4.
And which the Presbyterian Brethren so approve of as to use the same Arguments
for Government as Worship.

The Third general was to enquire,. 3.
how we might know what things are indifferent in the Worship of God. The main
things he herein objects against, respect Edification; In handling of which, he
thus sums up my sense of it; Our Author would not have us judge of Edification
from what most improveth Christians in knowledge and grace, Case examined. Page
33.
but from what tends most to public Order; as if I spoke of Order, in
opposition to, and as exclusive of a Christians improvement, whereas I plainly
say, and he acknowledges it, that we are not so much to judge of them asunder,
as together. The meaning and design of what I said, was to show that Christians
are to consider themselves as members of a Church, and so to have a tender
regard to Communion with it, and not to think their own Edification a
sufficient reason, to break the Peace and Order of it.

To this he says several things. In Answer to which it will be convenient to
give a clear representation and state of the Case, which I shall do in these
Propositions.

1. We must consider that Edification is not the laying a Foundation, but a
building upon it, and so there is not the same reason for the breaking Order
for the sake of Edification, as there is for the sake of things absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and that which will warrant and does oblige to the one,
will not warrant nor oblige to the other. This will serve to show the little
force there is in what this Reverend Author confidently asserts, Page 34*
We know and are assured, that no man, to keep up any such human bounds (of
Order,) ought to omit means by which he may improve his own Soul in the
knowledge of Christ, or the exercise of his habits of Grace; by which assertion
of his he makes Edification and improvement in knowledge, etc. as necessary as
the knowledge of the Fundamentals of Religion.

2. We must consider (as I then observed that Order is a means of Edification,
Case of Indifferent things. P. 36.
and therefore if there happens a dispute betwixt observing Order, and
improvement in knowledge or grace, it is 'twixt means and means, 'twixt what is
for Edification in one way, and what is for it in another, and not betwixt what
is for, and what is against Edification, Case examined. Page 35
as he would have it understood.

3. We must observe that when there is a dispute betwixt means and means, the
less is to give place to the greater, and what is most for Edification, is to
yield to that which is least.

4. That for that reason the Edification of the Church, and the welfare of the
whole is to be preferred before the spiritual advantage of any particular
member; for what the less is to the greater, that is a member to the Church;
and if a person cannot serve and improve himself without damage to the Public,
he is rather to sit down without that improvement, than to do mischief to the
Community for the obtaining it; And as long as he is not without means
sufficient for Salvation, he is in that Case to recede from some further
seize; in doing which, for so good an end, he is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. Romans 14. 18.
So that however our Author may seem to shelter himself under the phrase of
Human Order, yet as long as no Church can subsist without it, Case Examined p.
34. 35.
and he that takes away Order takes away the Church, and he that says a person
ought to throw it down to improve his Soul, takes away Order; he must pardon me
if I think that he talks without consideration, for he that talks of
Edification of particular Souls, in a distinct notion from the building them up
as members of a Church, or of members of a Church without being united as a
Church, or of a Church without any means to unite it, does to return him his
own words) but discourse of building Castles in the Air, and what he would be
loath his own Congregation (if he has one) should at every turn put into
practice; Case of Indifferent things, p. 41, 42.
Of all which, if this will not convince him, I shall desire him impartially to
view the places of Scripture quoted by himself from the Apostle; Case of
Lay-Commun. p 39, etc.
as also what was said before in the controverted Tract, and he has not yet
answered, or has been since discoursed of in another Case.

The 4th. enquiry in the Tract aforesaid was,. 4.
How we are to determine our selves in the use of Indifferent Things in the
Worship of God? Under which head I showed what respect is to be given to
Authority, whether Ecclestiastical or Civil.

In Answer to which our Author takes up the Case of Imposition, Case Examined,
p. 39.
and propounds Two Questions, which in effect are these.

Q. 1. Whether there be any Authority in Church or State, to determine the
things which God has left Indifferent to his people?

Q. 2. Whether in Case they make any such Law, the people may, without sin,
obey them?

As for the First, Page 5. 9. 17* 32. 40.
he says there and elsewhere, We cannot conceive how it is possible that in
things of Divine Worship, things of an Indifferent nature should be the matter
of any human determination; and again, that in matters of Worship, no
Superiors may restrain, what God has left at liberty. We are not immediately
concerned in this First Question, for our business was to consider not so much
the extent of our Superiors power, in what Cases they may lawfully command, as
in what we may lawfully obey. But yet because he has herein offered somewhat
like an Argument, and because the clearing of this will make way for the
Second, I shall take it into consideration. To render his Argument the more
complete, I shall repair to a foregoing part of his Book, and make use of that
in conjunction with what he says here, and he thus represents it.

We cannot be fully of our Brothers mind, Page 9.
that in the Worship of God Superiors may determine circumstances which God
has left at liberty. God left it at liberty to the Jews, to take a Lamb or a
Kid, Turtle-Doves or Young-Pigeons, etc. We offer it to the judgment of the
whole reasonable World, whether Moses after this might have made a Law
commanding the Jews to use none but Kids, and only Turtle-Doves, etc. [for it
had been a controulment of the Divine Wisdom.] If not, let not our B. think it
strange if we judge the same of words in Prayer, which God has left at
liberty, etc. This is an Argument I find offered long since by Dr. Ames, Fresh
suit. part 2. p. 300.
and which is so considerable in our Authors opinion, that he often repeats it
elsewhere Page 17. 30. 32. 39. 41.
.

In Answer to this,

1st. I shall consider the Case under the Law, and how far what he has said
will hold good.

2ly. I shall show that there is not that parity betwixt the Case Then, and the
Case Now, as to render that unlawful Now, which would have been unlawful Then.

1st. I shall consider the Case Then, and I doubt not to affirm, it would have
been no controulment of the Divine Wisdom, for Moses and Aaron to have enjoined
the Jews in some circumstances, to have taken a Kid or a Turtle only; As when
it was for a public convenience and necessity: There was somewhat of this kind
of Equity in the first establishment of it; So the poor was to bring such of
these as he could get: Lev. 14. 30.
And Mr. Pool says, On Lev. 1. 14.
These Birds were appointed for the relief of the poor, who could bring no
better. And certainly he that grants it was to be left to the discretion and
convenience of the offerer which to determine, Page 30.
(as our Author does) should not deny the like power to Superiors for a
public convenience and benefit; nor can this be to blot out (as his phrase is)
what God has written, Page 17.
as long as they do it not in opposition to his Authority.

2ly. Supposing, that where God had wrote Or's (as he says) and that to
command the use of one of them alone, had in that Case been a controulment of
his wisdom, yet the Case Then is not parallel to ours. For, (1.) The Case was
then determined, it was indeed a Lamb or a Kid, but so as no other Beast, a
Turtle or a Pigeon, but so as no other bird was to be used instead of them.

But now though there is the Or under the Gospel, yet it is without such
restraint, for ours is free through the whole kind, and nothing determines us,
but a consonancy to the general rules. It Is so an Or and an Alias, that nothing
of the kind is excepted. So says our Author himself; Page 30.
In Prayer God has left standing, sitting or kneeling, to our choice and
convenience, etc. He has left us at liberty what words to use, what method or
order to observe, etc. (2.) As the disjunction was then determined, so the very
disjunction it self was of Divine institution, and the liberty they had to
choose one of the two, as well as the restraint of not choosing any but one of
the two, was from the special Law of God. And then for Authority to have
determined what God had left free, had some show of controulment of the Divine
Wisdom; especially if it had been required (as our Author somewhere supposes)
that they should never have offered any other but one sort of them. Page 9.
But under the Gospel it is otherwise, for the disjunction, the Or and the
Alias, does not proceed from Divine Institution, but from the nature of things,
and sometimes from human Art and Contrivance. As when Washing is commanded,
(for I shall not contend about it) all the particulars are comprehended, and
the person might be dipped or sprinkled, or have water poured on him, as he
observes; Page 22.
so in receiving the Sacrament, the posture of the Primitive Church (not of
mere standing, as he mistakes me, Page 35.
but) of standing (as I said) by way of incurvation; or sitting, or kneeling,
are all comprehended under the general species of posture. Again sometimes this
Or and Alias proceeds from human Art and Contrivance, hence the diversity of
habits, as a Gown, Cloak, Surplice. Now when this disjunction does proceed not
from Divine Institution, but from the reasons aforesaid, and that there is no
special Command of God to interpose, determine, restrain, or disjoyn, it can be
no controulment of the Wisdom or Authority of God for a Church to interpose,
restrain, or determine these matters in his Worship. This is plain in the Case
of Meats and Drinks, in which under the Law there was a restraint, an Or and
Alias, This and not That, and there is still an Or arising from the nature of
these things, and yet a determination or restraint herein is no controulment of
the divine Wisdom, as it might have been under the Law, because there is no
Institution that does interpose: And the Case must be the same in Divine
Worship, in which since there is no Institution about these matters, it is no
sin to Act in the same way; that is, it is no sin for Authority to limit and
determine, and for others to be limited, and determined; which brings me to the
next Question.

Q. 2. Whether in Case such things are determined, people may, without sin,
obey? Upon this our Author speaks very variously, sometimes determining for
Authority against the Principle, P. 7. 38.
sometimes for the Principle against Authority P. 9. 30.
. And at last leaves it problematical, and says they are divided upon it
amongst themselves P. 39, 40.
. I think not my self at present concerned to show the absurdity of this
Principle, as, how (if this be true) the same things must be lawful and
unlawful according as they are required or forbidden by our Superiors, etc.
But shall only consider what he offers on its behalf.

1. He says they may not in this Case obey, without sin, because nature
teaches us not to part with all our natural liberty.

2. Because we have a command to stand fast in the liberty, etc.

As to the former, I only say (and that is enough) that Nature teaches us and
does oblige us to part with some of our liberty in Communities: And they are
far from being required to part with all in ours, and so if his argument have
any thing in it, it has nothing in it as to our Case.

For the Second, Case of Indiff. Things, p. 46.
I leave him to what was said by way of prevention, in the Tract he opposes,
and which he should have Answered before he had made use of this as an Argument.

All that he has excepted against upon that subject is the notion I laid down
of Christian Liberty, which I said was no other than the Liberty which mankind
had, before it was restrained by particular Institution, and he gives this
reason against it, Case Exam. p. 40.
For in that [viz. Natural Liberty] we must not stand fast, because Divine
Institution has restrained us in it, etc. neither has Christ restored us to
any such Liberty. In Answer to this I shall consider what Natural Liberty is,
and then what Liberty it is that the Apostle did treat of? As to the Former,
it is no other but the free use or disuse of things Indifferent, whether out of,
or in the Worship of God. As to the Latter, it was no other than a freedom from
the Jewish yoke of bondage, and that Law that gendred to it, as the whole
current of the Apostles discourse does show. And therefore it could be with
respect to no other condition than that which mankind would have been, had
there been no such particular Institution, and was in before that Institution.
'Twas the nature of the Law, and the injoining of it by divine Institution, so
as it became necessary to them, Act. 15. 18.
that made it a Yoke, and a Yoke intolerable, and it was a freedom from that
Law that constitutes the Liberty which the Apostle treats of in that Epistle:
And if it be also to be taken as our Author would have it) for a freedom, in
matters of Worship, from any thing but what is of Divine Institution, that is a
secondary sense, and which may be taken from some parity of reason betwixt Case
and Case, but is not the Apostles, nor the primary sense of it. But take it how
we will in this or the other, Case of Indifferent things. Page 47.
I there showed that the Apostles exhortation was of no use to them that plead
it against submission to Authority in Indifferent Things, when imposed in or
about Divine Worship.

I am now come to the last general head of the aforesaid Tract,. 5.
which contained a short account of the things required in our Church, as they
were either Duty or Indifferent. And for an inforcement of that, and conclusion
of the whole, I shall briefly show how far this Reverend Author consents to, or
by his concessions must be bound to acknowledge it. Indeed he sometimes does
tell us, Case Examine. page 3. 36. 38.
that Nine parts of Ten of all Dissenters say they cannot comply with things
required in the English Liturgy, because they believe the things sinful and
unlawful; And elsewhere, Two hardly of an Hundred think them Indifferent: But
whether our Author be of that number, or at least has reason so to be, I shall
leave to his own conscience, as to himself, and to his concessions as to
others. In which I shall observe the method taken in the aforesaid Tract, where
I said all things objected against, might be referred to Posture, Forms, and
Times, and showed these to be Natural or Moral circumstances of Action, and
inseparable from it. Now in general he grants what are such may be lawfully
used; page 14.
And if we come to particulars, he does at last yield it.

As for postures what more scrupled and opposed than Kneeling at the Sacrament?
page 22.
Yet of this he says There is no command in it, page 12.
and it is Indifferent; that in all probability our Savior administered it
Kneeling, and sitting backward upon his Legs; page 36.
that no Dissenter refuses it, because it is not decent, but because it is a
posture of Adoration; that our Church does not intend it as an homage to the
Body of Christ there really present, but declares that to do it as to the
bread, page 12, 13.
were an Idolatry to be abhorred; And in conclusion tells us, that those that
hesitate in that point, fear a posture of Adoration used by Idolatrous Papists;
which is a consideration of no moment as has been already showed.

As to Forms of Prayer, (he says) God has left us at liberty what words to
use; page 30.
and further, that for conceived Prayer, page 22.
we know no body says no other must be used in Gods Worship; and if so, then
Forms may be lawfully used in it: Case of Indiff. p. 8.
But suppose any scruple the use of them, he says however, We know no reason
but people may hear them, Case Exam. p. 22.
if any scruples the use of them he may yet have Communion with the Church, we
hope, though he does not act in it as a Minister.

As to time, page 29.
he says, the Law of Nature directs; and for Festivals, such as Purim amongst
the Jews, he says, page 26.
It was generally commanded under the precepts of giving thanks for public
mercies.

Lastly, Are the things required unlawful because imposed? He answers, Some of
us including surely himself are not of that mind; page 39.
nay he affirms that the most sober Dissenters will agree in these things, page
7.
[that is, Natural circumstances] to obey the command of Superiors, provided
it be not such as by circumstances is made sinful. But if imposition would make
them sinful, such a command must not have been obeyed. So that in the
conclusion, I see no reason why our Reverend Brother* and the Dissenters he
defends, and that in all things (as he says agree to the Doctrine professed in
the Articles of the Church of England, page ^.
should dissent from the Liturgy and Ceremonies of it, as far as Lay-Communion
is concerned in them. Nor why he should tell us so much of Goals, page 41, 44.
and Sessions, and Judicatures, and of the Sufferings they endure, when if
there things be true) it is for not doing what they lawfully can. It is no
wonder when such withold communion from the Church, and set up other Churches
against it, that some call them (as he complains) perverse and contamacious
persons, ibid.
and others call them damnable Schismatics and are so bold as to say that such
a separation from that Church, page 1.
is a separation from Christ; And it is likely he will meet with such that will
speak very severe things of his following appeal to God, Judge O thou righteous
Judge between these people, page 41, 44.
and those who thus pursue them. I am far from one (God is my witness that is a
smiter of his fellow servants as he calls them) nor would have any one do what
he verily believes is unlawful; page 41.
but I do think it is the duty of all to do what they lawfully can, to hear
readily, and consider impartially what may be offered for their satisfaction,
and to suffer patiently where they cannot receive it. This I think every truly
conscientious person will do, and I should question his conscience that does it
not. Certainly (to return him his own words) if our Brethren have any value for
the Glory of God, ibid.
for the good and peace of others Souls, for the preserving the Protestant
Religion, for the union of Protestants against Popish adversaries, for any
thing indeed that is good and lovely, they will rather break than any longer
draw this saw of contention, and will do as much as in them lies for the
repairing of those breaches which must be confessed are no less dangerous than
scandalous to our Religion.

The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but righteousness and peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 13. r. I should. p. 30. l. antepenult, r. imply. p. 31. l. 6. r.
expressions. p. 89. Marg. add to Lightfoot. Hor. in Matthew. and Mark. p. 46. l.
17. r. Government.

Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
1. A A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion

3. The Case of Indifferent things used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated, by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Aaonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. In two Parts.

8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether it be Lawful to separate from a Church
upon the Account of promiscuous Congregations, and Mixed Communion?

9. An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayer, and some
other Parts of Divine ^ervice Prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

10 The Case of Kneeling at the Holy Sacrament, Stated and Resolved, etc. in
Two Parts.

11 A Discourse of Profiting by Sermons, and of going to hear where Men think
they can profit most.

12. A serious Exhortation, with some Important Advices, Relating to the late
Cases about Conformity; Recommended to the Present Dissenters from the Church
of England.

13. An Argument to Union; taken from the true interest of those Dissenters in
England who profess and call themselves Protestants.

14. Some Considerations about the Case of Scandal, or giving Offense to the
Weak Brethren.

15. The Case of Infant Baptism, in Five Questions, etc.

16. The Charge of Scandal and giving Offense by Conformity Refelled, etc.

17. The Case of Lay-Communion with the Church of England Considered, etc.

1. A Discourse about the charge of Novelty upon the Reformed Church of
England, made by the Papists asking of us the Question, Where was our Religion
before Luther?

2. A Discourse about Tradition, showing what is meant by it, and what
Tradition is to be Received, and what Tradition is to be Rejected.

3. The Difference of the Case between the Separation of Protestants from the
Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England.

4. The Protestant Resolution of Faith, etc.

5. A Discourse concerning a Guide in Matters of Faith with respect especially
to the Romish pretense of the Necessity of such an one as is Infallible.


