THE Papist Represented, AND NOT MISREPRESENTED; BEING In ANSWER to the SECOND
SHEET of the Second Part of the PAPIST Misrepresented and Represented. And for
a further VINDICATION of the CATECHISM truly Representing the Doctrines and
Practices of the Church of Rome, In the Point of their Praying to the CROSS.

LICENSED, December 24. 1686.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

THE PAPIST REPRESENTED, And not Misrepresented, etc.
WHEN I observe the late Proceedings of some of the Controvertists in the
Church of Rome, and the design they have in hand of setting forth their
Doctrines and Practices in a way less offensive to others, and more defensible
to themselves, than in former Ages; I cannot better resemble it, than to a
Carver, that being employed to form an Image of the Virgin Mary or other Saint,
concerns not himself to make it like to the Person thereby to be represented,
but so as shall best serve to allure and excite the people to a devout
Adoration of it. If the Image was strictly to be examined, and we had an
Original to compare it with, it is likely there might not be one true Line in
the whole Composure, and that it might as well suit any other Person in the
World, as him or her whom it pretends to resemble. And thus it will fare in
many points now introduced upon the Stage by Veron and the Bishop of Meaux
abroad, and a late flourishing Pen and others amongst us, which carry in them
so little Conformity to the Ancient Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Rome, that Face can hardly be more unlike to Face, than one would be unlike to
the other, if impartially compared; and which, if in another Age they had
appeared as they do in this, would have been suspected of Heresy, if not
condemned for it. For did they in former times Formally pray to the Saints, and
frequently beg those things of them, which are only in the power of God to
grant? The Papist after the new Mode of Representation, is said to believe all
good, whether Spiritual or Temporal, comes immediately from God through the
Merits of Christ; Pap. Misr. par. 2. c* 2.
and that they no otherwise desire the Just in Heaven to pray for them, than
they do the Just on Earth, to be Joint-Petitioners with themselves to the Seat
of the Divine Majesty. Did they heretofore use, without Scruple, to Worship and
to pray to Images, as if the persons thereby represented were before them? Ibid
c. 2.
We are now told, they give no other Respect, Honor and Veneration to them,
than we do to the Bible; and that they can as well pray to the Monument, etc.
as to the Image of the greatest Saint in Heaven. Did they formerly adore the
Cross, and direct their Prayers to it in the solemn Offices of the Church? It Is
now only a Rapture, an innocent Wish, a Rhetorical Flight. By which Palliations
and Glosses it may well be supposed, they are ashamed or grow weary of their
Religion as formely practiced and defended; and were they as sincere as liberal
in their Concessions, that they are hastening apace to a Reformation of it. But
now as we are not to judge of the Virgin Mary and other Saints by the Images and
Pictures of them extant in the World (in which the Carvers and Painters do
indulge their fancy) for then they would be Black and Fair, little and great,
and what not? So we must not Judge of the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Rome, by the design of these late Officious Artists; for then we should find
contradictions in their Infallible Church, building and pulling down, saying
and unsaying, age against age, principles and practices against principles and
practices; but we must have recourse to the Originals, and see what their
Authentic Authors and Offices do teach, and what is yet practiced in those
places where their Religion has no Enemy near, to contend with, or to make too
curious observations upon it. Which course, as I have already observed in
Discoursing upon the Worship given by them to Images, so I shall proceed in
this present Argument of the Cross; and show what reason there was for that
charge in the Catechism that they Pray directly to it. But here our Author
takes up the point betimes, and a strain of Calumny, Insincerity, Defamation
charged upon the Catechism, etc. runs through the whole Chapter. And why? Is it
because it has produced any false Citations against them, Ibid.
or such as are insufficient? No, but the Catechism takes that literally which
is to be understood figuratively; and from two words in one of their hymns
which literally imply a Prayer to the Cross, takes the occasion of charging
them with directly praying to it; whereas the Papists are never any where
directed to pray to the Cross, and have no prayers to it. Upon the Reading of
this, I was for the present at a stand, how a person of that Communion, and
that Undertakes the defense of its public Offices, should be so Ignorant as to
profess there are but two words in one of their Hymns to this purpose, and that
they have no prayers to the Cross, nor direction about it; or if he did know
otherwise, how he should be as confident to assert it, as if no one had ever
read their Offices, but themselves. But being now a little wonted to his way, I
began to think there must be some reserved meaning in these positive
assertions; and by looking back a page or two, I find that he and the Catechism
are not agreed about the chief Term in Dispute, and that is the Cross. For
whereas the charge in the Catechism is, that they pray directly to the Cross,
he, with much sincerity, alters the terms, and says, that the Faithful
Catechist produces an argument to prove the Papists so stupid, as to pray
directly to a piece of wood, and a mere material Cross. But if that is a mere
piece of Wood, which in the Consecration of, the Bishop prays may be made the
stability of Faith, and increase of good works, and the Redemption of Souls. If
that be a mere piece of wood, which they use all expressions of outward
Adoration to, by kissings, prostrations, etc. If that be a mere piece of wood,
to which they give Latria, or the sovereign Worship which is peculiar to God;
Then indeed they Pray also directly to a mere piece of wood, to increase Grace
in the Godly, etc. But if the Cross they thus Consecrate and Bless, and is thus
effectual after Consecration; if the Cross they Adore, kiss and prostrate
themselves before; if, lastly, the Cross they give Divine and Sovereign Worship
to, is not a mere piece of wood, so then neither is that a mere piece of wood,
they are said in the Catechism to pray directly to. For it is the same Cross
that the one and the other, nay that all of the things here recited of, are in
the Catechism applied to. But becaufe I am willing to clear the point, and as
much as I can, leave it without exception,

1. I shall show what they mean by a Cross.

2. I shall prove that they do Adore and Worship the Cross.

3. That they do pray directly to the Cross they adore.

The Cross we are now concerned about, is an external Representation of our
Savior Crucified upon it: And so is as distinct from a bare material Cross, a
mere Cross of Wood, etc. as what is an Object of Worship, is from that which is
none. For by being thus Representative, it is no longer what it was before, a
mere piece of Wood; but being in the stead of him whom it Represents, De Cruce.
l. 1. c. 49.
and sustaining his person, it has by that means an excellency communicated to
it, and which formally alters the Nature of it, as Gretser the Jesuit, a
copious writer upon this Argument, does show.

For the further explication of which, and to add some authority to the
abovesaid character of the Cross, I shall transcribe the sum of what he writes
of this matter. Chap. 51.
It having, it seems, been objected, That if all the Crosses are to be
Worshipped because Christ hung upon the Cross; by the same reason all Thorns,
Reeds, Nails, Spears, Sepulchers, etc. are to have the same respect, because
Christ was crowned with Thorns, Nailed to the Cross, had his side Pierced, and
at last was buried in a Sepulcher.

To this Gretser Answers, That all Crosses are made in Imitation of the Cross
upon which Christ suffered, and of him suffering upon it, and that they may
both Represent That and Him. Wherefore we do deservedly honor all Crosses, as
they are Images, and an Image is for Representation; but we do not thus honor
all Sepulchers, Nails, etc. because they are not Images or Representations of
the Sepulcher of Christ, nor of the nails that fastened his Body to the Cross.
But if any one does build a Sepulcher, or erect a Manger, or make Nails, or
choose out Thorns in imitation, and for a Representation of the first
Sepulcher, Manger, Nails and Thorns, etc. it is no doubt but they may be
Worshipped. For then they are endued with, and have in them the Nature of an
Image, which is Representation. So that as there is a distinction betwixt
Sepulcher and Sepulcher, Manger and Manger; and which distinction is such, that
the one is an object of worship, and another is not; so there is betwixt Cross
and Cross, that is, betwixt a Cross, either Natural, Accidental, and Artificial
when made for other uses, and a Cross that is Representative (as the same
Author there shows.)

So that our Author might safely enough declare, Misrepr. p. 2. c. 2. c* p. 10.
that if his Religion did either teach or practice such stupid Idolatry, as
praying to a piece of Wood, he could no more be any longer of her Communion
than he could Sacrifice to Molech. For as it is a piece of Wood, it is not the
Cross we are here concerned in, not the Cross by Representation, not the Cross
by Consecration, which alone, and under that consideration is the object of
their Worship. So that tho he may continue in that Communion, and make this
Protestation against a piece of Wood; yet he cannot be of that Communion and
enter the like Protestation against a Representing and Consecrated Cross, and
call such application to it, Idolatry. For this Cross we are speaking of, is
not only representative, but is also consecrated for that purpose; and there is
an Office accordingly, with such Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies as make it as
well a Sacred, Pontificale in benedic. Nov. Crucis.
as a Representing Object. As for instance, in the consecration of a new Cross
of Wood, the Bishop prays in these words; We pray thee, O Holy Lord, etc. That
thou would vouchsase to bless this Wood of thy Cross, that it may be a
wholesome [saving] remedy to mankind; Salutare.
a stability of Faith, an increase of good works* the Redemption of Souls, a
comfort, protection and defense against the evil darts of the Enemies, through
our Lord, etc. And as if this were not sufficient, after the consecration of
the Incense, the Bishop sprinkles the Cross with Holy Water, and Incenses it;
Saying,

Let this Wood be sanctified in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the HolyGhost. Let the blessing of that Wood upon which the Holy Members of our
Savior hung, be in this Wood; that all that pray and bow down themselves for
God, before this Cross, may find health both of Soul and Body, through the same
Jesus Christ. But if the Cross be of Metal, etc. then he is to pray to Christ
in these Words, Do thou take this Cross [now consecrated] in those hands with
which thou have embraced That [on which he hung] and with the holiness of That,
do thou Sanctisy This: And as the World by That was cleansed from guilt, so the
devout Souls of thy Servants who offer it, may by the Merit of This Cross be
delivered from every sin they have committed.

So that it is very evident, that as the Cross by virtue of its Representation*
is quite another thing than a mere piece of Wood; so upon its Consecration,
it is endued with another Nature; for then it has Merits of its own; it is
healthful both for Soul and Body, and is for the stability of Faith, the
increase of Good Works, the comfort of Souls to all them that bow down before
it. And here it is sit to be remembered against we come to need it, that there
can be no Apostrophe, no Rhetorical Flight, when we not only consider it is a
Prayer, and not a Poetical Composure; but that also the Cross here spoken of,
is as much distinguished from Christ, as from that Cross he suffered upon.

By this time, I hope, it is sufficiently proved, that the Cross in dispute, is
another thing than a mere piece of wood.

But tho the right stating of a Case goes a great way toward the resolving of
it, yet this is not all I intend in it: To proceed therefore,

2. I shall prove that they do adore and worship the Cross. It has been of late
pretended by some, that the Cross is only a Memorative Sign: but this was
accounted in the last Age, little better than Heresy: And therefore Gretser
says of the Lutherans, De Cruce l. 1. c. 50.
who retained Crosses in their Churches for Remembrance* and not for Worship,
that they are Enemies to the Cross, and not better than those that wholly
reject them* For indeed, this is so embodied into the Offices of the Church of
Rome, that no one can be truly of that Communion* but must thus conceive as
they do. Thus we find after the Consecration of the Cross, the Bishop first
kneels before it, and does devoutly adore and kiss it, Pontific. ibid.
as do also all that are present, if they so please. But tho it be left to the
pleasure of the People in that Solemnity, yet it shows what the Church does
intend; and accordingly it does call upon them in the public Office, to join
with her in the Adoration of it; Ibid. c. 49. Missal. Romans in Para^^ev. Fer. 6.
as Gretser does acknowledge. For the Missal says, at the uncovering of the
Cross, Behold the wood of the Cross, Come, let us adore; upon which all the
People fall to the ground. And when the Priest has wholly uncovered the Cross,
and repeated, as before he places it before the Altar, and first himself draws
near to adore the Cross; bowing his knees thrice before he kisses it. And then
the Attendants at the Altars, and the Clergy and Laity, two and two, as he did,
Adore the Cross; the Quire in the mean while singing, We adore thy Cross, O
Lord. This I take to be past Controversy in the Church of Rome, where it is not
disputed, whether the Cross is to be worshipped, but with what Worship it is to
be worshipped. And which indeed is also determined to their hands by the
Pontificale in the place quoted in that Catechism which our Author wrote this
Chapter against. Lud. de Paramo de Orig. S. Inquis. l. 2. tit. 3. c. 8. n. 5.
And therefore when Joh. Aegidius, a Canon of Sevil, had maintained that God
was to be worshipped with Latria [Soveraign Worship] and the Cross with Dulia
[an inferior sort of Worship (as they call it) which they give to the Saints]
he was enjoined a public Recantation, as denying the Adoration of the Cross,
contrary to the practice of the Church, which says, O Crux ave spes union,
Hail, O Cross, our only Hope. And in another place. Crucem tuam adoramus, We
do adore thy Cross, as Ludovicus de Param^ relates it.

And this puts me in mind of bringing this Matter to a Conclusion, which I
shall do, by showing,

3. That they do directly pray to the Cross. This was asserted in the
Catechism, but I must not say proved, till I have cleared the Point. But
however if it was not proved, there was somewhat fairly offered toward it;
when it produced the express words of the Breviary in justification of it;
which before I proceed I shall recite. The words are these; Hail O Cross, our
only Hope! do thou increase Grace in the Godly, and blot out the Sins in the
Guilty. In exception to what the Catechism has produced this for, our Author
has said as much as the Cause will bear, and to give him his due, with Art*
and Smartness enough: And to give what he has said its full sense, I shall,
without taking notice of the extravagant Censures, and inveterate Expressions
scattered through the whole, sum up what he has said: And it comes all to
this; That this Hymn is of ancient composure; that it is an Hymn and not a
Prayer, and so being Poetical, it is but a Rhetorical Flight and Apostrophe,
frequent in Scripture, and the Fathers; that there are but two (that is, I
suppose, a few) words in one Hymn to this purpose; that the Church has no
Prayer to the Cross, nor are They ever directed any where to pray to it. In
fine, he says, the meaning of their Church in saying that Hymn, is, Hail, O
Christ, our only Hope, etc. I am apt to think that he will grant, upon the
perusal of the whole, that I have done no injury to what he has said, by this
short and close account of it.

But now if I shall be able to prove that this is a Prayer as well as an Hymn,
and that there are parts of their Office to corroborate the sense I have given
of it; if I prove that their Church has Prayers to the Cross, and directs the
People to pray to it, I think there will need little more to vindicate the
Catechism from all that Defamation he has so plentifully cast upon it.

In the first place, Bellarm. de Scriptor. Eccles. An. 300.
he tells us that this Hymn is found in St. Ambrose's Works. So Bellarmine
indeed says it was in the Paris Edition 1540, which he used; and yet there are
other Editions in which it is not. So that I may as well say, it is not in St.
Ambrose's Works, as he may say that it is, and both alike true. But is this any
credit to it? Then it would be so to the Hymns, Optatus votis omnium, and
Christ, qui lux es and dies, etc. which Bellarmine says are unworthy of so
great a Name, and not to be attributed to him. But however if St. Ambrose be
not the Author of it, he has found out a Learned Bishop to father it upon, one
Vincentius Fortunatus, who, he says, composed it to be sung by his Church on
Passion Sunday. But tho he has not favored us with the Sea this Bishop had,
yet I easily apprehend whom it is that he means, and that is Venantius
Fortunatus, which Mistake I shall be so candid as not to impute to his
ignorance in these Matters, but to the haste, which he that intends to write a
Weekly Packet of Controversy must be more or less liable to. Ibid. de Venant.
Fortun.
But yet I am not satisfied in the Point; for tho he has the learned Bellarmine
before him, that seems to say, or is willing to have it believed, that this
Bishop was the Author of this Hymn; yet I find others doubting of it; and
amongst them is Gretser, who tho a diligent Reader, and one as willing and
ready to lay hold of what might serve for his Purpose, as Bellarmine, or any
Man whatsoever, yet speaks very doubtfully of it, Lib. 1. de Cruce, c. 53.
and says, some do attribute it to Theodulphus [Bishop of Orleance], others to
Fortunatus; the former of which lived 265 Years after the latter, according to
Bellarmine. So that the truth is, there is no certainty at all in this Matter,
which our Author has yet so positively asserted.

But be that as it will, it is no great matter who is the Author of it, nor
indeed what the sense of that Author was, for as long as we know what Church
does constantly use it, and in what sense that Church does take it, we have
enough for our purpose: And that is the thing to be now enquired into. I grant
that the words here quoted, are part of an Hymn, and that there are several
things to be Indulged to a Poetical Fancy, that are not otherwise to be
Indulged: and therefore if there was nothing in their Church, to induce and
oblige us to take it in a sense quite different from what he imposes on it, it
would not be fair or ingenuous to force a proper sense upon it, when the nature
and reason of the thing, as well as their own declaration, require it to be
taken in an improper. But when we know that the Cross is among them, a
Representation of our Savior's Passion, and has for that reason a Worship
given and ordered to be given to it as a Representing Object. When we know that
it is also consecrated, and upon its Consecration is supposed to have altered
its Nature, and to have Divine Virtues communicated to it, or to have a power
of communicating such Virtues to those that adore it. When, further, the
Passage quoted from this Hymn is conformable to the other Offices of the
Church, we have no reason in the World to take it in his sense, when we have
thus the current sense of their own Church against it.

I think I have made it evident before, in what I have said of the Consecration
of the Cross, that the Cross is considered as a distinct thing from our
Savior, because they pray to him to bless the Cross, and to have such and such
Virtues communicated to it and by it. I think also it has been made evident,
that the Cross it self is to be considered and proposed as an Object of
Adoration. And then, why is it more absurd to pray to the Cross, than it is
thus to adore it? Or, why is it absurd to pray to the Cross for That, which
they have prayed before may be communicated to the Cross? But because this is
but reasoning (though such reasoning as is natural and plain) therefore I shall
appeal to the Hymn it self, which I shall transcribe.

Vexilla Regis prodeuut,
Fulget Crucis Mysterium,
Quo carne carnis Conditor
Suspensus est patibulo.
Arbor decora and fulgida,
Ornata Regis purpura,
Electa digno stipite
Tam Sancta membra tangere, etc.
O Crux Ave spes unica,
Paschale quae fers gaudium
Piis ad auge gratiam.
Reisque dele crimina.
The Banner of the King comes forth,
The Mystery of the Cross does shine.
On which Cross, the maker of Flesh has hung.
A comely and bright Tree,
Adorned with the Purple of the King,
Chosen out of a Stock worthy, etc.
To touch so sacred Members,
Hail, O Cross, our only Hope,
Increase Grace in the Godly.
And blot out the Sins of the guilty.
Then in one of the places quoted in the Catechism immediately follows this
Sequence, Fest. Invent. Crucis ad Vesper.
The sign of the Cross shall be in Heaven, when the Lord shall come to
Judgment. But this is not all; for it follows further, O Cross, brighter than
all the Stars, which alone have been thought worthy to bear the weight of the
World! Sweet Wood, bearing the sweet Nails and sweet Burdens; save the present
Company, gathered together this day for thy praise.

From whence I observe, 1. That the word Cross in this Hymn, cannot be applied
to Christ, but to the Cross distinct from him: For else, the Cross which is the
Banner of the King, would be the King himself; the Cross on which the Maker of
Flesh hung in his Flesh, would be the same with the Maker of Flesh; The Tree
which touched his sacred Members, be the same with the Members touched by that
Tree. 2. I observe that the Cross which is saluted with Hail, O Cross, our
daily Hope, is the same with the Cross upon which Christ hung; and therefore
must be the Cross this Salutation is directed to. 3. That the same, or what is
equivalent to it, which our Author supposes here to be said poetically, is
prayed for; Sweet Wood, save the present Company. But because all the
Contradictions in the World will not open some Men Eyes, I shall give our
Author the sense of Persons as considerable in his own Church for Learning and
Authority, as himself may be presumed to be. And first of all, let us hear
Dominicus Soto, a Divine (as I remember) in the Council of Trent, who, it seems
had not learned our Author's sense of this matter; Dom. Soto de Instit. and
Jure. l. 2. q. 3. art. 2. in fin.
for he says, We ought to worship the Images themselves; for the Church does
not say, we worship Thee, O Christ, but thy Cross, O Crux ave, spes unica, etc.
Catharinus leads us a little further, Cathar. de cultu and ador. Imag. p. 133,
and 137.
for he says, We direct our words and signs of Adoration to the Images, to
which likewise we burn Incense: As when we say to the Cross, O Crux ave spes
unica, etc.

And so Aquinas and others tell us, V. Simon. Majolus pro desens. sacr. Imag.
centur. 13. c. 14.
that Latria is to be given to Images, because the Church in praying to the
Cross, speaks to it as if it were Christ himself.

From which Authorities, we may perceive how little heed is to be given to our
Author (though he writes as if he held the sense of their whole Church in the
hollow of his hand) when he affirms, Page 12.
That the meaning of Catholics in saying that Hymn, is, Hail, O Christ, our
only Hope! And that in the holy time of the Passion, in which that Hymn is
sung, their whole Devotion and Prayers are directed to Him. By which words one
would at first think, See the defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Church of England. Append. p. 121.
our Author was much of Imbert's mind, a Disciple (as he himself thought) of
the Bishop of Meaux, who when the Cross was shown to the People on Good Friday,
franckly and openly declared, We adore not any thing of what we see, but Jesus
Christ crucified; and that he might expect the same Censure for it, as that
poor Man met with from his Diocesan. But our Author has prudently provided for
his own Security; for by adding a word or two, he has rendered his Exposition
harmless, and secured himself from the fate of Imbert: For a line or two
before, he says, The Catholics do not understand the words of this Hymn
Barely of the material Cross, but of Christ crucified. And indeed our Author is
not alone, nor the first in this Exposition, for thus it is also expounded in a
French Office, L'Office de la Semaine Sancte, Francois and Latin. 8o a Lion, p.
1667. Remarques, p. 317.
viz. This Adoration is not terminated only on the Wood, but on Jesus Christ
who was nailed thereon: [Cette Adoration ne se termine pas au Seul Bois, mais a
J. C. qui y a este attache]. So that for the future, when we meet with such
Expositions, that do seemingly translate the Worship from the Cross wholly to
our Savior, we are to understand that there is some reserved Qualification, to
moderate it, such as merely, barely, only, that is implied, or expressed
perhaps a line or two before or afterward. And having now this Key, we may
pretend to understand the meaning of our Author's Exposition, and, if you will
take his word, the meaning of all Catholics, which is this, Hail, O Cross, our
only Hope, And, Hail, O Christ, our only Hope; that is, Christ is their only
Hope, but so as the Cross is their Hope too; and the Cross is their only Hope,
but so as Christ is their Hope also. So that whilst our Author charges the
Catechism with pointing to a false and mistaken sense, he himself has, much to
the advantage of the Hymn, expounded it into Nonsense. A word, I must confess,
I borrow from him, and which puts me in mind of the last Tire, that he
discharges upon the Catechism; but though in managing of this he has spent the
greatest part of his Sheet, Page 11.
I shall dispatch it in few words. If, says he, for these words in this
Anthem, their Church must be blackned with the Infamy of Idolatry, and praying
directly to the Cross; then stand clear Paul, have a care Chrysostom, beware O
Creed, and you Common Prayer Book, look to your self. For if you have but a
grave Catechist that will faithfully represent you; you will be infallibly set out
for nothing better than Professors of Folly and Nonsense, bundles of
Absurdities and Profaneness, etc. One would think that this Author, from a
certain pique he has taken against what he so often calls a Grave Catechism,
had forgotten all Gravity, and Respect to the most serious matters. Stand
clear, have a care, beware. Who and what are these addressed to? No other than
a holy St. Paul, an excellent St. Chrysostom, and the chief Sum of the Articles
of our Faith. For God's sake are there no more decent Forms of Speech to
describe these things by? And are we to discourse of them as if we were at some
light and rustical Pastimes? But what can be strange in this kind, when it
shall be suggested that there is as much reason to say St. Paul reverenced the
material Cross above all things in Heaven and Earth, Page 11.
because he says, God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ: As much reason to say, he looked upon the Wood of the Cross, as
that which had purchased Man's Reconciliation to God, because he says, Man was
reconciled to God in one Body, by the Cross; as there is for saying the Church
of Rome prays directly to the Cross, because she salutes it with Hail, O Cross,
our only Hope: and as if there was no more reason to apply this to a material
Cross, than there is these and the like Texts of St. Paul. He does indeed
intimate, and would have it understood, that the material Cross is herein
concerned. For thus he says, To do right to St. Paul, St. Chrysostom, Page 12.
etc. besides giving a bare Narrative of their Expressions, it ought to be
explicated to the People that in these high Encomiums they do not understand
the mere material Cross. But when he can prove there was any material Cross
then used, and that those Encomiums do in any sense belong to it, then it will
be time enough to answer further to his Exceptions; but till that time, what I
have already said about the Notion of a Cross, the Consecration, the Adoration
of it, and I will venture to say their Prayer to it, is sufficient to show,
that though there be good reason to understand St. Paul in a figurative sense,
there is none to understand the Phrase, before recited and used in the Romish
Church in that sense. If our Author expects an Answer to his Heathenish
Catechism, (as he calls it) which is a Name very proper for it; I shall,
instead of that, only put a few Questions, and conclude.

Q. Whether the Crosses used in the Religious Service of the Church of Rome be
mere pieces of Wood, etc?

Q. Whether they may not, and are not to adore the Cross, tho they may not
adore a mere piece of Wood?

Q. How the Cross which they pray to Christ to bless, is made the stability of
Faith, and increase of good Works?

Q. How the Cross upon which Christ hung, may be Christ who hung upon the Cross?

FINIS.

