A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL Of the Reverend Thomas Jekyll, D.D. LATE
Preacher at the New-Chappel, Westminster, OCTOBER 7. School. By JOHN Lord Bishop
of Chichester.

LONDON: Printed for H. Walwyn, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, against
Stocks-Market. School.

TO MY Good Friend Mrs. Jekyll, Relict of Dr. Thomas Jekyll.
MADAM,
IT was the Desire of our Deceased Friend, that I should Preach his Funeral
Sermon; and it is at Yours that I now publish it. I am truly sensible that the
design of both was to do some service to Religion, and to those that do
survive. It being (as he well knew) one of the best Opportunities that we have
for it, when we have, as it were, the Dead speaking to the Living, and the
Occasion giving Life and Force to the Doctrine. And great pity it is, that this
should any where grow into disuse; and that the Good that might by such
seasonable Discourses redound to the Souls of Men, too often gives way to the
Pomp of the Funeral. We all have a Loss by the Death of our Deceased Friend;
the Church, his Auditory, and his Acquaintance; but more especially You, and
the Branches derived from both. It is a Loss that only the Father of all
Mercies, and God of all Comfort, can support You under; and to Him I commit
You, who has promised that all things shall work together for good to them that
love God. I am,

MADAM, Your Faithful Friend and Servant, JOHN CHICHESTER.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Dr. Jekyll.
Hebrews IV.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
THIS Epistle was written to the Hebrews, that is, such Jews as had been bred
up under the Law of Moses, but were converted to the Christian Faith: And the
chief design of it was to confirm them in it; that neither by the Force of
their former Education, the Fear of Persecution, nor the sly Insinuations of
false Teachers, they should be prevailed with (as too many had been) to desert
it. To this purpose, amongst other Arguments used to dissuade them from so
doing, the Apostle shows the Jewish Constitution to have been temporary and
imperfect, Hebr. 9.9. 10.1.
a Figure for the time then present; and a Shadow of good things to come: and
that the Persons and Places, the Ceremonies and Ordinances, the Actions and
Events of it had a respect chiefly to what was to be, and should be completed
under the Gospel. Of this kind was Canaan, a Land of Rest, which God promised
to their Forefathers: And yet notwithstanding, for their Unbelief and
Disobedience, he swore that none of that Generation (except Caleb and Joshua)
should enter into it, and so their carcases fell in the Wilderness. Chapter 3.11,
etc.


This was the state then, and parallel to this, says he, is the state of
Christians now, who have a Rest, as they had, and which God has promised. But
withal, the same Conditions are annexed to This, as were before to That; and so
no more can we enter into the Christian Rest, because of Unbelief, than they
could for the same reason enter into their Rest, the Land of Canaan, Chapter 3.19.
as the Apostle argues: And accordingly he infers in the Text; Let us therefore
fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should
seem to come short of it.

In discoursing upon which Words,

1. I shall consider the State here described and contained in the Words, His
rest.

2. The Security and Certainty of that Rest, if we our selves come not short of
it.

3. The Possibility and Danger of falling short of this Rest, notwithstanding
it is promised.

4. I shall show, that from these Considerations, there is sufficient Reason
for the Caution in the Text, Let us therefore fear, lest, etc.

1. I shall consider the State, called here, His rest. The Rest promised to the
Jews was Temporal, a Rest which after forty years travel in the Wilderness,
they entered upon under the Conduct of Joshua, according to God's promise. But,
says our Apostle, This was the Gospel preached unto them, v. 2. That is, their
Rest in Canaan was a Type and Figure of a more excellent State, more clearly
revealed in the Gospel. This he proves from Psalm 95. where it is said, that
upon the Unbelief and Disobedience of that Generation, God swore that they
should not enter into his Rest. That was thus far literally true of the
Israelites, chapter 3.7. 4.3.5.
whose carcases fell in the Wilderness: But withal he shows, that it is there
to be understood in a higher sense, and not of a Rest that is past, such as
God's was, when he ceased from the Works of Creation: v. 3, 4.
Nor can it be understood of Canaan, for that was a Rest they entered upon four
hundred years before the time of David. But it must be understood of another
sort of Rest yet to come, which the Sabbath and Canaan were a Type of. This he
farther confirms by the Observation he makes on the phrase in the Psalmist, v.
7, 8.
To day, after so long a time, from the entrance into Canaan, to the time of
David. v. 9.
For if Jesus (that is Joshua) had given them rest, then would not be afterward
have spoken of another day. From all which the Apostle concludes, There
remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

But as the Rest here spoken of is yet to come, so it is a Rest far more
excellent than that of a Temporal Canaan. But this would not be so, if that
Psalm were only a Prophecy of some peaceable and Halcyonian days that the
Christian Church should enjoy about a thousand years after that time; during
only the short Reigns of the two Roman Emperors, D. Ham. in cap. 3, and 4.
Vespasian, and his Son Titus (^s some have conceived.) Can we think that so
short a time of Rest, as the Christians had between Nero and Domitian, could be
the subject of that Prophecy? And that this was all the comfort the Apostle
gave to his desponding Hebrews, That the storm coming on, or that then overtook
them, should soon vanish; and then they should have as many years of Rest for
it? Is this all the Rest, which many of those he wrote this Epistle to, should
never live to see, and which a natural, or else a violent Death by Persecution,
might deprive them of their part in? Is this all which the Apostle means, when
he says, There remains a Rest, or Sabbatism, to the people of God; and that
he that is entered into it, has ceased from his own works, from all the toil
and distress, the troubles and sorrows of an afflicted life? No, certainly it
is a more excellent and divine Rest than that of an Earthly Canaan, which is
thus emphatically called God's rest; a perfect and an eternal Rest, resembling
that of God; when they rest from all their labors, Revel. 14.13.
and their works follow them. A Rest, which above all they are to be solicitous
about; Let us labor (says the Apostle) therefore to enter into that rest, v.
11. And in the Text, Let us fear -- lest we come short of it.

Heaven is indeed a Rest with respect to this present life; as that of the
Israelites was, when they rested after their Pilgrimage in the Wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 12.10.
and from all their enemies round about, so that they dwelt in safety. But
withal, it is a state of Enjoyment, Happiness, and Perfection, such a Rest as
God himself does enjoy, and they shall enjoy with him. For it is called his
rest, not only as to what God himself does enjoy, but with respect to his
Promise, by which he has made it ours, and assured it to us. Which brings to

2. The Security we have of this Rest, and that is from the Promise of God.
Thus it was in the Typical state of the Jews, to whom Canaan was promised,
called therefore the Land of promise, Hebr. 11.9. And after the same manner is
this Christian Rest confirmed, called therefore the promise of an eternal
inheritance, Hebr. 9.15. and by way of Eminency, The promise, Hebr. 10.36.

At the first it was a mere act of Grace and Favor; there was neither Merit
beforehand on our part, nor could there be Recompense after: But now it is
unalienable, and what we can no more fail of obtaining upon the terms of the
Gospel, than God can be unfaithful, and cease to be what he is: And therefore
for our comfort and satisfaction, 2 Timothy 1.10.
as life and immortality is brought to light through the Gospel; so he has been
pleased to pass over a Right unto us by his Promise, and has given us the
liberty of pleading it. Upon the undoubted Title thereby given unto us, we are
said to have everlasting life, Joh. 3.36: because, by virtue of the Promise, we
are as sure of it, as if we were actually possessed of it. So that we need not
look any farther for a ground of our hope and confidence than this; and if we
perform the conditions required of us, and that there be not in us an evil
heart of unbelief, Chap. 3.12, 14.
in departing from the living God -- if we hold the beginning of our confidence
steadfast unto the end, we are (says our Apostle) made partakers of Christ,
i.e. of all the benefits here and hereafter which he has purchased, and God
through him has promised. But if we fail on our part by not performing the
Conditions, if we are wanting in Caution and Diligence, we disparage the State,
the Rest, which God has promised: And if we are wanting in our trust and
confidence in God, upon his promise; we disparage him, and divest him of those
perfections of Goodness and Faithfulness, which make him to be what he is, and
without which he could not be God. But as certain as this Record is, 1 John 5.11.
that God has thus given us eternal life: 2 Cor. 1.20.
and that this life is in his Son, in whom all the promises of God are Yea and
Amen;

Yet,

3. There is a possibility of falling short of this Rest. There could be
nothing more firm than the Promise of Canaan made to Abraham and his Carnal
Seed: But we see, for want of having Trust and Faith in God, which were
necessarily and indispensably required, all that came out of Egypt, except two,
fell in the Wilderness, Chap. 3.19.
and they could not enter in, because of their unbelief: And God that had thus
obliged himself by Promise to give them that Land for an Inheritance, did also
swear, that they should not enter into his Rest. Now if those Murmurers and
Unbelievers were excluded that pleasant Land, which was thus promised and
secured; then there is the same reason, that the Christian and Eternal Rest,
which is infinitely beyond that Terrestrial Rest, should not be obtained
without the like qualifications then required of them; and that Infidelity and
Disobedience should now as well deprive us of the greater, as it did them of
the less valuable Inheritance. For the Promise of God does not any more oblige
him now, than it did then, to exceed the Measures set to his Kindness and
Beneficence. And therefore as the Apostle has compared State with State, in
the nature of it, as it is a Rest; and in the Assurance we have of it, as it is
promised: So he does also carry on the Parallel in the Conditions upon which
the Promise is suspended, and they are Faith and Obedience; the harkening to
the Voice of God, and not hardening their hearts. Ver. 7.
And accordingly he takes occasion from what befell the Jews, to exhort his
Christian Hebrews to take warning by them, in the Text, Let us therefore fear,
etc.

So that whatever Proof we have of the Goodness of God in revealing such a
State of Rest and Happiness to us; yet as the mere Revelation of such a State
will not entitle us to it without a Promise, so neither will the Promise alone
alter the case, as long as it is confined and limited by certain Conditions to
those that are duly qualified for it. Let us fear, says the Apostle, lest a
promise being left us, etc. Which Caution needed not to have been added, if
there had been no danger of falling short; and fall short we could not, if the
Promise had given us an absolute and unlimited Title to it. So that the Caution
it self does suppose a Qualification on our part to be necessary: and yet not
content with that, the Apostle, as sensible that we cannot get far enough from
such an impendent Danger; he adds, Let us fear, lest any of you seem to come
short of it. Where if the Greek word (...), which we translate seem, be not an
expletive, Luke 8.18. compared with Mat 13.12, etc.
without any determinate signification, (as sometimes it is) it shows that
there is so much hazard of Miscarrying and Apostasy, by reason of the
temptations of this present life, proceeding from the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; and so great a prejudice will redound to us, if we do, that we cannot be
too cautious. Beware, says he, lest any of you seem to come short of it. Which
brings us to the next General.

4. There is sufficient reason for this Caution of the Apostle, Let us fear,
etc.

Here I shall look back upon the Text, and shall apply it to the several
Considerations here referred to, as so many Arguments to a vigilant
Circumspection and diligent Care. As,

1. An Argument may be taken from the Nature of the State, as it is called a
Rest, and His Rest.

Rest is a word that signifies more than what this World affords; there is no
Person, no Condition of life can challenge it, or entitle it self to it; it is
not to be found within us, nor without us. Not within us; for we have
Infirmities grow up in us, as well as Troubles that surround us. Our Bodies are
in their composition frail and crazy, subject to numberless Diseases; the Air
we breathe in, the Diet we feed on, the Passions of the Mind, nay even the
Medicines we use by way of prevention or remedy, do often beget or stir up in
us those humors, that carry us out of the World, or unfit us for the enjoyment
of it. And our Minds have Infirmities as well as our Bodies; our Tempers fickle
and uncertain; we suffer by Precipitancy on the one hand, and Obstinacy on the
other; by Imprudence, Neglects and Follies. And our Bodies and Souls as
conjoined, do contribute to each others infirmities; and the dispute between
them is, whether Temper or Reason shall govern. So that we our selves prevent,
and often supplant our own satisfaction.

But then were it otherwise with us, that as we naturally love our selves, so
we may attain to Self-satisfaction; yet however willing and disposed we are to
be quiet and at rest, we must ask leave of a thousand things to obtain and
secure it; of every one we have to deal with, and live amongst; for our
Conversation, our Business, our Professions, that are in themselves useful and
necessary, yet do minister to our trouble; for thence do arise suspicions and
jealousies, quarrels and misunderstandings. Or suppose we lived so as to assist
and be assisted by others Friendships with cheerfulness, and lived in perfect
Peace and Amity, as we are private Persons; yet we are but part of a City or
Nation, and so must fare as the Nation or City does, and lose by its loss as we
may gain by its gain, and must rejoice and mourn, and be as the general State
of the Country is. Suppose farther, that a Nation would be quiet; that the
Government is framed for Peace, and the Rights of Governors and Governed so
well laid out, and all public Orders so well observed and inviolably
maintained, that there are no jarrings nor discord, no grudgings nor
animosities: Yet this is but one Nation, and this to the World is as one Man to
another, and so can no longer be quiet than other Nations will permit it. The
Ambition or Covetousness of a Foreign Prince may bring him upon them, and in
their own defense they must take up Arms, and engage in a doubtful War. So that
we may as reasonably expect, that the Body which has so many several Vessels,
Humors and Juices, should enjoy a constant and uninterrupted State of Health,
and all those Humors be so exactly balanced and allayed, that there should be
no commotion or disturbance in it, as that this World should be a place of
Rest. Men must be without Bodies, and there must be no such thing as Sickness
and Mortality: Or without Passions and Appetites; and so no such thing as
Ambition and Pride, Anger and Revenge, Covetousness or Lust, Prejudices, nor
Interest: they must have nothing within to dispose, and nothing without to
excite, if they will talk of Rest, and expect it. That is an Vtopian State, and
has here no other Existence than in Imagination.

But then if we add to the Account the Providence of God, and the Accidents of
Life, the Argument grows upon us; we are never secure; and we know not, but
though the Sun rises upon us in its glory and brightness, it may be with us as
it was with Sodom, and close in a dismal destruction; and we that rise in a
State of Ease and Security, may lie down, if we can do that, in Sorrow and
Anguish, and the most doleful dejection of Mind. Thus it was with the Fool in
the Gospel, that when he sung a Requiem to himself, Soul, Luke 12.19.
take thine ease, etc. met with a terrible conclusion and disappointment when
God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee:
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? The prospect of
which is sufficient to make the best and most prosperous condition in the World
uneasy, since we must either want, or enjoy with fear; and next to the total
deprivation of the comforts of this life, nothing is more intolerable than the
fear of losing them.

Now what sad Reflections are these? How miserable must be the state of
Mankind, if this be all that a Man has to enjoy, all that he has to comfort him
in the enjoyment? When he has thus the disturbance of the Ocean, but not the
confinement of it; nor can it be said of any Miseries he is incident unto, as
it is of that, Job 38.11.
Hitherto shall they come, and no further.

But is there no relief in this case? nothing better to be expected? Yes, says
our Apostle, there remains a rest to the people of God. There is such a
State, but it remains, it is in reserve for such as do believe, desire, and
endeavor after it. This was the Temper and Condition of the Patriarchs of old,
they lived and died in the Faith of this, Hebr. 11.13.
they saw the promises afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them;
and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the Earth -- but desired
a better Country, that is, an heavenly, as the Apostle shows. Here alone is
that Rest, which is God's; Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Rev. 7.16, 17.
Where the happy Souls shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, and that
all tears shall be wiped from their eyes. Neither can they die any more, for
they are equal, and like unto the Angels. (...). Luke 20.36.
This is the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, where are Myriads and Ten
thousands, and an innumerable Company of Angels, Heb. 12.22.23
, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect. Here alone is Satisfaction,
Stability and Certainty; this is the time when all the Troubles of this life
shall close in the Happiness of another; where there will be no infirmities, no
necessities, no appetites or irregular passions, no divisions or enmities, no
seducers or temptations, no fraud or circumvention, no prejudice or suspicions,
nothing that is evil, but all harmonious, equal and delightful. And of which we
may say all this and more; more indeed it is than we can say or describe: So
the Apostle, 1 John ^.^.
It does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

Is there now such a State, such a Rest to be had? Is there a possibility, a
certainty of obtaining it? May we who are here as it were upon a wide Ocean,
continually tossed by the furious Winds and boisterous Waves, and in danger
every moment to be swallowed up by them, may we arrive to a Harbor of Rest and
Safety, and have a Star and Pilot, and an unerring Compass to guide and direct
us? And shall we be as the Israelites, unbelieving and obstinate, that despised
the pleasant Land, Psalm. 106.24.
and would rather be returning to Egypt, Numb. 14.4.
and there feed upon Garlic and Onions, than venture forward to take
possession of that, Deuteronomy. 8.9.
where they should not lack any thing. O how much does Unbelief blind the Minds
of Men! How much does the love of this World, and the poor Enjoyments of it,
infatuate them! That when they are hurried from one Misery to another, and can
hardly look out but they see Objects sufficient to terrify them, and have the
relics of many a miserable Shipwreck floating in their view, and are equally
exposed to the same Dangers; yet choose rather to run the hazard of being
miserable, and eternally miserable, than to hearken to the Voice of God, and
observe those Measures that will infallibly direct, and bring them in the
conclusion to a place of safety and undisturbed repose.

Surely we cannot but perceive, and our own experience will convince us, that
this World is not a Rest; Job 5.7.
that Man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward. We cannot but observe
(how hood-winked soever we are in other matters) that in a few days, after many
other Changes, and a Course and Succession of other Miseries; that the last
Enemy of this World, Death, will seize upon us, and carry us out of it. We
cannot but think, that though the spark of an Animal life be extinguished, and
we are then dead to all the Enjoyments of this present state; yet that our
Souls which thus think, are immortal, and never die. We cannot but think, that
as the spirit within us is immortal, so there is a state suitable to such a
spirit; another World that it must live in, and does upon its separation pass
into. We cannot but think that the future state is a state of Recompense, and
that we are therein accountable, and shall be determined to Happiness or Misery
according to what we have done in the Body. We cannot but think, that however
it fares with good Men here, how deplorable soever their present condition may
be, yet that it shall at last be well with them that fear God; Eccles. 8.12.
and that their light afflictions, their temptations, and mortifications, which
are but for a moment, shall work out for them a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.


Lastly, We cannot but think, that as this is a desirable state in it self, so
that the Thought and Wish of Balaam will be (if it is not now) the Thought and
Wish of the worst of Men; Numb. 23 10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his; that
is, the beginning of a glorious and happy Eternity.

Where is now the misery, the hunger and nakedness, the pain and anguish, the
poverty and contempt of the once wretched Lazarus? Luke 16.20.
Where are the trials of the cruel mockings and scourgings, of bonds and
imprisonment of those, of whom the World was not worthy? Heb. 11.36, etc.
Where are the pilgrims and strangers that once wandered about, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented? Mat. 5.29.
Where is the right hand which was cut off, the right eye that was plucked out,
the body that was buffered and kept under, 1 Cor. 9.27.
and brought into subjection? Where is the strait gate and narrow way, the
conflicts and strivings of the Self-denying Christian? Where are the laboricus
Studies, 2 Timothy 4.25.
the Cares and Prayers of the pious and industrious Teacher? Where the Ministry
he has fulfilled and made proof of in his Preaching, Reproving and Exhorting
with all Long-suffering and Doctrine? Behold them in their Crowns and Rewards,
in their Glories and Triumphs, in the Peace and Comfort, the Perfection and
Happiness of Heaven. Behold there Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
Prophets in the Kingdom of God. Behold there the pious Lazarus in the Bosom of
Abraham. Luke 13.28.
Behold there the wise and faithful Teachers, shining as the brightness of the
Firmament; Dan. 12.3.
and those that turn many unto Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

It is God's Rest, who is his own Happiness, and can alone be the Happiness of
all out of himself: And there it is that we shall be replenished with the like
Goodness and Love, in our proportion, as fills the breast of God himself. There
we shall converse with nothing but Perfection; And have our Souls so employed
in Acts suitable to the exalted and divine Powers they shall be endued with,
that they shall not only be unwearied, but infinitely satisfied in it. Where
our Rest shall be the same, and our Will and Desire one with his, Ephesians. 1*23.
who fills all in all.

A Consideration from the beginning to the end of it, that should excite all
the Powers of our Souls to obtain it; and that should make us extremely
cautious, lest we fail in our advances and travels toward it. Let us fear,
says the Apostle, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any
of you should come short of it.

2. It is a Rest which is promised, and so is a farther Argument to Caution,
Lest we come short of it. We have the advantage of the Heathen, and of a mere
state of Nature, that we have the Revelation of the Gospel, by which life and
immortality were brought to light. And this Revelation comes with the greater
advantage, as we have the Promise of God to ensure it to us: A favor as well
beyond our comprehension, as our discovery and desert. For how could we who
have defaced the divine Image, and been Rebels against God, and have forfeited
his favor, think of being restored to it? How could we whose Souls are
d^praved and corrupted, think of being admitted to that state, whereinto no
unclean thing can enter? Rev. 21.27.
How could we that are corruptible, think that we should put on incorruption?
And so must conclude, that we are no more fit for that state of holiness and
perfection, of fellowship with God and the enjoyment of him, than we are like
unto him. But when we are prevented in our thoughts, and these arguings are
fore-clos'd by the divine Goodness and Faithfulness, by a Revelation and a
Promise: If we in the conclusion prove like those in the Parable, that when
invited to a Royal Entertainment, make light of it, Mat. 22.3.5^^.
and go away, and reject the Counsel of God against our selves; shall we fare
better than they, Luke ^.20.
against whom the King sent forth his Armies and destroyed them, and burnt up
their City?

It was the aggravation of the Sin of the Israelites when they entered the Land
of Promise, Exodus 23.20.
and had a Land prepared for them, Deuteronomy. 6 10, 11, 12.
where they had goodly Cities which they builded not, and Houses full of all
good things which they filled not, Vineyards and Olive Trees which they planted
not; that they tempted and provoked the most High God, Psalm. 78 55, 56.
and kept not his testimonies.

And will it not aggravate our guilt, when we have a Revelation as clear as the
day, and the promise of God for our security, which is as sure as the
Ordinances of Heaven; nay, that is established upon a better and more lasting
Foundation? Mat. 8.18.
for Heaven and Earth may pass away, but this Word shall not pass away.

Behold then here the greatest testimony of the divine Benignity and Honor,
the Treasure of Heaven laid open to our view. Behold God himself proffering
Salvation to Sinners, and engaging himself by Promise to bestow it upon us on
our acceptance. And what can we plead in our own defense, if at last we shall
fall short of it? For can we have any thing more clearly revealed to us, that
is not in our view; and which we are not capable, by reason of the imperfection
of our Natures, perfectly to understand? Can we have any thing more secured,
which we have not in present possession? Can we have any thing more confirmed,
than God bearing witness to the truth of it, Heb. 2.4.
with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles? And can any thing be of greater
consequence than the things that are thus revealed, promised and secured? And
when a Promise is thus left us of entering into his Rest, shall not we fear,
lest we come short of it?

Especially

4. When there is a possibility on our part of coming short of it. I say a
possibility on our part: For there is nothing wanting on God's, Number. 23.19.
who is not as Man that he should lie, nor the Son of Man that he should
repent. Has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not
make it good? But yet notwithstanding the amplitude, the fullness and firmness
of the Promise, there is a suspension of it, nor will it operate without the
conditions belonging to us to perform, without which we are in the same state
of darkness and misery, as if there had been no Revelation nor Promise. And
when it thus rests on our part, and nothing is wanting to complete our
happiness, but our own consent, could we in reason wish or desire any thing
more, when it will be at our own choice and refusal, whether we will be happy
or miserable; whether we will be saved or damned? And yet alas! here is the
difficulty; the difficulty is to win us over to our own interest; and all the
arguments and considerations of the Gospel are to dispose us hereunto, to be
willing and desirous of being saved. And all in the conclusion prove generally
too little; for we remain stupid and senseless as if we were not at all
concerned whether we obtain or fall short of this Rest.

We are as the Israelites upon the borders of Canaan, a few days would have let
them into the possession of the promised Land; it was to be seen from the top
of the Mountain; Numb. 13.14, 25, 40, 43. Number. 14.29.
but they believed not the report of Caleb and Joshua, and murmured; so of Six
hundred thousand Men that came out of Egypt, only those two entered into that
Land. And we are upon the borders of the promised rest, we have a prospect of
it; we have the Gospel preached unto us, we have our Education in the Church of
Christ, and are members of his Body, are called by his Name; have eaten and
drank in his presence; but how sad and miserable will our state be, if at the
last we shall meet with, Mat. 13.26. Mat. 7.23.
I know you not, depart from me? And yet as near as we are to Heaven, in
profession and faith, in appearance and expectation, it is possible and without
an extraordinary caution, it is certain, that notwithstanding the promise of
God, we may come short of this Rest. Thus our Savior represents it, Luke
13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek
to enter in, and shall not be able.

Shall I now need any farther arguments than what the Text affords, to make us
cautious left we come short of this Rest? shall I need to press the Apostle's
Exhortation any further? Need we to be advised in this matter, in a matter of
so great importance and absolute necessity? Let us, beloved, look within our
selves, and try whether our condition be so safe as to be above all hazard;
that we are arrived to a full satisfaction of mind concerning our title to this
Rest. I would that every one that hears me at this time, and that we all were
in the state of St. Paul, and were arrived to that settled and happy temper of
soul, as to be able to say, Phil. 1.23. 2 Timothy 4 7, 8.
That to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. And, I have fought a good
sight, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord shall give me at that day.

I could wish that we were out of the reach of all temptations, troubles and
dangers, and that there was no need for us to fear, nor occasion to exhort us
to it. But what should I wish for that which belongs not to the state in which
we are? That is a Rest which remains, it is the Rest of Heaven, that is God's
Rest. It rather becomes me to return to the Apostle, to exhort and repeat, and
exhort again: Take heed brethren, says he, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. Let us labor to enter
into that rest. And in the Text, Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should come short of it.

Thus far have I considered the Text; and am certain that if our deceased
Friend were to speak to you of this Auditory, who were so lately His: He that
is now gone to his Rest, would exhort you after the Apostle's manner, to
caution and fear, left having such a promise, any of you should come short of
it.

It was in St. Paul's phrase, Romans 10.^.
his heart's desire and prayer to God, that ye might be saved. This was the
Theme and Subject he continually insisted upon, and made it his restless
endeavor to promote. This he taught in this Pulpit; and this he again taught
out of it, and confirmed by the regularity of his Life. Of whom I have many
things to say, and might speak of him in his Secular capacity, As to his
Friendship, in which he was sincere, entire and steadfast; As to his
Conversation, in which he was free, without levity; Grave without moroseness,
Instructive without imposition; and not without such a competency of skill,
even in matters relating to this present life, as did render him useful to
others, and capable of advising them that wanted it.

I might speak of him as to the Government of himself in his exact Temperance
and Sobriety; as to his Family, in his affectionate tenderness as a Husband and
a Father, and in the care he took of the meanest of those that were about him,
and the Exercises of Family-devotion.

But that which I at this time shall principally respect, is the discharge of
his Ministerial Office, in which he took a special delight, and made it the
principal business of his Life, laying hold of all opportunities of doing good
in private and in public.

In public, how constant and diligent, useful and practical was he in
Preaching! Preaching with that plainness as might be suitable to the meanest
capacity, and designed to the most useful purposes of sound Doctrine, and
unblameable life; Preaching as one that was in earnest himself, and
endeavoring to persuade others so to be.

What care did he, again, take to instruct the Youth! what pains in the little
School that by his industry, and the pious Contribution of well-disposed
Persons was Erected in the Neighborhood! which I hope will not die with him,
but by the same or like good and charitable hands be supported and continued.

In private, how many did he lend his helping hand to, encouraging them in the
way of Religion, resolving their Doubts, comforting them in their Sorrows,
directing their Endeavors! And this he did with sweetness and tenderness,
giving an easy access and admittance even to the meanest, and hearing them
with patience.

And in the mean time, whilst like a good Samaritan he was pouring oil into
the wounds of others, and administering such seasonable reliefs as their case
did require, He himself showed by the cheerfulness and liveliness of his
spirit, that Religion was no sadning or uncomfortable state; but that however
it might appear to drooping and melancholy minds, whatever it might appear to
such as looked but little into it, or had little or no experience of it; it was
indeed the most comfortable state in the world to those that were intimately
acquainted with it.

To this let me add the care he took of the Sick, visiting them with great
application, sparing no pains to prepare such for another state; of which his
last Sickness and the occasion of his death was too deplorable an Instance,
that whilst thus exceeding solicitous about others; he was careless of
himself; and whilst the dying Patient received Spiritual Consolation from him,
he in all probability drew what proved a mortal Infection to himself.

Which brings me to his last Hours: It pleased God to give him some
Premonitions and Warnings of his approaching End; I mean not only by the
dangerous disease he labored under the former part of the year; but also by
such impressions upon his mind as seemed to carry in them the finger of God. So
that for some Months past he would be often speaking, and I may say, preaching
to his Wise submission to the will of God, if he should think fit to take him
out of this life to a better.

For this reason, it may well be supposed that he was very desirous to see some
of his Relations that lived remote from hence; and though newly come from one
Journey, immediately made another to pay them a Visit (where he had not been
for some years) or rather, as he told them, to take his last Farewell.

And accordingly he set his House and Affairs in order, made his Will; and if I
may take notice of so small a matter, among the greater, he composed his own
Epitaph; which though plain (as he intended) is very expressive of his Piety,
and of the care he took of the People committed to his Charge.

And then it was no wonder when all this was done, to find him composed at his
approaching End, and to behave himself as he had lived; showing an excellent
temper of mind, heartily resigning himself up through Jesus Christ to God, the
Father of Spirits, and the Father of Mercies; whom in that condition he
entirely depended upon, and found the greatest, I may say the only supports
from.

With what submission did he receive the sentence of his Dissolution! With what
transport and joy did he speak of our blessed Savior, and the happiness he
hoped for, or rather doubted not to be made partaker of, by him!

With what tenderness did he bewail our differences, and that spirit of
censuring, reviling and dividing, that so much prevails; and especially when
after all, such must come (if ever they be happy) to join in the
Church-triumphant with those whom, too often, they refuse to converse and
communicate with here, in the Church-militant!

With what comfort did he take leave of his Friends, of his Wife and Children,
calling them one by one in his last interval to him, and giving each of them
such advice as a dying Friend, Husband and Father, and a dying Christian, would
give to those whom he affectionately loved!

And now what is the issue of all this, but that we should reflect upon it, and
reflect upon our selves?

Who of you that heard the last Sermon of our deceased Friend six days ago, but
if you had known it should have been the last, would have hearkened to it with
another sort of attention! you would then have entertained it as the last Words
of a dying Man. It was observed, that though he always spoke with an
affectionate warmth, that he then spoke beyond himself, with a concernment more
than ordinary; as if he were sensible it should be his Valedictory, and the
last Sermon, and That the last opportunity he should have of Preaching to this
people. It was the last indeed; but we read of Abel, that by his Faith, he
being dead, yet speaks. Hebr. 11.4.


Our Friend is dead, his Body lies there before us; he has no Tongue to speak,
nor Eye to observe how you receive his Doctrine; but he yet speaks to you in
his Doctrine and Example; and I hope, as it was said of Abel, he shall for that
reason be yet spoken of, (...), So the Margin.
amongst you.

And Oh that his Words were written, not with ink, 2 Cor. 3.23.
but (as St. Paul says) with the spirit of the living God, in your hearts and
lives, to be known and read of all men: Or howsoever that last Sermon or other
Discourses of his may have been neglected or forgot; let us remember the
Caution which the Apostle here advises all to take; and Fear, lest a promise
being left us of entering into this rest, any of us should come short of it.

FINIS.
ERRAT. Page 4. line 6. after storm read of Persecution.

Some BOOKS Printed, and Sold by H. Walwyn at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
against Stocks-Market.
THE Works of the late Learned Divine Stephen Charnock, in two Volumes, Folio.

Geography rectified, or a Description of the World, in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, etc. Illustrated with Maps. The 3d Edition: by Robert
Morden, Quarto.

Sermons on several Occasions, by John Conant, D.D. Published by John Lord
Bishop of Chichester, Octavo.

Tillotson 's Sermons, Octavo.

Horneck 's Sermons, Octavo.

-- Great Law of Consideration, Octavo.

Gibson's Anatomy of Human Bodies.

Bishop Wilkins of the Gift of Prayer.

Drexelius of Eternity, Twelves.

Posing of the Parts.

Eutropius's Roman History, in usum Scholar^^^.

Helvicus's Colloquies.

English Exercises for Schoolboys to Translate into Latin, comprizing all the
Rules of Grammar, and other necessary Observations, ascending gradually from
the meanest to higher Capacities: by John Garretson, Schoolmaster. The 7th
Edition, Twelves.

Gradus ad Parnassum, sive Nov^s Synonymorum Epithetorum Phrasium, etc. ab uno
e Societate Jesu.

A brief Exposition of the Church-Catechism, with Proofs from Scripture: by
John Lord Bishop of Chichester, late Rector of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St.
Mary Cole, London. Printed for H. Walwyn at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
against Stocks-Market.


