AN IMPARTIAL CONSIDERATION OF Those Speeches, Which pass under the Name of the
FIVE JESUITS LATELY EXECUTED. Viz. Mr. Whitebread. Mr. Harcourt. Mr. Gawen. Mr.
Turner, and Mr. Fenwick. In which it is proved, That according to their
Principles, they not only might, but also ought to die after that manner, with
Solemn Protestations of their Innocence.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXIX.

AN ANSWER TO THE Late SPEECHES of the Five Jesuits.
THE words of dying persons have always been esteemed of greatest Authority, as
Mr. Harcourt in his Speech does observe: and at the first sight, what was
spoken by him and his Associates just before their Execution, does seem to
command it; when Mr. Gawen after the like Preface does add, I do solemnly
swear, protest and vow by all that is sacred in Heaven or on Earth, and as I
hope to see the Face of God in Glory, that I am as Innocent as the child
unborn, etc. A Speech of so great Assurance, that if it were not for the
clearness of the Evidence that was brought in against them, the impartiality of
the Court which they stood before and were Condemned by, the Order which they
were of, and the cursed Principles held by that Order; and Lastly, other things
spoken by them at the same time that were manifestly untrue, I should have had
so much charity as to believe. But when all this and more does appear against
them, and confute what they have with so much confidence maintained before God
and the World, it will be a work of Justice and Charity to detect their
Hypocrisy, and to show that the Jesuits have a Gospel by themselves.

And this I shall do:

First, By showing that their present case is such, that although they had been
guilty, such a Protestation of their innocence was necessary, if it might be
consistent with the principles of Religion.

Secondly, That such a Protestation is consistent with their Principles, and
what is agreeable to the practice of their Order.

Thirdly, That from the consideration of their circumstances, and a careful
perusal of what was said by these persons at the time of their death, there is
sufficient reason to believe that they acted upon such Principles.

First, It was necessary for them at this time, and in their circumstances, tho
never so deeply guilty, to stand upon their own vindication, and to vindicate
themselves after the most solemn way imaginable. For if this Plot should be
believed, and they discovered to be the Contrivers and Promoters of it, it
would be a foul blemish to their Religion, and so great a disparagement to
their Society, that all their Art and Industry could never be able to wipe it
off. It would awaken the Princes of Christendom, and they would never think
themselves secure till this Order followed that of the Templers, and was
Universally dissolved and extirpated. It would make those that mean well too
among themselves to abhor them, and open a fair way for Protestantism to enter
in upon them. And therefore it concerned them as much as might be to prevent
it; and how could it be prevented, but by this way that they have taken. For if
they had been silent under so great a charge as this, all the World would have
concluded them Guilty; or if they had but faintly denied it, when the Evidence
was so full and peremptory against them, the suspicions that are abroad would
have increased, and the Evidence already given in would be further enquired
into and made out. It was not a sorry Evasion, or some puny Equivocation that
would put a stop to these mischiefs, and set them right in the opinion of the
World, as they well enough understood; and therefore it concerned them, if the
honor of their Religion, or that of their Society was dear to them, to betake
themselves to the most formal Protestations to ensure it; if so be it might be
done with consistency to their Religion, or their own safety in another World.

Secondly, I shall therefore show that such Protestations are consistent with
their Religion, and that although they were never so Guilty, they might stand upon
their own Innocence and Justification to the Death. And that is to be done upon
these Principles. (1) If what they are charged with be made Legitimate by a
Superior Authority. (2.) If they are under a precedent and sufficient
Obligation not to confess what they are justly charged with. (3.) If they are
indemnified and declared Innocent. (4.) If they are charged before an
incompetent Authority. (5.) If the Charge it self be laid wrong.

First, If what they are charged with be made Legitimate and allowable by a
Superior Authority; which may be done two ways.

First, By a dispensation from the Pope, or by others ordinarily deputed
thereunto in their Church. This is what they do now deny amongst us,
confidently maintaining that a Dispensation is never given beforehand. But this
is vainly alleged, whether we consider the nature of a Dispensation, which
has a relation to an action yet to be done, or to the continuation of it; or
whether we consider the practice of their Church, of which we have a very
modern instance. For whereas the Marrying of a Brothers Wife, the Brother being
yet alive, is both contrary to the Law of God and Nature; there is a Prince now
in the World that is dispensed with in that matter, and enjoys the Wife and
Kingdom of his Brother by virtue of the Popes Authority. Now if the Pope has a
Power of altering the nature of things, and of giving a Dispensation for what
would without that Dispensation have been in it self unlawful; then the doing
of an Action otherwise evil is, by virtue of that Dispensation, no sin; and he
that has that for his Authority, is so far Innocent.

Secondly, The Action may be made Legitimate, by virtue of the command of such
a Superior, as they are bound fully and universally to obey. And this is the
case of the Jesuits, who are under a perfect Subjection to their Superiors, and
whose commands they are not to dispute. This is the first thing which they are
taught, to be so Conformable to the Catholic Church (which in their sense is
the Pope) that if it defines that to be black, which appears to them to be
white, they are notwithstanding without more ado to account it black Ignatii
Exercit. Spirit. p. 141. reg. 13. Antw. 1635.
. And this is an obedience which they are not only bound to yield to the
Apostolic Chair, but to the rest of their Superiors, and which their Founder
Ignatius writ an Epistle on purpose to confirm them Epist ad Patr. and Fratr.
Societ in Lusit.
in. An Epistle, that nothing can be added to, or taken from, says their
General Fr. Borgia Epist. ad Patres and Fratres Aquitaniae, p. 63. number 9.
. An Epistle that is truly Divine, says their General Mutius Vitellescus
Epist. ad Patres prove. Societ. p. 441.
. In this Epistle it is that Ignatius does lay down these things.

First, That they must look upon their Superior, not as a person obnoxious to
error, but as Christ himself -- who could not be deceived, nor would deceive.

Secondly, That Whatever their Superior commands or thinks, that they must
always be ready to defend, and by no means to reject.

Thirdly, Whatever he commands, that they must resolve to look upon as the
command of Christ, and with a blind Resolution without any doubt or delay,
resolve to do N. 16. 17.
without giving way to any humane reasonings and discourses, as their General
Aquaviva expounds it Cl. Aquavivae Industriae, cap. 5 number. 6.
, that they renounce not only their own wills, but understandings also, and
submit them wholly to his, without calling any thing into question; for
otherwise the excellent virtue of blind obedience would fail, as Ignatius says
Ibid. n. 3. 9. and n. 12.
. That every one must persuade himself, that he is acted and governed by Divine
Providence, through his Superiors Orders, and that he ought to be in that case
as a Carcass, which suffers it self to be carried or disposed of any way; or as
a staff in an old man's hand, which he directs as he pleases, as it is fully
expressed in their Constitutions Pars 6. c. 1.
. Now if they are thus obliged blindly to obey their Superiors, and that
whatever they command them, is without any demur to be done, they are so far
innocent in their own account, and think that they may safely without doubt,
purge themselves as such.

But they may say that they are only obliged to this obedience in things
Lawful, and no further, according to what Ignatius himself does say Epist. p.
25. n. 18.
, and is further confirmed by their constitutions Pars 6. c. 1. p. 234.
. But is this likely to be the sense, when their Superior is in the place of
Christ Aquavivae Industriae, c. 5. n. 6. Constitut. par. 6. c. 1. p. 234. and
par. 4. c. 10. p. 183. etc.
, and whom they are to submit to as to him, and whom they are to attend to,
whatever he be, how weak or insufficient soever, as he represents the person of
him, whose wisdom cannot be deceived, as Ignatius says Epist. n. 3. p. 13.
? Is this likely to be, when they must universally and wholly submit their own
understandings to his, and are without delay or doubt to do what he requires?
And that it is not so, whatever they pretend, is evident from their own
Constitutions Pars 6. c. 5. p. 256.
, where the Title of one Chapter is, that the Constitutions do not bring any
under an obligation to sin; but how little it answers that Title, any one that
reads the Chapter may perceive; for it is the^e said, that it seems to us --
that no Constitutions, etc. can bring under an obligation to mortal or venial
sin, unless Visum est nobis nullas constitutiones, declarationes, vel ordinem
ullum vivendi posse obligationem ad peccatum mortale vel veniale inducere, nisi
superior ea in nomine D* N. J. Christi, vel in virtute obedientiae juberet,
quod in rebus vel personis illis in quibus judicabitur, quod ad particulare
uniuscujusque vel ad universale bonum multum conveniet, fieri poterit.
the Superior in the name of Christ, or in the virtue of obedience should
command it: and then that may be done in the cases so judged of, which tends
much to a private or universal good. So that a general or particular good may
make it lawful for a Superior to command what otherwise would be a sin; and the
Vow of obedience makes it necessary for him that is under command to obey. By
which means any sin shall be none, and the greatest Criminal be Innocent.

2. They may justify themselves if they are under a precedent and sufficient
obligation not to confess what they are justly charged with. And such an
obligation is (1.) the disadvantage of Religion, or the injury of another. For
which reasons it was that Sir Everard Digby did clear all the Priests before
the Lords; and when asked by the Lord Chief Justice, if he had not taken the
Sacrament to keep secret the Plot as others did, boldly said, that he had not;
because, says he, I would avoid the question, at whose hands it were. Sir
Everards first Paper, printed at the end of the Gunpowder-Treason, 1679.
And upon this Principle Parsons the Jesuit does proceed, when he says,
Mitigation, c. 13. p. 549.
that if a Priest taken in a man's house, of whose overthrow he either must be a
cause, or does suspect that he may be so, should be asked whether he is a
Priest, he is bound to deny himself so to be.

2. Such an Obligation also is Confession; of which I shall give you their
sense in the words of Parsons. Ibid. c. 10. Sect. 1. p. 408.
If a Confessor that has heard another man's Confession should be demanded,
whether such an one had confessed such a sin unto him or not, he may not only
say I know not, but answer directly, that he has not confessed any such thing
unto him, albeit he had so done; and that the said Confessor may not only say,
but swear also this answer of his, understanding and reserving in his mind,
that the Penitent has not confessed unto him so as he may utter it, etc. All
Divines and Lawyers do hold that in this case of Confession, the obligation of
secrecy is so great, as for no respect whatsoever, nor to what person soever,
though he be never so lawful a Judge, Prince, Prelate, or Superior, nor for
saving of a whole Kingdom or Commonwealth, and much less the lives of any
particular men or women, or of the Confessor himself; no, nor of the whole
world together, if it were possible, or to work never so much good thereby
might he utter the same. To which another Author of the same Order Henr.
Henriq. sum. Theol. moral. de Sacr. poenit. l. 3. c. 19. praeversie religionis,
and omnium Sacramentorum intentata demolitio.
adds, though the matter confessed was no less than the subversion of Religion,
and the destruction of the Sacraments.

This was the Defense which Garnet made for himself, why he at the first did
not discover the Conspiracy of the Gunpowder-Treason, and why he afterward did
obstinately deny his knowledge of it; because as he pretended, it was disclosed
unto him by Greenwel the Jesuit in Confession, and that it would endanger the
lives of diverse men Proceedings against the Traitors, p. 190.
: by which he said he was so bound up, that if one confessed this day to him,
that to morrow morning he meant to kill the King with a Dagger, he must conceal
it Ibid. p. 215.
. The case then is, That if at any time a dangerous Conspiracy is made known to
them in Confession, which they themselves were actually before egaged in; yet
it being thus complicated, that their own concurrence in it is joined with the
others confession, they then may and are bound to stand upon their own
innocence, because they cannot plead guilty, though they are so, without
betraying what they heard in Confession.

3. They may justify themselves, when they are indemnified and declared
innocent by Absolution. Pardon is a discharge from punishment, and Absolution
is a legal declaration of Pardon; and in it self is not a making Innocent, but
only an assurance, that a person, notwithstanding his former crimes, shall be
dealt with as if he were such. But they extend this further, for such a growing
thing is power in the Roman Church, that it would bring every thing within its
compass. Sometimes Sin by the Pope's power shall be made none; and a Man shall
violate his Oath, and by virtue of a Dispensation from his Holiness shall
become perjured without Sin. Sometimes the Guilty shall be made Innocent, and
by the power of Absolution shall be able to swear it. For if a person by
confession to a Priest, and Absolution from him, has what is sufficient to
Salvation, and to set him right in the sight of God (as is the common opinion
among them Navar. Man. c. 25. n. 38. Dia. Sum. V. Reus. n. 12. etc.
) then it may be thought sufficient also to make him innocent amongst Men, and
to give him reason to think so. This seems to be the ground of the present
practice amongst them; as when Gurphy, after his Absolution denied at his Death
with all assurance imaginable, That he was guilty of that Burglary, which he
was in Ireland condemned for; though the Rope breaking he lived to confess it
Vid. The late printed Relation of it, in a Letter to the Earl of Essex.
. And this principle has so far prevailed at this day; that Mr. Prance does
ingenuously acknowledge Page 24. of his Narrative.
, That if he had been absolved after the Murder of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfry, as
Hill, and his other Accomplices in it were, that he should have probably
persisted in avowing his Innocence, as they did, and never, or without extreme
difficulty have been brought to any acknowledgment.

Agreeable to this is that which is said by Lud. Lopez, 1. p. Instruct. c. 42.
who is quoted as good Authority by Raynaudus the Jesuit, ut supra. A Woman that
has been false to her Husband, does sin, if she without cause does swear that
she is Innocent, and does so swear because she has done Penance for the same;
unless her Husband does unjustly compel her to swear. The meaning of which is,
that if she does swear it vainly, when not put to it, and there is no reason
for it, then she offends; but if her Husband threatens, and she is in danger
(for that is often the meaning of unjustly in the sense of these Casuists) then
she may safely swear that she is Innocent, forasmuch as she has repented, and
given satisfaction to the Priest, and been Absolved by him.

From whence it appears, that if persons be compelled to swear unjustly, as (in
their opinion they all are when made to swear before Heretics) that then they
may swear, though never so Guilty, that they are Innocent and without fault, as
having been Absolved for it.

4. They may plead their own Innocence, and justify it with an Oath, etc. if
they stand charged before an incompetent Authority. Of this Opinion is Parsons,
for he says, Mitigation in Equiv. c. 8. part 3. Sect. 2. n. 52.
If a Judge be not lawful or competent, the party charged may answer as if he
was alone, and no Man by, for that he has no necessary reference to him at
all, etc. And much to the same purpose says Lessius. De Just. and jure, lib.
2. c. 42. dub. 9. n. 47.
Now an incompetent Judge, is one that has no lawful Jurisdiction over a
Person; as may be gathered from Parsons. Mitig. c. 11. Sect. 9.
And such with them are

(1.) All Heretics, who are incompetent, because they are incapable of rule,
as Gab. Vasquez says; Com. in 1. 2. Thom. Tom. 2. did. 152. Sect. 8.
and as soon as a Prince is fallen from the Catholic Religion, he presently
falls from all his Power and Dignity, says Parsons. In his Philopater, p. 194.
for he is said to be the Author of it, by Watson in his Quodl. p. 11, 71, 284.
And thus was the case determined with an especial respect to England, as you
may see in Greg. Martin in lib. resolut. cas. and Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon,
on Matt. 10. 16. p. 42.

(2.) Such again, according to Them, are all Lay-Magistrates, with respect to
the Clergy. A Priest being exempted from all civil Jurisdiction, says
Bellarmine Lib. de Cler. c. 30. p. 554, 80.
. The belief of which led Emanuel Sa, so far as to say, Apher Tit. Clericus.
Edit. Antwerp. and Colon.
That Rebellion in a Clergyman is no Treason, because he is not subject to the
Civil Power. And Bellarmine says little less, when he maintains Ibid. c. 28.
p. 538.
that Kings are not the Superiors of the Clergy, and therefore such are not
bound to obey them, but only as to matter of direction. This is clearly stated
and applied to our purpose by Parsons Mitig. c. 8. Part 3. Sect. 2. n. 52.
; If a Judge, says he, be not lawful or competent; as if a Lay-Magistrate in a
Catholic Country would enquire of matters not belonging to his Jurisdiction, as
for example, sacred or secret: then he may answer as if he were alone, and no
man by, for that he has no reference to him at all. For, as he says
afterward. Ibid c. 10. Sect. 3. p. 415. n. 11.
Priests both by divine and humane Law, according to Catholic Doctrine, are
exempted from Laymens Jurisdiction. When therefore Priests are brought before
Lay-Magistrates, and Catholics before Heretics, they have a liberty to say what
they please, and what may best serve their purpose and convenience: they may
protest and swear that they are Innocent, though never so guilty, that they
know not what they know, and did not what they did.

And if they may thus stand upon their own Vindication, how unjustifiable
soever their case be in it self, before incompetent Authority; then they may as
well do it before incompetent Witnesses and Auditors. For the Heretics at
Tyburn have no more right to Truth, than those at the Old Baily; and they may
as well protest and vow by all that is sacred, that they are innocent, when
they come to die, as when they were upon their Trial; since the People there,
as well as the Judges here, were alike incompetent and heretical.

5. They may plead Innocence when the Charge is laid wrong. This we acknowledge,
when we say that a Person guilty of the Fact, may yet plead not guilty as to
matter and form. But now the Charge with them shall always be laid wrong, when
they answer to it by Equivocation or Mental Reservation. For then it is not
what the Charge is in it self, but what they charge themselves with, that they
direct their answer to. As if a Person be charged with a Crime, but by an
incompetent Authority, or illegally, he may securely say, I did not do it,
reserving within himself that he did not do it in Prison; or that he had no
design upon the King, thereby meaning a painted King Lessius de Instit. l. 2.
c. 42. Dub. 9. n. 47, 48.
. And this is a current Opinion among them. If a Judge be not lawful or
competent, the Defendent may answer as if he were alone and no Man by, and may
frame to himself any Proposition that is true of it self, and in his own sense
and meaning, though the other that hears, understands it in a different
sense, and be thereby deceived, says Parsons Mitigat. c. 8. part 3. Sect. 2.
n. 52.
. If he be guilty, in such Cases he is to turn himself to Almighty God the Judge
of all, and frame to himself some true reserved sense, may say, I have not done
it, I have not seen him, I have not killed him; understanding thereby that he
has not done it, so as the Examination or Punishment of it is subject to that
Tribunal, or he subject to their Jurisdiction, whereby he is bound to utter the
same to them; as that Author further says Ibid. c. 10. Sect. 4. n. 21.
. But what if he be put to his Oath? Lessius answers, Ibid. n. 48.
That as often as it is lawful to use a doubtful Speech, or a secret
Reservation, it is lawful to use an Oath, if necessity or some notable Cause
requires it, namely, to avoid a great evil, etc. And accordingly Parsons Ibid.
Sect. 6. n. 29.
does lay it down from Azorius, etc. If the Judge that exacteth the Oath be not
a lawful Judge, or proceeds not lawfully in exacting the same; then has he
that swears, no Obligation to swear to his Intention at all, but may swear to
his own, etc.

Amongst other Examples of this way, we have in Dr. Abbot's Antiologia, p. 12.
b. of one John Underwood, that being examined before the Arch*bishop of
Canterbury, 1612. denied that ever he was beyond Sea; and affirmed, That he was
Married, and had six Children, and was an Husbandman. And yet acknowledged
afterward, that he had been formerly six years at Rome in the College, was
admitted there into Orders, and was a Jesuit, and that his true Name was
Cornford; and that in what he said before, he meant, That he was married to his
Breviary, and that he had six Spiritual Children; and that he had not been
beyond Sea, so as to confess it to the Archbishop. This Answer was much talked
of, and what Sancta Clara has defended under his own hand, as is yet to be
seen. This was also the opinion of Garnet, and the way he took Is. Casauboni
Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum p. 118, 123.
, for having an Oath administered to him, and being examined upon the word of a
Priest, whether he had ever sent or writ to Greenwel the Jesuit, since they
were together at Coughton? answered, No; and when convinced of it by the
Letters produced, said, he had done nothing in his denial but what was lawful.
But supposing this should be at the point of Death, may this then be practiced?
Lud. Lopez 1 p. instruct. c. 37. as quoted by Raynaudus in his Defense of
Lessius against Barns, c. 15. n. 9.
says, That if a Woman having been excommunicated for not living with her
Husband, should at the point of Death, to obtain Absolution, swear, if she
recovered, to return to him; reserving in her self, if it might be without Sin,
she shall not be guilty of Perjury (if she knew an impediment) though she
recovers and lives from him. And this was Mr. Tresham's case, Proceedings
against the Traitors, p. 176, 219, 220, 221.
who having accused Garnet of the Spanish Treason, for fear this might be to
the prejudice of the Jesuit, three hours before he died subscribed a Paper, in
which he testified upon his Salvation, that he had not seen him of 16 years
before: whereas Garnet himself confessed, that within two years before they had
frequently been together. All which Garnet said he believed, Mr. Tresham might
have done, as he meant to equivocate. And it is an Example may safely be
followed, as he maintained In some Papers of his, quoted by Is. Casaub. Epist.
ad Ducaeum. p. 122.
. This was the Case of Parry, that attempted the Life of Queen Elizabeth, who
upon his Apprehension, and after at his Trial, confessed it; but at last denies
it, lays his Blood upon the Queen and Judges, and summons the Queen to answer
for his Blood before God Foulis Romish Treasons l. 7. c. 4. p. 442.
.

But what if they voluntarily renounce all Equivocations, and Mental
Reservations, or are required so to do in Oaths and Protestations; Is this
defensible upon their Principles? So says Parsons As quoted by Barns, contra
Aequiv. Sect. 20. p. 174, and Sect. 22. p. 200.
; When thou answerest to a Judge, that is incompetent, by Equivocation: If he
ask, whether you Equivocate, or not? You may answer, No, but with a further
Equivocation. If he urges again, and asks whether you did not Equivocate in
your denying it? You may answer, No, with another secret Equivocation, and so
as often as you are asked. Nay, he says further Mitigat. c. 10. Sect 5. p.
426. n. 26.
; When a Judge is not lawful, though a Person has first sworn to answer
directly, he may use doubtful words; which if they prevail not, then say the
Doctors, that he may deny, and say, I know nothing, I have seen nothing, etc.
reserving in his mind, that he knows nothing which in that unjust Examination
he is bound to utter. This was the measure Garnet the Provincial of the Jesuits
took; for when he was called before the Lords, and was asked, Whether Hall the
Jesuit and he had any Conference together in the Tower? and being desired not
to Equivocate; he stiffly denied it upon his Soul, reiterating it with many
detestable Execrations: And yet when proved against him, cried the Lords Mercy,
and said, He had offended, if Equivocation did not help him Proceedings, p.
195. Casaub. Epist. p. 117.
.

Of this we have a notable Instance Rob. Abbotti Antilogia. c. 2. p. 12.
in one John Coome, that Anno 1609, being examined by the Bishop of London, and
required to set down his Answer in writing, did it after this manner;
Whatsoever I now affirm, I affirm upon the Faith of a Christian, without all
Equivocation and Mental Reservation, or secret Interpretation kept to my self;
and affirm it according to the plain sense of the Words by me spoken; So God me
help, through Jesus Christ. First, I say, therefore that my Name is John Coome,
neither have I been called by any other Name here, or beyond Seas; and
particularly that my ordinary Name is not Scammel, neither is it my true Name.
Furthermore I affirm, upon the Faith of a Christian, that I never was in Orders
according to the Way of the Church of Rome, and did never enter into a Vow
according to the Rule of the Jesuits; nor ever studied in any English Seminary
in Spain or Flanders. And to the truth of all this I have subscribed, and of my
own accord have subscribed, John Coome. These things he swore, and yet did all
by Equivocation and Reservation; for he afterward confessed that he was a
Priest, and Jesuit, and did commonly write his name Scammel. And that they may
use Equivocation when they declare against it; see it further made good by Dr.
Stillingfleet in the sore-quoted Sermon, page 39.

If we reflect upon these Propositions, we may be able to reconcile all that
Mr. Whitebread and his Brethren did declare at their late Execution, or
whatever they are made to say in these Speeches that pass up and down in their
Names, to the justice of the Sentence they suffered by. It Is true, amongst
Protestants, nay amongst Heathens, such solemn Protestations would be hearkened
to; and those that are honest and sincere, could hardly think those that use
such Asseverations to be otherwise. But if we consider what has been before
said, we have reason to judge of Them by other measures. For some of their
Principles do show that they may do it. As those of being dispensed with in it;
and of having Absolution after it; and of denying and swearing, with
Reservation before an incompetent Authority. But others of the abovesaid
Principles make it necessary, and show that they ought to do it. As if they
were required so to do by their Superiors, whose Commands they are not to
question or dispute: If it were for a notable Good, or preventing a
considerable Mischief; or if they heard it in Confession; In these cases they
are obliged to deny, and to deny again; to equivocate upon Equivocation; to
die, and, I had almost said, to damn themselves, rather than confess when they
are thus bound to be secret.

But that they need not fear, for besides the security that they have
otherwise, it is said, in a famous Book of theirs, Imago primi Saec. Societ
Jesu. p. 650.
that God granted to their Order, that for the first 300 years, none of them
should be damned. And perhaps they may think it worth the while to venture
Purgatory to secure their present Plot from Miscarriage; as the Lord Cords is
said Bacon's Henry the 7th.
to have been content to lie seven years in Hell, on condition Calice might be
recovered from the English.

That if we consider their Circumstances, and peruse 3 General.
their Speeches, it may be presumed that they acted according to these
Principles. And here I shall not repeat what I before said to make it evident,
that if they had been guilty, this way of proceeding was necessary to maintain
the credit of their Religion and Society, etc. But shall observe, (1.) That
there are not in any of these Speeches, higher Protestations and Appeals to
God, than what was in the words of Garnet, and the writing of Come before
spoken of; which yet were plainly Sophistical, as the Sequel showed. (2.) That
there is in the most material parts of them such an agreement, and that in the
phrase it self, (as has been already observed) as if they were to act a
prescribed part, and to observe particular Orders in what they should say. (3.)
That the Elder, and those who it is likely were to give absolution, spoke with
greater caution and reservedness, whilst the others spoke with greater freedom
and boldness. (4.) That notwithstanding all, there are some things notoriously
false, and in which at least they do equivocate; which may give just reason to
suspect that they do equivocate also where it is not so evident. And this falls
the hardest upon Mr. Gawen, who thus delivers himself; Because they [Jesuits]
are so falsely charged for holding King killing Doctrine, I think it my duty to
protest to you with my last dying Mr. Gawen's Speech.
words, that neither I in particular, nor the Jesuits in general, hold any such
opinion, but utterly abhor and detest it; and I assure you, that among the
multitude of Authors, which among the Jesuits have printed Philosophy,
Divinity, Cases or Sermons, there is not one to the best of my knowledge that
allows of King-killing Doctrine, or holds this position, That it is lawful for
a private Person to kill a King although an Heretic, although a Pagan,
although a Tyrant; that is to say, not any Jesuit that holds this, except
Mariana the Spanish Jesuit, and he defends it not absolutely, but only
problematically, for which his Book was called in again, and the Opinions
expugned and sentenced. Now toward the clearing of this, four things are to be
enquired into.

1. What the Opinion of Mariana was touching killing of Kings? 2. Whether
Mariana held it problematically only? 3. Whether and how Mariana was censured
for it? 4. Whether any of the Jesuits besides Mariana were of that Opinion?
1. What the Opinion of Mariana was touching killing of Kings? Mr. Gawen says,
That he held it lawful for a private Person to kill a King, if an Heretic or
Tyrant, etc. His Opinion is to be sought for in his Book, De Rege and Regis
Institutione Lib. 1. cap. 6, and 7. Edit. 2. Typis Wechel. p. 59, 60.
; where he thus delivers himself, (1.) If a lawful Prince becomes a Tyrant, and
does oppress and violate the public Laws, etc. he is to be admonished; and if
he afterward persist therein, he may be declared a public Enemy, and may be
killed (if otherwise the Commonwealth cannot be defended) and that by a
private Person. (2.) That in case there cannot be a public Convention of the
People (as a Parliament) that then the common Voice of the People shall be
sufficient to warrant it; and he who then favoring the Public Wish does
attempt his Life, does nothing unjustly. (3.) That yet it is not lawful for any
private person to kill a King. So that he takes a private person in two senses;
(1.) For one that does it upon a private account, as for his own Pleasure, or
Revenge; and then he declares it to be unlawful for such an one to kill a King.
(2.) For one that is commissioned by Authority, as by a Pope, or Convention of
People, or that does it for a general Good; and then it is lawful and
honorable for him so to do.

2. Whether Mariana held this problematically only? So says Mr. Gawen, and so
did also Eudaemon. Johannes In Respons. ad Amic. c. 1.
, saying, That he delivered his Opinion with doubt The advantage they take of
saying so, is from what Mariana says toward the conclusion of Chap. 6. viz.
This our Opinion does certainly proceed from a sincere mind; in which, since I
may be deceived, as a man, I will thank any one that shall bring better. But
this is no more than what is ordinarily said, even by those that write most
positively. Thus did Father Barns begin and end his Book against Equivocation
Dissertatio contra Aequiv. Epist. Dedio. and p. ult. libri.
; If I commit an Error, yet since I submit my Writings to the Canonical Censure
of your Holiness, (writing to the Pope) my Error is not obstinate. I am a Man,
and if I err, it is only an humane Error: And yet that Learned Person was
conceived to be so dogmatical in the Point, that he was fetched to Rome by the
contrivance of the Jesuits, against whom he wrote it, and died distracted in
Prison. But there is nothing more evident, than that Mariana was as positive in
this Opinion, as Mr. Burns in the other; For he not only commends the Murder of
Henry the Third of France C. 6. p. 53, 54.
, but also says, That the lawfulness of killing a King, in the Cases above
mentioned, is as clear as the day C. 6. p. 60.
; and who is so void of counsel as not to believe it Ibid. p. 62.
? and says, to exterminate such out of the society of men, is a glorious Work
C. 7. p. 64.
: And determines for the lawfulness of killing him by Poison, provided it be
not in his meat P. 66.
.

3. Whether and how Mariana was censured for this? Mr. Gawen says, That the
Book was called in again, and the Opinions expugned and censured. But I would
fain know when the former of these was done. I know that there was once a great
talk of a Book of Mariana's censured by the Pope, and the Jesuits took an
occasion from thence to stop the mouths of those that understood no better; but
alas, it was far from any thing of this Nature; for whereas a Book of the
change of money was written by Mariana; in which, says an Author of theirs
Alegambe in Biblioth. Scrip. Societ. Jesu, p. 258.
, He had sharply censured some corruptions in that kind; he contracted there by
so much displeasure, that at the instance of the Spanish Ambassador, Pope Paul
the 5th did prohibit it for a while till the storm was over. But as for the
other Book, De Rege, etc. there is not a word in the foresaid Author concerning
any such Censure, tho he is so particular as to tell where and when it was
first printed; and who would doubtless have made some remark upon it, if any
such thing had been. Which does mightily confirm what is said by the Abbot
Sylvius Continuat. Thuani p. 101. Francof. 1638.
(or whoever was the Author of the Inscriptio ad Gallos ingenuos) that the
Censure of this Book of Mariana by the Jesuits at Paris, in 1606, and the
Letter of Aquaviva their General to them upon it, was wholly fictitious, and
brought in by Father Cotton to serve a turn, and a little to cast off the odium
from themselves, after the Murder of Henry the 4th, and the Decree of the
Parliament of Paris for burning this Book of Mariana's by the Common Hangman,
as containing many cursed blasphemies against King Henry the Third; and
principles pernicious to the Lives of Kings, etc. Ibid. p. 86.
as it is there declared. And that which does more discover the imposture is,
since Aquaviva is there made to say, That he was troubled that he knew nothing
of this before; which how unlikely it is, will be evident, if it be considered,
that it was about seven years betwixt the first publishing of this Book of
Mariana, and this Letter said to be written by Aquaviva; the Book being
licensed December. 1598, and printed at Toledo 1599, and the Letter was written
1606. Now that their General should be so long ignorant of a Book written by
one of their Order, and by so learned a Man as Mariana, and a Book that had set
the World in a flame, cannot be conceived. But indeed I do not find this
Censure at Paris much insisted upon by themselves. And the recalling of it is
much like the Censure, for besides that Edition at Toledo, there was another at
Mentz by Balthazar Lippius, which the Jesuits there did revise sheet by sheet;
not to speak of that printed at Frankford by the Heirs of Wechelus, which a
Learned Person says they did by the instruction of a famous Jesuit Casauboni
Epist. ad Ducaeum, p. 48.
.

But however the principles of it are expugned and censured, says Mr. Gawen. I
will take that at the present for granted, which an Author of theirs says
Eudaem Joh. ad Amic. c. 1.
, viz. That upon a Consultation of the Jesuits at Rome, their General Aquaviva,
made a Decree, whereby he forbad to teach, either by Word or Writing, that it
was lawful for any person whatsoever under any pretext of Tyranny, to kill
Kings, or to plot their Death. A Decree that looks very speciously; but (1.) we
are here to observe, That there is no censure of what has been already written
or taught, or the persons so writing or teaching. (2.) We may very well suppose
that the any person whatsoever, will admit of their common limitation, and is
to be understood of any private person, that does it without the command or
sentence of the Judge, according to the words of the Decree of the Council at
Constance Non expectata sententia aut mandato Judicis Council. Constable. Sess. 15.
. And I have the greater reason so to think, because when it was objected that
the Council of Constance had condemned this Position (that the Tyrant may and
ought to be killed by any one of his Subjects whatsoever]. Suarez Defens. Fid.
l. 6. c 4.
answers, Where do you find, in the Acts of that Council, that it is spoken of
Princes excommunicate by the Pope, or degraded? (3.) There is no little
exception to be taken against the word King, as it is here laid; for in their
sense, an Heretical, Excommunicated and Deposed King, is no King; and he only
is with them a King that is not under such a censure, and so the killing of
such an one only is to be declared against. (4.) And this we may be the more
assured of, since it is said only under any pretext of Tyranny; but it is not
said under any pretext of Herefie, Excommunication or Deposition. So that after
all, here is no security for a King, if an Heretic; or for a Catholic King,
if Deposed or Excommunicated: And the Doctrine is still left much where it was
before the Decree. So that this deserves the like Censure given by the Abbot
Sylvius of that before spoken of, that it is a Censure full of Equivocations and
doubtful Expressions Continuat. Thua. p. 101.
. But the best way to find out the strength and validity of this Decree, is to
observe their practice. Were these Principles never reassumed by them? What
must we think of the book of Suarez, printed at Colein, 1614 Defens. Fidei
Cath. adv. Angl. Sect.
, and which was condemned by the Parliament of Paris to be burnt, as containing
Propositions highly Scandalous and Seditious, and which tended to the
subversion of Kingdoms, and the stirring up Subjects to murder their Kings
Contin. Thuani, p. 410.
. And upon which occasion the Senate sent for Amandus, and the chief of the
Jesuits, to let them know how little respect was had to the above said Decree
of their General, in Anno 1610. What shall we say to a book of Sanctarellus the
Jesuit, printed at Rome 1625 Tractatus de Haeresi, etc.
, not only under the Eye of Vitelliscus their General, but with his express
Allowance? in which were eleven Propositions condemned by the Parliament of
Paris, and for which it was commanded to be burnt by the Common Hangman.

Amongst which it is maintained, That the Pope may depose Princes, if
insufficient or negligent, and adjudg them to Death, etc. When this Book was
produced, the Parliament sent for several of the Jesuits, and asked them what
they thought of that Book? Father Cotton answered in the name of the rest, That
they disapproved it. Being further examined, How it came to pass that they
condemned what their General did allow? He replied, That their General being at
Rome, could do no less. When it was asked again, What they would do if at Rome?
He replied, They should think as they do at Rome. This you may see particularly
set down by Gramondus Gram Hist. p. 676. Francof. 1674.
, a Friend of Cottons. So that such Declarations as these are of no force, but
are only to serve a present need, to pacify Princes, or please the People, but
what they themselves are not obliged by: therein making good that Character of
them, which I find in a sober Author of their own, Jesuits Cat. l. 3. p. 234.
Engl. 1602.
That a Jesuit is every man; of which that book will afford some other
instances, p. 235, 236.

4 And so way is made to consider: Whether any of the Jesuits besides Mariana
have bin of that Opinion; I hope it will be granted, that some there are, by
what has been already said; and it will be further allowed,

(1) That they are of the same mind with him that do commend him for having
well acquitted himself upon that argument: Such are Stephen Hoieda, Visitor of
their Society in the Province of Toledo, that licensed it, and those that gave
their approbation of it to him; such again are Scribanius For he is said by
Alegambe to be the Author of Amphitbeat. Honor.
Gretser, Becanus, etc.

(2) They again are of his Opinion, that do hold, not only that a King may be
deposed by a Prince or People; but that also, when deposed, he is no King. So
Suarez Defens. Fid. l. 6. c 4. Sect. 4. and 18.
, When a King is deposed, then he is neither lawful King nor Prince. So De
Instit. l. 2. c 9. Dub. 4. Sect. 10, 12.
Lessius, Greg. Valentia, and many others.

(3) They are of Mariana's Opinion, that hold a Deposed King may be killed. So
Lessius Ibid.
, Any having authority, may, if a Prince's Tyranny grow intolerable, Depose
him, etc. whereby any thing may be attempted against his Person, because he
then is no more a Prince. So Becanus Controv. Ang. p. 115.
, The Pope may deprive Princes, and if contumacious, he may have them deprived
of their Life. So Suarez Ibid. ut prius.
, Eman. Sa Aphor. Tyrannus.
, Molina, etc.

(4.) They are of his Opinion, that say, A private person may kill a King so
Deposed; The Sentence being issued out, any one may be the Executioner of it.
So Eman. Sa Ibid.
; so Molina De Instit. Tom. 4. Tract. 3. Disp. 6. Sect. 2.
. The People may Depose their King, and punish him when he is deposed.

So that we see Mariana is still a Jesuit, and they have no Reason to clamor
against him, and to cry out of the rashness of one man, as Mr. Gawen does, when
as it is the prevailing Opinion amongst them; and it is disingenuously done of
them, to do by him as the Deer by one that is wounded, clear themselves of his
Company, when he is of the same Herd with them.

Indeed after all that Mr. Gawen has said toward the Vindication of himself
and his Order, he has said but what Mariana did before him; for Mariana held,
as I have before showed, That it is not lawful for a private person to kill a
King; and therefore says, Cap. 6. fin.
That John Duke of Burgundy was condemned by the Council of Constance, because
he caused Lewis Duke of Orleance to be killed, Non expectata Sententia
Superioris, without attending the Sentence of a Superior, as the Pope, i. e. he
did it upon his own head, and out of private Revenge. And if this be the
meaning of Mr. Gawen, which is the received Sense of those of his Order, we are
much beholden to him. For then our Prince is left to the Mercy of the Pope's
Bull, or that of the People; for as soon as he is by them declared against, or
is an Heretic, or grows intolerable, or is deposed, then any private Man is
the Minister of Justice, and does right to God and his Church, or the People,
if he kill him. If Mr. Gawen had meant honestly, he should have told us that it
was not his Opinion, that a King may be Deposed, or that upon Deposition he is
no King, and that tho thus deposed it was unlawful for any Person whatsoever to
attempt his life. But as long as he uses the current phrase among them, we
must take their Interpretation of it also; and then he must say any private
Person may kill a King in the Circumstances before spoken of; so that a King is
only secured against private Revenge, or the present rage of his Subjects; but
if they have Warrant for so doing from the Pope or People, then Lord have mercy
on him, for he is like to find none from them.

So that after all his renouncing of Equivocation, etc. he in his last dying
words is found basely to Equivocate, whilst he neither tells us what the King
is whom a private person ought not to kill, nor what that private person is,
that ought not to kill him. And when if he means according to the style of his
Order, it is no more but that whilst a lawful King is not Excommunicate, an
Heretic, or deposed, no one may kill him: and when he is either of those, no
one of a private revenge or malice may be allowed so to do: But if the public
good be concerned in it, or there be Authority or Commission from Superiors
[that is, Pope or People in Parliament] then the private person is no private
person, and there is no bar to secure a Prince's life from the Assaults even of
such.

And if there be such a notorious Equivocation in this so set a performance of
his; and that he acted so conformably to his own Principles, of obeying his
Superiors in whatever they commanded, in denying whatever may be to the
prejudice of their Cause or Party, in using mental reservations, even whilst he
renounced them, for these and the other ends before spoken of; what hinders but
we are to think that all the rest wrote after the same Copy with him; as when
they say that they are as innocent as the Child unborn, of treasonable crimes;
is not this reconcilable to the principles of Dispensation and Absolution?
(which last they might, and it is probable did give one to another) Is it not
reconcilable to the Excommunication and Deposition of his present Majesty, and
to the Title which the Pope challenges to these Kingdoms, by the ancient claim
of Surrender? When they speak of the King, might they not apply it either to
the Pope or a Successor, doing therein much as a certain Priest did, that when
asked who was Supreme in all Causes in the Church of England, presently
answered the King, meaning thereby the King of Heaven, as he afterward
Expounded it? Abbot. Autilog. cap. 2. p. 12. b.
When they do declare against a Plot for the Alteration of Government, is not
that easily applied to the kind or form, or some main parts of it? When they
renounce Equivocations, etc. Did not Garnet and Coome do the same, and yet in
the mean while did Equivocate or Lie? Did they do all this at their Death, and
call God to Witness, and pawn their Souls to verify and confirm what they
said? Is this more than what was practiced by Mr. Tresham and Gurphy; and what
is frequently done by Villains at their Execution without such Reasons for it
from Religion or Interest as these Men had? When I read their Speeches, I can
hardly but believe them; When I think of their Accusations, their Principles,
and the Practices usual amongst them, I begin to tremble: To think that at such
a time, and in so great a case as this is, men should prevaricate, and to
deceive the World, care not what becomes of their own Souls; or else that they
can be so stupid as to think that the Salvation of their Souls can be
consistent with such Impieties. I question not but that time will make this as
clear as the day, and then what they did to strengthen their Cause, will be the
greatest blow to it that perhaps it ever yet had. When it shall be upon record,
and published before all the World, That so good may come of it, the good of
their Church and Order, they care not what Evil they do, nor how they Subvert
the Laws of God and Nature, so they may establish their own.

FINIS.

