HEAVEN The End of Man OR, FINAL CAUSE OF THE SOUL's SPIRIT.

By WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Teutonico-Philosopho-Theologus.

Juvenal. Satyr. VIII. Summum creed nefas animam praeferre pudori, (viz.
Virginis Pudicitiae.)

Et propter vitam vivendi perdere CAVSAS. Viz. Deum, Efficientem; Virginem,
Formalem; and Coelum Finalem Causam.

He that loves his Life above the end of Life, shall lose it.

LONDON: Printed for Eliz. Whitlock, in Amen-Corner, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

READER.
THou art here presented with a small Tract, written in an Uncommon Style: The
Author has been much conversant in, and a Studier of the Teutonick Philosophy:
His Notions, which he has here delivered, (though somewhat uncouth) yet are
they not to be rejected: He has expressed himself for the most part in a
Metaphorical manner, in which the Curious Readers are desired to receive them:
With this Request, Not to permit the Non, or Misunderstanding of the Rational
Reader, if not a little Elevated, and more Divinely Enlightened, then the
unthinking World generally is, be imputed as a fault to the Unintelligibleness
of the Book it self: It is not denied but that somewhat may be Objected against
it; but what then? I know of no Systems, of Divinity nor Philosophy, exposed to
Humane View, but there may be Objections raised, that cannot (by the best Wits)
be easily, if at all, Answered. It will likewise be expected from him that is
so Captious and enviously Critical, to set forth something in which will be no
Contradiction nor Disconsonancy; and then he may more reasonably find fault:
But as it is improbable, nay utterly impossible to please all, so the Author
expects not to be disliked by all; and if what he has here published please
but the best, or be profitable to any, he has his end, who desires nothing
more than the Manifestation of the Truths of God in Nature and Scripture; whose
aim and end is to be his Servant, and every Man's Brother,

Dum Spiritus hos regit Artus.
Reader, Thou may here perceive, 1. What Man's Condition was. 2. What it is.
3. What it ought to be. 4. What it ought not to be. 5. What it may be, if he
accept. 6. Or if he refuse. 7. What it must be, if persevere. 8. Or if he fall
from Grace. 9. What it will be in the Bliss. 10. Or in the Curse.


CHap.I. The Souls Antiquity.
S. 1. Lucifer's Noble Birth. 2. Lucifer's Fall. 3. His Captivity. 4. The Souls
Eternity. 5. Man now a Subject of Time. 6. The Souls Circle. 7. Fatal Necessity
of the Souls being. 8. Gods Repentance. 9. His Balance allows the same event,
etc. 10. All alike relieved by a poor wise Man.
Chap. II. The Souls Longing.
1. Crying, Give, give. 2. Sevenfold Craving. 3. The Souls Importunity. 4. He
desires some real thing. 5. It is no Whimsey. 6. Atheists Objections Answered.
7. By Humane Laws. 8. By Religion and Dreams. 9. By Loves Passion. 10. By the
Seven Properties.
Chap. III. The Souls Allegiance.
1. There is a Divine Law. 2. It alters not. 3. Yet it is inverted by Man. 4.
But it must be observed. 5. To indulge the good Genius, etc. 6. It is no
indifferent thing. 7. Man's Portion from God. 8. The Fool neglects it. 9. And
hates his own flesh. 10. No middle state.
Chap. IV. The Souls Rebellion.
1. The Fools Appetite. 2. Trust not in Uncertainties. 3. The Law^ivers
Example. 4. His Wisdom. 5. Travall appointed to Man. 6. Christ's Sorrows. 7.
Man's Ignorance. 8. And Mortality. 9. Thantasie inverted. 10. Soul and Body most
sympathize.
Chap. V. The virgins Suit.
1. Man's Meet H^lp. 2. Virgin Virtue. 3. The Beginnings of Grace. 4. The
Excellency of Virtue. 5. The Gospel of Peace. 6. The Pleasantness of Virtue. 7.
Divine Contemplation. 8. The Contentment of Virtue. 9. The Acceptable
Sacrifice. 10. The Authority of Virtue.
Chap. VI. The Whores Suit.
1. The Soul's Backsliding. 2. The Baits of Sin. 3. Sevenfold Vice. 4. The
blind fall headlong. 5. The Destruction of the Individuum. 6. For spoiling the
Souls sport. 7. Not propagating the Species. 8. Degrading the Soul. 9. The
Divine Reprover in the Conscience 10. Misery the end of Vice.
Chap. VII. The Virgins Espousal.
1. Reconcilement. 2. Consecration of the Soul. 3. Full Assurance. 4. Perfect
Liberty. 5. Religious Vows. 6. Pious Resolution. 7. Sevenfold Virtue. 8.
Sevenfold Reward. 9. Grace turned into Wantonness. 10. By Double-Heartedness.
Chap. VIII. The Virgins Farewell.
1. Beware of falling from Grace. 2. For there is no third Recovery. 3. Virtue
very Rare. 4. Christ's proffered Service slighted. 5. A seared Conscience, 6. The
Tallent given to another. 7. The Souls Anguish. and, 8. Despair. 9. Late
Repentance. 10. Hellish Blasphemy.
Chap. IX. The Souls Rest.
1. Where is this Rest? 2. Not Gods fault, if missed. 3. God allows Time. 4.
And Tallents. 5. The ^eed sown at Death. 6. The Heavenly Feast stays for Man.
7. Man's self-enjoyment Gods glory. 8. Spoil not the End for the Means. 9. Seven
fold state in Eternity. 10. Heaven Described.
Chap. X. The Souls Transmigration.
1. Christ is the Lawful King. 2. His Right to reign in Man. 3. False Judgment.
4. Retaliation. 5. The Souls Metamorphosis. 6. Work in time. 7. Before the Evil
Days come. 8. Before a second Apostasy. 9. No Redemption out of Hell. 10. The
Conclusion.
HEAVEN The End of Man OR, FINAL CAUSE OF The SOULS Spirit.
CHAP. I. The Souls Antiquity.
The PREFACE.
THe Words of the Eternal Preacher, Son of God, King of Heaven, Vanity of
Vanities (says the Great Prophet) Vanity of Vanities. All the Labor of
Lucifer is Vanity: And it is in vain to act against God, it shall never
prosper. What profit has Lucifer now of all the Labor in opposition to God,
which he has taken under the Sun of his Eternity? One Generation of Angels
has passed away, and another humane off spring comes in their stead: But the
Kingdom and the Prize which is to be contended for, abides still.

. 1. Lucifer's Noble Birth.
WHen Almighty God was pleased to multiply himself in Generating the holy
Angels, even the three Throne-Angels, from whom again sprung many thousand
Millions, Lucifer's Dominion stood in the middle betwixt Michael and Vriel: And
he receiving and partaking of the brightness and beauty of the other two, as by
reflexive Rays, was invested with a most transc^ndent Glory and Fairness. But
when he gazed and looked upon the most excellent Clarity and Beauty of the Son
of God, and also of his Pure and Blessed Virgin, making her self ready as a
Bride for the reception of her Husband; and when he perceived that this Virgin
of God was the most beautiful of the Virgins, he took a distaste against his
own Virgin, whom God had appointed for him as his chaste Consort, and fell
deeply in love with Gods Queen Virgin, desiring to be like her, or indeed
brighter and fairer than she: And was excee^^li^^ly importunate to unite with
and defile her in the Bed of Incest, not being content to enjoy her pleasant
Aspect and Serenity, to partake of her delightful Society and Communication, as
his dear Sister. But, Oh (said she) do thou know who I am? Look upon my
Clarity and Excellency, and the Majesty of my Glory: Go home to thy study, and
think of something else: Aim not too high: This Attempt is too difficult for
thee: Thou art not worthy of me, for I am the chaste Spouse of the Son of the
Deity: I never ^ill defile my self: I will never consent to thy ^oolish desire.
Thereup^^ Lucifer being highly af^^ented, endeavored to ^^ce her to his
unlawful ^^re, and would needs commi^ a Rape upon her: But (...) as rescued by
the Angels, and carried into the Wilderness, where she had a place prepared of
God for Her. Then Lucifer cast out the Flood of his Wrath, and disgorged the
Vomit of his Malice after her, to devour her. But the Earth helped the Virgin,
and swallowed up the Flood of his Envy, and the escaped late Gods Palace,
which God appointed for (...) ^^^ctuary of Refuge.

. 2. Luciser's Fall.
NOw Lucifer increasing the Infection of his Eyes, by gazing upon her Beauty,
and letting out his Mind after her for a hellish end, he importuned her to look
out at the Window of her Palace, and would needs per^wade her by all manner of
smooth and flattering speeches, to take a walk with him in the adjacent Groves
of Paradise: She still dissuaded him from such a foolish Attempt of false Lust,
saying, Be but content, and I will cloth thee with my Jewels, and the
Ornaments of my excelling Beauty; But be assured I will never consent to be
Des^led with false Imagination, or to be infected with Lust. Then he opened the
Door in the Center of his Dominion, which was Eternally forbidden: And would
needs search into the Ground or Abyss of the Deity, to know the Root of the
false Tree in the Center or midst of the Creation, seeking to know whence the
Cause of Gods Beauty and his proceeded. And then said, O fair Virgin, if thou
consent to cohabit with me, I will honor thee with the Jointure of my Black
Kingdom: I will make thee Queen of the Infernal Regions: She still scorned his
Rashness, and pitied his Folly. Art thou, said he, become so disdainful and
haughty? I will force thee to my L^st, whether thou consentest or no. But she
was caught up to Heaven. At that Lucifer raved, roa^ed, raged and spat poison,
like an horrible Dragon, as if he would tear the three Worlds, and the Deity it
self in pieces, if it had been possible. And there was a kind of War: Michael
and his Angels expelled Lucifer and his Dragon- Angels out of Heaven: And yet
it was no real War, for Heaven spewed him out of its own accord, and he was
cast out, as Dung, into the cursed part of the Earth; and his Soldiers, his
Vassals, were ^ast out with him.

Then for Malice being mad with Fury, he endeavored to blow his poison, and
belch forth his malignity into all the Seeds and Idea's of the Creatures of
this Creation which we now see.

Thus also Lucifer for Madness sought to slay his own innate proper Virgin,
after he had failed in deflowering of her, which was contrary to the Law of
Eternity: And therefore he opened the Matrice of the wrathful Nature, and was
united with, and generated a Dragon-like Essence, and to his own everlasting
Torment, so that now he burns in the Hellish Fire of his Consumption, never to
be consumed: And has great Wrath and Envy against the Son of Man, who is to
dethrone him, because he knows he has but a short time. Woe to the Inhabitants
of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you. So that to
this day we plainly see the cause of Luciser's Envy against the Son of Man,
even, Because He expels Lucifer out of his Throne, and is but an Usurper, as
Lucifer lays to his Charge. And so Lucifer spat his Malice upon every thing
that was capable of Receiving it, as a Serpent out of a hole or prison to which
he is consigned: And before the Creation he would envenom the Seeds of the
External Essences: For every thing had its own Formative Seed in its self,
before it was created. So the Earth was without Form, and Void, like a Chaos,
and Darkness was upon the face of the great Deep in Lucifer's Dominion.

3. Lucifer Captivated.
YEt the Spirit of God would not suffer this once fair middle World to stand in
Eternal Ignominy, and to become the Devils Murdering Den: But he moved the
Waters to quench Lucifer's Dark Lightning and Thunder, and his Juggling Tricks,
and said, Let there be Light to adorn this fair World, as it had done from
Eternity, and there was Light. Then the Creation groaned and travailed in great
Labor to be freed from the Vanity of the Curse, this Vanity of Vanities, that
was a Vexation to the Spirit of God. For Lucifer, if he had his will, would
suffer neither Grass, Flower, nor Fruit to grow, nor Animals to live, for the
Use and Recreation of Man, for he envied his Happiness. And he himself could
not enjoy their Society, for every thing feared him, and shunned him, as a
Revolted Prince and Tyrant. But when on the fifth Day he saw that Life and
Sense sprung up through his dark Death, he intended as he sat in Council, to
torture or to kill the Beasts, Birds and Fishes, for a Mock-Sacrifice to atone
the wrath of the incensed Gods: For he understood there was no Lord or
Arch-Shepherd set over them, to protect them: Therefore also the Creator
consulted to put a stop to his Traiterous Rage, and malicious designs of his
fellow-Plotters, and to generate a Lord to supply his place upon his Throne,
and to divest him of his Robes and his Crown.

Here arises a great Objection, Why did not God annihilate the Devil, when he
was aware of the danger of his Fall?

Answ. Lucifer being created out of the Essence of God, and being made a free
Agent, had the Power of his own Will, and was in a Capacity of giving Glory
(...) God, as well as the other two Hierarchies: So that according to the Order
and Creation of Angelical Nature, the Essence of Lucifer could not be turned
into Nothing. God as a most skilful Musician melodized with himself on his own
Harp in Heavenly Joy before the World was. God gave Lucifer (once a most fair
and bright Angel, but now corrupted and spoiled by Imagination and Pride) such
another Harp. But Lucifer broke the Strings, and instead thereof, (because he
was not willing to play together with God and the holy Angels, in one Symphony)
puts something invented by his vain Fancy, which makes an horrible noise. [And
here is now God against God.]

But you will say, Lucifer is Unalmighty. So he is; but ask the Devil, and he
will tell you, He is the Almighty God, and Omnipotent Mountebank in the Dark
World, and also Prince of the wrathful part of this World, and is absolute
Monarch in his own Black Region. Therefore O Man, beware to come thither: For
to return again to God's Jurisdiction, Hac Labor, Hoc Opus est.

But you will say, Why did God create or generate Man, seeing he knew it would
increase the Devils Kingdom?

Answ. The Devil could not be captivated otherwise: And there was no necessity
that Man should ^^ll, except he would himself: For if our Noble (...) ^ast ^^d
stood, in the great Trial in Paradise, (...) Lucifer had infected the
Macrocosm, as to one part, yet the infected part was hidden in the black
Principle, and the Earth had been a mere Paradise in this (...) World.

4. The Souls Eternity.
NOw, O Man, behold thy self: Thou art Lucifer's Rival: Consider the Eternity,
Antiquity, and Beginningless Noble Birth of thy Soul: Thou art but a little or
small Incarnation, and yet God was pleased therein to multiply himself: O Man,
consider thy self here: Thou have the Image of the Great Creator upon thy Soul;
though defaced, yet capable to be restamped upon thy Spirit. Vanity of Vanities:
All is Vanity, whatever it be that offends or vexes the pure Spirit of God
and his Divine Image: Therefore whatever hurts or hinders the well-being of
the Soul, or Separates it from God its Creator, must be removed. What profit
has he that works in all wherein he labors for the Wind? God has made
every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the World in Man's Heart;
Yea the three Worlds are in the little World; so that no Man can find out the
Work that God makes from the Not- beginning of Eternity to the infinite End:
For the Work of Eternity is the World not yet made, and yet ever made by
Eternity.

And Good and Evil do manifest themselves one by the other; so Pain and
Pleasure remain in one another hidden, yet both remain in the wonder of God, to
his own Manifestation and Glory.

And so, when I applied my Heart to know Wisdom, and to see the business that
is done upon the Humane Earth in this lower World: ( for there is that neither
day nor night enjoys a sweet rest of sleep with his Eyes, in the Darkness of
the Hellish Shadows:) Then I beheld all the Work of God, that a Man cannot find
out the Work that is done under the Eternal Sun: Because though a Man labor to
seek it out, yet he shall not find it: Yea, though a Wise Man by the Serpents
Craft think to know it, yet he shall not be able to search it out.

The thing that has been before the Creation is that which shall be; and that
which is done at present, is that which shall be done in the succeeding World,
and there is no new thing under the Temporal or Eternal Sun: Is there any Soul
whereof it may be said, See this Essence is New? It has been already of old
time (in the Nonage of Man's Generation) which was before us. There is no
remembrance of former things that were done in Lucifer's Apostasy: The New Man
forgets all old things: Neither shall there be any remembrance of things that
are ^o come in Man's Apostasy, by the succeeding Generations that shall come
after us. For to every purpose under the unmixed Heaven there is a season, and
a time for every Action: A time to dye to the World, and a time to be New-
born: A time to plant good Herbs, and a time to pluck up evil Weeds that are
planted in the Heart: A time to kill evil Beasts, and a time to heal the wounds
of the Soul: A time to break down Lucifer's Bulwarks, and a time to build up
the holy Tabernacle for God in Man. A time to weep for sins past, and a time to
laugh in Heaven: A time to m^urn, when the holy Bride is withdrawn; And a time
to dance with her when she is found: A time to cast away Stones out of the
Soulish Field, and a time to gather Stones together for Gods Building: A time
to embrace the Virgin, and a time to refrain: A time to get Heavenly Treasures,
and a time to lose all for the sake of the Beloved: A time to keep the Divine
Talent, and a time to cast away Lucifer's Jewels: A time to rent the Heart, and
a time to sew new Garments with new Cloth: A time to keep silence from uttering
vain words, and a time to speak to Gods praise: A time to love God and his fair
Daughters, and a time to hate what is contrary to him: A time to War with
Lucifer, and a time of Peace, when the End of our Journey is found.

5. Man a Subject of Time.
SO that though Time be mutable, yet there is an uninterrupted coherence between
its Links or Chains; and if the Cause go before, the Effect must follow: For if
there be a departure out of the Order, there must be a time to put that which
departs therefrom in its due place again, or turn it out.

And so if there be a time of a false Birth, there must be a time to die
Eternally, if not new born. If there be a time to plant evil Weeds, there must
be a time to pluck them up, and throw them without the Garden, and the Planter
together. If Man affords time to kill the Son of God in his Conscience, God
will find a time to raise him again to judge the Murderer. If Man sin is time
to build up a Babel of Confusion, God will break it down in his time. If there
be a time to langh in vanity, there must be a time to weep in repentance, or to
weep in Eternity. If a time to dance to Satan's Music, there must be a time to
mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes. If there be a time to gather stones together to
Babel, there must be a time to cast them away. If there be a time to embrace
Jezabel, there will be a time to refrain from that embracing. If there be a
time to get Riches by false dealings, there will be a time to lose them by
Thieves and Rust, or other means. If there be a time to keep Gods Talent in a
Napkin, and hide it, there will be a time to take it away, and give it to
another. If there be a time to sew Fig Leaves, there must be a time to rent
them, and discover the Nakedness of those that sew them. If there be a time
that the dumb Conscience (who betrays his Author) keeps silence, there must be
a time that it will speak to Condemnation. If there be a time to love the
Whore, there will be a come to hate and curse her, that ever she was a^
occasion of Allurement. If there be a time of false peace, and taking up a
false Rest, short of the (...) end, there must be a tim^ that the Conscience
will proclaim an implacable War against him tha^ does so, and cause him to
wander as a Fugitive and Va^abond to Eternity, and yet never obtain his Desire
upon (...) Enemies. And thus, because to every Action there (...) appointed a
true time, therefore the misery of Man (...) upon him.

Now here lies the Great M^^stery, because of Ignorance in the Souls Original
and Nobility, many a Man becomes a wretched M^screant. Nay (may some say) It is
by Gods predestinate purpose that Man is to know and seel pain. Yes, this is
the predestinate purpose of God, and the Ancient Law of Eternity, That whoever
would be greater than God, and oppose his own Lumour and self-will to Gods
will, must feel Eternal Pain, that proceeds from this chiefly; He will gnash
his Teeth, and eat his own Flesh; yea, from his own Center shall stream Flashes
of burning Brimstone, because he will think how he has fooled himself away by
his own Folly, when he might have been a Royal Prince: So that Ignorance is the
cause of Man's Wretchedness: Man shuts his Eyes, and sees not how God the Root
of Man, cannot by any Skill or Device be plucked up: And so Man comes to be
subject to an evil time and ill chance, by breaking himself off from his true
Eternal Root.

6. The Soul's Circle.
THe words of the Preacher, the Prophetical Sound, the Son of God, King of
Heaven. Prince of Order, and Ruler of the seven Worlds: One Humane or Angelical
Spirit passes away into its own Place and Lot, and another brood comes into
this World in his stead: But the Mansion of the Spirit abides unmoved for ever.

The Humane Sun arises and seems to set out of sight, and so Immortal Man
seems to be Mortal, but he hastes to the place of Eternity where he arose, and
wheeleth from one Tropic to another by an uncessant Labor, and Eternal Motion.
The Wind of the Soul goes toward the South, and turns to the opposite side;
it whirleth about continually, as upon seven Wheels, whether moved backward
with Lucifer, and so remaining still: Or returning again according to its
Circuits, as moved forward by the Divine Motion and Breath. All Humane Rivers
run into the Ocean of Eternity, yet Eternity is never filled: Unto the place
from whence the Rivers of Generation came, thither they return again. Some
flowing hiddenly to the springing Fountain, and some abiding in the restless
and tossed State in the Abyss.

The Son of Man before his External Birth, was as it were taking his Rest, or a
sweet Nap of Repose upon the Breasts of the Virgin his dear Mother, the holy
Bride of God, who comes down from God out of Heaven; And there the Eternal
Soul was at Rest, until his Natural Parents waked him, and disturbed his
Beatifical Visions: His Natural Parents sent for him into this outward Region,
to see the Beauty of this fair World, and to receive the Salutation of a Joyful
Welcome thereinto: Who (as a Birth of Time out of the Matrice of Eternity) came
very mean, simple and helpless into this lower Country, even as a most vile
spr^wling Worm, not bearing the least malice to the Creator, or any other
Creature of the Creation: And lived a year, ten years, (or more; or perhaps a
hundred years,) and then leaves all in great longing after some New Friends or
Beloveds, which he had chosen to his Solace in this strange Land.

7. Fatal Necessity of the Soul's Being.
BY reason hereof, he goes back with an ill will toward his Ancient home, and
parts in great anguish and pain, and perhaps in that anguish and despair he
Eternally abides; and that for following some Lusts, and pursuing some
Pleasures, which he would fain solace his Mind with for a few years in this
World, and never so much as considered that he must endure a thousand millions
of painful years, in lieu of that little short pleasure, till the hour of
Death, or rather the time of taking his leave of his Friends, being too late:
And though truly the Light of the World be sweet, and though it be a pleasant thing
for the Eyes to behold the Sun of Time, yet if a Man live many years, and
rejoice in them all, let him remember the Days of Darkness, for they shall be
many: All that comes is Vanity. Now then where lies the fault here?

Here arises a great Question: Is it any promoting of Gods Honor, Joy, or
Profit, that Man must know Pain opposed to Pleasure, or be sensible of, and
really feel in the Practick what Anguish and Torment is? I say, Does this
increase Gods Joy or Beatitude, and as it were perfect the Perfection of the
perfect God?

Some may answer, No. But it was God's Will that it should be so: Well! Then
there must be some Cause wherefore God willed this Evil: The Objector may
reply, He does all for his Glory: If so, He confesses God torments his own
Child for his own Glory.

8. Gods Repentance.
BUt this is a Belying of the Deity, and of his Love to the Children of his own
Loins; and making of God an unnatural, cruel, fierce, wrathful Judge, or
Executioner; yea, crueler than the Savages of the Desert, which love their own
Issue; nay, than the very Devils of Hell. For, alas! It is no Glory nor'
Pleasure at all to God, to hear that his own dear Children are imprisoned in an
Eternal Wilderness, where they can never find the way to their Journey's End,
their Creator: But he counts it a great Loss, and Dishonor and cause of
Rpentance (if we may use that Metaphor, that God repents) that when he views
his Brides Room, and finds that his Children (each one with his Mate) are not
returned to the Great and Solemn Wedding of his Son: He will say, Where are all
my Children but these? It will be answered, They have listed themselves
Soldiers under another Power, and would not come.

Here again we must be forced to frame another Metaphor, to speak or utter
these high Mysteries with a humane Tongue: For no Grief can ever enter into
God, nor the loss whereof may vex him, (if we speak properly) God perceiving
that his Children took not his Sons Counsel; will, as it were, mourn for them a
few days, and when the mourning Days shall be ended, He will consider that
there is no Redemption out of the Jaws of Eternal Death, and and so he will for
ever forget them.

And so I considered in mine Heart even to declare all this, that though Mankind
go forth from one Root, or Fountain Ocean, yet the greatest part comes not back
to the same Door or Gate of Entrance into their Ancient Resting Place; but
enter in at a false Door by a gross mistake: And being once entered there, there
is no Recovery, because they would not hearken to the Voice of Divine Wisdom
and Skill.

Therefore (in a humane sense) it is an Addition to God's Glory to see his dear
Children returning to Heaven: (Oh! what hearty and kind Embracing and Welcoming
is here!) Their Ships laden with Divine Treasures, and carved with the Story of
the Afflictions which happened to them in a strange Land.

9. The same Event to all by allowance of God's Balance.
THe Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works, are in the hand of God, and
weighed in the Balance of Equity: No Man knows either Love or Hatred, Joy or
Sorrow, and how it will be in the other World, by all that is before him in
this World: All things come alike to all: There is one Event to the Righteous
and to the Wicked: God makes the Sun and Rain to come upon the Just and
Unjust: His Divine Sun enlightens every one that comes into this World; both
the Clean and the Unclean: Him that sacrifices his Lusts, and him that
sacrifices not: Him that swears to Gods Covenant, and him that fears the
Oath of Divine Allegiance, and him that forswear^s it

This seems an evil among all things that are done under the Sun, that there is
one Event unto all: Yea also the Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil; and
Madness is in their Heart while they live, and after that they go to the Dead:
For to him that is joined to all the Living: in the holy World, there is hope
in this Lifetime for a living Dog, which may be cultivated by degrees, is
better than a dead Lion. And the Living know that they shall dye the Eternal
Death, if they cut themselves off from the Root; But the Dead, who die the
second death, know not anything at all, but only pain; neither have they any
more a reward from God, for the memory of them, when the Days of Mourning shall
be past, is for ever forgotten. Also their Love, and their Hatred, and their
Envy is so perished, that it can never hurt any of the Celestial Incolists:
Neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under
the Sun of their Eternity, in the dark Center of their Abyss.

. 10. All alike Relieved by a Poor Wise Man.
SO I returned and saw under the clear Sun of Divine Light, that the Race is
not always to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, nor yet Bread to the
Skilful Tiller of the harsh Earth; nor yet Favor to Men of Skill: But Time and
Chance happens to them all; and a wise Man discerns both Time and Judgment.
But a wise Man also knows not his time: As the Fishes that are taken in an evil
Net and as the Birds that are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men
snared in an evil time, or Unlucky Hour of the Enemies temptation, when it
falls suddenly upon them, and that for want of Divine Skill and Wisdom, with
which whoever is endued, he cannot be cheated. This wisdom also have I seen
under the Sun, and it seemed great unto me. There was a little Microcosmick
City, and few skilful Soldiers within it: And there came a great King against
it, and by Authority from Luciscer besieged it, and built great Bulwarks
against it: Now there was found in it a poor contemptible wise Man, and he by
his Wisdom delivered the City, by giving his Life for the Inhabitants Yet no
Man remembered that same poor servile Man. Then said I, Wisdom is better than
strength: nevertheless the poor Man's Wisdom is despised, and his words are not
heard. The Words of the Wise are heard in quiet, as a still pure Voice, more
than the cry of a King that rules among Fools, and his losty loud words in the
streets of Confusion: Wisdom is better than Weapons of War: But one sin full
Affection destroys much Good, and by its jarring spoils the still Harmony in
the Humane Harp, even as one scabbed Sheep infects the whole Flock.

CHAP. II. The Souls Longing.
1. Crying, Give, Give.
VAnity of Vanities (faith the Soul's Spirit) All extern Objects are a vexation
of my Spirit. Now O Man ( says the Eternal Preacher of the holy Gospel)
Know thou what thy Soul, and what the Spirit of thy Soul is? The Soul is a
dry Hunger; It is a longing Anguish: It is a Fire without Fuel: Lay thy hand
upon thy Breast, and feel thy own Root the Heart, and then tell me, do thou
feel no panting there? No Breathing or Longing there? No Hungring nor Thirsting
there? Art thou sensible of no Labor and Travail there? No restless and
incessant Crying there? Crying, Give, give; O give me that which I labor for:
O give me that which I seek after; Even as every thing would fain live, so
would I: Thou will say, That Is the throboing and motion of the Heart and
Pulses, proceeding from the Vital Spirit. Though that be true, yet Life and Sense
in Man, are rooted in the Abyss of the Source of Eternal Joy and Delightful
Affection of a thing Loved: And that is the Soul, who cries in the Gate of Man's
Palace, Give me some Food, true Food for me.

2. Sevenfold Craving.
O Says the Spirit of the Soul, Pity me, my dear Soul: O pity a poor Prisoner:
Bring me out of this Dungeon of Confinement, enlarge my Habitation, that I may
find my late home again, and solace my hankering eager Mind with my own dear
Family and Relations.

Oh have pity upon a poor Beggar; Give me a little Food to satisfy a hungry
craving Soul: O give me a little Water out of the Living Fountain, to quench
the great thirst and furious fire of my Passion.

O have compassion upon a poor Pilgrim; show me the way to a quiet lodge of
Repose: I want the shadow of a great Rock in this weary Land: I cannot take a
Nap of sweet sleep and refreshment in this parched Heath: Here is no spreading
Elm, nor Beech, nor Fountain of Crystal Streams, no warbling River, beside
which I may take my rest, to recreate my languishing and tired Spirits. O come,
dear Shepherd, to seek thy roving Sheep: Call me again with thy Melodious
Shepherds Pipe: I listen at times to hear it, but cannot: I dare not bleat my
self, lest the Wolves hear me: O come, blessed Shepherd, and stand upon a high
place, where thy Voice may be audible: Come skipping upon these Mountains, and
leaping upon the Hills of my wandering Mind: For I am quite ^^^ed in this
tedious Wilderness, O give Rest to my travailing weary Spirit: O this is not my
Rest. O somebody have mercy upon a distracted Innocent, condemned by false
Witnesses, to be confined as in Bedlam: I cannot set my heart at rest, because
of a pannick Fear that seizes upon me: Oppression makes a wise Man mad, and
besides himself. O some Skilful Musician, come and refresh my Senses, and
selfafflicting Conscience, with the Har money of the holy Gospel, and the Melody
of the blessed Tidings of Everlasting Serenity.

O who will pity a poor wounded and sick Person? Give me some heavenly Balm or
Cordial, to heal my heavy heart, and to slop the raging of my Sore, and the
swelling of my furious Agony: Break the sense that separates me from my desired
Object.

O show mercy to a poor naked Person: O I have been stripped naked in a
Wilderness by Thieves and Murderers; they have whipped me, and smote me with
sore Boils all over: As Lions they have broken and crushed my Bo^es: O somebody
cloth me with the Robes of Panity, and white ^innen of Sanctity; to cover the
Nakedness of my Lustful Affections and Longing Mind.

O Pity a poor Slave, a Servant of Servants, a condemned Person: Redeem me from
under the Captivity of Luciser, and raise my drooping Life into the Heaven of
Everlasting Safety, and Undisturbed Quietness: O give some Fuel to feed the
Coals of my aspiring Love, that it may blaze in a holy Flame of Divine Light.

. 3. The Soul's Importunity.
TO these Demands the Soul Answers, Trouble me not: Get thee gone, and come
another time; when I shall have convenient opportunity, I will take thy
condition into Consideration. I will not be gone, says the Spirit: Now is my
time; I will not be put off so: Be gone, says the Serpentine Soul, I have
nothing for thee: Go work and earn it where thou can get it: Whence come
thou? O says the Divine Spirit of the Soul, I have been wandering and
travailing upon the Mountains on thy Errand; I have not been idle: Think not
that I am come to put a Trick upon thee, as to beg of thee an Alms for the
maintaining of my self in Idleness. Go, says the Soul to thy vagabond
Companions: Thou art a Spy, coming to see the Nakedness of the Land. I am no
Spy, says the Soul's Spirit; I am in great necessity, and that not for my own
sake, but for the sake of others.

Who is there in the House, says the Soul? One of the Handmaids answers and
says, What will thou have me to do, to this Disturber of our Peace and
Enjoyments? Go, says the Soul, and give him some of these Orts, the Refuse of
vain Pleasures. When these are proffered to the Spirit, he says, (utterly
refusing them) Take them your selves, I will not meddle with it: I must have
some true Food, or none at all. Nay, says the Soul, if thou art so saucy a
Beggar, and so wanton, want thou shall for me. Say thou so? says the Divine
Spirit; Is it come to that? Must I now be a Gleaner? And yet would fain tasle
and eat the best ripe Grapes. O give me some of your Superfluities. A little
pittance of what you throw away to the Infernal Dogs, would be greatly p^ized
by me, and relish as a sweet Morsel: O give me some. No, no, says the Soul,
go and get where thou can. Is it thus you requite me, says the Spirit? It is
by my Labor and Procurement that you enjoy all your Pleasures. And I defire a
part: Either procure some for me, or suffer me to go to fetch some, my self; or
I will never leave complaining in thy Streets. Lay therefore thy hand on thy
heart, and give some to this Beggar, and I will be gone: And I will never
trouble, vex, nor worry thee any more: I will be quiet, and gone to my Place
and Lot: Thou shall have quiet for me: Give me my desire and I have done: Thou
shall hear no more of my murmurs, my tormenting and pricking of thy Conscience.
Get thee gone quickly, says the Serpent, thou art a sturdy bold brazen-faced
Beggar, let me alone. Nay, says the Soul's Spirit. I will never stir, I will
not be gone: I will never let thee alone, until I have the Alms I seek: I am so
sturdy I will not be denied: I am fully resolved, I never will cease vexing of
thee, till I have my Desire: Therefore I pray consider of it. Take this Fellow,
faith the Soul to one of his Servants, Bind him hand and foot; strike the
Conscience dumb, we will not be controuled by it. The Oppressed Spirit still
Cries and Moans in the Gates of Man's City: Cease, says the Soul; What is all
this Clamor for? Let us have no more Noise: Be packing, thou impudent Bawler,
and disturb not our sweet sleep and quiet Rest, our present Joys and
Recreations. I will not give over, says he, if I bring my Blood upon thee, I
will never cease, though you slay me: I am so importunate and impudent, that I
will never stir a foot from this place, till I have my Errand: My words shall
break thy Rest: My Words shall be as Goads and Nails in thy side, Clenched by
the chief Architects and Masters of the Assemblies: I will prick and vex thee
in thy Conscience everlastingly, until I have my deDesire: But if thou grant me
my Divine Object, I will deal so fair, that in token of gratuity I will give
thee a Vantage of Temporal Joys added unto thee. If first thou allowest me my
desire, do what thou will: Enjoy Temporal Pleasures freely, It shall not be
imputed a Violation of Gods Law, and the Righteousness thereof.

4. He Desires some Real Thing.
BUt to what shall I compare this Cry in the Soul? The Soul is like a Child
that cannot speak, even as a Lamb dumb before the Butcher, his Voice is not
heard in the Street of Man's City; He is afflicted and grieved, and yet opens
not his Mouth: I say, The Soul's Spirit is like a poor afflicted sickly Child,
that can nothing but jabber a little: The poor Child repines, murmurs, whines
and grumbles; and is still discontented: Give him what you will, yet still he
has the same tone: Then the Mother or Nurse asks, What do thou lack, my dear
Child? O that I knew thy want! Come, my sweet Child, my poor sick Child, we
will make thee a well-relish'd Dish: No, no, says the Child, in effect, making
Signs by the Aversion of his head. Will thou have this sine Rattle to play
with? No. I will sing thee a sweet Lullaby: No. Will nothing in this World we
can procure or do for thee, please thee? My sweet Babe art very hard to please,
and humoursome: All we can do for this Child, is to no purpose: O that some
skilful Body would come and direct us: For we are at our Wits end, because of
this Child, it is past our Skill to humor it.

Am I so hard to please (says the Child, if he could speak) Yes, says the
Nnrse, thou know not thy own Mind. Do I not, says the Child, in his Mind: I
want none of those fine things you would put me off with: I want no Lullaby, I
want Ease and Quietness: I would fast some small time from those false Delights
which was the cause of my Malady: I want Ease: O ease me of this pain, and then
I will be quiet, and not before.

Therefore hereby All know very well what it is the Soul would have, and what
it seeks after, that is, Food, Fuel, and Satisfaction for its fiery longing
Hunger: Which if it has, it will be satisfied, and not till then. The fire
longs for the Light: If it burns in secret, it is in pain and in anguish. All
things are full of Labor: Man especially cannot utter his own Labor, and
travail of his Soul: The Eye of the Mind is not satisfied with seeing Vanity:
Nor the Ear of the Spirit filled with hearing Childish Rattles: Therefore
Vanity of Vanities, (says the first and last Preacher) Vanities of Vanities,
all is Vanity, whatever it is, though seemingly pleasant, which refreshes not
the Spirit of the Soul.

. 5. It is no Whimsey.
AGain, The Soul is like the Horse-Leech: It has two Daughters, crying, Give,
Give: There are three things that are never satisfied, yea Four, that never
say, It is enough: The Grave of Devouring Hell, in which every Soul that
enters is Eternally Lost, and then gapeth for more Souls: And the barren
unsatisfied Womb of a false Virgin, which receives without Conception: And the
Fire of false Lust, which never says, No more, it is enough: And lastly, The
Soul which is not filled with Vanity. But O Man, if thou find in thy self
that thou longest for nothing, that thou have all things according to thy wish,
as thou would have it to be; and that thou art fortunate in every accident
that happens to thee, and that nothing crosses thy Mind; that thou art content
in whatsoever state thou art; that thou never vexest nor tormentest thy self in
Prosperity or Adversity; and that thy Soul takes all Accidents for Good, having
framed it self to receive all things in good part, then it has attained its
desire, and the Longing cease.

Thou will say, My Soul is not in that Frame: My Soul within me is always
wanting and craving, and very hard to please: It knows not what it would have:
It wills, and it wills not. Am I so humoursome? says the Soul: Well might I
deserve the blame, if I were like one mad or frantic, (as if one longed for
the Kings Crown, to which one can claim no Title, seeming to be possessed with
a strange fury) or if I were like a Childing Woman, longing for things
unprocurable for money: Even as a whorish Deceiver, being pregnant of a false
Essence, longs for strange Properties, which endangers the Soul: But I desire
that which desires me, and cries, O my dear Companion, come and receive me: for
I stand here very lonesome in a solitary condition, except some Soul pity me,
and entertain me: If I longed for far-fetched Treasures, and dear-bought bought
Sawces and Jewels procured by the Blood of others, which all hazard the Eternal
Life, there would be some color for blaming me: But that which I long for, is
easily procured, and (if not too much slighted and neglected at first) obtained
without wracking Labor and Care.

Now perhaps you will mock me, and impute this my Longing to a foolish Fancy;
and say to me in scorn: Ah ha! But I defy your Reproaches: Give me my Desire,
or I will vex and worry you for evermore: Now I am come as a Sojurner to view
this outward World: But I will not partake of your false Joys, and count them a
satisfaction of my mind: For all is a Vexation of my Spirit. If you will not
give me Food for my Hunger, (mark well) I will be glutted like an Horse-Leech
with the Blood of humane Souls, to Eternity; and then I will vomit up all
again, as previous to a fresh thirst after Blood.

I was born crying when I came first into this World, and that makes it
manifest that I longed to go back again to lean upon my Virgin-Mothers sweet
Breasts: I cried, Give, give; O give me some of my Virgin-Milk.

Here may seem an Objection to lie in the wny: Whimsie of Whimsies, (says the
vain Atheist) Vanity of Vanities, All is a Whim, whatever checketh the Soul,
and is a Vexation to his lustful Spirit. What is the Voice in the Conscience
which opposes the Hamane Lust, but a Vain Whimsie, which the Beasts are not
sensible of? Therefore Man by his Sensibility, and being immoderately affected
with a vain Fancy, degradeth himself below a Beast, and sensual Animal: And see
now what his witty and wise conceit bath has brought him to: So that he cannot
enjoy all sorts of pleasure at his Liberty, without being controuled by a
Consciential Whimsey: Let him thank himself for his Folly.

. 6. Atheists Objections Answered.
NOw, Who is the Wise Man? And who knows the Interpretation of the Souls
Enigmatical Mystery? And who can search out that which is far off, and
exceeding deep? Who can discover the Devices and Intrigues of the Harlot, the
Souls Enemy?

Wisdom makes the Face to shine. And the boldness of the Countenance shall be
changed, by which means the Divine Virgin, the Souls Friend, will be enamoured
with him, and invited to love him: But he that is wilfully blind in a foolish
Passion of false Love, hates the Light of the blessed Sun, in the Virgins
Beautiful Face: And why does Darkness hate the Light? Why cannot Obscurity
endure the splendid Rays of Beauty? Perhaps it fears, lest the Light should
inspire it, and so it should become Fantastical, or posfessed with an
Enthusiastic Fury.

Object. Here the Atheist encounters with me, saying, What is this whole World
but a Stage? The Actors are Mankind: When the Play's ended, the Stage down they
fling,
And then there is no difference in this thing,
Between a Beggar and a King.
(As says the Poet)


Answ. Then if it be a Stage, it represents some Actions that are really done,
or that were and will be acted in a real Substance, in one of the two Eternal
Worlds.

But still he will object, saying, Death is Nothing, and after Death there will
be Nothing: And who but a Fool, will be asraid of Nothing? What is Heaven but a
sublime Fancy? What is Hell but a Child-frighting Bugbear? A Whim- Chimera,
built by the Fantasy in the Air of Darkness, and hudled up in the Chaos or
Hoil of Nihility. Ye that believe Immortality, rid away the Hag of your Fancy,
which Night-Mareth your Souls: Send her packing to the Hell of Silence, and the
Grave of Nonentity.

Answ. There was a Man asked what Life was? The other returned an Answer
Answerless; for prefently he turned his back and went away: As much as if he
had said, If thou know not experimentally thy own Death and Life, it is not
a matter of Discourse; therefore he by his removing from his place, did
actually define what Life was: The Fool says in his heart, and wishes, There
were no God: But he believes not so in his Heart: For though he tells you so in
the day time, yet by night he doubts.

7. By Humane Laws.
But the Atheist affirms, Cum prorepserunt primis Animalia terris, etc. There
was a time when Humane Animals, as a mute and filthy Cattle, crept upon the
Earth, and wandered like Beasts, the stronger driving the weaker out of his
Cave: Fighting with their Claws and Fists, until afterward Use and Art
invented the framing of Weapons.

After wandering they came into Society: And then invented Articulate Sounds, to
discover the meaning of their Minds to one another; and so Reason taught them
to abstain from sighting about their Food, and from snatching, as Bulls or
Dogs, an uncertain Concubine one from the other.

Then they invented the Marking out their Minds by Images upon Tables, and made
Law to distinguish every Man's Propriety from another. But those Laws being not
able to Bridle them, they at last invented, there was a Just Eye in secret that
observed every Unjust Action: That so they might be afraid to steal, or commit
Fornication.

Answ. That God made Man upright. and that Man found out many Inventions; part
of which was the Languages now extant we acknowledge: But withal we affirm,
That the first Language was a Natural Mental Speech. Let such an Atheist read
History: For he shall find there is no History that shows the Manners of any
People, but it shows also, or gives a hint of their Religion. The Voice of
every Animal likewise, calling to the Lord of Nature, when any sudden fear
seizes upon them, proves a Superior Power.

There was one told his Friend, That when he was young he thought there was no
Hell in the Conscience; but now being old, he began to doubt, what if there be
one?

Now seeing the Atheist pleads, That as the Flame of an Extinguished Candle
dissolves and loses it self in the Circumambient Air, even so the Taper of
Life vanishes into pure Ether, and is no more, when the Law of Union of Body
and Soul is violated and broken. Second Spira.

Answ. Here some Atheist may perhaps acknowledge (as Reason will force any one
that has common Sense) that there is a First Mover: Which is demonstrated in
all things: So many Fountains from one Trunk or Bole, which is the Ocean: So
many Branches from one Root: So many Members receiving a Radical Life from one
Heart; so many Stars receiving Light from one Fountain of Light, the Sun.

But seeing he will not acknowledge that God will be so cruel to be the Cause
of an Everlasting Hell to the Soul of Man, I acknowledge the same thing: Yet
there is a Hell, and that Eternally. For if it were not so, Man would have
destroyed the whole Creation ere this time, (in which there is such an an
excellent Order, and sympathetical Harmony between Superiors and Inferiors,
between Bodies and their Spirits) and rifled the Closet of him that sits
Eternally upon the Fire, the Root of every Being. As God made all Visibies of
Nothing, or rather out of his own invisible Essence: So thou, O Chemical
Atheist, make of the whole nothing.

8. By Religion and Dreams.
AGain, The Atheist asserteth, That Pride and Humility are but one thing, only
they differ a little in Circumstances: For Pride looks upon all its desired
Accomplishments to be behind i^: Humility expects its Perfections as being
before it, not yet attained: And so Humility is a kind of Pride; saying to it
self, Thou shall be advanced to Honor some time or other.

Answ. But let him know that right Honor is an Advancement of Love: For in
Heaven there is not the least defire of Revenge: As may be seen in the Son of
God himself, than whom none is more Honorable, yet He is that which helps
and saves Nature, which is gone out of its Order, and becomes a Servant of
Servants, stooping to Death for the sake of Mankind. The Babe is greatest in
Heaven.

But Honor that rigorously rules by Force is no Honor: He is not long
feared, that is not always loved. It is true, God alone by his Power must keep
up the Wall and Fence of the Gulf between the two Natures, to keep them in
Harmony, which Harmony he himself is in the Abstract: Or else the Fire of Hell
would break in, and destroy the being of the first Essence in the Love-World,
which was without beginning.

But the Atheist yet imagines that because he dreams of frightful things, and
the Idea's that he has of them impress afflicting Resentments upon his
Spirits, as if they were real; but when he awakes he says all vanishes. Second
Spira.

Answ. We will suppose a Man in a terrible Melancholic Dream, and that the
said man should Eternally remain in that Condition, wherein the Soul is as
really disturbed, frighted, and put out of Harmony, as if he had been awake.

That is, The Fright that he is assaulted with, is real to the Imagination of
the Soul, as may be perceived that it many times trembles, and continues in a
trembling posture after waking a long time. Now you will say all vanishes, and
passes into Silence, when the Soul recovers it self by the outward Senses.

Answ. But suppose it had no such recourse, as to seiz upon the Body and wake
it when it is so exceedingly affrighted, to rid it self out of the supposed
imminent Danger.

Suppose it were then in the Sleep of Death, and the Body will not be waked;
where shall the Body seek shelter then? The temporal Sleep being a true figure
of Death, even the first Death, or sleep of the Body in the Grave.

And as the Soul is sensible of a real Joy or Sorrow in Dreams and Visions: So
also in Death why may not it feel the same? Seeing the Soul by its creative
Imagination frames either an Heaven or Hell to it self, and is really sensible
thereof, without the use of the material Organs, while the Body is incapable of
Sense in sleep; or, which is all one, dead to the Natural Functions of the
External Sensoriums.

So that it is very clear and plain against all Atheistical Deniers of the
Souls Immortality, even an Eternal Testimony for Gods being, and the Souls
everlasting abode either in Life, or in feeling Deaths Property, called Pain or
Hell; that there is no material thing that can hurt or afflict the Soul, either
in Sleep or Death, but only its own Imagination or Turba, which the Worm of the
Soul causes.

Thus in Dreams, the Passion wherewith the Soul is affected, seems a Shadow of
a Fancy after waking: So the matter of this outward World seems (and is indeed
nothing more than) a Shadow, in respect of the two Real, Substantial, Eternal
Worlds. For when this World was made, or rather Newmodelled or formed, yet
there was no new matter under the Eternal Sun.

. 9. By Love's Passion.
AGain, The Atheist objecteth, The Irrational Animals dream as well as Man: And
therefore the Phantacy that fancieth Images in sleep, is Temporary.

Answ. In the Creation of the World, there was no new thing done, but what was
done in the Eternal Mystery before, in the Nonage of Time: And all Created
Beings will eternally abide in the Figure and Shadow: Yet in the Stilness: For
when we say Beasts have no immortal Souls, it must be meant they enter back
again, or downwards, into the Root of their First Constitution.

That is, Though they are now out of their first Order, yet the Breach thereof
shall not be imputed to them, because it was not their Fault but Man's, and they
sprung forth each according to his kind, or Eternal Property in the Seed of
their Souls of Life, so they shall be manifest Eternally in the same.

But the Atheist objecteth still, That the Conceit of the Soul is very
deceitful, and as unconstant as Proteus. For if the Mind strongly conceits a
Heaven to it self, the Mystery of the same conceit unknown, makes an intension
of its Heaven: We often see that Love after Marriage grows Languid: Whereas the
same Love before the Enjoyment of its wished Object, was so elevated and wrapped
up in the said Object, that it counted the same a seeming Heaven. But many
times two Lovers (who have attained to the Blossom of the Tincture of Venus.)
insect one another by their burning Lust, so that they become Deadly Enemies,
even these very same Persons, who were ready to impart the Heart within them
one to the other, if it could be done without Death.

And though sometimes the Complexion of others are more Noble, and still some
Love remains, yet it is not always so pure and faithful as the first. As may be
seen by Experience, that many in Wedlock hunt after Whoredom and wandering Beds,
more than they did when in a single state.

Answ. The Original of Love and Propagation proceeds from the hiddennefs of
the Virgin: All things grasp after the Virgin; and that made the Spirit of this
World grasp and reach after Man, because he found the Virgin in Man before the
Fall. And when a young Man loves a Maid, he thinks to find the Virgin in the
said Maid; but when he Unites with her, and touches the Tincture of Venus, but
cannot get the Virgin in his Possession, then follows a less Esteem of the
Felicity which he thought to find in her.

. 10. By the Seven Properties.
SAy what you will (says the Atheist) He that has Skill to rule his own
Spirit, may draw his Affections and Fancy to what Object he pleases.

Answ. Ask thy own Mind, why will not it give over Imagination, and lie in
Silence? Ask a Madman why he will not stop the Wheel of his Mind, that rolleth
about too violently? Ask a Man why he will not in sleep dream of Comedies? And
enquire whether any of these have power over this Spirit of Phantacy, to retain
the Spirit by his own Power.

It is true both in the Light and in the Wrath-World, which soever of the Seven
Properties are predominant in the seven fold Wheel of the Eternal Mind, that
will by and by be lowermost: But in the Love Kingdom one Property desires not
to expel the rest out of the Harmony, or to move and turn the Wheels backward.

This is demonstrated in all things, especially in Music: For though there be
insinite Varieties of Notes and Tunes, according to the Altering and
Transposings of the seven Sounds, yet (though the Saturnine or Martial String may
be predominant) while an Instrument is dexterously handled, the rest by a
secret sympathy will bind them in a Melodious Harmony.

And this is also observable, That the end of a Tune has some Resemblance to
the beginning therethereof; to show that when the Harmony of the Spears or
Stars of Time shall find its beginning again, then will it be swallowed up in
an Eternal Consort of the Properties: Excepting those Essences who have spoiled
their Materials, or rather changed the form of their Breasts, according to the
Pattern of which the Instrument is to be tuned.

It may also be seen in the Variety of other Sensibles: For in taste there are
many thousand Varieties, yet if the seven Properties be rightly and
artificially mixed, though the Saturnine property be predominant, yet the other
Properties will bind it in an equal Accord: The like is understood of other
qualities, too tedions to enumerate.

Thus by what has been said, it is clear that a terrible Dream comes from the
multitude of vain Business; and a Fool in his Eternal Melancholy Fit of
Angnith, snores in a deep sleep of Despair, and sees horrid Spectiums that
imposes real Punishment upon his Soul, according to his Lot and Degree.

And to answer the aforesaid Objection, it is consest that when a Man is in
love with a Maid: (the Object engaged to his Noblest Passion, her Idea being as
it were stamped upon his Spirit with the Character of Sympathy) Though you proser
him another Maid far more worthy in Beauty and Nobility than the former, yet
none will content his Fancy, or stop the current of his Passion, but the
Enjoyment of her, (to whose Service he was made Votary before) or Death.

Even so the Soul being in love, and enamoured with his fair Virgin, though you
proffer him all the External Joys and Pleasures that the World can afford, yet
the Soul does slight all, and contemn them in comparison of the Virgins Love.

Answ. Though this External Love has some Analogy (if it be pure and Faithful)
to the love between the Soul and Gods pure Virgin; yet there is a difference
between the Phantacy and Imagination, in its pursuit after diverse Objects: The
Object makes the Difference: For if the Soul takes a Shadow for a Substance,
there is the Deceit, and the great Error. And so as one said, (Ow. Epigr.) If
chaste true Love be accounted the greatest Terrestrial Happiness, what may we
suppose Calestial Love to be!

CHAP. III. The Souls Allegiance.
. 1. There is a Divine Law.
NOw the Question is, Whether the Soul be left loose or dissolute, to do that
which is right in the sight of his own Eyes, not subject to a Law, not enjoined
to obey his King by an Oath of Allegiance, and so left open to hostile Powers,
who may allure him and draw him to the Traps of headlong Ruin and Destruction:
And by this means Religion may degenerate into Sceptism.

Answ. It must be confessed, There is a Perfect Law of Liberty; but it is in
subjection to Gods Spirit in Love, not by a slavish Fear. For instance, A
little Child before he can go, must be under Guardians, and not permitted to
creep where he will: But when he is so educated that he knows how to comply to
the beck of his Guardian or Tutor, he is let loose to go where he will; and yet
he will not do what his Tuto^ has forbidden him, if he be of a pliable
Disposition; efpecially having had experience of the Crosness of another Tutor
or Master: Though our Ancestor went beyond his Bounds in a like Case.

Again, Here arises agreat Question, Where lies the great Mistake, that many
a Soul must wander at a Fugitive, and never find a Lodge of quiet Repose? Is
there a Counter-Law in Eternity, that forbids him to find Ease?

O no: The Ancient Law of Eternity does strictly command the Soul to give the
Souls Spirit the thing that he longs after; the Object that he earnestly
desires.

There never was any other Law in Eternity, nor ever will any be repugnant to
this: Feed on the Tree of Eternal Joy, and pure pleasant Life: Thou may eat
of all the fair and pleasant Trees in the Garden of Eternal Delight: Yea, thou
must eat of them: But touch not the Tree of Pain, opposed to Pleasure, upon
penalty of feeling Pain without end, or of entering into the Property of Death;
that is, Thou shall not have thy Liberty to choose an altering of that painful
property by reason of thy own false Tincture, which had tinctured the Souls
Spirit, and fermented it by a false Leaven, into that Nature which is contrary
to its first Creation.

. 2. It alters not.
Observe therefore, O Man, what I say: I the Truth, the Eternal Preacher, By
searching have found out and know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for
ever: The same Commandment still remains unalterable: Nothing can be put to it,
nor any thing taken from it: And God does it, that Men, his Offspring, should
fear before him, and love him. That Law which has been in the Angelical
Republic, is now in the ^^umane Commonwealth: And that which is to be after
the End of the humane Judgment, has already been, before Man's Creation: And
God requires, and wi^^ at the great Assizes require an account of that which
is past, if done contrary to the old Law, for he requires that it for ever
continue the same.

And God death this, that all his Generation, Angels and Men may by an awful
Obedience take an Eternal Oath of Allegiance and Submission to his Law, that
alters not, and make an Everlasting Covenant with him, and love him.

Therefore I counsel thee, O Man, my Brother, to keep the King's Commandment,
even my Law, and that in regard of the Eternal Oath of God: Be not hasty to fly
away. and sneak as a Fugitive out of my sight; and stand not in an evil thing.
For a King does whatsoever pleases him: Therefore bring thy Deeds to the
Light, that they may be discerned: Where the Word and Law of a Lawfully
succeeding King is, there is Power: And who may say unto him, What do thou?
Or why have thou appointed me to be a Vessel of Wrath? Nay, None has power to
call him to question, tho he has been the occasion of his Subjects Rebellion,
and then torment them for R^b^lling: Which is an unjust thing: Yet it is not to
be supposed that the right King of Kings, (who is Justice it self) can or will
do such injustice: Whosoever keeps the Kings Commandment shall fee^ no evil
thing. And a wise Man's Heart by Wisdom and Divine Skill, discerns both Time
and Judgment: Both when and how he must act, according to the Unalterable Law.

And because to every purpose there is Time and Judgment, therefore the misery
of many a Man is great upon him; for he knows not that which shall be; and
who can tell him when it shall be, if he himself has not Skill?

3. Yet it is inverted by Man.
MOreover, I saw under the Sun of Time and Vanity, the Place of Judgment, that
Wickedness was there: That there is a time wherein one rules over another,
even his lawful King, to his own hurt: I saw also the place of Righteousness,
which ought to be Righteous, that Iniquity was there; that Servants were put
upon Horses, and Princes of the Noble Royal Blood, even of the pure Seed in the
Conscience, walking in the form of Servan's upon the humane Earth: And so Folly
(I have seen) was set in great dignity, and the Rich, Free, and Right
Honorable, sit waiting upon them in a low place, as a Gleaner or Beggar: Which
is an evil that I have seen, as an Error that proceeds from the Ruler of an
humane City, who succeeded not as a lawful Heir to the Kingdom.

O my Soul, come not thou into the secret Plots of such as these; unto their
Assembly and Cabal, O mine Honor, be not thou united: Neither do thou, O Noble
Soul of Man, be privy to their Treachery and Treason. For in their anger they
slew the right Seed, and Gods Image, and in their self-will, like Lucifer, they
would dig down the Wall of Heaven: Cursed be their Anger, for it is su^ce, and
unfit for the Holy Heaven; and their Wrath, let it be for ever separated from
the Divine Order and Harmony, for it is Cruel and wild: I will divide them in
Eden, and scatter them in Paradise.

4. But it must be Observed.
I Said in my heart (when I saw this breaking of the Ancient Law in the place
of Judgment) God by Christ shall judge the Righteous and the Wicked, and put
each one in their due place and station: For there is allowed a time for every
purpose, and for every work, to prevent the Sentence of Condemnation.
Therefore, O Man, keep thy foot (When thou go to the Temple of God) from
stumbling: And be more ready to hear his Law from the Mouth of his Messenger,
than to give the sacrifice of fools, who sacrifice the Lord of Glory the Holy
seed to their false Lusts: For they consider not that they do evil. Be not rash
with they mouth to add any thing; and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any
new Commentary upon the Ancient Law of God: For God is still the same in the
unchangeable Heaven, and thou upon the corrupted Earth; therefore let thy
Commentaries and words be few.

For a Dream comes through the multitude of Business in Vanity: And a fools
Voice is known by multitude of words: When thou vowest a Vow to God defer not
to pay that which thou have vowed: Better it is that thou had never been born
an humane Being, to vow the Vow of necessary Obedience to God, than that thou
should become such an Essence, and not pay thy Vow. Suffer not thy mouth to
cause thy flesh to sin, not performing the Oath of thy Covenant: Neither say
thou before thy Angel. Guardian, the Witness of all that thou do, that it
was a foolish Error, and I am sorry that ever I was born, to make a Vow to be
broken by deliberation.

Wherefore should God be angry at thy Voice, and destroy. the Work of thy
plotting Hands? For in the multitude of Whimsies, Images of Fancies, and many
Vain Words, there are also diverse Vanities: But be thou wise and fear God.

. 5. To indulge the Good Genius: The Injunction.
MOreover, O Man, consider by all this, that there is a strict Obligation laid
upon thee (if thou be'st born a Man, the Son of God's Loins) and a mere
Necessity put upon the Soul, that he must do what in him lies, to promote the
Joy and Pleasure of his Mind: For an Heavenly Feast is purposely made for his
Eternal Solace; Celestial Nectar and Fruit of the pure Vine is appointed to
make thy heart everlastingly merry.

Gods Virgin has told thee so in the Prophecy which she taught thee, as soon
as thou wast born, saying, What my Son? And what the Son of my Womb? And what
the Son of my Vows? Give not thy Strength and Purity to Whorish Women: Nor thy
Ways to that which destroys the Royal Off spring: It is not for Kings, O
Man-King, it is not for Kings to drink the Gall and Poison of Wine, which
intoxicates the Senses: Nor for Princes of the Divine Monarchy to drink that
which inebriates the Brain, and causes Pain in the Bowels: Lest they drink and
forget the Ancient Unalterable Law, and pervert the Judgment of the Afflicted,
who bears the Form of a Servant in the humane Gate.

Give this intoxicating Drink to him that is ready to perish in Eternal Misery:
And the Wine of Spewing and Ebriety to them that have heavy Hearts in the
hellish Chambers: Let them drink and forget their Poverty, and want of the
means of Refreshment, and let them try whether by Guzling and Tippling they may
remember their Misery no more.

But swim thou, O Man, (this is the Injunction) in Rivers of Pleasures, and
Christaline streams of Nectar: Yet thou art forbidden upon pain of Eternal
Death, (or an Imprisonment in Deaths Bonds during the Life of thy Eternity) to
drink of the sour harsh property of Pain opposed to Pleasure, or of the Poison
of the Creation, which will cause a Commotion in thy griping Bowels, and a
Rebellion of one Property against another in thy disturbed Conscience, that
thou shall never feel Ease and Refreshment.

Rejoice, O Man, therefore, and continue young Eternally: And let thy Heart
cheer thee in the Endless days of thy renovated Youth, and walk in the ways of
thy heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes, affording to thy Soul his Will and
Desire, all that which he longs after: But know thou that for all these things
God will bring thee to Judgment, to clear or condemn thee; yea, and if thou
neglectest this, to banish thee for ever to thy own desired Country, where Pain
is known.

6. It is no indifferent thing.
THerefore remove sorrow from thy Heart, and put away evil and pain from thy
flesh: for the Childhood of Folly and fading Youth are Vanity, and the source
of Death.

Be not Righteous overmuch, and wise in thy own Conceit, thinking thou can
find a place of Superity above this Heavenly Joy: Why should thou destroy and
cast thy self into an Abyss of never attaining thy aim? Be rot overmuch
wicked, having treacherous thoughts in thee that thou may Dethrone God:
Neither be t cu foo ish, in not apprehending the way and means of satisfying
the Soul: Why should thou dye before the appointed time? For thou wast never
appointed to die, except thou drawest Death upon thee, and swallow up thy self
by thy babbling, and foolish self-accusation in thy accusing Conscience.

It is good thou should take hold of this Counsel: Yea, also from this
Obedience withdraw not thy Hand: For he that fears and loves God's Law,
shall come forth out of all the foresaid dangers.

Now observe, It is no indifferent thing, this Law must be fully obeyed, that
is, thou must afford all the delight and Pleasure to thy Soul, that he is
capable of.

There is nothing better for thee, than that thou should eat of the Tree of
Life, and drink the Wine of Pleasure, and play in the Celestial Dance, and
fill thy Soul, and make him enjoy good in thy Labor: This is the Ancient
Unalterable Law, which will continue to all Eternity: This also I saw, that it
was from the Hand of God to do thus: For who can eat and drink, and sport in
this Angelical Scene, And who else can hasten hereunto more than I, who am
nearest to God? For God gives a Man that is good in his sight, Wisdom and
Knowledge, and Joy: But to the Sinner against this old Law, he gives Travel,
to gather, and heap up, that he may provide for, and give to him that is good
before God; but he shall never reap the Fruit of his Labor, because he had not
the Fear of God before his Eyes, when he plotted to undermine him.

7. Man's Portion from God.
BElieve it, O Man, I know there is no good in all thy Labor, except thou
do rejoice, and do good in thy Life, and enjoy the Fruits of thy Travail:
This is the Gift of God: And this is thy Portion which God has appointed thee,
and every man: If thou do not so, who will deliver thee out of the Jaws of
Death to see what Pleasures shall be after thee in the next World?

This is a sore Evil which I have seen under the Sun of Time and Vanity, namely
Treasures and Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt: But those
Riches perish by evil Travel: And he begets a Son or Fool like himself (in
his own Metamorphosed Form, whereinto his Soul by Transmigration does enter:)
And he carries nothing in his Hand to the Infernal Shades: As he came forth
out of his Infernal Mothers Womb, or the Original Matrix and cause of every
Property, Naked shall he return or go as he came, and shall take nothing of his
foolish Labor, and hunting after Vanity, which he may carry away in his Hand:
And this also is a sore Evil that it must be thus: God cannot be blamed: That
in all Points as he came, having nothing of his own but what God gave him, so
shall he go again with his empty Vessel: And what Profit has he that has
labored for the Wind? And will Eternally Labor, and yet find naught but a
Shadow of Vanity.

All his Days also be eats in Darkness, and he shall have much Sorrow, and
Wrath, with never-ceasing Pain and Sickness.

Behold that which I have seen: It is good and comely for one to Eat and Drink
in true Pleasure, and to enjoy the Delights of Humane Life, and the good of his
Labor that he takes under the Sun of his Lot, all the days of his Eternity
which God gives him for his Right and Propriety: For it is his Portion: For he
shall not lay to Heart the Days of his Affliction: Because God answers him in
the Joy of his Heart.

There is an Evil which I have seen below the Sun of Purity, and is common
among Men: A Man to whom God has given Riches and Honor, so that he wants
nothing for his Soul of all that he desires, Yet (because of his evil Mind)
God gives him not Power to eat thereof, and enjoy the Fruit of his Labor, but
a Stranger eats of it: This is a sore Vanity and an evil Disease.

8. The Fool neglects.
IF a Man beget an hundred Images of his evil Mind, and live many Years, so
that the days of his Years be many, and yet his Soul be not filled with good,
and also that he have no Burial, but that he be left as a Carcass for the
Demons of the Power of the Air, I say that an untimely Birth is better than
he, as being cut off in the Bud.

For this Embryo comes in with Vanity, and departs in Darkness, and his Name
shall be covered with Darkness, and never known in the light of Life: Moreover
He has not seen the Sun of Vanity, nor known any Opposition of the Properties:
This has more rest than the other. Yea though this other live a thousand Years
twice told: Yet has he seen no Good: So as to find Satisfaction: Do not all
such as these go to the same Place at last? All the Labor of Man as for his
Mouth, for the Preservation of the Individuum, and the Propagation of the
Species, and yet the Appetite of the Fool is never filled.

For what has the Wise Conceited more than the Fool? What has the Poor and
Vagabond Beggar, that faith, he knows how to walk before the Living? B^tter
is the sight of the Eyes, and real Enjoyment of the thing longed for, then the
Vagabond- wandering of the Desire: This is Vanity and a grievous Vexation of the
Spirit of the Soul. That which has been, is named already: And it is known,
that it is Man, who is the second Angel: Neither may be contend, as Lucifer
did, with the Deity who is mightier than he, and Cross the natural Inclination
of his Soul, by forcing it to change it into the contrary Property, and so to
desire on Opposition of both. Seeing that there be many things that increase
Vanity, which is no real Felicity to the Soul, what is Man the better, if he
try the false Tree and Poison himself as Lucifer?

For what Fool knows what is good for Man's Perfection in this Life, all the
Day of his vain Life, which he spends as a Shadow or a Fancy? For who shall
tell him what shall be after him under the Sun of Vanity? Nay, though he should
know that out of his Ashes should arise a virtuous holy Property, yet that will
not bring him back to the Living, and immortal Nature.

. 9. And hates his own Flesh.
AGain, I considered all Travel, and every right Work, that for this, a Man is
envied of his Neighbor Lucifer: This Envy is also Vanity, for it will not
prosper: And it increases the Vexation of his proud Spirit.

The Fool foldeth his Hands together, and rather then stir to find that which
his Soul desires, he Eats his own Flesh: There is one alone, and there is not
a second: Yea he has neither Successor nor Companion: Yet there is no End of
all his Labor after something that the Soul wants not: Neither is the Eye of
his Mind satisfied (no more then the Grave or Horse-Le^ch) with vain Riches:
Neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my Soul of that which it
longs after? This is a great Vanity, and a sore fruitless Labor.

Then after all, I commended Mirth, and true Pleasure, because a Man has no
better thing under the Temporal or Eternal Sun, then to Eat the pure Manna, and
Drink the Nectar that God has appointed him and cheer up his Heart, and be
Merry for that shall abide with him of his Labor, all the days of his Eternal
Life, which God has appointed and given him under the Sun of Immortality.

Though I said before that there was an unalterable Law, or Rule of Eternity,
by which all Eternal Creatures, Angels and Men must be governed, yet it is not
meant, that this Law was any other than a Law of natural Love: It was no
Imposition contrary to the Inclination of the said Eternal Essences: (For to
speak properly, a Law is given to show Transgression:) But it was a Law of Love
and Sympathy, which they by natural Instinct observed, as naturally as every
Creature loves Life and shuns Death: It was the straight Rule of Eternal Life
and Joy. From which if any Eternal Essence swerve and change his Form and
become Crooked, it cannot be ever made straight again: And that which is
wanting to the composing of an Harmony cannot be numbered in the Election of
God: It was the Law of pure Philautia: Love thy self and God: whose Image thou
thy self art: Indulge thy Fortunate Genius, defraud him not: This Law was not
indifferent but necessary, and therefore may well be termed an Eternal Law.

. 10. No Middle State.
BUt perhaps some may say, I desire no such sensibility or Knowledge of
extraordinary Joy and Pleasure, in the enjoyment of my Life: If I could but
avoid Pain and Death, I desire no more: Or if I could be annihillated again, I
would be content: I labor not after the Promotion of Pleasure in the highest
intenseness, or degree, that my Soul is capable to partake of, which this Law
enjoins me to: I desire but a little Corporal Pleasure, and that but for a time
in this Life.

I Answer, thou shall not be left to thy Choice herein: For thou art strictly
bound to avoid Death and love thy Life, Aut Coesar aut nullus: Either give me
my Desire or nothing: Says the Soul, and for this end thou wast Created and
Begotten, to increase the Joy of thy Mind to its highest Pitch, as a
Play-fellow in the Scene of Heaven: And yet not so much for the sake of others
(as if the Divine Joy were not perfect without Thee) but chiefly for thy own
sake, and for the sake of the Divine Prisoner within Thee, who longs to be
released out of Captivity: For it is but just and fit, that if any will not
Dance with the Celestial Incolist's in the Divine Sport of Love (but murmureth
and is discontented) He shall be excommunicated and turned out of the Society,
as a Disturber of the harmless Peace and Love-sport.

CHAP. IV. The Souls Rebellion.
. 1. The Fools Appetite.
NOW then, O Man, I will ask Thee a Question: Do thou think thou came to be
a Creature into the World, purposely to Eat and Drink and to take thy Pleasure?
Thou will say, No, perhaps: But I say Yes: That was the Cause thou came into
this World, and only so thou glorisiest thy Creator, who sent for Thee out of
the Abyss and Womb of Eternity: This was his beginningless Law to Angels and
Manpreceding Essences, and this same Law will stand for Man-succeeding
Creatures in the endless Eternity, if any shall ever be Created by the Creator
hereafter, when the Humane World shall be consummated: For (as we said before)
All the Labor of Man is for his Mouth, and his holy digesting Throat, if he
knows how to feed on the Tree of Eternal Life and Pleasure in eating and
drinking and sporting in the Angelical Pastime, and gathering of Flowers in
Paradise: And yet the Appetite of the Fool who misused this Pleasure, and
contracted upon himself the Disease of the Greedies is not filled: His Canine
Appetite or Orexis is never satisfied.

Again, another Fool longs after strange Heterogeneous Objects, which tend not
to the satisfaction of the Appetite, and are not proper Food for him: And gives
his Money for that which is not Bread, and his Labor for that which profits
not his Soul, and the well-being of himself, What is Man the better for them?
What would this Fool have? He knows not himself: He wills this: He refuses
that: He wracks himself and his own Spirit: And what is this but much Pains to
little purpose? And though it be true, that it is a piece of Wisdom to reserve
the best till last, And he is not wise that suffers himself to be condemned by
the poor silly Ant, who knows (by an instinct of Nature or Law of Creation) his
time, and lays up or provides in the Summer against Winter: And he is a Fool
that will fare above his Purse to day and want to morrow, and eats and drinks
beyond the Power of Nature, and thereby gets a Surfeit or Disease; yet there is
no need for Man to gather up more then needs, seeing there be many things that
increase Vanity and Emptiness, and mere husks not proper Food for the Soul.

. 2. Trust not in Uncertainties.
SOme may say: Wisdom is good with an Inheritance, and by it there is profit to
them that shall see the Sun after him, his Successors: For Wisdom is a Desence:
And Money or Treasures (being Price of necessary things) is a defense against
the Winter, and Forreign-Invaders from Lucifers Dominion.

Answer, The Covetous Man nourishes an old grudge against God belike: For he
cannot trust God for Maintenance: Though the right Frugal Man be a wise Man,
yet it is a folly for such a Man (when he has gathered sufficiency for
himself, to live in the right and natural order of Health and true Pleasure) to
torment himself too much in heaping up, and gathering into a Bag with Holes for
his supposed Successors: Except he knew that his Successor, who should enjoy
the Fruit of his Labor, would be a Wise Man: That is, One that will know how
to manage those Treasures that are provided for him, and fulfill the Proverb,
One Sows and another Reapeth; that both he that Sows and he that Reapeth
may rejoice together in an holy Sport of Eternal Love, in the Lord.

But how can he tell that, whether his Successor be a Wise Man or a Fool, to
whom he shall leave all his Labor? What though Money or Treasures be a Defense,
yet the Excellency of Knowledge is, that true Wisdom, which knows how to use
them, gives Eternal Life to them that have it, that they may Eternally enjoy
the Fruit of their Labor.

. 3. The Lawgivers Example.
I Was in Paradise chief Regent over the Essences and Animals in Eden, when I
dressed the fair Flower-producing Garden, in the pure springing Odours and
delightfulness of the Spiritual Senses: When I made me pleasant Gardens, I said
in my heart, Come on, I Will prove thee with Mirth: Therefore enjoy Pleasure: And
behold, if not managed with true Wisdom, it is also Vanity. I said of temporary
laughter, It is mad: And of mutable mirth, What does it but presage a following
fit of Sorrow?

I sought in mine heart to give my self unto the mirth of Celestial Wine, yet
acquainting mine Heart with Wisdom; and to lay hold on Folly, if Folly were
therein, that I might see what was that Good, for the Sons of Men, my Brethren,
which they should do under their own Heaven, all the Days of their Immortal
Life: I made me great Works in Eden: I builded me Houses, and many pleasant
Ma^sions in the Forest of Paradise: I erected fair Bowers, and recreative Walks
and Galleries: I planted me Vineyards, where pure Grapes might be produced: I
made me fair Gardens and Orchards, and I planted Trees in them of all kinds of
Fruit, pleasant to behold, and good for the Everlasting Food of Man.

I made me Pools of Water, to water therewith, as with Celestial Dew, the Wood
that brings forth Trees for my fair Building, and for Food: I gat me
Servants, Angel-Guardians, and Maiden-Virgins: And had Maidens born in my
Celestial House: Also I had great possessions of all sorts of Animals, which
were brought to me to receive their Natural Names, according to their genuine
Nature, and to be in Subjection to my Authority, above all the Monarchs, (yea
Lucifer himself,) that were in Eden before me: I gathered me also Silver and
Gold, the Celestial precious Metals, and the peculiar Treasures of Kings, and
of Angelical Provinces and Hi^rarchies: I got me Singers, Virgin-Si^gers, with
their ravishing Voices, ^he Delights of (...) S^ns of Men, as Musical
Instruments, and that of all so^t^: For the workmanship of my Tabrets, of my
Pipes, in^ H^rps and Viols, were prepared in me, in the Day that I first
appeared in Eden: All precious Stones were my Covering and Ornament wherewith I
walked up and down in Puri^y in the midst of the Siones of Fire.

. 4. His Wisdom.
I Was the Anointed Cherub, and God had set me so: And so I was great, and my
Grandeur increased more than all the Princes that were in Pardise in the Throne
of the third World before me: Also my true Wisdom remained with me: And
whatsoever my Eyes desired, I kept not from them, I with held not my Heart from
any Joy: For my Heart rejoiced in all my Labor: And this was my Portion of all
my Labor and Sport: Then I looked on all the Works that my Hands had wrought,
and on the Labor that I had labored to do: And behold all seemed Vanity and
Vexation of my Spirit, and a wracking of the Spirit of my Successor Adam: And
there was like to be no profit to him under the Sun of his Third Principle.

And so I turned my self to behold Wisdom and Madness, being a deprivation of
the Heavenly Senses, and Folly: For what can the Man do that comes after the
Royal King of Eden? Even that which has already been; That which was done by
the holy Angels, if he continue in my Wisdom.

Then I saw that Wisdom excels Folly, as much as the Light of Heaven
excels the dark and painful Fire of Hell. The Wise Man's Eyes are in his
Head, and walks by my Light, but the Fool walks in Darkness, and will not
bring his Deeds to my Light.

And yet I my self perceived also that one Event happens to them all.

. 5. Travail appointed to Man.
THen said I in my Heart, As it happens to the Fool, so it happens even to
me: Then why was I more wise? Then said I in my Heart, That this is also
Vanity: Yea, it is a miserable Lot, that both the Fool and the Wise should
become so subject to Vanity, that they must both dye the Corporal Death: And
while they groan to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, they must
either beget a Child that will (when this Corporal Death, as pangs of a
travailing Fema^e seizes upon them) either comfort them concerning their Work,
Labor and Travail, and the Toil of their Hands, which God has given to all
the Sons of Men to be exercised therewith, and concerning the Ground which the
Lord has Curs^d: Or else they will Eternally remain in this Labor and Pangs,
and dye the Eternal Death, with the imperfect Embryo in their Bellies, and
shall never be disburthened, or cast out their Sorrows.

In the External World there is no remembrance of the Wise more than the Fool
for ever: Seeing that which is now in respect, in the Days to come shall all be
forgotten in the other World: And all things are mutab^e: And how dies the
wise Man? As the Fool: Therefore I h^ted the outward Life, and the Life of the
salse Birth: Because the Work that is wrought under the Sun of Vanity is
grievous unto me: For all is Vanity and Vexation of the pure Spirit of the
Soul: Yea, I hated all my Labor, which I had taken under the Tempo^al Sun,
because I should leave it unto the External Man, who shall supply my Place in
Eden.

And who knows whether he shall be a Wise Man, or a Fool? ^^t shall he have
Rule over all my Labor wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my
self wise under both Suns: This is also the Vanity of mutable and fading things.

. 6. Christ's Sorrows.
THerefore I went about to despair of all the Labor which I took under the Sun
of Mu^ability: For there is a Divine Man whose Labor is in Wisdom, and in
Knowledge, and in Equity: Yet to an Earthly Man, that has not labored
therein, shall he leave it for his Portion: This is also Vanity, and a great
Evil: Yea, it is a great piece of Injustice and Abuse of the Kindness of the
Divine Man, who undert^ok all this Travail for the sake of the Earthly.

For what has the Divine M^n of all hit Labor, and of the Vexation of his
Hear^, wherein he has labored under the Sun? For all his Days are Sorrows,
and his Travel Grief: And he is a Man of Afflicti^ns, and acquainted with
Vexa^ions, yea his Heart takes not Rest in the Night of his Anguish, which he
feels in his continual waiting upon his Companion for his Companions sake:
And what Thanks has he? What return of an Acknowledgment of his Love has he
from many a Man, but to add Affliction to his Sorrow? This is also Vanity, or
rather a great Cruelty, which will be imputed to such ungrateful Men. The time
will come, that all the Days of their Eternity shall be Sorrow, and their
Travail endless Grief, weeping and gnashing of Teeth: Their Hearts shall never
take a sweet Repose and Rest in the Night of their Woe; because of their Worm,
which will Everlastingly gnaw them like a Fury in the Conscience.

. 7. Man's Ignorance.
NAy, Let such cruel Men use all the Skill they can in this World, yet they
shall not prosper: The Race is not to them, be they never so Swift: The Battle
is not to them, be they never so Strong: But they will be taken at last by more
subtle Powers, in an evil time, as Animals in a Snare: And so become subject
to Fate or Fortune, as passing by and slighting the good Fortune which God has
appointed for them: And Fortune being now their Goddess, Rules and Governs
them, making Sport with them, just as rude Boys make sport with any thing that
they can master, when they go about to kill it, and put it to as much pain as
they can. Thus we see a good or bad Fortune happens to all: Good Fortune is
called the Mind or Astrum of the Deity: And according as Man's Manners be here,
such a God he will have to sport with him, either in anger or in Love, in the
other World: O Man heware here.

Thus for want of Divine Skill in the super-coel^stial Astrology of discerning
the true Time and good Fortune, which God has appointed for every Man that
comes into this World, the Misery of many a Man is great upon him, and he
becomes most wretched, and cast into an Eternal Hell: Hell! What Is that? An
inward ^i^e and I orment in the Bowels, pu^^ing him to an unspeakable Pain,
because a good Fo^t^^e o^ Conci^ion of Serenity and Satisfaction once profer^d
unto Man, was neglected or slighted: F^r if the (...) Li^^t or Candle had not
come to direct them i^to the ^ay, out of Blindness and Ignorance the^e could ^e
no Hell: And if a good Fo^tune had not been appointed for every Man, there
could be no Vexation of Spirit, or Torment for the loss of that which was
impossible to be obtained: But now because his place in Heaven stands empty,
there is his Hell, and there is his Woe.

Man also by his wilful Blindness stands in his own Light, and becomes more
ignorant still, while he will not use his Wit and Skill with all his Might, to
do whatever the hand of his Power sinds to do, by Divine Assistance, and the
helping hand of God reached forth in mercy to him, in order to his future
wellbeing, and everlasting happy Estate. For also he loses his Senses and
Reason, and knows not so much as how to distinguish the true Form, of
Prop^rties, from the false, by the Skill of Divine Logic, which is infused
into every Man, if he be a Man. Nay, he knows not the FORM of his own Soul,
viz. God: He understands not what God in the Abstract is, viz The Pure Nature
shining in the Soul: But he seeks to find him in the Concrete, and cannot reach
him. As the Philosopher said, Whoever sees God, sees nothing diverse or
heterogeneous from himself.

Further, Ignorant Man knows not how to give a Species its right Genus; He
makes Fleshly Pleasure to depend on the pure Nature: And therein the grossly
Mistakes, as in many other things, too tedious here to enumerate.

. 8. And Mortali^y.
ANother Folly is to do that first, which should be done last: To do that to
Excess, which should be confined to a Mean: For in Music the Mean is the
sweetest Note. To take care for a temporal before an Eternal Inheritance is a
like folly: For Pleasure (I mean temporal Joy) is not Sin, but the manner of
using it in a wrong way and manner makes it a sin, and a breach of the Ancient
Order. Then let us not rank the Excess of Virtue in the Predicament of Vice

Thus Man, because he will not give to his Soul the thing that he craves after,
makes his Soul an Eternal Beggar or Craver, and yet shall never procure the
thing craved. Here Is the Woe: Here is the Misery: Here Is the Hell. Woe to thee, O
Humane Land, when thy King is a Beggar; and an ignorant Child: And thy Princes
eating in the Morning of their Eternity, devour all, and are in want when the
time of Hunger comes. But blessed art thou, O Microc^smical City, when thy King
is the Son of the Noble Deity, and thy Princes eat of the Tree of Life in due
Season, for their Eternal Health, and Joy of their Everlasting Lives. Blessed
art thou, O Immortal Man, that Live for ever in this pure Life: But cursed
for ever art thou, O Immortal Man, that choosest to d^e, or to be for ever
feeling Death's Property, which is Eternal Pain.

This therefore in short is the sum of this Eternal Law: Eat not of Poison,
where Two Properties strive for Mastery: Lut feed on the Tree of the Joyous
Life: O Man- King live for ever: Eat, drink, and make thy self morry in the
Divine Sport: And satisfy thy Mind (...) Eternal Delights, for there is no
Pleasure after the (...) Death, which is a Living Death, and an Eternally
Dying-Life; No Wisdom nor Skill to sind this Life, in the Crave of Anguish
whither thou go.

. 9. Fantasy inverted.
WHY, says my Objector. This is a wonderful thing: If this be the only Law and
Right of Eternity. And if God never e^acted any Counter-Law, but only as a
Penalty upon the breaking of this Law which cannot be altered? What would the
Soul have? Or what would Mortal Man have to give himself rest? For the End of
all Motion is Rest: And the End of all Travail is Refreshment, the End of
Longing is the Enjoyment of a thing Loved.

Answer, Phantafie sorceth the Soul out of its natural Posture to work against
the Hair: And as the Ancient Proverb says, Love is Blind, and that which is
deformed seems fair in the Souls Eye. And because God has forbidden the Tree
of Contrariety to be touched, therefore Man has a strong Fancy that there is
some great Mystery in it: And so like a Fool he comes to be governed by Fancy,
not considering there is no Smoke without Fire: which not prevented, his House
may be burned.

But to clear the Mystery of this Subject still plainer to the Understanding:
It is well known, where Fancy is strong, the Author chooses a Laborious Life,
while he enjoys a thing loved or fancied, and feels not the Pain: And prefers
it before a Life of Pleasure without the Society of the Object his Love: For he
cannot enjoy Pleasure in Pleasure, while the one thing fancied is withheld and
kept back from him: And the best thing being out of sight is out of Mind.

Now (says my Objector,) ^ apprehend the Matter: God who is a true Rest to the
Soul offers a bitter Cup to the Soul; saying, Drink this first, and thou shall
enjoy Eternal Pleasure.

And Lucifer presents Dishes pleasant to the Palate, though bitter to the
Belly: God says, Come to me; O all ye that labor and are heavy laden with
Vanity, and I will give you rest, for my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is Light:
But here is a Yoke of Burden of Affliction mentioned.

. 10. Soul and Body must Sympathize.
ANswer, I deny the Objection: God commands the Soul to enjoy the Pleasure of
Temporal as well as Eternal Life: For the temperate Man has a thousand times
more Pleasure in Eating and Drinking then the Spewing Sick intoxicated
Drunkard: And as for the Yoke and Burden mentioned before: the upright Soul
counts it no yoke of uneasiness: For indeed it is not uneafie to any part but
only the corrupted Fancy, and the crooked Nature, which judges the delightful
way of Virtue to be irksome because unaccustomed thereunto.

For the Spirit of the Soul desires only his Right Object, which if he obtains,
he l^ts the Soul enjoy Temporal Pleasure as he will, out of what has been
said, it is clear, that it is not God fault that Man attains not the Fruition
of his longing Desire, and the Rest of his laboring Mind.

For like a Leech he chooses to glut himself with the Blood of false Pleasure,
and then to spue up all again, rather than to enjoy the true rest of his Mind
in Contentment. So Man's Ruin is of himself.

And the Soul sacrificing the Spirit (as being the true Child in the
Regeneration) there are Drums and loud Musicks sounding to stop his Cries, that
the Voice of this Divine Complainer cannot be audible. As thou knomest not the
way of the Spirit, or how the Bones do grow in the Womb of the Holy
Pregnatress, So thou know not the Work of God that makes all, except thou be
born of this Holy Seed. And here also arises another Question, how shall the
Soul attain to satisfy his Longing and vehement Desire? This is the Lesson
which the whole World of Mankind are yet seeking to learn, and for the most
part learned as well as unlearned, are stupid and dull in the comprehending of
it, because they would learn it the wrong way.

And God has set the World in Man's Heart, so that Man cannot find out the Work
that God makes from the beginning to the end of his Life, without the
Assistance and Revelation of the Spirit of the same God.

For first Man must by the Assistance of this spiritual Physician cure the
Distemper of his Soul, and then he will love the thing enjoined: For what is
the most pleasant Dainties in the World to an illprepared Stomach.

And also, here also arises another great Question: Is it possible for every
Man born of a Woman to reach and attain to this Food or Fuel which he
earnestly longs after? Answer, Though it has been concluded by some pretended
famous Divines that it is not possible for some who have been excluded by Gods
predestinate Purpose, who according to the Poet, Inscripsere Deos sceleri;
numenque supernum,
Coede laboriferi credunt gaudere juvenci:
And though this Doctrine be horrid Blasphemy or Reproaching of God: Yet I must
be forced now to remit the Answer to another place.

CHAP. V. The Virgins Suit.
. 1. Man's meet Help.
I The Preacher was Prince over the three Worlds in Eden: I Preached the
ancient Law in the Throne of Paradise: And I gave my (...) to seek and to
search out by Wisdom, concerning all things that are done under the Holy
Heaven: This sore Travel has God given to the Sons of Men to be exercised
therewith: This sealed Book has he given to Mankind to unclasp and to Read: I
have seen all the Labor and Travel, and Work, that are done under the lower
Firmament.

And behold all is Vanity, and Vexation of the pure Spirit of the Soul.

I communed with my own Heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great Estate, and have
gotten more Wisdom then all the ancient Revolted Princes and lord Lucifer wh^
has been Prince in Eden before me.

Yea my Heart had great Experience of Wisdom and Knowledge; and I gave my Heart
to know Wisdom, and to know Madness, and Folly, by Reason whereof Lucifer lost
his Throne.

I perceived also that this is a Vexation of the Holy Spirit: For in match
Serpentine Wisdom and Subtilty is much grief: And he that increases the
Knowledge of good and evil in Opposition, increases Sorrow, as not practicing
what he knows.

And so all is Vanity, whatever is a Vexation to the fair Virgins Spirit: And
promoteth not the mutual Joy of the Spirit of the Soul, and the Divine Virgin
or Humane Goddess.

And here lies the great mistake of Mankind: Folly is the grand Cause or
rather a foolish Fancy of setting the Affection upon an Object Loved, which
cannot easily be withdrawn: How is that? Man will not love the fair Virgin whom
God has appointed, for his Eternal Solace, and Pleasure in the pure Paradise
of undesiled Love and immaculate Chastity, the true Cause of Eternal Joy.

Now what is Joy, but the Enjoyment of a thing loved and longed for? But here
lies the great Error, and here is Man's Misery, he chooses to eat and wipe his
Mouth in a corner, and to sit sotting over a Cup of Hellish Liquor in Private
like a Fool, or Self-conceited Frantic, or Parasite; not considering that two
are better then one: Because they have a good Reward of their Labor: For if
they fall the one will lift up his Fellow: But woe to him that is alone when he
falls into Misery: For he has not his Virgin to help him. Speaking like a
Guilty Sinner, and if thou spare to speak, thou wilt spare to speed: O Guilty
Soul.

Again if two lie together in the Bed of Purity, then they have heat: But how
can one be warm alone? And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him:
But the thre^fold Cord, of God, the Soul, and ^is Virgin is not quickly broken.

Or else (rather then Love the Virgin) Man often chooses to fall in love with
Jezebel, who will not love him again: For as he proved cruel, hardhearted, and
cross to the fair Virgin that loved him, (for it is a sad thing that true love
should ever be lost, and it is a most sad thing, to love and not to be loved
again:) So he is men with and requited in his kind, and shall never attain the
thing loved, and this is Man's woe: There is no other Misery nor any other thing,
that will be cause of Pain, nor any other cause of Anguish, Horror, and
Eternal Despair, but only this, which is because he slighted his own
potentially-good Fortune, whereof he will eternally Repent; God never ordained,
muchless created and sramed Man to Eternal Perdition. But Man's Destruction is
of himself. And observe this for a certain Truth, Man hated God, before God
rejected Man.

. 2. Virgin-Vertue.
HEre some one may Object, that this Virgin is meaner, and not of so excellent
a Beauty as this Harlot is supposed to be.

Answ. In no wise imagine so: the sault lies in the blindness of the Lover.

This fair Virgin, is most excellingly Beautiful, both by innate Beauty, and
precious Ornaments, wherewith her Mother attired her and dressed her up: She is
the Daughter of the Deity, (For an insinite number of Virgins flow from the
Fountain of Divine Virtue, and have been Eternally in Heaven, and intended for
Brides to the Humane Offspring: There are threescore Queens, and fourscore
Concubines, and Virgins without number,) but this Divine Virgin is born in
Heaven, and is in Heaven in perpetual Youth: And for Man. Souls-sake (and to
fulfill the Creators Will) Woeth him; appearing at times unto him, with most
glorious and serene Smiles and Speeches.

She is called by the Surname of Fair Virtue, or Divine Form: She is far more
Rich than the Soul: More Fortunate: More Potent: More Noble: More Beautiful:
More Wise: More Sound then the Soul: And yet she thinks it no disparagement to
be espoused to Him. If he would be but willing.

First she makes her Address to her Virgin Mother, and entreats her that she
would grant her the favor of going out to see the Daughters of the Humane
Land, as rejoicing in the habitable Parts of it, her delight also being also
with the Sons of Men: As one brought up with the Creator, his duily delight,
rejoicing always before him.

Yes (says her Virgin Mother Gods Eternal Bride) Go, I know thou will not
suffer thy self to be defiled: Choose whom thou likest, if thou can gain his
Love, and be espoused to him.

And when she has pitched her Affections upon a Soul, she returns back, and
shows him to her Mother, and says, O dear Mother, behold is a Child of Adam
which pleases my Eye, shall I have him for my Bridegroom? Yes, Win his
Affections to thy self, and be eternally united to him.

Then she uses all means to compass her ends: First she endeavors to draw him
by her looks: And to ravish his Heart with her Eyes (as with one of her
Aspects:) And with one Chain of her Neck, which her Virgin Mother gave her.

My Beloved is like a Roe or a young Heart skipping upon the Greening Meadows:
Behold he stands behind our Wall, He looks forth at the Windows, showing
himself through the Casements of the Creation: Then was I in his Eyes as one
that found favor.

He looked again on me, as if he esteemed my Beauty, and counting me all fair
as if no Spot were in me.

O then, I was in great Hopes to attain nay Ends: I was many times restless;
for by Night upon my Bed, I often thought upon him: I sought him whom my Soul
loves: I sought him but I found him not: For sometimes I doubted, whether he
loved me as I loved him.

. 3. The Beginnings of Grace.
I WILL rise now, said I, and go about the Streets, and in the Broad-ways; and
will count no Labor irksome to seek him whom my Soul loves: I sought him

I went to Bed again: I slept, (in the Platonic Silence) but my Heart waked as
in a Divine Dream, it seemed as if the Voice of my Beloved knocking at the Door
was calling me: Saying, open to me, my Sister, Gods Daughter, my unspotted
Dove: For my Head is filled with Dew: And my Looks with the drops of the Night
of Anguish.

But me thought I answered in the Vision: I have put off my Coat, How shall I
put it on now in the Cold? I have washed my Feet in the pure Fountain, how
shall I desile them? Then me thought my Beloved put his Hand in at the hole of
the Door, and then my Bowels were moved for him: I rose up to open to my
Beloved: And my Divine Hands being perfumed with Myrrh, and my ^ingers with
Odours dropped Odoriserous Juice upon the Look of the Door.

I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself and was gore: His
Voice still (me thought) sounded in my Ears: My Soul failed to think how
pleasantly he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him but
he gave me no answer.

The Watchmen that went about the City, met me, to whom I said, saw ye him whom
^y Soul loves: But instead of giving me an Answer and dire^^ing me, they smote
me and wounded me in the Dark, The keepers of the Wall took m^ Vail from me.

O! Angelical Daughters of the Celestial City, I charge you if you find my
Beloved, that ye tell him how I am sick of Love.

My Heart is filled with Perplexity and Sorrow: I expected here no fatal stroke
of Mortal Wound, or Contagion of Disease: In the Blessed Regions whence. I came
Death is Out lawed, and Sin an Exile, at least wise a Terror only heard of by
the Ear: Pleasures are there boundless, because unlimited to the Partakers: For
Excess and Intemperance are Strangers in our Courts. Our Rural Fields are
blessed with the beanteous Beams of the Orient Sun of Eternity, who shines
through the Casement of the New Creation. And our. Radiant Morning can scarce
raise a blush, before our Blessed Titan is ready to unvail his splendid Face.

4. The Excellency of Virtue.
WHy (said the Celestial Daughters) art thou so concerned? Why would^st thou
leave so blessed an Habitation? For whose sake have thou undertaken this
Travail and Trouble? What is thy Beloved more than another Object of Love, O
thou fairest among the Angelical Virgins? What is He more than another, that
thou do so charge us? O, said she. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the
chiefest in my Mind among ten thousand: The Humane Soul is a little Incarnation
wherein God my Father was pleased to propagate himself: The Glorious Son of God
himself is an immor^al Man. His Cheeks are as a Bed of Spices and fragrant
Flowers: His Lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh: His presence is
most lovely: He bears the Character of Divine Meekness upon his Aspect: This is
my Beloved, and this is my Friend, O ye Daughters of Paradise. Whither (said
they) is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among the Virgins? Whi^her is He
turned aside, tha^ we may seek him with thee? For we sympathize with thy sad
M^sery. My Beloved (said she) is I believe gone down into his Rural Garden to
the Beds of Odours, to feed in his fragrant Paradise, and to gather Lillies by
the Fountains of Living Waters.

When she had found him, he breathed forth these Affections and Passions of
Love: Thou art beautiful O my Love, O fair Sophia: O blessed Astrea, O
Excellent Virgin-Vertue: Turn away thine Eyes from me, for they have overcome
me. Thy Hair is is a flock of G^a^s, appearing on the Mountains of Pleasures:
Thy Teeth are as a flock of Innocent Sheep, which go up from being washed in
the Rivers of Chrystalline Purity: As a piece of Pomegranate are thy Templ^s
within thy Locks. There are threescore Queens and fourscore Concubines, the
Virgins Han^mai^ens, and other Virgins without number: My Love, my undefiled is
chief in my Eye: She is the only one of her Virgin- Mother in my account: She
is the choice Darling of ^er that bare her in the Angelical Regions. The
Daughters of God saw her, and blessed her, yea the Queens and the Ladies of
Honor, they praised her. Who is she that looks forth at the Window of true
Light which enlightens the Humane House, even as the most beautiful Aurora,
fair as Phoebe, and Majestic as the Colors in the Army of Heaven. I went
down, at this saying into the Garden of Paradise to see the Frutis of the
Valleys and Savanna 's: And to see whether the Heart-chearing Vine flourished,
and the Pomegranates of the Tree of Pleasure budded as Blossoms of Holiness; Or
ever I was a ware, my Soul made me like the Chariots of Pite: Then he called
her: Saying, Return, return, O Daugh^er of the Deity: Return into thy
Retirement, that we may look upon thee: What will ye see in the Princess? As it
were the Banner of an Angelical Army.

. 5. The Gospel of Peace.
THE Voice of my Beloved, I hear: Behold he is coming: Leaping upon the
Mountains of my Moans, and skipping upon the Hill of my Hopes.

How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of my Shepherd? How far more
beautiful are thy Feet (said He) with the Shoes of Gos^el-Peace, O Princes
Daughters: Thy message of Meekness is joyful to my Heart: Thy Breasts are like
two skipping Roes that are Twins. No noise of Oppression shall any more Alarm
our Holy Land, for it is like to be restored to its Primitive Purity: Neither
need our Fellow-Shepherds dread the sense of Invasion of a Foreign Enemy:
Privileges shall be as sacred as Life: And our Pastures shall be Levelled, as
being all in Common: The Mountains of Pride shall be debased: And every humble
Valley exalted: Modesty and Innocence will be here Alamode: And Simplicity with
Loyalty, as of old the newest Dress. The Pelican in these Golden Ages will not
pick wounds in her tender Breasts infeebling her self to relieve her Young
Ones: Neither will the Ostrich conceal her Eggs dreading the crush of the Wild
Beast: These are the Halcyon Days prophesied of by the Holy Angels in the
Non^ge of Time, wherein the Swan will no more sing an Elegy as previous to her
Funeral: Nor will the Phaenix Fire her Urn to genera^e her species: Alligators
will not be so ravenous as to prey upon Passengers: Nor will the
Hypocrite-Crocodile dissemble his Tears to moisten the Funeral of his
Fellow Creature. In this Country all live according to the immemorial Customs
thereof by Sympathy: For Antipathy is a Stranger to these Borders. Here the
Hind Calveth without Coruscations: Claps of Thunder are not needful to
disburden her. Neither does the Bear lick her Cubs into Shape; for Deformity is
exiled from our Pastures.

. 6. The Pleasantness of Virtue.
BY thee O fair Goddess the Princes of our Country Reign: How fair and
altogether pleasant art thou O Love for Divine Delights! O how I delight to
walk in the Paths that my Virgin Fair Virtue use^h to walk in at her Morning
and Evening walks in the cool of the pure D^y of Everlasting Light. The King of
Mankind is held in the G^lleries: This thy Stature is like a Palm Tree: And thy
Breasts to Cluster fo Grapes: I s^^d, I will go up to the Palm Tree of Triumph,
I will take hold of the Boughs thereof, as a Trophy of Victory over the vain
World: Now also thy Breasts shall be as the Clusters of the Vine of Lise, and
the smell of thy fair Cheeks like Apples of Paradise: And the Odours of thy
Mouth like Celestial Wine of ^^avenly Reireshment for her Beloved, that is
pleasant to his Palate, causing the Holy Lips of them that sleep in the
beatifical Vision to utter Angelical Songs, and speak Gods Praise. Here we will
eat of the Trees of Life and live for ever: For in our Pastoral fair Fields no
Brambles grow: Nor is Sterility known in the Coasts of our Eden: The Trees of
Knowledge of one pure property look big as burdened with the Fru^t of Eternal
Life: And their blushing Heads bow down to the Courteous Hands that reach them:
The Holy Earth knows nothing but fullness of prolifick Virtue which nourishes
in it self, the prima^y cause, the ends of Germination: Whence proceeds the
Blossom of the blessed Bud in the new ^^generation.

. 7. Divine Contemplation.
O My Dove, that seem to lurk in the Clefts of the Rocks, in the secret
Places of the ascent into Heaven: Let us see thy Countenance: Let us hear thy
Voice, for it is sweet: And thy Countenance is comely: Thou that dwell (faid
she) in the Rural Gardens garnished with glorious Flowers: Thy Companions, the
Angels hearken to ahy Voice: Cause me to hear it. Draw me, and my Heart will
run after thee: The Royal Shepherd has brought me to his Cottage of Clay, into
his Princely Chambers of Green Flowers: We will be glad and rej^yce in thee: We
will remember and think of thy Love more than Wine of Temporary Delights: The
upright Virgins love thee.

My Beloved spoke and said unto me, rise up, my Love, my Fair one, and come
away: For the Winter in this our Climate, while we abide here is eternally
past: The Tempest of Afflictions is over and gone: I suffered many a bitter
Night for thee; now the Flowers of thy Virgin Beauty appear on my humane Earth:
The Time of Melody of Birds is come: And the ravishing Voice of my Musical
Virgin is heard in my Land. Hark! The Queristers of the Grace-inspiring Air do
change their Notes: The Blackbird and Thrush are my Companions in the Greening
Groves: They refresh my inspired Some with a Divine Song of Praise to their
Creator: While I endeavor to bear the burden with my slender Shepherds-pipe:
And then pretty Philomel closes up the Day of Alacrity with sweet
Epithalamiums: And the Lark admiring the Beauty of my late-ris^n Light, mounts
the fair Welkin to partake of its splendor: And the rest of the Aerial Tr^op
manage the Consort, til^ the Cool of the Blessed Evening. Here he Plower flies
with the ^assel: And the Phesant keep slight with the F^lcon: Neither does the
P rtridge know Engine or Noosy Thread, nor dreads the switter slight o^ the
Hawk: Nor is the Lark dared with the Hobby.

. 8. The Contentment of Virtue.
THE Figt^^e puts forth her Green Figs: And the Vines of cheerfulness with
the tender Grape of Delight in the Pat^s of pure Ve^tue, new budding in the
h^dge of Distinction of the two Natures gi^e a ^ragiant S^^^s^: Let every one
enjoy himself in true Rest and Tranqu^lity under his V^ne and under his
Fig Tree: Where none shall make him afraid: For now the golden Ages are again
returning: Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Sat^rnia regna: Arise, my Love, my Fair
one, and come away. Come with me from the sair F^rrest, my Sister: Go with me
from the greening Grove my Spouse: Look from the Mountains of my late moanings,
from the Top of the Rocks of despair: From the Lions Den: From the Laborious
Hills of the Leopards: No wild Beast has Power to hurt us, while thou art our
Princess: For the K^ds with the Flock Sport with the Wolf, and run about the
Bear for Diversion. The Lion lies down with the Lamb, and eats Grass as an Ox:
Nor is any thing of Emulation known in this sacred Creation: For the Tiger
sports with the Herd, and the Dove, Queen of the Fowls takes Wing with the
Eagle, and Vul^ure, her Subjects: And the little Child may lead the Lion upon
the Mountain of the Leopards: And the Suckling may play at the hole of the Asp
and Cockatrice; and receive no hurt: As being the Regenerate Babe of the
Blessed Birth: None shall hurt or destroy in all this holy Mountain.

Come my Dear Shepherd, Let us go into the fair Fields of Eden: Let us lodge in
the A^gelical Villages, who live in the next Nature of our Neighborhood: Let
us get up early to the Vineyards of Life: Let us see if the Heart-chearing Vine
of spiritual Joy does sloarish: Whether the Grape of the Regeneration appears,
and the Pom^granates of Eternal Refreshments bud forth: There will I give thee
my Loves, in the Garden of D^lights: Where no Cankers or Caterpillars bre^d out
of Putresaction: Nor are Northern Blasts injurious to us: Our Fields are full
fraught with Flowers and Odorates: For no Serpent has Admission to taint the
Fruit of Life: And our Earth in abundance brings forth Pleasures, whose Womb is
the Storehouse of Heavenly Treasures. The Humane Plant is Odoriferous, and at
^ur Gates are all manner of pleasant Fruits of Eternal Life, which I have laid
up for thee, O my Beloved.

. 9. The acceptable Sacrifice.
BUT tell me, O Shepherd, tell me O thou whom my Soul l^veth, where thou
feedest thy Sheep, and where thou make thy ^locks to rest at No n: and I will
meet thee in thy Rural Pastures: O let me not be as one turned aside from the
Frocks of thy Companions. O thou Princess, will thou condescend to my Rural
Recreations? Will thou of a Princess become a Shepher^ess? If thou will debase
thy self so low, then go thy way forth by the Tracks of the Flock of Innocence,
and thou shall see how I feed the Kids and Lambs beside the Shepherds Tents,
and preserve them in their Innocent State. For here the Golden Rule must be
kept among all the Creatures, where each one does justice by kind, and not that
the dread of Punishment should compel them: For the R^y of Justice is so
generally distributed, that it naturally shines in every one: ^he Creatures of
t^is New Creation (which is ^lso the beginningless live p^rely by instinct, not
making their Bodies the Sepulcher of dead Carcasses: Here the Innocent Lamb
(because not knowing the Terrors of Death,) would readily (if occasion were)
proffer his Throat to the shrines of the Altar: And the Calf is so far from
fear, that he dreads not the formidable stroke of Separation, because he knows
by natural instinct, there is no Butcherly or Bloody Dog in this Land: There is
no living here for the Rapacious.

. 10 The Authority of Virtue.
BEhold thou art fair in my Eye, O dear Shepherdess: Also this Green place of
Repose is pleas^^t: The Beams of our Arbors are Cedar; and the Raf^er^ of ou
Pastoral House are of Fir. See how the lofty Cedars lif^ up their Majestic
Heads: And the Martial Oak, stand by them: The trembling Asp^hakes his Palsi^
Crown: Behold i^ is calm in this cook ^av^, behind this B^ech of Tranquillity,
where the Vine full-loaded with Grapes of Purity is a Shadow of Pleasure,
embracing the Olive under the Holy Mount: And the Eglantine entangles it self
with the Rose: The Honey-Suckle ties knots about the Arbortes.

Oh! some body take away the Foxes, and chase the Young Wolves that spoil the
Vines: For our Vines have tender Grapes, being but newly budding in the Gard^n
of my Heart. My Beloved is mine, and I am his: He feede^h his Lambs in a Meadow
of Lillies. Hunters of tame Beasts and Men of Violence will starve here: For
Death being an exile cannot seed their devouring Appetites: The Ditties of the
Melodious Birds will fright Fowlers into their own ^ot and Place: Nor can the
Fishes be deceived by the Angler; who is forced to keep within his bounds: For
here is no Treachery nor Treason in this Holy Land.

Swo^d^ are beaten into Plough-shares, wherewith we dig the Gardens not for
Necessity but Recreation: Spears are turned into Pruning Hooks to dress the
bowers of Contentment: And murdering Guns are made Instruments of Music, and
sweet Melody. Here the Creatures make Sport and Pastime with Danger, as if
Death and Destruction were Sanctuaries aries unto them. When fair Aurora began
to appear, and the Shadows of Eternal Death fled away, I saw my Beloved
skipping like a Young Heart without Gall upon the Mountains of Manna: Even where
fear is altogether unexperienced, and the Grave such a Stranger, that its
greedy devouring Jaws are satisfied, not gaping for Carcasses to fill the Womb
of Putrefa ion: For nothing can languish or be sensible of Smart: Because Pain
is uncreated: And Death altogether unknown.

CHAP. VI. The Whores Suit.
. 1. Backsliding.
BUT after all these amorous Enjoyments of each others Societies and Embraces,
as previous to their future Felicity, the Soul oftentimes shows the inconstancy
of Lovers, and as a rolling Stone that gathers no Moss, cuts of the increase of
Love in the Bud; and so playing fast and loose does and undoes, gives the slip
to the Virgin; though she remains faithful and constant on her part.

For the Soul hankers after other Lovers, and dissembling (as the Proverb
says, Holds with Hounds and runs with the Hare.) And thus hunting after other
Lovers is never satisfied, but Conceits there is more Pleasure hidden in other
pretended Virgins of the Land, after whom he gazeth, and by whose forged Beauty
he is smitten, though they have no real Beauty, their Faces being painted with
Artificial ^olours to deceive; and so the Soul imagines the Enjoyment of one of
these is a Heaven of an higher Degree than the Virgins Paradise: And so Heaven
(as the Atheist says though falsely) were not Heaven, if its Mystery were known.

I say the Soul often nourishes foolish Fancies in it self, and because he
finds the Virgin or Pleasant Virtue too easy to be attained, (according to the
false Epicure: -- Meus est amor huic similis:
Nam Transvolat in medio posita, and fugentia captat:)
Therefore he aims at those who seem more rare, and harder to be attained in
his Judgment: Dis-esteems her Gifts and undervalues her Graces: But here his
Judgment is blinded: For he sees no form or comeliness in the Virgin, nor any
thing in her that might make her worthy to be desired: And becomes gradually
infected with false Love: He sees and looks upon another pretended Delilah
or Maid far more fair then God's Daughter; and endued (in his Opinion) with
rarer and nober Qualities.

Thus the higher the Souls seize and enjoyments of the pure Virgin has
been, the more basely he becomes degenerated; For as dead Flies cause, the most
precious Ointment of the Apothecary to cast forth a most nauseous smell: So
does a little Folly him that was in a high Degree of Reputation for Wisdom, and
honorable Enjoyment of God's Virgin-Child.

. 2. The Baits of Sin.
A Wise Man's Heart is at his Right Hand toward Heaven, but a Fools Heart is at
his Left, whose Rumb is Hed-wards: Yea also when he that is a Fool walks in
this way, his Wisdom which he once had fails him, and he says to every one
he is a Fool, for adds he, I am deepty in Love with such and such a Delilah.

But O thou immortal Man, wake not a sleeping Lioness, let the Hellish
Properties rest still, O Son of Man look before thou leapest: For the Ab^s, is
deep, which is the Womb of the false Who^e.

Keep thou the Covenant and live for ever, and the Law of Wisdom as the Apple
of thine Eye, which suffers not thee to be bewitched by gazing after Vanity:
Bind her Vows upon thy Fingers, and write them upon the Tables of thine Heart,
say unto fair Wisdom, Thou art my Sister, and my Spouse: And call pleasant
Virtue thy near Kin^^^oman: That she may keep thee from the [Whore] and the
Stranger: Who is not Kin to thee in the Divine Lineage; even from her that can
flatter with her Serpents Tongue. She is the Serpents Daughter, [An ^vil Crow
an evil Egg.]

For at the Windows of my House, I looked through the Casement of the Creation:
And I behold among the humane Fools; there was a young Soul void of Wisdom,
passing through the Street near the Angle where two ways lead to the Eternal
Life and Death, he went on the Left Hand the way to the Whores House: In the
Twilight, in the Evening: When the black and dark Night at last covered him,
and thus he began to be blinded.

And there met him a Woman in the attire of an Harlot su^tiller than this Fool:
(She is a Stranger at home, but overmuch acquainted in the Streets of Deceit:
Her loud Words are heard in the broadways: She never wears her Eyes but when
she goes abroad; Now she is without, now she is in the Street, and lies in wait
in every turning:) So she is a Saint, abroad, and a Devil at home: She caught
him, invergled him, and b^ssed him, and impudently spoke to him. I have
Peace Offerings with me, to appease the Justice of God, and to stifle the
secret Convictions of thy Conscience: This day have I paid my Vows, and have
vowed to love Thee.

Therefore came I forth to meet thee, and have found thee unexpected; I have
decked my Bed with coverings of Tapestry: With carved Works according to thy
enlarged Fancy, and with fine Linen of seeming Innocence: I have persumed my
Nest with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon: Come and let us take our fill of Love
until the Morning dawn upon us, if ever; Let us selace our selves with
Pleasures until the Eternal Aurora appears, though perhaps never: For the Man
of the Family is not at home: The Spirit of this World my Husband is gone a
long Journey: [This Husband she has married only as a Cloak for her filthy
Lust.]

He has taken a Bag of Treasures with him, to wait upon the Creator his
Master, whose Ambassador he is, and will come home at the day appointed.

With her much fair Speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her
Lips she forced him.

He goes after Her straightway, as an Ox to the slanghter, or a Feel to the
Correction of the Stocks: Till a Dart strike through his Heart; as a Bird that
is caught in the snare, and is taken in an evil Net, not knowing that it is for
his Eternal Life.

. 3. Sevenfold Vice.
BUT, O Son of Man, consider, let not thy Heart be taken with her, incline not
toward her Paths: For she has cast down many wounded: Yea, many Valiant
Heroes, who came from Heaven have been slain by her: Her House is a Cave
leading to Hell, going down to the dark Chambers of Eternal Death.

And as this Pestilent Whore bawleth in every Corner, to watch and inveigle
Souls: So also the fair Virgin cries in the Gates of every Humane City: Though
with a far different Voice, for her Voice is a still small Voice, and yet it is
heard in quiet, by the Wise, more than the cry of him, that rules among Fools:
She has erected a House in Heaven to entertain her Bridegroom, she has hewn
out seven Pillars, whereon are engraven the seven Rewards of Virtue, or the
Goods of Fortune? She has sent forth Maidens, the five senses Virgins to
invite Souls: She cries upon the high Places of Man's City: Yet being despised,
she for the Souls sake invites him.

Whosoever is simple, let him come in hither: how long O scorner will thou scorn me
who wish thee well? O Fool how long will thou hate that which is for thy good?
Because I have called and thou would not answer, though thou did hear my
Voice in thy Conscience: Because I have piped to thee and thou would not
Dance: And I mourned for thee, and thou have not sympathized; therefore the
Time shall come that thou shall call to me, but I shall be married to another:
Who was thy Rival, in the time when I would have consummated the Wedding with
thee.

Be not entangled with one that will bring thy Soul to ruin: and who is far
inferior to the Souls Nobility: For there are an indefinite number of these
gone out into the World to trapan Mankind: Whereof there are variety of kinds,
but especially seven: As sprung forth from the Mystical Mother of Harlots.

They Lust after the best, richest, greenest, fairest, strongest, tallest,
wittiest soundest, noblest, and most durable Essences: And they find too many
humane Souls fit for their turn: They perceive that the Souls of Men are
Eternal and Excellent, Fair, Lovely, and Lively Essences: As being made after
the Image and Similitude of the Divine Being: Now every Created Being lusts
after something that is of a higher Nature than it self, that in the Fruition
thereof, it self may be perfected.

. 4. The Blind falling Headlong.
FOR every Creature groaneth and travelleth for its own Perfection: But cannot
attain it without the Assistance of some one above him: Hence it is, that this
sevenfold Whorish Spirit is become an earnest Attractor and Enticer of the
immortal Souls of Adam's offspring.

And for to solemnize the Wedding-seast, she furnishes her Table, and presents
Man with the delicate Dishes of Pleasure, and false Joy: viz. [Counters for
Gold.]

But when she has once got the Poor Soul within her Net, and cropped off the
Flower of the noble Affections of the Heart, which the right Virgin should have
had, and so spoiled the Spirit of the Mind with a false Vizzard, or Mark of
Infection, when Man's Body fall as a Leaf to the Grave, and the Souls
Wedding Day draws on, and he is to be settled in one of the two Eternal States:
Then this false Whore cr^eth.

Aha! Thou humane Soul, thou art Eternal, I am but Temporal and Mortal and thou
do partake of my Mortality: Eternally to seek Death and yet never Die:) I had
my Pleasure with th^e: Go now into Eternity, I indeed was only the cause of
alluring of thee to Sin: But how thou must answer for it thy self: I am but for
a time: In the end I return to the Original Abyss of Nihility.

Now here arises a great Question, seeing Man's fate is so dism^^, Whether has
his unlacky Soul sinned or his Parents, that he is thus born Blind?

Answ. No Soul is born stark Blind: But if some one should be so born, yet
there is Ve^tu^ bestowed, through the Merit of the perfect Sacrifice, upon
every Soul to open his blind Eyes, if he do not wilfully neglect the means of
washing them in the Pool to which he is sent. But if he will not go where his
Virgins great Champion and Physician does se^d him, then let him groap in his
Blindness: For there is no Man that has Power over his Spirit, and passionate
Mind, (that loves a Harlot,) without the Assistance of the foresaid great
Counselor, Prince of Peace, in Mental Calmness.

Now these foresaid Whorish Jezebels have painted their Faces, and adorned
themselves with an Image of seeming Beauty (like the Fruits of Sodom which when
touched will fall into Ashes) but no real Beauty: They lay wa^ at the Head of
every Humane Street: Some are like Hartors that receive hire: And some scorn
hire like Marrons that commit Adultery, and take Strangers to defile their
Husbands Beds: And are contrary to common Harlots, in that they give Gifts to
all Lovers, that they may come to defile them.

. 5. For Destruction of the Individuum.
FIrst the Thief or surveying [Harlot] that surveys the whole World, comes, and
says, All this will I give thee, if thou Marry me, and be joined to my Nature
in the Bed of my Friendship under Ground: There I will nourish thee, and thou
shall have the Entrails of the Earth for thy Chest and Coffer: But I do not
promise thee to see Daylight for many a Year, if ever: But there (like a Slave
in the American Mines,) thou shall see Gold and Silver enough, and thou shall
sleep among the heaped Treasures.

But the Spirit of the Soul, cries, O this is not Happiness, O who will
release me out of this underground Prison? If this were Felicity, then my
Purse would be better than my self: A Horse is not esteemed by his Trappings,
nor a Man by his Rich Concubine.

The Womb of this Whore is a snare of Temptation: Which catches in the Pit of
Perdition: She gapes like a Gulf for the Mind of Man: And spreads like a Sea
for his Soul: She is beautified by the Hand of her Whorish Mother: Who writes
on her Face, sweet Solace.

But O Son of Man, Child of God, legal Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven: If thou
have Oxen, do thou offer Oblations: And if thou have Sheep, thou shall
Sacrifice to God: And if thou have Children; thou shall heartily Consecrate
them: With the Wife of thy Wedlock to the Lord: That his Heavenly Blessings may
be upon thee: Which the World does hold for a Curse: And yet knows not the
Curse on the earthly Blessings: Nor how they are a Curse unto them.

Who strive for Content in much: But when they have much are hungry: Yea they
thirst as the gaping Grave, whose Womb consumes them that gape after her. But
if thou have the Virgin, be thou content: For she will make thee to flourish as
a fruitful Field: Thy Gardens shall be garnished with Greens: With the fashions
and fragrancies of Flowers: Having Hope thy Seed shall spring up: And in Faith
shall thou fill thy Vessels.

If this [Harlot] cannot prevail, then comes the Riotous, Luxurious or Swinish
[Jezebel] I see (says she) thou art a quiet harmless Man: Will thou therefore
live in Joy? Get thee Wine and strong Drink: Drink until the Poison thereof be
enraged: Quaff this noble Liquor in Bowls: Strive to conquer thy Companions in
the Valor of Bacchus's Soldiers: Eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves
out of the Stall: And make thy Body as mine is, a Sepulcher of Dead Carcasses.

Put far away the Evil Day: Let not thy Conscience trouble thee, nor Reproofs
awaken thee: So thou shall be an easie-hearted Sot or Voluptuous Flog-like
Epicure, of whom much shall be made in the Swine-house, until thou be fully
fattened for the House of Slaughter: Come therefore along with me to the
Banqueting house: And we will cast away Care, and remove that Melancholic Fit
with a cherupping Glass: We will treat thee with variety of Dishes (dress^d
after a new Fashion,) with poinant Sawces: We will rant it, and make merry over
the Witness of God in the Conscience: For this Solace is better than Gold or
Silver: Spend it away prodigally upon thy Lusts, and gratify thy Luxurious
Palate. And we will anticipate Prayer in the Morning with the Incense of our
burning Lusts as preferring Sacrifice before Devotion.

Oh but in the midst of my Mirth, my Heart is sad, says the Souls Spirit: I
was but now bathing in a River of Wine: But what is the Matter? What are these
qualms upon my Stomach? They seem now to revenge my out-daring of Bacchus's
Foes, because I was not a fit Soldier for his Service: Therefore his
Surgeon has given me some of his Pills, which now I cast up by filthy
Vomitings and Spewings: Sure he will give me a Foil at Wrestling: Thus I shall
stumble over the Dead, and reel into a Grave of Worms and Serpents, who will be
drunk with my Blood. Therefore, O thou naturally found and healthful Spirit of
Man: The Luxurious is as full of Diseases as an Hospital: For as the Night does
call him to the Supper of Surfeit: And as the Morning does rouse him to his
Breakfast: He languisheth in the hunger of his Lust, making but one Meal a Day:
Until he has glutted himself with the Dainties of his Delights: And thus
eating, He wipeth his Mouth in a Corner: Accompanied with his Drunken Hostess:
Whose Body is a Pit of Poison: But to touch it, is danger of Death: Therefore
rather than Dine on her Delicates; do thou mingle thy Meat with Mourning.

. 6. For spoiling the Souls Sport.
THen comes a Third, the sluggish [Harlot] come my Dear (says she) we will go
to the Gaming-house, or, if thou please, to the Temple of the Gods, where we
will send for the blind Lover our Captive to make us some Sport: We will have
Music and Dancing: We will wheel about our God: Now our Bellies are glutted
with the butcherly and bloody Sacrifice of Beasts, we will rise up to Play: We
will lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch our selves upon our Lazy Couches: We
will chant to the sound of the Viol: And invent to our selves Instruments of
Music like David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel: We will sing his Psalms in
Canting and Mocking of God.

But O Man consider, Give not thy Heart to the Music of false Mirth: Tremble
to tread in the Tracks of it: Use the Cross as thy Crutches to bear thee
upright in the Way: Nail the Flesh to the Fashion thereof: And the Spirit shall
save the Soul. Give not sleep, O Man to thine Eyes; nor slumber to thine
Eyelids: Until thou find an Habitation for thy self with thy Virgin: For thou
art born to a good Fortune: When O Sluggard will thou awake from thy sleep? The
Day is far spent: Go to the Ant^ Consider her ways, and be wise at last.

If not, this Harlot has prepared a Net of Mischief to ensnare thee: She will
hunt thee into her Pit: As thou did drive the Beasts of thy own Image into
the Nooze to be slain: So she will draw thee as a Beast into the depth of her
Dungeon: But the Counsel of the Virgi^ is the safety of De^ence: Which delivers
thee from the sweep of her Dragg: It saves thee from sliding in the slippery
Places: And stablisheth thy standing on the Rock. Avoid Her that enticeth into
every treacherous Trap: And allureth into the Doors of Destruction: She
polisheth her Parlour with artificial carved Images; and with the works of most
curious Limners: Her Entry inviteth with the Odors of Perfumes: But her Bed is
the Infection of Plague: Her Breath is the Contagion of Death: And her Breasts
the Bottles of Bane: He that lays his Head to repose between them, shall be
smothered in a deep sleep.

Enter thou not into the Doors of her House: Lest her allurements should murder
thy simplicity: For she will entice thee with all things that are lovely to the
Eye: But her purpose is to an end of Slaughter: Mark the Line of her Path: And
behold whom she catches with her Hook: He that studies the steps of her Feet;
runs swift to the Doom of Destruction: But he that seeks deliverance from her
Door, shall dwell in the Temple of God: He shall draw to a Rest from the Travel
of Iniquity, which shall compass his Soul with Salvation.

If this will not do, then comes another, the Crafty Witch: Saying, come to my
School, and I will make thee a Necromancer: I will teach thee all the
Philosophical Learning of the World, and the highest Contemplation of things:
Thou shall understand how the Worlds Wheel is rolled about: And how the Chain
of Eternity is entangled by an indissolvable Band: So thou shall be accounted
the Wise Magus among the People.

O! I will not do so, says the right Spirit of the Soul: I am afraid of the
Deep of Deeps: Lest I fall headlong into the Abyss; and by searching and
seeking the Universal Tincture, I may get a wound in my Soul, and then I shall
be sent to finish my Contemplation in a Circle of Misery.

Therefore O Man be wise: This false Wisdom is a snare of Death; which is hid
from the Eye of Man: He sees not her mischievous End: Because she has made
his Day a Curse: She bewitched by enchantments a couple in Paradise, and
dragged them from Life to Death. And bolted their Generations within the Doors
of Darkness: And locked them from the Light of the Day. Beware therefore lest
she lead thee by her subtle Art and Serpentine Wisdom, To taste of the Tree of
Knowledge of Evil and Good: Whose Fruit is desirable to make one wise: And to
open the Eyes of Curiosity.

. 7. For hindering the Propagation of the Species.
BUT anon the Amazonian shows her self, whose hand is against every one, and
every ones hand against her: She will accompany thee in a Virile Garb to the
Field of Mars, and lead thee to Akeldama: She will beat Plough-shares into
Swords, and perfume thy Nostrils with the stink of her murdering Powder.

She will persuade thee to cut off many of thy Fellow Creatures, as a mighty
Hunter of Men before the Lord; as if the Earth were too narrow to maintain such
a numberless number of Men in the same world, saying: Keep up thy Pomp
gallantly, and oppress all monyless Wretches and Widows: Make many Martyrs by
thy Sword of Cruelty and Rigor.

Search for the p^ths which the Lions Whelps have not trodden, and which the
Vultures Eye has not seen: For there is a Vein for the Silver, and a Place for
the hidden Treasures of Gold: But the Martial Iron is Lord of both: Dig
therewith into the Bowels of thy Fellow-Offspring, and see if the Golden Mine
be there or no. If any oppose thee, see here, I give thee these snaky Hairs, as
so many Furies in the Conscience.

O no, I had rather (says the Souls Spirit) dwell in the Corner of a poor
Cottage, in content and quietness, than with a brawling Whore (such as thou
art) in a wide Habitation. I had rather sleep in a whole Skin, than to boast of
Wounds and Scars upon my Body: Let Cyrus (if he like it) glut himself in his
Bowl of Blood: I love not his Mess; I am weary with such Sacrifices.

This Martial Strumpet drags the Valiant by the Nose, and the Lofty by the
Fore-lock: Yea, the Mighty do plunge in her Bloody Pit, which swallows them as
Sops into her Womb: The Fruit of her Womb is the firstborn of Tophet, which
was in the beginning a Devil: Whose Jaws are the Gates of Hell to slaughter the
Soul, and to spill the Blood of the Blessed: But turn thou thy Windows from her
Martial Colors, lest her Drums and loud Music stop thy Ears from hearing the
Virgins Voice: And that she should bite thee with the Teeth of an Asp, and thou
be stung to death with her Venom.

But O Immortal Man, Love thou the Virgin of Innocence, and she shall surround
thy Situation like a Silver Munition, and be for ever to thy Gladness the
Glory of a Golden Dwelling.

If this cannot prevail upon the Soul, then comes the lustful unsatisfied
Harlot; saying: What? will thou dye without a Child of thy Lust to receive thy
Soul by a Transmigration of the Humane Nature into the Bestial: Behold, the
Sylphs and Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains and Waters are in Love with thee, and
will entertain thee in the Garden of Delights.

O (says the Soul, having found the deceit of this Strumpets embraces,) now I
enjoy the Sweetheart of my fading Youth, which to fetch I endangered my
precious Life, by passing through a fierce Fire of infernal Adultery: The Fire
of my Passion is not so fierce as it was: When I was further from my desired
Fire, I burned (me thought) with Myrrha more violently by a secret Conceit:
Therefore now my Mind is variable, and wanders after fresh Lovers: I thirst as
the unsatisfied Womb, which receives without Conception.

O thou fair Angel, consider, whom thou eagerly longest after: It is the
Catamite-Strumpet, He that touches her Flesh is tainted with her Filthiness:
And he that goes in unto her, corrupts his Soul: She makes a Man as a
Monster: And an unspotted Lamb, as a Leopard: Her false Pleasures are as many
Ponds, where Serpents, Toads, and Vipers, do drink: Their Palates do delight to
pamper with Poison: For their Nature is one with the Venom.

The Love of their Lust does Sacrifice their Seed to Molech: And infects them
with the stink of the Stews: There is not a Man that dwells in their House,
That says no more, I have enough. But their Heart is as a tired traveling
Pilgrim, that cannot find a lodge of Repose They flame in their Bowels as a
burning Bush; and cannot find Water to quench it. They fill up their bundle as
a Faggot of Fuel: To blaze in the Torment of Tophet.

. 8. For degrading the Soul.
LAstly, the imperious Harlot says, if all did bow down before thee as before
God: O what a brave sellow should thou be! Then thou could rule by force
over the Virgin, and make her Handmaid to thy ambitious Harlot.

But many a Soul in the midst of these enjoyments, is often struck with a
Panick fear, and knows not whence it comes: For the Virgin who causes it, is
become a Stranger to her Flesh and Blood: O (says he) I have conquered in
Triumph over one World, now I Lust after another Vtopia.

But as the Philosopher told the great Conqueror, there are innumerable Worlds:
How then does it seem so difficult to me to gain the Government of one? I will
sit down and weep and search my own little World: Woe to him that wandereth out
of it: And woe to him that goes not out of himself, and out of his own mortal
World: And yet as little as this World is: Many a Man cannot Travel to the
utmost bounds of it, in the whole compass of his Live: For it is a very long
Journey to their own true Native World.

O Man this is she that draws to a draught of desire: To Drink up Dominions
like a Dram: And in a Compendious Circle would compass all Crowns: And trample
upon Thrones as Trifles.

The Entireness of Empires could not extinguish his enterprises: Except he be
greater than God: But wait thou with wariness: That the haughty Hand may not
tear down thy Tent: Mark the Example of Jesus the Just; who joined not to the
Joys that the Jews would have given him.

He was a King without Enjoyment of the earthly Kingdom, or Contemplation of
the corruptible Crown: He was a Prince, a Pilgrimage of Passions: Without the
Propriety of a supposed Palace: Thou shall tread in the Trace of his Travel:
And run in the Race of his Righteousness. Thou shall obey his Message as thy
Master in Meekness; and Honor him in the House of Humility. And then the
Blessings which he preached shall be thy proper Possession; with the
Constitution of a Kingdom and Crown.

The Glory of the World runs down as a Minute: But the Crown of Gods Kingdom
lasts for ever.

. 9. The Divine Reprover in the Conscience.
NOW when the Soul is in Love with any thing that it fancies: Give him the
choicest Pleasures: Proffer him the fairest Virgins: Yet they are slighted and
contemned in Comparison of the one thing loved and longed after. In this sense
Love is called Blind.

So the Spirit of the Soul is in Love with his appointed Virgin, and therefore
is still unsatisfied, discontented, murmureth, grumbleth, repineth, whineth,
pricketh, vexes, and worrieth Man, and disturbeth his Peace in the Conscience,
when ever he goes to look after other Lovers; crying, (as it were plucking him
by the Skirt, or twitching him by the Ear,) This is the right way walk in it,
when the Soul is in the Wilderness wandering after his Lovers.

And he often sees the burning Bush of his Heart on Fire, and well may he
wonder that it is not consumed: This Fire is the Flame of the Virgins Love to
him.

O therefore turn aside and see this great miraculous sight: And look back and
listen to the Voice behind thee: And if thou turn thy course; then the Voice
that was behind thee in thy own Wilderness; will go before thee, and lead thee
into the Land of Eternal Rest.

Now these Whores are they that aim at Man's ruin by Emulation, for they envy
that Man's Soul should be a Favorite of the Deity: But if Man would Love Gods
Daughter, she would keep him from the Strange Woman: Who forsook the Guide of
her Youth, and would allure Man to do so too, and to forget his Contract or
Covenant with the Virgin.

Her House declineth to Death, and her Paths to Hell: None that go into her
return again: Lust not after her false Beauty in thy Heart, neither let her
take thee with her Eyelids: For by means of a whorish Woman Man is brought to
a piece of moldy Bread: And the Adulteress hunts for the precious Life. Can
one go on hot Coals of a Fantastical Passion, and his Feet not be burnt as in
the Fire of Hell?

Men do not despise a Thief, if he steal to satisfy his Soul, when it craves
and longs after the right Food being withheld from it by the Fancy: But if he
be found, he shall restore sevenfold, according to Gods Balance and right
Measure: But whosoever commits Adultery with the Wife of the Spirit of the
World, destroys his own Soul: A wound and dishonorable stigmatized Mark
shall he get, which shall never be wiped away, in this World or in that to
come. For Jealousy is the rage of a Rival: Therefore he will not spare in the
Day of Vengeance; he will not regard any Ransom, neither will he rest Content,
though thou give all that thou art worth: Neither will the Spirit of the Soul
be reconciled, though thou should give him all the Substance of thine House
for a Bribe.

. 10. Misery the End of Vice.
NOW the Covenant is a Lamp, and the Law of Loving the Virgin is Eternal Life:
And the reproof of her Instruction is the high Way to Heaven: When thou go
she shall lead thee: When thou sleep she shall keep thee: When thou art
awake she shall talk with thee in Divine Contemplation: By her thy Days shall
be multiplied upon the Eternal Earth, and the Years of thy immortal Life shall
be endless: Therefore keep thy Heart true to the Virgin with all Diligence, for
out of it are the issues of Life and Death: Believe not the Whore in her
flattering Speech, for she is a Liar, when she cries, Stolen Waters are sweet,
and a secret Banquet in a Corner of Darkness is pleasant. Be sure that her Cave
leads to the Shadow of Death, and her Guests go to the Depths of Hell. And a
desperate woe is pronounced against them that delight to lurk in the holes of
Guilt, and despise the light of Purity, lest their Deeds should be reproved.

Come to my Tavern says she, It is indeed a House of Sin, but not of Darkness:
For our Candles and hellish Squibs never go out: It is like a Country near the
Frozen Zone, as clear at Midnight as at Noon.

Beware therefore O humane Soldier: For armed Mars does not so much wound thee
as this naked Venus.

The Sorceresses Mouth drops as the Honeycomb, and her Lips are smoother then
Oil, but her end is as Wormwood; it will cost the Soul that loves her many a
bitter Tear: Her Instruments are sharp as a two edged Sword: It will cut the
Conscience to the Heart.

Her Feet go down to the Abyss: And her steps lead to the Hell of Eternal
horror. Lest thou ponder the Paths of Life: Her ways are moveable, that thou
can not know them: Remove thy way therefore far from her: And come not nigh
the Doors of her House.

CHAP. VII. The Virgins Espousal.
. 1. Reconcilement.
IF the Soul recant and change his Mind, Fair Virgin-Vertue bearing no grudge
in her pure Mind, welcometh and entertains him again most joyfully, (unless he
be stigmatized with the Disease of the Stews,) and so renews their mutual
Acquaintance: And the Virgin wandering in her Shepherds Rural Fields: The long
absence of her late Beloved had grieved her Spirit: She had enquired of
Passengers, did they see a Shepherd passing along that way? They answered: No:
It was but a little that I passed from them (says she) even from the pretended
Guides into Paradise, but I found him whom my Soul loves: I held him, and
would not let him go, until I had persuaded him to come into my Virgin-Mothers
Habitation in Heaven, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me of the
Divine Seed. Who is this (said the neighboring Angels, who were Proxime to the
Deity, as Princes before a Monarch) Virgin that comes out of the Wilderness of
Woe and Despair, leaning upon the Breasts of her Beloved? I raised thee up (said
he) under the Tree of Life, there thy Virgin- Mother brought thee forth, in the
upper Paradise: There she conceived thee as an Holy Birth of Newness of Life in
the Womb of her Virgin-Purity. I charge you, O ye Daughters of the Holy City,
(said she) by the Roes of Paradise, and by the Hinds of Edens fair Fields, that
ye stir not up nor awake my Beloved until he please, for he is very weary after
his Journey and long Travel upon the Mountains of Vanity: And requires a due
time of Rest from his Labors and vain Wanderings. And now the wearied Bees
return home with laden Thighs: The tired wandering Sheep that had forgotten
their resting place, have found their Fold of rest, where they may lie down
with the Leopards in a safe and quiet repose. And now when I perceived how he
admired my transcendant Beauty, and the form of God in my aspect. My Cheeks
being comely with rows of precious Jewels; and how I was adorned with Topazes
and Rubies, with Amethysts and Saphires, with Diamonds and Gold: I gave him a
present of borders of Gold with knobs of Silver, and the richest Gems. For our
Mountains are big with Mines, and the Veins of our hidden Treasures are
Infinite. When my Royal Shepherd sits at my Table, my Spikenard sends forth the
Odours thereof: Abundle of Myrrh is my welbeloved unto me: My Pastoral Friend
is unto me as a Cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Eden. Because of the
Savor of this pure Ointment, wherewith I besprinkled thee, thy new Name of
Virtue is as heavenly Oil poured forth out of Golden Vials full of sacred
Odours.

. 2. Consecration of the Soul.
I Am the Holy Rose, and the Lilly of the low Valleys: As the Lilly among
Thorns, so is my Love (said he) among the Daughters of Vanity: As the
Apple Tree of Eternal Life among the Trees of the divided Properties in the
Wood. So is my Beloved among the Sons of worldly Wisdom: I sat down under his
Shadow with great Delight, and the Fruits of his rural Trees were sweet to my
Taste: He brought me to his Banqueting Arbor, and his Banner over me was the
Canopy of Love. I am come (said he) into my Gardens, my Sister: I have led thee
through a Wilderness, my Spouse; I have conducted thee into the Meadows of May:
Blessed be the Hour that first I saw thy Face: I have brought thee to the
Rivers of Milk and Honey which flow in this Land of Rest and Rural Refreshment.
Thou have accompanied me, my lovely Mate, to the Mountains of Myrrh and the
Holy Hills of Frankincense: I have gathered my Flowers (said I) in the Meadows,
with my Aroma's in the Valleys. Here in this perfect State of Holiness the
Earth is not unburdened with Tillage, neither is it wounded with Culture: Come
now (said he) O fair Virgin of Purity, sit down with me under this Vine and
under this Fig Tree, where none can make us afraid: And we will take a walk in
the calm Evening, in the cool of the Eternal Day, and the Divine Springs and
aquaeducts shall refresh our Spirits after our Journey: Thy Breath is as the
Odors of Myrrh, as the pure gale of Refreshment upon my late-languishing
Spirits: Awake O. Eternallybreathing Spirit, Come thou Divine Wind, and blow
upon the Garden of my longing Heart, that the Spices thereof may flow out to
the rejoicing of our Minds. Come my fair one into my rural Garden, and eat
these pleasant Fruits. I have gathered my Spice with my Myrrh: I have prepared
my Honeycomb with my Honey: I have mingled my Wine with my Milk: I nourish a
Cow and two Sheep: And for the abundance of pure Nectar that they supply me
with, I never want Soul-refreshment: For Honey and Etherial Cream does every
one Eat that is left in this Land of Rest, and such Food that is innocently
prepared for the Everlasting health of the Soul. I will treat thee with the
Arabian Aroma's, with the Oriental Gems, the Palms of Asia, the Wine of
Pomegranates, the American Pine-Apples, the most delicious Cordials, and the
purest Elixir and Quintessential Virtues of Paradise. How fair is thy Love, my
Sister my Spouse? How much better is thy Love than Wine: Honey and Milk are
under thy Tongue, and the smell of thy Garments like the odours of the Holy
Groves.

. 3. Full Assurance.
O Thou my Souls Joy, my Virgin-Solace: The smell of thy Vesture is like a
fragrant flowering Meadow which the Lord has Blessed: Thy Lips ( O my Espoused
Lady) drop as the Honeycomb, and the smell of thy Heavenly Ointment is more
fragrant than all Spices. Therefore come, thou fair Object of my Love, we will
ascend to the Top of the Holy Mount; where we shall have a prospect of the Holy
Land: There the floriferous Hills look big with innocent Flocks, and the
Fruit-bearing Valleys with lowing Herds; supplying the Babes of the new Birth
with sincere Milk: The winged Aerials in the Vocal Forests now turn Serenades:
And every flower and flourishing blossom in the florid Plains perfume the chaste
Air with most delicious Odorates. The pretty Lambs true Pictures of innocent
Recreation (poor Animals) skip upon the Mountains of Pleasure, bleating in the
Pastures of Purity: But the boggy swamps and marshes are crowded with
Amphibious Creatures, with whom I care not to converse. The Hares fly not here
for fear: For the ravenous Hound in this Country finds other Food suitable to
his Palate: Thy Plants O Divine Virtue, are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with
pleasant Fruits of the Tree of Everlasting Life: Saffron and Cinnamon, with
Frankincense. This Fountain that waters the knots of Paradise, this
Wellspring of living Waters springing up in my Soul to Everlasting Life, and
the Eternal Satisfaction of my fiery chirst; these Silver Streams that glide so
softly, and with their warbling sound and murmuring m^lody recreate my tired
P^ssion of Love: These Rivulets which bound upon the Banks of Eden strewed with
odoriferous Ga^lands of Prayers and Praises: This Field of fair Flowers, even
all these shall be shut up and sealed to the use of the Divine Nature. Let my
Beloved kiss me (said she) with the kisses of his pure Mouth: For his Love is
better than the chearing Wine of Pomegranates: Thy Lips, O my Dear Spouse (said
he) drop as with pure Manna: Stay me with Flagons of blessed Nectar (said she)
and comfort my Love passion with Pine-Apples of Eternal Life: For I am now sick
of Love.

. 4. Perfect Liberty.
THen (said he) inspire the odours of thy Soul-ravishing Breath into my Mouth
and Heart and let it eternally breath upon the Fire of Love in my Soul. Yes
(said she) I will be thy Eternal Satisfaction, and Everlasting Refreshment to
thy late-passionate Spirit: Let thy left Hand be under my Head, and let thy
Right Hand of true Love embrace me for ever. I will wipe away from thy Eyes all
Tears of Sorrows, over which thou did swim as over an Ocean of despair to
seek after me, and find me to the Joy of thy Heart, in this thy Rural Paradise
the Suburbs of Heaven: So naturally is Innocence planted here, that nothing
knows its Enemy, because no Enemy to know: Unity and Harmony are inseparable
Companions: And every Individuum knows no Argument but Love, whose Law is alike
forcible to others, as the Law of Harmony is united in it self: For nothing
does Sorrow, nor can any thing grieve, in as much as there is no cause of
Suffering, or desire of Revenge. Of late I wished thou were as a Brother that
sucked my Virgin- Mothers pure Breasts: And now my wish is fulfilled: When I
should find thee without thy Shepherds Arbor, or if I should light upon thee
in thy late-forsaken pleasant walks, I would be so familiar with thee that I
would kiss thee, and fill thy Soul with the Odoriferous Myrrh of my Holy
Breath: Yea now I know and am Confident I should not be despised. I will lead
and guide thee by the motions of my pure Spirit, and by the Inspiration of my
Vocal Gale, into my Virgin- Mothers House: Into the Habitation of Gods Holy
Bride: She will instruct me how to please thee: There I will cause thee in
token of gratuity for all thy loving Kindnesses and Courtesies which thou have
shown unto thy endeared and faithful Spouse, to drink and be refreshed with the
spiced Wine which I prepared for thee, and the pleasant Juice of my Pomegranate.

. 5. Religious Vows.
I Remember thee, and the kindness of thy Youth, and the Love of thine
espousal: When thou wentest after me into the Wilderness, into a Land that was
not sown: Behold thy Time is a Time of Love. Behold O Virgin, I will enter into
Covenant with thee: Then said I, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, and
his desire is toward me. I will anoint thee with Holy Oil: I will cloth thee
with broidered Work wrought by the Virgins of Heavens: I will gird thee with
the Linen of Innocence, and cover thee with the Silk of Sincerity: I will deck
thee with Angelical Ornaments: I will put a beautiful Crown upon thy Head: I
will deck thee with Gold and Gems: I will write thy Injuries upon the Dust: And
thy Kindnesses upon Eternal Marble. Thou shall eat with me in my Fathers
Palace, fine Flower, Honey, and Oil: And thou shall be exceeding beautiful, and
shall prosper into a Kingdom, and thy renown shall go forth among the Heathen
for bravery: For it shall be perfect and eminent through my comeliness which I
will put on thee. O Virgins! behold the Shepherd, behold the humane King, go
forth O ye Daughters of the Deity: And behold him with the Crown wherewith his
Mother Gods Eternal Bride crowned him in the Holy Day of his blessed Espousals,
and the gladness of his Heart; for it is the best work that ever he did to make
a Covenant, and be betrothed to the Virgin fair Virtue, if he do not break it:
Else it will be his Eternal Horror and cause of Everlasting Repentance, if he
prove faithless: Better it is he should not Vow unto me, then Vow and not
perform.

. 6. Resolution.
I Gave my Royal Shepherd a Chariot of the Wood Lebanon (i. e.) white Moon: In
the Original it is Lebanah, and signifies the white Moon.
of the Celestial Forest: The Pillars were of Silver, the Bottom of Gold, the
Canopy of Purple, the midst thereof being paved with the Love of fair Virtue,
or pure Pleasure for the Divine Daughters of the Holy City. Now set me as a
seal upon thine Heart: As a Divine Stamp upon thine Arm: Think upon me, and the
ways of Virtue, as thou walk in the way, and as thou sit and oestest and
as thou risest up. For my Love to the is as strong as Death: My Jealousy will
be cruel as the Grove, it will devour the perjured Soul (if thou prove false to
thy Vow) in Eternal Death: But O God my Father, may that never be! For the
coals of Jealousy are as coals of Eternal Fire, which has a most cruel
Scorching Flame of Torment: Many Waters of Sorrows cannot quench my Love to
thee: Neither can the Floods drown it: Neither can the Rivers or Tears of a
thousand Suitors and Rivals to thee stop the burning thereof. If one should
give all Substance of his House for my Love, it would be utterly contemned. And
so if thou abusest me hereafter, and runnest gadding in thy Mind after other
Lovers, though thou should give all that thy Soul and Body are worth, and all
the Substance of thy House for the enjoyment of me the third time, it will be
utterly rejected and despised as a vain trifle. Take notice of it: And be true
to me thy Spouse. After this Day the Divine Damsels saw me and praised me with
this Blessing: Be thou Mother of thousands of Millions: And the Author of a
numberless number to People the Celestial City by the new Regeneration: And
let thy Seed effess the Gates of Heaven which Lucifer lost: Build thou the
House of the Humane Offspring: Thou art our Sister: Do thou worthily in Heaven
and be thou famous in Paradise. And this was the Contract, that the Wedding
must be solemnized in the prese^^e of the King our Father, on the Day of my
Trid^grooms ^^tting off his Earthly Tabernacle and Elementary Robe. Now Happy
is the Man that can arrive to the Haven of so great a Happiness as this: so as
to find Virgin Virtue, God's most Beautiful Daughter, called also pure
Pleasure, or Divine Delight of the Son of Man: For her Pri^e is far ^bove
R^^^es.

. 7. Sevenfold Virtue.
NOW these Celestial Virgins are of different Degrees; for some Virtues are
predominant in these, which are weak in those: And yet all clothed with the
Garments of Unity. 1. One is a good Housekeeper and diligent as the Be: The
Heart of her espoused does safely trust in her: So that he need fear no spoil:
She seeks Flax and Wool, she works willingly with her Hands: She is like
the Merchants Ships: She brings her Food from a far: She considers a Field
in fair Eden, and buys it: With the Fruit of her Hands, she planteth a Vineyard
of Refreshing Bowers: She lays her Hands to the Distaff, and her Candle goes
not out in the Eternal Night: She reaches forth her Hands to the needy: And
all her household are clothed with Scarlet: She makes her self coverings of
Tapestry: Her Garments are Silk and Purple. 2. Another is skilled by Divine
Wisdom, in playing upon Instruments of Music: She inventeth means for the
Recreation of Humane Life: She makes Songs in the Praise of her Creator and
Father: The Workmanship of her Tabrets were prepared in her in the Day that she
was Created; whereby she chaseth the evil Spirit, that troubles the Humane
Mind. 3. A third by her Politic skill in Martial Discipline, delivers a
besieged Microcosmical City surrounded by Lucifer and his Soldiers, by causing
one Man the Offender to dye, whose Head shall be thrown over the Wall, that the
whole City perish not. This is the anointed Virago. 4. Another is more
beautiful and amiable in her Divine Form, as clothed with the Shape of God,
and bearing the very Picture of her Virgin Mother in her Lovely Visage, as they
indeed all do, but this in an especial Manner: She is most meek and courteous
in Carriage, and Communication, therefore the froward and grudge-bearing
Sycophant shall never partake of her Love. 5. Another is wise in true Wisdom,
and foretells of Evils which are like to befall a Humane Soul that is espoused
to her, if he observe the Divine Motion of her pure Gale in the ^ool of the
blessed Day: She reveals hidden Mysteries to the Humane Spirit that loves her:
Thus though also she be acute and eloquent, yet she is entirely Sincere. This
is the Angelical Philosopher and Prophetess. 6. Another is sound and healthy,
and by that means has skill in the Plant of Life, and the Virtue thereof for
the healing of Maladies in Humane Body and Soul. This is the Celestial
Physitianess.

. 8. Sevenfold Reward.
LAstly. The most Noble is she whose Clothing is Divine Honor and
Magnanimity; Majesty, and an Heroic Greatness of Spirit is in her Countenance:
She is adorned with a generous Brightness, and she shall rejoice in time to
come, in Eternity, and shine as the Celestial Star in the Holy World, as being
brighter than the rest, as partaking more of the solar property: She opens
her Mouth as one speaking with Authority, yet in Modesty and Wisdom; yea, in
her Tongue is the Law of Kindness: Her Children in the new Birth arise up and
call her Blessed: Her Husband also, he praises her: Many Daughters have done
Virtuously, but thou excellest them all: Though not equal with the Bride of the
Anointed Champion, the Sister and Friend of the Great Messiah. Fawning Favor
is deceitful, and counterfeit Beauty is vain; but this Divine Virgin that
obeys her Father, shall be praised: Give her of the Fruits of her Hands, and
let her own Works praise her in the Gates of Heaven. Thus in particular, Fair
Virtue (which is pure Pleasure of the Soul) gives to the Soul that accepts of
her, according to the capacity of the Receiver: 1. Treasures of Eternal Life.
2. A Clue of Thread to direct Man out of the Labyrinth of false Pleasures and
Sports. 3. An Armor to resist Lucifer. 4. Jewels and Ornaments. 5. A Book of
Prophecy, compiled by the Prince of Philosophers, and a new Name written
therein. 6. Food, Bread, and Wine, without end; proceeding from the Tree of
Eternal Life. 7. A Golden Scepter to rule over the adverse party. Thus Man by
accepting of a good Fortune proffered to him, does become Rich, Sound,
Prosperous, Wise, Potent, Fair and Noble, and so preferred to an Heavenly
Dignity and Office.

. 9. Grace turned into Wantonness.
O Man therefore be not so self-conceited and obstinate: Be not Osor Mulierum,
one that Disregards God, and the Desire of Women, Dan. 11.37. An Hater of the
fair Virgin: Be willing to enter into the holy Estate of Matrimony, for to this
thou art purposely born: Else thy Soul (if thou refuse) will be left to be
tormented by the Demons, and thou will die the Eternal Death, for Love of a
Harlot, whose Love thou shall never enjoy. If thou art in love with the fair
Virgin, have a care of abusing her, and offering Violence to her, by deflowring
her: Though thou indeed shall never be able to make her comply to thy false Will:
Yet thy evil attempt before the Wedding (which is the Day of the Fall of the
outward Body) will make thee guilty of her departure, and the fault shall
Eternally lie at thy Door. Do not thou like a Vagabond combine to put a trick
upon the Virgin thy Spouse, and to murder thy dear Companioness: If thou do,
be sure the Murder will come to light, for she will rise again to judge you
both. Be not has^y in thy Choice, lest thou do that in a day, or unlucky hour,
which cannot be undone in an Age of Eternity. But some may say, Nature seems
cruel in this, That a fair young Man, the Soul, cannot dart his Eyes upon a
supposed Beauty, without great peril of being wounded himself. Answ. Leave the
Cross, and lose the Crown. The youthful Soul, who formerly took pleasure in
Exploits and brave Actions, is now turned devout, and become a Zealous and
Religious Votary, to some Feminine Beauty. O humane Soul, beware of Idolatry.
As Christ descended into Hell, so must the Soul of Man too: That is, if he
finds himself unworthy of all comfort in this World, and if things should fall
cross with him in outward things, and i^ he should become the scorn of Devils,
yet he esteems it all just, and according to his Des^rts, so he obtains the
Favor of God, and the Virgin again. He must de^cond into the Infernal Shadows,
to seek and fetch her home again.

. 10. By Double-Heartedness.
HE that keeps not the Virgins Love, for Love-sake; but suppose^h he has it
for a Reward; to him it is most grievous, and he desires to be soon rid of it;
and this is the Property of every Hireling, to desire and wish an End of his
Toil. Whereas a true Lover thinks no Pains, Labor or Time too much and
grievous, so he may but retain his love. If Virtue could be seen by Men in her
own Natural Beauty, Naked, (said the Philosopher) Men would be wonderfully in
love with her. But the Soul suspects the Virgins Purity, thinking to find the
same impure lasciviousness in her, which he finds in himself: Another would
willingly enjo^ both: He loves the Virgin a little, and Jezebel a little: But
the Virgin never appears in the Society of the incestuous Strumpet: And that is
the Reason that the Soul often longs after her, and fetches many a deep sigh
for her, when in the midst of vain Mirth and Laughter, the Heart is sad and
heavy. Tho'at long run, the Soul becomes tinctured by a false Ferment b^ the
Whores Society: Also if the Virgin should appear in the House of this Trull,
all the Ravenous Birds would have a peck at her. And that is the Reason, when
any goes to the House of Feasting on vain and counterfeit Food, he cannot hear
the Voice of Wisdom, (as Christ's Voice could not Echo forth to the Questions
of them that envied him at his Examination:) For two Contraries cannot be of
equal Authority at one and the same time in the same Subject.

CHAP. VIII. The Virgins Farewell.
. 1. Beware of Falling from Grace.
GIve not thy Honor, thy honorable Soul, to another: Nor thy Eternal years
unto the Cruel: Lest Strangers be filled with thy Wealth, and thy Labors be in
the House of thine Enemies: And lest the Jewels of the Virgin, which she gave
thee, be ridiculed by them that emulate her happiness: And thou mourn at the
last, when thy flesh is consumed in the Grave of Despair, and say, O now I
wonder that I could not esteem her: How was I such a Fool as to despise the
Instruction of my Virgin. Ah! What did I call her MY Virgin? She is not mine,
but she was mine: O that I could say she never was so now! But there is my
Eternal Hell: Because I crossed the Mind of my Creator, who appointed her to be
mine: But I appointed her Enemy for my everlasting Companion, who will not lead
a loving Life with me, but torment me with the Snakelike Scourges of her
Scorpion Furies. Now observe, here is the crossing of the Eternal Fancy of the
Soul, (if thou call it a Fantasy) the Spirit of the Soul must have his Will,
his desired Object, the Virgin; Or he will die, and that Eternally. And the
false Mind will enjoy Jezabel, the Object of his Love, or he will also dye the
Eternal Death. And so Man lies in a great strait, as compassed about with Nets
on every side: And there is no way to escape the Gulf, but by being faithful to
his Virgin: For though Man prove faithful to the said Humane Sorceress, yet she
will not be true to him, but will play the Harlot, and defile his Bed in
Eternity. Therefore, O Man, (poor Wretch) consider thy self here: Drink Water
out of thine own Cistern: And running Waters of Eternal Pleasures out of thine
own undefiled Virgin- Well. Let thy Holy Fountain be blessed everlastingly, and
Rejoice with the beautiful Maid of thy ever-flourishing Youth: Let her be as
the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, and let her Breasts satisfy and refresh thee
at all times: And be thou ravished world without end with her chaste love. And
why will thou be ravished with a strange Woman, and embrace the Bosom of a
Whore, that is common to the evil Demons, who will not love the again in truth?
Go then thy way from this Trull: Eat thy Bread of Life in Joy, and drink thy
heart-chearing Wine of eternal Beatitude with a merry heart: For God now (if
thou art true to his Virgin-Daughter) accepts thy Works: For this is the
Antepast of Heaven. Let thy Garments be always pure, clean, and white, and let
thy Head, blessed by thy Virgin Mother, lack no Ointment of heavenly Oil. Live
joyfully with thy Espoused Virgin, whom thou love all the days of the Life of
thy Vanity, which God has given under the Sun all the days of thy temporal
Vanity, for that is thy Portion in this Life, to thy Labor which thou take
under the Sun of Time, and that only is the end of thy Travail, and the final
Cause of thy Journey, which to perform, necessity is laid upon thee by the
Creator: He sets thee upon this Work and Labor, to see whether thou will love
his Virgin-Daughter by the Light of the Sun, and not suffer thy self to be
blinded, by not looking for true Light in the Virgins Face, and so be dazzled
and struck blind for love of an unworthy Guest at her seeming Beauty.

. 2. Or there is no third Recovery.
SIn not against the Virgins holy Spirit, for thy Sin will never be forgiven.
If thou prove faithful to the Virgin here, under the Sun of her Light, which is
pure, thou shall Eternally enjoy her pleasant Aspects and Smiles, and loving
Communications, under the Sun of an ever-shining Light in Heaven. Whatsoever
thy hand finds to do, in reference to the Nods and Pointings of the Virgin,
do it with thy might: For there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor
Wisdom in the Grave of Eternal Death, whither thou go, if thou break her
Law: Neither can any one help thee out of that Grave, for out of the Eternal
Hell there is no Redemption. Nay if Angels and Saints did all join their Skill,
and Device, and Wisdom together, they can afford thee no help from thence.
Besides, if thou do not now use all thy Skill, and do thy best endeavor to
forsake Vice and Sin, (the form of this Jezabel in the Abstract) and to do good
with all thy might, and love God (or Virtue, which is God and the fair Virgin
in the Abstract) with all thy strength and Soul, thou will never have space
granted thee to mend thy work in the succeeding World, or to rectify and make
straight that which is made crooked in this World, or to fill up the measure or
number or weight in Gods Balance: For that which is w^nting here, cannot be
numbered hereafter: And two cannot be subtracted out of one. For by
Slothfulness the Building decays, and through Idleness of the Hands in this
World, the House of the humane World will drop through, and be swallowed in the
Abyss And while I was passing by the Soulish Field of the Sluggard, I looked,
and behold it was all grown over with Thorns; It became a Wilderness, wherein
the Owner was entangled, and knew not which way to turn to find Ease and
Refreshment. I went by the Vineyard of the lazy Labourer, and Lo, Nettles had
covered the Face thereof: And the Stone-Wall thereof was broken down. Then I
saw and considered it well: I looked upon it, and set it forth for an Example;
that he that sleeps in the Summer shall starve in the Eternal Winter: So
shall his Poverty come as a fugitive Beggar, who travaileth in the boundless
Wilderness; and his want as an armed Soldier in Lucisers Camp. O Man repent in
time.

. 3. Virtue Rare.
TAke no heed to all Words, or Affronts, that are cast at thee, lest thou hear
the Servile Handmaid (or else the Whorish Woman) curse her legal Mistress. For
often times also thine own Conscience knows that thou thy self have cursed thy
Rivals. All this (says the Great Prophet) have I proved by Philosophy: I said
I will be wise: But Wisdom is not easily attainable: For that which is far off,
and exceeding deep, who can find it out, without heavenly Skill in Theosophy?
And by Man's Churlishness the Virgin often removes far from him. I applied my
heart to know, and to search, and to seek out by Wisdom the reason of things,
and the deep Cause of Causes, and the Wickedness of Folly, even of Foolishness
and Madness. And I find more bitter than Death the Woman whose false Heart is a
Snare, and whose Fingers are Nets and Bands to bind the humane Soul: Whosoever
pleases God, and loves the Virgin, shall escape from her, but the Sinner
against Gods Law of Obedience, shall be caught in her trap, as a Woodcock in a
Snare, or Fishes in an evil Net. Behold this have I found, (says the Preacher
of Truth) Counting one by one to find out the Account by Mathematical
Calculation: Which yet my Mind seeks, but I find not clearly. One humane Soul
among a thousand have I found, but scarce a Virgin can be found now a days,
among a Thousand Handmaids and false Women, for the Earth being stained with
humane Blood, has forced the Divine Spouses of Mankind to disappear, and enter
into their own Principle. The way that leads to the Whores lodging is broad:
Yea even the blind finds it without a Guide. And the path of Virtue is narrow,
yet it is easy and straight to him whose Eyes are in his Head. But when the
Virgin is lost, (as the Epigrammist said) so may the Soul say to the Virgin,
thou have given me a Looking-glass as a token of thy Love; wherein I may see my
own shape, and if I had not been a Fool, might have learnt by it to know my own
self. I had rather thou would now send me one wherein I might see thee and
the Signs of thy Favor and Acceptance, and thy most beautiful Aspect once
more, attracting my longing Mind: But it is too late. I may indeed see my own
ug^y Form infected by the Whore of false Lust. The Fire of this Harlot is like
the Fire of Hell, which burns another, but gives no Light, whereby her Lover
may find her.

. 4. Christ's proffered Service slighted.
FOR three things the Earth is disquieted: And for four which it cannot bear:
For a Servant the Worm of the Soul, when he reigns over the noble Mind: And a
Fool, the false Affection or Delight, when he is filled with Meat, which is not
the true Food of the Soul: and so cannot relish Food by a longing hunger which
is the best Sauce. For an Odious Strumpet, when she is married to her Superior
the Soul: And for the Virgins Handmaid, who is Heir to her Mistress. But
Virgin-Vertue cries to the Spirit of Man, Oh can thou be cruel? Can thou be
so hard-hearted? Will thou now forsake and despise me after all thy pretended
kindnesses? Must I now be a Bond maid to thy Concubines, who was born a
Princess? Thou have not brought me any Gifts, thou have not sent me any tokens:
I have not caused thee to serve and wait upon me with an Offering of thy
devoted Soul, nor wearied thee with the Sacrifices of thy vowed self: Neither
have thou honored me with the Incense of thy promised Service. But thou have
made me to serve with thy Sins: Thou have wearied me waiting upon thee in thy
Debauchery. And the Jewels I gave thee thou have bestowed upon Harlots. Many
take occasion to blame the Virgin for a small seeming Offense, when they wink
at this Jezebels Impudence: yea though the sincere Virgin do but whisper a Word
to one of her Companions, it must be judged to be Treason. If thou would be
wise and retain thy Jewels, not bestowing them upon thy unworthy Harlot, thou
should soon see how she would pack away to her own Companions: Now therefore
see thy Folly at last, thy entrusting of thy Jewels with her, believe her not,
reject her fair Promises, for she waits to deceive and entrap thee.

. 5. A seared Conscience.
THen bethought her self, when the valedictory parting Kiss was given her: O
this Wedding Song is become a Threnetick Song. When the Virgin fair-Vertue
perceives the Soul continues obstinate, and will not commiserate her woeful
Condition, whereunto she has plunged her self for his sake, by letting her
Affections of true Love after him, he being unworthy thereof, and slighting her
kindness, then she goes into a solitary Wilderness to bewail her doleful fate:
And now says she, I have piped unto thee, but thou have not danced. I have
Sung an Elegiack farewell to thee, but thou have not sympathized with my Griefs.
And it grieves her to think how she has been trampled upon, and causlesly
kicked out of his Society; though she wished him well, and did all for his good
and everlasting welfare (Oh, says she, How long thou simple one will thou hate
me, and neglect thy own Mercy? How long O scorner will thou scorn me?) Yea He
was the first occasion which moved her to set her Affections upon him: But it
seems with an intent to mock and deceive her, and make a May Game and Derision
of her before his Jezebelish Companions. Yet when she sees there is no Hope or
Remedy, (for she resolves never to leave or forsake him, while the least Oil
capable of receiving the flame of Love remained in him:) And when she finds
that his Mind is resolved another way, then she considers with her self: And
mutte^ring says, Why do I pine and waste thus? I do not profit at all to my
self, nor promote the means of regaining his Affections toward me, I will
again return to Paradise to my Mothers House, even where I was raised up under
the Tree of Life by the Fountains of Eden, and where I was snatched away while
I was securely gathering Flowers by the upper Springs of the Celestial Groves;
and hurried away into this fair World. There in Paradise, I shall see my dear
and heavenly Mother again, and I will complain to her of my hard Fortune, and
dismal Fate, the result of the unkindness of my late Lover. There I will open
my Mind in Sincerity to her: Perhaps she will afford me some comfortable
Advice. Being come home, her Virgin Mother perceives by her looks that she has
not sped well, and says unto her. What Is the Matter with my sweet and dear
Daughter? Is this she who I thought was lost, whose lovely Face I almost
despaired ever to see again? What? have not things occurred well with thee?
Have thou no Fellow-Traveller? No Recreator of thy tedious long Journey? What?
Come through such a terrible Wilderness alone? What are those wounds on thy
late beautiful Face? How is thy fair Visage more marred than thy Sisters, and
thy form seems more disfigured than pretended Maids? Oh dear Mother, says
Virgin-Vertue, many have been astonished at me: My Virgin-Play-fellows did not
know me: It seems I have no Form nor Comeliness which Man's Soul can see in me,
no Beauty that he should desire me: I am despised and rejected of my Companion:
I am a Virgin of sorrows and acquainted with Grief, my Mate has hid his Face
from me, I was despised and be esteemed me not: He looked on me as stricken,
smitten and forsaken of God. And now who shall declare my Generation, and the
Children of my Womb? Yet I have done no Violence, neither was deceit found in
my Mouth: I was true to my Lover: But he proved false to his late Companion in
Tribulation: I was deceived and inveigled into his Wiles by his fair Speeches:
He seemed to prosess great kindness at the first, and drew me into his Not with
smooth but deceitful Promises: But now he has utterly slighted me. I received
these Marks on the Palms of my Hands, by the Malice and Treachery of his false
Companions, who drew my Lovers Heart from me, and the Watchmen of the Night did
smite and wound me. Then do thou (says her Virgin Mother) slight him as much:
If he suffer his Eyes to be so blinded, that he cannot see his own Good,
forsaking his own Mercy and the Day of his tender Visitations; let him thank
himself. Choose another and let him go: Be not so concerned my blessed
Daughter, the Child of my Womb: Take Heart and raise thy drooping Mind out of
the Grave of Despair.

. 6. The Talent given to another.
WHY do thou take on so? Why art thou so affected with thy Sorrow? Leave thy
Sobbing: Sigh no more: Stay with me in thy Mothers House as a desolate Widow,
and she shall cherish thee with the Oil of Joy again. And thou shall again
rejoice in Eternity: Come take a drop of this Celestial Wine into thy fair
Mouth, it will cheer thy dejected Heart, and comfort thy pure and sincere
Spirit: And thou shall have a sweet nap of refreshment upon my Breasts. And
when thou awakest, this hard-hearted Beloved of thine will be cast out of the
Church of thy Affections, and committed to the Hell of Oblivion. But (says
Virgin-Vertue) where are my dear Sisters? Oh! says God's Bride, they all
sympathize with thee, and bemoan thy hard Hap, and yet congratulate thy safe
return from wandering in the wide Wilderness among wild Beasts: Blessed art thou
my Daughter, that have found thy Native Haven of the Holy Heaven again. When
she has had the enjoyment of the sweet Society and Communication of her
heavenly Friends a small Season, she gradually receives Comfort and a
Refreshment of pure rejoicing with a Divine Hallel^jah, praising the Creator
with Songs of Trin^ph in her Mouth, that he has delivered her from the Fury
and Cruelty of her envious Rivals, who laid wait for her Halting, and looked
for her Ruin. Now I being weather beaten, and having swum over an Ocean of
bitter briny tears, am now arrived at my fold of Everlasting Rest. Her Virgin
Mother says, O my Virgin-Dan^hter; thou shall be yet in Love with a faithful
Companion, and divinely inamoured with one who will equally love thee again, as
thy loveliness deserves. The next true Friend, whom thou shall show k^n^ness
to, in a real Commiseration of their ruireable Condition, shall resalute thee
with an Answer of (...) kindness, neither will it ever enter into his Heart to
receive thee, when he shall be espoused to thee, with whom thou shall Eternal,
abide in the and undefiled ^^ed of Eternal Joy At this her Virgin Sisters come
forth out of a retired Room or Closet in Heaven, saying: O is this our Sister
marked with the Scars of an unfortunate War in the Fields of crossed, and
unfaithful Love? Alas for thee! our dear Sister. I am black, O ye Daughters of
the Holy City, and Swarthy, and my former Comeliness can scarce be perceived.
Look not upon me, because I am Black; because my Skin was become Tawny in the
parched Wilderness: Because the scorching Sun of deceitful Lust and false Love
has looked upon me, and sought to infect me. My Mothers Stepsons were angry
with me: They made me the Keeper of their Vineyards, I waited upon them in
their Superflui^ies and Pleasures, and would faintaste of the Gleanings, and
the Grapes that they refused: And so mine own Vineyard I have not kest, and now
you see my beautiful Flowers are laid in the Dust. Alas for thee? say they,
Alas and well a day! We have a little Sister, and she has no Breasts, she
seems to be Eternally Barren, and incapable of propagating her Divine Species
according to the Creators Law. O what shall we do for our Sister in the Day
that she shall be spoken for, and invited to the great Wedding-Dinner? If she
be a Wall of Defense against impure Lo^ers, we will build upon her a Palace of
Silver, which shall be as a Golden Temple of Gladness to entertain her Noble
Beloved. And if she be a Door of Invitation, we will enclose her with boards of
Celestial Caedar, to receive her saithful Shepherd in her Holy Habitation, and
Tent of Contentment under the Trees of Eternal Life.

. 7. The Soul's Anguish.
THus, as it happened to the Fool, that is in Labor and Travail to obtain his
false Delilah: So it happened to this fair Virgin: But they shall not have the
same Catastrophe in the end of the Act or Play. For they shall dye in a
different manner, which when they shall have sacrificed their Souls, devoted to
the service of their Lovers: The one shall dye to his Condemnation: The other
to the Resurrection of Everlasting Life and Joy. Now the Soul that slighted
this fair Virgin, being deceived by a blind Fancy of false Passion, forsakes
her for ever; and falls in love with an unworthy Harlot far inferior to
himself and his nobility, whereby he degenerates into a bestial State, by a
Soul-Transmigration. Verifying the Proverb.

Pares cum paribus facillime Congregantur. And this Delilah only plays the Fool
with him to sport her self, and make a Mock play of him with her Companions,
and her fellow-Harlots: And will not Love him again, as he Loves her: (It is
hard to rob a Thieves House.) And so he becomes a Vagabond, and Fugitive upon
the Earth, and Eternally seeks after her, but can never obtain her Love. And
though perhaps he may so far prevail with her, as to have the favor of
defiling her in the Bed of obscene wantonness, yet that is only to give him a
Taint of her Infection, which will Eternally burn in, and wast his griping
Bowels. And this is a Description of Man's Hell (almost without a Metephor) viz.
A Separation of the Soul from God his desired Object, in his dying Hour and
last Minutes; when he finds himself by Reason of a wilful and continued course
in deadly Sins excluded the Enjoyment of Heaven, nor can he lay any claim to
the Benefit of the Sacrifice, having shut himself out by false Lust, falling in
Love, and being inamoured with a blind Passion: A false Delilah having had the
Flower of his youthful Love, he is no more for her turn. And so to speak in a
similitude, Man's Soul shall be confined to an Eternal Wilderness: So that it is
very clearly understood how the labor of the foolish Souls will weary every
one of them, because they know not the way to go to the City of mutual Love and
Solace. All which ways leads him to endless Sorrow and Miseries, being the
effects of Sin, which confine him to an un-openable Prison, in which he shall
feel within him a Fire of Eternal Pain and aching of his Mind, whereby his Heart
shall burst in pieces, and yet remain whole by renewing it to endure a fresh
wracking Torment in the Grim Life.

. 8. The Soul's Despair.
ANd all this because he would not allow the right Spirit of the Soul, the
thing that he earnestly begged and cried after: Yea he shall as through a
Goal-Grate at times behold this Harlor, who was the occasion of his Misery,
mocking him, and saying, O Fool! now pay Eternally for thy Folly in believing
me: Now eat thy sower Sauce after thy sweet Meat. Also he shall see Heaven
above him, by looking at times beyond the great Gulf, and he shall to his
Repentance ever to be repented, and to his Grief never to be expiated, at times
espy his once fair Virgin, whom he might have Eternally enjoyed to his
unspeakable Solace, and mutual Refreshment; for she was (if he had not undone
the knot of true Love) his own proper Right by the Law of Eternity. And because
he refused her, there must be a Transmigration of Souls, and out of his Ashes
must spring another, who will gladly step into his Throne, and Love his Virgin
who never was defiled: And this his Rival-Successor, he shall look at with an
envious Eye embracing his Virgin, who is now become his Rivals own, by the
unalterable Law of the Deity. Thus this spiritual Adulterer shall see his Late
Virgin in the dear Arms of another, but he shall never in Eternity receive so
much as one smile, nor so much as one of her looks to refresh him, wherewith
his Heart used lately to be ravished. Instead of this he shall Conceit she
frowns upon him, though indeed her Nature is ignorant of the manner of frowning:
And so shall feel intolerable Pain and Griping in his Conscience, which is a
difference or Combustion between the Soul and Spirit of the Soul, because he
has foolishly squandred away his fair Virgious Gifts, and scorned or refused a
good or blessed Fortune which the Creator had appointed him. And upon the
Monument set over his H^llish Grave shall be this Epitaph engraved: Here lies
the cursed Ashes, (the Object of Scorn) once the Seat of the Fire of pure Love,
who deceived his own Soul like a Fool, and now suffers the Punishment of his
own procuring, and burns in the Fire of his own kindling. Therefore O Man have
a Care, defraud not the pure Mind of the true Pleasure it earnestly cries,
longs, and pants after, or of the Virgin it labors and travails for:
think not that it will be put off with Foperies, and shammed with Toys of
Vanity, or lusled asleep by a Song of Vanity. If it be cast by some
Soporiferous Poison into Sleep, yet it will again awake to thy Condemnation:
And will never cease craving for the right Food that is proper for his Eternal
Health and Life, and will by his Officer, Scourge and Torment thee, till he
obtain his Desire.

. 9. Late Repentance.
THerefore spend not thy Money for that which is not Right Bread, nor thy
Labor for that which profits not the Spirit of the Soul: For I say again he
will not be cheated. For when the Body comes to drop as a Leaf from the Tree of
the Soul to the Grave: Death will by no means in the World, by no fair Speeches
be bribed to put off the time, when the forcible Wind is sent to blow it down.
When the guilty Sinner sees that Death will not be put off, then he endeavors
to bribe the Souls Spirit, and to speak him fair, saying, O be reconciled to me
in my extremity. The Soul's Spirit says, Fly hence; thy House does Crack, it
falls:
Get under Ground for safer Walls.
The Soul answers, Oh but give me a token of thy savor, before the thread of
my Life be cut off by the Sword of the Cherub: I have done brave Exploits for
thee in former days. O, says the Spirit, so Lucifer's Cities were once famous,
where Satyrs now dance, and doleful Birds howl: No, I will never be reconciled
in Eternity to thee: The time is past: Where was this desire of Reconcilement
before, when I was willing to keep peace with thee, on condition I should have
my will, and the end of my longing, which once was easily attainable: But now
thou art wise too late. O but, says the Soul, now I repent from the bottom of
my heart: O be favorable to me, and show me some kindness, remit that rigor
which thou threatnest me with, now at my last gasp, where with I will pray
Heaven to requite thee. Keep thy thanks to feed thy hellish Brood, (says the
pure Mind) This is but to gain the time, because thou see the thing I longed
for is gone from me: Thouhast prepared lying and corrupt Words to speak
beforeme till the time be changed; therefore there is but one Decree, Either
procure to me my dear Virgin, and wash thy Blackmore's Skin white, or thou
shall be utterly destroyed, and thy House shall be made a Dunghill.

. 10. The Soul's Hellish Blasphemy.
BUt, (says the Soul) O be not so cruel, and rigid. She is unattainable, she
is taken into thy Rivals Favor: It is impossible to substract a greater number
from a lesser, that I cannot do: Only remit the penalty of this severe Law: Nay
(says the Noble Mind) I must proclaim an Eternal War against thee; For as thou
had not Power over the false Spirit, to retain the Spirit of thy Affections,
so neither have thou power in the day of Eternal Death; neither has any one
the Power to retain the Virgin, when she is gone into her place, and quite
rejected. And therefore I say, There is no discharge in this War, no redeeming
of thee from the Fury of the bloody Soldiers, and avenging Officers, who will
now cast thee into Prison: Neither shall wickedness deliver them that have been
all their time given to it. Therefore, O humane Soul, think not that thou shall
escape, and that the Spirit of the humane Soul shall die for the rest of the
humane Commonwealth, and come under the Lash for the loss of his dear Virgin,
(for though thou should give all the Substance of thine House, and all that
thou art worth, to be reconciled to her, it cannot be, when the day of Grace is
sinned out) and that this Divine Essence shall suffer for thee. No, no, this
Divine Essence shall remain as an Image in a Looking-glass, and thou shall
endure the Pain, as being condemned by this said Essence, who will arise again
out of the Grave which thou have dug for him, and condemn thee, as being thy
Eternal Judge. And here is seen what part suffers; for where the sore is, there
will be the Hand. And here begins the great and Hellish Blasphemy of a Soul in
the real Tophet, the Soul will gnaw his Tongue for pain and vexation, and
Revenge against the Spirit of the Soul, as if he were in sault; whereas himself
was the cause of Bringing this tormenting Woe upon himself. And now the dumb
guilty Soul may be long at the Gate of the deaf Spirit, who will not hear his
Cries, because he himself was lately as the deaf Adder who would nor hearken to
the Charms of the Spirit, charming never so wisely: And struck his Conscience
oft-times as dumb as a Sheep before the Shearer. Yea the Soul will rave and
rage as if he would tear the Deity it self in pieces. And when a poisoned Arrow
does light upon his Flesh, he knowing not whence it comes, he will receive the
Blood into his hands, flushing out, and throw it up to the Abyss, crying out, O
Almighty Power thou have conquered me; and so blaspheming, dies the Eternal
Death.

CHAP. IX. The Souls Rest.
. 1. Where is this Rest?
IF the Soul do but attain the End of his Journey, which was appointed as the
true final Cause of his Travail and Labor by the Creator, then he becomes
happy, and not before. The Sleep and Rest of the Laboring Soul is sweet,
whether he sleep little or much; but the bundame of the covetous Rich and
conceited Soul, who conceits he needs nothing, as being not beholden to God,
will not suffer him to sleep, and to take a quiet Nap of sweet Repose. But
where is this Rest to be found, There Is the Question: The Elements say, It is
not in us: The Depth says, It is not in me: Hell and Death say, We have heard
the Fa^e thereof with our Ears: There is a Path which the s^^tillest Fowl knows
not, and which the quick sighted Vultures Eye has not seen. Nay, let Man
search and grope into every Corner and Cranny of the whole Creation, yet he
shall never find Rest for his Soul, until he come and return to Virgin Virtue,
Gods fair Daughter, his appointed and predestined Spouse. As the Stars and
Astral Powers bear sway over Mortals, so also the Minds of Men have a reflexive
Influence upon the Starry Natures: For Evil Minds, by Sympathy or Simile
attract the Evil Influences, which infect the Air, and so alight upon the first
Authors. Even as a Not oft-time generate^h within it self that which destroys
it, namely, the Worm of an evil Influence. In like manner also virtuous and
holy Souls attract the good Influences of the Astral Properties by Sympathy.
Now who knows the Spirit of a Man that goes upwards to his own natural
Heaven, and attracts the good and sweet Influences thereof? For, God with a
lofty Mind did Man indue,
And bid him Heavens transcendent Glory view;
As being his Natural Scope and right Home. But if any humane Soul approve not
of this Form, choosing a prone or downward Look, and to be leaded with the
guilt of an evil or guilty Conscience, he shall sink down into the Abyss.

. 2. Not God's Fault, if missed.
Though God commands the Soul to choose Life and Eternal Joy, and let every Bird
delight in his own Note, which th Creator has inspired into him, to praise the
Inspirer, yet most Men choose Death, and let them thank themselves. But now
Heaven is the appointed Home of Man's Soul: And if the Soul miss to find his
home, there is his Hell, and there is the Inverting of the Mind of God, or
frustrating of the Intent of the Almighty, which makes the Woe and the Hell. But
some may say, Hell was also appointed to some Men, as Heaven was predestined
to others. Answ. Yes, Hell was conditionally appointed to Adam and all his
Posterity, upon their slighting of Heaven: But Heaven was Man's native Place or
Home: And thither he must return, if the Causes of Man co-work and suit
together in their genuine coherence. And to say that Hell was the sinal Cause
of some Men's Creation, is absolute Blasphemy. But as the younger Brother said
in the Epigram ( Sum pauper, non culpa mea, etc.) It was not my Fault that I am
poor, but the Fault of my Parents, who have not begotten me before my Elder
Brother, who had the Inheritance: This is the case of the Fool, that lays the
Fault upon the Almighty Father of Mankind. As it was affirmed by the old
Heathen Polytheists, that one Idol-God or Power could not undo what another
did: So it is true in this sense, That whatsoever is made Crooked by the
hellish Power, can never be made Straight again, no not by the Power of the
Almighty Creator himself: For it cannot be expected that God should or would
help Man any more, having created him like himself, and also created him a new,
when there was possibility lest of Recovery: But if Man becomes his own
Creator, and a Necromancer in the Hellish Operation, a third Relief can never
be: And why? Because God himself cannot work against the Truth, or the right
Order of Eternity: He himself being the Prince of Order. And he cannot deny
himself, and belie his own Nature: Neither will he call back a Day that is past.

. 3. God allows Time.
NOw, now, now is the time: It may be possible to day to do a thing which
cannot be done to morrow: Yea, the true Hour must be waited upon to do it: Go
not about a Business against the Hair. Because to every thing and business
there is Time and Judgment, which Man o^t times neglects, therefore his
Misery is great upon him. Lose not the Tide of the Eternal Ocean, which should
carry the Soul to Paradise, for it stays for none. Now is the time to work with
all thy might, and to lay up for Heaven, the end of thy Labor and Work: For in
the Grave whither thou go it cannot be attained. T^o' God promises
Forgiveness to Repentants, yet he does not promise to morrow to repent in: For
many shall strive to enter in at the Gate of Heaven, but when the day of Grace
is past, they shall not be able. Whoever he be that sins out his Day, or
despises the last Day of his Visitation, by Obstinacy, slighteth the Holy
Ghosts last Reproof, rej^cts him out of his Company, and becomes Reprobate: A
Man in a Christian Warfare may quarrel with his Reprover oft-times, and be
reconciled again; considering that those Reproofs were for his Good: But the
Reprobate is past Reproof, and hates to be Reformed: He shall not be forgiven
in this World, nor in that which is to come: No, tho'he, Esau-like, does seek
to repent, for his Repentance is too late: And though he work at the Hour of
Death with all his might, what soever his hand sindeth to do toward his New
Creation, yet the Mystery of the false Nature prevails: And it is folly to seek
the Living among the Dead. It is true, God and his benign Powers or Influences
wait for an Advantage against the Devils Temptations at all times: And
therefore the good Genius will not leave the very worst Sinner till the last
gasp: For according to the Right of the Deity, the holy Angels claim the first
sifting and searching of the Soul, when Man is a dying. As a Physician, when he
sees his Patient mortally sick, yet he gives him some Cordials to ease him: So
God may lessen the Punishment and Damnation of one that has sinned out his Day
of Grace offered once to him, and now repents heartily (that he has passed by
the Gate of Mercy at such and such times, which is now fresh in his Memory) and
is forry by late repentance: But he can never enter in at Heavens Gate: For the
Door will be shut in its right time, and ^arries for no Man's lingering: And the
Tide of the Eternal Ocean will wait no Man's leisure.

. 4. And Tallents.
SEranimis Vita est C^asina, vive Hodie: To Morrow's Life is too late, Live to
Day: Feed on thy true daily Bread to Day, or to Morrow thou will dye Eternally.
Post Mortem Aeternam nulla Voluptas. Expect not therefore, after thou have
eaten thy Morsel in wantonness, to have it too when there is need of it to
refresh thee in thy Journey. Thus Men complain nowadays of the hardness of
the Times, not considering how they spend in a Day many times, in a Drunken
Feast, what might naturally supply them with sufficiency (as to the maintenance
of their Bodies in Health) for a Month. This is abusing, or rather a
Fascination of Gods Blessings. Therefore (as One said, In this World is the
Place of Mercy; in the Other, of Justice and Judgment: And, The Eeginnings of
Things are in our own Power, but the End in God's. And, He that considers what
is past, may foresee what is to come. One scoffingly said to one that lost his
Watch, or Horary Engine, Time will away, all the World cannot help it: So may
it be said to the Fool, that lost his spiritual Instrument of discerning Time
and Eternity. O Man! Provide Oil and Treasures for Heaven beforehand; Trimmed
Lamps without Oil, are of no real Use. Though one of thy Feet may be already in
the Grave of Hell, as being one that came when the Door of Mercy was shut; and
though thou may be an old and reprebate Sinner, and yet would now repent at
the Twelfth Hour, after thou have been working for thy Master the Devil (as
being one of those that stood idle in the Marketplace, expecting Work from the
Lord of the Vineyard) though it be too late now; Make thy self a Friend in time,
for old Friends and old Wine are best. Thou will perhaps hope, God will make
thee his new Friend at the last Hour, but that is too late: For says Christ,
It is not mine to give you, to sit on my Right or Left Hand, but to whom it is
prepared of my Father, according to the condition of the Covenant: But
whosoever comes to God in time, God can in no wise cast out: For such a one
takes Heaven violently by Force, and (as one said) overcomes God, and claims
Heaven as his Right, as though Heaven were his true native Home, and God his real
Father, as indeed he is: Though it must be confessed, Man's Fall made Heaven to
become a Free Gift.

. 5. The Seed sown at Death.
SOme may object, If Man be a small Incarnation, wherein God was pleased to
multiply himself; Or if Man be God's Offspring and Essence, how can God pass
Sentence upon his own Essence? Answ. Here lies the great Mystery: The Work of
Eternity is the World not yet made, and yet ever made by Eternity: viz. This
World was made in six Days, but the World for which this was made, will scarce
be finished in less than Six thousand Mystical Days or Years. The Soul as to
the stamp, mold, or eternal shape thereof, will not be finished till the death
of the Body: Even then the Signature of the Soul's Spirit, (or else of its
Worm) will be charactered for Eternity. Every wicked Soul is but an Embryo: And
the Divine Child, or Pious Soul, is now a forming in the Womb of the outward
Body, and not perfected in an holy Man till the fall of the Body. Therefore
whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever established by his Graver, the Spirit
on the Souls Beast-Plate. Consider his Work: For who can make straight that
which he has made crooked, by the Law which alters not. And say not thou,
What is the cause that the former Days in the outward Life, were better than
these dark and gloomy Days nigh Deaths Door: For thou do not enquire wisely
concerning this: And the Day of Death (if the Soul be perfected in its
formation) is better than the Day of the false Birth. Dicique beatus ante
Obitum n^m^ supremaque funera debet: No Man before Death should be accounted
happy: This World is a wide Prison, and every Day is Execution Day.

. 6. The Heavenly Feast stays for us.
THe Apostate Soul is like the Viper, dying at the parturition of her young
ones. But the Right Soul is perfected at the Death of the Body: Being formed a
perfect Divine Man, whose Form is the Image of the Deity. Even then is the
Marriage and full fruition of the Virgin of God, who is to be clothed in fine
Linen clean and white, the Purity and Righteousness of a holy Soul, as being
her Delight and Ornament: And therefore, O Man, be sure thou be related by
Affinity to the Great Messiah, whose Bride will shortly make her self ready in
the presence of God and the holy Angels: Blessed art thou that shall be called
to the Wedding Supper of the Lamb-like Prince of Innocence: These Sayings are
Faithful and Real: Not a Scene of an Imaginary Fantasy. God would have all to
be saved: The Devil none: And so neither of them is a Respecter of Persons. The
Reprobate wrongs himself, yet seems to do the wrathful Powers a kindness: Yet
his kindness is no kindness: He is like one that throws Brine into the Sea: For
Hell is never satisfied. Come therefore, O Man, to Heaven, and there thou shall
be welcome: If thou art fairer than another, he shall not envy, but rejoice at
thy Beauty: God himself desires thy company, for there is a Superfluity of
Dainties at his Feast: The Profit of the Holy Earth is for all: The King
himself is served by the Fruits of Eden's Field. But if we speak properly, we
must acknowledge God has no loss by a Reprobate Soul, seeing he is Perfection
it self: But the loss is thy own: Thou have not cheated the Virgin, for she
has another appointed her upon thy Refusal: But thou have fooled, deceived,
and put a Cheat upon thy ^elf, and art fallen into the Snare which thou have
prepared for another: And it is an ill Bird that defiles her own Nest. They use
to say of a D^unkard, or some such luxurious Fellow, He does no Hurt to any,
but what he does to himself: I pray who can trust such a (...) a harmless Man?
He is the greatest Cheat of (...) who cheats himself: Seeking to undermine God
and his Virgin. To be fore such a one (if he finds but opportunity) will prove
false to his Neighbor also, and to the whole Creation. I love thee as my own
Soul, (said a fat luxurious Man to his Sweetheart.) Then you love me not as
your Body (said she) or you love me not at all: For I see you love not your
self, because you repent not of your sins.

. 7. Man's Self-Enjoyment Gods primary Glory.
THus many a Soul thinks to advance himself, by a vain expectation of the Death
of God, Christ, and the Soul's Spirit, whose Officer is like to torment him in
a Fiery L^ke. There was a rich thriving Man, that had a Servant who thrived not
at all, but was very Unfortunate in outward things: The Master indeed pitied
him, because he proved honest in his place, and perhaps there was a vigilant
Eye over him, that he could not cheat his Master: But his Master paid him the
Arrears of his Wages, and turned him away from his Service, saying, While you
thrive not your self, you cannot be profitable to another; and therefore you
are no servant for me, and so God ^less you. This is the Case between God, the
Master of the great humane Family, and us his Servants: Therefore every Man for
his own Soul chiefly, and God for us all. And so where nothing is to be had,
God loses his Right, as it were: Yet he is accidentally glorisied by the
Reprobate. Heaven is the true End of Man, or final Cause of the Soul: And if
the End be frustrated, the whole Work is in vain. It is the Glory of a King,
and the Ornament of a Kingdom, that his Subjects are Populous and Valiant; And
Children are the Riches of a Parent: So Man attaining the (...) his Generation,
becomes the Glory of God a^^ his Celestial Kingdom. But all is Vanity and a
Frustration of the Right End, whatever excludes and vexes the pure Spirit of
Soul, and hinders him from reaching the scope of his Desire and Labor. It
might be judged that he that adventureth his best Jewel (his precious Life) in
behalf of his Prince, is a Magnanimous Man: But as the Poet said, Vivere pro
patria dulcius esse puto: So it is the case of the Soul: And it is very clear:
For if the final Cause be marred or cut off, the whole Action is vain: As for
instance: A Man whose House is on fire, and leaps into the Fire to save his
Goods, spoils the End: And so does a Thief that adventures his Life for the
enjoyment of a sum of Money; for he disesteems the End, and undervalues it, in
comparison of the Me^ns to preserve and promote the said End: The End of the
Treasure stolen is to preserve Life: If therefore he ha^ards his Life in the
attaining of it, when it might he preserved without such hazard, he is a Fool,
and a vain Fellow. Just so is the Case of one that hazards his Soul in the
attaining of some strange Lust, or supposed Means of promoting the well-being
of the Soul: What is a House good for, if the End, which is Dwelling in it, be
frustrated? (...) one that angleth with a Golden Hook, and (...) own Flesh; and
rather than sleep in a whole (...), ^^ig^atizeth his Soul.

. 8. Spoil not the End for the Means.
ONe feared to go on a Message to the Grand Vizier, saying, He is so
unconstant, he may take my Head off upon no occasion given: The Governor that
sent him, said, I would he durst; I will have a thousand of his Men's Heads off
in lieu of it: Yes, but I question said the Ambassador whether any of them will
sit my Shoulders. Thus may the Souls Spirit upbraid the Soul, when sent by him
upon desperate, and unlawful hazarding of his Life. Take another Example or
Comparison: A Dissolute Fellow under pretense of honoring his Prince, and
wishing well to his Patriots, and Praying for the Health of his Friends, Drinks
large Healths (as he calls them) as in remembrance of his said Friends, and to
the Commemoration of their Prosperity. And what is all this for, but chiefly to
gratify his greedy Belly tub which like a sink receive these Health-resisting
Bowls, under pretense of Praying for the Health of another? But let any
impartial Man judge; whether these impious pretended Salutations, do add any
thing to the Health or Happiness of him who is pretended to be the Subject of
these flatteries: Nay, it is plain robbing of the King, and his Honor, and a
diminishing of his Revenues. O Immortal Man, to thee I speak, and not to him
that prefers Mortality to Eternal Life, Love Virtue, and her Gists, Long Life,
Health, Peace, Plenty, Joy and Rest from Labor: Accept thou of the Fair
Virgins Heavenly Balsom, wherewith she will so embalm thy Soul, that it shall
never turn to Putrefaction, but continue an Immortal Mummy for Gods use. Now it
is well known, that the Humane Body, while it is kept in Health and Fresh by
the natural Balsom or Oil; the Tincture of Life its natural Ferment: it is
preserved free from Decay or Rottenness: For we well may see and observe, when
the Oil is corrupted by the Impur ties of V^nus or some other anomalous means,
the Body many times gradually begins to rot above the Earth. Live thou
therefore Eternally O Humane Soul, lest thou become also Subject to such a
Fate: And be thou Immortal: For there is no Profit to God in the spilling of
thy Holy Blood, neither can they that go down into the Pit of Eternal Death,
Praise and Celebrate his Blessed Name.

. 9. Seven Properties of a future Being.
LAy therefore thy Hand upon thy Heart, O noble Soul, and consider: For the
choice lies at thy own Hands: Whether will thou choose to repossess thy Native
Inheritance: Or like a Fool to become Surety for a Stranger, the Serpent or
Worm who would invade thy proper Right: Consider what thou do before thou
sign the Bond, lest thou make a forfeiture of Heaven thy natural home, and so
suffer thy Soul to be fined, and taken for a Pledge. For what will it profit
thee, if thou should gain the whole World; while thy Soul which should enjoy
it, is amerced by a Mulct which never can be redeemed by any Ransom by the Law
of the So^lish Court? And so thou shall look upon Heaven with doleful Eyes, as
a Prodigal that is become a Beggar, and begs a piece of Bread at the Door of
his Fathers House, to which he was born Heir, now possessed by a Stranger. But
perhaps thou may say, I have purchased a new Birthright, the Kingdom of
Hell: Nay, Hell also spews thee out, as being thy sworn Enemy, and loathes thee
as a false out coming Renegado or Traitor, aiming to become Lord in the Kingdom
whereunto thou wast not created. Whether would thou choose to feed on the
Tree of Eternal Life in Paradise? And to drink of the Living Fountains of
Water, or to be confined in the barren Heath of the Abyss, where thou shall be
starved to Death? Or else thou shall Eternally Vomit out thy own Blood and the
Poison (which thou did swallow in this Life) in Everlasting Pain and
Sickness. And when thou art about to fill thy Belly, thy Enemy shall cast the
Fury of his Wrath upon thee. Will thou refuse Rest after thy Travails, and a
soft repose in the Beatisical Vision, and Divine Recreation and Heavenly Joy?
And in stead thereof choose to sport with Hellish Squibs in Hellfire with Evil
Angels? Where thou shall be terrified (as a feverish Body) with broken Sleeps
and frightful Dreams? And all this, for thy slothfulness in this Life: Because
thou would not Labor in Harvest, thou must want in the Eternal Winter: While
thou made as if thou observedst the Wind and the Clouds, for an excuse to thy
Laziness, when the time of Sowing and Reaping was: Now therefore thou shall
neither Day nor Night see a sweet Repose of Sleep with thine Eyes. O Poor
Prisoner, hard is thy Fate. Will thou refuse Fair Wisdom the Virgin for thy
Consort? And choose to be a Fool, or else to know Pain opposed to Pleasure, and
to be wise like God? Or to become a raging Bedlam whose Wheel of the inward
Seuses wants Reason to guide it: Longing for strange things which are
impossible to be attained. Whether will thou choose to be a Valiant Hero in
Heaven? And a Conqueror of the World? Or to pine away the Remainer of the Days
of thy Eternity as a wounded Soldier? Lurking in Holes from the noise of the
Battle, for fear of thy Enemies who won the Field: And now a dreadful sound is
in thy Ears, as of a Hound or Hellish Fiend pursuing thee Day and Night, and
waiting to apprehend thee as a Catchpole by the Authority of Lucifer, who will
deliver thee to the Judge and so to the Officer, who will do Execution upon thy
cursed Body. O faint-hearted Coward: Now thy fears are in the way, and lay wait
to seize upon thee. Will thou refuse the Bosom of thy chaste Spouse, for the
embraces of a Harlot? Will thou be the Devils Catamite? Will thou loose thy
beautiful Garments to sit in the Dust? Will thou refuse Divine Honor of a
Prince in the Kingdom of Heaven? And choose to be hissed and mocked by them
whom thou have scorned and despised in this Life time? Will thou leap down into
the Abyss and Hellish Fire, and there burn Eternally in the slame of aspiring
self-love? Will thou cast thy self down from the Pinnacle of thy false
Imagination and Fancy by highmindedness and Pride? O stop the Carrcer of thy
Mind, lest thou fare as Luciser does.

. 10. (...) Described.
O Heaven the Eternal source of all Joy! O Paradise (...) Garden of Everlasting
Delight How shall I describe thee? Even as the Holy Spirit works from
Eternity to Eternity, and continually manifests the in^^^ite and number less
Forms o^ the (...) Virgins of God: Just as the Earth produces fair Forms of
Plossoms, Herbs and Fruits, and puts them forth sometimes more fair, and
manifests their Virtues more sovereign and powerful than at other times: And
when one arises in the Essence, another falls down: And there is a continual
lasting uncessant Enjoyment and Labor. Thus likewise is the Paradisical
blossoming in the Holy Bud of the Divine Pregnatress: Where the Plants of Holy
Souls stand (as in a sweet odoriserous Meadow) by one another: And all is as a
perpetual Love-combate or Wrestling-delight: A blooming of fair and curious
Colors, in the Beauty of Gods Virgins: An Harmony of excellent Heart-chearing
Music from their sweet Voices: A pleasant ravishing Smell of Odorates in their
Holy Breath: A continual pleasant taste of Love in their Divine Kisses: And a
full Frnition of their Virtues, as being the Productions of the Blessed Deity
in the pure Garden of Everlasting Pleasure, and Joy, The Prince of Salem had a
fair Vineyard in the Fields of Eden: He set out the Vineyard unto Keepers of
the Humane Race: Every one for the Fruits and Prosits thereof was to bring and
pay a thousand Pieces of Celestial Gold: My Vineyard which is mine by free
Gift is before me, says the Virgin, the Companion of the Holy Soul: Thou O
Price of Salem must have a thousand: And they that keep the Fruit thereof five
hundred Pounds, or five Talents: Now O Man, do thou know where to sind thy
Souls Satisfaction? Beware of despising the means: A Sesvant being sorced to
stay with a Master against his Will whom he loves nor, will never seek to
please him: You shall never have any good of a Maid that is compelled to Marry
against her Will: She will be but the more perverse, the more you endeavor to
humor her. Have a Care lest thou negl^^^ thy own Good: And when thou art well,
hope not in vain for higher preferment, lest thou justle thy self out of all,
and repent too late. A Hen or some other Fowl aiming at the End of Procreation
by the impulse of the natural Spirit, counts it no toil to sit upon her Eggs a
whole Month or more or less, and is willing to be confined without the Element
of her Pleasure and Recreation. May thou be as willing to promote the Glory
of God, the End of thy Journey and Labor: which to promote is the right Heaven
of Man's Soul: To which place O King of Heaven direct us all: Amen.

CHAP. X. The Souls Transmigration.
1. Christ the Lawful King.
BEtter is a Poor and Wise Child, the innocent offspring of God, than an old
and foolish King that tyrannizeth over the pure Seed, who will no more be
admonished, as being Reprobate or past Reproof. For out of an infectious Prison
or Dungeon of Darkness he comes to Reign, as being no lawful Heir, and not of
the Right Line; He is an Usurper: Whereas also every Subject (the Faculties of
his Mind) that is born in his Kingdom becomes Eternal Beggars. I considered all
the Living which walk under the Sun of Time, with the second Child of
Regeneration that shall stand up and sit in the Divine Throne Eternally in his
stead. There is no end of all the People and Subjects of illegal Tyrants, even
of all that have been before them in ^^cifers Apostasy, whose Seed lives in the
Humane Generation. They also that succeed or come after either before or after
the end of this World shall not rejoice in Lucifer, or an Humane Usurper. This
also is Vanity and Vexation of God's Holy Spirit. The Humane Commonwealth comes
to Ruin under a Foolish Prince, even as the Feet stumble by the Intoxication
of the Head. In the Day of Prosperity be joyful; and when things fadge well
between thee and thy Virgin, let thy Heart be merry. But in the Day of
Adversity, when thou art crossed in thy Desire or Love by the Sorceress,
consider what thou art a doing. God also has set the one over against the
other, to the end that Man should find nothing after and Superior to the fair
Virgin of God, worthy to be sought after.

. 2. His Right to Reign.
THe Fire of Hell, and the Ocean-Womb of Eternity are good Servants, but bad
Masters. The Virgin (it is true) should be Queen in the Humane Republic: And
the Spirit of the Soul ViceRoy: But if Man inverteth the right Order, he
himself must pay the Forfeiture or suffer the Penalty: Yet the Rebel must have
his due: And as the Proverb says. He that cannot bear to be a Servant, let him
be his own Servant. When thy Work is done, and the Crown obtained, then rest in
Security; but woe to him that has an ill Name in his Youth, He will be
suspected by the Virgin: As having put the Crown of blooming Youth upon the
Serpents Head. But if thou follow Virtue. thou may become the Head of all
thy kindred, Therefore O Son of the Virgin, if thou see the oppression of the
Poor Spirit of the Soul in the Humane Republic: Marvel not at the matter, and
if thou beholdest a violent perverting of Justice and Judgment in the Soulish
Province for a time, wonder not: For he that is higher than the proudest and
highest Mind regards: And there be higher than they: For the Spirit though
ost as a Servant walking a Foot in low place is higher than the Rebel Soul. O
Man mark what I say: I the Preacher returned, and reflected upon all the
Oppressions that are done under the Sun of this vain Light: And behold the
Tears of such as were oppressed, and the sighing of the Spirit of the Soul, and
they had no Comforter. And on the side of the Soul, there Oppressor, there was
Power, (for there was no Compulsion to draw him to Sin against his Will,) but
he would not open his Ear of Compassion. Wherefore I praised the Dead, that are
already Dead, even the Mortal Animals, more then the Living that are yet alive
for a time, but are like to dye the Eternal Death. Yea, better is he then both
they which have not yet been, who has not seen the Evil that is done under ehe
Sun of Time and Eternity: An Embryo is more happy than the false Birth. Yea an
Eunuch is happier than he that is joined to the Witch like Traduction of a
false Will, which rebelleth against the Will of the Deity. All these things
have I seen in the Days of my Conversation in the Vanity: There is a Just one,
the Spirit, that perish; (or rather vanishes) in his Righteousness. And there
is a wicked one, the false Mind, who prolongeth his Life of Eternity in his
wickedness, and yet would willingly Dye, but shall not find Death.

. 3. False Judgment.
THis also have I seen and applied my Heart to every Work that is done under
both Suns, there is a Time wherein one Rules over another (as the Soul ove^
the Spirit) to his own Eternal Hurt. And so I saw the wicked buried in the
Abyss, who had come and gone from the Place of the Holy by his Apos^acy: And
they were forgotten in the Holy City where they had done any good, for their
good Works did not follow them. This is a great Vanity. Because Sentence
against an evil Work is not executed speedily (for the Spirit of the Soul or
Conscience has not Power to pronounce it till the Day of Death) therefore the
Heart of the Soul, Son of the Humane Root is fully set upon mischief, by
plotting against his own Judge, and working wickedness against God's Friend.
But know this though a Sinner do evil an hundred times, and the Days of his
Eternity be prolonged in Pain and Horror. Yet surely I know that it shall be
well with the Spirit of the Soul that fears to Sin against God's Law, and to
the Soul that consents to the Spirit and fears before him: And so all is well
that ends well. But it shall not be well with the Wicked, neither shall he
prolong his Days of Vanity in this inferior World, which are as a Shadow, and
whose Spirit will vanish as an Image in a Looking-glass, because he fears not
God, and to offend his Virgin. There is a Vanity which is done upon the Earth
of Humanity, that there be Just men, unto whom (if they Apostatize) it happens
according to the Work of the Wicked: And if the Father has eaten sower Grapes,
the Child of this Apostate, as by Transmigration of or into an unlucky
offspring,) his Teeth shall be set on Edge: Again there be wicked ones to whom
(if they retract) it happens according to the Work of the Righteous, I said,
that this is also the result of Vanity.

. 4. Retaliation.
THe Soul that diggeth a Pit for the pure Spirit of the Soul shall fall himself
into it: And whosoever breaks an Hedge the Fence betwixt the two Properties, a
Diabolical Serpent shall sting and bite him. Whosoever removes Stones or the true
Landmark shall be hurt therewith, and the building of his false Imagination
shall fall upon him: And he that cleaves the Pillars of Heaven shall be
endangered thereby. If the Iron be blunt and there be no Stone to what the
Edge, because it is lost by Negligence, then thou must put more Strength in the
Gate of Purgatory in this Life, but Wisdom (if in time she had been embraced)
would have directed thee. Surely the Serpent will bite without Enchantment: And
a Babbler or false Accuser of the Spirit of the Soul is no better. The Tongue
will break a Bone: Yet it is the best weapon of Defense, if skilfully handled.
The Words of a Wise Man is Gracious, and refresh the Spirit of the Soul with
his good News, and Story of his Travels and escape in Shipwreck; but the
Self-accusation of a Fool will condemn and swallow up himself in the Abyss. He
needs no Bell at his Neck: His Bolt is soon shot. The beginning of the Words of
his Mouth contradicting his Conscience is Foolishness: And the end of his talk
at the Day of Judgment is Mischief and Madness and an eternal Frenzy. Curse not
therefore the King O Man, no not in thy thought: Speak not reproachfully
against the Princely Spirit in the Bedchamber of thy Whorish Companion: For
the Angel-Guardians of the Air shall carry the Voice: And the winged Cherub
shall discover the High Treason. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft: And
as a Witch is a Rebel in Physics: So (reversing the Point) a Rebel is a Witch
in the spiritual Politics.

. 5. The Souls Metamorphosis.
ALso I said in mine Heart concerning the State of the Sons of Men, that God
might manifest them, and they may see that they themselves are of a Bestial
Shape in the inward Signature, except they be newborn in the right Humane
Shape. For that which befalls Men, befalls the outward Animals: Even one
thing befalls them, as the one dies the External Death so does the other:
Yea they have all one Breath drawn from the Airs Power: So that a Man has no
pre-eminence above a Beast, for all is Vanity, which is in the outward Love,
and vanishes as a Shadow. All Animals, Humane and Bestial, Sensitive and
Rational go unto one Place, the Grave of the four Elements, the Womb of their
first Mother which conceived them swallows them again: All are of the Dust, or
of the hoil of Atoms, and all turn into the same Chaos again. Now (observe this
Mystical Ancient Philosophical Point) who knows the noble Soul or Spirit of a
Right Humane Being that goes upward into his own Heaven, and the Spirit of the
Bestial Man by the Transmigration of his Soul into an Eternal Brute, (or rather
by the Metamorphosis thereof into a degenerated Viper or Toad, or other sensual
Animal, according as his Soul was inclined in its Nature in this Life) that
goes downward into the Opacious Cave of the gross dark Earth in the bottomless
Abyss This is not set down here to reproach Mankind, but because it is
certainly known in the Light of the Eternal Sun: O Man consider thy self here.

. 6. Work in Time.
CAst thy Bread into a Ship floating upon the Waters of thy Eternal Ocean, as
Treasures laid up in Heaven, and thou sh^dt find it after many Days in
Eternity. Give a Portion to seven; thy seven Properties, and also to the Eighth
hidden in the seven the beginning of a new Harmony: For thou know not what
evil may be hereafter in thy Humane Earth. If the Clouds of blessing be full of
Rain and Heavenly Dew, they empty themselves upon the Earth of Man: And if the
Humane Tree falls by Balance toward the pleasant South or toward the Grim
North, in the Place where the Tree falls, there it shall be to all Eternity.
He that observes the Mystical Original of the Holy Wind or Spirit or Breath of
God (thinking God will come by force into his Heart to compel him to come to
Heaven) shall not sow Divine Seed: And he that regards the Clouds of
Darkness, (thinking the Time of the spiritual Harvest is not yet come) shall
not reap a spiritual Crop. As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit of
the Soul, nor how the Bones do grow in the Womb of the Virgin that is with
Child of the Regenerated Birth: Fven so God thou know not the Works of who
makes all. In the Morning of thy Youth betimes while it is called to Day sow
the blessed Seed, and in the cool of the Evening-Gale of God's pure Breath
withhold not thine Hand: And commit the Improvement to God by Resignation. For
thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that: Or whether they
both shall be alike good.

. 7. Before the Evil Days come.
REmember therefore (O Man) thy Creator and Father in the Days of thy renovated
Youth: Think of the Ancient of Days in the beginning of thy New Regeneration:
And he will prolong thy Eternal Days, call to mind thy Everlasting State,
before the evil Days come, in which thou shall say, I have to Pleasure in them.
If thou Love God and the Virgin of Eternal Youth, and perpetual Beauty, the
Evil Days or Years of Sorrow will never draw nigh, or overtake thee, or if they
come they shall not continue: For an Everlasting Calm will come after a Storm
of true Repentance. Therefore remember the kindness of her Youth, and the Love
of thy Spouse, while the Sun of the Eternal Spirit of the Soul, or the Mind of
the Affections of the Astral Nature be not clouded in blindness, nor the Clouds
of Darkness return after the Shower of a Purgatory in this Life. In the Day
when the Keepers of the Humane House and the Maintainers of the Soulish Family
tremble and quake, for Rottenness in their Bones, and the strong Men that carry
Provision to the Mill shall bow themselves under their burden. And the
Milstones cease, because they are worn ^ut, and the sound of the Mill is low;
and the Voice that calls to Repentance is not audible: And the Sentinels that
keep Watch and Ward at the Windows of true Light be darkened and blinded by
false Fantasy: And so cannot prevent the Invasion of the Whores Brats, which
will seize upon the Castle. And the Door of the Lips shall be shut in the
Streets of the little City, and will not be opened to the cries of the
miserable Beggar and Wanderer, and yet are open from within to utter
Blasphemies: And Self-accusations in Despair. And he shall rise up as being
frighted at the noise and terror of his own Evil Conscience: Because he would
not in Time attend to the Crowing of Aurora's Bird. And the Daughters of Music
shall be brought low, that they cannot hear the Voice of their chief Musician.

. 8. Before a second Apostasy.
ALso when they shall be afraid of an high Precipice, on the brink of the great
Abyss, or Depth of Depths; And a panick fear shall seiz upon them in the way of
their Wandering. And the Almond-Tree of Fading Youth shall flourish in its last
Leaves ready to fall. And the Grasshoppers singing which calls them to labor in
the Harvest, shall be a tedious Note: And he that blows with the Bellows upon
the Fire of Life, shall spoil them by unstopping them; or fit them for kindling
the Eternal Fire of a false Passionate Love. And Desire of Generation in the
Virgins Love, shall fail: Because Man leaves this Country of his Pilgrimage,
and seeks to wander to his long home, but cannot find it, except in the Grave
of Silence and Darkness. And his Oil in his Lamp is wasted in his Virgins Hand,
which should show him the way whither he should go. And the Mourners, the
Virgin and his good Genius, and the Spirit of the Soul, go clothed in black
about the Streets of his little City: And the Conscience rings a sad and
doleful Passing Bell. Or ^ver the silver Cord be loosed from the Pitcher (which
should draw Water out of the Fountain of the holy Blood) be cracked: Which
Pitcher, though it went often to the Well of Salvation, yet comes home broken at
last by Negligence: Or the Wheel of the circular motion of the incorrupted
Juice, be discompacted by Retroversion at the Cistern of Living Water. Or the
Golden Candlestick of a Pyramid-Figure, be broken: Or the Sieve of Separation
of the impure Recrements from the pure parts, be crushed: Or the Sink of the
Hellish Fundament be stopp^d, whereby the whore House becomes an Infectious
Jakes. Th^n shall this confused Chaos, without form, and void, return to the
Womb of the Earthly Mother as it was: And the Spirit of the Soul shall return
to God that gave it, to receive a Commission to apprehend the Soul, and the
Soul shall go back to the Original Matrix of its own Worm. Vanity of Eternal
Vanities, (says the Immortal Preacher:) All the Actions, and Qualities, and
Passions in the dark World, is Vanity, and the real Scene of a false Fantasy
in the insinite Abyss. O Man, beware of thy self: This Abyss is the cause of
thine own Being. Be therefore advised, O Man: Of Searching the Original Books
of Science falsely so called, (i. e.) vain Philosophy, of which there is no
end: And too much study therein is a weariness of the Soul.

. 9. No Redemption out of Hell.
KNow this, O Man, if thou doubtest whether of the Two Ways thou ought to
choose, and thou perhaps lightest on the wrong, and so come to a bad
Misfortune; then thou will say, I intended to go the other way once: When thou
art already come into the irrevocable Pit. Now (I say) know thou therefore what
was the cause of this; Because thou by some evil Imagination a little before,
did stop the Ear of the Spirit of the Soul, which only is capable to hear the
Voice of Fair Wisdom, the Pure Virgin. Though the Virgin did at that Instant
direct thee aright, at the Parting or Turning of the Two Ways, yet thou had
not an Ear to hear her, who cried behind thee in the Wilderness, This is the
Way, walk in it. When thou shall come to be hid from the presence of thy dear
Relations, and banished as a Vagabond from thy right Native Country, this may
be thy Note, Ah Wretch that I am! How am I become a Wanderer and Fugitive, or
Renegado! Why cancannot I find my dearly Beloved whom I long after? Must this
be my Eternal Work and Labor, to long uncessa^tly after the end of my Journey,
and yet never find the true Joy of my Soul, and Refreshment of my Spirit? O
Almighty Creator of us all, can thou not break forth to me, though I cannot
rush forward to thee? For I know thou bear no malice toward me: It is a
thing inferior to the Nobility of thy Nature, to bear a grudge to a
Delinquent, and that Eternally. O must I continue for ever in this Laby^inth,
seeking my Beloved, and never e^joy the Fruit of my (...) What pr^sit is in my
m^rtal Blood? Those that go (...) into the (...) cannot add to thy Praise. The
Answer from God wi^^ be, Those that would come from thence (...), cannot: And
they that wou^d go from hence thither, cannot (...), so as to ^etch out a
Captive thence, and redeem him, This is thy woeful Work and Wages to Eternity.

. 10. Conclusion.
LEt us hear the Conclusion of the whole System: Fear God: Fear to break his
Law: Which Law is Threefold in the Root, and Sevenfold in the Branches, viz.
Love God above all: And the Virgin as thy self, as being thy own Flesh and
Blood: She it is whom God has appointed to preserve thy Seven Properties in an
Harmony of Joy, which Joy thou art bound to be Eternally affected with: For
this is the Whole Duty of Man. But feed not on the false Mandrake-Tree of the
Hellish Jezebel's Property, which is Pain opposing Pleasure, by virtue of her
Baneful Breath. But if thou art one that meanest (thinking thou may be able
(as a Self-conceited God) to alter the Fundamental Constitution and Law of the
Celestial Realm, by calling Good Evil, and commanding Pain to be Pleasure, or
the contrary: Thou must first begin thy self: That is, A King or Lawgiver
ought to prescribe the same Law to his Subjects, which he himself is willing to
keep: As Gods Law is to promote the heavenly Joy; so he himself does so: But if
thou art minded to frame a tormenting Engine, a self-invented Idol for others;
If thou desire as a pecullar God, to correct Gods work, and make a new
Repugnant Law; that is, Let the sighting Properties be thy right Food; or let
the Hellish Pain be promoted; then thou must begin and do so thy self, and so
thou shall become a God in the dark World, and thou shall sit in a Throne of
Anguish, as being inspired by a malignant Blast from Hell, by the Whore's side,
in the Chamber of Contagious and Fiery Infection without end, and all Creatures
shall wonder at thy ever-abiding the Flame of Consumption never to be consumed,
and at thy Necromantick Fabric, never to be blown up by thy self-produced
Powder Plot. For God will bring every Thought, Word, and Deed to Judgment, to
be weighed in the Balance of his Sanctuary, by the motion of the Seven Wheels;
and every secret thing must be tried in the Eternal Fire, which discovers the
inward Impurities, that it may be known whether it be good, or whether it be
evil; that is, Whether the Good or Evil Property be predominant in moving the
Souls Wheel Backward or Forward.

As Gods Law was in the Beginning, So it is now, and ever shall be: World
without End, Amen.

FINIS.

