IMPRIMATUR,

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
September. 4. 1689.
SERMONS AND DISCOURSES ON Several Occasions. By WILLIAM WAKE, D. D. Chaplain
in Ordinary to Their Majesty's; and Preacher to the Honorable Society of
GRAY'S INN.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. And W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. MDCXC.

TO The RIGHT HONORABLE Sir WILL. RAWLINSON, Knight. One of the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal of England. Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight. Lord Chief
Justice of England. TO The HONORABLE Sir WILL. GREGORY, Knight. One of the
Justices of Their Majesty's Court of King's Bench. Sir JOHN POWELL, Knight. Sir THO.
ROOKESBY, Knight. Justices of Their Majesty's Court of Common Pleas. Sir EDWARD
NEVILL, Knight. Sir JOHN TURTON, Knight. Barons of Their Majesty's Court of Exchequer.
TO The WORSHIPFUL, THE MASTERS OF THE BENCH. AND TO The Rest of the MEMBERS OF
THE HONORABLE SOCIETY OF GRAY'S INN.

HAving a long time designed to make some public acknowledgment of my great
Obligations to you, I could not tell in what way more properly to do it, than
by presenting to you a small Collection of some of those Discourses, which I
have lately had the Honor to Preach before you.

It Is upon this acount that I now crave leave to Prefix your Names to these
Sermons: Both as a Testimony of that particular Respect I owe to you; and to
let the World see, what Persons they are by whom I have the Happiness to be
Countenanced and Encouraged in my Ministry: Such whose Integrity and Abilities,
have rendered them at Once both the Support and Ornament of our Courts of
Justice: Whose firmness to the true Interest of our Church and Government, in
the Worst of Times, have set them above the power of Malice to Calumniate: Who
by suffering heretofore, rather than they would betray either the Liberties of
their Country, or their Own Consciences, have effectually convinced all
Impartial men, That as it cannot be Ignorance of our Laws and Constitution, so
neither is it Interest, or any other unworthy Design, but the clear Evidence of
Right, that engages them to that Submission they now pay to the Present
Government: And who that they may long possess those Places they so worthily
fill, and be the Honor of the Bench, as the Rest of the Society are of the
Profession, is the Hearty Prayer of Him who with all possible Respect will
always remain,

Your most Obliged Humble Servant, WILLIAM WAKE.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. OF the Qualifications required to a Profitable Hearing of God's
Word. Luke viii.8. He that has ears to hear, let him hear. SERMON II. Of the
Benefit and Practice of Consideration. Deuter. xxxii.29. O! that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
SERMON III. Of the Devices of Satan. 2 Cor. ii.11. -- For we are not ignorant
of his devices. SERMON IV. Of stedfastness in Religion. 2 Pet. iii.17, 18. Ye
therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.

But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
To him be Glory both now and for ever, Amen.

SERMON V. Of the Reasonableness and Terrors of the future Judgment. Acts
xxiv.25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come,
Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee. SERMON VI. Of the Causes of men's
delaying their Repentance. Acts xxiv.25. -- Felix trembled; and answered, Go
thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for thee.
SERMON VII. Of the Danger of men's delaying their Repentance. Acts xxiv.25. --
Felix trembled; and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee. SERMON VIII. An Exhortation to mutual
Charity and Union among Protestants. Romans xv.5, 6, 7. Now the God of patience
and consolation grant you to be like-minded one toward another, according to
Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind and one mouth, glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of
God.

SERMON IX. Of the Nature and Benefit of a public Humiliation. Joel ii.12, 13.
Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and
with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning: And rent your heart and not
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.
SERMON X. Of Contending Earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints. Jude 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the
common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you, That
you should Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the
saints. DISCOURSE I. Of the Nature, and End, of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. 1 Cor. xi.24. This do, in Remembrance of Me. DISCOURE II. Of the Honor
due to the Blessed Virgin. Luke i.48, 49. For behold, from henceforth, all
Generations shall call me blessed: For he that is Mighty has done for me great
things, and holy is his name.
ERRATA.
Sermon. 1. p. 27. l. 6. r. Christ's. Ib. l. 24. r. an Indisposition.

Sermon. 3. p. 80. l. 16. r. may we.

Sermon. 5. p. 161. l. 3. r. he so much. ib. l. 15. r. Interests. p. 182. l. 1.
personally r. presently.

Sermon. 6. p. 190. l. 10. dele been. p. 202. l. 19. r. than as they.

Sermon. 8. p. 264. l. 17. r. in the Faith.

Sermon. 11. p. 383. l. 11. marg. r. illustre.

Sermon. 12. p. 471. l. 23. r. do not esteem. l. 24. dele not. p. 480. l. 13.
these r. those. p. 493. l. 7. r. ordinarily.

OF THE QUALIFICATIONS Required to a Profitable Hearing OF GOD's WORD. A SERMON
Preached on the Gospel for Sexagesima-Sunday, AT GRAY'S INN, 1689.
LUKE VIII.8. He that has Ears to hear, let him Hear.


THE Words are a kind of Proverbial Expression, with which our Blessed Savior
very Mat. xi.15 -- xiii.9.43. Mat vii.16 Luke xiv.35, etc.
frequently concludes his Discourses to his Disciples, the more to engage them
to a just Attention to, and Consideration of that holy Gospel which he
delivered unto them: And the import whereof we cannot better learn, than from
that excellent Parable to which they are here subjoined.

A Sower went out to sow his Seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way-side,
and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it: And some fell
upon a Rock, and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it
lacked moisture: And some fell among Thorns, and the Thorns sprang up with it,
and choked it: And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundredfold: And when he had said these things, he cried, He that has Ears to
hear, let him hear.

In which Parable our Blessed Savior sets forth to us the different success
which his Gospel then did, and would ever after be likely to meet with,
according to the different dispositions of those to whom it was Preached.

It is indeed an uncomfortable Reflection, and, I think I may say one of the
greatest discouragements we labor under, in the discharge of our Ministry, to
consider how very little benefit, for the most part, all our Endeavors have
upon the minds of those to whom we declare the Gospel of Christ. That after all
we can do, 2 Cor. v.11.
either by the Goodness or Terrors of the Lord to persuade men, yet scarce a
fourth part brings any fruit at all to perfection, and even those too in a very
small measure. Some few perhaps there are, who produce a little increase; they
hear the word, and consider their duty, and return it thirty-fold in Piety and
Good works: But for the sixty, and the hundredfold, scarce any there are, Mat.
xiii.8.
that ever arrive at this pitch, or but give us any great cause to hope, that
ever they will come up to it.

Instead of fruitless Complaints in a matter of so great consequence both to
our Ministry, and to your Salvation, I shall make it my endeavor on this
occasion, both for the happier prosecution of my own Duty, and, if it may
please God, for the greater benefit of your Souls, plainly to lay before you
the cause of this: By resolving it, as both the Authority of our Savior, and
the natural reason of the thing its self require I should, into the general
indisposition of Men to receive the Gospel. We now, as the Sower in the
Parable, scatter the same Seed on all the parts of the Field indifferently: We
desire that every one should yield a suitable increase. What can possibly be
the cause of that strange variety we find in the product, that one part should
bring forth a plentiful crop of Faith and Good works; another either none at
all, or but a very small one in comparison, but only this, That the Ground is
in some better prepared to receive the Seed than it is in others, and therefore
brings forth the Fruit accordingly.

This is the plain design both of the Parable before mentioned, and of that
Exhortation with which our Savior here concludes it in the words of the Text,
He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

In my Discourse upon which words, that I may pursue the same Method which our
Blessed Lord did in his Parable, I will

I. Show you what sort of Hearers they are, to whom the Word is in vain spoken;
who are not likely to benefit themselves by our Preaching. And

II. Will offer some Rules for the disposing of your Souls in such a manner,
that by the Grace of God you may be fit to receive benefit by it.

I. I am to show what kind of Hearers they are, to whom the Word is in vain
spoken, who are not likely to benefit themselves by our Preaching.

In pursuance of which Point, I should be infinite should I insist particularly
on all those indispositions that are apt to render a man an unprofitable Hearer
of Divine Truth. I will reduce this first sort of Auditors to as few Generals
as I can, and that with all the freedom and plainness, that both the Nature and
End of such an Undertaking require.

1. And the first that I shall mention, is, The Careless Hearer.

It is the misfortune of too many, in the Church of Christ, 2 Timothy iii.5.
that in St. Paul's Character, they have a form of Godliness, but are little
acquainted with the Power of it. They come to our Assemblies, and hear our
Discourses, and for the time are very much affected with them: But they go
away, and presently they forget what they heard; their Holy Affections are
scattered as a morning Cloud, they grow cold and indifferent as they were
before; nor much concern themselves with any farther thoughts of Religion, till
the next Sunday comes, and another Sermon again puts them in mind of it. As if
the end of all our Preaching were only to make the Service a little the more
solemn; to entertain them an hour extraordinary in the Church; and if they did
but sit out that, with any tolerable Attention, they had then discharged their
duty, they had done all that was required of them.

To such Auditors as these, I would only beg leave to remonstrate how
unreasonable such a negligence as this is; and of what a dangerous consequence
it will most certainly prove to them in the end. Our Discourses in these
Places, all of them I am sure should be, and I believe for the most part are,
either Explications of that Duty which God requires of us, or Exhortations to
fulfill it; or else to show the danger and baseness of those Temptati^ns, that
most usually draw men aside from it. Now all these naturally imply an
obligation on the part of those that hear us, to do somewhat in pursuance of
these instructions: Either to fulfill this Duty, or to fly those sins that are
contrary to it; or to watch and arm themselves against those Temptations which
they are forewarned will otherwise be apt to seduce them from it. And if they
neglect to do this, they will be much more inexcusable, than if they had never
been instructed by us: What our Savior once said of the Jews with reference to
his Preaching, will be found as true now, with respect to ours: If I had not
come and spoken unto them, Joh. xv.22.
they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin.

It is not in discourses of this kind as in other ordinary addresses that are
sometimes made to us: which if they do but afford us some agreeable
entertainment for the present, we have our desire; and though we afterward
never trouble our selves with any farther thoughts of them, yet we run no great
hazard, nor it may be sustain any Loss by our neglect of them.

But when we tell you your Duty, and lay before you the Doctrine by which you
are to be Saved, the Case is much otherwise. We speak as the Commissioners of
God; and as the Ambassadors of Christ we beseech you to be reconciled unto Him.
The words which we deliver unto you, they are not our own, but His that sent
us: they are the rules and measures by which you ought to live, and by your
neglect or observance whereof, you must preserve or lose your Souls to all
Eternity. The light esteem of what we say, do not mistake, it reflects not upon
us, but on him whose Ministers we are; whose Gospel we preach, and whose
Goodness we set forth, and who therefore will one day call you to a severe
account for that little regard you now show of what we deliver unto you. But

2 dly. A second sort of Hearers, who reap but little benefit by all our
discourses are, The Curious Hearers.

For such there still are in our days, as well as we read there were heretofore
in the Apostles; Who hold men's Persons in Admiration, and esteem the Gospel of
Christ more according to the Preachers Eloquence, than its own Authority. One
is of Paul, 1 Cor. i.12.
another of Apollos, and a third of Cephas; As if the business of our Preaching
were to please their Fancies, not to instruct their Minds and to reform their
Manners; and that simplicity which was once the Glory of the Gospel, -- Ib.
ver^ 17, 18, 19^ and 2 Cor. iv.13.
were now to be esteemed the scandal of its Ministers.

Hence it is that so many of our Auditors, instead of coming to our discourses
as they ought, to hear their Duty, and confirm their Faith, and increase their
Piety, come rather to observe, and censure; The application they make, is not
to enter into their Closets, and Meditate upon what they have Heard, and
consider how they may benefit their Souls by it; and then to beg the assistance
of God's Grace to enable them so to do; But to Applaud or Despise the Preacher,
according as he has had the Fortune to be liked or disliked by them. There is
hardly any defect in the Preacher so small, that is not enough to distaste them
against the very Doctrine that is delivered: And be the Duty never so clearly
and solidly established, yet if the Method be not exact, the Style correct, the
Subject such as they approve; the Voice, the Action, nay and sometimes the very
Look of him that speaks to them, agreeable to their Fancies, all is spoiled,
and they are not Edified.

But alas! Who is Paul, 2 Cor. iv.5.
or who is Apollos, or who is Cephas? Are we not all the Ministers of Christ,
and your Servants for Jesus sake? Do we not all Preach to you the same common
Salvation? Is it not the same Gospel that is delivered by every one of us? What
if we have not all of us the same accidental advantages? If another speak to
you with more Ornament and Eloquence? Must therefore my Weakness, render the
Gospel of Christ Contemptible?

I would to God, for your sakes, we were all such as you desire. That we could
every one of us not only instruct, but please you too to Edification; 1 Cor.
ix.22.
that so by any means, if it were possible, we might gain some of you. But yet,
in the words of St. Paul, give me leave freely to say of this Curiosity, That
verily there is a fault among you. 1 Cor. vi.7.
And what wonder if you do not reap that real Advantage we could wish from our
instructions, when alas! it is not That you look after: You come with curiosity
to gratify an itching Ear, 2 Timothy iv.3.
not with true Humility, to increase your Knowledge, and improve your Piety.
But,

3 dly, A third sort of Hearers to be considered in this place are, The Carnal
and Sensual Hearers: Men, who in their wills and desires are utter Enemies to
the Practice of Christianity, however they sometimes comes to be hearers of it.

But as the Great Philosopher heretofore when he opened his School of Morality,
and began his Lectures with the same reflections I am now making, excluded all
vicious and even young men from his Auditory; Aristot. Eth. Nic. lib. 1. c. 1.
Esteeming it in vain for him to spend his time in instructing those who were
either already engaged in a Course of Sin, or otherwise by the bent and heat of
their Age strongly inclined and tempted to it: So may I certainly, with much
greater reason, say with reference to our Gospel, That to such as these, all
our Addresses will signify but very little. Nor can we reasonably expect men
should become such Proficients as we desire, by our exhortations to Piety, till
they will begin seriously to dispose their minds to the practice of it.

To preach to a soft Voluptuary, the severe Doctrines of Mortification, and
Self-denial; to an Angry and Impatient Spirit, to bear Injuries, Romans xii.17.
Mat. v.44. Luke xi.41. -- xvi.9.
not to recompense to any Evil for Evil; to forgive, nay, to love his Enemies:
To the Covetous Miser, to Give Alms of such things as he has; and make himself
friends in Heaven, by the wise distribution of his unrighteous Mammon upon
Earth; what is this but to plow the sand: to sow your seed upon the water? They
look upon the Doctrine to be senseless and unreasonable, and the Gospel of
Christ foolishness indeed, 1 Co. i.18, 21, 23, 25.
if it expects they should obey such kind of Precepts as these.

What therefore our Blessed Savior once said with reference to his own
preaching, I must here beg leave to apply to ours: If any man will do his will,
he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, John vii.17.
or whether I speak of my self. If any man will do God's will; if he will
sincerely resolve to apply himself to the practice of Religion, then he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether we speak of our selves:
He shall be fit and prepared to judge of what we speak, whether they are our
own words, or the Gospel of Christ, and the Words of Eternal Salvation, that we
deliver unto you. Luke viii.14.
But till these thorns are first rooted out; ( i. e.) according to the
explication which our Savior gives us in this very Parable; till men have
overcome their affections to the Cares, the Pleasures, the Riches of this
World, it is in vain to expect that any thing we can say should be able to
prevail with them to bring forth fruit unto perfection, Ib.
and such as may carry them to everlasting Happiness in the next. But,

4 thly, And to close this first point; A fourth sort of Hearers there are, who
profit nothing by our preaching, and those yet worse than any I have hitherto
mentioned, viz. the Malicious Hearers.

A sort of Men, who come to our Churches now, as the Scribes and Pharisees were
wont sometimes to do to our Savior's Discourses, not to improve themselves,
but, if they can, Mat. xxii.15.
to entangle us in our Talk.

I shall not need to say, that such Auditors as these are not likely to be much
benefited by what they Hear. This is not what themselves aim at: their business
is only to find faults, to lie in wait for any thing that they may but be able
to make an ill use of, and like to some venomous Creatures, to suck poison out
of the most wholesome Flowers. If a word, or an expression chance to fall from
the Preacher which they think for their purpose, that is sure to be turned and
scanned to the uttermost: And though the meaning was never so innocent, yet
it is great odds but by a false conjunction of things with one another, by a
convenient alteration, and an uncharitable representation, it shall be set
forth to the World as some heinous Crime.

And were they always our Open Enemies that did this, we should have the less
reason to complain of them. We know their Principles, and what a liberty it is
their Religion gives them, by any means to defame and abuse those whom their
Church thinks fit to put the greatest abuse of all upon, in calling them
Heretics. But for men pretending to be our Friends, and our Brethren, to do
the same thing; to bow the knee, and cry, Hail Master, and betray us, this is a
piece of treachery that we cannot choose but lament, and heartily beseech God
may never be laid to their charge.

I shall not much labor to correct such Auditors, by showing how mean and
scandalous such a practice is: How contrary not only to all the rules of
Religion, but even of common Honesty and Humanity. No, rather let them come and
search us with all their industry; What is their Sin, will be our
Justification. Nor could we desire any thing better, were it not in charity to
their Souls, than by defying even malice it self to find any just cause of
Exception against us, to manifest the more clearly to the World the Innocence
and Excellency of our Holy Religion.

There is nothing here done or said, but what we could be glad all the World
were conscious of. We have no mystery of Iniquity to palliate, or to conceal.
Our Religion and our Selves are everywhere the same. What we preach to you in
the Pulpit, we speak to you in private; and, if occasion be, we publish it to
all the World. Our Sermons, our Writings, our Conversation, are all of a piece.
We have not one Doctrine to whisper to those that are initiated, and another to
seduce those that are not.

It is not therefore for our own sakes, that we complain of this fault in any
of our Auditors. Were that the motive, could we be so wicked as to deliver any
thing to you in God's name, and as his Gospel, that we feared all the World
should become privy to, yet were it sufficient to know what kind of Hearers we
sometimes have, Mat. x.16.
to make us at least Wise as Serpents, if not Harmless as Doves. But though we
are therefore sufficiently secure as to our own Innocence, yet we cannot but be
concerned for our Brethrens sin. And beseech them, that they will at last be so
kind to their own Souls as to consider how great the danger and sinfulness of
such Hearing is; what a dishonor it brings to our Holy Religion, what a stop
it puts to their Edification now, and how fatally ruinous it will finally prove
to their everlasting Salvation hereafter.

But it is time for me to go on to the other part of this Discourse; that so
having hitherto discovered what the general Faults of our Hearers are, that so
much indispose them to receive that benefit they ought by our preaching, I may
now show

II dly, What Qualifications are required in such a One as will profit himself
by these kind of Instructions.

Many are the Qualifications of this kind that might be offered; but I think
the principal of them may be very well reduced to these four, and which I shall
therefore particularly consider: viz. That he who will dispose Himself to
become a profitable Hearer of these Holy Instructions, must 1 st, Be Pious. 2
dly, Docile. 3 dly, Diligent. And 4 thly, Earnest in his Prayers to God
Almighty, to bless his Word to him, and to teach him to profit by it.


1 st, He must be Pious.

This, I have before observed, Andronic. Rhod. Par. Eth. Nic. l. 1. cap. 4.
the very Philosophers required in the Auditors of their Morality: and sure it
will be then so much the more necessary in our Hearers, by how much the Rules
and Precepts of the Christian Religion are higher, and more repugnant to the
sinful Lusts and Interests of Men, than what they taught.

Hence we find our Savior Christ Himself to have resolved the Cause of the
infidelity of the Jews into the indisposition of their Hearts, for want of
probity and goodness to receive his Gospel. They were engaged in a Course of
Pride and Vain glory; they courted the praise and applauses of the People, and
they could not endure to hearken to a Religion that would not support their
vanity, nor preserve to them the Respect and Honor of the World, which they
valued more than the Praise and Glory of God. Jo. v.44.
How can ye believe (says he) that receive honor one of another, and seek not
the honor that comes from God only? John v.44. And again, chapter xiith. the Holy
Apostle tells us, Jo. xii.42, 43.
That among the chief rulers also many believed on Christ, but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue. For they loved the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God. And
in general, our Savior Christ says, Jo. viii.47.
chapter viii. He that is of God, hears God's words; ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God. Where we find not only the true Character of him who
will be a profitable hearer of God's word, viz. that he must be of God, as that
Phrase is opposed to what our Savior had just before said of those men, ver.
44. That they were of their father the devil, and followed the lusts of him; i.
e. He must be an honest and upright man, endued with such a Probity and
Sincerity as becomes a Child of God; but also the reason why others are not
qualified to receive the Gospel, viz. That they are of a temper of mind averse
from holy things, and therefore not fit to profit themselves by the hearing of
them: Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. And St. John
himself in his 1 st Epistle, 1 John iv. ver. 6. col. cum verse. 4, 5.
iv.6. gives the same for the reason why their Preaching, as well as Christ's,
had so little effect upon some Men; We are of God: He that knows God, hears
us; he that is not of God, hears not us.

And indeed, how can it possibly be, that a man who is not inclined to Piety
himself, should be a fit Auditor of a Gospel, whose great end it is to promote
it?

1 st. He is averse to it; he has no relish of what is spoken, nor can endure
to hear his Lusts and Affections, his beloved Vices, and darling Sins set forth
as things that must either be abandoned here, or they will render him for ever
miserable. And therefore our Savior in the same St. John, tells us, John
iii.19, etc.
that this shall be one part of the worlds condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

2 dly. All the Arguments that can be offered for such a one's conviction,
stick not at all upon him; they are as unsuitable to his apprehension, as if
you would feed a Lion with Hay, or entertain an Ass with a Theorem. He has no
sense of their force, nor is therefore at all like to be persuaded by them.

To talk to a viciously inclined man, of the baseness and odiousness of his
sins, what is this, but in his opinion to argue against his sense and
experience? To represent to him the reasonableness, the pleasure, and comfort
of living well, what is it else, but to maintain a Paradox, and show a great
deal of Skill, only to demonstrate how much may be said for the most incredible
things? Heaven is a place which cannot raise his desires, who has not thoughts
purified enough to be in love with innocent and spiritual delights. The
pleasures of those happy Regions are not suited to the sensual apprehensions of
such men, as know no attractives, but those of a Mahumetan Paradise: And Hell
it self, tho the most formidable consideration of any, yet such as for that
very reason, he will be sure to put as far from him as he can; and either fancy
that perhaps there is no such place, or if there be, yet ho^e it will be time
enough hereafter to p^ovide for the escaping of it.

3. And then lastly, for that which is the great end of all religious
instructions, the Practice of Piety, and without which, all our knowledge in the
Mystery of Godliness will be in vain; this is what such a one is yet more
indisposed to, than all the rest. There are many in the world, who can be
content to applaud the reasonableness of Piety and Virtue, and will allow of
all that we can say in praise of it, that yet when it comes to the trial,
cannot endure to put it in practice. Like the Ground overrun with Thorns in
the Parable, they receive the Word with gladness, but the Cares of the world,
and the Pleasures of life, choke the seed, so that they seldom bring forth any
Fruit unto perfection.

It is therefore absolutely necessary, that he who will be a fit Disciple for
the school of Christ, should first dispose himself by a Probity and Integrity
of mind, to be willing to follow his Instructions. That he labor sincerely to
have a Conscience void of offense, both toward God, and toward man. Acts xxiv
16.
That he come to our Religious Exercises with a Pious Mind, not to please his
Fancy, or gratify his Curiosity, but to learn true Wisdom, and that in order
to Practice. Instead of considering how the Discourse is managed, whether the
Preacher performs his part as he expected he should, he must employ his
Thoughts on more substantial Meditations: In what particular especially the
Disc^urse came up to his own condition, and how he may best apply it thereunto.
If any Vice were reproved, whether his own Sin be not concerned in it. If any
Duty explained or encouraged, whether that were not directed by God, to inform
his Knowledge, or to reprove his remissness. If it set forth any of the great
Mysteries of our Redemption, or the Glories of Heaven, and what we must do to
attain to them; to remember that in all these things, God calls upon us to
acknowledge his Power, and to celebrate his Goodness, who has sent so wonderful
and gracious a salvation to us.

This is the true way whereby the Pious Christian may profit himself, even by
the meanest of our Discourses; but without such a disposition to receive
Instruction, the best seed will in vain be cast away upon us.

2 dly. The next qualification required in a Christian Auditor, as well as in
all others, is, That he be Docile.

By which I do not mean, Endued with quick Parts and Abilities to learn; that
is the Gift of God, and which sometimes may do more harm than good; but I mean,
that he be desirous of Instruction, and to that end prepared with such a temper
and disposition of mind, as to be willing and ready to pursue the means of it.
And to this end more particularly,

1 st. That he be Humble, i. e. neither vainly conceited of himself, as if he
had no need of instruction; nor esteeming himself to be too great to receive
it, even from the meanest Preacher.

There is nothing in the world so great an Enemy to our Proficiency in any
thing, as Pride: When men look upon themselves as too great to learn, and as
such, neglect and despise the means of Instruction. Indeed I am not so vain, as
to think that we are not many times called to speak to those who are much
fitter to become our Teachers. But yet neither can I so far undervalue the
Gospel of Christ, which we deliver unto you, as to believe there is ordinarily
any Sermon so mean and despicable, but that an humble mind might have profited
by it, and have found somewhat at least to exercise his Charity and his
Patience, if not to excite his Zeal, and improve his Knowledge.

2. A second thing required to this Docility, is, That a man be free from
Passion*

This disturbs the mind, and blinds the reason, and hinders many times the best
Doctrine from producing any suitable effects upon us.

Those who are subject to the command of their own affections, judge more
according to the inclinations of them, than to the dictates of right reason. He
that espouses a Party or Interest* that loves an Opinion, and desires it should
be true, easily approves of whatsoever does but seem to make for it; and
rejects, almost at all adventures, whatsoever appears against it. How does the
Hope and Desire of Honor, or Favor, or Fortune in the World, carry men away
to the vilest things for the prosecution of it? And so all the other Passions
of the mind; whether it be fear or pleasure, or whatever else be the affection
that rules us, they hinder the reason from judging aright, and weighing
impartially what is delivered to us; and it is great odds, but such an Auditor
receives or condemns the Doctrine of Christ, not according as the Authority of
Holy Sripture, and the Evidence of right reason require he should, but as his
own Passions and Inclinations prompt him to do.

3. A Third thing required to Docility is; That a man be free from Prejudice.

He that will advance any thing in the finding out of Truth, must bring to it
that Travelers indifference which the Heathen so long since recommended to the
World* He must not desire it should lie on the one side rather than the other,
lest his desire that it should, prompt him without just reason to believe that
it does.

And so in Religion too: He that will make a right judgment, what to believe,
or what to Practice, must first throw off all prejudice in favor of his own
Opinion, or against any others: And resolve never to be so tied up to any Point
or Party, as not to be at all times ready impartially to examine whatsoever can
reasonably be objected against either.

How far the want of this does at this day divide the Church of Christ, I would
to God, we had not too great reason on all sides to complain. There are many
among us so strangely engaged by false principles to an ill cause, that it is in
vain to offer them the clearest Arguments to convince them.

If you bring them Scripture, it is true that must be heard, but then be it
never so plain they are not competent Judges of the Meaning of it: and they
durst not trust their own Interpretation to tell them that Abraham begat Isaac,
if the Church should think fit to expound it otherwise. For such and so plain
are many of those passages that we alledg against them, to show their
corruptions in a great part of those things wherein they differ from us.

If you offer them Reason, as clear as the plainest Demonstration; why, that
were well: But still Private Reason may Err, and the Church cannot.

Convince them by their Senses, which one would think should convince any body;
Desire them to consult the Verdict of their own Eyes, and Mouths, and Noses,
and Feeling: it is no purpose, the Senses may deceive them, but the Church
cannot.

Thus have they suffered themselves to be conjured into a Circle out of which
it is impossible ever to Retreive them. Sense, Reason, Scripture, All are of no
force against this one Prejudice of their Churches Authority; though at the
same time they know not either what the Church is to whom Christ Promises are
made, nor where to find it, nor what it has decided, nor wherefore they at all
Adventures attribute to their own the Title of the only true Church.

Such Hearers as these, are Unteachable, and Unprofitable: And we ought
certainly by their Example to beware of such an indisposition as is able to
lead men into so strange a Slavery; and make them believe they are never more
in the Right, than when they have put themselves out of a Capacity of ever
being so upon any Certain grounds, and otherwise than by mere Chance.

4. A Fourth and last thing required to Docility, is a freedom from Obstinacy.

This is a disposition for the most part consequent upon that I the last
mentioned, and such as wherever it is found, renders a man utterly incompetent
to receive any benefit by the best instruction, It is called by St. Paul (...),
Romans i.28.
a reprobate mind, Romans i.28. a mind void of judgment. When men resolve they
will not be instructed, but affect ignorance; and either to keep up a faction,
or to serve their present Interests, or to indulge themselves the more freely
in their sins, flee both the means and the desire of knowledge.

And this, or somewhat like it, is again the Case of those of the other
Communion. Who not content with the Prejudices I before mentioned in favor of
themselves and their own Opinions: do moreover engage their proselites by a
most Solemn Oath, See Pontif. R. Ordo ad reconcil. Haer.
never upon any account, or by any Argument whatsoever, to be drawn out of
those Errors in which they have engaged them.

Such then is the Nature, and these the Vices that are to be avoided by us, in
order to the second Qualification required in a Christian Auditor, viz.
Docility.

3. The next I mentioned was, That he must be Diligent.

By which I mean, not only a carefulness to attend upon all the public means
of instruction which God is pleased to afford us; but yet much more, to apply
those means to a right and due End. To be sedulous and diligent in embracing
the Opportunities of hearing, is indeed very commendable, and the duty of every
Christian; but yet if his diligence stop here, he may for all that reap but
little benefit by all his Care. He that will be truly sedulous, as he ought to
be, Let him,

1 st. When he comes to these Holy Exercises, be very careful that he attend
with all his Soul to what is delivered; But especially if any thing chance to
be spoken in which his Conscience tells him that he was either altogether
Ignorant before, or not sufficiently instructed in it.

2 dly, When he has done this, Let him be careful to take the first opportunity
to retire within himself, and call to remembrance the things that he has Heard:
And either by writing, or some other way let him provide for the future
preservation of it. But especially,

3 dly, Let him employ his utmost diligence in the Practice of what he hears:
Let him consider that this is the great end to which all his Knowledge in the
Mystery of Godliness is to be referred: And that without this, he shall become
but the more inexcusable for all the rest; For he who knows his Master's will,
Luke xii.47.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

It was for this that God sent his Son to Preach his Gospel to the World; And
it is for this that we still are commissioned by him to declare to you your
duty, and press you with the strongest Arguments, the Hopes and Terrors of
Eternity, to be careful and sedulous in the performance of it. The End of
Christianity was not to puff us up, but to Edify us: To make us Better rather
than more Knowing, and more Knowing only that we may be Better. They are not
the Hearers of the Word that shall be justified before God, but the doers of
it. It is but a half Diligence that carries men to Learn their Duty; He is the
truly Sedulous Christian indeed who both seeks with all earnestness to know
what God requires of Him, and then as carefully endeavors to put it in
practice.

Now to this end, and to conclude all,

4 thly, He that will Hear as he ought to do, must to all these other
Qualifications add his fervent Prayers to God for his Assistance.

It is not an easy matter to become a Perfect Christian: So high and excellent
are the precepts of the Gospel, and in many things so contrary to the Interests
and Inclinations of sensual Men; that without some extraordinary Assistance of
the Grace of God, we are not able so much as to comprehend any thing of these
kind of instructions as we ought to do. But to bring a willing and ready
disposition of mind to receive the Word; to become such an Auditor, as not only
speculatively to learn the great Truths of Christianity, but to resolve
effectually to put them in practice too; this must certainly be the work of God
upon our Hearts, and it is his Grace alone that can both enlighten our
Understandings, and incline our Wills.

And here therefore we may see at once, both the necessity of this last
disposition, our Prayer to God for his Grace; and in that, the true cause why
so many make no better an Advantage by their Hearing. They come to the Church
as if they were going into a Theater, where they had nothing to do but to
attend to what is spoken, to render them every way competent Auditors of it.

But alas! The Divine Truths that are here delivered, are above the discernment
of the Carnal mind: 1 Cor. ^^ 14.
Spiritual things must be Spiritually understood: Such Auditors as these, like
the Scribes and Pharisees among the Jews, may hear our words as they did our
Blessed Savior's; but they will not be at all the better for them. God must
open their hearts, Acts. xvi.14.
as he did that of Lydia; and then our addresses will find a suitable
admittance, and not pass without a due and careful consideration. And our
Prayers to God must obtain this, Who will not fail to give his Holy Spirit to
them that ask him. Luke. xi.13.


And now, How shall we wonder, if the seed, though never so carefully sown,
produce yet but a very mean increase, when God knows for the most part the
Ground is so utterly unprepared to receive it? This certainly is a
consideration that ought to engage every good Christian seriously to search and
examine himself, how he is disposed to become a fitting Hearer of the Gospel of
Christ.

If you have therefore hitherto come to our Assemblies, without such a due
Preparation as you see is thus necessary to qualify your minds to receive that
benefit you ought from these Instructions, let me now earnestly beseech you no
longer to deceive your own Souls, but to prepare them in such a manner that our
Preaching may not be in vain to you. Let not any little, unworthy designs
accompany you to these Holy exercises; But come as befits Christians, with
Charity, with Humility, with an Honest and Upright Heart; sincerely desirous of
understanding your Duty, how mean soever the person be that is to deliver it
unto you.

But above all come with a firm resolution of Practicing what you Hear.
Remember that it is this Christianity designs in all its instructions; And
however our Zeal in these latter days seems unhappily engaged, more in the
Pursuit of Divine Truth, than in what I could rather wish we did chiefly aim
at, the Practice of a Divine Life; yet let us be careful so to maintain the
One, as not to prejudice or overthrow the other.

And if we thus sincerely direct all our Hearing to the Glory of God, and our
own Everlasting Salvation, we shall not fail to Hear as we ought to do. God
will open our Ears, and illuminate our Understandings, and dispose our Wills.
The seed that is Sown upon such Ground, shall not fail to Spring up into a
Blessed increase; And produce those Fruits of Holiness in this life, which
shall finally bring us to the Everlasting Joys and Glories of the next.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy vouchsafe unto us, through the merits of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom. etc.
OF THE BENEFIT and PRACTICE OF CONSIDERATION. A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL,
Before the Princess of DENMARK, Febr. 26. 1687/8.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!


THE Words are part of that great Song which Moses spoke unto all the
Congregation of Israel immediately before his Death, See chap. xxxi.19, 30.
and by God's express Command left with them as his last and best Legacy to
them and their Posterity for ever.

A Song both in its self so considerable, and so highly esteemed by them, that
they thought no words could be sufficient to set forth its Excellency:
Insomuch, that we find it at this day characterised by the Jews of our own
times, as (...) See Munster and Fagius on v.1. of this Chapter. Crit. M. Vol 1.
the foundation and summary of the whole Law.

In the Verses before the Text, we have a sad and terrible declaration of those
Judgments that should hereafter befall them for their Impenitence. And it is not
to be questioned, but that this great Prophet, from whom God never concealed
any thing that concerned that people; had here by so much a more particular
prospect of those Evils, that were afterward to come upon them, as he was now
the nearer to be taken from them. And that it is from these therefore, that we
must derive at once both the Occasion and Importance of that passionate Wish
into which the Holy Man here breaks out, in consideration both of their danger
and of their insensibility of it, O that they were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their latter end!

Whether by their latter end we are to understand that great and terrible
destruction which finally befell both themselves and their Country, in the loss
of Jerusalem: Or, Whether with some, we shall interpret it of God's rejecting
of them from his Covenant, from being what they were once, his own peculiar
Inheritance: Or, Whether lastly, the more to heighten the Idea, we shall join
them both together in the Prophecy, as they were by God united in the
Execution; certain it is, That a greater and more amazing instance of the
Divine Vengeance upon a particular Nation, has hardly been known from the
beginning of the World, than that of their Destruction; nor shall there I
suppose be any Parallel, to the very end of it.

But it is not my design to enter on any reflection of their Punishment, but to
enquire rather what it was, that Moses here so much wishes they would have
done, in order to the preventing of it; what that great defect was, which was
the Cause of all their Evils.

Now that in one word was Inconsideration: A fault certainly very great in that
people, than which none had ever received more clear and sensible Proofs of the
Divine Power and Goodness. They had seen the Miracles by which God had brought
them up out of the Land of Egypt; and continued to conduct them now almost
forty years through the Wilderness. They had beheld his Majesty, when himself
in that terrible manner that we read in the xixth and xxth Chapters of Exodus,
vouchsafed to give them his own Law from Mount Sinai. Nay, that nothing might
be wanting to awaken a stupid and insensible people, they had known his
Judgments too in the punishment of their Sins. They had seen the Destruction
which their Fathers had suffered, and they were here expressly foretold what
Evils themselves and their posterity should hereafter undergo for their
impiety. Yet was not all this sufficient to awaken their Consideration to a
sense of their danger, and a care to prevent it.

And now I would to God these Jews were the only men we could justly charge
with this neglect; and that our own indifferency in the concern of our duty,
did not equally tax us with the same Inconsideration. But alas! I fear, were we
here to enter on a review, we should find but too just a parallel, both in our
danger, and in our incogitancy: And that a very little reasoning upon the
Methods of God's Providence, without the help of a Prophetic Spirit, might be
more than enough, to make any sober, considering man tremble to think what
shall be the consequence of such a general Insensibility as we have these many
years shown, notwithstanding all his Mercies and his Judgments in vain made use
of to reclaim us. At least, I hope it will be abundantly sufficient to
Apologize for me, if I beg leave, especially at such a Season as this, freely
to expostulate with you in the words of Moses in the Text: O that ye were wise,
that ye understood this, that you would consider your latter end!

In speaking upon a Subject, both in its self so important, and to us so
necessary; that I may, if possible, not omit any thing that may serve either to
excite or to direct the practice of it, I shall endeavor with all the
plainness I can, to discourse to you of these Four Things. I st. Of the Danger
and Mischief of Inconsideration. II dly, I will enquire into the Causes of it.
III dly, I will offer some General Rules for the Practice of Consideration. And
IV thly and Lastly, Will close all with some Motives that may serve to stir you
up to the discharge of your duty, in so great and important an instance of it.


I begin with the First of these.

I. Of the Danger and Mischief of Inconsideration.

It has been the usual Method of most Casuists, in enquiring into the Causes of
Sin, to expose the Mischief, and aggravate the Danger of those particular
Temptations that are the immediate occasions of it.

Hence there is hardly a man so little in^^ructed in Morality, that has not
learnt to run into an invective against the Interests and Pleasures, the
Honors and Riches of this world; that the good Christian must resolve either
to abandon them as much as is possible, or at least, to quit all undue Esteem,
and inordinate Desire of them.

But the great and Catholic Cause of all our evils, Inconsideration; this is
either not at all, or but very lightly touched upon by them. So far are men
from exposing the Danger of it, that I believe there are few who have yet
learnt to place it in the number of their Temptations, or that think themselves
at all concerned to provide against it.

Very necessary therefore it is, before I proceed to those particular Proposals
I am hereafter to make for the removal of this evil, that I should first
convince you of the necessity there is of setting about it; to show you, that
of all the Artifices of the Devil, this has been the most successful; that
whatsoever strength any other Temptations may seem to have, it is all derived
from the influence of this. In a word, That Riches, and Honor, and Pleasure,
and Interest, seduce some particulars only; triumph over the weakness of some
certain dispositions that are more peculiarly apt to be moved by them. But that
Inconsideration is a general snare, stops not at particulars, but carries all
before it: The One, Last, Universal Cause of all our Sins being no other than
this, That we do not consider as we ought, what our Duty is, and what our
Obligations are to the Practice of it.

And 1 st. It cannot be denied, but that this Inconsideration exposes us to
every Temptation which the Devil shall think fit to lay in our way; is very
often the Cause that we are tempted at all, but always the reason that we are
overcome by the Temptation.

I shall not need to say how many Sins men fall into, for want of considering,
and knowing that they were so. I would to God the frequent Excuses that are
drawn from this Topic, did not too fully show, how great a cause this is of
our offending. There is hardly a more general Plea in the mouth of every
Sinner, than that he meant no harm in what he did, but either he did not know,
or he did not think that it was unlawful. But then I am sure we must resolve to
lay aside this excuse altogether, and confess it to be as false, as indeed it
is for the most part frivolous; or we must be allowed to conclude from it, that
this want of Consideration, exposes men to infinite Temptations, by keeping
them in an unwarrantable Ignorance of what they might have known, and ought to
have Considered.

But they are not only the Ignorant that are concerned in this danger. He who
knows his Duty the best, is yet oftentimes no less surprised by his
Incogitancy, than he who is the most Ignorant of it. The Devil who knows our
weakest times, and constantly watches his advantage, never fails then
especially to assault us, when he sees we are least upon our Guard, and by
consequence least in a condition to resist him. And if by a diligent care of
our selves and attention to our Duty, we are not as ready and prepared to
resist those Temptations which may be apt to solicit us from it, as we are
otherwise well instructed in the duty its self, it is evident, that our Enemy
will have a very great advantage against us; and it is odds if for want of being
prepared to fight, we are not for the most part overcome by him.

For 2 dly, And which may be alone sufficient to confirm my assertion, that
it is our Inconsideration that is the real, ultimate Cause of all our sin; be it
observed, secondly; That there are in our Religion, such Motives, such
Engagements to Obedience, that were they but duly weighed, it would be
impossible for a man ever to live wickedly.

And indeed he must be a very great instance of this defect I am now speaking
of, and never have considered any thing at all of his Religion as he ought to
do, that can reasonably doubt of what I now say.

Is there any among us that has but once seriously reflected on the Nature of
God Almighty: How excellent his Goodness is, how Terrible his Justice? With
what an irreconcilable hatred he prosecutes Sin and Sinners for its sake? That
he is Omnipotent, and cannot be Resisted: Omniscient and cannot be deceived:
Nay that he is Present with us, sees our most retired actions, and will one day
bring them all to light in presence of the whole World, in the day when He
shall judge the world in righteousness. Is there any one here, that has but
seriously considered all this? Let him then say whether it were Possible for
the Devil to have been able to draw him into Sin, whilst he had such thoughts
as these present to his mind to oppose to his Temptations?

But Christianity carries us yet farther. It shows us a God Incarnate, a God
made man on purpose for our Salvation; He gave himself for us that he might
redeem us from all Iniquity, Titus ii.11.
and purchase to himself a peculiar people zealous of Good works. It represents
to us a Covenant of Grace, Sealed with his own most precious Blood, and into
which we have every one of us been solemnly initiated, that is, solemnly Sworn
at our Baptism; and the condition whereof on our part we know was this, that we
should forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh; and instead of serving
these, should obediently keep God's Holy will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of our Lives.

I shall not now enquire, how often we have, I believe, the most of us renewed
this Covenant, whether in the Church at the Holy Table, or on other Occasions
that have called us to put up our Vows to Heaven. Nor need I add, that it is to
such a Practice alone as that requires, that God has promised the Blessings of
Eternal Glory. But sure I am whosoever will but duly consider the weight and
moment of this one Engagement, will find in it an impregnable fortress against
Sin, and such as all the Temptations in the World should not be able to
overcome.

For to reflect on it only in a Word or two. What is there in all our sins, or
in all those Temptations that lead us to them, whose Force and Power would not
be utterly overcome by this one serious Consideration?

Where is the Lust that can offer any sufficient, shall I say, or rather any
tolerable inducement to comply with it, that may be worthy to compare with our
obligations to Love and Obey so Great, and so Excellent a Redeemer? Is there a
Passion so darling, or an interest so Valuable, that the most desperate sinner
would in his Cool thoughts be willing to exchange Heaven for it? Or rather, for
indeed that is the true Case, would be content for the prosecution of it to go
down, it may be the next Moment, into Hell, and there dwell with Everlasting
Burnings?

No, no: Sin may deceive us by our own carelessness, but it cannot stand before
Consideration. It may surprise our Passions, but it can never reconcile its
self to our Reason. Nor are our Natures yet become so degenerate, but that a
due reflection on our Engagements to Obedience would by the Grace of God soon
resolve into a performance of it: And the Hopes of Heaven, and the Terrors of
Hell; The Vanity of this World, and the Eternity of the Next, once thoroughly
considered as they ought to be, so stop our Ears, Psalm. lviii.5.
that all the Arts of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, should not be able
to open them to his Insinuations.

And for a farther proof of this, and which may be yet another Argument to
confirm my Position, that it is the want of Considering that is really the great
and last Cause of all our Sin: Let me

3 dly, Appeal to the common Practice, and Experience of Mankind: No sooner
does any one begin seriously to Consider these things, but he presently becomes
a good Christian.

What is it else but this, that makes the very worst of Sinners if they come
but into any danger or calamity; if any sickness or affliction befalls them; any
thing that but stops them in their wild Career so long as to give them only
time to cool, and to Consider their Duty, and their great and dangerous
deviations from it; what is it I say, but this, that makes these persons
presently disclaim their Extravagancies: to confess that they were mistaken in
their notions of Virtue and Vice, and had therefore preferred the Interests of
the One because they had either never known, or never sufficiently considered
the excellency of the Other.

And if perhaps these Pious reflections have not been able afterward to secure
their Obedience, but they have again returned to the follies they so lately
renounced; It is not that they are ever the more convinced that they were
over-reached in the Argument: That Piety and Religion, have not that reason on
their side which we pretend, and which ought to engage them to the troublesome
task of denying themselves, and forsaking all their sensual pleasures, and
worldly interests for its sake: No, but only that their danger being removed,
they have also lost their Consideration with it; and their Incogitancy now
again exposes them to those sins, which no sooner shall some new occasion call
them again to reflect on, but they will be no less ready again to condemn them,
than they were before.

And now though I suppose it may by this time be sufficiently evident how great
the Mischief of Inconsideration is; yet for a final demonstration of its
danger, I will offer one reflection more* and it is,

4. That whatever particular Temptations we may at any time chance to be
exposed to, they would all of them have no force at all, but for this one
General defect.

For let us not deceive our selves; Pleasure and Riches, and Honor, and
Interest, and if there be any other Vanity besides that is yet more powerful
than all these, they are not such omnipotent Temptations as our corrupt
affections would represent them to us; on the contrary, it is certain that they
have no force at all but by our own Incogitancy; to consider them only, were to
overcome them.

1 st. For Pleasure: Is it imaginable that the base Voluptuary would pursue
that, as he does, did he really reflect what shall in a little time be the End
of his Debauches? That yet a few years, at the most, it may be a few months, or
days, and all his Enjoyments shall cease; and his Pleasures be exchanged for
Pain and Sickness, Impotence and Infirmity, and the rest of those Torments in
this Life, that are usually the sad forerunners of his Eternal Punishment in
the other?

2 dly, For Riches; the next instance: Were it possible men should take so much
Care and Labor to get them, and when they have got them, neither be satisfied
with them themselves, nor do good to others, had they ever been acquainted with
that Treasure in Heaven which the Gospel speaks of, so infinitely surpassing
all the highest acquisitions here; so much surer to be obtained, and for the
most part so much easier too; and when it is got, for Ever to be Enjoyed?

3 dly, For Honor, the next Temptation: If there can be such a thing as Honor
without Virtue, and that High Places, and great Titles, and the rest of those
trifles that have so long usurped the name, may indeed be allowed the character
of it: What other judgment can any considering man pass upon such Honor but
this; That even Christianity apart, it must certainly be a very vain thing to
build a man's hopes, and expend himself and his life, upon that, which when all
is done, depends upon other men's opinions of, and value for us; who too often
give this Honor to the most undeserving Persons, and with whom the truly brave
and worthy Man sometimes finds the least share of it.

And then 4 thly, for the Interests of this World; Good God! What can they
appear to any serious, considering man, but mere Vanity, who has learnt of his
Savior to ask his Conscience that great and wise Question: Mat. xvi.26.
What is a man profited if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

Is it not Evident, that in all these, and whatever instances besides can be
offered of the greatest Temptations, it is only for want of Considering that
they prevail upon us; and so, that not they, but our own Incogitancy ought to
be charged by us as our greatest Danger and Mischief, The one, last, universal
Cause of all our Sins.

And now if this be so, then it cannot certainly but be very well worth our
while to search a little,

II dly, Into the Causes of this Inconsideration, the next thing I proposed to
speak to.

And the first, and perhaps the most fatal of all others, and which may serve
to remove a very dangerous mistake we are apt to make in this affair is, That
Men are wont to think they do very well consider these things, when in truth
they do not consider them to any purpose at all.

For indeed, what is that which men now a days to call Considering? If they are
sometimes a little serious, if they reflect now and then upon the business of
Religion: If they go to Church on Sundays, and are not scandalously wicked the
week after; If they receive the Holy Sacrament in its seasons, and when they do
so, sit down a while and reflect a little, a day or two, it may be the week
before, upon their Sins and their Vanities, and then Sigh, and are Sorry, and
resolve to Sin no more, this they call Considering; and this, I fear, is what
makes up the Religion of a very great number amongst us.

But alas! this is as far distant from that true Consideration, I would now
recommend to you, as the little imperfect Effects of it, are for the most part
inferior to that excellent Piety that would be the certain consequence of the
other. It Is not every light reflection upon the business of Religion, that is
worthy the name of a true Consideration. He that will do this as he ought to
do, must resolve to do it thoroughly: He must search to the very bottom of his
Soul; Not a Sin so secret, not a Lust or Interest so dear or profitable to us,
but what, to the best of our power, must be enquired into. Now all the danger
of Sin in General, all the black circumstances, and heightning Aggravations of
our own Sins in Particular, must seriously be considered: The Hopes and Terrors
of Eternity be thoroughly weighed; What the Goodness of God is, if we will yet
repent; What his Judgments will be, if we shall continue to despise the Riches
of his Mercy, and Treasure up to our selves Wrath against the day of Wrath. In
a word, whatever may serve either to convince us of our Sins and of our Danger,
or to engage us to forsake the one, that so we may escape the other, must all
be laid before us; till finally, by God's Grace, we are brought in the
bitterness of our Souls, to such a sense of our Condition, as shall engage us
to a sincere Repentance of our Sins, and Obedience to God's Commands. And so
work in us that change of Life, which alone is able to save our Souls for ever.

He that gives off before he has done this, He may have thought of his Duty, if
you will, but he has not yet considered as he ought to do: He may have prepared
the way, but he is yet to run. In short, He may have considered of Religion as
many now a days do, who read the Holy Scriptures, run through all the various
Sects and Parties of Christians, who suffer not the least Controversy to
escape them, nor a Dispute to arise in which they do not interest themselves;
and yet when all is done, have not one jot of real Piety in their Souls: but
after a great deal of pains get only that knowledge which puffs up, and are
yet to learn that Charity which Edifieth.

This is the first, and perhaps one of the most fatal Cheats men commonly put
upon their Souls: They flatter themselves that they do very well Consider these
things, when indeed they do not consider them to any purpose, nor as they ought
to do it.

2. A Second Cause of men's Inconsideration, and but little inferior to the
foregoing, either in the danger or the univer^ality of it, is, That our
Consideration is for the most part totally turned another way.

It is a long time since the generality of Mankind seem to have fallen under a
very dangerous mistake, That Religion ought not to be looked upon as their
Business, but only as a thing by the by: somewhat to entertain their thoughts
with upon solemn times, and in their Melancholy hours, but which 'twere
unreasonable to expect amidst so great a plenty of other affairs, as the world
now abounds with, should ordinarily be made the subject of their thought, and
their Consideration.

Thus have we utterly reversed the Maxim of our Savior, and made not our
Salvation, but the business of this World, our Employments and our Interests,
nay, Good God! our very Vices and our Sins the Vnum Necessarium, the great
thing to be taken care of by us: and we are so wholly taken up and engaged with
these, that we have no leisure to think at all, to be sure not to any purpose,
and as we ought to do of that.

And now, what wonder if when this is the Case, we see such very sad, it is
true, but yet such very natural Effects of it? Whilst men reckon the concerns
of this present life to be the main of their business, we ought not to be
surprised if they consider no more of what may make for a better.

Till this mistake be rectified, we may be troubled indeed to see men so
Inconsiderate, but sure we ought not to admire it. We may with Moses wish, O
that they were wise, that they would understand this! But till that be done, we
cannot expect they should very much Consider their latter End.

But 3 dly, Another Cause, and which I believe has kept very many from
considering as they ought to do, is, That it is Uneasy to them; and therefore
they do not care to enter upon it.

It is a great disadvantage to Religion, that tho there be really nothing in
the World more pleasing or more agreeable to our Rational Natures, than the
practice of it; yet has it something that is rough and uneasy in the first
setting out, and which the habitual Sinner cannot without pains and difficulty
get over.

He that thrives by Sin, that grows Rich, or Great, or Honorable in the world,
by Injury and Oppression, by Fraud and Flattery, will no doubt be very uneasy
to embrace a Religion, that requires a Justice and Integrity in all our
actions, that forbids all Violence and Rapine, all Artifice and Dissimulation;
i. e. all those Methods by which he has been wont to increase and flourish
heretofore.

Again: If a man has been used freely to indulge himself in all that his heart
desired; to gratify his Passions in their wildest irregularities; he will no
doubt find it a matter of no small difficulty to deny himself, and resist and
do violence to those appetites, which he has been so accustomed to comply with
heretofore.

So that in effect, whether out of a prevailing interest, or a real fear;
whether out of an unwillingness to forsake sin, or a mistaken apprehension of
the impossibility of overcoming it, Many, I believe, content themselves to go
on without ever considering at all; and hate to reflect on what they are
resolved never to reform.

Or, if perhaps this does not carry them so far, as to make them totally lay
aside the thoughts of Religion, yet at least, it renders them unwilling to set
about it, and so produces a

4 th; And which is the last Cause I shall now mention, of that Incogitancy I
am here complaining of; viz. That men are apt to Procrastinate this great
Affair; They resolve they will one time or other consider, but never heartily
and effectually do so.

This is certainly a very great, and yet I fear a very general fault; and such
as perhaps has ruined more souls than any one thing again in the whole world.

It is a hard matter totally to silence Conscience, and stifle all the thoughts
of Piety and Religion. But our unhappiness is, that when we are thus put in
mind of our duty, we either content our selves with some very slight and
superficial Consideration of it; or else we put off our Consciences, as Felix
did St. Paul, to a more convenient Season.

Thus some refer these kind of thoughts to Old Age, and never come to it, but
go down into the Grave, before they have made any just provision for it.
Others, it may be, set it a shorter date, but then still some business or
hindrance interposes, and then another time is fixed, and that too is
disappointed; and thus our lives run on, but the great work of Considering is
still to come. It may be at length God's Grace is withdrawn, and Conscience
grows weary of being any longer importunate, when it has been so often denied.
And thus when we thought to have considered, we find neither will, nor
strength, nor opportunity so to do.

How much the more earnestly may I beg leave to exhort you this day, no longer
to defer so great, and to be sure so necessary a work as this; and to that end,
that you will pass on with me to the Third Point I proposed to speak to.

III. Of the Practice of Consideration.

The Sum whereof in general will appear from the resolution which I shall give
to these Two Enquiries.

1 st. How, or after what manner: 2 dly. When, or at what times, this is to be
done by us.
1 st. For the former of these; how we are to practice this Consideration? I
reply, That we must do it by a serious and impartial Enquiry both into our
selves, and into our Religion; by a diligent and strict examination, what our
Duty toward God is, and what our own Performances have been, and ought to be
of it.

1. As to the former part of this Consideration, Our duty toward God: I shall
not need say any thing to show how necessary this is to be well understood by
us. I am persuaded there is no one, how negligent soever he may have been in
his performance of it, but what is sufficiently convinced of his obligations to
it.

I will rather complain, that in a matter so necessary, that our Eternal
Salvation depends upon it, and God be thanked so easy too, to the very meanest
capacity, there should nevertheless so many continue in as utter an ignorance
of it, as if we too were some of those who encourage a blind Obedience; and
esteem an ungrounded Assent, to be the best Faith, and Ignorance indeed the
Mother of Devotion.

It has been the fault of many in the practice of this kind of Consideration,
to fix their thoughts wholly upon some parts of their Religion, but to take
little or no notice at all of the rest. Thus many run away with the Promises of
the Gospel, but never consider what they have to entitle them to those
Promises. Others, on the contrary, look wholly on the difficulty of its
Commands: and as if that had given them a final release from all endeavors to
fulfill them, they conclude that it is impossible for them ever to be able to
live as they ought to do, and that therefore it is in vain to try whether they
can or no.

Some when they read the great, and no doubt very just Elogies of Faith in St.
Paul, stop there, and never trouble themselves either to consider what that
Faith is, which S. Paul speaks of, much less to go on to St. James, and there
see the necessity of good works too. They sit down contented that they have a
right faith: They are members of a Pure, Reformed Church on the one hand; or
else of an unerrable, infallible, Catholic Church on the other, and so all is
secure: As if the espousing such or such an Interest or Party, were an
unquestionable mark of Election, and all that God requires in order to our
Salvation.

Many are the mistakes of this kind, which men are apt to fall into, in the
Consideration of their Duty, and to all which I will only offer this one plain
Rule for their direction: That whosoever will consider it as he ought, must do
it universally, he must leave no part of his Religion unexamined; being assured
of this, That whatsoever Consideration does any way contribute to lessen
Practice, nay rather, does not very much serve to help and promote it, is false
and imperfect; and if he stops there, will certainly deceive and ruin him in
the end.

2. For the other part of our Consideration, our Selves; two things there are,
on which the Practice of it must chiefly terminate; viz. 1. What our State is,
with reference to what is past? 2. How to govern our selves for the time to
come?


It would require some longer time than I may presume to allow to this
Discourse, but barely to enumerate the several Rules and Cautions to be
observed in the doing of this. With what Care and Diligence, with what
Exactness and Particularity; in a word, with what Piety and Sincerity we must
proceed in all this; and search into the real Grounds we have, either to hope
or fear, and accordingly give God the Glory, whether by a patient continuance
in that Piety which we have hitherto practiced, or by our Repentance for those
sins we have unhappily committed.

This is a work which I have always thought the proper business of a Casuist,
or if you will, of a Confessor, rather than a Preacher. General Rules seldom
come up to particular men's conditions. Nor is it possible for the most exact
Discourse, to give any satisfaction comparable to those directions which our
Church therefore exhorts us to seek by a free opening of our Condition to some
of those who are appointed by God to be our Guides in these matters.

And to them therefore let me beseech all those who are sensible of any want of
farther Instruction in this matter, to address themselves for such Advice, as
neither the Nature nor Limits of this Discourse, permit me to offer to them. As
for the other thing proposed in order to the Practice of this Duty,

2 dly, When, or at what Times this is to be done by us? If the question be
concerning the last sort of Consideration I just now mentioned, that of our
Actions; it is evident that this must be perpetual; because it has so necessary
an influence upon all Moral Actions. The same Prudence which directs every wise
man before he acts, to sit down and consider what he is going about, whether it
be fit to be done by him, ought certainly yet much more to carry every good
Christian to this farther necessary Reflection, Whether it may be done by him?
And whosoever ventures upon any Action without this, he may by accident not do
ill; but it is his good Fortune, not his Praise, that he does not. And were it
never so good, yet for want of doing it with that design, and knowing it to be
such, he must not expect that God should ever impute that to him for
Righteousness, which he himself did not design or perform with that intent.

As to the other sort of Consideration, That of our State, and of our Duty:
What God requires of us, and how we have lived according thereunto? Certain it
is, that it is absolutely necessary that we should some time or other enter upon
it; and then, I suppose, I need not say how very prudent it will be for us not
to defer it. For since our Life is but a puff of breath, every day in our
Nostrils, and which we can at no time say shall be our own the next moment:
surely it will very much concern us not to defer considering how we are
provided for another World, seeing we have so very little Hopes or security in
this.

Repentance is not a Duty that can be discharged in a Moment, and I fear the
best among us upon the enquiry will find that we stand in need of a very great
one. Now there is no time, no place for Repentance, but only in this present
Life: And should we suffer our Incogitancy so far to prevail upon us, as to
neglect it here, we shall in vain lament our sin and our folly to all Eternity
hereafter.

If there be therefore any one among us, that has hitherto omitted so great and
necessary a Consideration, what shall I say to him? Let him no longer defer it:
Nay, but rather in the words of holy David, Psalm. 132.3, 4.
Let him not go back unto his house, nor climb up into his bed; let him not
suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eyelids to slumber, till he has begun to set
about it.

It were, no doubt, very much to be wished, that men would not suffer any day
to slip, without this Consideration. There is, I believe, but seldom a day
passes, in which we are not guilty of something that may justly call for a
particular Repentance, to obtain our forgiveness. And who can tell, if he lies
down to sleep e're he has done this, whether he shall ever rise up to perform
it afterward?

But alas! This is the greatest Instance of all of our Inconsideration. And
instead of repassing in this manner every day upon our Actions, I fear there
are many who go on whole Weeks, and Months, and Years, without ever thinking at
all of it; as if it were enough to practice this duty by the same proportions
which some of our modern Casuists have prescribed for that other of the Love of
God; some of which have thought it necessary to be done only upon Sundays and
Holy Days; others not above once a year; some once in Five years; others at any
one time in our whole lives; and lastly, others never at all, either living or
dying.

But tho there be then no time so proper as the present, for the doing of that
which cannot without the greatest danger be deferred the least moment; yet some
seasons there are, which seem more especially to invite us to it.

Thus 1 st. If old Age be crept upon us, or any Sickness or Danger threaten us
with a speedy appearance before God's Tribunal; this ought certainly at the
same time that it admonishes us of the shortness of our present life, to call
us to an immediate providing for the next.

2. Tho the hand of God be not just upon us, yet if we see his Arm lifted up to
strike; if we have some just cause to apprehend any evils or afflictions likely
to come upon us: much more if our Country and our Church be in danger for the
iniquity of her Children and People within her; this also may be another time
that seems on purpose marked out to call us to Consideration; to think upon our
ways, and how to prevent both our own, and the public desolation.

But now, 3 dly. If these Evils are not merely apprehended, but are actually
upon us; so that we already have begun to bear the punishment of our sins, and
may have just cause to apprehend yet more dreadful effects of them; this
certainly ought yet more strongly to engage us to such a Consideration.

In such circumstances as these, the worst of men naturally become Religious.
God himself could say of the Rebellious Israelites, Hos. v.15.
That in their afflictions they would seek him early. And the Prophet observed
of all men in general, That when God's Judgment are in the Earth, Isa. xxvi.9.
then the inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.

I will only add, 4 thly, And with reference to the approaching season; That as
the time of Lent has in all Ages of the Church been looked upon as a season
proper for the business of Repentance; so certainly we cannot better prepare
for it, than by the practice of this great Preliminary duty of Consideration,
without which it will be impossible for us ever to discharge it as we ought to
do. And however the Godly Primitive Discipline of Public Confession and
Penance, has for the hardness of our hearts, been of late laid aside among us;
yet ought we not therefore to be ever the less, nay rather we should be the
more careful to examine our own souls, and call our ways to remembrance; and by
our Private Diligence make some supply of what seems to be acknowledged by our
Church, See the Commination used on Ash Wednesday.
as wanting to our Public Discipline.

And to the end I may the better enforce this Practice, which upon all these
accounts seems so very proper for us, I will now finally Close all,

IV thly, With some Motives that may serve to stir us up to the fulfilling of
our duty, in so great and necessary a part of it.

I have already observed in the beginning of this Discourse, That it is the want
of Consideration that is really the last, universal Cause of all our Sins. And
I have just now shown, That till it be removed, it will be impossible for us to
repent of them. And sure then one would think that nothing more need be said,
to engage any sober man to the practice of it.

But I must now go yet farther: For to complete our Obligation to so necessary
a practice, Inconsideration is not only to be charged as the cause of all our
evils, but the corrupter of our good too: It spoils our very virtues; insomueh,
that were it possible for the unthinking man to fulfill every Command, and not
deviate in the least degree from the rules of his duty, all would be in vain;
his Inconsideration alone would ruin him, and his Virtues themselves lose by it
not only their Praise, but their very Nature too: Would become at most, but
mere indifferent Actions, neither worthy in themselves, nor deserving of any
reward for the fulfilling of them.

God Almighty, who has given us our Understandings and our Wills on purpose for
his Service, requires the concurrence of them in all our Actions that are
intended for that purpose. His Service must be reasonable, or it will not be
accepted. He is not to be pleased with what we do by chance; where his Glory is
not designed, he looks upon it, that neither is it advanced. And that good
which is done without Considering, is but a mere Natural Action, deserves as
little praise as a Plant for growing, or a Stone for falling down to its
Center; and we may as reasonably expect to see one of these promoted to Heaven
for so doing, as the unthinking man be judged worthy of it, for any thing he
can do.

But, 2 dly. This Incogitancy does not only render us thus obnoxious to God,
but it exposes us to the censures of men too: It does not only deprive us of
all our pretenses to Piety, but even to common Wisdom and Discretion.

He that never Considers in any thing, all the World will say is a Fool; and
sure I may well add, That he who Considers only in little things, and never
thinks in those that are of the highest importance, is not so wise as he should
be. But to pretend to be Christians, and to desire Salvation, and yet never
reflect what it is to be the One, or how we are to live that we may attain the
Other; this is certainly such a combination of Folly and Impiety, that were not
sin as great an Enemy to Reason, as it is to Religion, 'twere impossible that
any man should ever be guilty of it.

And now when so many engagements concur to recommend this duty, that it is
impossible for us to approve our selves either to God or man without it, what
shall I say more to stir you up to the practice of it?

I am, methinks, unwilling so far to comply with the melancholy apprehensions
of very many, and those not altogether without just grounds too, as to desire
you to think whether our Circumstances at this time, be not such as may well
engage us in the literal import of our Text, to be wise, and consider our
latter end, for ought I know, the final end of our selves and our Religion, if
we do not by a speedy Repentance reverse that Judgment which God seems ready to
pronounce against us for our Incogitancy. I will rather close all with a more
excellent engagement. Blessed be God, who has made this a Duty as pleasing as
it is necessary; as apt to incite our practice, as it is fit to be practiced by
us. For certainly to Consider these things, after all the frightful Idea's men
are apt to entertain of it, is not only one of the most useful, but one of the
most pleasing things in the whole world.

Let me appeal to the experience of those Pious Souls, who by a due performance
of this Exercise, have their Conversation already in Heaven; are elevated above
the little Passions and Interests that engage the busy part of mankind in so
much labor and vanity. Who live in this World as if they were not of it; free
and quiet in the midst of its disturbances; still the same in every estate; who
love nothing but God and their Duty, fear nothing but to sin against him, nor
desire any thing but to be dissolved, and to be with him. Whose well-grounded
Hopes already secure them of their future Reward; and a Good Conscience so
fully justifies them, that neither Death, nor Hell its self, not any evils of
this life, or any terrors of the other, are able to disturb the Peace and Calm
that is within them.

O happy state! The blessed effect of a serious and frequent Consideration!
Where is the Sinner that can pretend to say, he has ever found in any of his
ways of Wickedness, a pleasure comparable to that Peace and Joy, which such a
Christian meets with even in the present course of his Life?

Let the Miser boast his Riches; The Ambitious Man his Honors; let the
Voluptuary wallow in his sensual and beastly satisfactions: But o Lord! What
Vanity are all these when compared with the solid Comfort and Satisfaction of a
Good Conscience: that can reflect freely upon its Actions; can search into the
most secret parts of its Life with Joy and Assurance; and delight to compare
its Duty and its Practice, and see how Gloriously the One illustrates and sets
forth the Other.

Who would not pursue the Happiness of such a state, though there were no such
thing as Heaven and Eternity to follow after? Certainly if Pleasure be that
which is to govern our pursuits, it is the good Christian that, when all is
done, is the only Wise Man; and to Consider, the most delightful practice of
any in the World.

Only let us Consider seriously, and as we ought to do: Let us once in our
lives be persuaded heartily to experiment a Duty, which we have been so often
told should be the great Business of them. Let us be willing to be convinced;
and do our Religion and our Souls so much justice, as to give these things a
fair and an Equal hearing.

So shall all those Blessings I have now been speaking of, descend upon us. We
shall exchange only, not lose or lessen our Enjoyments. Whatsoever Pleasure or
satisfaction we have heretofore met with in the ways of Sin, we shall find them
all infinitely surmounted in the Practice of Religion. Till finally being fit
for Heaven, ripe for Immortality, we shall be Translated from these Excellent,
but yet still imperfect Joys here, to those absolute and Eternal Blessings,
which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor does it enter into the Heart of
Man to conceive.

To which God of his Infinite Mercy vouchsafe we may all arrive, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
OF THE DEVICES OF SATAN. A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, April. 26. 1688.
2 COR. II.11. For we are not ignorant of his Devices.


AMong all the parts of a Christian Institution, which either the Gospel of
Christ directs, or we as the Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. iv.5.
and your Servants for Jesus sake, Exhort you to; there is none after the
knowledge of our Duty toward God, and what he requires of us in order to our
Eternal Salvation, either more necessary to be well understood, or, would men
seriously apply themselves to it, more easy to be attained by us, than how to
Arm and Fortify our selves against those Devices of Satan, whereby he
continually Endeavors to Seduce us.

There are few so ignorant in this matter, but are able at least to trace out
his most ordinary Temptations, and to discover what it is that the most usually
exposes them to Sin. And though he has his Crooked and bypath too, Devices
both more subtily laid, and more difficult to be discerned; yet a little more
vigilance and care would serve to discover even these also, 1 Cor. iv.5.
and to bring to light the most hidden Mysteries of Iniquity.

But though there be then nothing more obvious to a sincere and inquisitive
Mind, than to find out these Artifices of the Devil; yet alas! A sad experience
shows us, that there is scarce any thing in the World in which men for the most
part seem more to betray either their Ignorance or their Inadvertency; Whilst
they suffer every the most Ordinary Temptation to overcome them, and scarce an
assault so weak can be made upon them, but what is sure to have its effect, and
find them altogether unprepared to resist it.

To correct, if it may be, this careless and supine Temper, so dishonorable to
God, and so dangerous to our own Souls; I shall Endeavor at this time to lay
before you some of those Methods whereby the Devil is most wont to lead Men
into Sin; That so knowing our danger, we may be the better able to Arm our
Souls against it, Lest Satan should get an advantage of us; For we are not
ignorant of his devices.

The Occasion of which Words was this.

St. Paul having in his former Epistle to the Corinthians, See 1 Cor. v.1.
commanded them to pronounce a Sentence of Excommunication upon a certain
incestuous Man amongst them, who had married his Fathers Wife; had since
received an account of a very good effect that this infliction had wrought upon
the offending Person; so as to bring him to a great sense both of the Sin he
had committed, and of the Scandal which thereby he had given to the Church.

Upon this the Apostle in this his Second Epistle, commands them to take off
the Censure under which he lay; and to receive him again into Communion with
them, lest being swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, he should be driven to
despair, and so the Devil get an advantage against them; and that not only in
the ruin of a single Brother, but yet much more by turning that Discipline
which was designed for the Edification of the Church, into the Destruction of
it; For, says he, we are not ignorant of his Devices.

Were I not resolved against entering on any Point of Controversy in this
Place, I should not here want a very fair Occasion to do it. See the Rhemists
Annot. on this Chap. Catholic Scriptur. Point 26. of Indulgences. n. 6.
It has been the great Endeavor of those of the Other Communion, to establish
on this procedure of St. Paul with this Corinthian, their new and dangerous
Doctrine of Humane Satisfactions to be made for Sin, and of the power of the
Church to grant Indulgences for the Remission of them. But I desire now to have
no other Enemy but that of my Text to encounter: And the half of whose Devices
will be more than enough for our present Consideration, without exposing the
Artifices of any Others, how busy soever they too may be to get an Advantage
of us. And therefore it shall suffice to remark with reference to the Subject
before us; That all which can reasonably be concluded from St. Paul's process
with this Corinthian, is no more than what we readily allow of; viz. The
Exercise of public discipline for the correction of Open and Scandalous
Offenders; and whom the Church has certainly Power both for their Sins to
separate from her Society, as the Apostle did this Incestuous Man; and upon a
sincere Repentance to release the Censure, and receive them again into
Communion, as in this Chapter he ordered them to do this Penitent Corinthian.

But now this is neither the Doctrine nor Practice of those who pretend to
argue from this place. Their Satisfactions and Indulgences are of another kind
than what Canonical Penances and the Relaxation of them will amount to. They
suppose that after men's Sins by the Sacrament of Penance are Forgiven to them,
so that there is now no more Guilt remaining, nor by consequence any more
Obligation to an Eternal Punishment due to it; there continues nevertheless an
Obligation to Temporal Punishment, to be undergone as a true and Proper
satisfaction for Sin, either here, or in Purgatory: and that this the Pope has
power to dispense with, by Applying to them the satisfactions not only of
Christ, but of all his Saints; who having lived severe Lives, and suffered a
greater Temporal Punishment than was requisite to satisfy for their own Sins,
have left a Stock in Bank to the Treasure of the Church, for the advantage of
others; and the Remission of these Temporal Pains, by such an Application, this
is that which they properly call an Indulgence.

And now then we may beg leave to ask, In what part of this History do they
find any grounds for all this? Did St. Paul in his former Epistle command the
Church of Corinth to impose a Penance on this Incestuous Man to satisfy for
his Sin? No; But he commanded them to Excommunicate him for his Offense, to cut
him off from the body of the Faithful, to whom he had given so great a scandal
by his uncleanness.

Or here in this Chapter, does he send him any kind Bull with a plenary
Indulgence for what he had done, to set him free of what Temporal Pain might
yet be due for his Offense; and to acquit him of any further trouble now, and
of the danger of Purgatory hereafter? Not so neither: But he orders the
Governors of the Church to take off the Censure under which he lay; and to
receive him again into Communion with them; and to confirm their Love toward
him; Lest he should be swallowed up of over much Grief, and so Satan get an
advantage against Him.

In short, That there is here a plain account of the Exercise of Public
Discipline both in the Excommunicating of this Incestuous Corinthian, and in
the Receiving of him again into Communion, this we readily confess. But for the
new-inventions of Humane Satisfactions to be made for Sin, and of the Power of
the Pope to apply one Man's Merits to the Forgiveness of another Man's
Offenses; and all this after such a manner, and upon such terms as is now
Practiced in the Church of Rome, of all this there is not one word either in
this, or any other passage of Holy Scripture, but much to the contrary, as
might easily be made appear, were I minded to enter on such a Debate.

But it shall suffice me to have remarked thus much, for the clearing of the
present place from these Abuses. As for those Devices which I am now to
consider; viz. By what means and motives it is that the Devil after all our
Cautions and Engagements to the contrary, nevertheless still continues to draw
us into Sin; many there are, and I cannot pretend in this Discourse to
comprehend more than a very small proportion of them. I will take up those that
seem most useful to be remarked under these two Considerations: I st. Of those
Devices whereby he makes it his business to hinder us in the Discharge of our
Duty. II dly. Of those Devices whereby he leads us into the Commission of Sin.
I begin with the Former of these, the Consideration,

I st. Of those Devices whereby the Devil is wont to hinder us in the discharge
of our Duty.

And here, I shall not insist on those common and obvious Methods which every
one knows, though few are so careful as they ought to be to prevent them; such as
carelessness and indifference in the concern of our Salvation; The Love of this
World; and of the Honors, and Pleasures, and Interests of it: and which upon
this account, St. Paul calls the root of all evil: 1 Timothy vi.10. And St. James
plainly tells us is Enmity with God. James iv.4. The Devices I shall now
consider, are such as have more of Subtilty and Contrivance in them; and which
by a show of somewhat that seems to be Good, seduce men many times into a
neglect of that Duty, which alone really and truly is so. Now four things
especially there are by which the Devil is wont to discourage, and hinder
weaker Minds in the discharge of their Duty: viz, 1 st, By throwing Prejudices
in their way against it. 2 dly, By instilling into their Minds False
Principles, whereby to corrupt the Practice of it. 3 dly, By filling them with
Doubts and Scruples to discourage them in their Piety. 4 thly, By engaging
their Zeal in vain and fruitless Strifes and Disputes about Religion, which
ought to be employed on the Practice of it.


1 st. It is none of the least of the Devices of the Devil, to hinder men's
Piety, by throwing of false Prejudices in their way against the Practice of it.

I need not say what a frightful thing many look upon a Christian course of
Life to be, and how difficult, and sometimes even impossible they think it, to
fulfill that Duty which God requires of us.

They regard him as a hard and severe Task-Master that lays intolerable
Burdens upon his Servants, and has prepared Eternal Punishments for the least
defailure under them. All their thoughts are taken up with those Strict
Commands of Mortification and Self-denial, of taking up the Cross, of forgiving
and loving Enemies; of despising any losses, shame or other difficulties they
may at any time be exposed to for the Sake of Christ and the Preservation of a
Good Conscience. Thus they look upon Christianity to be a Religion made up of
nothing but Melancholy Fears, and amazing Dangers; that allows of no Pleasure,
suffers not the least Appetite to be gratified; but denies even the most
Innocent and Reasonable Enjoyments; nor promises any Happiness in another
World, but upon the severe Condition of being Despised and Miserable in this.

And now when such are Men's Apprehensions of Christianity, what wonder if we
see so few care to enter on the Practice of it? But Blessed be God, who has not
thus dealt with us. Mat. vii.14.
Straight indeed is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to Heaven, but by
the Grace of God it is not Impassable. From the very first entering, it dilates
its self, and in a little while becomes no less pleasant, but much more secure,
than that High Road which so many prefer before it.

To be plain, I dare affirm, That a State of Religion is so far from being that
four disagreeable State men commonly apprehend it to be; that on the contrary
it is the only State that is attended with a real Pleasure and Satisfaction.
Godliness is its own reward, even in the present practice of it: 1 Timothy iv.8.
It has the promise of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come. And whosoever will but seriously apply himself to the discharge of it,
will soon be convinced upon how good Grounds the wise man once pronounced
concerning it; Prove. iii.17.
That her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.

As for that frightful Idea which so many entertain of Religion, it is wholly
founded on their own mistakes of the true Nature and Design of it. For,

1 st. It is utterly false that Christianity denies us any of those Enjoyments,
which a Wise man would even desire to Indulge. It allows whatever is truly
fitting for us, and restrains only those brutish excesses, which even Natural
Reason and the Principles of Common Morality forbid us to pursue.

Nor 2 dly, Do men any more truly represent God, than they do his Religion.
They look upon him as one who requires great things of us; but they forget that
he who requires these things, does also Promise that if we are not wanting in
our own Endeavors, he will give us Grace, and Strength, and Ability to fulfill
them. They consider him as a most severe, and Just Judge: But they do not
consider, that his Mercy is as Infinite as his Justice; and that he is as ready
to make allowances for our Infirmities, and Pardon those Sins we unwillingly
Commit, as to Punish those Offenses which our Malice and our Negligence expose
us to. That for this He has sent his own Son into the World, to be Himself the
propitiation for our Sins; and to open the way to Heaven by a Gospel of
Repentance, seeing we could not attain to it by any way of a Perfect and
unsinning Obedience. So that now then, let a Christian be but upright and
sincere, let him but love God, and delight in his Service, and strive and
labor as far as he is able to fulfill it; If he Sins, let him Repent of it, let
him confess his Wickedness, and be sorry for his Sins, and humbly Implore God's
Mercy to forgive him; and then how Weak and Impotent soever he be, He shall
certainly find not only Pardon, but acceptance too with his Blessed Savior for
ever.

And then, 3 dly, For what concerns those severe Duties of Christianity, and
upon which the strongest prejudices are commonly raised against it: Besides
that they are things infinitely excellent in themselves, and by a divine
assistance far from being burdensome to us; nay, when put in the balance with
the reward of Eternal Glory, not worthy to be compared with it; it is Evident
that these Duties are not required either of all Christians, or at all times.
How few are there, for instance, now a days, that have any occasion to put in
practice that severest precept of all which our Religion Requires of us; viz,
Man. xvi.24.
To deny our selves, and take up our Cross, and follow Christ? These are the
Trials only of some singular Persons, and at some certain Seasons. And whenever
God sees fit to call any good men to them, He never fails upon their earnest
Prayers to Him, to furnish them with Strength and Grace proportionable to bear
them.

So that upon the whole, it appears, that all these Prejudices are only the
Devices of the Devil to discourage Men from their Duty; and by the false
apprehension of I know not what imaginary difficulties in the Practice of
Religion now, to precipitate them into Real and Eternal Miseries hereafter. But

2 dly. A Second way whereby He hinders men's progress in Piety is, by
instilling such Principles into them, as are apt to corrupt the practice of it.

And here had I the time to insist upon them, I would not doubt to rank in the
very first front, those Atheistical conclusions which the brisk Disputers of
our Age so much abound with; Who not content with the Psalmist's Fool, Psalm.
xiv.1.
to say in their heart, there is no God, dare openly dispute against his Being,
and with their mouths deny that God whom yet in their hearts they acknowledge,
nay whom their fears and terrors into which every the least accident throws
them, even testify to the world, that for all their Gallantry they cannot
disbelieve.

Or, because this is the presumption only of a few desperate men, I would beg
leave rather to argue a little with some of our more refined Skeptics, the
great Assertors of Human Reason, in opposition to the Sacred Authority of
Divine Revelation. Who allowing of a God, nevertheless strengthen themselves in
wickedness, by their ungrounded Notions of his Goodness and Justice: Whilst
they conclude it to be inconsistent with either of those Attributes, for him to
punish a temporal and transient sin, with everlasting Torments; tho committed
against an Infinite God, and against the plain terms of a Covenant of Eternal
Happiness if we do well, and of Everlasting Punishment if we do ill, entered
into by us at our Baptism, and at Confirmation made our own act, by our own
express consent to it.

Or, lastly, because such too there are amongst us, I would reason with those
who argue against the malignity even of Sin it^ self, and would by their
disputes turn the greatest Vices into innocent and indifferent Actions: Whilst
from the strong inclinations which they find in themselves to evil, they
conclude, that certainly it ought not to be esteemed so very great a fault to
pursue the dictates of that Nature which God himself has implanted in us: And
that doubtless our Passions were never designed to be merely a snare and a
torment to us, as yet they conclude they must be, unless we will allow it to be
lawful for them as freely to indulge them, as they unreasonably contend they
ought to do.

But all these, and a few others of the like kind, how destructive soever they
may be of true Piety, are the Principles of Men not yet beginning to be
religious; and by consequence, such as I ought to suppose are needless to be
obviated in this Assembly. Those I would now remark, are of another nature,
Principles upon which even good Christians do sometimes flatter themselves in
Wickedness, or at least neglect to live up to that exactness of Christian
Practice, as they ought to do.

Now such I esteem first of all, that popular mistake by which many persons too
easily delude themselves, of a good mind; a desire and an intention to live
well, and which they hope shall atone for all their miscarriages, which
notwithstanding their good intention, they still continue to commit. This is a
Principle which I fear deceives very many in the world. They cannot deny but
that they are indeed very great sinners; but yet they are sorry for it, and
they desire to live better. But alas! What shall they do? They are weak and
impotent as others are; exposed to a thousand Temptations every day, and who is
there that either does or can withstand them all?

And indeed, where the Intention is so good, as to make men careful and
diligent in their duty; if they sin only by surprise or incogitancy, and when
they do so, repent them truly, and watch themselves more diligently for the
time to come; I will not deny, but that here their good Intention may find
acceptance with God Almighty. But otherwise, to think that a weak desire, and a
vain resolution, and a transient sorrow, the usual Piety of those who rely upon
this excuse, shall find favor at the Great Day of Accounts: This is that
Device which the Devil, I fear, deceives many withal, but for which there is
not the least ground or color in the Holy Scripture.

2. And from this proceeds another mistake, and that not at all less dangerous
than the foregoing; which is, To reckon all those sins which after such a good
intention they commit, to be sins of Infirmity, and which they persuade
themselves may be consistent with a state of Grace now, and with the hopes of
Glory hereafter.

Thus if when they commit a sin, their Conscience checks them, and they parley
with the Temptation, and strive a little, and then yield, and then they are
sorry and make some transient, ineffectual resolutions of doing better for the
time to come, but which all vanish at the very next trial; this they call
Infirmity, and so God knows it is, but such an Infirmity as will by no means
excuse the sins which they commit upon the account of it.

Sins of Infirmity are of another kind; they are weak and imperfect sins, when
we are either surprised into the Commission of them, or otherwise hurried on by
some sudden fear, or other the like powerful Passion or overbearing Temptation,
before we have time to consider what we do, or to arm our selves with firmness
and resolution against it. But otherwise, where the sin is known, and the Will
free, and there was time for deliberation, and yet we agreed to it, this can by
no means be called a sin of Infirmity: And here the frequency of the
Commission, or the easiness of falling, may serve to aggravate indeed, but sure
will by no means extenuate, and much less excuse the guilt of it.

I might to these add, 3 dly, those Principles of the Church of Rome, which I
am persuaded, have not a little contributed to men's neglect of true Piety, viz.
of being saved by others Performances; of Purgatory and Indulgences, Masses and
Prayers for the Dead; of the power of the Priest to absolve sins; and of an
imperfect, ineffectual sorrow for sin, sufficient to dispose a man to receive
the Grace of Absolution; of the efficacy of the Sacraments to obtain their
ends, tho the person be not otherwise in a condition to obtain the Grace of God
without them; and in which some of them have gone so far, as to declare
Contrition to be rather a hindrance than a benefit to the Sacrament of Penance;
and one adds plainly, Morin. de Poenir. l. 8. c. 4. n. 26.
That the excellence of the Sacraments of the Gospel in general, above those of
the Law, consists in this, That they have freed us from the intolerable yoke of
loving God, and being truly sorry for our sins.

I need not after this say any thing of the extravagance of their late private
Casuists, remarked and censured by many of their own Communion, and not long
since by the Pope himself, yet still continuing, notwithstanding both, to be
but too much applauded by very great numbers amongst them. But these being
Principles against which I hope I need not prepare any one of our Communion; I
will instead of all these, mention only one Principle more, 4 thly, By which
men often hinder their progress in Piety, and that is a Principle of Compliment
and Good Breeding. When they neglect their duty, it may be do that which they
know to be contrary to it, but yet rather than be thought rude and precise,
rather than they will disturb Company, or be marked out as singular, they will
do as others do, and so disobey God, for fear of disobliging men.

That this is a Case which very often occurs in the method of our present
Conversation in the World, is not to be denied. Now then consider, I beseech
you, what the Contest here is, and what the issue most certainly will be. God
and Man are the Parties concerned, and the question is, Whether your Duty
toward him, or your Civility toward the other, ought to preponderate? Whether
you should go to Heaven with a few, singular, out-of-fashion Christians, or for
company sake take the broad road, tho you know that it leads to Eternal
Damnation? And now when the choice is so plain, methinks it should be no hard
matter to persuade men to despise such a Principle as this. To convince them
that their Salvation is a concern of too great importance to be submitted to
these formalities, and that it is to push the Compliment a great deal too far,
to be damned rather than be thought ill bred. But

3 dly. A Third Device whereby the Devil oftentimes endeavors to hinder men's
progress in Religion, is, by filling their minds with groundless fears and
scruples as to their Eternal Salvation.

It is a matter of sad Consideration to think what discouragements many
Christians labor under, in the discharge of their duty; who either wanting a
Capacity to receive a satisfaction, or indulging a close and melancholy
disposition so long, till they are at last incapable of any, live in doubts and
fears, and perplexities of mind, and it may be by degrees, wholly cast off all
thoughts of Religion, since they cannot find any peace or satisfaction in it.

Now tho such troubles as these may much more easily be prevented before they
arrive, than removed after; yet there are ways to encounter even this Device
too of our Enemy, and to render it of no force to hinder our Piety. To which
end,

1 st. If any fears or scruples of this kind arise in your minds, examine your
selves, and see whether there be any real grounds or foundation for them.
Whether your lives have been such as may give you just cause to apprehend your
selves in danger of losing your souls? If there be nothing of this kind which
you can discover to support such fears, then consider with your selves, that
the tenor of God's Threats and Promises is very plain, and easy to be
understood. That he will never condemn any man in another world, but for living
in a disobedience to his Commands in This. That our duty is clear and express;
and that Conscience, when sincerely examined, will not fail to tell us whether
we do truly fulfill it or no. And therefore that, as St. John says, Beloved, 1
Jo. iii.21.
if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. But should
the case be otherwise; should you find your selves in never so dangerous a
course of sin, yet still it is in your power, by God's Assistance, to deliver
your selves out of it. And then, There is mercy with God, that he may be
feared. Psa. 130.4.
So that be your state at the present never so dangerous, yet if you will even
now lay hold upon his Mercy, if ye will yet repent and return unto the Lord
your God, 1 John 19.
and confess your sins, he is faithful and just to forgive you your sins, and
the blood of Christ shall cleanse you from all unrighteousness.

But now 2 dly, If your Case be dubious, and neither these nor any other
reflections are able to give you that satisfaction you desire, yet should not
this move you to give way to the Tempter; but rather should engage you to set
your selves the more diligently to this work; to call in some Spiritual Guide
to your assistance; and if upon a sincere opening of your state to him, neither
can he find out any grounds for your fears and scruples, your doubts and your
apprehensions; you ought then to labor by all means to possess your Souls in
Peace; and to conclude, That these Terrors are only the Devices of the Devil to
discourage you in your duty, not any real causes for doubt or despair.

And yet 3 dly, Tho neither by these nor any other means you should ever be
able totally to overcome these difficulties; yet ought not this to make you
ever the less careful of going on still in a serious discharge of your duty.
Nay, on the contrary, it ought to make you the more zealous and diligent in the
performance of it. A man that lives here all his life in such perplexities, if
yet he fulfils that obedience, and practices that repentance which God
requires, may nevertheless be saved at the last. But he that upon any of these
grounds neglects this, tho he goes on never so securely and comfortably in his
evil way, shall certainly fall into ruin and destruction in the end. And since
such fears as these, arise from an apprehension that we do not live so well,
nor serve God so sincerely as we ought to do; the best means, when all is done,
to remove them is, if it be possible, to outlive even our own apprehensions,
and to serve God so truly and heartily, as not to be able to doubt, but that we
shall find a reward for it at his hands.

I shall add but one thing more in this Case, (4 thly,) and it is this. Be not
discouraged, nor think your Faith imperfect, or your Religion vain, because you
find your selves still attended with some fears and anxieties about your future
state. St. Paul not only allows this, but exhorts us, with his Philipians, To
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. ii.12.
To be without all concern in a matter of such moment, were to be stupid and
insensible, rather than religious. And when we come to appear before Christ in
Judgment, we shall be sentenced, not according to our own Opinions or
Apprehensions of our selves, whether good or evil, but according to the
Sincerity of our Lives, to the Extent of our Charity, and to the Truth of our
Repentance. And all these supported and made perfect by the Merits and
Satisfaction of a most Gracious and Merciful Redeemer, who will pity and pardon
beyond what we are able to express or to conceive. But,

4 thly, And to conclude this Point, The last Device by which the Devil, in
these days especially, has endeavored to hinder our Piety, is, by turning that
Zeal into Strifes and Disputes about Religion, which ought to have been
employed on the Practice of it.

For indeed, were we now to enquire what the great demonstration of all our
Zeal is, both in the Priests and the People, what other account should we be
able to bring back than this, That they are all hot and furious for their
several particular Opinions; as if the whole Gospel of Christ, and all the
Hopes of Eternity, depended on them; but for the Practice of a Gospel-life, for
that Devotion, that Charity, that Humility, and Integrity which were once the
great Care and Ornament of the Christian Church, these, God knows, are but
little regarded by the most of us.

If, 1 st. We consider the Public Effects of these Controversies to a decay of
Piety: What a desolation shall we find too often occasioned by them? I need not
tell you how many Countries have been ruined; what Kings and Princes have been
murdered, and banished, and deposed by their own people; what Blood has been
spilt; what numbers of honest and innocent people, men, women, and children,
have been lost and undone by them. And by a strange Metamorphosis, Cruelty and
Oppression, Falseness and Dissimulation, Deceit and Perjury, all the vilest and
most scandalous sins, by the Sacred Power of the Churches Interest, consecrated
into Christian and Heroical Virtues. And to complete the astonishment, the Holy
Martyrs and Confessors have been damned to Hell, whilst their Persecutors have
been Sainted, and placed in Heaven.

If 2 dly, We look upon these Disputes in themselves only, without regarding
any such desperate effects of them: I wish I had no occasion to say how
prejudicial they have even thus been, and without God's Infinite Mercy, might
have been much more to our common Christianity: Whilst by the means of these,
not only Schisms and Heresies (and even those too, St. Paul reckons among the
works of the flesh, Gal. v.20. which whosoever are guilty of, cannot inherit the
kingdom of God) have crept into the Church; but, Some from these Contests have
concluded all our Religion to be uncertain; and esteemed it the wisest way not
to join with any of us, till we can somewhat better agree to which of us they
ought to go. Others, considering the manner how these Controversies have, of
late especially, been managed and carried on, have with some color of reason,
been tempted to believe all our Pretenses to be only Deceit and Vision; for
that surely did those who stand up in the defense of Religion, believe it
themselves, they would never defend their Faith in such a manner, as utterly
contradicts all the Morality of it.

Which of the great Articles of Christianity have not our modern disputes
called in question? It is but a very little while since the Mystery of the
Sacred Trinity, and the Glorious Incarnation of the Son of God, have again been
struck at, by those who plainly show they care not what becomes of
Christianity, if they cannot make their Popish Heresy prevail with it. And
that if not in so plain and direct a manner as the Arians and Socinians of our
days do; yet in another no less repugnant to the belief of them. For if the
contradictions, as they say, be indeed as great in these, as it is plain they
are in that other Mystery, or rather as one of their own great defenders of it
truly called it, Card Perron.
That MONSTER of Transubstantiation, to which they are compared; I doubt all
considering persons will resolve from the self-evident falseness of the one, to
conclude against the others; rather than from their belief of those, to give up
their assent to this.

If we look to the Morality of the Gospel; let the Heat and the Passion, the
Bitterness, and the Evil-speaking; shall I add, and even the fraud and
dissimulation which have appeared in these debates, be a sad evidence how
destructive such disputes are of true Piety and Religion. Whilst to lessen an
Adversary, or to be thought to get the better in an Argument, men value not how
or what they write; but seem resolved at any rate to maintain their point, tho
for the doing of it they are forced to such shifts, as without God's Infinite
Mercy, must lose them their own Souls.

What shall I say to that Epidemical Incharitableness that is from hence
diffused into the several Parties of Christians? Whilst every one seems to
reckon his Enemy no better then a Heathen and a Publican; and having by their
uncharitable censures cut him off from the hopes of God's Mercy hereafter,
think themselves afterward disengaged from all obligations even of common
humanity toward him now.

I speak not this, as if I meant to accuse those of our Church who have so
generously stood in the Gap, and sacrificed their Peace, their Quiet, and their
Interests to the defense of an excellent Cause, and a truly Orthodox, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church: And much less would I be thought hereby to discourage you
from being as zealous for the Faith, and as constant in its defense, as both
your duty requires, and as, I bless God, you all of you are this day, and I
hope, and am persuaded, will ever be so. But I speak this to deplore the sad
state of Christianity, and to bewail ^^^se divisions, than which nothing ha^
(...) ^ore destructive to the practice of Religion. I speak it, earnestly to
beseech and exhort you, even by the Bowels and Mercy of Christ Jesus, that you
will be careful to add to your Faith Works: To adorn your holy Profession, by a
suitable Conversation: To live to the Honor of your Church, as well as to
dispute for it: And seeing ye know what danger these Controversies are apt to
bring to the decay of Piety, that you would be careful to prevent them, and not
suffer your Zeal for your Faith, ever to carry you to any unchristian or
unwarrantable measures in the defense of it.

And thus have I set before you some of those devices whereby the Devil is wont
to hinder our Piety; I have but just time to mention a very few of the other
kind, viz.

II dly, Those by which he is wont to draw us into the commission of Sin.

It has been an ancient Remark, and the reason whereof is so deeply rooted in
our very Natures, as may justly make it a first principle in this Enquiry; That
Evil, as such, is not desirable. No Man ever commits a sin for sinning sake,
but upon the account of some good or other which he either really does, or at
least thinks shall accrue to him thereby.

Now it is upon this, the Devil founds all his devices to deceive us. He
observes our Interests, our Tempers, and Inclinations; what it is that either
our Condition, or Circumstances, or Designs in the World render us the most apt
to be caught with, and accordingly offers his Temptations to us in such a
manner as may be most like to prevail with us.

So that then to arm our selves against those Artifices by which he is wont to
draw us into Sin, we shall need no long search, no laborious enquiry into his
particular Temptations. Only let us turn our eyes into our own Souls; there let
us consider what sins they are we are the most apt to fall into, what passions
the most command us, to what irregularities our Tempers, or our Circumstances
lay us the most open, and this will presently both show us our danger, and how
we ought to fortify our selves against it.

But tho to enter therefore upon all the particular Devices of Satan whereby he
leads Men into sin, be a work as needless as it would be infinite; yet some
general remarks there are, which we may do well to make in order to our
security.

And 1 st. It is commonly the first step which the Devil takes toward the
leading Men into sin, to persuade them to a Carelessness and Indifference in
their duty. Whilst Men are warm and vigorous in the practice of Piety, zealous
of God's Honor, and sincere in the pursuance of what makes for it; it is plain
the Enemy can get but very little advantage of us. But if instead of this, we
live only in a form of Godliness, and regard not the power of it: If we are
negligent and unconcerned for Religion, and take but little notice of what it
requires of us; We are then ready for the Tempter to make his Assault upon us:
And 'twill be no hard matter to deceive that Man into the commission of sin,
who is already but very little affected with the sense of his duty, nor takes
any great care for the fulfilling of it.

2 dly, Another device whereby the Devil often gets an advantage of us, not
only to hinder our Piety, but even to lead us into the greatest violations of
it, is by the Customs and Opinion of the World. I have before observed what
Slaves we are, the very best of us, to these things. They corrupt our Practice,
and debauch our very Reason and Understanding. And we may at this day find many
things in the practice of mankind, become the praise and accomplishment of a
Gentleman, which, were we to examine them by the Rules of the Gospel, would be
seen to have no part in the Character of a Christian. And then I need not say
how fatally dangerous that must be to lead us into sin, which is able so far to
deceive our very Consciences, as not to be thought to carry any guilt or shame
in the commission of it.

And these are such Devices whereby the Devil oftentimes draws men into Sin; I
will add only two more, whereby, when once men are engaged in a course of sin,
he is wont to strengthen and confirm them in it: viz. 1 st. An unreasonable
Hope of God's Mercy; And 2 dly. A vain dependence on their own future
Repentance: That is to say, They sin on now, in prospect of amendment
hereafter; and then they make no doubt but that they shall find favor and
mercy with God, as well as other sinners in the like circumstances have done
before them.

But, O God! what a desperate reliance is this, whereon to venture all the
Hopes and Glories of Eternity! For tell me, O Sinner! whoever thou art that
thus projectest a future Amendment, after thou have taken thy fill of Pleasure,
and art no longer able to pursue thy Sins and thy Debaucheries: What security
have thou, that That God whom thou so despisest shall continue thy life to
thee, and give thee any such Time and Opportunity to repent? Can thou command
the Sun that it should stand still, and put a stop to thy days, that thou
may the more freely follow thy Revels and thy Delights? Or can thou hope,
when thou lie down on thy last Bed, with Hezekiah, to add a new Series of
Years to thy expiring breath, by then lifting up thy profane Heart, and thy
deceitful Voice, to That God whom thou have so long continued to offend?

Nay, but could thou do this, and so arrive to the time thou have assigned
for this Work; Art thou sure thou shall then be in a Capacity of fulfilling it?
There is a time when there shall be no more any opportunity for Repentance,
though we should have otherwise leisure enough for the accomplishing of it. And
sure, if any such is, the most likely to be that Season, which Wicked Men have
laid out for their return to their duty, in order to their going on for the
present in their evil doings. Nor is there any reason why that man should
expect Grace to repent at the last, who all his life long has neglected and
despised the Offers of it.

I will not now say how unfit a time that of Old Age and Sickness is for so
great an undertaking: When the Soul as well as Body is feeble and impotent;
when the Memory is decayed, the Reason fails, and our Affections are dull, our
Zeal is cold, and all our thoughts taken up with the horrors of Hell, and the
sense of those Infirmities under which the Body labors. But sure I am, all
these things ought to convince men of the desperate folly, and even madness of
such a procrastination; and to engage them, whilst they have yet the time, to
lay hold upon that Mercy, which it may be they shall hereafter neither have
Grace nor Opportunity to implore.

See this more at large Sermon. VI, VII.
But I must not pursue these things any further; nor shall I make any
Application of what I have already offered: but, without more enlargement, will
conclude all with the words of the Church.

O God, Collect for the ivth Sund. after Epiph.
who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that by
reason of the frailty of our Nature we cannot always stand upright: Grant to us
such strength and protection, as may support us in all dangers, and carry us
through all temptations; through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom, etc.
OF Stedfastness in Religion. A SERMON Preached before the PRINCE and PRINCESS
OF DENMARK. August 5th. 1688.
2 PET. III. 17, 18. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own stedfastness.

But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
To him be Glory both now and for ever. Amen.


THese words are not only the Close of this Epistle, but also the Application
of all that the Apostle before had written in it. And for the understanding of
them, we must observe, That the design of St. Peter in this Address to the
Christians dispersed abroad among the Jews, and now under great temptations
either to corrupt or to abandon that Faith that had once been delivered to
them, Jude iii.
was to exhort and stir them up to a constant continuance in their Profession,
and not to suffer themselves, whether by the cunning Artifice of Some, or by
the open Violence of Others, to be either totally frightened out of their
Religion, or to be misled into any false Doctrines, contrary to the Truth and
Purity which they had been taught.

In the beginning of the second Chapter, he speaks of certain false Teachers
that were crept in amongst them, V. 1.
and made it their great endeavor by any means to bring in damnable Heresies.
And he foresaw that their wicked Industry would be likely to prove but too
fatally succesful; for, Many (says he) shall follow their pernicious ways, V. 2.
by reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

And in the next Chapter, he goes on to foretell the near approach of those
Judgments which our Savior Christ had so often denounced against the Jews, and
in which those complying Christians were in like manner to be involved. And by
both these Considerations, he finally, in the Close of all, stirs them up, both
to a Care of themselves, and to a Constancy in their Profession; Ye therefore,
Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away
with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.

But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
to Him be Glory both now and for ever, Amen.



Such was the occasion of these words; and the prosecution of them at this time
will engage Me to explain the nature, and to exhort you to the practice of two
Duties, than which I know none more proper for our serious Consideration;
Growth in Grace, and Stedfastness in Religion; and from both which there are
but too many Seducers on every hand to turn us aside. I shall pursue both in
this following Order.

I. I will show you, what the true nature of that stedfastness in Religion is,
to which our Text here exhorts us. II. By what Motives especially it was, that
the Apostle stirred up the Christians to whom he wrote, and that I would now
crave leave to exhort you, to such a stedfastness. III. How highly both
necessary in its self it is* but especially how advantageous to this great End,
that we should all of us endeavor what in us lies, to grow in Grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
And first,

I. What the true nature of that stedfastness in Religion is, to which our Text
exhorts us, and which I am from thence to recommend to you.

For it is not every firmness that deserves the name of a true and rational
stedfastness: and a man may as well exceed, by a perverse, unwarrantable
resolution not to hearken to any Motives, though never so reasonable, to change
his Opinion; as by an unfix'd and irresolute temper abandon himself to every
wind of Doctrine that shall come to turn him aside from it.

Constancy in Religion is a Virtue that, like all others, must be regulated by
Prudence. It must be firm, but it must be well-grounded too. And he who would
go about at all adventures to recommend a perseverance in that Faith, whatever
it be, in which a man has been born and bred, without allowing a just enquiry
to be made into the Grounds of it, and even a liberty to forsake it too, should
they prove less solid than they ought to be; He may indeed provide for their
security who chance to be already in the right way, but shall render it utterly
impossible for those that are not, ever to come to the knowledge of it.

It is not therefore such a blind stedfastness as this, a constancy in our
Religion whether it be good or bad, that either the Apostle here means, or that
I would now recommend to you. This would be to make a plea for Obstinacy rather
than Constancy; whilst by such a Rule it would be the duty of a Jew to remain
a Jew, a Heathen a Heathen; for a Papist or Socinian to continue all their
lives Papist or Socinian, no less than for One of the Church of England to be
firm and steadfast to the Faith and Communion of it. That which I understand by
a true stedfastness, is this: When a man is upon rational and good Grounds
evidently persuaded of the Truth and Purity of his Religion, then to resolve to
stick close to it, and not suffer any base, unworthy Motives, to draw him aside
from it. Our Religion must first be well grounded, and then it will be true
stedfastness to adhere to it. And therefore to give such necessary directions
as may suffice for the practice of this Duty, I must distinctly consider it in
both its respects, and as it stands in the Middle between the two Extremes of a
blind Obstinacy on the one hand, and of a weak Instability on the other; and by
either of which, the true nature of it will become equally destroyed.

First then: He that will be truly steadfast in his Religion, must take heed
that he does not mistake Obstinacy for Stedfastness.

This is an Error so much the rather to be remarked on this occasion, in that a
daily experience sadly shows us at once, both the danger and easiness of such a
mistake. It is a strange perverseness in some men, that they make it no less
than a mortal sin to have any doubts, though never so reasonable, of any the
least Doctrine they have once been taught to profess. And there is hardly an
Immorality so heinous and provoking, so contrary to the Honor of God, and so
destructive of Salvation, which their Spiritual Guides will not sooner
overpass, than such a Scruple. Insomuch, that by the express Order of the
Church which I am now speaking of, it is made a part of men's solemn reception
into their Communion, See the R. Pontific. O. d. ad Reconcil. Haerer. Spondeo
sub Anathematis Obligatione, M^ nunquam Quorumlibet suasionibus vel quocunque
al^o modo ad -- Reversurum. Et si (quod absit) ab hac me unitate aliqua
Occasion vel Argumento divisero, perjurii Reatum incurrens, aeternae obligatus
poenae Inveniar. etc.
the very condition of being admitted into a state of Proselytism with them,
not only to abjure for the present, all those Tenets which they are pleased to
call Heretical, but also to imprecate upon their heads all the miseries of
Eternal Torments, if ever they suffer themselves BY ANY OCCASION OR ARGUMENTS
WHATSOEVER, to be hereafter better instructed.

This is, in good truth, to make a Faction of Religion; it is a Combination
rather than a Constancy: And what wretched effects it has upon the minds of
those unfortunate, deluded men, that have once suffered themselves to be thus
engaged, appears in this; That no rational Motives, no Arguments, though never
so clear, are almost able to work upon them. The sad Vow they have made, recurs
continually upon their minds: They have sworn to continue where they are gone,
at all adventures; and therefore they now as obstinately resolve never to
return to the Truth, as they once weakly suffered themselves to be seduced from
it.

To avoid such an unhappy Obstinacy as this, and be constant in our Religion
upon such rational Grounds as may justify us before God and Man, from the
charge of a pertinacious firmness, we may please to observe these following
directions.

1 st. Let our Religion be founded in Knowledge; i. e. Let us be clearly and
evidently convinced of the Truth of that to which we do adhere, and then we may
be sure we cannot be justly charged with Obstinacy for our adhering to it.

He who takes up his Religion upon trust, that receives all the Articles of his
Creed by wholesale; believes as his Church believes, but it may be knows not
either what that is, or wherefore he does so; it is evident that such a
credulous Disciple as this, may be blindly obstinate, but he cannot be wisely
steadfast in the Faith. A good Christian must be able to give some more
reasonable account of his Faith than this, if ever he means to be securely firm
in the Profession of it. His Creed must be founded on some better Authority
than a bare Credulity. And 'twill be a very useless Plea at the last day, that
a man believed as his Church believed, when he might have had the opportunity
of a better information, should he chance by so doing, to live and dye in a
damnable Heresy; unless he can render some tolerable account either wherefore
his Church believed so, or at least, wherefore it was that he submitted himself
so servilely to her Authority.

But he that believes with knowledge, because he is clearly and evidently
persuaded that it is the Truth, need never fear either the danger or imputation
of such an Obstinacy, for his firmness in adhering to his Faith. If, for
instance, a Member of the Church of England reads in his Bible those express
words of the Second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, etc. Thou shall
not Bow down to it, nor Worship it; If he looks forward to the History of the
New Testament, and there in the Institution of the Blessed Eucharist sees those
words, Drink ye ALL of this, in as plain and legible Characters, as those
others, Take and Eat; and thereupon resolves never to be prevailed upon, either
to Bow down himself before an Image, or to give up his Right to the Cup as well
as to the Bread in that Holy Sacrament, whatever glosses may be made, or
pretenses be used to induce him to either; It Is evident that such a Firmness as
this, cannot be called Obstinacy, unless these Scriptures be no longer the Word
of God, or that no longer a Principle of Scripture, that in matters of plain
and undoubted Command, Acts iv.19.
we are to obey God rather than man.

And in these and the like instances, where the matter is clear even to
demonstration, there is no doubt to be made, but that such Knowledge will
certainly secure us against the charge and danger of Obstinacy. But because all
points in debate are not thus Evident, but on the contrary many are not a
little obscure; therefore for the securing our selves from danger in our
adherence to these too, we must to our Knowledge add,

2 dly, A sincere zeal to discover the truth, with an affectionate Charity to
those that differ from us.

In such Cases as this, tho we must believe and profess according to what
appears to us at present to be the Truth; yet since the Evidence is not such as
to exclude all possibility of our being mistaken, our adherence to it must be
qualified with this reserve, neither rashly to censure those who are otherwise
minded, nor obstinately to resolve never to change our Opinion, if we should
perhaps be hereafter convinced that we ought to do so.

Now in order hereunto, it is not necessary that a Man should either fluctuate
in his present Faith, or not be firmly persuaded that he shall never see any
reason to forsake it. It is sufficient to take off the imputation of obstinacy,
that our stedfastness be such as not to exclude either a readiness of being
better informed, if that be possible; or of making, upon all occasions, a
strict and impartial enquiry into the Grounds and Reason of our Faith; or even
of hearing freely whatever objections can fairly be brought against it. And all
this with a sincere desire, and steadfast resolution to discover and embrace the
Truth, wheresoever it lies; Whether it be that which we now suppose to be so,
or whether it shall be found to be on the contrary side. He who is thus
disposed in his mind at all times to receive instruction, and never presumes
rashly to condemn any one that is thus in like manner disposed, however
otherwise disagreeing in Opinion from Him; need never fear that his firmness is
any other than that Wise and Christian stedfastness which our Text requires,
not such an obstinacy as both that and we most justly detest and condemn.

But here then we must look to the other extreme, and take heed, lest for fear
of being perversely constant to our Faith, we fall into a weak and criminal
Instability. To prevent this, these three things may be considered: 1 st. That
we carefully avoid all Unworthy Motives of changing our Religion. 2 dly, That
we be not too apt to entertain an ill Opinion of it. 3 dly, That if any
Arguments shall at any time be brought against it that may deserve our
considering; we then be sure to give Them that due and diligent Examination,
that we ought to do.


I st, He that will be steadfast in the Faith, must above all things take heed
to arm himself against all unworthy Motives of changing his Religion.

It is very sad to consider what unchristian means are made use of by some
persons to propagate their Religion: And a Man need almost no other assurance
that it cannot be from God, than to see the Professors of it pursue such
methods for the promoting of its Interest, as most certainly never came down
from above.

Thus, if a Man's fortunes be mean, or his ambition great; If Religion has not
taken so deep root in his Soul as to enable him to overcome the flatteries and
temptations of a present Interest and Advantage; then there shall not be
wanting a seducer presently to show him, that he must needs be out of the right
way, because it is not that which leads to preferment. And it is great odds but
a good Place, or an Honorable Title, will quickly appear a more infallible
mark of the true Church, than any that Scripture or Antiquity can furnish to
the contrary.

If this will not do, and Interest cannot prevail, then the other governing
passion of our Minds, men's fears, are tried. Instead of these allurements, the
False Teacher now thunders out Hell and Damnation against us. Nothing but
Curses and Anathema's to be expected by us if we continue firm in our Faith.
And it shall be none of the Prophets nor his Churches fault, if all the Horrors
and Miseries of this present life be not employed against us, in charity, to
prevent our falling into the Everlasting Punishments of the next.

The Truth is, I am ashamed to recount what unworthy means some have not been
ashamed to make use of to promote their Religion, and draw us away from our
stedfastness. France and Savoy, Hungary and Germany; The Old World and the New,
have all, and that but very lately been witnesses what ways it is that Popery
has, and does, and if ever it means effectually to prevail, must take to
propagate its interest: -- Animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit. Now he
that shall be so unhappy as to suffer himself by any of these motives, which a
constant Man might and ought to have overcome, to be seduced from the right
Faith; he may deserve indeed to be pitied now, but I fear he will hardly be
hereafter excused.

But it is not sufficient to secure our selves against this danger. He that
will be constant in his Religion, as he ought to be, must see,

2 dly, That he be not too apt to entertain an ill Opinion of it.

For if it be Obstinacy on the one hand, not to admit of any Conviction tho
never so clear and reasonable; it is certainly a great Weakness on the other,
to be affrighted at every shadow of an Argument, and to put it in the power of
every little Disputer to prejudice us against our Religion, because one who is
its professed Enemy, rails against it, and pretends it is a very ill One.

He would, I believe, be thought a very credulous person indeed, who should
begin to stagger and fall into a trembling, tho he saw himself upon plain and
even Ground, because a bold and fanciful man is very positive that it is a
precipice. And doubtless that Man is no less to be pitied, that is frighted for
fear he should be in the wrong, tho he has the undoubted Authority of Scripture
and Antiquity, nay, and even of Sense and Reason too on his side, as often as
every Commonplace Trifler shall think fit to run over his division upon the
Church, the Antiquity, Succession, Infallibility of it; and, without either
Modesty or Proof, call us Heretics. If Men have Reason on their side, if they
have Scripture for what they say, let them on God's Name produce it: We are
always ready to consider and to submit to such convictions. But otherwise to
think to persuade us that we are in utter darkness when we see the Sun shining
in our faces; That we must be damned for not believing that what we see, and
taste, and know, to be but a bit of Bread, is not the Body of a Man; That they
are not Infallible, who are actually involved in the grossest Errors; In a
word, That our Church had no being before Luther, every Article of whose Faith
is founded upon the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and has been professed in
all Ages of the Church from the Apostles to this day; this is certainly one of
the most unreasonable things in the whole World, and what ought not by any
means to stagger our stedfastness.

And now having secured our selves on both these sides, it only remains to
preserve our Constancy;

3 dly, That if at any time any Arguments should be offered to us that may
deserve our regard, we then be sure to give them that due and wise Examination
that we ought to do.

It is a very great Weakness, and indeed a very great fault in many persons,
that if at any time they begin to doubt in their belief of any part of their
Faith which they have been taught to profess, they presently abandon their own
Guides, and run for satisfaction to those who are the professed Enemies of
their Religion. From henceforth they hear nothing but what is ill of their
Church; they are taught more and more to suspect the way that they are in; and
then it is odds but a very little examination suffices to make them leave it.

This is certainly a very great fault, and will one day prove of very dangerous
consequence. What such persons may think of changing their Religion, I cannot
tell; but sure I am, our greatest Charity will hardly enable us to entertain
any very comfortable Opinion of them. Nor are they such as those that we either
say, or believe may be saved, notwithstanding the errors and corruptions of
that Church with which they Communicate.

He that will make a safe change from one Religion to another, must not think
it enough to enquire into one or two points, and having received a satisfaction
in them, embrace all the rest at a venture for their sakes; but he must pass
distinctly through every Article in debate. He must enquire, not only whether
the Church of which he is at present a Member, be not mistaken in some points,
it may be there is no Church in the World that is absolutely free from all kind
of Error; But whether those mistakes be of such a consequence, that he cannot
communicate any longer with it on the account of them. When this is done, the
greatest difficulty will still remain, to examine with the same diligence every
Article of that other Church to which he is tempted: For else, tho he should
have reason to forsake his own Church, he will yet be but little advantaged if
he goes to another that is as bad, or, it may be, worse than that. If there he
should find the most part well, yet so that there are but any One or Two things
so Erroneous as to oblige him to profess what he thinks to be false, or to
practice what is unlawful, even this will be sufficient to hinder him from
reconciling himself to it. And in all this, there must be a serious, and
diligent, and impartial search. There must be no prejudice in favor of the
One, or against the Other; no desire that the Truth should be on this side,
rather than on that: In short, nothing must be omitted, whereby he might
reasonably have got a better Information. And to all this Care, there must be
added fervent Prayer to God for his assistance. He who falls away from his
first Faith on any lesser convicton than this, can never excuse himself from a
criminal lightness in a matter of such concern. And for him that sincerely does
this, I shall, for my part, be content that he should leave the Church of
England, whenever he can be thus convinced that any other, but especially that
the Church of Rome is a safer way to Salvation.

And this may suffice to have been said to the first particular; What that
stedfastness in Religion is, to which our Text exhorts us. I go on 2 dly to
show,

II. Upon what Motives it was that the Apostle here stirred up the Christians
to whom he wrote, and that I am now in like manner to exhort you, to such a
stedfastness.

Now these our Text reduces to this One General Consideration; That they both
understood their danger, and were expressly forewarned by his Epistle how
careful it would behove them to be, to arm themselves against it: Ye therefore,
Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, Beware. And doubtless it is not
only a great security, but ought to be also a great engagement to such a
vigilance, to be thus expressly forewarned of our danger. And he who either
neglecting or despising the Admonition, suffers himself to be seduced from his
own stedfastness, must certainly be utterly inexcusable both in the sight of
God and Man for his Inconstancy.

But that which will aggravate this neglect yet much more, is the consideration
of those Motives by which the Apostle here cautions them to Beware, and which
therefore I must lay a little more distinctly before you. Now such were
especially these two.

1 st. The dangerousness of those seducers that were crept in amongst them: And
this not so much in respect of their cunning and diligence, tho that too were
considerable; as of the motives they used to draw them from their stedfastness.
There are, it may be, scarce any two things in the World, the weakness and
corruption of Man's Nature considered, more apt to seduce, than an easy
Practice, supported with high Pretenses; when both the way that is offered is
extremely agreeable to our loose inclinations, and the Proponent wonderfully
confident in the tender of it; And both these St. Peter here tells us, were to
be found in the Heretics against whom he forewarns them: And indeed 'twas upon
this account especially, that he seemed to be so apprehensive of their
prevailing. For when (says he) they speak great swelling words of vanity, II.
Chap. ver. 18.
they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness. And
therefore, as he said before, ver. 2. -- 2.
Many shall follow their pernicious, or rather, as both the Original Greek, and
our own Marginal Note read it, their loose, their lascivious ways. But,

2 dly. Another danger there was, and that no less to be considered than the
foregoing. The Christians to whom he wrote, were under some trial and
persecution for the Faith of Christ, and these Heretics who chiefly provided
for the ease and quiet of this present life, had found out a remedy against
that danger too. They taught, That it was lawful on these occasions to
dissemble, or even to deny their Faith, and not to run any such hazards for it.
Now this to weak minds could not but be a strong temptation to comply with
them. Men, for the most part, are very easy in believing that, which they very
much desire should be true. And therefore no wonder if our Apostle thought
himself highly concerned amidst all these dangers, to exhort them to beware,
lest being led away with the error of the wicked, they should fall from their
own stedfastness.

Such was the state of these Christians; and I shall not need to make any
Application. But now, if as we have seen their dangers, so we shall also
consider the Arguments which the Apostle here urges to confirm their Constancy,
we shall be forced to acknowledge them to be such, as ought in all reason to
have prevailed with them. For,

1 st. As to the temptations before mentioned, they are indeed but too apt to
seduce, because we are few of us so wise or so good as we ought to be: but to
an upright and sincere Christian, they will appear exceeding inconsiderable,
and even detestable. Confidence and Assurance stagger weak minds: but if
destitute of solid reason, they only argue to wise men the vanity of the
Undertaker, and render the Man and his Cause the more ridiculous. And for the
other dangers, the fear of Persecution, and the looseness of their Morals; he
must be a strange sort of Christian indeed, whom such considerations can
prevail with to fall from his stedfastness, and hardly worth the while for any
Church to get or to preserve. And though I should be glad by any honest and
Christian means to promote the Interests, and enlarge the Borders of the Church
of England, yet I must confess, that I am so little concerned for such Members
as these, that on the contrary I could almost wish that all those who will not
be persuaded to live Christianly in our Communion, would be so kind to us as to
live Unchristianly out of it, rather than in it, The loss of Ten thousand such
Proselytes would only lessen our number, but neither our Honor nor our
Interest; nay, perhaps, would rather help to promote both: For I should then
begin to hope, that God had indeed a Blessing in store for us, could I once see
these Jonas's cast out, for whose sake, perhaps, it is that the present Storm
is fallen upon us; and whose departure from us, may therefore, for ought I
know, be the likeliest means to restore to us the Blessing of Peace and
Security again.

But if there be then nothing in these temptations that should draw us aside
from our stedfastness, I am sure,

2 dly. There is more than enough in what St. Peter here offers, to engage us
to continue firm to it. And because I may not now enlarge my self, I will
rather point it out to you, than insist upon it. For,

1 st. It is with us now, as it was with the Christians in St. Peter's time:
Those who would draw us away from our stedfastness to the true Catholic Faith,
would bring in dangerous, I am unwilling with the Apostle to say damnable
Heresies, in the stead of it. We do indeed charitably hope, That they who by
the Providence of God have been born in a different Communion from us, and bred
up all their lives not only in an utter ignorance of the right Faith, but in an
irreconcilable hatred to it; who have been taught to damn us as Heretics and
Schismatics, and to value themselves upon the score of their own pretended
Catholicism, if they are otherwise sincere in that Faith which they profess,
and repent them truly of their sins, but especially of their uncharitableness
to those that differ from them, may, through the extraordinary mercy of God, be
saved, notwithstanding such their Errors. But for us, who know their delusions;
that whilst they damn all others as Heretics, they are indeed themselves the
most perverse and obstinate that ever were; should we forsake our Truth, and go
over to them, that little Argument so often used on these occasions, That we
confess men may be saved in their Church, but that they utterly deny they can
be so in Ours, and therefore that it is better to be on theirs, i. e. the safer
side, would stand us in small stead; and for all this Sophistry, we should
certainly run a very great hazard of being damned for falling away from our own
stedfastness. But,

2 dly. A second Motive which our Apostle here offers to engage us to such a
constancy, will arise from the consideration of the exceeding great punishment
that shall be the consequence of such an Apostasy. Now that in this case was so
much the more to be considered, in that the punishment which St. Peter here
speaks of, was to fall upon them even in this present world. The Prophecies of
Christ for the Destruction of the Jews being now just ready to be accomplished,
and in which the Apostatizing Christians were also to be involved. But however,
I neither have, nor would desire to have any such prospect with reference to
the Seducers and their Proselytes in our days, whose Conversion, though I
heartily wish, yet, I thank God, I never did, I hope I never shall desire their
Destruction: yet certainly the Argument ought never the less to be considered,
because it respects only the Miseries of another life. There is more than
enough in the consideration of Eternal Torments, to move the most indifferent
person both to consider, and, if it may be, to prevent the enduring of them.
And however men may please to put the Evil Day far from them, and hope that it
shall not, because it is their Interest that it should not, too soon overtake
them: yet neither can any of us say how soon it may come upon us; and were it
at never so great a distance, yet let us but remember that when it does come,
it brings an Eternity along with it, and we shall be forced to confess, That no
present Considerations, how great soever they may seem to be, are yet fit to
stand in competition with it.

He must be a very foolish, or a very necessitous man indeed, that would part
with the certain reversion of a Thousand Pounds a Year, for the obtaining a
present Penny. And yet such, or rather God knows infinitely greater, is the
folly of that man, who for any secular advantages whatsoever, sells his Soul;
and thereby not only loses his title to all the Joys and Glories of Heaven, but
exchanges them for a dreadful Portion of Fire and Brimstone for ever.

Blessed Savior! What is there in all those little Enjoyments men here pursue
with so much greediness, that for the sake of them We should deny Thee, and
that Faith which must save us when we appear before thee in Judgment! Behold!
yet a little while, and there We must stand to render a strict Account of all
our actions, and receive according to what we have done in the body, whether it
be good or evil. And what then will all these Interests and Advantages avail
us? What profit shall we then have, though we could have gained the whole World,
when we shall have lost our own Souls for the doing of it? How will it then
please us, that we have renounced our Faith to preserve those little Enjoyments
that are now no more; but the sad punishment of the soul Apostasy to which they
have tempted us, will continue for ever? Certainly, were the complying
Hypocrite but capable of reflecting what shall be the end of his Apostasy;
could he but once think with the Prophet, Who can dwell with everlasting
burnings? he would need no other motive to convince him of the folly of such
Courtly compliance, and to keep him from falling away from his own stedfastness.

3 dly. But the Apostle adds yet another Motive, and which having mentioned, I
shall conclude. We have seen the sad, the unspeakable, and what is yet more,
the eternal misery of him that falls from his stedfastness. Could I now
represent to you the as infinite Reward of the constant Christian; could I
delineate to you but a small part of those Joys which are prepared for such an
One; what an illustrious Crown of Glory shall adorn his triumphant Head to all
Eternity: I might then hope to have fully accomplished the design of this
Exhortation, and to have effectually secured you against falling away from your
stedfastness.

But this is an Argument above my Capacity to illustrate. Eye has not seen, 1
Cor. II* 9.
nor ear heard, nor does it enter into the heart of man to conceive, what God
has prepared for them that love him. We have neither thoughts to imagine any
thing comparable to its greatness, much less words to express it. And methinks
even this should be enough to recommend it to us, that we are not able to
express it. That its Excellency so far surpasses whatever experience we can
pretend to of any felicity in this life, that we cannot so much as found upon
it any tolerable apprehensions of the Joys and Glories of the other. At least,
this I am sure, that it ought to be more than enough to convince you, how
incomparably more worthy our desires and pursuits such a reward of our firmness
is, than whatsoever can be offered to draw us aside from it.

And now having shown you both what it is to be truly steadfast in our Faith,
and how great an Obligation there lies upon us so to be; what remains, but that
I briefly close all with the last particular I proposed to speak to,

III. How highly necessary in its self, but especially how advantageous to this
great end it is, that we should all of us endeavor what in us lies, To grow in
Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

I could wish I had some longer time to improve, as I ought, this great and
useful Exhortation. But I have insisted too long already, and therefore may not
enlarge upon it. The duty, in short, recommended to us is this; That we should
seriously endeavor according to our several opportunities, to increase every
day in our Knowledge and Understanding of the Gospel of Christ, and in a
suitable practice and performance of it. And he who truly makes it his business
to do this, need never fear falling away from his stedfastness. His Knowledge
will teach him what is the right way, and the Grace of God rooted in his heart,
will establish him, that no unworthy Considerations shall ever be able to draw
him aside from it.

1. For what concerns the former of these, Knowledge, he must understand but
very little of the true Spirit of Christianity, that is not able at the first
sight to discover the illusion of those false Teachers, that are at present the
most busy amongst us.

* Christianity is a Gospel of Peace and Charity: It commands us to love and to
do good to all men even our very enemies. To bless them that curse us, Mat.
v.44.
to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for those that despitefully use
us and persecute us. And can those be its Disciples, who scatter nothing but
hatred and malice, confusion and disorder, wherever they come; and make it a
matter of conscience to root out and destroy from off the earth, all those that
differ from them? The very foundation of whose Religion consists in a Maxim of
the most detestable uncharitableness, That all must be damned that are not of
their Persuasion?

* Christianity is a wise and reasonable Religion; a Religion becoming a most
wise God to plant, and rational creatures to embrace. But our new Teachers are
for a blind and unreasonable Piety: They are for a Faith and a Worship full of
the greatest contradictions: And esteem the true Character of a thorough-pac'd
Believer to be, to believe not only without any just grounds, but even contrary
to the common Sense and Reason of mankind.

* Christianity is an honest, an upright, a sincere Religion; a Religion that
requires the greatest plainness and simplicity in all our words and actions.
And can those be Christians who are wholly made up of Fraud and Dissimulation;
who palliate the very Doctrine they profess; deny the very Articles of their
Faith, when it is requisite thereby to seduce men to their Party; and plainly
show that they value not what they do or say, as often as the mother-interest
of their Church requires them to deceive.

* Christianity teahces us to worship but One God* 1 Timothy ii.5.
and one only Mediator between God and Man, Christ Jesus. But our New-Masters
are not thus content: They set up, if not more Gods, yet I am sure more Objects
of their Religious Worship, more Mediators than one; and teach men to address
their Prayers more frequently through the Merits and Intercession of their new
Advocates, to whose Patronage they have committed themselves, than through His
who is the true Christians only Advocate, Christ blessed for ever.

* Christianity forbids us to make any graven Images, 2 d Com.
the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, to Bow down before it, and worship
it. These false Prophets set up their Images in every Church, and bow down to
the work of their hands. For this end they consecrate them with many
Abominations. And however some think fit to dissemble it, yet others speak it
boldly out, as the Doctrine of their Church, That the very same Religious
Worship is to be given to the Cross of Christ, Aquin. and his School.
that is paid to Him that suffered upon it.

* Christianity commands us to pray in a tongue which the Church understands, 1
Cor. xiv.
that so the unlearned may be able to say Amen at our giving of thanks. Our New
Guides direct men to pray in a tongue which to be sure the people do not, and
which sometimes even the Priest too that officiates, understands as little as
they.

* Christianity is a Religion that teaches men to be meek and humble, not to
think of themselves above what they ought to think; but when they have done
all, to say, they are unprofitable servants. But our new Teachers have not so
learnt of Christ. They know a little better how to value their own
performances. Instead of saying they are unprofitable servants, they teach men
to value themselves on the account of their Merits; to look upon Heaven to be
but an equal recompense of their Piety; nay, yet more, that they may live so as
to make God a Debtor to them beyond all the Glories of Eternity, and to merit a
Crown both for themselves and others.

* In short, for there is indeed no end of the contradiction; Christianity
commands us to take bread, to bless it, and break it; To take Wine, bless it
and pour it out; and eat and drink at the Holy Table in remembrance of that
Death and Passion, which our Blessed Savior once for all underwent upon the
Cross for us. But what now do our new Instructors? They tell us here is neither
Bread nor Wine to be eaten or drunk; that they are, I know not how, converted
into the very Natural Substance of Christ's Body and Blood. That he was not
offered up once for all, but is here again as truly offered as ever he was upon
the Cross: That thereby a new Expiation is made for the Sins both of the dead
and the living; and tho our Savior has as expressly commanded both kinds as
either, yet they declare that one is sufficient for the people to partake of,
and accordingly they give no more to them.

Thus you see how very little a Knowledge of our Lord and his Religion will
suffice to show that there cannot be any just cause for any one to forsake the
Communion of our Church, to plunge himself into such an abyss of Error and
Superstition as this. And then if he be but equally advanced,

2 dly, In Grace too; this will certainly secure him, that no base motive, no
danger or Interest shall be able to prevail with him so to do.

Let the Seducer display all the seeming advantages of such a change. Let him
with his Master the Devil set us up upon the high mountain of our own vain
imaginations. There let him show us all the Kingdoms of the Earth, Mat. iv.8.
and the glories of them; and to complete the Parallel, let him, if he can, add
too; All these things are mine, and to whomsoever I will, I can give them; if
thou will therefore renounce thy Faith, and fall down and worship me, all shall
be thine. By Grace we shall learn to despise them all: This will convince us,
that there can be no true honor in dissembling a man's conscience, and
prostituting his Soul, his Religion, and his God, to a little present
advantage. That the Riches of this world are but vanity; that the true treasure
is in Heaven. In a word, That the favor of the greatest Monarch is not worth
the purchasing, if to obtain that, we must lose the favor of God for ever.

Let him shift the Scene; instead of all these advantages, let him set forth
all the dangers that either the Devil can suggest, or his own more furious Zeal
invent; By Grace we shall be able to despise even those too. This will teach
us, that there is a God in Heaven, who shall laugh them to scorn; and whose
Counsel it is, that when all is done, shall stand. That if he pleases to
protect us, it is not all their malice that can do us the least injury. But that
should he either for our Punishment, or our Trial, expose us to their rage, yet
still we ought with Moses, Heb. xi.25, 26.
to esteem the reproach of Christ beyond all the treasures of Egypt; and choose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season.

This was the brave resolution of the Saints of old; They were tortured, Heb.
xi.35.
not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. Dan.
iii.
When Nebuchadnezzar commanded the three Children in Daniel, -- 15.
to worship the golden image which he had set up; they regarded neither the
Majesty of the King, nor the Threats of his fiery furnace: -- 16.
They told him plainly, That they were not careful to please him in that
matter; -- 17.
that their God, if he pleased, both could and would deliver them out of his
hand: But if not, yet Be it known to thee, O King, -- 18.
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have
set up. And the same has been the spirit of our forerunners in the Faith; they
have overcome all the fiery darts of the Devil, whilst that Blessed Savior who
first gave the Command, has ever since inspired his followers with strength and
resolution to fulfill it; Mat. x.28.
Fear not them who can kill the body, and after that, have no more that they
can do; but fear him who can cast both soul and body into hellfire; yea, I say
unto you, fear him.

Here then let us exercise our selves. Let us be steadfast to our Faith; and
that we may be so, Let us grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. The Seducers amongst us are many; they are diligent and
watchful by any means to draw us into their Nets; and God knows both their
Religion and their Arguments are but too much adapted to our Passions and our
Interests, and may therefore be but too likely to prevail upon us. But, Ye
therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware.

Behold, I have fre^^^ set before you this day, Life and Death, your Duty and
your Danger; and I am very confident the choice is not difficult. I shall
finish all with those words of our Blessed Master, Matt. x.32. and which indeed
is the sum of all I am now exhorting you to.

Whosoever shall confess me before men, Matthew. x.
him will I also confess before my Father which is in Heaven. -- 32.


But whosoever shall deny me before men, -- 33.
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven.

OF THE Reasonableness and Terrors OF THE FUTURE JUDGMENT. A SERMON Preached at
WHITE HALL Before the PRINCESS of DENMARK, May 12. 1688.
ACTS XXIV.25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, Felix trembled; and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee.


AS the context at first sight tells us, that the Person here spoken of, was
St. Paul; so if we look into the foregoing Chapter, we shall find that he had
been not long before sent down from Jerusalem to Caesarea, Acts xxiii. v. 23,
etc.
by the chief Captain, Claudius Lysias, upon a discovery that had been made to
him of certain Jews who had bound themselves under a great Curse, Ib. v. 12,
14, 16.
not to Eat nor Drink till they had slain Him.

It was none of the least instances of the blind and furious zeal of those men
for their Religion, that as they thought themselves disengaged even from all
the Common Offices of Humanity to those that were not of the same Country and
Opinion with themselves; so here they looked upon it to be a piece of merit, a
doing of God service, Joh. xvi.2.
by any the most base and treacherous means that could be imagined, to
persecute and destroy this Holy Man, merely for having Apostatized from it.

They saw the mischief that he did them, and they knew not how, otherwise than
by his death, to prevent it. His Quality, his Education at the feet of one of
their most Learned Rabbis; the zeal he once had for the Jewish worship in
opposition to that to which he was now converted; His indefatigable Industry in
every where drawing others out of those Errors and Prejudices in which Himself
had been engaged; In a word, that Astonishing Miracle, by which our Savior
Christ himself from Heaven wrought his Conversion; All these, as they rendered
him a most useful and blessed Instrument of propagating the Gospel, so did they
in proportion mark him out as a peculiar object of their Rage. And accordingly
we find that they left no Method, whether of open Violence, or private
Treachery; either by false Accusation, or secret Assassination, unattempted to
destroy Him.

But the Providence of God was not to be overcome by the malice and wickedness
of Men. And our Blessed Lord, who so wonderfully called him to his work, did
not cease as wonderfully to protect and defend him in it: So that after all
their endeavors to entrap him, we find him here more safe than ever from their
Violence: In the hands of a Centurion, to secure Him from their Malice, Acts
xxiv.23.
but not to forbid any of his acquaintance to come or minister unto him.

In this state was our Apostle when Felix sent for Him to hear what he could
say concerning the Faith or Gospel of -- v.24.
Christ. What the particulars of that Sermon were which upon this occasion he
made to Him, we are not certainly informed. But the sum of it is recorded in
the Words of my Text, viz. That it was of Righteousness, Temperance, and the
Judgment to come: And those proposed to him in so plain and powerful a manner,
that he was not able to dissemble the impression it made upon him, For, as he
reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come, Felix trembled, and
answered, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season I will call
for thee.

To discourse upon which words in that proper manner that I ought to do, I must
desire these two things may be observed.

1 st. That the Person to whom St. Paul here addressed himself, was not only a
very wicked Man, and guilty in a more particular manner, as I shall presently
show, of those very crimes against which the Apostle here particularly
inveighs; but a Heathen too: A Man utterly unacquainted not only with the
Doctrine of Christ, See Grotius and Dr. Hammond on that Verse, which in our
Translation seems to imply quite otherwise, viz. That he had a perfect knowledge
of the Jewish Law.
verse 24. but also with the profession of the Jews, verse. 22.

2 dly, That to this man St. Paul proposes the Doctrine of a Future Judgment,
and that dreadful punishment which by consequence should hereafter be
pronounced against sinners, not by way of Authority, or as a Revelation which
the Gospel had made to the World; but as a point which his own Reason would
tell him was most just, and fit to be bebelieved. He reasoned, says my Text,
before him, of the great obligations that lie upon Men to live justly and
soberly, and of the severe enquiry that shall one day pass upon all of us,
whether we have lived or no as we ought to do. And then taking of our Text
under these Considerations, I suppose I shall pursue the most proper design of
it, in discoursing to you on these four points: I st. That the Doctrine of a
Judgment to come, is so highly reasonable, that the greatest Infidel must be
forced to confess the probability of it. II dly, That if there be a Judgment to
come, and a future state of rewards and punishments, it cannot be doubted but
that those who live wickedly now, shall then be in a most wretched and
deplorable condition. III dly, That however sinners may pretend to dissemble
their belief of this, and live as if indeed they did believe nothing at all of
it; yet the greatest of them cannot choose but tremble sometimes at the
Apprehension of it. Tho now, IV thly and Lastly, It too often happens to such
persons, as we see it did to this unfortunate Man here; That the effect of
these terrors is not to bring them to repentance of their sins; but to engage
them by any means to put off the thoughts of their future state, which are so
troulesome and amazing to them.


But before I enter upon these Particulars, there is one thing which I cannot
but observe with reference to those other points mentioned in the Text, as part
of St. Paul's Discourse before Felix, Righteousness and Temperance: And the
Application whereof may serve to reproach the Complaisance of too many of his
Successors among us in the Gospel; whose tenderness in reproving the Vices of
Great Men, and sometimes even their connivance at them, does but very illy
agree either with that great Obligation which our Holy profession lays upon us,
or with that admirable Example which the Apostle has here set us for our
imitation.

It is the Character which Historians have given us of this Felix, Josephus,
Hist. l. 20.
That he was a man, who, in his Government, managed his Power with all the
Violence and Injustice that can possibly be imagined; and breaking through all
the Ties of Justice and Continence, had, by the help of one Simon a Magician,
Tacitus, Hist. l. 5.
gained the Affections of Drusilla, the Wife of Azis, King of the Emisseni and
lived in a state of Adultery with her.

Now this being the Case of Felix, it is plain, that the Subject of St. Paul's
Discourse was to remonstrate to him his Injustice, and Intemperance; and let
him freely know, That however he might carry it out by his Power and Authority
now, yet there was a time coming, a future Day of Judgment, when he should be
called to a severe Account for all his Wickedness.

This was indeed an Address becoming the zeal of an Apostle, and the Spirit of
St. Paul. And too plainly shows, how little we have left in us of that
Primitive warmth which inflamed this Holy Man, by our different management on
the like Occasions.

There can hardly be imagined any greater discouragement to such a freedom,
than what our Apostle here labored under. To touch an Unjust Governor in the
point of his Violence and Injustice; a lustful Adulterer in the business of his
Incontinence, this one would think should have been a pretty bold undertaking
for any One. But for Saint Paul, a Prisoner, one that was to appear as a
Criminal before him; for him, instead of flattering this great Man* as his
Adversary Tertullus had done: Verse 2. Instead of Applauding the great
quietness which the people enjoyed under his government, Verse 2.
and the very worthy deeds that had been done by his providence, to call him to
repent of his Rapine and Cruelty; of his Intemperance and Adultery: and this
too in the presence of that very Woman whom he much loved, Verse 24.
and for whose sake he had done so many vile things; this was an Honest freedom
and plainness, becoming an Apostolical Age; but which, I fear, in these days of
ours, would be censured as rudeness, and indiscretion; any thing rather than a
commendable Zeal for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls.

But alas! St. Paul had not learnt that tender Application that is now adays
made to Great Persons. He had no Interest of his own to pursue; and therefore
did not address himself after the manner of those who are more afraid of
offending Men, than of displeasing God, and of disparaging their Character. He
knew the Doctrine to be seasonable to Felix; and that if he pleased to make a
good use of it, it might be profitable too: And he never stood to consider,
whether Felix would like it, or no; or whether it might not perhaps provoke him
to run to any Extremities against him for his freedom. In short, He had an
Unjust, Adulterous Man to preach to; and he knew nothing so fit to reason of
before him, as of Righteousness, Temperance, and the Judgment to come. And had
we but the same honest Courage and Indifference that he had, we should speak,
not only with the same freedom that he did; but, by the Grace of God, with the
same efficacy too: And poor and despicable as we are thought by many, yet in
the power of that Divine Truth which we are sent to preach to the World, make
the greatest Sinners tremble to think, That for all these things God will bring
them to judgment.

And that this is the Case, is the first thing I am to show:

I st, That the Doctrine of a Judgment to come, is so highly reasonable, that
the greatest Infidel cannot but acknowledge the probability of it.

In pursuance of which Point, it is not my Design to show what Grounds the Holy
Scriptures give us for the belief of a future Judgment, which we all of us
every day profess as an Article of our Faith, and therefore cannot be supposed
any of us to doubt of it. What else do we meet with almost throughout the New
Testament, but Exhortations to live well upon this Ground, That God has
appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness: Acts
xvii.31. Romans xiv.10.
Acts xvii.31. That we must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans
xiv.10. That we must All appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; Every one
to receive the things done in his Body, according to what he has done, whether
it be Good or Evil: 2 Cor. v.10. 2 Cor. v.10.
What Revelation has there ever been more clearly made, I do not say than this,
That there shall be a final Judgment, but of the manner and Circumstances of
it? 1 Thessalonians. iv.15, etc. 1 Cor. xv.
How the Trumpets shall sound, and the dead arise, and those that are alive be
changed. How the just shall be caught up into the air, and the sinners lie
grovelling below, in vain crying out to the Mountains to fall upon them, and to
the Hills to cover them: How the Judgment shall be set, and the Books opened,
and every man judged out of the things contained in those Books, according to
his works. Matt. xxv.31, etc.
Then shall the Son of Man come in his Glory, and sit down upon the Throne of
his Glory: And before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate
them the one from the other, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats:
and he shall set his Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left: And he
shall say to them on his right hand, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World. But to those on the
left, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment; but the
Righteous into Life Eternal.

In a word; So particular is the Account which we here find of all the
Circumstances of this great Audit, that I scarce know any thing left unrevealed
to us, but only the Day and Hour when this Judgment shall be: And which indeed
God has in Mercy kept up from us, that so we might always live in Apprehension
of that, which we can never tell how soon it may arrive.

But this is not that which my Text leads me to consider: And indeed, however
it may be useful enough to call upon the most faithful Christians to think
sometimes on this future Judgment; yet it would certainly be a very needless
undertaking to reason with such Persons concerning it, and use any long
Arguments to convince them of the futurity of it. That which I have now to do,
is of a quite different nature; It Is to offer such Reasons for the belief of a
Judgment to come, as may convince the Greatest Infidel of the probability of
it: And show them that, whether they will believe us in other things, or no,
yet here at least they cannot with any reason doubt of the Truth of our
Doctrine; but must resolve to become Good Men, if they will not be persuaded to
become Faithful Christians.

And indeed in this Skeptical Age, in which we now live, it may not, for ought
I know, be altogether unseasonable, to argue sometimes with Men upon their own
Principles. To show them, that Religion is not a contrivance of State Policy,
nor the effect of Priestcraft. That when we discourse of another World after
this, and a final Inquest to pass upon all our Actions; and a Vast Eternity of
Rewards and Punishments, according to what they now do, whether Good or Evil;
we do not alarm Men's minds with false Fears, and ungrounded Terros, but speak
to them a Truth which the very Gentiles themselves have universally
acknowledged; nay, which their own Consciences will not suffer them to
disbelieve, however they may sometimes endeavor to stifle their Convictions,
and have the Impudence to deny, what at the same time, with Felix, they tremble
to think of. In short; That whether we look into the frame and constitution of
our own Souls within us, or contemplate the Dispensations of God's Providence
in the affairs of the World without, they both speak to us this great Truth,
That God will bring us to Judgment.

1. If first we look back into the Principles of the Heathen Theology, what
point shall we find more universally acknowledged by them, than this of a
Judgment to come? This we may see illustrated not only in the flights of their
Poets, in the Harangues of their Orators, in the Dictates of their
Philosophers; and all which have been particularly collected by the Holy
Fathers of the Church in their Writings against them, and may be seen at large
in the Works yet extant of Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Theodoret and others: But
as Tertullian well observes, even in their common Conversation, in which Men
usually the most speak according to their Natural impressions, they still
testified the same belief: And by calling God to witness and judge of their
Actions; by commending themselves and their Cause to God, when they could find
no remedy or relief from Men, they plainly showed it to be a principle rooted
in their very Natures, That there is a God who sees and observes what passes
here below; and will one day set to rights all the present seeming irregular
dispensations of his Providence in the Government of the World, and render to
every man according to his Works.

I shall not in this place enter so far into this Argument, as to show you in
the particular expressions of the Ancient Heathens themselves, how clearly and
peremptorily they have delivered themselves as to this Point of a Judgment to
come. But thus much I suppose I may take the liberty to conclude from what I
have already in General observed; That it cannot be denied, but that,
Christianity set apart, the belief of a future Judgment must be allowed, even
upon the mere Principles of Nature, to be very highly probable, which the
Gentiles themselves, without the help of any Divine Revelation, have so firmly
and universally received.

And indeed so clear are the Evidences of it, that wheresoever we turn our
eyes, whether into the Nature and Constitution of the little World within, or
into the Government and Administration of the greater without us, we cannot but
acknowledge the reasonableness of this belief. For,

2 dly, If we consider the Nature of our own Souls within us, we shall find a
Conscience, even in the most wicked Men, that will plainly bear witness to this
great Truth.

There is a certain Principle implanted in every one of us, that not only
directs and informs us what we ought to do, and what to avoid; but does
moreover check, or encourage us, according as what we have done is either Good
or Evil. Now upon this Sentence which our Consciences here pass upon all our
Actions, we find either a pleasure, and confidence, and satisfaction if we have
done well; or else a fear, and terror, and distrust, if we have done ill: And
this not with reference to any Reward we are like to receive, or any Punishment
we may be in danger of suffering in this present World: The greatest Monarchs
being no less sensible of these Motions within, when their Consciences do
either approve or condemn them, than the meanest of their Subjects; and both
the One and the other, though the Action were never so secret, no less than if it
had been done in the presence of the whole World.

And what is all this but a plain Evidence planted in our very Nature, to keep
us in a continual expectation of some account to be given of our Actions in
another World, beyond what is done in this. When the long Series of our present
Lives shall be reviewed, and our Consciences, now our Judges, then become
Witnesses, and give Testimony for or against us, according as we have done
either Good or Evil.

But that which will be a yet farther Confirmation of this Argument is, That
the nearer we approach to our latter End, still the more Powerful and Vigorous
are these impressions of our own Consciences upon our Souls. How does the
Sinner then begin with Horror to reflect upon his Life past; and to hate and
fear the Consequence of his Evil doings, when he is just ready to die, and by
consequence is passed all apprehension of any farther inquest in this Life,
more than he did at the time of his commission of them? Whilst the Good and
Virtuous man embraces Death with such a Quiet and Composure, and oftentimes
with such a sensible Joy and Satisfaction, as if he were about to receive some
great Good by it, to be sure did not Fear any Evil from it.

This certainly can be nothing else but a still more sensible evidence of the
Belief of a Judgment to come, rooted in our very Natures, and that there is to
be a Restitution of rewards and Punishments in another Life, besides what is
made to our Actions in this*

3. To all which if we add, 3 dly, The farther strength that will be given to
this Principle, from the Consideration of the present Irregular Dispensations
of God's Providence, as they seem to us, in this World, to oblige us to expect
some Judgment in the Other; I do not see what the greatest Sceptick can have to
oppose against so firm and clear a Demonstration of it.

It is, I presume, agreed among all sorts of Persons that admit the Being of a
God, that as he is the Author of all Perfections in all other things, so he can
have nothing Defective, or Imperfect in Himself. That as this World was not at
first made by Chance and Fortune, but by a most Wise, and Good, and Powerful
God; so neither is it now Governed by Chance, but by the Providence of the same
God who first made it.

Now if God be Infinitely Perfect, then he must be Perfectly Wise, and Just,
and Good; and we may as well suppose him not to be God, as not allow him to be
all this. But if he be so, and if this World be indeed subject to the Guidance
of his Providence, then We must of necessity acknowledge a Judgment to come. It
being plain, that as the Affairs of men are ordered in this Present World, they
show but very little sign of an exact Justice and Goodness in the
Administration of them. The best Men now being oftentimes the most Unfortunate;
and the most Profligate Miscreants, the most happy, in the Enjoyments of the
Good things of this Life.

Either therefore we must deny that there is a God, altogether; or that the
world is Governed by Him: Or we must say, that he is not Just and Good, and
therefore minds not what becomes of those that are so, which is in effect to
say he is not God: Or else that he is Impotent and Ignorant; either does not
know how things pass here below, or though he does know, yet is not able to
redress them; and this again destroys the very Notion of a God, which includes
an Infinite Perfection in Power and Knowledge, no less than in Goodness and
Justice: Or lastly, If there be a God, and that God does take care of the
Affairs of men; and is Good and Just; and has such a Knowledge and Power as we
say he has; then it must remain, that there shall be a future Judgment, in
which all these uncertain, irregular Dispensations of his Providence, as they
appear to us, shall be cleared and set right, and the Good and Bad receive the
just recompense of what their Actions here have deserved.

Seeing then we cannot with any reason doubt either that there is a God, or
that this God is Just, or that his Providence does indeed superintend over the
Affairs of the World; and yet it is plain that things now are not ordered with
so exact a Justice as a Divine Providence does require: It must remain, that
neither can we with any reason doubt, but that there is to be a Judgment to
come, in which God will make a perfect Demonstration of his Goodness and
Justice to every man according to what he has done in the Body, and of which
our Consciences, as we have before shown, shall then render a most exact
account.

Which being so; I shall not need say much to show,

II dly. That then it cannot be doubted, but those who live Wickedly now, must
expect to be hereafter in a most wretched and deplorable condition.

This is the plain, indeed the necessary Consequence of the foregoing
Reflections. For if the very End of this Judgment be, as we have said, to make
a great and Eternal Demonstration of God's Justice in his Dispensations toward
the Children of men, then in the words of St. Paul, Romans ii.6. Romans ii.6, etc.
He must render to every man according to his works. To them who by Patient
Continuance in will doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal
Life: Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of man that does Evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile: For there is no respect of persons with God.

If the present Administration of Affairs in this Life, be not exactly
according to the strict rules of Equity and Justice; God permitting the
Righteous man to struggle under the Pressures of an Adverse Fortune, and the
Wicked and Ungodly to Prosper in their Wickedness; yet may this be very well
Reconcilable with his Justice, both because he may have other excellent Ends,
to serve by such an Irregularity, and for that he has yet an Opportunity
remaining in his hands, abundantly to recompense all the sufferings of the One,
and to Punish all the Wickedness of the Other. And instead of concluding from
these Promiscuous events now, that God is not Just, or does not regard the
Affairs of this World; that he knows not, neither understands how things pass
here below, nor has power sufficient to Govern them as in Justice he ought to
do; I have already shown that we ought rather to infer, That this Life is only
a State of Trial, that the great time of Retribution remains in another World,
when all these Irregularities shall be set right, and the Goodness, the
Justice, the Power of God be made known in a most severe and exact Sentence
which shall then pass upon every man, in the day when he shall judge the World
in Righteousness.

But if God not only suffers the Wicked to Flourish now, but shall hereafter
also let them go Vnpunish'd; if he permits them to enjoy the Fruits of their
Sins in this present World; and will take no Care to avenge himself upon them
in the next; Genesis xviii.25.
How then shall the Judge of all the Earth do right? Or what is there more
remaining whereby to justify God in his doings, who thus apparently connives at
Sinners; and neither asserts his Cause in their ruin here, nor will call them
to any account for all their Wickedness hereafter?

It remains therefore, that as certainly as that God is Just, and therefore
must some time or other render to every man according to his works, the Sinner
shall one day receive a dreadful Sentence of Horror and Misery from that God,
neither whose Knowledge he can escape, nor whose Power he is able to withstand:
Who sees all his most secret Villainies now, and will hereafter bring him to
Judgment for them. But now what or how great that Punishment is which remains
for Sinners in the other World, this is what we cannot pretend by any Natural
way of Reasoning precisely to define. And yet thus much I think even our own
Reason may suggest to us.

I st. That it must be some very great Punishment which a long Life of Sin and
Impiety, and that too heightened with all the Aggravating Circumstances of being
committed against Knowledge, against the checks of our Consciences to the
contrary, it may be against Vows and Resolutions of doing better; nay possibly,
against many special means and methods of God's Providence to bring us to
Repentance, must deserve, and therefore in all probability shall receive.

2 dly. That as there are different Kinds and Degrees of Sinners now; All men
do not rise up to an equal pitch of Wickedness, nor begin so soon, nor continue
so long in their Evil doings; nor it may be have it in their Power to do so
much mischief as other Sinners do; so in all reason we may believe that there
shall also be different degrees of Punishment suitable to all these, and some
be condemned to a much more Severe and intolerable infliction than others.

To both which remarks I cannot tell, whether I may not add,

3 dly. That seeing the Soul is a Spirit in its own nature capable of
Immortality; having neither any dependence on the Body, nor being exposed to
any of those Casualties that are the Causes of the Corruption of all other
things which we see Decay and Perish here; and there being no Declaration any
where made to us, that it is the Will of God ever to extinguish them after they
are gone out of the Body; We may, I think, have some cause to fear, whether our
Souls being capable of an Eternal existence, the Puishment also which in that
last Judgment they shall be doomed to, may not be for all Eternity.

And all this the Principles of Natural Reason, and the Dictates of our
Consciences direct us to, and the greatest Infidel must be forced at least to
confess the Probability of it. And indeed, However Wicked men may endeavor to
dissemble their Belief of these things, and live so as if they truly did not
give the least credit to them, yet are their Fears many times too strong for
them, and discover their Apprehensions, whether they will or no. This is the
next Point I proposed,

III dly. That however Sinners may Live as if they Believed nothing ^f all
this, yet the greatest of them cannot choose but Tremble sometimes at the
Appprehension of it.

So Felix did, and so we have been told of many others that have done likewise.
Men may pretend to outbrave Hell and Eternity at a distance, may laugh at our
Discourses concerning another World, and the Judgment that is to pass on all
our Actions in it; and make it a Piece of Wit and Gallantry not to believe any
thing of them; But I have seldom heard of that man that could look Damnation
in the face when he came within prospect of it. There is a certain time when
all men begin to acknowledge the Power of Religion; and if not to believe a
Heaven, yet at least to fear a Hell. Atheism and Profaneness are things that
pass well enough while there is no great cause to reflect on the danger of
them: Whilst men's Pulse beats strong, their Years run briskly on; their
Condition is Easy and Prosperous; they go on in their sins without Control,
and therefore without considering either what they do, or whether they are
running.

But no sooner does any Trouble and Adversity come upon them: If their
prosperity fails them, and the iniquity of their ways begins to encompass them
round about; If age and infirmities call upon them to think what they have
done, or where it is they must next go; but presently all their Schemes and
Hypotheses vanish: They awake as Men out of a deep sleep, and too late begin,
if not to convince themselves that there is a Judgment to come, yet to tremble
with horror, lest perhaps there should be One.

But alas! What is for the most part the consequence of these Terrors? Is it
even now at least to fit and prepare themselves for it? No, They are afraid of
a future judgment, and cannot endure the thoughts of it; yet still they neglect
to provide against it. This was the last point I proposed to consider, and is
evidently the sad condition of many of these Men: viz.

IV thly, That the use they make of these reasonings concerning a Judgment to
come, is not to bring themselves thereby to a repentance of their Evil-doings;
but rather to endeavor by any means to put off these thoughts of their future
state, that are so troublesome and uneasy to them.

There is not perhaps any one thing in the World that ruins more Souls, than
this unhappy Method so common with most sinners, of still putting off the
business of Religion to a more convenient season. They cannot endure the
thoughts of another World, and that Judgment which we must every one of us
undergo in it; They tremble at the reflection of it, and delude themselves with
a future prospect of resolving in good earnest to prepare themselves for it;
but like Felix in the Text, they put off this work to another Time, without
ever fixing when that Time is to come; and it happens to them, as it did to
him, that for the most part it never comes at all.

I believe there are but few in the World so wicked as never to have had their
lucid intervals of Piety and Religion; nor occasions both to consider of a
Judgment to come, and how much it would import them to provide for it. On the
contrary, I am apt to think the greatest part of Sinners go on in their sins
now, with a confidence and resolution of repenting some time or other: But
still some thing or other interposes to prevent their doing of it; and Death
overtakes them before they are aware; and they go out of this World or ever
they have made the least provision for another.

I shall not need to say how unreasonable such a procrastination is, even upon
those Principles of Natural Reason on which I have hitherto proceeded in the
managing of this great Argument. For if we have so much reason as we have seen,
to believe that there is to be a Judgment to come, in which we must render a
strict account of all our Actions; and every days experience convinces us of
the shortness and uncertainty of our present life, and the little depend^nce we
can make upon it for the time to come: If in that judgment the state and
condition of sinners shall, without controversy, be very grievous; and there be
no way to promise our selves either any peace of Conscience now, or any hopes
of Happiness hereafter, but only by acting in such a manner, and putting our
selves in such a state, that we need not be either ashamed to live, or afraid
to die: It must then certainly be most fit and reasonable for all of us to
begin personally to consider and do like Men, and no longer continue in those
sins which are our torment now, and which, should we chance to die ere we have
repented of them, will prove our ruin for ever.

And all this the very light of reason, and the dictates of natural Conscience
speak to us to call us to repentance, and to convince us of the Danger and
Unreasonableness of the least delaying of it. And if there should chance to be
any here present, whose Wickedness and Infidelity render this discourse as
seasonable to them now, as St. Paul's once was to Felix; I cannot but hope they
may meet with somewhat in this reasoning that may have the same Effect upon
them, but with a better Consequence than the Apostles had upon that wretched
Man: may serve not only to awaken their fears of a judgment to come, but to
stir them up to an immediate provision for it.

But it is time now to remember, that I am speaking all this while to a
Christian Assembly; and therefore to such, as will admit of yet more lively
persuasives of a future Judgment; and of the Great and Eternal Torments that
await the Wicked after it.

And I shall not need to say how much our Religion has discovered to us, to
make the sinner tremble at the apprehension of that dreadful Inquest, which the
best Christian cannot think of without amazement.

For indeed, where is the Soul so well established, so secure of its own
sincerity, as to be able to endure the Horrors of that day, when the end of all
things being come, the World its self shall begin to tremble and fall into its
ancient Chaos. When the sun, and moon, and stars shall be darkened: the
mountains shall quake, and the powers of Heaven be shaken. When the Earth shall
be set on fire; the Heavens shall be shrivelled up as a scroll, the Elements
also shall melt with fervent heat. When the Trumpet shall sound, and the Graves
be opened, and the Dead arise; and our Consciences begin to fly in our Faces,
and represent to us the sins we have committed; the means and opportunities of
repentance which we have neglected; and the Everlasting punishment to which we
are now just ready to be condemned.

O! the terrors of that time, when being distracted with all these amazements,
we shall begin in vain to cry out to the Mountains to fall upon us, and to the
Hills to cover us! When we shall be able no where to see any hope or comfort
remaining to us. If we look up to Heaven, that place which we shall now never
be able to approach; behold there our Judge with all his Holy Angels about him,
pronouncing a bitter sentence of Indignation and Wrath, and Eternal misery
against us. If we cast down our eyes below; nothing is there to be seen, but
the wretched Companions of our misery; Weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth. The fire already bursting out, in which we are to perish, and yet to be
preserved alive for ever; and the Devils ready to drag as into that place of
Torments.

How shall we then Curse our Sins, that have brought us into this desperate,
lost estate? And too late begin to consider the wisdom of those happy men, who
have been persuaded timely to think of, and to provide for Eternity. Wisd. v.4^
We fools counted their lives madness, and their latter end to be without
honor. We once laughed at their folly, and smiled to see them pine away
themselves in penitential exercises, whilst we freely indulged our Ease and our
Debauches. But now they are numbered among the Children of God, -- 5.
and their lot is among the Saints.

And now when all these, and infinitely more terrors than I am able to express,
are included in that one thought of the judgment to come; tell me O wretched
sinner! Can thou hear me reasoning this day before thee of these things, and
not tremble at the Apprehension of them? And if the very thoughts of a judgment
to come, be thus dreadful to thee now, can thou yet think thy self
unconcerned to provide against that time, when thou and I, and all who are here
present, must prepare to appear before it?

Rather, Let this reflection engage every one of us to examine our selves, how
we shall then be able to give up our Accounts: And let us so judge our selves,
that we may not be condemned for ever. Let us, whilst we have yet the time,
confess our wickedness, and be sorry for our sins. Let us turn from our evil
way, and from the violence that is in our hands, that our iniquity may not be
our ruin. Let us fly to our Judge, whilst we are yet in the way, before we go
down into the Grave where there is no repentance.

And if we thus improve the Terrors of the Lord now, we shall hereafter with
great confidence expect them: And that great day, so dreadful to the unprepared
sinner, shall be to us a day of joy and triumph with all Saints,

Which God of his mercy grant it may be to every one of us, for his dear son
Jesus Christ his sake: To whom be ascribed, as is most due, Salvation, and
Glory, and Power, and Praise, and Dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.
OF THE CAUSES OF Men's Delaying their Repentance. A SERMON Preached before the
QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, Febr. 27. 1689. Being the Third Wednesday in Lent.
ACTS XXIV.25. -- Felix trembled; and answered, Go thy way for this time, when
I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.


IN which Words we have the result of St. Paul's Discourse before Felix,
concerning the future Judgment, and the Punishments that should one day be
pronounced against sinners in it. He had sent for our Apostle, -- v.24.
who was then a Prisoner at Caesarea, to hear what he had to say concerning the
Faith or Gospel of Christ.

And as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix
trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient
season I will call for thee.

It was the usual method of St. Paul in Preaching the Gospel of Christ, in the
first place to awaken men's fears, by declaring to them the terrors of a future
state, and the strict account that we must one day render to God of all our
Actions; that so being full of Horror at the apprehension of their danger, they
might become the better disposed to hearken to those means he was afterward to
propose to them, whereby to secure them against it. And in his second Epistle
to the Corinthians, vth. 11. he gives us an account how effectual a preparation
it commonly made for him to prevail; Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord;
i. e. as appears by the foregoing verse, 2 Cor. v.10.
this revelation of the future Judgment, we persuade men.

He had here in this Felix, a most profligate sinner to deal with. A man in his
Tacitus Hist. lib. v. c. 9. says of him, That per omnem saevitiam ac libidinem,
jus regium servili ingenio exercuit. Et annal. l xii. c. 54. cuncta malefacta
sibi impune ratus, tanta potentia subnixo.
Government violent and unjust: In his own manners lewd and debauched: He had
ravished another man's Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 20. c. 5. page 616. Basil. 1544.
The Account of which see above, p. 159.
Wife out of his bosom, and lived in an open state of Adultery with her.

And now what so proper to awaken his Conscience, and make him indeed begin to
repent him of his sins, as to reason before him of a Judgment to come? What
Application so pertinent, as to show him the particular danger of unjust and
intemperate men, that is, such as himself should be exposed to in it. This was
certainly the most proper address to such a one; and such was this of St. Paul
to Felix: He reasoned before him of Righteousness, Temperance, and the Judgment
to come.

And behold in my Text, the result of his Discourse, such as in all reason we
might expect it should have been, Felix trembled.

And now who would not hope for some good effect from so fair and promising a
beginning? And that the next thing we should have heard of, should have been
some such question to St. Paul, as the Jews once made on the like occasion to
St. Peter and the other Apostles, Acts ii.37. Act. ii.37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? This one might reasonably have been
expected should have been the result of his Terror. But alas! We find a much
different effect of it. He was indeed amazed to hear of a judgment to come; but
he could not for all that, resolve so soon to begin to provide for it. He
trembled to think what his condition there should be, and very probably he
might intend that he would sometime or other very seriously consider how he was
prepared against it. But he could not presently determine to part with his
sins; and therefore he defers the time; he puts off the Apostle to some more
convenient season; but we never read that ever that season came, or that he had
ever any Admonition given him afterward, to repent him of his evil doings.

Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time: when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee. Such was the effect of St. Paul's
reasoning at this time before Felix; and I would to God we had no cause to
complain, that such is too often the consequence of our Preaching to you. That
the Knowledge which we have, and the belief which we profess of a Judgment to
come, were so efficacious to our amendment, that we none of us needed to be
called upon, no longer to defer it, but to begin in good earnest to consider
how to make our Peace with God, and to provide for Eternity. But alas! I fear I
have here pitched upon a subject never like to be out-dated. And tho it be
certainly one of the greatest Contradictions in the world, not only to
Scripture and Reason, but to our own Interests too, and to which we are not apt
to be so blind, to pretend to believe a judgment to come, and yet nevertheless
to neglect to provide for it; yet I know not how, such is the power of our
lusts, that they stop our ears against all Arguments, though never so clear and
forcible, that would induce us to forsake them; we tremble to think what shall
be the consequence of our sins, yet still we go on in the commission of them.

And now what Argument can I take up more seasonable to the present time, or
indeed more fit at all times for our Consideration, than to reason a while of
this great and dangerous neglect? To enquire into the Causes which move so many
thus to delay their Repentance, and to offer some effectual Arguments that may
convince you of the unreasonableness of it. In a word, to stir up such an
Auditory as this, both from the example of this wretched man in the Text, and
from the just cause we may have to fear, lest if we continue with him to put
off still the time of our Repentance, we finally perish with him in his
Impenitence; to hasten with all the speed we can, to return to our duty, that
our Iniquity may not be our ruin.

And this is the design of my present Discourse, wherein I shall First, Enquire
into the Causes that move so many to delay their Repentance, and be still
putting off their provision for another World, to some more convenient season.
And Secondly, shall show the Danger of so doing:


And by both endeavor, what I can, to engage every one that now hears Me, to a
timely, a speedy, or rather to speak more properly, to a present Repentance. And

I st. Of the Causes that move so many to delay their Repentance; and be still
putting off their provision for another World to some more Convenient Season.

Now those, I presume, may well be reduced to these four General
Considerations. Either 1 st. They do not think at all, or not to any purpose,
of their Future State, and therefore neglect to provide for it. Or, 2 dly, They
do not believe there is so great a necessity of Repenting, in order thereunto,
as we say there is. Or, 3 dly, They suppose they may do this hereafter as well
as now. Or, 4 thly, Though they are convinced both of the necessity of their
Repenting, and of the Reasonableness of setting presently about it, yet for all
that, they cannot so soon resolve to part with their Sins, and enter on a
course of Piety and Religion.


These are some of the Principal Causes that, I presume, may be likely to
prompt Men to put off their Concern for another World; and I shall make it my
Endeavor with all the plainness that I can, to show the folly and
unreasonableness of every one of them. And,

1 st. There are many in the World, who do not think at all, or not to any
purpose, of their Future State, and therefore neglect to provide for it.

It is a matter of sad Consideration, to see how very Careless and Secure most
men seem to be as to the Business of another World. They Live, if not as those
who believe nothing at all of it, yet in such a manner as if they were not in
the least danger of miscarrying in their way to it. They think and contrive how
to manage their Affairs in this present Life: To Establish their Health, and to
Improve their Fortunes, and add still new degrees to their Honors and
Dignities. Only the Happiness of the other World, that they seem to look upon
as hardly worth their Care* They leave it as a thing, that it will be time
enough to provide for when they begin to come nearer to it; and it is no longer
worth their while to trouble themselves about the good things of this.

And now what can be more unreasonable than such an Incogitancy? To spend all
our thoughts and our endeavors, upon a few Temporal pursuits, that have
neither worth nor duration to recommend them to our desires; and in the mean
time never to think at all, or at least not to any purpose, of those Joys and
Glories that shall continue to all Eternity.

Indeed, had we either never heard of any such thing as a Judgment to Come; or
did we not believe that there is such a State as our Religion has revealed to
us; A State of Everlasting Happiness if we do Well, but of Eternal Punishment
if we continue to do Ill, there might then be some Excuse for such a neglect.
And yet, even in this Case too, we ought to be very sure there was no such
thing as another World, before we could reasonably give over the thoughts of it.

He that lives well, and denies himself some part of that Liberty, he would
otherwise indulge himself now, out of the fear and apprehension of another Life
that is to come, does at the most run but the little hazard of living a more
Reserved and Innocent sort of Life than he needed to have done, if it shall
hereafter appear that he was mistaken. Whereas he that confidently presumes
there is no such thing as a Future State, and so neglects to provide for it,
should it chance to be otherwise, must be for ever Miserable, without all
possible means to reform his Error.

But for men to know and believe, that God will bring them to Judgment, Eccl.
xi.9.
and they cannot tell how soon he may do it: That if they chance to be caught
away in the midst of their sins, as they see thousands are every day before
their eyes, they shall then be doomed to the wretched sentence of Everlasting
Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; Mat. xxv.41.
and yet still to continue careless and unconcerned; and not so much as spend a
thought how they are prepared to stand before the great Tribunal; This is,
doubtless, such a piece of Indiscretion, as may well deserve our pity and our
wonder, but certainly will not need that I should say any thing to expose the
desperate folly and unreasonableness of it.

2 dly. Another cause of men's delaying their Repentance, is, That they do not
believe there is so great a Necessity of Repenting, as we say there is.

This is a Cause which men do not indeed care so openly to profess; but yet
such a one as their Actions oftentimes do but too plainly point out to us. And
I wish that even this were all; and that there were not some in the world,
whose very Principles seem to lead them into such an opinion, so contrary to
the very nature of Christianity, and so fatally ruinous to their own Eternal
Salvation.

For 1 st. Not to say any thing now to those wise men of the world, who laugh
at all our discourse of another life after this, and of an account to be given
of all our Actions before a Divine Tribunal; but to leave them to the
convictions of their own Consciences, which speak loudly to them this great
truth, and make them with Felix, still fear what they pretend not to believe:
What shall we say to a more refined sort of Disputants; who acknowledging a
future Judgment, and an Eternal Reward for those that do well, yet extinguish
The Soc^nians 1st. Deny Immortality to the wicked, Smalc. contr. Frantz, p.
415. Volkelius, lib. iii. cap. 11.12.

2dly, They affirm, That they shall be for ever destroyed, Smalc. l. c. Volk.
l. c. page 73. and cap. 33. page 133. Socinus in 1 John 2.17. Bibl. Fr Pol. p.
178. Woltzogen. in Mat. iii.12. and in Mat. xxv.46.

And that 3dly, By Fire, Schlicting. comm. in Hebr. x.27. apud Crellium, in
Bibl. Fratr. Polon. T. 1. see his Paraphr. on the same verse. ibid.


in great measure all the flames of Hellfire, and allow of little or no danger
for those that do ill. They suppose that the worst that can happen to them, if
they should chance to be overtaken in their sins, is but to lose their Portion
in the Joys of Heaven, and be for ever annihilated; the only danger that, if
you will believe them, attends the greatest Sinners in the other World.

But yet still, methinks, since they confess that there is such a place as
Heaven, and that there shall be an enjoyment of Honor and Glory there to all
Eternity, for those who at that day shall be found worthy of it; even this
should be enough to make them think it worth their while to endeavor to
procure themselves a share in so much happiness. And however they suppose that
the Everlasting Punishment which the Holy Scriptures threaten sinners with,
shall be only an Eternal Annihilation; yet since it is plain that the same
Scriptures speak very dreadful things of it; and it cannot be denied, Mat.
xiii.42.xxii.13 xxv.41, 46. Mar. ix.43, etc^ compared with Rev. xiv.10.xx.10.
Romans ii.5, 6, 8, 9.

Add, for the reality of the pains, Mat. xi.24.xxiii.15. Luke xii.47, etc.


but that the greatest part of Christians have and do believe that the wicked
shall not cease to be, but on the contrary, for ever continue in a state of
Misery, which neither any tongue can express, nor any thought conceive; and
it is certain there are many passages in the Sacred Writ, that seem very much to
favor this apprehension, indeed that cannot without violence be detorted to
any other signification; It must certainly be the wisest course, not to be too
secure in their own sense, but whether they believe the Torments of the Damned
to be Eternal or no, yet certainly to live so as if they made not the least
doubt of it.

2. But secondly: Another sort of men there are, who by their mistaken Notions
of Christianity, have very much contributed to lessen their Opinion concerning
the necessity of Repentance, that I do not say have utterly corrupted the very
nature and practice of it, I mean the Casuists and Confessors of the Church of
Rome.

It is a Point commonly disputed among these men, what the precise time is, in
which men are bound by the Law of God to Repent? There have been some of them
indeed so severe, as to think that a man ought to repent on all the greater So
Scotus
Festivals of the Church. Others Soto and others. See Escobar sum. Theol. Exam.
iv. de Paenit. c. vii. Sect. 2.
think that it is enough if a man do it against Easter: But the common Opinion
is, that this is only to be understood of the external and ritual Repentance of
the Church, which consists in Confessing and Receiving the Holy Sacrament; but
that for the true, inward Repentance, Reginald. praxis fori paenit. l. v. c. 2.
Sect. 4. n. 23. Vasquez. in 3. qu. 86. art. 2. dub. 6. See below.
the precise time in which the sinner is bound by the commandment of God to be
contrite for his sins, is the imminent Article of a Natural or Violent Death.
Insomuch, that some of them doubt not to say, That even for a man to resolve to
defer his Repentance, and refuse to Repent for a certain time, is but a Soto in
iv. Sent. did. 17. qu. 2. art. 2. concl. 2.
Venial Sin; nay, and others think, Cod. de Paenit. tract. 1. qu. 6. Escobar.
sum. Theol. Tract. vii. cap. 7. page 780. Lugd. 1659. and page 770. ad Quaest.
Quando nam quis actum contritionis teneatur elicere. R. Non statim ac peccat;
sed stato tempore, nempe in mortis articulo, and in vita aliquoties si solum
jus natural spectetur, and probabile est quinto quoque Anno.
no sin at all.

And these men, to be sure, in express terms take away the necessity of present
Repentance: But this is not yet all; for when they do come to the time that
they think it necessary to put it in practice, even then they find out so many
other Artifices to elude the sincere performance of it, that they who do all
which they require of them, yet do not in effect truly Repent.

What else can we make of the allowed practice of that Church, upon Confession
of Sins, and an imperfect Contrition for them, to admit them to Absolution; and
so in effect make the whole of this Duty to amount to no more than a little
sorrow for sin, See Escobar. sum. mor. Theol. Tract. vii. cap. 7. n. 92, 93.
page 781.
and a resolution to forsake it; though at the same time they are so far from
doing it, that it may be they do not themselves believe that ever they shall
make good such their Resolution? And that too, though they have neither any
love of God in their hearts, Morinus de poenitent. l. viii. cap. 4. n. 15. Lugo
de Poenit. disp. v. sect. 9. n. 130, etc.
nor otherwise hate their sins, than they are afraid of being damned for them.

I need not say how many other Devices these Men have found out, to free
themselves from the trouble of a true Repentance. By Pardons and Indulgences;
by Masses and Prayers for the dead; by Consecrated Garments, and Priviledg'd
Fraternities: and the End of all which, is what I am now complaing of, to make
men careless and negligent in the discharge of that Piety that God requires of
them; and of that Repentance which alone can obtain an effectual forgiveness of
their Sins.

But these are not yet all, who by their mistaken Notions of some of the
Doctrines of Christianity, have been but too much encouraged to neglect the
practice of a Christian life: Others there are,

3 dly, And those of a more near concern to us than either of the foregoing,
whose Principles seem, without great care, but too naturally to tend to the
same neglect. Such are, The Great Assertors of Salvation by Faith alone without
Works; of God's Eternal Predestination, and in consequence thereof Men's
Absolute Election or Reprobation; Of the slavery of the Will, and its
incapacity to do any thing as to the business of our Future state without that
special Grace of God, which if men have, then they must needs do Well; and
without it, cannot but do Ill; and which God does not afford indifferently to
All those to whom the Gospel is preached, but to such only as he intends
thereby to bring to Faith and Repentance first, and then to Salvation. Now not
to dispute with any one the Truth of all these Points, when wisely and soberly
stated according to the Authority of the Holy Scripture; that which I say, is
this, That all these, and the like Principles, are apt to mislead Ignorant and
Wicked Men, who are not very well instructed in the true notion and
understanding of them, to a neglect of their duty; as if the whole work of
their Justification were either so secure and settled on the one hand, or else
so desperate and impossible on the other, that there was no need of their own
Care or Concern about it; nor any reason for them to trouble themselves about
that, which if they shall ever attain, no negligence of their own can do them
any hurt; if they must not, no care or endeavor can do them good.

4. I shall add but yet one thing more, which, I fear, has led many into a
neglect of Repentance; and that is, An unwarrantable presumption upon God's
Mercy; either that he will afford them time to repent at the last, though they
go on for the present in their Sins; or, if he does not, will at least make a
very favorable allowance for their Impenitence.

This is an Opinion which Wicked Men do as greedily catch at, as their
deplorable State renders them greatly in need of it. And indeed far be it from
me to lessen any reasonable Hopes of God's Favor to Sinners, who my self stand
so much in need of it. No doubt, there is Mercy with God that he may be feared.
Psalm. cxxx.4.
Many are the ways, and Gracious and Excellent the Methods whereby He calls and
invites us to Repentance. And if we accept the Invitation, we need not question
but that we shall most certainly receive the pardon of our Sins through the
Blood of Christ. But then this is not the Question, Whether God will not make
very great allowances for our Infirmities, and forgive us, though we have never
so long and grievously sinned against Him, if we repent at the last. But
whether, if we neglect the Opportunities which he affords us of repenting; if
with Felix in the Text, we still put off our Consciences to a more convenient
season, and at last die in our sins without ever repenting of them, God will
not then turn his Mercy into Judgment; and whether we ought not therefore to
make all the haste we can to repent, lest perhaps he should do so. But,

3 dly, A third cause of men's delaying their Repentance is; That though they do
believe it necessary for them to repent some time or other, yet they think this
may be done hereafter as well as now.

And this is what most of us are but too apt to flatter our selves withal.
Repentance is, God knows, a melancholy duty: It calls us to another kind of
life than that we have been used to, or indeed for the most part do at all
desire to be acquainted with. He that will put it in practice, must expect to
meet with no small difficulties in the setting out; and few there are who have
Constancy enough to go through them all; and therefore no wonder if we find the
generality of Men so little care to set about a work that is so hard and
discouraging to the most resolute Undertakers of it. Now it is this makes them
willing to meet these troubles as late as ever they can: When their years run
deep, and their Lusts fail them, and they can no longer pursue the Pleasures of
this World, then they suppose it will be time enough to think of the other. And
they see no reason, why they may not hope as well to be accepted then, as
others who in like manner have come in at the Eleventh hour, Mat. xx.6,
and yet received as great a reward, as those that had born the heat and
burden of the day. -- 12.


But this is indeed as unreasonable a ground for any one to delay his
Repentance, as either of the foregoing. For,

1 st, They cannot endure to set about their duty immediately, because of the
trouble and difficulty which they apprehend in it. I will not now enquire how
they are sure it is so troublesome and difficult a thing to fulfill their duty,
as they suppose it to be, seeing they have never yet tried it, to be convinced
by their own Experience that it is so. This only I would know; Will it become
ever the more easy for their deferring of it? Nay, but on the contrary, I
shall hereafter show, that the longer it is deferred, the harder it will prove
to us. And were it not so, yet since it is necessary some time or other to
Repent, and so Dangerous to die ere we have done it; Certainly the more
difficult a thing it is, the sooner we ought to set about it, whilst we may
have yet the time, by the Grace of God, to accomplish it. And then,

2 dly, For that poor presumption, That others have done this, and yet were
saved at the last, and why therefore may not we be so too? Though I will not
say that none who have put off the business of their Repentance to the last,
have ever gone to Heaven; yet I must needs say, I fear that but few have done
so. I do not remember in all the Holy Scripture more than One Instance of the
Salvation of a dying Penitent, and that so extraordinary in all its
Circumstances, that it cannot with any reason be made a Precedent by us for the
likes Hopes; I mean that of the Thief upon the Cross; And even of Him too it
does not appear that ever he deferred his Repentance, or put it off purposely
to that, as the most convenient Season. And for those who came in at the
Eleventh hour, and yet were received; I shall only say thus much, That they
came in as soon as they were called, and did not refuse to go into the Vineyard
at the Third hour, because they thought it was too soon, and their Laziness
prompted them to decline their work, till the Heat and Burden of the day was
past.

In short, He that delays his Repentance upon this prospect, that he may do it
hereafter as well as now, ought first to have very well considered these two
things. 1 st, Is he sure that he shall live to that time which he so warily
allots to this great work? For if he be not, then I am sure he lives in danger
of Eternal damnation all the while he neglects to enter on a state of Piety and
Religion: and chooses rather to hazard his Everlasting Happiness, than to put
himself upon a Work that yet must be done, or he shall remain for ever
miserable. 2 dly, Is he certain, that though he should live to that time, yet
that then God will give him Grace to repent? That his Aversion to his duty
shall not be greater then, than it is now; and his Unwillingness increase the
more, the older he grows in his Sins and Impenitence?

What the satisfaction of Men's Lusts may be, I cannot tell: but certainly, if
they have any thoughts at all of their Future state, and do indeed believe a
Judgment to come, such dangers as these cannot choose but amaze them; and their
disquiets at the Apprehension, that by thus deferring their Repentance they may
possibly lose their Souls for ever, infinitely outweigh whatever Pleasures they
can in the mean time propose to themselves, by going on a little longer in
their Wickedness.

But I must not insist upon these things; and therefore

4 thly, And to conclude this Point: The last cause that moves many to delay
their Repentance, is, that tho they are convinced both of the Necessity of
repenting some time or other, and that it is highly reasonable for them to set
presently about it, yet when all is done, their Lusts are too strong for them,
and they cannot so soon resolve to part with their Sins, and enter on a Course
of Piety and Religion.

There is something in the Nature of Sin so fatally bewitching to us, that if
once we suffer our selves to be overcome with the Habit of it, it is after that,
one of the hardest things in the World to recover our liberty, and prevent our
selves from being altogether hardened by the deceitfulness of it. John viii* 34.
He that commits sin, says our Savior Christ, is the servant of sin.
Whether it be that the force and power of an Evil Course gains insensibly upon
us, till at last we have no more strength remaining to overcome it; Or, Whether
it be that the longer we continue in Sin, the more God's Grace is withdrawn,
and the less assistance we have of the Holy Spirit to extricate our selves out
of it. But this is plain, that even the best Men find it a hard matter, with
all their Industry, to keep themselves from its dominion; and to fulfill their
Resolutions, though never so soon taken up, of discharging their duty, and
living as becomes the Disciples of Christ.

I do not in the least question, but that we are all of us sufficiently
convinced of the reasonableness of what I have now been enforcing, of setting
immediately about our duty: and, I believe, there are but few, if any among us,
who, if they do not at this time, yet have at least some time or other resolved
to do so. But I fear it would be a melancholy reflection to most of us, to
think how little we have fulfilled these Resolutions hitherto, and may give us
some cause to fear whether we may not be but too likely still to continue in
the same careless and impenitent state for the time to come.

The truth is, in such a degenerate Age as this, wherein Vice is become almost
reputable; and to be religious, esteemed pedantry and preciseness: When the
Evil Customs of Men have prevailed so far above the Commandments of God, that a
Man must yield to be a little Wicked, unless he will run counter to the general
practice of the World; and not a little negligent of his duty, to maintain the
Company and Conversation of the Times; it is not an easy thing for a Man to
break through all these difficulties, and resolve to save his Soul whatever
censures or troubles he encounters for the so doing. And therefore, though we
all of us know well enough what we ought to do, and cannot but be sometimes
apprehensive of the dangers we run by our not doing of it, yet alas! we still
go on in the neglect of our duty: Ever thinking and resolving to amend, but
never able effectually to set about it.

And thus have I given you such a general prospect as the time would permit, of
those Causes that so much indispose Men to a present Repentance: I go on to the
other thing I proposed in order to the Cure of it.

II dly, To show the Danger of deferring the performance of it.

For, if such a delay as this, be not only very unreasonable in it self, but
shall be also very fatal in its Consequence; if there be really nothing in all
those pretenses that usually keep men from a present discharge of their duty,
and an infinite Hazard to be run by it; Sure then we ought to begin immediately
to do that which can neither be too soon begun, nor at all delayed without a
very great danger: Which we must some time or other do, and which will still
grow more difficult and uneasy to us, the longer it is that we put off the
doing of it.

And, 1 st, Let me ask him that thus neglects his Repentance, and thinks it
will be time enough to set about it hereafter, when the heat of his Youth is
past, and he begins to come to a greater strength of Reason and Discretion, to
govern himself, and to bring his Passions into subjection; It may be gives it
yet a longer delay, and reserves the business of Religion for the Close of his
Life, and an immediate preparatory to the hour of his Death: Is he sure that he
shall ever arrive to that time which he thus warily sets out for this great
Work? I need not tell you how uncertain our lives are; What Diseases, what
Accidents lay siege against us every Moment? And if notwithstanding all this,
some do live to a good Old Age; yet how many Thousands there are that fall in
the strength and vigor of their years? And we cannot say but that this may be
our Condition, as we are sure it has been the Condition of many Others, who, it
may be, as much flattered themselves with these Projects, as We do now, and are
therefore in vain lamenting their mad Security in the Concern of their
Salvation. But this I must needs say, a greater provocation there cannot be
given to God Almighty to cut us off in the midst of our years, and deprive us
of that opportunity we so presumptuously set out for to repent in, after a long
life spent in Sin and Impenitence, than thus to go on in our wickedness, and
designedly to live in a disobedience to his Commands, till we are no longer
like to continue in this World.

2. But however, 2 dly, Let us allow of this, that we had by some means or
other an Assurance of our lives, and could be certain we should arrive to that
Time we thus lay out for the business of Religion. Yet how are we sure that we
shall not then be altogether as unwilling, and much more unable to repent, than
we are now?

1 st, If we consider our selves only upon the Common principles of Nature,
without reflecting upon the Grace of God, without which yet we can do nothing
as to the Business of our Duty; Even these will tell us, That the more
inveterate any Habit is, the more difficult it is to leave it, and the greater
pains it will cost a Man to overcome it. And he who finds it so hard a Matter
to conquer his Lusts now, what will he do hereafter, when the Indulgence of
many years more shall have rooted them in his very Soul, and made his sins
become even natural to him?

2 dly, But then, secondly: If we examine this matter according to the
Principles of Christianity, these will show a yet greater improbability of our
repenting hereafter, than at the present. It being not to be doubted, but that
as upon the Use of God's Grace, He bestows a more liberal portion of it; so by
refusing and resisting the Motions of the Holy Spirit, God withdraws his hand,
and lessens his Grace, and it may be at last totally deprives Men of it.

The truth is, I cannot but think that such Persons as these, who not only
continue in the Commissions of sin, but project and contrive for the continuing
in it; and therefore put off the Time of their Repentance as a work that may be
well enough done hereafter, do in effect despise the Holy Spirit of God, and
trample under foot that Grace which should have led them to Repentance. And it
must certainly be a most daring Presumption in any Sinner, to think, that
notwithstanding such a provocation, God will yet attend his leisure, and
continue to afford him the Assistance of his Grace for his Salvation at the
last, though he has so often, wilfully, and designedly rejected all the Offers
of it.

I am sufficiently persuaded, that there is none of us, whom God does not call
most truly and sincerely to Salvation; and by consequence, that there is none
of us, to whom he has not offered such a measure of his Grace, as might enable
him to fulfill his Duty, in order thereunto, and perfect his Repentance. But I
must confess, I cannot without some concern think, what an unworthy use we have
the most of us made of it, and how justly we have deserved, that God should at
last leave us to our selves, and no longer in vain attend our Amendment.

And O! that we would therefore be persuaded seriously to reflect upon all
these things, and no longer go on to expose our immortal souls to such
desperate hazards, as it is plain from all these Considerations we do, every day
that we neglect to provide for Eternity! Be it enough that we are not already
made the fatal Monuments of Abused Mercy: That we are yet on this side Hell,
and may if we please, by our speedy Repentance, still prevent those Judgments
which our former Impenitence has but too justly deserved.

Jer. xiii.16.
Let us begin in this our day, to see and to pursue the things that make for our
peace, before they be hid from our eyes.

Heb iii.13.
Let us exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of us be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Heb iv.1.
Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of us
should seem to come short of it.

Let us give glory to God, before darkness come, and our feet stumble upon the
dark mountains.

I conclude all with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. LV. Verse. 6, 7.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.

Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and unto our God,
for he will abundantly pardon.

OF THE DANGER OF Men's Delaying their Repentance. A SERMON Preached before the
QUEEN AT WHITE HALL.
ACTS XXIV.25. -- Felix trembled; and answered, Go thy way for this time, when
I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.


AMong all the Aggravations of sin, there is none greater, than to continue it
not only against the checks of Conscience, and the motions of God's Holy Spirit
to the contrary, but after many admonitions in vain sent us by his merciful
Providence to bring us to Repentance. There are, I believe, but few, if any, in
the World, so lost to all the Hopes of Heaven and Eternity, who have not some
time or other, been put in mind of their Duty, and invited by God's Grace, to
Pardon and Salvation. And if notwithstanding all this, men will nevertheless
continue still incorrigible, and harden themselves against all the means that
can be made use of to reclaim them, we ought not to wonder, if they are at last
given up to the Dominion of Sin, and reserved as monuments of the just Judgment
of God, at the day of his glorious appearing.

I will not now enter on any Enquiry what the cause should be, why we who are
all of us sufficiently convinced of the necessity of Repenting, and the
deplorable State in which we must expect to be, if we do not some time or other
effectually set about it; should yet still for the most part be so very
unwilling to Repent.

But because, this is one of the most fatal delusions men are apt to cheat
themselves withal, that with Felix here in my Text, they put off this business
to a more convenient Season, and by their unseasonable Procrastinations in an
Affair that of all others ought the least to be deferred, too often die without
ever performing it at all; I will make it my endeavor so to lay before you the
Danger of such a Delay, as if it shall please God to convince you not so much
of the Necessity of Repenting some time or other, which I take it for granted
without my speaking you are all of you already resolved to do, as of the great
concern we have immediately to set about it; and do that presently which we
must some time or other do, and can never do so Well as now.

And this I shall make appear from these two Considerations; I st, Of the great
Danger we run by delaying our Repentance. II dly, Of the Comfort and
Satisfaction that will arise to us, from the Conscience of having duly
Performed it as we ought to do.


I begin with the former of these Considerations,

I st, Of the great Danger we run by delaying our Repentance.

Now that in one Word is this; That whilst we go on continually to put off our
Duty and the business of Repentance to a more convenient Season; and like Felix
in the Text think it still too soon to set presently about it; we run the
hazard of never doing it at all, and like Felix, too often die in our Sins and
our Impenitence. So that whatsoever danger there is of dying without ever
Repenting, the same is the danger which we run by delaying our Repentance. And
this I shall make appear, 1 st, From the great Shortness and Uncertainty of our
present State. 2 dly, From the Nature and Difficulty of Repentance. And, 3 dly,
From the Method of God's proceeding in the Dispensation of his Grace, as set
forth to us in the Holy Scripture.


And 1 st,

That the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Present State, ought to convince us
how great a danger we run by Delaying our Repentance.

For Proof whereof I shall not think it necessary to entertain you with any
Common-place-Argument of the Infirmities of our Nature, and the many Casualties
to which our Lives here are perpetually exposed, and against which we can never
say we are secure for the next moment. How many Persons have been struck with
Sudden Death? What accidents have befallen others to render them wholly unfit
for their Duty; so that though they have had a longer warning of their
Approaching End, yet either by the Intolerable Sharpness of their Pain, or its
influence upon their understanding Faculties, so as many times to deprive them
of all the use of their Reason, and render them utterly incapable, either to
reflect upon their lives, or to repent them of their Sins, have been so far
indisposed to all the Offices of Religion, that their longer respite has proved
of no more advantage to them, than if they had not had the least notice of
their approaching End. These are things which every Discourse of Mortality for
the most part abounds with; and a daily Experience renders any long insisting
upon them, needless to us.

We live in the midst of the Monuments of Death. Psalm. cxi.7.
Thousands fall every day besides us, and ten thousands at our right hand: And
it is only of the Mercy of God that we are yet alive, to consider these things,
and to prepare to die. And sure then it cannot but be a very great danger, as
it is certainly a very great presumption in any Man to neglect this, and defer
his Repentance to such a Time as he can never be sure he shall live to see.

And this is an Argument which every man's own reason will at the first view
offer to him to convince him of the danger of procrastinating his Repentance:
And such as ought never the less to be considered, because it lies so obvious
to our understandings, as to be the common Topic of every one in the managing
of this Exhortation. But yet, since such is the Infirmities of our Nature, that
we are apt to overlook many times what is the nearest to us; and common
Arguments, like other ordinary things, are not usually so much regarded, as
otherwise the true weight and value of them would deserve they should be: I
will endeavor to improve this useful Reflection, by desiring these two things
may be farther considered in it, and which perhaps are not so commonly attended
to.

1 st, Whether he who delays his Repentance now, out of a prospect that he
shall hereafter have time enough to enter upon the practice of it; does not,
besides the danger which arises from the common uncertainty of life, and the
miseries and casualties that ordinarily accompany it, to prevent his Repenting
at all, expose himself moreover by this very thing to the particular hazard of
the Judgment of God, to cut him off in the midst of his Sins. What such Persons
as these may think of their putting off their Repentance to some future season,
I cannot tell; But I must confess, when I consider the full import of it, I
cannot but look upon this as one of the most provoking Crimes in the World; Nor
do I think it possible for any man to add a higher Aggravation to his Sins,
than being admonished of his danger, and so far convinced of the necessity of
Repenting, as to resolve some time or other to enter upon it; nevertheless
still to go on in his Evil way, and desperately resolve not to begin to be
religious, till things are come to the very last Extremity, and it is
absolutely necessary for the saving of his Soul. For,

1 st, He who neglects to repent at the present, out of a presumption that he
shall hereafter have Time enough to do it, when Age and Infirmities are crept
upon him, and he is no longer in a Condition to pursue the pleasures of his
Sins; What does he but in effect declare, that the best of his Time is fit to
be consecrated to the service of his Sins, and the refuse only to be reserved
for God, which he knows not well otherwise how to dispose of?

I need not say how reproachful a thing this must be to Religion, to esteem it
a Work fit only for that part of our lives in which we are not good for any
thing besides. But sure I am, that Man must have a very mean Notion of God
Almighty, who can think him of so Easy a Temper, and so indulgent to Sinners,
as to be willing to receive them at any rate; and after all the Indignity and
Scorn with which they have treated Him all their life-long, to be glad to take
them upon their own Terms, and rather than go without them, to accept even of
this slight and seeming submission from them.

It must be confessed indeed, that great is the mercy and long-suffering of
God, beyond any thing we are able to express or to conceive. Psalm. cxxx.4.
But then there is mercy with him, that he may be served and feared, not
affronted and abused by us. His Goodness leads to Repentance, but gives no
encouragement to our Impenitence. And he who thinks that God will accept the
Refuse of his Time, after a long life spent in the service of sin; and the
business of Religion put off on purpose to this last period, as supposing it
would then be soon enough to provide for Eternity; will, I fear, instead of an
Acceptance, meet with the same reproof those of old in the like case did, who
kept the best of their Flocks, and of their Herds for themselves, and offered
to him the Blind, and the Lame, and the Sick for sacrifice; Mal i.8, 10
Mal. i.10.14. I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will
I accept an Offering at your hands. -- 14.
Cursed be the deceiver that has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, says the
Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.

But 2dly. He who thus delays his Repentance, does not only provoke God by
continuing at the present in sin, and that too out of an unwarrantable
presumption that he shall be accepted at the last, though in the mean time he
continues Impenitent; but it is plain, has no true Honor for God at all; nor
thinks of Repenting even then, because he loves God, and desires to please him,
but merely because he is afraid he shall otherwise be damned, and lose his Soul
to all Eternity. For else, had such a one any real sense of Religion, or did he
even then intend in good earnest to set about the practice of it, it is not to
be imagined wherefore it is that he at present neglects the performance of it.
Nor can any other account be given why he does not begin the next moment to be
religious, but only this, that he does not truly love God, nor desire to serve
him, nor by his good will would ever think of doing of it.

Now this will yet more aggravate the heinousness of such a delay, and betray a
desperate contempt of the Divine Goodness and Wisdom: As if God either were not
able to discover our Hypocrisy, and distinguish between a real Penitent, and a
pretending Votary; or would otherwise so far connive at it, as to accept of a
shadow of Repentance, a form of Godliness reserved on purpose for the last
business of our lives, and then too put on only because it could no longer be
deferred, not out of any love to God or Religion, but merely for fear of his
Eternal Vengeance.

And when such is the desperate Provocation which every Sinner by delaying his
Repentance, adds to all the rest of his Impieties; I cannot but think, we ought
seriously to consider, before we venture upon such a Procrastination; or
rather, to speak more properly, to keep our selves from deferring our
Repentance at all; not only how very little security we have of our lives, upon
the account of the general uncertainty of our condition in this world; But
whether this very thing of putting off the business of Religion to such a
season, may not be a particular means to call down some speedy Judgment upon
us, so that we shall never come to that time we designed for this work. But.

2 dly. Should nothing of this happen unto us, yet still it cannot but be very
dangerous to defer our Repenting, though never so little, seeing such is the
difficulty of performing it, that he who has the longest life, will find it
scarce enough to discharge it as he ought to do. And he that puts it off as a
work that may be done well enough hereafter, in his declining years, perhaps in
his last sickness; may possibly do somewhat which he may call Repenting, but
which it is very great odds shall have little in it, more than the Name and
Appearance of it.

And this brings me to the Second General Argument I proposed, to show the
danger of Deferring our Duty. viz.

II dly, From the Nature and Difficulty of Repentance.

This is an Argument which I the rather choose to insist upon on this occasion,
because I am apt to believe it is the mistake of the true Nature of Repentance
that chiefly encourages so many to a delay of it. For sure were men heartily
persuaded, that it is so great a thing to Repent as indeed it is; that it
requires so much Labor and Pains to accomplish it, and cannot presently be
known even by our own selves whether it be performed as it ought or no;
insomuch that should we allow him who has put off his Duty for the present, to
discharge it truly at the last, yet 'twill be impossible for him till he comes
to the Judgment Seat of Christ, to be sure that he has done so; they would
never venture to defer it to such a time, in which it is next to a Miracle for a
man not to miscarry in it.

Now Repentance, if taken in that proper Notion which the Holy Scriptures give
us of it, is a change of Mind, in the words of St. Peter, 1 Pet. iii.11.
an eschewing of Evil, and a doing Good. It consists not in a bare sorrow for
Sin, or a Desire and Resolution to live better for the time to come, but in a
real Conversion. By consequence, to fulfill it as we ought to do, we must not
only be sorry for our sins, and desire and resolve to amend, but we must truly
and heartily endeavor so to do. It Is a change of life, in which the true
performance of this Duty consists; and whatsoever comes short of this, when we
have opportunity so to do, is not a sincere Repentance, nor will ever be
accepted of by God as such.

And when such is the nature of this Duty, I shall not need to say, either how
difficult it is to discharge it, or how much Time as well as Labor it will
cost us to accomplish it. It is not a little while that will suffice to
overcome those vicious habits, which a long practice has rendered almost natural
to us; to conquer our passions, and bring our most extravagant lusts into
subjection to the rules of Religion. And we may have just reason to fear by the
difficulty we find but of beginning this work, how much more pains and trouble
it will cost us to bring it to perfection.

Let us add to this, That every Habit, and that of Sin above all others, the
longer it is continued in, the more it roots it self in our very Natures, and
the greater time and pains it will require to remove it. So that then our Task
will increase every day upon our hands; and the longer we neglect our duty, we
shall not only have the less time remaining to fulfill it in, but we shall still
have the more to do to discharge it as we ought to do.

If therefore we can with any reason suppose, that we shall be able to do all
this at the last: If we can indeed securely presume that such a change as this
is a work fit for our declining years: That when our Memory is decayed, and our
Thoughts move slow; When our Reason begins to fail us, and the Infirmities of
our Age, and our Sins to surround us; We shall then be in a Condition to look
back into all the remote Passages of our Lives passed, and to call our selves
to an account for all our sins, and raise up our resentments to a true and real
Contrition for them; and so to change our very Natures, as from old, Habitual
Sinners, to become upon the sudden, New Creatures; from the Servants of Sin,
the Children of God; let us then, if we please, put off our Repentance to the
last Act; and resolve that it will be time enough for us then to begin to live,
when we are just now about to die.

But if we cannot, without the utmost unreasonableness, imagine that we shall
then be able to do all this: If such a change as I have now mentioned, and as
the true Nature of Repentance does imply, be a work that will require our best
strength and labor to accomplish it, and without some extraordinary measure of
the Divine Assistance, be too much even for that: It must then remain, that
though we were the Masters of our own time, yet we could not, without a very
great danger, put our Salvation upon such a Hazard as this, in which if we
should allow it possible for a man to attain unto it, yet to be sure that is
all, and it is a thousand to one but he comes short of it.

There is yet a third Consideration which I proposed, and which will still more
show the danger of delaying our Repentance, viz.

III dly, From the Method by which God usually proceeds in the dispensation of
his Grace, as it is set out to us in the Holy Scriptures.

I have already observed, from the very nature of all Habits in general, that
the longer any one goes on in an Evil Course, the more unwilling he will be,
and the greater difficulty he will find it to get out of it. But in the Habit
of Sin, especially every little delay, adds a new strength to our Passions; and
those Lusts which at first might more easily have been overcome, being suffered
by a longer continuance to insinuate themselves into our very Natures, get the
mastery of us, so that we have neither desire nor ability to rid our selves of
them.

No one becomes extremely wicked upon a sudden. When first Men begin to enter
upon an Evil Course, they find many difficulties arise on every side to reclaim
them from it. Conscience is vigilant, and for the most part very troublesome
too. It remonstrates to them the baseness and unreasonableness of a Vicious
course of life, and it is not without some violence that they break through the
restraints of Shame and Modesty to pursue it. Sometimes it sets before them the
obligations which their duty lays upon them to fulfill it: How worthy and
honorable a thing it is to live Virtuously; what a Credit and Respect it gains
a man here, and what a glorious Reward shall be the consequence of it
hereafter? Sometimes it calls to mind the terrors of the Lord; and forces them
whether they will or no to think of that Time, Eccles. xi.9.
when for all these things God will bring them to Judgment: and how they shall
then be able to endure an Eternity of Torments in that wretched place, Mark ix*
4^.
where the Worm dies not, and where the fire never shall be quenched.

Now all these, and many other hindrances of the like kind, which the Sinner
meets with in the first beginnings of his Evil Course, are not only so many
Barriers which it has pleased God to set in our way to keep us from ruin, but
so many helps too to assist us, if we should at any time be enticed to do
wickedly, to recover our selves again out of it. But by a longer Continuance in
Sin, all these are overcome; and we are not only thereby more deeply engaged in
the ways of wickedness; but having lost all these Assistances, our retreat is
also rendered infinitely more difficult, than whilst we lay under the restraints
of Shame, and Fear, and Conscience, to reclaim us.

But this is not yet all: for by continuing in Sin, and putting off the time of
our Repentance, we do not only diminish our own Natural strength, and thereby
render our selves still less able to encounter with it; but what is yet more to
be considered, we deprive our selves of the Assistance of God's Grace too,
without which it will be impossible for us ever to overcome it.

It is laid down by Isaiah as the reason why God forsook his ancient People the
Jews, Chap. lxiii. verse. 10. That they rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit,
therefore was he turned to be their Enemy, and He fought against them. And our
Blessed Savior in his Gospel everywhere proceeds upon this measure in the
dispensations of his Grace; that Mat. xiii.12. Mark iv.25. Luke viii.18. --
xix.26, etc.
to Him who has, i. e. who makes use of, and improves what God has already
bestowed upon him, shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly: But from
him that has not, i. e. that does not make use of, and improve what he has,
even that which he once had, shall be taken away. And however it may sometimes
please God in an extraordinary manner to raise up Sinners at the last, and
though they continue long in their Wickedness, yet nevertheless still continue
his Divine Assistance to them, to bring them to Repentance: yet cannot this be
any Ground for any one to rely upon in this matter, seeing it is plain both
from the Authority of Holy Scripture, and the Common Experience of Mankind,
that in the ordinary Methods of God's Providence, his Grace is withdrawn in
proportion to Men's neglect of it, till at last they are utterly deprived of
it, 2 Timothy ii.26.
and given up to be led Captive by the Devil at his Will.

Hence it is that we sometimes read in Holy Scripture of Persons delivered up
to a Hardness and Impenitence of heart. Matt. xiii.14. Mark vi.52. John xii.40.
Hebr. iii.13. Romans ii.5.
Not that I think God ordains any man to destruction, or denies him such a
measure of his Grace as may be sufficient to preserve him from it; But when Men
neglect his Offer, and despise and grieve his Holy Spirit; and go on in their
Sins, notwithstanding all the methods of his Providence to bring them to
repentance; When the measure of their Iniquities is now filled up, and they are
become ripe for Vengeance; then God is pleased sometimes to withdraw his Grace
from them, and seal them up unto destruction: And tho he may sometimes permit
them, for other ends of his Providence, to continue still in this World, yet he
no longer continues the Power and Assistance of his Holy Spirit to them, to
bring them to repentance.

This I take to have been the Case of Pharaoh after the Sixth Judgment. Till
then, Exodus vii.14.viii.19, 32.
the Scripture tells us, that He hardened his Heard, or that His Heart was
hardened: But when his own Magicians confessed that the finger of God plainly
showed it self in the Miracles of Moses, and yet he still continued obstinate;
then God declares that He hardened him: Exodus ix.12. and caused him to stand, i.
e. kept him alive when he had deserved to be punished with a quick destruction;
for this very end, that he might show in him his power; Exodus ix.16.

Many are the Declarations of the Holy Scripture that confirm this to us. If we
look into the state of the Old World before the Flood; God himself declares,
Genesis vi.3. That his Spirit should not always strive with Man: Yet a hundred and
twenty years, and if they repented not in that time, then He would bring an
utter Destruction upon them.

And in the same manner we find Holy David speaking in the person of God
concerning the Rebellious Israelites: and which I the rather remark, because
Saint Paul applies it, Hebr. iii.12. to the very purpose of what I am now
speaking: That because they hardened their hearts, and tempted and grieved God
forty years, therefore he at last swear to them in his wrath, that they should
not enter into his rest. And the application which the Apostle makes, is this
plain Conclusion; Take heed, Hebr. iii* 11.
Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing
from the living God: -- 12.
But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.

And lastly, to mention no more, The same is the Declaration which Solomon
makes in the Name of God, concerning the Destruction of hardened and impenitent
Sinners, Prove. i. where having first set forth the Grace of God ready to assist
them, if they would repent: verses 22, 23. How long, ye simple ones, will ye
love simplicity? And ye scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: Behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you,
I will make known my words unto you: He afterward declares the just
indignation of God against them, if they should still continue obstinate and
impenitent; verses 24, 25, 26. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity,
and mock when your fear comes. And again, Verses 28, 29, 30. Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me: For they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord:
They would none of my Counsel; they despised all my Reproof: Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.

It were an easy matter to multiply Passages to the same purpose out of every
part of the Holy Scripture. But I have said enough already to show the danger
of delaying our Repentance, from the apprehension of over-passing the time of
it; and to warrant that great Conclusion, which I think is generally received
by most Christians; viz. That there is to every wicked man, a certain Time,
when the measure of his Iniquities being accomplished, there shall be no more
any space for repentance, nor any farther assistance given them by God, to
bring them to it.

Now if this be so, then would I only desire, that these three things might
seriously be considered by every one of us.

1 st, Whether he, who being invited by the Grace of God, and the Motions of
his Holy Spirit; by the cheeks of Conscience within, and the importunate calls
of the Ministers of the Gospel without, to Repentance, nevertheless neglects
all these Admonitions, and with Felix still puts off the practice of this duty
to some more convenient season; does not thereby grieve the Holy Spirit of God,
Ephesians. iv.30.
and despise his Grace, and affront his Goodness, who thus graciously offers
and continues to him the means and opportunities of Salvation?

2 dly, Whether by so doing, he does not provoke God in as high a manner as can
well be imagined, no longer to continue his Grace to him, nor to expose his
Mercy to contempt, by suffering his Holy Spirit still to strive with such
obstinate Offenders? And then by consequence,

3 dly, and lastly; Whether every such Person may not have just cause to
apprehend, that by delaying his Repentance, and putting off the business of
Religion to a still future opportunity, he shall at last provoke God to
withdraw his Grace from him? And seeing when he had the opportunity given him,
and was invited to repent, he despised the offer, and neglected so to do, God
may not hereafter deliver him up to a hardened and impenitent heart; Romans ii.5.
and take away that Grace from him, which he has so unworthily abused, and
thereby deserved to have no longer continued to him.

To conclude: See Matt. xxv.14.28, 30.
If in that famous Parable of the Talents, there be any application yet
remaining to be made of that part of it, in which we find the Talent taken from
the unprofitable Servant, and a terrible Sentence of Everlasting Misery
pronounced against him for his neglect: Or, in that other of the Fig Tree, Luke
xiii.6.
which was to be pruned and dug, and then tried another year; and if still
it continued to bring forth no Fruit, then to be cut down, and cast out of the
Vineyard: The meaning of both can be no other than this; That he who despising
the Grace of God, and the opportunity of Salvation, continues still in his
Sins, and improves not those Abilities God has given him to the great ends for
which they were bestowed upon him, shall at last by a severe, but most just
judgment of God, be deprived of them; and have his neglect punished with the
loss of God's Grace here, and in the consequence of it, with an Eternal
Damnation hereafter.

And this then may suffice to show, how dangerous it is for a man to put off
the business of Repentance at the present, out of an unwarrantable presumption
that it will be time enough to perform it hereafter. But now if the Question
be, What a man who has unhappily done this, should do? I reply,

1 st, Let him by all means hasten his Repentance all he can; and the longer he
has deferred it already, the more careful and resolute let him be not to put it
off one moment longer.

2 dly, Let him be so much the more zealous and diligent in his Religious
Performances; let his sorrow be the more pungent, his Confessions the more
humble, his Prayers the more fervent; but especially his Resolutions and his
Endeavors the more hearty and sincere to break off the course of his Sins, the
longer he has continued in them: that so by the extraordinary vigor of his
present Endeavors, he may make some kind of reparation for the slowness he has
been hitherto guilty of in setting about his duty.

But this is not all: It will, perhaps, be farther enquired; Whether upon the
Principle I have now laid down, of the withdrawing God's Grace from such as
refuse and reject the offers of it, it will not follow, that such persons as
these are to be looked upon as in a desperate Estate; and therefore that it is
in vain for them now to think of repenting at all?

But this is a Question which every man will best be able to satisfy himself
about. That he who puts off his Repentance now, upon a presumption that it will
be time enough to fulfill it hereafter, may justly fear the withdrawing of God's
Grace from him, I have fully shown: But that God does absolutely withdraw his
Grace from every such Person, I do not say; and whether or no he has withdrawn
it from any particular Person, he will presently be able to discern by the
state in which he finds his Soul as to the business of Religion.

If his Lusts and his Passions lead him captive at their pleasure; If he has no
Affections or Desires remaining after Piety in his soul; if he cares not for
God nor his duty, nor can yet persuade himself either to think of another
world, or to provide for it; These indeed are, though I will not say certain
signs of a desperate condition, yet such as may give us just cause to fear
whether he be not come into that state, from which there is no Redemption, and
in which God will no longer give him any Assistance, to return into the way of
Righteousness.

But if, on the contrary, he even now begins to come again to himself, and
wishes and desires, if it be possible, to be reconciled unto God: If being
touched with a lively sense of his sins and his obstinacy, he is at last
willing to amend, and return unto God with all his heart: Then it is plain, that
though his Condition may be bad, yet it is not desperate. God has not yet given
him up a Slave to the Devil, but still continues to him the benefit of
Repentance; so that if he be not again wanting to himself, he may yet hope for
a sufficient measure of Divine Grace to bring him by Repentance to Salvation.

But here still there will one difficulty more arise, and it is this. How such
a Person shall satisfy himself that he is truly penitent; and by consequence
that he may depend upon the mercy of God for Pardon, notwithstanding his former
Impenitence?

To this I answer, 1 st. If the person who thus repents at the last, be in a
condition of continuing yet longer in this world, he may then be sure of the
sincerity of his Repentance, and of the consequent security of his Condition,
by the same experience that all others are, viz. by the fruits of it in a
constant performance of Piety and Good-Works. But now

2dly. If the Question be of a dying Penitent, then indeed it will be a matter
of more difficulty to answer it. For if on the one hand I may not be so
uncharitable as to conclude at all adventures the utter invalidity of such a
Repentance, because for ought I know, it is possible for a man in the very last
act of his life, to be struck with such a true contrition for his sins, as
might, if he had lived, have produced a real Amendment, and then God who is
able to discern this, will consider him accordingly: Yet neither on the other,
can we ever be sure that such a Repentance is sincere, nor by consequence may
we at all Adventures supppose in favor of it.

The truth is, a Deathbed Repentance is, in the best prospect we can take of
it, exceeding dangerous, and in the case before us, I am afraid desperate. Nor
have we in all the Holy Scripture, so much as one Example of any one that
purposely put off his Repentance to this time, and yet was saved upon it; and
the Instance of Felix in my Text, is a terrible one to the contrary. He was
touched with St. Paul's Preaching, and feared the Judgment of which he spoke.
But he put off the Apostle to a more convenient season; and we do not find that
ever that more convenient season came, or that he had ever any future call to
Repentance.

It is not to be questioned, but that if a man be come to this sad pass, he
ought by all means to be exhorted to repent, because otherwise to be sure, he
must perish, and it is possible this may save him. But what that Repentance is,
which a wicked man then exercises, we cannot tell, and the effect of it must be
left to God's Judgment to declare; and it will be our parts instead of being
over-inquisitive into these secrets, to be careful not to expose our selves to
a condition so full of danger; in which there is much to be feared, but little
Hope, and no Security.

And now, what more remains to engage us to a speedy, or rather to a present
Repentance, but that having thus largely shown the danger of deferring our
duty, I very briefly close all with a more excellent Prospect,

II dly, Of the Comfort and Satisfaction that will arrive to us from the
Consideration of having perfected this great and necessary Work.

This is a Point on which it were as easy to speak great things, as I think
it is needless so to do. If to Live in a State of Friendship with God, and to be
able to look forward into Eternity with Comfort; If to be freed from the stings
of Conscience, and the Terrors of Everlasting Punishment, and instead thereof
to be full of a well-grounded Confidence that Heaven and all its Glories shall
be one day Ours; in short, If there be any such thing as a Felicity to be
attained either in this World or in the Next, such a Christian as this
possesses it all; For he enjoys the Love, the Favor of that God, who is the
Great dispenser of all Good both in Heaven and Earth.

O the Peace and the Tranquillity! The Pleasure, and the Satisfaction of that
Man, who lives in such a State as this! Whose Conscience acquits him; whose
Innocence supports him in the midst of Dangers; whose Piety and Virtue cheer
his Soul, and fill it with the most excellent Comforts; whose Present Condition
is full of Hope, and whose Future Prospect is to be for Ever Happy.

How will such a Christian as this Triumph over all the Miseries, and despise
the Blandishments of a vain, uncertain, sinful World? Even Death its self the
last, and greatest of Terrors, will not be able to amaze him: But rather He
will welcome it with a cheerful mind, and with St. Paul desire to depart, Phil.
i.23.
and to be with Christ; whilst able with him to cry out; 2 Timothy iv.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the faith;
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that day.

But O Wretched Sinner! Who by thy unreasonable Delays in a matter of such vast
concernment both to thy Present and Eternal Happiness, not only exposest thy
self to the danger of Damnation in the other World, but deprivest thy self of
the only true and real Felicity of this!

Men indeed may flatter themselves in their Evil doings, and find a great deal
of seeming satisfaction in their ways of Wickedness. But when all is done, the
Remembrance of this one thing, That in a little time they must die, and come to
Judgment, will ever and anon come in and embitter all their Enjoyments; and
convince them that it is the way of Piety that alone is the way of pleasantness,
and her paths the paths of peace. Pro. iii.17.


But I must not pursue these Reflections any farther; I will therefore conclude
this whole Argument, with those excellent Words of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus.
v.xviii.

Eccl. v.7.
Make no long tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day.

Ib. xviii. -- 20.
Before Judgment, examine thy self, and in the day of Visitation thou shall
find mercy.

-- 21.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and in the time of sins show repentance.

-- 22.
Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy Vows in due time, and defer not until
death, to be justified.

AN EXHORTATION To Mutual Charity and Union AMONG PROTESTANTS. IN A SERMON
Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT HAMPTON COURT, MAY 21. 1689.
ROMANS XV.5, 6, 7. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with
one mind, and one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of
God.


THE Words are part of that affectionate Application, which the Apostle here
makes of his excellent Discourse concerning the Exercise of Christian Charity,
See chapter xiv.1.
in that great Instance of Condescension to the Infirmities of our Weaker
Brethren, in the foregoing Chapter.

The Occasion of it was this:

There were in those first times, many among the Jews, who though they were
converted to the Christian Faith, yet still continued zealous for the Law; Acts
xv.1. -- xxi.20.
and not only carefully observed themselves all the Rites and Ceremonies of it,
but would also by any means impose upon all others also, the observance of
them. And how earnest they were upon this account, and how much they hated the
Gentile Converts, upon whom the Apostles did not think fit to lay any such
burden, Acts xv.19, 28. Gal. v.1, etc.
many Passages both in the Acts and in St. Paul's Epistles, do sufficiently
declare.

But as in all other differences it seldom happens that the whole heat of the
Controversy rests only on one side; so here, though the Jewish Converts were
both the first beginners of this Dispute, and the more zealous pursuers of it,
yet neither were the Gentile Christians utterly without fault in it; but so far
stood fast in that liberty wherewith Christ had made them free, Gal. v.1.
as not only to despise the weakness and ignorance of the others, Romans xi.18,
etc.
but to be ready almost even to cut them off from their Communion.

I need not say how dangerous such a Controversy as this might have proved,
nor what a stop it might have put to the progress of Christianity, in those
first beginnings of the Gospel. Great were the difficulties which the Apostles
underwent on this occasion; whilst they endeavored so to menage themselves
between these two Parties, as not only not to offend either, but, if it were
possible, to bring them Both to such a temper with one another, that neither
the Gentile Convert might despise the weakness of his Judaizing Brother; nor
the Jewish Votary judge too severely of the Liberty of the Gentile Christian.

And this was the design of St. Paul in the Chapter before my Text. Where
addressing himself, as indeed he seems to have done this whole Epistle, to the
Gentile Christians; and whom, as having the truer Notion of their Christian
Liberty as to this matter, he therefore calls the (...), the strong in the
Faith: Romans xv.1.
v.1. he exhorts them in a most admirable Discourse on this Subject throughout
the whole Chapter, Ibid.
to bear the Infirmities of the Weak; i. e. not to grieve nor despise them for
their mistaken Zeal, but by complying a little, and condescending to their
Infirmities, to endeavor, if it should please God, to draw them out of their
Error. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to Edification.
Verse ^.
And then concludes all in the words of the Text, wherein we have,

First, A hearty Prayer to God Almighty, That he would inspire them so
effectually with a Spirit of Unity and Charity, that notwithstanding all their
differences, they might join unanimously, both Jews and Gentiles, not only in
the same common Worship of God, but with the same hearty affection to one
another: Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one Mind and
one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And, Secondly, an Exhortation, as the final result of his whole Discourse,
That they should with all charitable condescension and kindness receive, and
love, and assist one another, and not despise, and censure, and deprive one
another, either of their Charity, or their Communion; Wherefore receive ye one
another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of God.

In which words, as they thus lie before us in the Occasion and Design of them,
there are two things that will offer themselves to our consideration.

First, An Exhortation to these Dissenting Christians, and in them to all of
us, Not to break either Charity or Communion with one another, upon the account
of such things wherein we may securely differ; but mutually to bear with one
another in our differences. Secondly, See Theodoret, Chrysostom. Theophylact,
etc. in loc.
An Enforcement of this Exhortation, from two of the greatest Considerations
that can possibly engage any Christian to an observance of it; viz. First, From
the Example of Christ toward us. Secondly, From the greater Glory that will
hereby redound to God.

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of
God. I shall make it my endeavor, with all the plainness that I can, to pursue
both the Exhortation and the Enforcement in the three following Propositions.

I. That there may be differences in matters of lesser moment, between very
good and zealous Christians, without any just reflection either upon the Men,
or upon their Religion. II. That these differences ought not to hinder such
Persons from agreeing together not only in a common Charity, but if it be
possible, in a common Worship of God too. III. That to this End it is the Duty
of all Christians, but especially of those who are the strong in Faith, not
only to pray for such a Union, but, as they have opportunity, heartily to
labor Themselves, and earnestly to stir up all Others, to endeavor after it.
Prop. 1.
And, First; That there may be Differences in matters of lesser moment between
very good and zealous Christians, without any just Reflection upon the Men, or
upon their Religion.

For proof of which, I think I need go no farther than the very History of my
Text. I have already said how great a division there was between the Jewish and
the Gentile Converts, about the Ritual Observances of the Law of Moses, and
with what a Zeal the Dissenting Parties managed the Dispute, till they had
almost lost their Charity, and made a deplorable Schism in the Church of
Christ. And yet I am confident no Man will say that this was at all derogatory
either to the Truth of their Common Christianity, or to the Infallible
Authority with which the Apostles had delivered it unto them.

And for the Parties themselves that thus differed with one another, that they
had a true Zeal on both sides for the Glory of God, and thought it matter of
Conscience, the one to observe these Ceremonial Institutions as what God still
required of them; the other to refuse any such Imposition, as not only a
needless Burden, Act. xv.28. Gal. v.2.
but even repugnant to the Grace of Christ declared to them in his Gospel; S.
Paul, in the prosecution of this very Argument, does clearly bear witness to
them, Chapter xiv.6. Where he makes use of this very thing as one Reason why they
should mutually tolerate one another in their Dissensions; viz. That however
they differed in their Notions as to these particulars, yet they were both
perfectly agreed in the same common Zeal for the Glory of God, and the
Discharge of their Duty. He that regards the day, Romans xiv.6.
regards it unto the Lord; and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he
does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God
thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God
thanks.

And indeed, either we must say, that all, even the least Points, relating to
our Religion, are so clearly and plainly revealed, that no Honest Man can
possibly be mistaken, if he will but impartially enquire into them; which from
the Differences of whole Parties concerning these things, it is plain they are
not: Or else Men's different Capacities, and Opportunities, and Tempers, and
Education considered, it is in vain to expect that all Good Men should agree in
all their Notions of Religion, any more than we see they do in any other
concerns whatsoever. And who am I, that I should dare to pronounce a Sentence
of Reprobation against any one, in whom there appear all the other Characters
of an humble, upright, sincere Christian, only because he has not perhaps met
with the same Instruction, or read the same Books, or does not argue the same
way; In a Word, because he is not so wise, or it may be, is wiser than I am,
and sees farther than I do, and therefore is not exactly of my Opinion in every
thing.

Now if this be so, as both the Principles of Reason conclude it very well may
be, and the common Experience of Mankind, not only in the particular concern of
Religion, but in most other things assures us that it is: That Men's
Understandings are different, and they will argue different ways, and
entertain different Opinions from one another, about the same things, and yet
may nevertheless deserve on all sides, to be esteemed very good and wise Men
for all that: How vain then must that Argument be, which a Late Author of the
Church of Rome, Histoire des variations des Eglises Protestants: par Mr. l'
Evesque de MEAUX. The Design of which, may be seen in the Summary of his
Preface -- Les Variations dans la foy preuve certain de faussete. Charactere
des heresies d'estre variables -- Ce Charactere reconnu dans tous les Ages de
l'Eglise. -- Charactere d'immutabilite dans la foy de l'Eglise Catholic. --
Que les variations de l'un des partis (de Protestans) est une preuve contre l'
Autre, etc.
has with so much Pomp revived against us, from our Differences in a few lesser
Points of our Religion, to conclude us to be Erroneous in the greater; and that
because we are not exactly of the same Opinion in every thing, that therefore
we ought to be credited in nothing; that is to say, That because Protestants
when they differ, are mistaken on One Side, therefore when they agree, they are
mistaken on Both?

1 st. It is certain that amidst all our other Divisions, we are yet on all
sides agreed in whatsoever is Fundamental in the Faith, or necessary to be
believed and professed by us in order to our Salvation.

There is no good Protestant, but what does firmly believe all the Articles of
the Apostles Creed; and embraces the Holy Scriptures as the Word of God, and
Rule of his Faith, and readily acknowledges whatsoever is plainly revealed
therein, and is at all times disposed to submit to any thing that can by any
necessary and certain Consequence be proved to him thereby. In short, Our
Differences, whatsoever they are, I will be bold to say, They do no more, nor
even so much concern the foundations of Christianity, as those of the Judaizing
Christians here did. If their differing therefore with one another, was no
Prejudice to the Truth of their common Christianity then, I would fain know for
what Reason our Differences, which are lesser, shall become so much a greater
Argument against our common Christianity now. But,

Secondly, If our differing from one another in some Points, be an Argument
that we are not certain in any; How, shall we be sure that those of the Church
of Rome are not altogether as uncertain as we are; seeing we are sure that they
do no less differ among themselves, and that in Points too, much more
considerable than we do?

For to take only one Instance instead of many, and that so considerable, that
Card. Praef. ad lib. de Sum. P. T. 1. p. 592. Ingolstad. A. 1586.
Bellarmin once thought the Sum of Christianity, he meant the Sum of Popery, to
consist in it, viz. The Prerogatives of the Bishop of Rome, both in and over
the Church of Christ. * Some there are who hold the Pope to be Head of the
Church, by Divine Right: Others the contrary. * Some, That he is Infallible:
Others, That he is not. * Some, That the Pope alone, without a Council, may
determine all Controversies: Others, That he cannot. Now if in these, and many
other points of no less importance, they themselves are as far from agreeing
with one another, as they can possibly pretend us to be; what shall hinder us,
but that we return their own Inference upon them, That seeing they differ among
themselves in such things as these, they are so far from that absolute
Infallibility they set up for, that in truth they have not so much as any
certainty among them, even in those Points wherein they do agree.

Is it that in their Church, tho, there be indeed as many differences as in
ours, yet this makes not against them, Bellarm. to. 1. p. 1377. de Not. Eccl. A.
seeing they have a certain Rule, whenever they please, for the composing of
them, viz. The Definition of the Pope, and of the Church? This indeed, I find
is commonly said by them: But then certainly, if they have such a ready means,
See Mr. Chillingworth, p. 99, 100.
as they say, of Agreement among them, it is the more shame for them, that they
do not agree; he being much more inexcusably guilty in the omission of any
duty, who having a ready means to fulfill it, neglects so to do; than he who has
none; or, which is the same thing, does not know that he has any. But indeed
they have no means of Ending their differences, any more than we have; The Holy
Scriptures we both of us acknowledge to be the Word of God, and an Infallible
Rule of Faith; but for any other direction, they are not yet agreed where to
seek it: And sure that can be no very good means of Ending all their other
Differences, which is it self one of their chiefest Controversies.

Or is it, Bellarm. I^ p. 1378. ^
That they agree in matters of Faith, and differ only in those things that do
not belong to it? Because if they differ about any Point, they for that very
Reason, conclude it to be no matter of Faith. But besides the Impenitence of
this Answer, which amounts to no more than this, that they do agree in what
they do agree, and differ only in those things in which they differ: This is
what we say for our selves concerning our Differences; We agree in all those
things that are necessary to a Sound and Saving Faith; and if we differ in
matters of lesser moment, it is no more than what all other Christians have ever
done, and what those of the Church of Rome it self at this day do.

So that still it must remain, either that those Differences which were among
the Christians of old, and which are among us now, are no Prejudice at all to
the common Truth which we profess; or if they be, the Consequence will fall
upon those of the Church of Rome no less, that I do not say, and more severely,
than upon us, and be of the same Force against Their Religion, that it can be
against Ours.

But I must carry this Reflection a great deal farther; for,

Thirdly, If once this Principle be allowed, That because Men differ in some
things, they ought not to be credited in any, what then will become, not only
of the Protestant Religion, as it now stands in Opposition to Popery, but even
of Christianity it self? For might not a Turk or a Jew, if he were minded to
give himself so much trouble to so little purpose as this late Author has done,
draw out a large HISTORY of the VARIATIONS of Christians among themselves, from
the Controversy of the Text, unto this day; and then by the very same
Principle conclude against us all, That we have none of us any certain Grounds
for Our Religion, because the differences that are among us, plainly show, that
some of us must be deceived? And to go yet one step farther; Might not a
Sceptick by the same Rule, argue against all Religion, and even against all
Reason too; That the disagreement of mankind in these and many other Points of
the greatest Importance, clearly proves that there is no certainty in any
thing; and therefore that we ought not to rely either upon the one, or upon the
other?

It remains therefore, that unless we will overthrow all the measures of
Christian Charity toward our Neighbor, and the common Truth, I do not say
both of their Faith and of our own, but even of Christianity it self, nay and
of all Religion and Reason in general; We must conclude, That good Christians
may differ from one another in matters of lesser moment, without any just
Reflection either upon themselves or their Religion.

But here therefore I must desire not to be misunderstood. For when I say, that
Christians may, without any danger to themselves, or disparagement to the Truth
of their Religion, differ with one another; I mean only, as the Terms of my
Proposition expressly show, in lesser matters; such as do not concern the
Fundamentals of Faith, nor destroy the Worship of God; nor are otherwise so
clearly revealed, but that Wise and Good Men, after all their Enquiries, may
still continue to differ in their Opinions concerning them. For otherwise, if
Interest and Prejudice blind men's Eyes, and they err because they resolve they
will not be convinced; and so by their own Fault continue in Mistakes contrary
to the Foundation of Faith, and destructive of Piety: If, for instance, Men
will profess to believe but in One God, and yet worship Thousands; If they will
read over the second Commandment, and nevertheless both make and bow down
before Graven Images in despite of it; If, whilst they acknowledge Christ to
have instituted the Blessed Eucharist in both kinds, they command it to be
administered but in One; and pray in an unknown Tongue, though S. Paul has spent
almost a whole Chapter to show the Folly and Unreasonableness of it: These are
Errors in which I am not concerned; and tho I should be unwilling, even here,
at all adventures to pronounce any Sentence against the Men; yet I must needs
say, That Religion cannot be very sound, which stands corrupted with so many,
and such fundamental Abuses.

And this makes the difference between those Errors for which we separate from
the Church of Rome, and those Controversies which sometimes arise among
Protestants themselves. The former are in matters of the greatest consequence,
such as tend directly to overthrow the Integrity of Faith, and the Purity of
our Worship; and therefore such as are in their own nature destructive of the
very Essentials of Christianity. Whereas our Differences do not at all concern
the Foundations either of Faith or Worship; and are therefore such in which
Good Men, if they be otherwise diligent and sincere in their Enquiry, may
differ, without any Prejudice to themselves, or any just Reflection upon the
Truth of their common Profession.

Which being thus cleared, in answer to the little Endeavors of one of the
latest of our Adversaries against us upon this Account; I go on, Secondly, to
show,

Prop. 2.
Secondly, That such differences as these, ought not to hinder such persons
from agreeing together, not only in a common Charity; but, if it be possible,
in a common Worship of God too.

This is what S. Paul here expressly exhorts these dissenting Christians to, and
earnestly prays to God that he might see accomplished in them. That when they
came together to the public Offices of the Church, to offer up their common
Prayers and Thanksgivings to Him, they might do it, not only in the same Form
of Words, but with the same Affection of Mind too, both toward God, and
toward one another: Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with
one Mind and one Mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Such was their Duty to one another then; and we ought certainly no less to
esteem the same to be our Duty toward one another now: And

1. As to the business of Charity;

God forbid that any Differences in Religion whatsoever, much less such little
ones as those we are now speaking of, should ever make us deny that to our
fellow Christians. It Is true indeed, our Savior Christ once foretold to his
Disciples, That there should rise up Men from among their Brethren, who should
upon this account not only put them out of their Synagogues, Joh. xvi.2.
but even think that it was a matter of Religion to kill them. But they were
Jews, not Christians, who were to do this; and He expressly adds, That 'twas
their ignorance of Him and his Religion that should carry them on to so furious
and intemperate a Zeal; For these things, -- V. 3.
says he, shall they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor
Me. And we must confess it, to the scandal of our Holy Religion, that there are
a sort of Men who call themselves Christians now, that still continue to fulfill
this Prophecy in the very Letter of it; who not only cast us out of their
Synagogues, that we should not much complain of; and, as far as in them lies,
cut us off from all the Hopes of Salvation too; but, to complete the parallel,
openly arm the whole World against us, and teach Men to believe, that it is a
Work of Piety to root us out of it; and therefore, that whosoever kills us,
does do God service. But in this, as well as in the rest of their Errors, they
give us but the more effectually to understand how little they have in them of
the true Spirit of Christianity; for sure such things as these they could never
do, but only that, as our Savior in that other case before said, they have not
known the Father nor Him. And I hope I shall need no Argument to persuade you
not to be misled by that, which we all of us so justly lament, as one of the
most deplorable Corruptions even of Popery it self.

Christianity commands us to love our Enemies, and sure then we cannot but
think it very highly reasonable not to hate our Brethren; but especially on
such an account, as, if it be once admitted, will in this divided state of the
Church, utterly drive the very name of brotherly Love and Charity out of it:
seeing by whatsoever Arguments we shall go about to justify our
uncharitableness to any Others, they will all equally warrant them to withold
in like manner their Charity from us.

There is no honest, sincere Christian, how erroneous soever he may be, but
what at least is persuaded that he is in the right; and looks upon Us to be as
far from the Truth by differing from him, as We esteem Him for not agreeing
with us. Now if upon the sole account of such Differences it be lawful for us
to hate Another; we must for the very same Reason allow it to be as lawful for
Him also to hate Us. Thus shall we at once invert the Characteristick of our
Religion; Joh. xiii.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another; and turn it into the quite contrary Note: Whilst we make our hatred to
our Brother the great mark of our Zeal for our Religion; and conclude him to
love Christ the most, who the least loves his fellow Christian.

How much rather ought we to consider, with our Apostle, the love of our dear
Master to us, even whilst we were yet his Enemies, and love those whom we ought
to hope, notwithstanding all their Errors, are yet still his Friends; and not
think those unworthy of our Charity, whom we piously presume God will not think
unworthy of his Favor? We suppose them to be mistaken in those things wherein
they differ from us, and perhaps they are so; but yet we must consider, that we
our selves also are but Men, and therefore may err; and They as verily think Us
in the wrong, as we do Them: And, for ought I know, we must leave it to the Day
of Judgment to decide the Controversy, which of us is in the right. In the
mean time, if they are mistaken, I am sure our uncharitableness is not the way
to convince them of their Error: but may rather indispose them to consider the
weight of our Arguments as they ought, whilst they see so little regard in our
Affections toward them. In short, if we are indeed, what we esteem our selves
to be, the strong in the Faith, let us then remember, that though Charity be
their Duty too as well as ours, yet it is to such as We are, especially, that
St. Paul addresses the Exhortation of the Text, Verse 1.7.
to bear the Infirmities of the Weak; and to receive one another, as Christ
also has recived us, to the Glory of God. But,

2. Such Differences as these, ought not only not to lessen our Charity, but,
if it be possible, not to hinder us from joining together in the same common
Worship of God with one another.

This was what these dissenting Christians, notwithstanding all their Heats and
Contentions, nevertheless still continued to do. They did with one Mouth
glorify God, even when their Differences would not suffer them to do it with
one Heart. They united together in a common Worship of God, though they could not
unite either in Opinion or Affection with one another.

Indeed where Men's Errors are such as do utterly subvert the very Essentials of
our Religious Worship, it is there in vain to hope for any Communion in the
Public Service of God with them. We must not destroy the Principles of
Christianity, out of a Zeal to enlarge the Communion of Christians. He would be
a very condescending Votary indeed, who for the sake of praying to God with the
Papist, would pray to the Blessed Virgin and Saints too with him: Who rather
than be excluded their Churches, would bow down before their Images; and not
only worship their Host, but even give up his Right to the Cup in the
Eucharist, only that he might receive that holy Sacrament in their Company. It
is, no doubt, a very desirable thing to lessen the differences of Christians,
and enlarge their Communion, as far as ever we can: And it has never gone well
with the Church of Christ, since Men have been so narrow-spirited as to mix the
Controversies of Faith, with their Public Forms of Worship; and have made
their Liturgies, instead of being Offices of Devotion to God, become Tests and
Censures of the Opinions of their Brethren. But yet when all is done, the
Truths of Christianity must not be sacrificed to the Peace of Christians; nor
the Honor of God be given up, to keep up a Unity and Communion with one
another.

But where Men's Differences are in Points that do not at all affect their
Religious Service; or not so much, but that God may be very well worshipped,
and yet Communion with our fellow Christians preserved too; in such cases as
this, our dissentions ought not only not to lessen our Charity, but not to
break our Unity neither: We may continue to differ, as the Christians in my
Text did; and yet with one Mind, and one Mouth, glorify God, as St. Paul
exhorted them to do.

And this brings me to the Third and Last Point.

Thirdly, That to this End, Prop. 3.
it is the Duty of all of us, but especially of the stronger Christians, not
only to Pray for such a Union, but also, as they have opportunity, heartily to
labor themselves, and earnestly to stir up all others to endeavor after it.

I do not believe there is any good Christian so little affected with those
unhappy Divisions under which the Church at this day labors, as not both
heartily to deplore them, and to think that nothing could be too much, that
might innocently be done on all hands, for the redressing of them. But then I
am sure the natural Consequence of this must be, what both my Text, and this
Discourse are designed to exhort you to; viz. That we ought every one of us,
not only heartily to pray for such a Union; but also, as we have opportunity,
earnestly to labor for the attainment of it.

Indeed for what concerns the whole Body of the Catholic Church on Earth, so
many are the Disputes that have arisen among the several Parties and Communions
of it, and some of them in Points so near to the Foundations of Christianity,
that whilst Men resolve to keep fast to their Conclusions, and will not suffer
the plainest Arguments to convince them of their Errors, it is in vain to hope
ever to see things brought to such a Temper, as we could wish in that. But
especially whilst that part which is the most corrupt, is so far from being
willing to concur to any such Union, that on the contrary, she has cut off all
possibility of attaining it: And by arrogating an unwarrantable Infallibility
to her self, and Authority over all others, will neither reform her own Abuses,
nor admit any into her Communion, that will not profess the same Errors, in
which she her self stands involved. So that here, all we can even wish for, is,
that Men would at last be so wise, as though they differ in Opinion, yet to love
as Brethren, and agree together in a common Charity, till we shall be so happy
as to unite in a common Faith and worship of God.

But for us whom it has pleased God, by delivering us from the Errors and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, to unite together in the common name of
Protestant, Reformed Christians, would we but as heartily labor after Peace,
as we are all of us very highly exhorted to it; I cannot see why we who are so
happily joined together in a common profession of the same Faith, at least, I
am sure in all the necessary Points of it; and I hope amidst all our lesser
Differences, in a common love and charity to one another, should not also be
united in the same common Worship of God too.

I will not now enter into any Dispute, to show how little reason there is for
any one to separate from the Offices of the Church of England, upon the account
of those few Exceptions that have sometimes been offered to justify the doing
of it. This is a work both too large for such a Discourse; and besides the
design of my present Undertaking. And that one Concession of many of our
Brethren themselves, who though they continue ordinarily to separate from us, yet
nevertheless freely allow of what they call Occasional Communion with us, I
think sufficiently shows how little real ground there is for those Scruples,
that have so long detained them in an unjust aversion to our Worship. Blessed
be God, who has abundantly justified both the Purity of our Doctrine, and the
Innocence of our Worship, not only by the general Approbation of the Reformed
Churches abroad, who both freely communicate with us in our religious Offices,
and have often given Testimony in favor of them; but in the happy Conviction
of many at Home, who were once Enemies to our Constitution, but who now go with
us into the same House of God as Friends.

And indeed the things for which some forsake us now, are no other than what
they were in the Beginning of the Reformation; when yet there was no such thing
as Separation from our Communion: But on the contrary, the old Non-Conformists
themselves, though they disliked some things in our Worship, yet freely declared
they thought it a Crime to divide the Church on the account of them. And they
who at this day separate from us, for the sake of those few Constitutions that
have been made for the Order and Decency of our Public Worship, must for the
same reason have separated from all the Churches of the Christian World, for
above 1500 years; in none of which they might not have found as great, that I
do not say, and much greater, occasion of Offense, than they can in Ours.

But yet, since Men's Scruples are unaccountable, and after all that can be
said, they will still differ even about indifferent things, and be afraid many
times, where no Fear is; and a too long Experience has already shown us, That
if ever we mean to accomplish that Union so much recommended to us by our
Apostle, so advantageous to the Church at all times, but especially at this
time so necessary to our Peace and our Establishment, that it seems to be the
only way that yet remains to settle and to secure us; and upon all these
accounts, so much to be desired by all Good Men, we must seek it by that Rule
which St. Paul here proposed to the Dissenting Christians of my Text, We then
that are strong in the faith, Romans xv.1.
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. I
cannot but think it a Reflection becoming every good Christian among us, but in
a more especial manner, worthy the Consideration of such an Auditory as this,
Whether somewhat may not yet be done for the sake of Peace, and to bring things
to such a See the Petition of the Archbishop and Bishops to King James* for
which they were committed to the Tower.
TEMPER, that both Order and Decency may still be preserved, and yet our Unity
no longer broken.

And for Exhortations to so Good and Christian a Work, shall I set before you
the Example of our Blessed Savior recommended to us in the Text, with what a
mighty condescension he has treated Us; how he came down from Heaven, Phil.
ii.6, 7.
and took upon Him the form of a servant, and being made in the likeness of a
sinful man, humbled Himself even to the Death upon the Cross for us? How He
still bears not only with our Infirmities, but with our Sins too; and by all
these wonderful instances of his Love to us, teaches us, says St. John, How we
ought also to love one another? 1 John iv.11


Or rather, shall I show you, how far such a Blessed Union as this, would
conduce to the Glory of God, to the Security of our Religion, and to the
Promotion of Peace and Charity, and Piety among us?

I need not say what a dishonor our Divisions have already brought to the
Reformation, nor what a stop they have put to the progress of it Great, to be
sure, is the Advantage which our Enemies either have, or at least hoped to have
made, by those Contests which they have taken so much pains both to bring in,
and to keep up among us: And methinks there should need no other Argument to
stir up every true Friend to the name of Protestant, to endeavor all he can to
compose our Differences, than this one thing, That we are sufficiently
convinced who they are that we please, and whose Interests we serve, by the
continuance of them.

Let us add to this, what great Obligations our Holy Religion lays upon us,
Romans xiv.19.
to follow after those things that make for peace, and whereby we may edify
one another: How our Savior has set it down as the very Badge of our
Discipleship; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, Joh. xiii.35.
if ye have love one to another: What Exhortations his Apostles have given us;
Romans xii.18.
If it be possible, as much as in us lies, to live peaceably with all men. But
especially with reference to the differences about Religion, Romans xvi.17.
To mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine
which we have learnt, and avoid them.

With what a scrupulous care did St. Paul manage himself between the dissenting
parties in my Text? What admirable Rules did he lay down for them to walk by?
And with what an affectionate earnestness did he enforce them? Phil. ii.1, 2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like-minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind.

And may I not beg leave, though not with the Authority, yet with the Charity of
St. Paul, to apply all this to those unhappy Divisions that at this day rend in
pieces the Church of Christ among us; and beseech you, by all these endearing
Considerations, to pursue those things which may make for our Peace; and for
the closing of those breaches, which the malice of our Enemies too successfully
begun, and our own weakness has too fatally kept up among us.

Never, certainly, was there a time, since the name of Separation was first
heard of among us, in which we had greater reason to consider of such a Union;
or, I hope, a fairer opportunity to promise our selves an Accomplishment of it.
Only let us be on all hands as careful to improve it, as I am persuaded we have
all of us not only seemed to desire, but have indeed earnestly longed for it.

Let us show the sense we have of that wonderful Deliverance God has given us
out of the hand of our Enemies, by uniting our selves in the strictest League
of Friendship with one another.

Hitherto we have defended our Church by our Arguments; let us now by our
Charity settle and establish it, against the like Dangers for the time to come.

This will indeed render both our selves and our Religion Glorious to the
World; and may be a Happy Augury that the blessed time so long wrapped up in
sacred Prophecy, is indeed now ready to be revealed: When the Church of Christ
being purged from those Corruptions that have so long defaced its Beauty, shall
again appear in its primitive Purity. When all Heresy and Schism being every
where abolished, and the Mystery of Iniquity laid fully open, and the Man of
Sin destroyed; true Religion and sincere Piety shall again reign throughout the
World; God himself shall pitch his Tabernacle among us, Rev. xxi.3.
and dwell with us, and we shall be his People, and he shall be our God.

O Blessed State of the Church Militant here on Earth! the glorious Antepast of
that Peace and Piety which God has prepared for his Church Triumphant in
Heaven! Who would not wish to see those days, when a general Reformation, and a
true Zeal, and a perfect Charity, passing through the World, we should All be
united in the same Faith, the same Worship, the same Communion and Fellowship
one with another? When all Pride and Prejudice, all Interests and Designs being
submitted to the Honor of God, and the discharge of our Duty, the Holy
Scriptures shall again triumph over the vain Traditions of Men; and Religion no
longer take its denomination from little Sects and Factions, but we shall all
be content with the same common primitive Names of Christians and Brethren, and
live together as becomes our Character, in Brotherly Love and Christian Charity
with one another?

And who can tell but such a Change as this, and which we have otherwise some
reason to believe is nigh at hand, may even now break forth from the midst of
us, would we but all seriously labor to perfect the Great Work which the
Providence of God has so gloriously begun among us, and establish that Love and
Unity among our selves, which may afterward diffuse it self from us into all
the other Parts of the Christian World besides?

But however, whether we shall ever see, I do not say, such a Blessed Effect as
this, but even any good Effect at all of our Endeavors here on Earth, or no;
yet this we are sure, we shall not lose our Reward in Heaven. When to have
contributed, though in the least degree, to the healing of those divisions we so
unhappily labor under, shall be esteemed a greater Honor, than to have
silenced all the Cavils of our Enemies; and even to have prayed, and wished for
it, and, where we could not any otherwise have contributed our selves, but to
have exhorted others to it, shall be rewarded with Blessings, more than all the
Stars in the Firmament for number.

Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind, and one
mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:

To Him be Honor and Praise for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET'S
WESTMINSTER, June 5 th. 1689.
Being The FAST DAY Appointed by the KING and QUEEN'S Proclamation, TO Implore
the Blessing of Almighty God upon Their MAJESTY'S Forces by Sea and Land, and
Success in the War, now declared, against the FRENCH KING.

Jovis 6o die Junii, 1689.
Resolved,THat the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Wake for the Sermon he
Preached before them yesterday; And that he be desired to Print the same.

Ordered,THat Mr. Gray do give him the Thanks, and acquaint him with the
Desires of this House accordingly.

Paul Jodrell, Cl. Dom. Com.

OF THE Nature and Benefit OF A PUBLIC HUMILIATION.
JOEL ii.12, 13. Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to Me with all
your heart, and with Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning.

And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God,
for He is Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and
repents Him of the Evil.


THough the time of this Prophecy be uncertain, so that neither the Jewish
Rabbis, nor Christian Antiquaries are able to give us any tolerable Account of
it, yet is the Design plain, and the words of my Text a most proper and
pathetick enforcement of the great duty of this day, to turn unto the Lord our
God with all our Heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning,
-- for he is Gracious and Merciful, slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, and
repents him of the Evil.

If we look into the foregoing Chapter, we shall there find an astonishing
Account of the great Evils that were just ready to befall the Jews for their
Sins. But that which is yet more surprising, is, That though all this was about
to come upon them, yet were they nevertheless insensible of their danger, nor
took any the least care to prevent their utter desolation.

To awaken a stupid and inconsiderate People, a Nation dead in Sin and
Security, in the beginning of this Chapter he prepares a lofty and magnificent
Scene. He sets before them a Prophecy of yet greater dangers than any they had
hitherto experimented, and that in a manner so unusual, with such a Pomp of
Words, and in such Triumphant Expressions, as carry a terror even in the
Repetition of them:

Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, Joel. ii.1^
sound an Allarm in my holy Mountain; Let all the Inhabitants of the Land
tremble, for the day of the LORD comes; for it is nigh at hand: -- 2,
A day of darkness and of gloo^iness; a day of Clouds and of thick darkness; as
the Morning spread upon the Mountains; a great People and a strong, there has
not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it. A fire devours
before them, -- 3,
and behind them a flame burns: The Land is as the Garden of Eden before
them, and behind them a desolate Wilderness. The Earth shall quake before them;
-- 10.
the Heavens shall tremble; the Sun and the Moon shall be dark; and the Stars
shall withdraw their shining.

Whatever be the Import of these Phrases; whether by the mighty and terrible
Host here spoken of, we are only to understand that swarm of Judaei putant in
diebus Joel tam innumerabilem Locustarum super Jud. eam venisse multitudinem,
ut cuncta complerent, and non dicam fruges, sed ne Vinearam quidem and arborum
C^rtices, ramo^que dimitt^rent, ita ut omni virore consumpto arentes arborum
rami* and sicca vinearum flagella remanerent. Hieron. in Joel. i. v. 6.
Locusts, and other Insects, that, we are Chapter i.4.
before told, were utterly to devour all the Fruits of the Land: Or whether
under the Character of these, we shall See among the Ancients, St. Hierom. loc.
cit. Drusius in Joel. i.1. Groti^s in Joel i.5. Theodoret in Cap 1.4. (...). v.
pl.
with most Interpreters, comprehend the numerous and mighty Armies of the
Chaldeans and Babylonians, which at diverse times brought such Desolations, as
we read of, upon the Jews: This is plain, that we have here the denunciation of
some Judgment worthy of God, and great as the sins and incorrigibleness that
occasioned it.

And now, who would not here expect the final desolation of such a People as
this? But behold, God even yet in his Anger remembers Mercy; and though they had
hitherto neglected all the Calls and Invitations of his holy Prophets to
Repentance, yet He resolves once more to try, whether they would now, at least
in their dangers, hearken to his Admonitions: He raises up Joel at once both to
set before them his Judgments, if they continued still impenitent; and to
encourage them, by repenting, not only to prevent their Ruin, but to assure
themselves of his Favor. That though they had so long neglected him, yet if
they would (...).
now even now at the last, return with a true Zeal, and a sincere Affection to
their Duty, they should not fail to meet with a favorable acceptance from him:

Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to me, with all your heart,
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: and rent your heart, and
not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

It is not my intention to seek a a Parallel of all this, either in the sins,
or in the danger of our own Country. I would willingly hope, that neither our
Guilt, nor our Incorrigibleness have been so heinous as theirs, nor shall any
such deplorable Judgment as this, ever, I trust, be made the punishment of what
our Iniquities have indeed but too justly deserved. No, blessed be God, who by
a wonderful Concurrence of great and singular Mercies, seems rather to call
upon us to celebrate his Goodness, than to deprecate his Judgments; to praise
his Name in Hymns of Triumph and Eucharist, than to weep between the Porch and
the Altar, in melancholy Litanies to avert his Anger, and implore his Mercy.
But yet since the Goodness, as well as Judgments of the Lord, are designed to
bring us to repentance, and that whether we look back into our own particular
Actions, or consider those Public and National Transgressions, whereby we have
so long and loudly called to Heaven for vengeance; we must with shame and
indignation confess our selves some of the greatest of Sinners; I cannot but
think, both the Solemn Occasion of this Day, and the Design of my Text, to be a
most proper and seasonable Admonition to us, to turn unto the Lord our God, and
to implore his Blessing upon our present Enterprises, that those vile Insects,
the Locusts and Caterpillars, that have so barbarously consumed our Neighbors
round about us; our worse than Assyrian or Babylonian Enemies, may not be able
to prevail against us.

And indeed, however it has pleased God, as at this time, to give us some
Encouragement to trust in his Mercy; yet we cannot so soon forget, that we have
also born the punishment of our sins. For not to repass upon the things that
are at a greater distance from us; let the Instances still fresh in all our
Memories, speak to us: What just Apprehensions did we but very lately lie under
of our Lives, and of what is yet dearer to us than our Lives, our Liberty, and
our Religion? How did our Enemies not only project our Ruin, but as if it were
already accomplished, begin to say in their hearts, nay, they began freely to
speak it out to us; Aha! so would we have it: Psalm. lxxi.9.
Persecute them, and take them; for there is none to deliver them.

And if now we are no longer exposed to those dangers that so lately threatened
us; if God has begun, upon our late more serious concern for Religion, and more
general return to him, to give us some Testimony of his gracious Designations
toward us; This certainly ought to be so far from lessening our solemn
Humiliation at this time, that it should rather engage us to be the more
forward in perfecting our Repentance, the greater Encouragement we have to
hope, that it shall be accepted at our hands. And I must now beg leave, with so
much the more Earnestness to enforce the Duty of my Text; Therefore also now,
says the LORD, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning:

And rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God.



By how much I hope I may with the greater assurance propose to you the Promise
of it for your Encouragement: For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

I have already pointed out to you the two great parts of my Text; and which
must therefore be the Subject of my Discourse upon it; viz.

I. The Address of the Holy Prophet to his Country, and in that the
Exhortation, which I am earnestly in the Name of God to recommend unto you this
day; To turn unto the LORD your God with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning.

II. The great Encouragement which he offered to induce them, and which ought
to be of no less a force to stir up all of us to a serious and diligent
performance of it: For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil.

I begin with the former of these, the Exhortation of my Text: I. To turn unto
the LORD your God with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and
with mourning.

And here I presume I shall not need to tell you, That all this is but a larger
Paraphrase of what I may in other Words call a General and National Repentance,
of those Public and National Sins which had provoked God Almighty to send down
so many Judgments upon them, and to threaten them with yet greater, if they
continued still in their Impenitence. And indeed, what could be more
reasonable, than by such a Solemn and Universal Acknowledgment both of the
Evils they had committed, and of the Judgments which they deserved, and of the
sorrow they were now touched with for their Offenses; to appease God's Anger
for that General Incorrigibleness, by which they had so long exposed both his
Goodness and his Justice to Contempt, among the Heathen round about him?

For however it be very certain, that all the outward pomp and solemnity of
Repentance, the fasting, and the weeping, and the mourning, are at best but a
form of Godliness, empty and unprofitable, unless there be also added to these
that true inward change of Mind, in which alone consists the Power of it; yet
there may be such Circumstances and Cases put, wherein this Duty must pass
beyond the Heart and the Closet: and the Humiliation will be imperfect, if it
be not as publicly set forth to the Eyes of Men, as it is sincerely performed
in the sight of God.

And such especially must be the Repentance for National Sins. Where Men's
Transgressions have been open and notorious, there their Return also must be no
less Solemn and Evident; that so the Honor as well as Justice of God may be
vindicated in their Forgiveness; and some sort of Reparation made not only for
the Guilt which they have contracted, but also for the Scandal which they have
given to his Honor and Religion in the World.

Now it is this which at once both declares the Piety, and commands the public
Humiliation of THIS DAY. And for the due discharge whereof, I must entreat you
to go along with me in these following Reflections.

First, That though, as I have just now shown, there must be the public marks
of Sorrow and Humiliation in our public Repentance, yet we must by no means
stop in these; nor thinks that this is all that God requires of us in order to
our Forgiveness.

This was indeed the Vanity of the Jews heretofore, and is too much the folly
of some misguided Christians now.

Their Indignation against their Sins, and against themselves for having
committed them, was spent especially in the outward appearance of Sorrow: They
rent their clothes, 2 Samuel iii.31.
and put on sackcloth; they wept, 1 King. xxi.27.
and fasted, and went softly; and then they supposed they had done their
business; though it may be their Souls were not yet humbled; nor their Hearts
at all broken with any true Contrition for their Sins.

And so among those of the Church of Rome at this day. If we may believe some
of their greatest Casuists, an external Worship is sufficient to carry a Man to
Heaven, without the trouble of the true inward Devotion of the Soul: He may
repent without Contrition; may fast with a full Meal: Nay, and if the Pope
pleases, This Passage is so very Extraordinary, that I ought to give some
Account of it. Pope Boniface IX. having granted a large Indulgence at Rome,
whither the Lombards, by reason of the Wars they then had, could not go to gain
it, at the Prayer of John Galeas, Visconte of Milan, he grants the same
Indulgence to Milan he had done at Rome, viz. that all the Subjects of the said
Galeas, though they had neither confessed their Sins, nor were contrite for
them, should yet be absolved of all their Sins; only for visiting a few
Churches, and praying the Sum of Money prefixed by the said B^ll: Bonifacio
Pontifice a intercessione di Ciovan Galeazzo Visconte la concesse in Milano (
sc. la indulgenza) nella medesina sorma ch' era a Roma: cioe, che ciascuno nel
Dominio del Visconte, se a^cho non fosse Contrito ne Confesso, fosse assolutio
di ogni peccato, etc. Co^io Hist. Milan terza part, page 629. Edit. Venet.
anno 1565.
may obtain a plenary remission of his Sins, se ancho non fosse confesso ne
contrito; though he has neither confessed them to any Priest, nor finds in his
own Heart any manner of Contrition for them.

I shall not need to say how many Dr. Brevint's Saul and Samuel at Endor.
Crasset devotion veritabile envers la Ste. Vierge, part. ult.
new ways of Salvation of this kind they have found out; by wearing Leathern
Girdles about their Loins, or Scapularies over their Shoulders; by listing
themselves into such or such certain Fraternities; by dressing of Altars, and
going on Pilgrimages; by Holy Water, and Agnus Dei's: And all which, and
infinite more of the like kind, if, as our late Masters tell us, they are not
Authorized by their Church, yet I am sure are publicly recommended by their
Greatest Men, and generally practiced too, without any censure or contradiction
among them. This is certain, that all these, and whatever Artifices of the like
kind, Men may please either to flatter themselves, or to delude others withal,
without a true Contrition, and a serious Reformation, they are all but Vanity;
they make a show of Piety in the Eyes of Men, but they avail nothing to our
forgiveness with God.

I will not now dispute of what use some of these External Performances may be
to assist our Repentance, and render our Sorrow for Sin the more solemn, and so
in some Cases, as I have before observed, the more pleasing to God. I know well
enough that St. Paul has told us, 1 Timothy iv.8.
That Bodily Exercise, where it is discreetly ordered, does profit a little,
though it be not like Godliness, profitable for all things. But then as it is
plain, that the greatest part of those Follies so much magnified and
recommended in the Church of Rome, are but vain and ridiculous Impositions to
cheat the silly and superstitious Multitude; so it is certain, that the best of
these things are neither in themselves Meritorious, much less Satisfactory for
Sins, as they pretend them to be; nor otherwise of any value at all with God,
than as they are attended with that true Repentance, which alone can either
incline his Mercy, or obtain our Forgiveness.

If we will therefore make our solemn (...). Chrysostom. Hom. ad Antioch. 3.
Humiliation this day acceptable to God, and available to our selves, our
Country, and our Religion, we must take the Method of the Prophet in our Text:
We must turn unto the Lord our God with all our Heart, and then our fasting,
and our weeping, and our mourning shall indeed be pleasing unto him. We must
rent our Hearts, and not, i. e. rather than our Garments; must humble our Souls
first, and then the violence we do our Bodies will be consider^d by him.

When Jonah denounced God's Judgments against Niniveh, we read in his 3 d.
Chapter* That the People of Niniveh believed, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth, from the greatest of them, even unto the least. (...), etc. --
(...), etc. Chrysostom. ad Antioch. Hom. 3.
But was this therefore that Repentance for which he spared them? No, it is not
so much as once mentioned among the Reasons of it. It was the Reformation of
their Lives that tied up his Hand. and sheathed his Sword, ver. 10. And God saw
their Works, that they turned from their Evil way; and God repented of the Evil
that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

2. And this brings me to a second Remark for the farther clearing of this
great Duty, viz. That not only these outward marks of penitence are not
sufficient to the discharge of it, but though we should to these add a true and
real sorrow of heart for the Sins we have committed, even this would not be
sufficient to purchase our Forgiveness.

Now by true sorrow, I do not mean that little imperfect sorrow, which looks
rather to the danger of our Condition, than to the heinousness of our Offenses;
and bewails our Transgressions more out of an apprehension of those Judgments
that may be the Consequence of them, than out of any real regret that we have
sinned against a most Gracious and Merciful God. For however those of the other
Communion, out of their great tenderness to Sinners, have declared such a
sorrow as this, if accompanied with Confession, to be sufficient Conc. Tr.
Sess. xiv. cap. 4.
to dispose Men to obtain the Grace of God by the Sacrament of Penance: and
therefore have resolved, that true Layman Theol. Moral. lib. 5. tract. 6. c.
2.. 2. And so most of their other Casuists, Morinus, Greg. de Valentia, Silas,
etc.
Contrition, or a sorrow for sin committed, with a purpose of sinning no more,
is not necessary to the Sacrament of Penance, after the Commission of mortal
Sin, but that Attrition is sufficient, though a Man knows it to be no more: Yet
I suppose it needless in this place to obviate any such gross Error, however
otherwise of very great danger, in the Practice of this Duty. Be the sorrow for
sin never so sincere; and our Resolutions thereupon no more to return to the
Commission of it never so firm and well grounded, yet if instead of making good
these Resolutions we shall stop here, we are but half Penitents; seeing we yet
want that change of life, which alone is able to complete the Nature, and
render the Practice of our Repentance acceptable unto God, and available to our
Forgiveness.

3. In short, Thirdly, if we will truly discharge that Repentance, to which we
are here called, we must do it not by being sorry for our Sins, or by resolving
against them, but by an effectual forsaking of them; i. e. as our Text speaks,
By turning unto the Lord our God. This is that which alone can implore his
Favor, and commend us to his Mercy. And this was what I before observed in the
Case of Niniveh: When God saw their works, that they turned from their Evil
way, then he repented him of the Evil that he had said he would do unto them,
and he did it not.

Nay, but it is not any turning unto God, that will suffice neither: We must
turn Veraciter, integraliter. Lyr. Mercer.
even unto him, and with all our Rev^ra, Ex animo, non simulate. Drus. serio ac
bona fide. Grot.
Heart: Words very Emphatical, and which offer to us two great Conditions,
which are absolutely necessary to render our Conversion every way such as it
ought to be. First, That it must be hearty and sincere: There must be nothing
of the Hypocrite mixed with it; our Souls must go along with our outward
Performances; and these penitential appearances be the true Declariations of
that real, inward sorrow, which we feel in our Hearts for our Offenses. For God
is not a Man, Psalm. xliv.21. 1 Chronicles. xxviii.9. Romans viii.27.
that he should be mocked. He sees into our very Souls, and knows the secrets
of all the Children of Men. And Secondly, That it must be entire, and without
reserve: As we must be sorry for every Sin we have already committed, so we
must resolve against ever committing any for the time to come; Hab. i.13.
For God is of purer Eyes than to behold the least Iniquity; and if our
Repentance be sincere, so shall we be too. The same Piety which moves us to
hate any Evil, will equally fill us with an Aversion against all. And if we
desire to continue but in one Offense, it is because that we do truly repent of
none.

So that now then if we will answer the design of this day; if we will render
our Fast such as the Lord has chosen, and has promised to reward with the
Blessings both of this life, and of that which is to come, we must not think it
enough that we comply with the outward Ceremonies and show of Repentance, but
we must indeed resolve to bring forth the Fruits of it. Whilst we address our
selves to God for Pardon, we must take heed to dispose our Souls in such a
manner, that we may be fit to receive it.

And if we thus improve the great Solemnity of this day, we shall not fail to
meet with a favorable acceptance at the Throne of Grace. God will be jealous
for his land, and pity his People: Joel ii.18.
He will perfect the great Deliverance he has begun for us, and once more
render us the fear and the terror of all our Enemies round about us. Deuteronomy.
ii.25.
Our Faith, which has so often triumphed over all the Arguments of its
Adversaries, shall now no less triumph over all their black Designs to root it
out, and to destroy it; and show to all the World, that though for our Trial
God may sometimes permit the Winds to blow, and the Floods to rise, and the
Storms to beat against our Church, yet has he founded it on that Rock that
shall never fail; Matthew. xvi.18.
Nor shall the gates of Hell, either the Power of France, or the Cunning of the
Jesuit, or the Malice of Both, ever be able to prevail against it.

And this brings me to the other thing I am to speak to: Our Encouragement to
this Duty.

II. For God is Gracious and Merciful, slow to anger, and of great Kindness,
and repents him of the Evil. It is not at all needful for me to enter on any
particular Explication of all these Attributes, and show what Arguments every
one of them affords to engage us to Repentance. Two things in general there
are, which will at first sight arise from them to excite us to it; viz.

First, The Goodness and Mercy of God to the greatest Sinners upon their
Repentance: God is Gracious and Merciful, and of great Kindness.

Secondly, His unwillingness to pronounce any Judgments at all against them,
and his readiness to recall them, if they repent: He is slow to Anger, and
repents him of the Evil.

And First, Of the Goodness and Mercy of God to the Greatest of Sinners upon
their Repentance: He is Gracious and Merciful, and of great Kindness.

When God proclaimed his own Name in the midst of the People of Israel, we read
Exodus xxxiv. that he chose to do it, not so much in the terrible Attributes of
his Majesty and Power, as in the soft Ideas of his Mercy and Goodness: The
Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious, Exodus xxxiv.6, 7.
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth; keeping Mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin. And if we look into
all the following Representations which he makes of himself, whether by his
Holy Prophets under the Legal, but especially by our Blessed Savior and his
Apostles under the Christian Dispensation, we shall find there is no Character
he so much delights in, as this of being Good and Gracious, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. iii.8.

And now what more forcible Encouragement can any one desire to bring him to
Repentance, than to be thus assured of the Goodness and Mercy of God to the
greatest of Sinners, if they Repent? That he will not only forgive him upon his
return, but will even assist him with Grace and Strength in the doing of it.
That he desires not the death of the most profligate Offender, but rather that
he should turn from his wickedness and live. In a word, That he has promised
forgiveness, without exception, to the most wicked Men upon their Repentance;
so that if they will but yet break off their evil Course, and keep his
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, they shall surely live, they
shall not die, Ezekiel. xviii.21.

Many are the ways, and excellent the Methods that God has taken to convince us
of his Mercy, and the time would fail me to enter on a particular Consideration
of them.

Sometimes he declares not only that he is ready to pardon us if we repent, but
that he even desires we should repent, that he may forgive us. And lest his
Word should not be sufficient, he confirms that desire with an Oath, Ezekiel
xxxiii.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O House of Israel?

Sometimes he Expostulates with us in the way of Reasoning, to see if by that
means he may be able to bring us to consider his Love and Affection to us,
Isai. i.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, Isai. i.16,
put away the Evil of your doings from before mine Eyes; cease to do evil,
learn to do well. Come now, -- 17.
and let us reason together, says the Lord: Though your Sins be as Scarlet,
Isai, i.18.
they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as
Wool.

If he Exhorts us to Repentance, he always does it upon this Promise, That he
will Pardon us, if we repent. If we turn from our Sins, Ezekiel. xviii 30.
Iniquity shall not be our ruin.

If he threatens Judgments, yet still he keeps a reserve for Mercy to triumph
over Judgment; and will rather be thought inconstant in his most peremptory
Decrees, than inexorable to Repenting Sinners. Thus he commanded Jonah to go to
Niniveh, and to pronounce an utter Destruction against it. He fixed the very
time too, Jonah iii.4.
Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown. But what now was the issue of
all this? Were they utterly destroyed, according to this Prophecy? Nay, but on
the contrary, God was yet entreated for them, and spared them. So we read, ver.
10. the City believed, and feared God, -- 10.
and turned from their Evil way: And God repented of the Evil that he said he
would do unto them, and he did it not, Jonah 3.

And what must the Consequence of all these Reflections be, but to engage us
not to despise the Goodness of God, whereby he thus graciously invites us to
Repentance; but to conclude with Holy David, Psalm. cxxx.3. If thou, LORD,
should be extreme to mark what is done amiss; O God, who may abide it? But
there is Mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

And what I have now said of Gods's mercy in General, will yet more hold in the
other Part of this Character, wherein is set out to us in Particular,

Secondly, His great unwillingness to pronounce any Judgments at all against
Sinners, and his readiness to recall them upon their Repentance: He is slow to
Anger, and repents him of the Evil.

And because I would now, were I able, speak not so much to your Reason, as to
your Sense and Experience, to your Consciences and Affections; I will for the
Proof of this, no more lead you back to the Israelites in this Prophecy; to
Past-times, and unknown Countries; but will rather desire you to consider your
own Times, your own Country, and, if you will allow me freely to add it, your
own Souls. Which of all these will not afford me an evident Demonstration of
the Patience and long-suffering of God? And speak him in the words of the Text,
to be a God slow to Anger, and that repents him of the Evil?

That after so many Sins, as we have every one, the very best of us, committed,
we are yet alive this day; whereas God might, if he had pleased, long since
have cut us off in the midst of our Sins: That after so many calls and
invitations as he has sent to bring us to Repentance, he is still pleased to
call and to invite us to it: That notwithstanding we have so far abused his
Goodness and long-suffering, as to improve that which above all things should
have the most engaged us to our Duty, into an encouragement to go on the rather
in our Sins; he nevertheless still continues to us the Offers of Pardon and
Peace, if we will even now in this our day consider the things that make for
our Peace: What is all this but a most Demonstrative, as well as a most
Affectionate Proof, that God is indeed slow to anger, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance?

That he has delivered us out of so many dangers, in which, but for his
Providence over us, we must long since have perished: That he has smitten us in
Mercy, and not in Judgment; to correct and admonish, not to ruin and destroy
us: That upon our deprecating his Anger, he has at any time heard our Prayers,
and answered our Desires: What is this but a plain Evidence, that he smites not
willingly, Lam. iii.33.
nor loves to afflict the Children of Men: and so is a God repenting him of the
Evil that he is at any time forced either to threaten us with, or to bring upon
us.

And if we look into his Dispensations toward us in the common concern of our
Country, and our Religion; How slow must that God have been to Anger, who after
so many years Attendance, nevertheless still calls upon us, as at this day,
Ezekiel. xviii 30.
to turn from our Evil way, and from the violence that is in our Hands, that
our Iniquity may not be our ruin?

And for his repenting him of the Evil, which we have sometimes forced him by
our continual Provocations to send upon us: Let the Instances which we our
selves have known, suffice to tell us, how unwilling he has shown himself to
bring us to an utter desolation.

When it pleased God for our iniquities, Lam. ii.6.
to despise, in his indignation, both the King and the Priest; and by the
deplorable Judgment of Civil Confusions, had proved and exercised us about
Twenty Years; with what a Miracle of Mercy did he turn again the Captivity of
our Sion, Psalm. cxxvi.1.
and restore to us both our Government and Religion, as before?

When this would not do, but our Sins and our Prosperity returned together; so
that we were again in a very few years become ripe for Judgment; He called
forth a destroying Angel; He put a new Sword into his Hand, and commanded him
to slay his Thousands, and Ten Thousands in our Streets. The PLAGUE consumed
our Strength; and hardly was that passed, when another Vengeance, a devouring
FIRE, such as scarce any Age or Country has ever heard of, burnt down our
Dwellings. And had not the Hand of God wonderfully interposed, Isai. i.9.
we must have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrha.

And yet how did he then cover us with his Hand in that day of his displeasure?
He neither suffered our Enemies to invade us from abroad, nor any Domestic
Quarrels to embroil us at home. He preserved us in Peace; he sent again the
Blessings of Plenty and Prosperity among us, and our City is risen more Great
and Glorious out of its Ashes.

What shall I say to the fears and jealousies we have labored under since,
from a restless Party, Enemies to the Name of Protestant, and by Principle
conjured, if they can, to root it out of the World?

In how many dangers has God delivered us? And how many Designs, for ought we
know, may he have prevented, which have not yet been brought to light? And when
at last, either to awaken us the more effectually to a Repentance of our Sins,
or it may be to accomplish the number of their Iniquities, he delivered us over
for a little while into the Hands of our Enemies; and to convince the most
incredulous among us, what the true Spirit of prevailing Popery is, suffered
them with such an inconsiderate Fury to pursue our Ruin, That no Ties, either
of God or Man, were sufficient to restrain them; but all Obligations, whether
of Justice or Conscience, were equally trampled under their feet: How did it
then please our Almighty Defender to assert his Character of being a God
repenting him of the evil that he had brought upon us, in a manner that is the
Wonder and Astonishment of the present; and, that I am persuaded, shall be the
Praise and Triumph of his Church in all succeeding Generations?

He raised us up a Deliverer out of the House of his Servant David. He touched
his Princely Heart with a generous Sense both of the Evils which we had
suffered, and of the greater that we apprehended. His Honor and his Zeal
enflamed him to do somewhat worthy Himself; and that might answer the mighty
Hopes God had prepared us to conceive of Him. He meditated the great Work of
delivering our Country from Oppression, and our Religion from Destruction. And
by the Blessing of God, he accomplished it, in a manner so extraordinary in all
its Circumstances, as, I think, should not suffer us to doubt from whose
Providence it was, that this Redemption was sent to us. This was the Lord's
doing, and, whatever it is, I am sure ought to be, mavelous in our Eyes: And
may, I think, be a final, I hope it shall be an effectual Confirmation to us of
this Great Engagement of our Text, to turn to him with all our hearts; viz.
That he is a God repenting him of the evil; and therefore whose Mercy, if we
now truly do so, we may securely depend upon both for the forgiveness of our
sins, and for our deliverance from those dangers which our sins have so justly
exposed us to.

And now what remains, but that having all these great Encouragements, such
Promises, or rather, such an Earnest of God's Favor to us, we resolve, every
of one of us, seriously to comply with the great Design both of this Day, and
of this Discourse; and by our sincere Repentance for our past Offenses, obtain
that Blessing we so much desire both for our Country, and for our Religion.

Never was there a time wherein we had greater Reason to hope for God's
Acceptance than at this Day; and such an Occasion as this, to implore his
Favor, there may not perhaps again occur in the Course of many Ages.

For indeed, what is it that we are now assembled to recommend to His Mercy,
but in Effect the preservation of our Selves, our Laws, our Liberties, and our
Religion, against the Violence of those who have long conspired both Their and
Our Destruction.

That be would preside in our Councils, and go forth with our Armies; and so
direct the one, and prosper the other, that we may again enjoy the Blessings of
Peace and Security; that there may be no decay, Psalm. cxliv.14.
no leading into Captivity, and no just complaining in our Streets.

And this he will do, if we be not our selves wanting to our own Preservation.
Only let us act as becomes Good Christians, and True Englishmen; let us do all
things for the Glory of God, and for the Safety, Honor and Welfare of our
Country: In the words of Joab to his Brother Abishai, upon an Occasion not much
different from our own at this time; Let us be strong, and of good Courage, 2 Samuel x, 12.
and let us play the Men for our People, and for the Cities of our God; and
then he will not fail us, nor forsake us.

But if instead of pursuing the things that make for our Peace, we shall still
go on to precipitate our own Destruction: If when we are called this Day to
turn unto the LORD our God with all our hearts, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning; we shall instead thereof fast only for strife and
for debate: Isai. lviii.4.
If when we should be here prostrating our selves before the LORD, to implore
the Completion of that Great Deliverance he has begun to work for us; we shall,
on the contrary, continue ungratefully to murmur against his Providence, and be
ready almost to implead his Justice for what he has already done; and with
those repining Israelites of old, be looking back again to our Egyptian
Bondage, when we are brought even within prospect of the Promised Land: In a
word, If when we should be uniting our selves against the Common Enemy of our
Country and Christendom, we shall suffer a Spirit of Fa^tion and Sedition, of
Mutiny and Discontent; of private Interests, and unseasonable Resentments, to
distract our Councils, and divide us against one another; What can we then
expect, but that God should at last give us over into the hands of our Enemies,
and make those that hate us, to rule over us.

Wherefore now, arise O ye Worthies, ye Chosen, and Counselors of our Israel;
Consult, consider, and resolve: And may the God of Heaven; the God before whom
we are here assembled this Day; He who has, and does, and we trust will still
deliver us; our Rock, and our Defense against the Face of our Enemies, so
direct and prosper all your Consultations, that the Children which are yet
unborn, may rise up in their Generations, and call you Blessed; when they shall
enjoy the Benefits of that Peace, and Security, which we trust shall descend to
them, through your Wise and Vigorous Resolutions.

Behold this day the Eyes not of your own Nation only, but of all the Nations
round about us, fixed upon you: The Fortunes, I do not say, of every single
Person among you, though that were somewhat; nor yet of your own Country and
Religion only, which ought to be much more valued; but what is still more
considerable than all this, the Fortunes of all the Reformed Churches, and
distressed Countries of Europe, depending on the Success of our present
Enterprises. This is the fatal Crisis, that must secure or ruin both them and
us for ever.

May the Consideration of all these things, inspire every one of you with a
Spirit suitable both to our present Needs, and to that great trust that is here
committed to you: A Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding; a Spirit of Prudence
and Discretion; a Spirit of Charity and Moderation; but above all, with a
Spirit of Piety and Unity; that being endu'd with all these excellent
Qualities, ye may become the Repairers of our Breaches; the Restorers of our
almost lost and trampled Liberties; the Defenders of our Faith; the Support of
your Country; the Avengers of your barbarously abused Allies; the Scourge and
Terror of the Universal Enemy of Truth* Peace, Religion, Nature: In short, of
all the common Laws and Rights both of God, and of all Mankind.

May your Councils be governed with such a Calmness and Temper, as may settle
and compose all the unquiet and dissatisfied Spirits (if there be any) yet
remaining among us; and suffer none to regret our wonderful Preservation, but
those only whose fury had once prompted them to attempt, and whose Principles
still carry them on, to desire, even when they are not able to accomplish, our
Destruction.

May your Resolutions be as speedy, as the public Necessities are pressing;
and their Execution be accompanied with a Fidelity and Success that may equal
not only our Expectation, but even our very Hopes and our Desires.

And for the obtaining of all these Blessings, and whatever else may serve to
make these Kingdoms Happy:

May we all this day, fast the fast which the Lord has chosen; Isa. lviii.6.
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
Oppressed go free.

Psalm. 38.18.
Let us confess our wickedness, and be sorry for our sins.

Let us turn to the LORD our God with all our heart; Joel ii.13.
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

Isa. lviii.7.
Let us deal our Bread to the Hungry, and bring the Poor to our Houses.

-- V. 8.
So shall we call, and the Lord shall answer; we shall cry, and he shall say,
Here I am. Isa. lviii.9.
Our light shall break forth as the Morning, and our righteousness as the
Noonday.

God shall come, and shall not keep silence: Psalm. l. 3.
He shall save us from our Enemies, and put them to shame that hate us. Psalm.
xliv.7.


He shall arise, Psalm. lxviii.1,
and all our Adversaries shall be scattered; they also that hate us, shall flee
before us; -- 2.
Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall we drive them away; Exodus xv.16.
terror and dread shall fall upon them.

Thus shall all our Mourning be turned into Laughter, and our Heaviness into
Joy; and we shall yet sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, when he shall
have given us rest from all our Enemies round about us;

Salvation and Glory, and Power, and Praise, and Thanksgiving, be to him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for Ever and Ever, Amen.

OF Contending Earnestly for the Faith Which was once delivered to The SAINTS.
A SERMON Preached at MERCERS-CHAPEL, January 8. 1687/8.
JUDE iii. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the Common
Salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that you
should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.


IT is generally agreed by Learned Men, that this Epistle was written by St.
Jude upon the same Occasion, and to the same Persons to whom St. Peter had not
long before addressed his Second; whose Thoughts he pursues, and whose very
Words he seems in some places to have transcribed. And the Subject and Design
of both we have here expressed to us in the words of my Text; viz. to exhort
the Christians dispersed abroad among the Jews, neither to sink under those
Persecutions that were brought upon them for their Faith; nor to suffer that
holy Doctrine which had been so fully and purely delivered to them by the
Apostles, to be corrupted by the Errors of those pernicious Heretics, who even
already began to creep in among them.

Great was the danger of these Christians, and great the concern of our Apostle
for them. To persevere constantly in the Faith, at a time when the severest
Trials were made use of to affright them from it; and to preserve it in its
Purity, when so many subtle Heretics made it their whole business, by any
means, to corrupt the Truth of it. And no wonder if St. Jude thought it not
only becoming that Character our Blessed Lord had honored him with in his
Church, to write unto them, but even necessary for him so to do; and to exhort
them, (...), to strive with all their might, and, as our Translation has very
well rendered it, To contend earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints.

For the due prosecution of which words, as they lie before us in the Context,
I shall consider these Four things.

I. What that Faith is, which the Apostle exhorted them to contend for? II. How
they were to contend for it? III. The great reason they had at that time more
especially so to do. IV. By what means he advised them to contend for it; that
so they might secure their Faith in those dangerous times.
I. What that Faith is which the Apostle here exhorted them to contend for?

Now this the Character here given of it in our Text, will clearly show. It Is
the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. That Faith which the Holy
Apostles had once for all instructed them in, and which therefore both they and
all succeeding Ages in the Church were both faithfully to retain, and earnestly
to contend for for ever.

So that here then we have a plain account, what the true Christian Faith we
are to profess, is, and where we are to seek it? It Is not the Faith of this or
that Church or Party; It Is not the Faith of this or that Country or Century.
Let Men and Times make what Changes and Alterations they please in it: The
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, is what we are to contend for, not
for any Inventions or Additions of Men that have since been brought into it.

I shall not need to tell you whither you are to go for this Faith: The Spirit
of God, by providing us a rule of it; and assisting and directing those holy
Men who first preached the Gospel to the Saints that then lived, to send it
down in writing to all the other Disciples that were to follow after to the end
of the World; has sufficiently directed us both whither we are to go for it,
and indeed where it is that we can alone be sure to find it. And however
Interest has made some of late the better to defend their Errors, and to
maintain an usurped Authority over Men's Consciences to pretend to some other
Directions: Yet since it is confessed, that the Holy Scriptures were written
for that very purpose, that they might be the Rule of our Faith; and St. Paul
has expressly told us, 2 Timothy iii.15.
That they are able to make the Man of God wise unto Salvation, and thoroughly
furnished to every good work; we shall have little reason to seek to any other
Rule, till some good Account can be given why this is not sufficient; or by
what Authority it is that they pretend to impose any other of their own
inventing upon us; and who gave them this Authority?

But however, be the Rule of this Faith what it will, that is not my business
at present to dispute. Let it only be resolved, that the Faith it self must be
no other than what was once delivered to the Saints, and then I am sure it will
be our duty not only readily to receive it, but earnestly to contend for it, be
the means of its conveyance what they will.

This is the next thing to be considered by us;

II. How we are to contend for this Faith?

And here if the Question be concerning the manner of the Contention, I have
already observed, that the Original Expression is very emphatical; and implies
a great vigor and earnestness in the doing of it. To teach us with what zeal
we ought to adhere to the Truth, and defend it against all such as would
endeavor either to affright, or to seduce us from it.

Indeed, whosoever shall consider the great value of that Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints; and what our concern is in the preserving of it; will
be forced to confess, that we can never be too earnest in our contending for it.

Truth is in all things so worthy and desirable, that a generous Spirit will
think he can never prize it enough. We see the greatest Men have made it the
whole business of their Lives to pursue it even in the smallest instances; and
have thought their labors worthily rewarded, if with the greatest Application,
and it may be with some danger and loss too, they have but been able to find it
out at the last. Much more certainly ought that Truth, which the Son of God
himself came down from Heaven to discover; and which, had he not revealed it to
us, it would have been impossible for us ever to have come to the knowledge of
it, to be most dear to us, and not upon any account to be forsaken by us.

But when to this we shall add, That these Truths are not matters of mere
Speculation, only to employ the Mind, and exercise the Soul in the
Contemplation of them: That the concern here is not a useless Theoreme; which
whether we believe or not, we are neither at all the worse now, nor shall be
ever the less happy hereafter; but such by our keeping or betraying whereof, we
shall finally be Happy or Miserable for ever: That therefore to give up these
Truths, is to become the vilest Traditors, the Betrayers not only of our
Religion, but of our Souls too, and that to all Eternity; we cannot certainly
but think it to be very much our concern to take the advice of the Apostle, and
earnestly contend for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints.

Such is the necessity of this Contention: And two things there were wherein
St. Jude here exhorted them to the Practice of it, proportionable to the two
great dangers to which I have before said these Christians were then exposed.

For, First; The Christians to whom he wrote, were at this time actually under
a Persecution for their Faith, and by consequence under great Temptations to
Apostatize from it. And this danger was by so much the more to be apprehended,
for that a sort of Heretics were crept in among them, who the better to
preserve themselves from those Evils which Christianity then brought upon all
the faithful Professors of it, had among their other Errors, set up this for
one, That it was lawful in such Trials to dissemble their Faith, and to escape
Persecution for it.

Now in Opposition to this base Cowardice of these Men, we must first interpret
the Contention here spoken of to imply a firmness and resolution of Mind to
undergo any Evils, rather than to deny their Religion: That they should not,
like those vile Heretics, seek by unworthy Compliances to preserve themselves
from danger, and ruin their Souls in the other World, to save their Lives, and
to preserve the little Interests of this.

And the same should be the resolution of every good Christian now. Persecution
ought to be so far from affrighting him from his Faith, that he ought then most
firmly to adhere to it, when he sees others the most violent in opposing it.
What though he should be called to suffer for it? Death ought never to amaze that
Man, who is able to look forward into Heaven beyond it; and there see that
Crown of Glory which these light afflictions that are but for a moment shall
place upon his Head for all Eternity. A true Christian is never greater, than
when he is under the Cross: Nor can any thing be more glorious to the Faithful
Disciple, than to follow his dear Master, not only in Well-doing, but, if the
Will of God be so, in patient Suffering too.

What shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, Romans viii.35,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is
written, -- 36,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter:) Nay, -- 37.
in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved us.

But, Secondly; This was not the only danger they were then likely to run, nor
it may be the greatest. And the hazard of corrupting their Religion, by the
Artifices of those Heretics who were unawares crept in among them, was yet
more to be apprehended than their total Apostatizing from it. And therefore St.
Jude here exhorts them, to contend earnestly for the Faith that was once
delivered to the Saints; i. e. to be very wary and circumspect to maintain it
in that purity in which they had received it, and not suffer any little
Sophistry or Insinuations of their Enemies, to lead them into any Errors
contrary to the truth of it.

And indeed, whosoever shall look into the Annals of the Church, will find this
to have ever been the more fatal danger of the two: And that the Devil has in
all Ages gained more by the secret cunning of his false Teachers, than by the
open violence of his Persecutors. There Is many a Christian who has carriage
enough to Die for his Faith, that yet has not Skill enough to defend it. And
those whose business it is to deceive, never fail to set most upon such as they
think are the least able to do so. And therefore it cannot certainly but be
very advisable in us all, and especially for those who are the most ignorant,
to be very careful of themselves as to this matter: Not to hearken to every
little Pretender that will but undertake to lead them; but if any such offers
himself to them, to draw them away from the right Faith, either absolutely to
reject him, or rather to bring him forth unto the light; to refer him to their
Teachers, who instruct them in the Truth, and who are therefore the fittest to
defend the Interests of it. And so maintain that wise indifference which ought
to be the resolution of every good Man in the search of all, but especially of
divine Truth; neither obstinately to refuse a better Instruction whenever it
shall indeed be offered to him, much less to be cheated out of his Religion by
Noise and Confidence, by high Pretenses, and no Arguments; and so by his
easiness, betray that Faith which our Apostle here calls us so earnestly to
contend for.

And this is a Caution that cannot be unseasonable at any time. But yet some
times there are wherein it is more especially to be recommended to Christians.
And such was that wherein St. Jude wrote this Epistle: Which therefore brings
me to my next Point,

III. Of the reason which the Christians at that time had more especially thus
to contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

I shall not now say any thing of that general Obligation which lies upon all
Christians thus to contend for the Faith, viz. the Eternal Salvation of their
Souls, according as they are careful or not in so doing, though this ought
certainly to have always its weight too with us, both because I have already
said somewhat to this before, and because I am now only to consider the
particular Reasons which those to whom St. Jude here wrote, had at that time so
to do. And those, whethersoever of the two things we consider, which I have
before shown they were herein exhorted to, are such as ought very much to have
engaged their care in this Contention. For,

First, As to the renouncing of their Faith.

They were actually under a Persecution for it. Their Interests, their Ease,
their Inclinations, all solicited them so to do. And as if all this were not
enough, some who called themselves Christians among them, not only encouraged
them by their Example, but even maintain^d it as an Opinion, That to avoid
Persecution, they might lawfully and warrantably dissemble their Belief. And
sure then it was high time for the Apostle to interpose his Exhortation, to
stir them up to contend for that Faith which both their Enemies persecuted, and
their pretended Catholic Brethren so readily renounced. To press them with
such Arguments, as both their present Circumstances, and past Prophecies
offered to him to confirm them in it; and which ought to have been of much
greater weight with them to keep them in the right way, than the scandalous
Examples and Doctrine of their Adversaries to draw them out of it. Now two
Considerations there were, which some suppose the Apostle to have here offered
to them for this purpose.

1. The nearness of their Deliverance; which according to our Savior's
Promises, must now be, as indeed it afterward proved, very nigh at hand.

This is what the learned Dr. Hammond understood to have been signified by that
Phrase of the Text; where the Apostle says, he thought it necessary to write
unto them, (...), Of the common Salvation; i. e. (says See Dr. Hammond's Par.
upon this Verse, and Note on Romans xiii.c.
he) of that special Promise of Christ to preserve and deliver those who should
firmly adhere to him, from that Universal Destruction, which was in a little
time to befall the Jews.

Many were the Denuntiations of our Blessed Lord against the Jews in his
Gospel. The Calamities he foretold were great, and the time of their
accomplishment nigh at hand. That Generation, which then lived, was not to pass
away till all should be fulfilled. But for those among them who should embrace
and keep firm to his Religion, they were to be secured in the midst of this
Desolation. So Mat. x.22. where speaking of those very Persecutions which St.
Jude here refers to, he tells them, But he that endures to the end, See Dr.
Hammond, Mat. x. h. Romans xiii. c.
shall be saved. Shall be saved, not only in another World, though that be
certain too; but by a remarkable deliverance even in this. And accordingly St.
Peter, who wrote much about the same time that St. Jude did, and concerning the
very same things, exemplifies this Deliverance in that remarkable Preservation
of Noah and his Family, when the whole World besides perished in the Deluge, 2
Pet. ii.5. Of righteous Lot and his Children, who were brought by an Angel out
of Sodom, when the wicked Sodomites were destroyed, ver. 6, 7. And then makes
this remarkable Application, ver. 9. The Lord, says he, knows how to deliver
the godly out of temptations.

Now if this be allowed of as the true meaning of this Phrase, then certainly
it could not but be a great engagement to them to continue constant in their
Profession: To consider, that they had but a little while remaining, and their
Deliverance should be accomplished: That, Romans xiii.11.
as St. Paul phrases it, their Salvation was now nearer than when they
believed. Romans xiii.12.
The night was far spent, the day was at hand: And therefore how unworthy,
indeed how weak a thing would it be for them, after all they had hitherto
suffered for the Faith, now finally to apostatize from it, when they were just
ready to be delivered out of all their Dangers.

But this is not all the force of this Argument, St. Jude presses it yet
farther; for that,

2. Such an Apostasy would not only not secure them, but would most certainly
involve them in that very Destruction which they sought to escape by it.

And of this the Examples which our Apostle subjoins, are an evident Proof; and
that Destruction which accordingly did involve the Complying Heretics with the
Unbelieving Jews, became a terrible Application. Our Blessed Lord, who provided
for the Security of the Constant Christians, leaving the rest, as he had
declared he would, to lose their Souls, or Lives, that were so politic for the
saving or preserving of them; and to be a standing Caution to all succeeding
Ages, how unworthy, indeed how dangerous a thing it is for Men to purchase
their Lives at the price of their Consciences; and to betray their Souls to
Eternl Damnation in another World, to secure the little Interests and
Advantages of this.

Such reason therefore had these Christians upon all these Accounts, to contend
earnestly for the Faith; i. e. not to renounce it, but to continue firm and
constant in the Profession of it. Nor were their Engagement, Secondly, any less,

Secondly, To contend for it; as it implies a Zeal for the preserving the
Primitive Purity of it.

And indeed it is this seems to have been the more especial design of St. Jude
in this Caution. For having in our Text exhorted them earnestly to contend for
the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints; he immediately subjoyns this
Reason, ver. 4. That there were certain men crept in among them, ungodly men,
who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness, and would otherwise be likely
enough to pervert them from it.

Now this could not but be a very great Obligation upon them to look to
themselves, and stand fast in the Truth which they had received, to be thus
expressly forewarned of their danger; and admonished by the Apostle what Men
there were crept in among them, that would make it their whole endeavor to
corrupt their Purity. But especially if we consider the Character which the
Holy Apostles every where given of them; and which will yet more evidently show
how likely they would be, without very great care, to deceive them. For,

1 st. As our Apostle tells us, ver. 16. They were great Pretenders; they spoke
mighty things in their own Commendation, as if they alone had not only all
Truth, but all Knowledge too on their sides; and the rest of Mankind were but
as Beasts in comparison of them. Now this oftentime makes a huge impression
upon weak Minds, who do not sufficiently consider how suspicious a thing it is
for Men to be too forward in their own Commendation; and that the best and
wisest Men are commonly those, who make the least noise of their Goodness, and
their Knowledge.

2 dly. They were very subtle and diligent in propagating their Heresy. They
durst not attack those whom they knew to be very firm, or well instructed in
the Faith. But they crept slily and secretly into Men's Houses, and, as the
Devil their Master before them, they set commonly upon the weaker Sex; 2 Timothy
iii.6.
leading captive silly Women, says St. Paul, and those too, for the most part,
laden with diverse lusts. Such for whom Christianity was too severe and rigid an
Institution, they could not find any great hopes of living up to, or
consequently of being saved by the Rules of that; and they were therefore glad
to hear of some more easy, and more agreeable way to Happiness.

3 dly, And such, Thirdly, these Heretics failed not to propose to them. Their
Religion consisted chiefly in a set of incomprehensible Phrases and Notions;
and if they were but Admirers of Simon and his Helena, it was for the rest no
great matter how little Morality they observed. If it were dangerous to profess
Christianity, they might freely deny it; and judaize, rather than suffer
Persecution. If their Lusts disturbed them, it was natural, and therefore
lawful to gratify them: and it was a great mistake to think that they ought
not to do so. The truth is, I am ashamed to repeat in this place, what
Ecclesiastical Writers have delivered down to us concerning them: And I shall
content my self to refer you only to this short Epistle, Ver. 4, 8, ^^, 16, 18,
19.
for the Character both of them and their Religion. For I am much mistaken if
this alone will not suffice to show what just cause our Apostle had to fear
their prevailing: and that such an easy Practice, supported by such high
Pretenses, might be but too apt to gain over Proselytes to its Party.

Let us see therefore in the last place,

4 thly, By what means it was that St. Jude here exhorted the yet Orthodox
Christians to contend for their Faith, and secure themselves in those dangerous
Times.

And those are principally these five: 1. By a close Adherence to that Doctrine
which had been delivered to them. 2. By taking heed of those that would seduce
them from it. 3. By building themselves on their holy Faith; i. e. by adding
Innocence of Life to the Purity of their Faith. 4. By fervent Prayer to God for
his Assistance. And, 5. By a serious consideration of their future state.


These are the means which St. Jude here exhorts them to make use of to secure
their Faith; and they are indeed such as if duly observed, will not fail to
have a prosperous Effect to the end for which they are proposed.

1 st. The First way to contend earnestly for the Faith, is, To keep close to
that holy Doctrine which we have received.

This was what the Apostle in our Text advised them to do; or rather, not
barely to keep close to it, but, as the Phrase here is, to contend earnestly
for it. And that was then a most undoubted Security, when the Apostles
themselves taught them their Religion; and so their Faith came to them without
all dispute, pure and uncorrupted. And however we do not now pretend that Men
should give up themselves so entirely to our Conduct, as to stop their Ears to
whatever can be said against us: yet since we profess no other Faith than that
which was once delivered unto the Saints; since the Rule by which we go, cannot
be denied to contain that Faith, and we desire not to be believed by you, any
farther than what we teach is found to be agreeable to that Rule: I think we
may very reasonably thus far at least make the Application even now, That you
ought not lightly to forsake a Faith which is built upon such a Foundation, I
am sure not for such a one as is built upon any other. And though we are so far
from encouraging a blind Obstinacy in any one, that, on the contrary, we had
rather all Men would search and see, whether what we profess, be not indeed
that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints: yet this deference we think
every one ought to pay to that Church which first made him Christian, and to
those Guides whom God's Providence has set over him to build him up in the
Faith; as not lightly to forsake either them or their Doctrine, but to presume
for the Truth of what they already profess, till they can be very clearly and
evidently convinced of the contrary. But,

2 dly, The next means proposed, whereby they were to contend for the Faith,
was, By taking heed of those who would have seduced them from it.

This is the general design of this whole Epistle, and I have before shown what
great need there was of such a Caution. Now by taking heed of Seducers, I do
not mean to imply, that Men should be so obstinately wary, as not to hearken to
any thing that one of a contrary Persuasion is able to say either for his own
Opinions, or against ours: For that were to lead Men by Faction, not Reason.
But I mean these Two things: First, That we should not have our Ears so open,
as to hearken to every thing that any one shall think fit to offer to disquiet
our Minds, and disturb our Consciences, without any just occasion for it: Nay,
it may be, upon the account of such things, wherein we are certainly and
evidently convinced, that we are in the right. Much less, that we should seek
occasion of Disputes, and love to be perpetually raising Difficulties against
our Religion, lest we should at last provoke God to give us over to Delusion,
and punish our needless exposing our selves to Temptation, by suffering us to
be overcome by it. Nor, Secondly, So far comply with such Persons, as to give
our selves up to their Seduction, and become easy and willing to be deceived
by them.

It is certainly a great weakness in any Man to go to his Enemy for the
Character of his Religion. To enquire concerning the Truth, of those who are
the professed Opposers of it. If Men have Doubts, or if their Curiosity must be
gratified in starting of needless Scruples, and one part only be consulted,
both Charity and Duty, and I had almost said even common Civility too, might
satisfy them, that they ought to be their Instructors, whom God has set over
them to be their Guides in Holy things, rather than any others.

But if this be thought too great a Partiality, to hear one side only, and not
enquire at all of the other; yet, at least if our Enemies may be admitted, our
own Guides sure ought not to be excluded, but to be allowed at least to be as
worthy our regard, as their Adversaries. Nor can I think any otherwise, than
that he is minded to be seduced, who instead of taking heed of Heretics, seeks
only to them; instead of avoiding them, avoids those from whom, if not alone,
yet I am sure principally, he ought to fortify himself against them.

3 dly, The next means proposed for their contending for the Faith, was, By
Innocence and Holiness of Life.

This St. Jude calls, a Building up our selves upon our most holy Faith, ver.
20. And again, a keeping of our selves in the love of God, ver. 21. And an
excellent means no doubt it is, to preserve the Purity of our Faith, and to
keep our selves from being seduced from it.

I shall not need to tell you how powerful a motive the want of Piety has been
to most of those Errors that have infested the Church Whilst Men, to gratify
their Passions, have corrupted their Faith; and Pride and Discontent, Interest
and Ambition, Looseness and Indulgence, more than want of Knowledge, have made
Men Heretics.

And were we now to enquire, what the true cause is that keeps up these
Divisions in the Church at this day; why Men should be so obstinate in Errors
so plainly contrary to the very Nature of Christianity, and, I had almost said,
to the common Sense and Reason of Mankind, that it even poses our Charity to
think they do not themselves know them to be so: I fear the best Account we
should be able to give of this matter, would be, That Interest and Prejudice
blind their Eyes; and that their Errors are as Useful and Beneficial, as they
are otherwise Gross and Unreasonable.

But would Men indeed lay aside all Humane Considerations, as in things wherein
Eternity is at stake, they ought to do: Would they with Charity and Humility
seek the Truth, and be as willing to discover their own, as they are but too
forward to censure other Men's faults: In plain terms, would they be Christians
indeed, seek nothing but the Glory of God, the Peace and Unity of his Church,
and the Salvation of their own Souls; I cannot but think that most of our
Controversies would presently vanish, and we should yet recover that Truth
which, I fear, some Men have too long detained in Unrighteousness, and been
deprived of by their own fault.

But especially would they to this Honesty and Integrity, add,

4 thly, The Apostle's next Direction, Of fervent Prayer to God for his
Assistance.

For certainly the Truth and Purity of Religion, is so great a Good, and so
pleasing and acceptable to God Almighty to be implored of him, that a pious and
upright Man, earnestly praying, and heartily seeking after it, shall hardly be
denied the Happiness of being constant to the Faith, if he be already in the
right way; or of being brought to it, if he is not.

He who has promised the true Votary, not to refuse him in any thing that is
necessary or but expedient for him, if he asks as he ought to do; will never
fail to answer him in a matter of such moment. And if he does not neglect
himself while he prays to God, but uses such Care and Caution as St. Jude here
directs us to do for our Security, he need not be afraid, though he were
encompassed with Seducers on every side; but be confident, that he shall either
still go on in the right way, or obtain God's Pardon, if after all this he
should chance to be mistaken in it.

There is yet one means more whereby St. Jude exhorts the Christians, earnestly
to contend for their Faith. And that is,

5 thly, By a serious Consideration of their future state.

Keep your selves (says he) in the love of God, looking for the Mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, unto Eternal Life, ver. 21. And indeed it cannot be doubted
but that this great Consideration, which so highly influences all the other
parts of a Christian Life, must here also prove of a singular advantage to keep
us firm and steadfast in our Faith. This will make us diligent in all the rest;
will awaken our Care, will perfect our Piety, and inflame our Devotion. By this
we shall be secure, that no worldly Considerations shall be able to prevail
upon us, to forsake our Religion. We shall neither be moved for any Terrors to
renounce it, nor be cajolled by any Interests or Persuasions to give it up. But
we shall resolve, as we ought, to enquire diligently into the Grounds of our
Profession, to judge impartially, and steadfastly follow what we are persuaded
to be the right Faith; that so we may be able to give a comfortable Account of
our selves to God, when we shall appear at his Tribunal. No matter how severely
we may be censured by Men for our so doing. We know that Truth very often meets
with, and makes Enemies to the best Men. Christianity it self was once every
where spoken against, and St. Paul arraigned as a Heretic. But whilst with
that Apostle we know wherefore we believe, we shall be so far from being afraid
of their Censures, or ashamed of our Profession, that should we for the sake of
Christ, as he was, be brought even before the Tribunals of our Enemies, we
shall be able with assurance to answer for our selves as he did; That after the
way which they call Heresy, Act. xxiv.14.
so worship we the God of our Fathers, believing all things that are written in
the Law and the Prophets. Such a power will this great Consideration of Eternal
Life have over us, to secure us in our Religion, that it will actuate all the
other means that have before been offered to establish our Faith, and it self
become a new defense, and such as all the Sophistry and Malice of our Enemies
shall not be able ever to overcome.

And thus have I given you as full an Account as the time would permit of the
several things I proposed to consider: And however I have not so closely
confined my Reflections to the particular concern of those Christians to whom
St. Jude wrote, as not to have observed somewhat in general the use that all
others ought to make of this Caution; yet I will now in the close crave leave
to offer two or three Reflections more, which may serve to show our own more
immediate concern in it.

And, First; Let us from hence learn with what Zeal and Constancy we ought to
contend for our Religion; which I will be bold to say, does, if any in the
whole World, the best deserve the Character of the Text, of being the Faith
that was once delivered to the Saints, and that without mixture of any thing
corruptive of, or contrary thereunto.

We pretend not to impose any thing either upon your Belief or Practice, but
what the Rule of this Faith, the Holy Scriptures themselves prescribe, or at
least allow us to do. We give no other Interpretation of Scripture, than what
is either so apparently the meaning of it, that no impartial Person can doubt
of it; or else has been so universally received by the best and purest
Antiquity, and is otherwise so agreeable with the rest of our Faith, that there
can be no just cause to suspect it. The Articles of our Creed, are the same
now, which the Church has received and professed from the beginning; and so
evidently founded on the Authority of God's Word, that they neither can nor do
admit of any Dispute among Christians. Those who the most pretend us to be
defective in our Faith, yet dare not say we are erroneous in what we do
profess: They acknowledge that what we believe is right, only they think we do
not believe all that we ought, because not all that they would have us, to do.

And certainly then such a Faith as this cannot but deserve to be earnestly
contended for, as being without all Controversy, truly that Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints.

And that so much the rather, Secondly, At this time, when so many Seducers,
for I shall spare the rest of St. Jude's Character, ver. 4. are crept in among
us; and make it their great Endeavor, by any means, to draw us away from it. I
shall not repeat either the manner how I have shown we ought to contend for our
Faith against them, or the Directions which from the Apostle I have before
offered for the doing of it. Let us only resolve on that one most just and
reasonable Method, never to leave our own Faith, till we can be clearly and
evidently convinced, that we have a better offered to us in the stead of it;
and then we shall either free our selves altogether from the Attacks of our
Adversaries, who seldom care to meddle with honest and understanding Men; or I
am sure we shall not run any great Hazard by their Attempts.

But above all, Thirdly; Whilst we thus contend for the Faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, let us be Followers of their Lives, as well as of
their Doctrine. This is that which must save us, when all our Disputes will
otherwise stand us in no stead. To believe aright, will do us but small
service, if we do not live so too. And I am persuaded, would we but be
prevailed with to do this as we ought, it would not only most effectually
secure us in the Truth, but be the most likely means in the World to draw over
others to it.

And indeed what pity is it, that a Chureh, which has in all other respects so
many admirable Advantages above its Adversaries, that it is defective in no
other mark of being truly Primitive, and even in this is less defective than
others, should not be blessed with this too? Consider, I beseech you, that we
rely upon none of those broken Reeds which others lay so much stress upon, to
make you happy in another Life, though you are not upright and holy in this.

If there be then any concern for your own or your Church's honor; if any
value for your Immortal Souls; if you desire the Blessing of God now, and the
benefit of his Promises in the World to come; if these Motives, which one would
think should be of all others the most considerable, may be allowed to have any
influence at all upon you; think then upon these things, and fulfill ye our Joy
in the practice of that Piety whereunto ye are called. Be as Good, as ye are
Orthodox; as free from all Corruption in your Manners, as God be thanked you
are from Error in your Belief: Accomplish that great Work, which Heaven seems
at last to have begun among us; And as we are now apparently more concerned for
our Religion, than we have perhaps any of us heretofore been; so let us go on
in well-doing more and more. Let us grow in Grace, and then we shall also grow
in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. iii.18. Ephesians.
iv.13.
till finally we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of
the Son of God, to a perfect Man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ.

OF THE Nature and End OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE Lord's Supper, A SERMON
Preached at St. PAVL's COVENT GARDEN, December. 30. 1688.
1 COR. xi.24. This do in Remembrance of Me.


THese Words are part of that Solemn Form in which our Blessed Savior first
celebrated the Holy Sacrament of his Body and Blood; an^ established it as a
sacred Institution, to be continued for ever in his Church, in remembrance of
that Death and Passion which he was just then about to undergo for it.

Whether our Apostle recounted the History of this great Institution, according
to what some of those who were present at the first Celebration of it, had
delivered it unto him; or whether, as seems most probable, he had received the
manner of it by some extraordinary Revelation from our Savior Christ himself:
This is plain, Non est meum quod vobis tradidi, sed a Domino illud accepi:
sicut ipse alibi dicit, Non ab hominibus sed a Deo omnia didicisse. Hieron. in
ver. 23. -- See Gal. i.1, 12.
that what he here reports to them of this matter, was no idle Story, no vain
Account of his own Invention, but a true and exact Relation of what the Blessed
Jesus then did, when in the same night in which he was betrayed, he took Bread,
and when he had given thanks, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying,
Take, Eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, This do in Remembrance of
Me.

So that our Text then you see contains a positive Command of our Savior
Christ himself, of something which he ordered his Apostles to do with reference
to this Holy Sacrament: And my business at this time shall be to consider what
that was, and how far we at this day are to look upon our selves to be
concerned in it. I shall reduce what I have to offer upon this occasion, to
these two general Considerations:

I. Of the false Construction and Application which those of the Church of Rome
make of these words.

Which having done, so far as may be necessary to the following Discourse, I
will then,

II. Show what indeed it was that our Blessed Savior here commanded his
Apostles, and in them, All of us to Do, in Remembrance of Him.

And by that time I have clearly examined these Two Points, I presume I shall
in some measure have laid open the whole Nature and Design of this Holy
Sacrament; and in that have answered the End of these Solemn and Extraordinary
Assemblies.

And first I am to consider,

I. That false Construction and Application which those of the Church of Rome
make of these words.

It is the Opinion of those of the other Communion, That our Savior Christ
here spoke to his Apostles, not as the Representatives of the whole Body of the
Church, Illud Christi, Hoc facite, non est dictum, nisi Apostolis, qui to
mandato Ordinati sunt primi Sacerdotes Novi Testamenti. Bellarm. de Euch. l. 4.
c. 16.. Haec autem.

Illud Hoc facite, non significat solum Manducate and Bibite; quod convenit
omnibus Christianis, sed significat, Consecrate, Sumite and aliis Distribuite
ut Me facere vidistis. Ista autem tria non possunt convenire omnibus, Ergo
illud Mandalum non est datum omnibus, sed solum sacerdotibus. ibid.


but as those whom he was now about to consecrate to the peculiar Office of the
Ministry in it: And therefore that commanding these, To Do This, He did at once
both command them to continue this Holy Sacrament for ever in his Church, and
also at the same time invest them with a Power, to Consecrate, and Take, and
Distribute it to others, as he had done to them.

To which if we did add their other Notion of this Sacrament, viz. that in the
Celebration of it, there is Council Trid. Sess. xxii. Can. 1
a true and proper Offering made for the Sins and Satisfactions both of the
Dead and the Living, we shall then find the full import of our Text, according
to their sense, to be this; DO THIS, that is, Receive the power which I hereby
give you of consecrating, i. e. Sess. xiii. Can. 1, 4.
of converting these Elements of Bread and Wine, into the true and proper
Substance of my Body and Blood; and having so done, Sess. xxii. Can. 2
Offer them up to my Father as a true and real propitiatory Sacrifice, Ibid.
Can. 3.
for the Sins and Satisfactions, for the Punishments and all other the
Necessities of all my faithful Disciples, whether they be alive or dead;
whether they be yet on Earth, or gone to Purgatory.

Such is the Account which those of the Church of Rome give us of these words:
And in this they are so very confident, that they not only Council. Trid. Sess.
xxii. cap. 1. Christus Corpus and Sanguinem suum sub speciebus Panis and Vini
Deo Patri obtulit: ac sub earundem rerum Symbolis, Apostolis quos nunc Novi
Testamenti Sacerdotes constituebat, ut sumerent tradidit: and Eisdem, Eorumque
in Sacerdotio successoribus ut offerrent praecepit, per haec verba, Hoc facite
in meam commemorationem. And Can. 2. Siquis dixerit illis verbis, Hoc facite,
etc. Christum non instituisse Apostolos Sacerdotes, aut non Ordinasse ut ipsi
aliique Sacerdotes offerrent Corpus and Sanguinem suam, Anathema sit.
Anathematize all those who shall say either that Christ in this Command did
not institute his Apostles, Priests; or that he did not Command, that they, and
other Priests, should in like manner offer up his Body and Blood; but have also
made it the very Form of Ordaining Priests at this day in their Church, having
delivered the Patin and Chalice into their hands, to bid them, See Catech. ad
Paroch. par. 2. de Ord. Sacram. n. 50.. tertio.
Receive Power to offer Sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Mass for the Living
and for the Dead.

I shall need say very little to show the falseness of this Interpretation,
which many of their own Doctors, notwithstanding all their Definitions
concerning it, yet are not themselves very well satisfied withal: They freely
allow, that this Command of our Savior, when he bids them Do this, cannot be
so restrained to his own Act of Consecrating the Holy Eucharist, as not to have
an equal respect to the Peoples Act of Receiving it: And by consequence, that
all that can hence be gathered, is, that our Savior has hereby obliged his
Church to the continuance of this great Memorial of his Death, both by the
Consecrating and Distributing of the Priests; and by the Receiving, and Eating,
and Drinking of the People; and which is no other Account than we our selves
give of the Words before us.

It Is from hence that Manifestum est quod Homo tenetur hoc Sacramentum sumere
non solum ex statuto Ecclesiae, sed ex mandato Domini, dicentis, Hoc facite in
meam commemorationem. Aquin. part. 3. Qu. 80. Art. 11. id Corp.
Aquinas concludes, that all Christians are obliged, as far as they have
opportunity, to communicate in this Holy Sacrament, not only in Obedience to
the Commands of the Church, but as a thing which our Savior Christ himself
required, when he said in our Text, This do in Remembrance of Me.

But Estius is more express: He tells us, that by Do this, our Savior plainly
intended the whole Action both of his Consecrating and Distributing, and of
their Receiving these sacred Elements. As if he had said, Estins in Sent. l. 4.
did. 12.. 11. page 165. l.A.B. Where having shown that facere cannot be
interpreted consecrare; he adds, Non enim absolute dicitur Facite, sed Hoc
facite, i. e. Id quod a Me and a Vobis nunc fit aut factum est, deinceps vos
and vestri Successores, facite in Mei memori^m. Et infra. ^aulus, 1 Cor. 11.
Illud facere etiam ad Plebem refert Edentem and Bibentem de hoc Sacramento, etc.
What you have seen now done by me and you, that do you and your Successors
henceforth in Remembrance of Me. And that this is clearly the meaning, he shows
from the Context of St. Paul in the following Verses, where repeating the very
same Command, after the Distribution of the Cup, that he had mentioned in my
Text upon the delivery of the Bread, he expresses himself in this plain manner,
This do ye (says he) as often, not as ye shall Consecrate or Offer, but as ye
shall drink it in Remembrance of Me. And then immediately subjoins a Reason,
which clearly refers to the Peoples Eating and Drinking, and not to the
Priest's offering any pretended Sacrifice in this Celebration: For as often as
ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he
come; that is, ye do, by this Action of yours, fulfill the Command before us, ye
set forth the Memory of Christ's Death and Passion, and do this in Remembrance
of Him.

And even De Euch. l. 4. c. 16.. Haec autem.
Bellarmin himself, though he supposes these words to have been spoke in a
peculiar manner to the Apostles, as those who were hereby to be consecrated to
the Priestly Office; yet cannot but own, that they must refer as well to the
Action of their Ibid. l. 4. c. 25.. Videtur tamen. Where he gives this
Paraphrase of our Text: Id quod nunc agimus, Ego dum consecro and po^rigo, and
vos dum accipitis and comeditis frequentate deinceps usque ad mundi
consummationem.
Eating, as to those of our Savior's Blessing and Distributing the Holy
Elements; Ibid. Paulus autem resert potissimum illa Verba ad actionem
Discipulorum, id quod ex ver. 26. colligitur. Et planum fieri potest ex
instituto and proposito B. Pauli, etc. q. v.
Nay, he says yet more, that it is most agreeable both to the Context of St.
Paul, and to his Design of repeating the History of this Institution, to apply
them rather to the Disciples action of Eating and Drinking, than to our
Savior's of Consecrating and Offering; the Error of the Corinthians, which he
designed to correct, consisting not in their Consecrating, but in their
Receiving of the Holy Eucharist, in that they did not do it with that due
reverence which they ought to do. Though how to reconcile this not only with the
Opinion of his Church before mentioned, but even with his own Interpretation of
Aquinas's Argument from this place, to prove the necessity of all Men's
Receiving this Holy Sacrament where it may conveniently be had; viz. that
Bellarm. ib. c 16 Dicet aliquis. His words are; Neque obstat quod S. Thomas
colligit ex hoc loco esse de jure divino ut omnes aliquando sumant
Eucharistiam; ubi videtur intellexisse illud Hoc facite dictum esse Omnibus;
Nam S. Thomas non vult colligi immediate sed mediate. Quia enim Dominus jubet
Apostolis ut consecrent, sumant, and distribuant, consequenter jubet Aliis ut
accipiant de manu sacerdotum distribuentium.
St. Thomas did did not intend to collect this immediately from this Command,
as if it had been given to All; but only by consequence, as our Lord must be
understood to have commanded the People to Receive, what he commanded the
Priests to Consecrate and Distribute, I cannot easily understand.

The truth is, both the Opinion of our Savior's making his Apostles Priests by
these words, and the Paraphrase which they now give of them in order thereunto,
are a mere Invention of these later Ages, sought out to support that other
great Corruption of this Holy Institution, the Communicating of the Laity only
in One Kind. When being pressed both with the Example of our Blessed Lord in
his Institution of this Holy Sacrament, who gave the Cup as well as Bread to
his Disciples; and with his positive Command, to do that to Others which
Himself had done to Them. The nice Masters of the Schools, Men who never wanted
a subtilty to elude what they could not otherwise fairly answer, first found
out this admirable Secret, unknown to the Church for above a Thousand Years
before; viz. That our Savior here Consecrating the Holy Eucharist, and giving
a Command to his Apostles to Do likewise, did invest them thereby in their
Priestly Office, and so intitule them to a Right of Receiving the Cup from him,
which neither they therefore had any Right to before, nor have the People by
consequence any more Right to at this very day.

But however, such an Evasion as this might well enough become the
School-Errantry, and serve to amuze a barbarous Age wherein it was first
invented; yet was it certainly too great a presumption in the Council of Trent,
in such inquisitive Times as these, to impose it upon Men's Consciences as an
Article of Faith; and to think, by the vain Terror of an ungrounded Anathema,
to secure it against all Opposition. For not to insist,

First, On the many gross Absurdities, and even blasphemous Consequences of the
very Doctrine of the Mass it self, That there should be a true and proper
Sacrifice, and yet nothing truly and properly sacrificed: A Propitiatory
Offering, and yet no Propitiation made by it: That Christ was but once offered
for our Sins, and yet that he should be offered again ten thousand times every
day: That by that One offering of Himself, he should have perfected for Ever
them that are sanctified; and yet that those that are sanctified should not be
perfected without many of these New-Mass-Offerings made for them. To say
nothing,

Secondly, Of the inconsistency there is in the very Supposition, That our
Savior Christ should ordain Priests of the New Covenant in his Church, before
he had yet so much as sealed that Covenant by his Death, or established his
Church. To pass by,

Thirdly, That we have another plain and evident Account, both when, and after
what manner, and with what words our Blessed Savior did ordain his Apostles to
the Ministry of his Church, namely, in the Twentieth Chapter of St. John; where
we are told how, after his Resurrection, he thus gave them their Mission, ver.
21, 22, 23. Peace be unto you; as my Father has sent me, even so send I you:
And then he breathed upon them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose soever sins ye retain, they
are retained: And which are at this day owned by the Catech. Conc. Trid. de
Ord. Sacr. n. 5.. 4. Manibus capiti (sc. ordinandi in sacerdotem) ejus
impositis, Accipe, inquit, Spiritum Sanctum, etc. Eique Coelestem illam quam
Dominus Discipulis suis dedit peccata retinendi ac remittendi potestatem
tribuit. And again, De Sacr. Poenit. n. 71. Il. lustr vero hujus Ministerii
Testimonium praebent illa Domini Verba apud S. Joann. Quorum remiseritis, etc.
neque enim omnibus, sed Apostolis tantum haec dicta fuisse constat, quibus in
hac functione sacerdotes succedunt.
Church of Rome, as well as by us, for one Essential part of the Priestly
Mission, and accordingly made use of by them in their Ordination: So that
either this Sacrament may be reiterated, or the Character divided, and one part
conferred at one time, the other at another; all which is contrary to their own
Principles; or else the Apostles were not ordained Priests when they received
the Holy Eucharist, but when our Savior here breathed upon them, and both by
his Action and his Words plainly expressed his Mission of them.

I say, not to insist on any of these things, either we must look upon these
words to relate to the whole Church, to the People as well as to the Priests;
and then to be sure they cannot have either the Effect or Signification that
they herein attribute unto them; or else it will remain, that there is no
Divine Command at all entituling the People to any Right to this Holy
Sacrament: For if our Savior spoke to his Apostles as Priests, if he not only
took the Bread and the Cup and consecrated them as a Priest himself, but also
distributed them to the Apostles as Priests, and bad them, Take, Eat and Drink
as Priests; then are not the People, no not by Cardinal Bellarmin's
consequence, at all concerned in any part of this Institution, which the
Priests only, by virtue of this Command, are obliged to continue, and
consecrate, offer, give, receive, all by themselves, and to one another, as
Christ and his Apostles here are supposed, without the rest of the Disciples,
and as Priests, to have done.

To pass by therefore this Interpretation, both so lately invented, and so
weakly established; set up to support that bold attempt of depriving the People
of one half of the Communion, and that upon such Principles as in the natural
consequence of them rob them of both; I go on to the other Point I have
proposed, and shall now take leave somewhat more largely to insist upon; Viz.

II. To show, what indeed it was that our Savior here commanded his Apostles,
and in them all of us, to do in Remembrance of Him.

And to this end it will be necessary that we distinctly to consider these Two
things: First, What we are to understand by the Phrase, Do this? Secondly, What
it is to Do this in Remembrance of Christ? First, What we are to understand by
the Phrase, Do this?


I answer; That if we take these words as they lie before us in the first and
most obvious Form of a Command, they will then imply a Commission hereby given
to the Apostles, and in them to the whole Church, to continue this Holy
Sacrament by an Ordinance for ever, as a Solemn Memorial of that Death and
Passion which he was now about to undergo for us.

When God was pleased, by a wonderful Deliverance, to bring up the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egypt, we read in the Twelfth Chapter of Exodus, That
the same Night in which he did it, he commanded them to kill a Lamb, and eat it
after a solemn manner, with bitter herbs, and unleavened-bread; and to continue
every Year, by a constant repetition of that Sacred Ceremony, the Memory of
that Deliverance which he had wrought for them.

In like manner our Savior Christ, being now to fulfill that Redemption,
w^ereof the other was but a Type and Representation, takes care for a Solemn
Memorial to be continued of it in all Ages of his Church to the End of the
World. He institutes another and better Supper; and the Observation whereof
should not only be the Commemoration of his Delivering us, but to the worthy
Partaker of it, the application also of all the Benefits of it. He takes Bread,
blesses it, and breaks it; He takes the Cup, and blesses it, and distributes
both to his Disciples; and then in the words of the Text, bids them also do the
same in Remembrance of Him: That as the Jewish Church had by their Paschal
Feast hitherto kept up the Memory of God's once delivering their Fathers from
the destroying Angel in the Land of Egypt; so should we from henceforth by this
Feast of Eucharist continue the remembrance of that infinitely greater and
better Redemption which he was just now about to purchase by his own Death upon
the Cross for us.

And this is no doubt the first and most proper design of these words. But now,
Secondly, If we consider them not only as a Command, but as they are, a
Direction, to inform his Apostles first, and then us, how we should celebrate
this Holy Sacrament; they will then add thus much to our former Account,
namely, that we have here not only in general a Command to continue the Memory
of the Death of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, but moreover an Instruction
also, after what manner we are to do it.

That as our Savior Christ here took the Bread, blessed it, and brake it, and
gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, Eat, this is my Body which was given
for you: As he took the Cup, blessed it, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
All of this; so should those who now minister in Holy Things, when they stand
at the Altar, and set forth the Death of Christ in this Sacred Memorial of it,
after his Example, and in Obedience to his Command, in like manner take, and
bless, and distribute these Sacred Elements to all those who partake with them
in this Sacrament.

* As the Apostles received first the Bread, then the Cup too at his Hands; so
should all they who supply the place of the Apostles at our Tables, receive
both the one and the other of these after their Example.

* And whosoever he be that celebrates this Holy Feast in any other manner than
the Blessed Jesus did, and has given us a Command to do it, he therein both
departs from the Example of our Savior, and violates the design of his
Precept, who not only in that particular manner, as so many of the Holy Penmen
have set forth to us, established this Sacrament Himself, but in the words of
my Text, has expressly commanded us to continue it for ever in the same manner
in which he established it, Do this in Remembrance of Me.

But here therefore let me not be mis-understood: For when I say that our
Savior Christ in my Text commanding his Apostles to do this in Remembrance of
him, did not only in general command them to perpetuate the Memory of his Death
by this Holy Ordinance for ever, but did moreover direct them after what Manner
they should do it: I do not mean to signify thereby, that we ought to look
upon our selves to be so tied up to the Example of Christ, as not to be at
liberty to depart in any the least Circumstances from that first Celebration of
it: For then we must never administer nor receive this Holy Sacrament but after
Supper, in a private Chamber, or upper Room, to Men only, and not to Women, and
those just twelve, neither more nor less, and lying along with our Heads in one
another Bosoms, as the Apostles now did, and which I suppose no Christian, of
whatsoever Church or Persuasion he be, does at all think himself obliged to do.

But my meaning herein is this; That in those things wherein the Nature of this
Holy Sacrament consists, and which the Holy Scriptures have recounted to us on
purpose to direct us in the Celebration of it; in those we are not to depart
from our Savior's Institution, nor to presume to set up our own Innovations,
as the Council of Constance has most presumptuously done in opposition to, and
even in defiance of our Blessed Lord's Appointment.

To receive the Holy Sacrament, in this or that posture, with such or such
particular Ceremonies, these are things wholly foreign to the Nature and Design
of this Blessed Sacrament, and therefore such as may in different places and
Ages be different. And every Christian ought to comply with what is used and
prescribed in that Church with which he communicates.

But for those things in which the very Nature of this Holy Sacrament is
concerned; for such parts as constitute the integrity of it, and serve the more
lively to set it off as a memorial of the Death and Passion of Christ, and
which therefore we must look upon our Lord and Savior to have sealed with his
express Command, Do this; In these, I say, we are to keep close both to the
Example of our Savior, and to the Command of the Text; and when he has
distinctly instituted this Holy Supper in Two Kinds, not dare to command Men,
under the pain of an Anathema, to believe that One alone is sufficient.

And this may suffice for the Explication of the former part of my Text, What
it is we are to understand by that Phrase of my Text, Do this. I go on,
Secondly, to enquire,

Secondly, What it is to do this in Remembrance of Christ.

It is, I think, agreed on all hands, That the Design of our Savior in this
Command, was to set forth the great End of his Instituting this Holy Sacrament;
viz. That it was to keep up in our own Minds, and set forth to others, a solemn
and lively Remembrance of his dying for us, and of the great Benefits and
Advantages that accrue to us thereby. And however it be pretty hard to
reconcile this plain Design of this Institution, with what those of the other
Communion now make to be the main business of it; namely, to be a true and
proper Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the Living, and of the Dead; in
nothing differing from that upon the Cross, but only in the manner of the
Oblation: A remembrance being ever of things absent from, not present with us;
and the same Sacrifice very improperly said to be a Type or Memorial of it
self; yet so clearly is this design of this Holy Sacrament here declared to be
for the remembrance of Christ's Death and Passion, that they have chosen rather
to encounter all these Absurdities, than to adventure to deny what our Savior
has so very plainly delivered as the End of this Institution.

But though it is not therefore to be doubted, but that the Intention of our
Blessed Lord in this Command, was to oblige us, by such a Solemn Ceremony as
this, to continue the Memory of his Death; yet we are not therefore to think,
that all we have to do when we come to the Holy Table, and attend on this Great
Memorial, is simply to remember or call to mind the Sufferings of our Savior.
No, this is not sufficient to answer either the meaning of this Command, or the
design of this Institution. The word in the Original, which we here render
Remembrance, is very emphatical, and imports not a bare calling to mind, but a
renewed Commemoration. It regards the Affections of the Heart, as well as the
Action of the Mind. In a word, it denotes not so much a private Remembrance, as
a public and solemn Commemoration; when in our Apostle's Phrase, ver. 26. we
do (...), annunciate and show forth to others, at the same time, that we thus
call to mind our selves, the Lord's Death; and that with all those pious
motions and resentments that befit so excellent and so advantageous a
Remembrance.

To know therefore what it is that our Savior here requires of us, when he
bids us to do this in Remembrance of Him, two things will be necessary to be
considered by us: First, What it is that we are to remember or show forth, when
we come to this Holy Sacrament? Secondly, In what manner, and with what Motions
and Affections we are to do it?


And, First, let us examine,

What it is that we are to remember or show forth, when we come to this Holy
Sacrament?

Now this in general St. Paul here tells us is his Death, ver. 26. that is,
that bitter Death and Passion which he was just then about to undergo for our
sakes, when he established this Solemn Memorial of it. For (says he) as often
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the LORD 's Death
till his coming.

But because a bare Remembrance of the Death of Christ, without any farther
Consideration either of the cause and manner of it, or of those infinite
Advantages which accrue to us thereby, will afford but a very imperfest
Memorial to us. We must therefore, for a full discharge of this duty, and to
raise up in our Souls those suitable resentments we ought to bring to this Holy
Administration, take a farther and more particular prospect of it: And
consider, First, What our State and Condition was that obliged our Blessed
Savior thus to die for us? Secondly, What that Death and Passion was which he
underwent for our sakes, and has therefore commanded us to remember in this
Holy Sacrament? Thirdly, What the Benefits are that accrue to us thereby?


And, First, To do this in Remembrance of Christ, will engage us to call to
mind, what our State and condition was, that obliged our Blessed Savior thus
to die for us.

For however we were by Baptism washed from all the Guilt, and delivered from
the Punishment of our Original Pollution, and admitted into the Covenant of
Grace, and made Heirs of the Promise of Eternal Glory; yet we are not therefore
to think our selves ever the less concerned when we come to this Holy
Sacrament, and show forth that Death of the Lord, by which our very Baptism it
self was consecrated into a laver of Regeneration, there to call to mind that
wretched State in which we once were, and must for ever have lain, had not the
Blessed Jesus given himself up unto Death for us.

I should indulge too much your Curiosity in an Argument of this moment, should
I enter on that vain Speculation which the Schoolmen first started, and has
since been made the Sport and Diversion of our Modern Scepticks in Religion;
Whether God could not otherwise have provided for the Pardon and Salvation of
Mankind, than by the Death of his Son? For since it was the Pleasure of God to
pitch upon this way of doing it, to what purpose is it for us vainly to enquire
whether he might not have made use of some other? This we ought at least to
believe, That God had his Reasons for preferring this; and that however we
ought not so far to tie up the Power and Liberty of our Creator, as to presume
to say he could not otherwise have redeemed us, than by the Death of Christ;
yet thus much we may, and it is our duty to conclude, That none could have
better, or so well have answered the great Ends both of his Justice and of his
Mercy; or more illustriously have set forth the Riches of his Love and Favor
to Mankind; or more powerfully have engaged us to a suitable return of Love to
him; or more clearly have convinced us of the hatred of God to Sin; or more
effectually have stirred us up to our utmost endeavors to live as we ought to
do, and as becomes those who had been so wonderfully redeemed by the precious
Blood of the Son of God himself.

But though this then be a Question otherwise of more Curiosity than Use; and
raised for the most part rather to cavil at Religion, than to magnify the
Power of it; yet may it here perhaps be of some benefit to us, to fill our
Souls with the highest resentments of Love and Gratitude to our Great Redeemer,
to consider not only from what Miseries he has delivered us, but with what a
freedom and readiness, and goodwill to us he did it. No, God was not
constrained, nor any necessity put upon our Savior Christ, as if either the
one must have died, or that the other could not by any other means have
reconciled Mankind unto himself. It was the free Choice of both, by this means,
the better to magnify their Love to us, and to secure our Love and Duty to
them again; that so, as St. John says, 1 Ep. iv.19. We may love God, because he
first loved us.

Hence it is that the Holy Scriptures every where set out to us the whole
business of our Salvation, as the effect of the free Choice and Pleasure of
God. So says St. John, cap. iii.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in Him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. So says St. Paul, 2 Timothy i.9. where he makes the business of
our Redemption to have been the eternal purpose of God, before Adam had yet
sinned, or by consequence before there could be any necessity of Christ's dying
for us; who has saved us, says he, and called us with an Holy Calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and Grace which was
given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. And of our Blessed Savior,
the same Apostle tells us, not only that He gave Himself for us, Tit. ii.14.
but that he did it with all imaginable readiness, and with the same good will
with which God designed it, Lo I come (says he) to fulfill thy Will, O God, Heb.
x.7, 9. And again in St. John, speaking of laying down his life for us, he
declares, Joh. x.18.
ver. 18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.

Such therefore was the love of our Blessed Savior to us, in freely giving up
himself to the Death for us. And for the reason that induced him to it, and the
benefits which thereby accrue to us, I shall not need to say either what or how
great they were. Indeed, the time would fail me, should I go about particularly
to lay them all before you. Miserable was the State, and deplorable the
Condition of Mankind, beyond any thing that we are able almost to conceive. We
were all dead in Trespasses and Sins, and must for ever have lain both under
the Guilt and Punishment of our Transgressions, had not the Blessed Jesus
opened to us the Gates of Heaven, and sealed a Gospel of Repentance with his
own Blood, for the Remission of our Sins. Our Nature was decayed, and that he
has restored; so that whereas before we had no sufficiency of our selves, we
have now a sufficiency of God, 2 Cor. iii.5. Phil. iv.13.
and can do all things through Christ that strengthens us. Our Sins had got the
dominion over us; and these he has not only very much prevented by his Grace,
but will also utterly wipe away by his Death and Satisfaction for us. We were
under a miserable Sentence of Death and Judgment: But Christ has now took away
the sting of the one, and the danger of the other; so that our Temporal Death
is no longer a Punishment, but rather a Blessing to us; and the Eternal
Judgment of God, shall, instead of being our Condemnation, prove to us perfect
Absolution, and a glorious Reward.

This is the blessed Change which has been made in our Condition, and which
certainly ought to render the remembrance of our Text most dear and precious to
us.

But I must not insist any longer upon this Point; I am persuaded there is no
one that now hears me, so ignorant in the great Mystery of Godliness, as not to
be fully acquainted with this first and chiefest Foundation of all our Faith.
Nor have I mentioned that little which I have now remarked of it, so much to
instruct you in what you ought to make a great part of your Memorial when you
come to this Holy Sacrament; as rather if it shall please God to stir up some
Affections both in my self and you, that may be suitable to a serious
Reflection on all these things: There being nothing, it may be, in the World,
more apt to fill our Souls with that due resentment we then especially ought to
have of the Death of Christ when we come to this Sacred Memorial of it, than to
consider the wretched condition from which we were delivered by it; nor more
apt to engage us to live as becomes those who have been freed from such
unspeakable Miseries, and are now put into a capacity of Everlasting Glory; and
without which our remembrance of him in this Sacrament, will be a Reproach, and
a Scandal, not an Honor and a Service to him; we shall forfeit all the
benefits of that Death we are called to commemorate; and as our Apostle phrases
it, ver. 29. of this Chapter, Eat and drink our own Damnation, not discerning
the Lord's Body.

This is the first thing we are to do in pursuance of the Command of the Text,
This do in Remembrance of Me.

Secondly, This remembering of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, will oblige us to
consider what that Death and Passion was which he underwent for our sakes, and
commanded us in this place to continue the Memory of in this Institution.

And this to be sure must be the proper business of every one when he comes to
this Holy Table. But now, what, or how great those Sufferings were which the
Blessed Jesus underwent for us, it is not for me to pretend to declare unto
you. Great and terrible are the Accounts which the Scriptures every where give
us of them. How does Isaiah set forth to us in his Prophecy, the Type and
Shadow of them? He tells us, That he should be a Man of sorrow, Isa. liii.3,
and acquainted with grief; without form, or comeliness, or beauty, that we
should desire him. He represents him as laboring under all the Miseries and
Afflictions that were due to the Sins of a wicked and incorrigible world. -- 4,
Surely (says he) he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: We esteemed
him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; -- 5,
But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.
-- 6.
All we like Sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquities of us all.

Thus did Isaiah speak of the Sufferings of Christ, when he foresaw his Death,
and prophesied of his Passion: And if we look into the Accounts which the Holy
Evangelists give us of the Accomplishment of it, we shall find those exceeding
whatever we are able to comprehend of it.

1. If we consider the Circumstances of his Suffering, it was accompanied with
all the bitter Aggravations of Misery that can well be imagined. For indeed,
what else can we say of the Mockeries and the Insults, of the Scorns and
Reproaches that appeared in all the parts of his Passion? Of the Baseness and
Treachery of his Disciples, and of the barbarous Malice and Cruelty of his
Enemies? How was he betrayed by one of his own Apostles, denied by another,
forsaken by all, condemned at one of those Feasts that brought together all the
Nation of the Jews to Jerusalem? And that for two of the most grievous Crimes
that could be laid to the Charge of an innocent Soul; Blasphemy against God,
and Sedition among the People; Set at naught by the Soldiers; Execrated and
Abjured by his own Countrymen; Adorned as a mock King, that he might be the
more derided by them; and then finally, to complete the Tragedy, Executed by a
Death not only the most scandalous, but the most painful of any in the World.

2. Which therefore brings us to a Second Consideration of his Passion; namely,
of the Pains and Torments of it. And here I shall not enter upon any long
Account of the Cruelty of that Death, which has been thought sufficient by
those whose kind of Punishment it was to give a general Name to the greatest
Torments, by derivation from this one, as the highest and chiefest of all. The
Wounds of the Hands and Feet, which the Nails made when he was fastened to the
Cross; the Agonies and Convulsions of his whole Body, when he hung upon it; the
slowness of dying, not to say any thing of those Furrows, which, in the
Psalmist's Speech, they had before made with their Scourges upon his Back.
Psalm. cxxix.3.
All these sufficiently declare to us an extraordinary Suffering, and may
warrant us to cry out with the Prophet, in the Reflection on it, Is it nothing
to you, Jer. i.12.
all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto this
sorrow wherewith the Lord afflicted his own Son in that day of his fierce anger.

3. And yet still all this was but the least part of his Passion; and the
anguish of his Soul, those unknown Sufferings he underwent within, far exceed
whatever Torments his Enemies were able to put him to. They were these that
made him sweat great drops of blood in the Garden, Luke xxii.44.
before ever the Officers had seized him, or begun to inflict the least
Punishment upon him. They were these that made him not only declare to his
Disciples, That his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, Mat. xxvi.37, 38.
even unto death; but carried him farther, in the bitterness of his Grief, to
pray three several times to his Father with the greatest importunity; Luke
xxii.44.
That if it were possible this Cup might pass from him. And when at last it
could not be, but that he must drink off the very dregs of it, forced that
vehement Expostulation from him, My God, My God, Mat. xxvii.46.
why have thou forsaken me?

It has been the rashness of some, from all these Expressions of his Grief, but
especially from the last, to conclude, That our Savior in his Passion
underwent all the Punishment that all the Elect of God should have suffered for
all their Sins; and, in short, That he bore in his mind the very pains and
torments of the Damned. But it is not necessary, nor indeed agreeable to a
right Belief, to run to any such Extremity. His Sufferings were indeed great,
but they were not such as either excluded him from the love and favor of God
in the midst of them; nor accompanied with any despair, which is always one,
and that not the least part of the Sinner's torment in another World. He died,
and went down into the Grave; but his Soul was not left in the regions of the
dead, Act. ii.27.
nor did his flesh see corruption. His Punishment was short in the duration,
and the intenseness of it, though very grievous, yet no more than was agreeable
to the Nature of a Man to bear: And we must not so speak of the Sufferings of
Christ, as to forget, that though he was God when he underwent them, yet that
he died, and suffered as he was Man.

Thus therefore must we call to mind the Passion of our Blessed Lord: We must
go through all the stages of it with care and exactness; and neither diminish
the Horror of what he endured by an imperfect Memorial of it, nor do violence
at once both to the Nature and Innocence of Christ, by straining it up to a
greater height than either the Authority of Holy Scripture, or the Honor of
our Savior, or his Humane Nature in which he suffered, will permit us to do.

This is the Second thing we are to remember when we come to the Holy Table.

The Third and last thing here required of us, is, Having called to mind the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Evils from whence we are delivered by them, to
consider finally, what the Benefits are that accrue to us thereby.

It is not to be doubted, but that there must be somewhat very extraordinary
for which the Son of God should Himself come down from Heaven, and not only
humble himself so far as to take upon him the form of a Servant, Phil. ii.7.
but being made in the similitude of a Man, expose himself to all those vile
and cruel Sufferings I but just now recounted. And indeed the Benefits which he
purchased for us by his Death, were not at all inferior to the Punishment he
underwent for the obtaining of them: And to speak them all in one general
Conclusion, he purchased the Redemption of a lost, miserable, sinful World; we
were all before dead in Trespasses and Sins; we are now raised to the Hopes and
Assurance of Everlasting Glory.

But here therefore I will be a little more particular. And,

First, By these Sufferings our Savior Christ delivered us from the Curse
which descended to us by our first Parents Transgression, and from that Eternal
Punishment which must otherwise have been the consequence of it.

For not to enter now into any scrupulous Enquiry concerning the Nature of
Original Sin, or the Grounds upon which God is supposed to impute it to us: Or
how far we should have been either condemned or not for the Actual Sin of Adam
in Eating of the forbidden Fruit: This at least cannot be doubted of by any,
That our Nature is now much degenerated from that primitive Purity in which Man
was at first created; that we have all, the very best of us, a strange
Propensity to Evil, and are born with an Impotency, if not Adverseness to that
Virtue and Piety, which the Principles of natural Religion, as well as of
revealed require of us. So that if we should allow the contentious Disputers of
our Days, that God will not impute Adam's Transgression to us for Sin, nor
condemn us for a Defect which we are not our selves consenting to, but bring
into the World with us; yet would this have stood us but in very little stead:
Whilst we should every one of us have been Guilty of so many Actual Sins, as
had not Christ purchased a Redemption for us, must for ever have sunk us down
into Ruin and Destruction. And certainly we ought then to esteem it no small
Benefit of our Savior's Passion, that he has now delivered us from this
Danger; and removed the fatal Necessity we must otherwise have lain under, of
being for ever miserable, without all possibility of preventing of it.

But this is only one Part, and that the first and least of those Blessings
which his Death and Passion has obtained for us. For,

Secondly, Our Savior Christ has not only delivered us from those Dangers to
which we were before exposed; but he has put us in a new and better way of
attaining to that, nay perhaps to a greater Happiness than what we should have
had, if Adam had never sinned, nor by consequence our Savior Christ ever given
himself an Offering for our Sins.

This is indeed the great Commendation of our Savior's Love to us, that not
content to deliver us from those Dangers that before threatened us, Heb. vii.25
He saves to the uttermost, those that come to him. And here to unfold the
Greatness of this Benefit, as I ought to do, I must run through all the
excellent Advantages of that New Covenant God entered into with us by the Blood
of his Son. But this would carry me into an Argument, great indeed, and worthy
your Attention, but beyond the Bounds of my present Discourse. In general,

* If to have a Systeme of the noblest and most admirable Rules of Living that
were ever communicated to the World; such, as by their own Excellence, no less
than by God's Command, recommend themselves not only to our Practice, but to
our Love too.

* If to be endued with a supernatural, Divine Assistance, to enable us to
fulfill them, and overcome all those Temptations that may at any time seek to
draw us from them.

* If to be assured, That upon our hearty Endeavors and earnest Prayers to
God, this Grace of his shall still increase in us, according as we sincerely
apply our selves to make use of it, or as other Circumstances shall happen to
put us in need of it.

* If besides this Help to keep us from sinning, to live under a Gracious
Promise of Pardon for those Sins, which many times we shall commit,
notwithstanding all our Labor to the contrary, upon our humble Confession and
hearty Repentance of them.

* If to know that for all these Ends, we have a Redeemer in Heaven, who stands
continually in the Presence of God to make Intercession for us, and represent
to his Father that Death and Passion which he underwent on purpose, that he
might obtain this Forgiveness for us; In a Word,

* If to be undoubtedly secured, That whatever becomes of us now, yet let us
but sincerely labor, what in us lies, to fulfill our Duty, and we shall be in a
little Time eternally happy in the Consummation of all these Blessings in the
Kingdom of our Savior; That yet a few Years and our High Priest shall again
return in Glory, and pronounce the great and final Blessing upon us, which
shall instate us in Joys never to be forfeited:

If I say, to live under the Conduct of such a Savior and such a Religion; to
have the Comfort of so great Promises now, and the blessed Assurance of such
Glory hereafter, may be esteemed a Blessing, as indeed what can we think of it,
but to be the greatest Blessing that a merciful God could bestow upon his
Creatures, or a Divine Savior purchase for his Servants: All this, and many
other Benefits, which I cannot now so much as mention to you, Christ purchased
for us by his Sufferings, and calls upon us in this Holy Sacrament to remember
with the highest Joy and the most grateful Acknowledgments.

Which brings me to the other thing proposed, for the full Explication of the
Duty here required of us: viz.

Secondly, * After what Manner, and * With what Affections it is, that we are
to Do this in Remembrance of Him.

For the former of these,

I. The manner, How we are here to remember Him;

I have already observed, That the original Word, which we here render
Remembrance, is very emphatical, and implies not any calling to Mind all these
things, but a frequent renewed Commemoration of them: And that especially such,
by which we may not only remember our selves, but also set forth to others the
Memorial of them. So S. Paul interprets it, v.26. As often as ye eat this bread
and drink this Cup, [(...)] annunciate, show forth, make a solemn Declaration
of the Lord's Death until his coming.

And so indeed the very Design of this Institution will oblige us to understand
it.

When our Savior first celebrated this Holy Sacrament, and commanded his
Disciples, by the like Sacred Ceremony, to continue the Memory of his Death,
until the End of the World: We are told by the Evangelists, That he had just
finished the Feast of the Passover; into the Place whereof he substituted this
Christian Feast, and as all the Circumstances of it plainly show, designed this
to have the same Place in the Christian, that the other had till then had in
the Jewish Church.

Now concerning that solemn Feast, we read in the Book of Exodus, Exodus xii.17.
xiii.3, 8, 9.
cap. xii.17. That God appointed it [(...)] for a Memorial, that is, for a
solemn Recognition which the People was thereby to make every Year, of that
great Deliverance by which they were brought up out of the Land of Egypt. And
in the thirteenth Chapter they are commanded to Remember the Day in which they
came out of Egypt, Exodus xiii.3.
and to keep the feast of unleavened bread seven days: And then and there
solemnly to declare to their Children the Cause of it: namely, -- 8, 9.
That they did this because of that which the Lord their God had done for them
when they came forth out of Egypt. To which end it was the Custom of the Jews
at this Solemnity, to have their Children propose to them the Question, What
the meaning of this Solemnity was? And thereupon the Master of the House gave a
full Account to them of the History of their Deliverance; and which from thence
they called the Haggadah, the Annunciation or Remembrance: Because of their
using it at this Time to commemorate or show forth that wonderful Deliverance,
which God had wrought for them.

Such was the Nature of that Remembrance which God commanded the Jews to
continue in their Paschal Supper of His bringing them out of Egypt: And the
same is the Remembrance which our Savior here commands us by this new Feast,
to continue in his Church, of his dying for us: We are to celebrate it, as a
solemn and Public Memorial of that great Deliverance which our Blessed Lord
has wrought for us; and to declare to all the World thereby what a Sense we
have of his infinite Love and Mercy to us.

Nay, but this is not yet all we are to do, if we will answer the full extent
of the Duty here required of us. We must not only make, in this Holy Sacrament,
our Public and solemn Recognition of Christ's Death and Passion; but we must
do it with that Affection, that Joy, those Resentments that become so great and
excellent a Memorial. So these kind of Expressions in Holy Scripture are for
the most part to be understood; and so it is plain we must take the Word in
this Place. And this is the other thing remaining to be considered for the full
understanding of the Text. viz.

II. With what Affections we ought to come to this Holy Table, and Do this in
Remembrance of Him.

It were too much for me here, in the close of my Discourse, to resume the
whole Consideration of this great Sacrament, and enter again upon a particular
View of it, and show what kind of Affections we ought to raise in our Souls,
proportionable to the several Parts and Respects of it. If we are indeed so
sensible as we ought to be of our Savior's Love to us, in thus giving himself
to the Death for us: If we have so seriously weighed, as becomes those who are
called to this Feast, the mighty Benefits and Advantages which are derived to
us thereby; what Miseries we have escaped, to what Blessings we are entitled
by his Sufferings; the Sense of all this will soon teach us what Motions and
Affections ought to fill our Souls, that may be suitable to so great and
blessed a Memorial.

For indeed, who can be so ignorant as not to know, without my Remark, when he
comes to the Holy Table, and there beholds the Minister of God setting forth,
as S. Paul speaks, evidently before his eyes Christ crucified for Him; Gal.
iii.1.
when both his Words and his Actions call upon Him to consider, Phil. ii.8.
How the Son of God humbled himself even to the death for our Redemption; and
submitted his Body to be broken, his Blood to be spilt, as He there sees the
Bread broken, the Wine poured out in this Celebration; that here certainly he
ought with the greatest Ecstasie of Love to contemplate this Love of his
Savior to Him; and break forth into the highest Expressions of a grateful
Thanksgiving, for this mighty Demonstration of his Favor and Affection to Him.

When from this He begins to reflect, on that wretched Condition in which we
all of us must have been, had not the blessed Jesus thus graciously undertook
the great Work of our Redemption; and by dying for us, delivered us from that
Death, to which we were condemned, and raised us up to the Hopes of Eternal
Glory: Where is the Soul, so dull, so un-affected with the Contemplation of
such a glorious Change, as to be able to keep in his joyful Resentments of so
wonderful a Deliverance; and not rather burst forth into new Songs of Praise
and Gladness for all the Benefits which God and his Redeemer have been so
wonderfully pleased to do unto Him.

But above all, who can think on that Value which the Blessed Jesus has put
upon our Souls; that he thought the Salvation of them to be a Price worthy his
own Death and Sufferings to redeem them; and then consider, That even these
very Souls for which Christ died, will yet be exposed to the hazard of a
greater and worser Damnation than that from which they have been delivered, if
we shall still go on impenitent in our Sins: And not presently resolve here to
sacrifice all his Passions at this Altar; to lay down all his Lusts at the
Pedestal of the Cross, and vow Himself entirely to the Obedience of that
Savior; Tit. ii.14.
who, as S. Paul tells us, for this very End gave himself for us, that He might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purchase to himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good Works.

Such Resentments as these will naturally arise in every pious Soul, when he
comes to this Sacred Feast, and therefore I shall not need to give any
particular Directions concerning them. Only I would take occasion from this
last Import of the Remembrance to which our Text calls us, To exhort you when
you come to this Holy Institution, that you would take Care to raise up all
these Affections and Resentments to as great a Height as you are able; and
having done this, that you would then cherish and improve them, that being not
only warm and vigorous upon your Souls at the present, but also rooted and
engrafted into them, they may not easily cool again, but become operative upon
your Lives, may increase your Love and confirm your Faith, and inflame your
Devotion, and keep you firm and steady to your Duty, till some new Occasion
shall again call you to a new exciting of them.

This will be indeed to render your Remembrance such as your Savior here
requires of you: And the frequent Returns which by the Blessing of God you here
enjoy of this Memorial beyond most Christians in the World; shall not only put
you in a Capacity of coming still with better and more affectionate Resentments
to this Holy Sacrament, but shall, by the Blessing of God, prove a most useful
and excellent Assistance, to the promoting of all the other Parts of your Duty;
you shall live as becomes those who know what mighty Engagements their Savior
has laid upon them; to what Hopes they are called, and by what means their
Redemption was purchased for them.

And as this Exercise will be the best means to prepare you to come worthily to
this Remembrance, so will it be also the most powerful Motive to engage you to
come frequently too. When you shall begin effectually to perceive the Benefit
of your Communicating, in the still new increase of Piety and Holiness in all
your Actions: When being full with a constant Sense of the Love of the Blessed
Jesus, here set forth to us, you shall find it to be the Desire and Longing of
your Souls, to come often to this grateful and pleasing Declaration of it.
When, in a Word, being accustomed to consider the Blessings and Advantages of
that New Covenant our Blessed Master has sealed to us in his Blood, and here
offers to renew with us in this Sacrament, you shall wish, if it might be,
every Day to repeat it, and think you can never enough declare your Desires of
being admitted into the Conditions and Advantages of it.

And thus have I offered to you what I suppose may suffice for the full
Explication of the Words before us. And from the Account, of which we may now
easily see, What is the true Nature and Design of this Holy Sacrament? Namely,
that it was instituted by our Savior to be a Sacred and Solemn Memorial of
that Death and Passion which he underwent for us, and of the great Benefits and
Advantages which accrue to us thereby. That as by the Paschal Feast among the
Jews, God perpetuated the Remembrance of his preserving them from the
destroying Angel first, and then delivering them from their Egyptian Bondage;
and engaged them to a constant, annual Return of Joy and Thanksgiving to Him
for so great a Blessing: So by this better Passover, should we in like manner
keep up for ever in the Church a lively and affectionate Commemoration of that
better and more glorious Preservation which our paschal Lamb, 1 Cor. v.6, 7.
the Lord Jesus, has by his own Blood obtained for us; and set forth to the
whole World that grateful and vigorous Sense which we have of so wonderful and
blessed a Deliverance.

Now this being the true meaning and Design of this Holy Sacrament, we may from
hence see, How great and dangerous the Mistakes are which some have run into
concerning it, with reference both to Faith and Practice? For,

1. If this Sacrament, as we have before shown, was instituted as a Memorial of
the Death and Passion of our Savior Christ; It is then plain, That it is not
our very Savior Christ Himself, neither in the State of his death, nor in any
other, that is here presented to us.

There have been in the Church, since the time of Paschasius Radbertus, one of
the first considerable Innovators that we meet with in the Doctrine of this
Holy Eucharist, among others two different Opinions concerning the Real or
Corporal Presence of Christ in this Sacrament, and both maintained with no
small contention at this day. One, That the Bread and Wine are converted into
the very Natural Body and Blood of Christ, so that nothing of the Bread and
Wine themselves at all remain, but only in show and appearance; which is what
they called Transubstantiation; the other, That the true Substances of the
outward Elements, the Bread and the Wine do indeed remain; but that the very
Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in an extraordinary and supernatural
manner joined to them; so that in the Communion of them, we do together with
the Bread and Wine, receive the true Body and Blood of Christ into our Mouths,
truly and really present, which they call Consubstantiation.

Now however the latter of these be much the more pardonable Error of the two;
as neither doing any Violence to our Senses, which evidently tell us, That what
we see and receive in this Sacrament, is certainly Bread and Wine; nor
contradicting the many Passages of Scripture, which declare to us the same
thing; yet are they both very great Mistakes. The natural Body of Christ being
not capable of existing in more Places than one at the same Time; nor to be
divested of the inseparable Properties of a Body; such as Extension of Parts,
Space, Figure, and the like, in which the very Nature of a Body, as it is
distinguished from a Spirit does consist.

But these Opinions do not only involve a plain Impossibility in the very
Nature of the Thing it self; but moreover do carry a manifest Incongruity to
the Nature and Design of this Institution. For if the End of this Holy
Sacrament were, as our Text shows, to be a Remembrance of Christ; a Sign and
Figure of his Body broken, and of his Blood shed for us; then certainly, as in
all other Cases, the Sign must be different from the thing signified: so here,
the Sacrament of Christ's Body, is not his Body, but the Memorial of it; the
Sacrament of his Blood is not his very Blood, but the Figure and Representation
of it. And thus these latter Words, Do this in Remembrance of Me, become the
best and clearest Interpretation of the former, This is my Body which is given
for you; and show that we are to interpret it after the same manner, as when we
read in the like kind of Speaking, in the Old Testament, This is the Lord 's
Passover; i. e. the Memorial of that Action, when the Angel passed over the
Houses of the Children of Israel, and destroyed them not, when at the same Time
he slew the Egyptians.

But here it may be asked; Do we then exclude Christ altogether from this Holy
Sacrament, and leave only an empty Sign, a mere ceremonial Remembrance of him
and no more? God forbid! Nay, but I dare say, We esteem Christ to be no less
present, though in another manner than they: Inasmuch as in this Sacred
Ordinance, he communicates Himself in the Benefits of His Passion in a more
especial manner to every faithful Receiver of this Blessed Sacrament; and makes
the Bread which he eats, and the Wine which he drinks become, not indeed by any
such needless and absurd Change, as we before mentioned, but by Grace and
Blessing; by his divine Power, and Spiritual Communication, his Body broken and
his Blood shed for us, to all the Effects of Piety and Justification. The
Elements are not altered, they continue not only after the Consecration, but in
the very receiving of them, the same they were before; Bread and Wine, without
any bodily Substance besides either veiled under those Appearances, or received
together with them. But by Faith, at the same Time that we take these into our
Mouths, we take Him also, whom they represent, into our Souls: Not as bringing
Christ from Heaven, but raising up our Minds and our Hearts to that Holy Place
where he is, we unite our selves to Him; and have all the Benefits of his Death
and Passion communicated to us for the Forgiveness of our Sins, for the
increase of his Grace and Favor to us here, and to be at once both the surest
Earnest and the most effectual Means to bring us to everlasting Happiness
hereafter.

This is that real but divine and spiritual Presence of our Savior in this
Sacrament, which we firmly believe, and which secures to us all the Blessings
and Advantages which the others can hope for, from their ungrounded and
unwarrantable Opinion of a natural and corporal participation of Him.

2. From this Account of the Design and End of this Institution it follows in
the next Place; What an Abuse they have made of it, who from a Remembrance of a
Sacrifice turn it into a Sacrifice it self; and instead of esteeming this
Sacrament a Memorial of that offering Christ once for all made for us, suppose
Him to be again as truly and properly offered in it as ever he was, though not in
the same manner that he was once upon the Cross.

I shall not now insist so long upon this Point, as to show not only how
contrary such an Opinion is to the express Authority of Holy Scripture, which
declares, That Christ was to be offered once for all; that by his once offering
himself for us, he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and much
more to the same purpose, in the ixth and xth Chapters to the Hebrews; but how
derogatory to the Honor of our Savior, whether we consider his former
Sufferings or his present Glory. This is plain, that if the Design of this
blessed Sacrament were as our Text declares it, to be a Remembrance of our
Savior's dying for us, then it is not a new offering of Him; there being
nothing more absurd than to say of the same thing, that it is both the Memorial
of what was done many Ages ago, and the very same thing again done in Memorial
of its self.

3. From the same Principles it will follow, That if this Holy Sacrament be no
more than a Remembrance of our Savior Christ, that then certainly those must
have very desperately abused it, who pay to it that Honor and Worship that
they would do, to our Savior himself, were his true and natural Body there
present.

I need not say any thing to prove what the Superstition of the Church of Rome
is as to this Matter: They here freely own it themselves, and censure us for
not joining with them in the same Service. They elevate their Host in the Mass,
for the People to adore it: They have instituted a solemn Feast, every Year, to
be observed in Honor of it: They dedicate religious Societies thereunto; they
set it forth upon their Altars to bless the People there assembled to its
Worship: If they carry it abroad, whether to the Sick, or upon the occasion of
any solemn Processions, they put it under a Canopy, born all the while over it;
Candles and Tapers are carried before it; and a Bell is rung all the Way that
it passes, to admonish all that are in sight of it to fall down and adore it:
And by all these and many other of their Actions, they oblige all Persons to
pay the supreme Honor that they give to God, to this Holy Sacrament.

It were easy to show how dangerous this Adoration is, even upon their own
Principles; whether we consider the Impossibility of their being ever sure that
their Host is indeed consecrated as it ought to be; or that if it were, yet at
least the Accidents of the Bread and Wine, which are Creatures, and yet make up
a Part of the Sacrament, are by consequence joint partakers of all their
Worship. But alas! what I have now been speaking shows a great deal more: Not
only that the Accidents of the Bread and Wine have their Part in being Objects
of this Worship; but that our Savior Christ indeed is not at all concerned in
it. They pay their Adoration to the inanimate Creatures of Bread and Wine, and
commit an Idolatry not much less gross, in the Opinion of some of their own
Writers, if we are indeed in the Right, than those who fall down before a Piece
of red Cloth, and pay their Adoration to a Tile or a Potsherd. But,

4. If our Savior Christ in our Text plainly commanded his Apostles, and in
them all of us, To do that in Remembrance of Him, which he had there done
before their Eyes: if what he required in order to this Commemoration, was,
That we should take Bread and Wine, and bless, and give, and receive these, in
Memory of his Body which was given, and of his Blood which was shed for us; it
will then follow in the Fourth place, That those who do not do this, have
plainly departed from our Savior's Institution, and do not remember him as
they are commanded to do.

And this alone is sufficient to confute that great Corruption of the same
Church, in Communicating the People only in One Kind. And whatever Pretenses
they may offer for their so doing, had they as just reason otherwise for
altering the order of this Sacrament, as God knows it is plain they have not any
at all; yet this would still remain a perpetual Exception against it, That our
Savior here expressly commands them to Do this, i. e. that which himself then
did in Remembrance of Him; Who gave the Wine as well as Bread to his Apostles,
and repeated the Command after the one, as well as the other; and not what they
should at any time after think fitting to do.

And these are such consequences as concern others rather than our selves; who,
God be thanked, are again delivered from all these Corruptions, and have no
otherwise any cause to remember them, than as they serve to confirm us in our
Pure and Holy Doctrine and Practice in this matter, and ought to raise up our
Souls to a grateful acknowledgment of God's Mercy to us, who has freed us from
such great and dangerous Errors, and in which he still permits so many others
to continue. But there are yet some other Conclusions to be drawn from the
foregoing Reflections, and in which we may perhaps find somewhat that will be
of a more near and direct concern to us. For,

5. If our Savior Christ has here commanded us, to Do this in Remembrance of
Him; that is, to come to the Holy Table, and receive this blessed Sacrament,
and make our public and solemn Acknowledgments to him for his great Mercy in
dying for us; What then shall we say of those who despising this sacred
Ordinance, do either totally absent themselves from this Memorial, or come but
very seldom and negligently to it.

This certainly must needs be a great fault, as it is evidently contrary to the
express Command of our Savior in the Text before us. And if we may make any
Judgment of Christ's resentment of it, either from the Nature of the thing it
self, or from the severe Punishment God threatened unto those in the Old
Testament, who should neglect the like Memorial of the Paschal Feast, one of
the greatest Provocations any Christian can almost be guilty of.

If we consider the thing it self, what does he who despises this Holy
Sacrament, and neglects to partake of it, but in effect despise Christ himself,
and tread under foot the Blood of the Covenant by which we must be saved? Heb.
x.29.
And how can that Soul expect any benefit of his Death and Sufferings, for his
forgiveness hereafter, who now will not vouchsafe so much as to make that
common Acknowledgment which every Christian ought of his remembrance of it, or
show any sense of his Obligation, though we have here so plain and peremptory a
Com^^^d to do it?

And if we look to the Denuntiations of the Old Testament, against those who
should thus neglect to join in the Jewish Passover, and show forth this
remembrance of the deliverance which that Feast referred to, we may, I think,
have some cause to fear, how much greater shall be our Punishment, whose
neglect is certainly, upon many accounts, much more inexcusable than theirs. If
any man (says Moses) Deuteronomy. xii.15. shall eat leavened-bread in that time, that
Soul shall be cut off from Israel: But more expressly, Numb. ix.3. He that is
clean, and is not on a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the
same Soul shall be cut off from his People. Whatever the meaning of that
Excision be which God here threatened that People with; whether it be, that such
a one should have no part in the World to come, as some interpret it; or, that
God would cut him off by an untimely temporal death, as others: Or lastly,
which was esteemed by them no small Curse, that he should die childless, and
have his name put out in Israel. This is certain that the Denuntiation is very
severe; and, if the Remark of a very learned Aben-Ezra. vid. Fag. in Exodus
xii.15.
Rabbin be true, almost particular to the thing in hand; there being but two of
all the affirmative Precepts to which God made this Denuntiation, viz. to him
that neglected the first Sacrament, of Circumcision; and this second, of the
Passover.

But perhaps it will here be said, That this Commination was to those that were
clean, and near at hand, and yet neglected this Holy Institution: And therefore
ought not to be applied to them, with reference to the Blessed Sacrament which
we are speaking of, who would gladly receive it, and have a very honorable
remembrance in their hearts of the Death of Christ; but alas! either they are
not clean, or are in a journey; either they are not prepared, or have not the
leisure to come to this Table.

It Is true indeed, God did here restrain the Judgment I have mentioned, to such
as were clean, and at or near to Jerusalem; but the rest were not therefore by
any means excused, and permitted to neglect the partaking of it. They had time
given them till the next Month, to cleanse themselves, and to come up to
Jerusalem; and if they neglected in the second Month to keep the Feast, after
having omitted it in the first, there was then no farther Provision for them,
but they fell under the Curse of those who neglected altogether to eat of it.

And this therefore may serve for a useful Admonition, as well as full Answer
to the Excuses of those, who are still pretending they are not worthy to come
to this Sacrament, or else have not time and leisure to prepare themselves for
it. If indeed this should chance by any accident to hinder them at this time,
or on this occasion, from receiving of it; they ought not therefore to disquiet
themselves, but to believe, that in such a case our Savior Christ will make
the same allowance for this Feast, that God did for that other; and permit them
yet another Month to remove the Obstacle, and prepare themselves to come to his
Table. But if instead of doing this, they shall still go on to insist upon
these vain Pretenses, and live so as not to be worthy to receive the Holy
Sacrament, and continue to live so still, without taking any care to put
themselves into a better state; this will prove an aggravation of their Sin,
not a lessening of it; and their neglect will be but the more inexcusable, for
being grounded on a reason so contrary not only to the design of this Holy
Sacrament, but of the whole Christian Religion. But,

Sixthly, And to close all: The Command of our Savior in these words we have
been so long considering, will not only oblige us in the general, sometimes to
remember his Death, by receiving this Holy Sacrament, but frequently and
oftentimes so to do.

I have before observed, that the word which we here render Remembrance, does
not imply a bare Memorial, but a renewed Commemoration; to teach us, that we
are often to refresh the Memory of Christ's Death in our minds by this Sacred
Solemnity, and to repeat again and again the Remembrance of it. And though it
be pretty hard to say, how often a Man ought to receive the Sacrament; yet it is
plain, he is not so zealous a Christian as he should be, that very seldom or
never does it.

We know that in the first Ages of Christianity, when Devotion was quick and
vigorous, and Men had the most sensible impressions upon their minds of the
love of our Savior, in giving himself to die for us, that then they received
it ordinarily every day: Insomuch that some of those Fathers who then lived,
have interpreted this Eucharistical Bread, to be that daily Bread which our
Lord has taught us to pray for. Afterward, as Men's Zeal cooled, so did their
frequent Communicating decay in proportion with it. At first it fell in some
Churches to four, in others to three times in the Week; and in a little while
it came to be the distinctive Devotion of the Lord's days: And at last, the
necessary, least proportion established was, the three great Feasts of the
Year, in which our Church still obliges all her Members to partake of it.

But as he who is in a pure and holy state, can never receive it too often; so
certainly it is a thing than which none would more advance our Piety, to labor
as frequently as we can, to fit our selves for it. And since it has pleased
God, to revive something of the Primitive Zeal among us as to this particular,
in bringing our Solemn Communions to a monthly course, besides other
extraordinary occasions of it; I do not see what better Exhortation I can leave
with you as to this Matter, than seriously to advise, and earnestly beseech
every one of you, to examine and prepare your selves, then at least, to join
with your Brethren in these Holy returns; and not deprive your Souls of the
Benefits which are thus graciously offered to you in this great and most useful
Remembrance.

This will indeed both best answer the design of our Blessed Lord in the Text,
and be the best Application, I could even wish you would make of my Discourse
upon it. But then I must observe, that I speak now by way of Exhortation, not
as necessarily requiring this in Obedience to the Command before us, but as the
improvement I desire, if it were possible, you might all make of those
Opportunities God is pleased here to reach out to you in order to this End; and
which I do not see how any good Christian can with a good Conscience so
frequently neglect.

In the mean time, this is the sum of all; He that despises this Institution,
does not only show a light esteem of the Death of Christ, and do violence to
the Command of his Savior; but does moreover deprive his Soul of the most
excellent assistance God has given us in this World, in order to our Salvation
in the next: Whereas he who comes frequently, and with that due Preparation he
ought to it, will not only put himself out of all danger from the Precept
before us, but will in a little while secure himself of such a measure of the
Grace and Favor of his Redeemer, whose Memory he here honors, as shall carry
him through all the Temptations, the Sorrows, the Afflictions of this Life, to
an Eternal Enjoyment of Glory, Honor, and Immortality in the next:

And to which God of his infinite Mercy vouchsafe to bring us all, for the same
his Son Jesus Christ's sake, our Lord, Amen.
OF THE Honor due to the Blessed Uirgin: A SERMON Preached on Lady Day, MARCH
xxv. 1688.
LUKE I.48, 49. For behold from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed: for he that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his
name.


THese Words are part of that Magnificat or Song of Thanksgiving which the
Blessed Virgin made to God, in return of that wonderful Favor He had
vouchsafed unto her, in esteeming her worthy to become the Mother of our Lord.
And they contain in them a kind of Prophecy of that Honor which the Christian
Church should in all Ages to come pay to her Memory upon the account of it.

It is the Observation of our English Rhemists in their Annotations upon this
Place; That this Prophecy is fulfilled in their keeping her Festival Days, and
saying the Ave Marie, and other Holy Anthems of our Lady. And that the
Calvinists therefore (so they are pleased to style us) for not doing of this,
are not among these Generations which call our Lady Blessed. And in their
Marginal Note on the same Passage, they very briskly ask this Question; Have
the Protestants had always Generations to fulfill this Prophecy? Or do they call
her blessed that derogate what they can from her Graces, Blessing, and all her
Honor?

In answer to so ignorant or so malicious a Calumny, and to show that We, though
we neither say any Ave-Maries to her Honor, nor are engaged in any other part
of that unwarrantable Superstition whereby they have so long dishonored God,
abused the Blessed Virgin, and scandalized the Church of Christ, have yet as
just an Esteem for the Holy Mother of our Lord, and proclaim her Blessedness as
much as either this Prophecy requires, or any sober Orthodox Christian may be
allowed to do it; I shall crave leave to make use of that Occasion, the
Solemnity of this Day offers to me, to enter on the Comparison between our
selves and them. And could I be assured, That the Blessed above have this Honor
from God, to be made acquainted with these solemn Exercises of their Brethren
here below; I would not doubt to appeal to the Holy Virgin her self to judge
betwixt us; Who they are that do the most truly honor her, We who freely pay
her all that Love, that Respect, that Glory, that any Creature in her
Circumstances can possibly be thought capable of: Or they who by giving her
more, raise her up to a State above the Condition of her Nature; and so instead
of honoring her, dishonor that Son whom she was so happy as to bring into the
World; and that God, who thought her worthy of so great an Exaltation.

Now in order to this End, I shall observe this following Method: I. I will
show what that Honor is which the Blessed Virgin is now capable of Receiving,
and which accordingly we our selves this Day pay to her Memory? II. I will lay
before you some Instances of that Additional Worship, which those of the other
Church pretend is due to her. III. I will offer some of those Reasons for which
we think such a Worship to be unlawful, and therefore refuse to give it to her.


I.
I begin with the first of these,

I. What that Honor is which the Blessed Virgin is now capable of receiving,
and which accordingly we our selves pay to her Memory?

For answer to which Enquiry, I shall lay down this plain, and I suppose,
undeniable Foundation; viz. That however some have been pleased to exalt the
Glories and Prerogatives of the Holy MARY to a very great, indeed to an
extravagant Degree, so as hardly to leave any Comparison between her and any
other Creature, whether in Heaven or Earth; yet since they still confess her to
be but a mere Creature, the Measure we must take whereby to judge, What Honor
may warrantably be paid to her, must be, to consider, What Honor any mere
Creature, in her Circumstances, is capable of receiving: And then, I presume it
cannot be justly said, That we are not of the number of those who call the Holy
Virgin Blessed; who upon this Foundation do freely profess, That providing only
for that just Distance that ought to be observed between the Adoration that we
owe to God, and that Honor which we may be allowed to give to a Creature;
there is no Respect that we think too great to be given to her: Nor will we
scruple to pay her any Honor that does not entrench upon our Piety, and
confound the Service of God and his Creatures together.

Were the Blessed Virgin yet present upon Earth with us, we would soon convince
those our Accusers that we thought no Respect too much for her, which either
they or we are wont to give to the greatest Saints yet on Earth. Now that she
is departed from us, all we can do is to follow her with our Esteem, our
Praise, and our Imitation: That is, To give her all that Honor which any
Creature in the same Circumstances is fit to receive, or which it may be either
Lawful or Reasonable for us to offer to such a one.

See the Instances of all the following Particulars in the 2d Def. of the
Expos. of the Doctr. of the Church of England: part 2. artic. 3. Of the
Invocation of Saints.
We pray not indeed to her now, nor would we do it if she were still on Earth,
and we were sure she could hear and know our Requests: Because Prayer we look
upon to be an Act of Religious Worship, and therefore such as is proper to God
only. But we Bless God for the Honor he vouchsafed unto her, when he made her
the Mother of our Lord; with the Angel, we pronounce her Blessed among Women;
and that in that very Form which she her self set us for our Pattern; And so
every Day fulfill her Prophecy, whilst we cry out with her to God Almighty, Luke
1.46, 47.
My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior, in
that he regarded the lowliness of his Handmaiden.

We entreat her not to pray for us, because we cannot tell how to convey our
Requests to her: And though for ought we know God might reveal them unto her; yet
since he has no where promised that he will do this, nor encouraged us to call
upon her to this End; we think we cannot in this manner pray to her without
either great Folly, or great Impiety: Without great Folly; if not believing
that she does certainly some way or other understand our Requests, we yet
neverless address to her: Without great Impiety; if in confidence that she has
such an Ability, we ascribe the most peculiar Prerogatives of God to her, viz.
Immensity, Omniscience, Omnipresence; and so make her every way equal with God

But were she now upon Earth, where we could either speak to her our selves, or
otherwise entertain any certain Correspondence with her; we should be far from
discouraging any to beg the Benefit of her Prayers, or thinking them worthy of
Censure for so doing.

When we stand at our Altars and celebrate the blessed Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. xi.26.
and set forth the Lord's death until his coming: We cannot indeed allow our
selves to do this to the Honor and Veneration of any other, than of him only
whose Death and Passion we commemorate. But even here also we do the utmost
that we can to Honor her. We name her at the Holy Table, we recite there the
History of God's Favor to her, and magnify him with her upon the account of
it.

In a Word; when we confess our Sins and absolve our Penitents; if we commend
either our selves or others to God's Mercy: In these and the like Cases, we
think it an Impiety to join the Daughter of Anna, with the great God, the Lord
of Heaven and Earth.

If we give Thanks for any Blessings we have receved; we choose rather to follow
her Example, and cry out with her, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit rejoices in God my Savior; than with others to divide the Glory
between God and her, and say, Glory be to JESUS and MARY.

If we vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear by his Name; we neither think it
fitting nor lawful to join God and the Blessed Virgin together; lest we should
thereby seem to make her the Searcher of Hearts as well as him; and a powerful
Avenger of such secret Sins.

If we speak of Her; we readily give her any Attribute that either the holy
Scripture warrants, or her Nature allows of. But to call her a Goddess, and our
selves her Suppliants; to style her Queen of Heaven, and Mother of Divine
Grace; the Refuge of Sinners, and the Ark of the Covenant; the Sovereign Lady
of Angels, See the Litanies of the Bl. Virg.
Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and all
Saints; and, as such, beseech her, That she and her Son would bless us; this we
think is to carry the Complement too far; and a Strain much fitter for some
poetical Heathen Goddess, than for a Christian Saint.

But let these and the like Superstitions be laid aside, and which a Virgin so
humble on Earth, cannot sure be supposed to be so much altered for the worse,
as to aspire after in Heaven; let Religion and the Worship of that be exempted,
as the peculiar Due of that God who made both her and us, and whom alone both
she and all of us therefore ought to adore, and then what farther remains to
proclaim her Blessed, shall as freely be allowed and paid her by us, as it can
be justly claimed of us.

Now the sum of all such Honor may be referred by us to these two general
Considerations.

1. Of that just Esteem and Value and Opinion we have of her: And, 2. Of
Actions suitable to such Opinions.
As for the former of these,

1. That Esteem and Value, and Opinion we have of her;

It is certainly as great as any sober Christian can desire it should be. We
believe her to have been a most pure, and holy, and virtuous Creature: That her
virgin Mind was clean and spotless, as her Body Chaste and immaculate; and that
she was upon the Account of both the most fit of any of all her Race or Sex for
the Holy Ghost to overshadow, and for the Son of the most Highest to inhabit.
When we consider the firmness of her Faith; the fervor of her Devotion; the
excellency of her Humility; we cannot but acknowledge a Grace extraordinary in
her, working all those eminent and Divine Qualities. And though we are not so
curious as to enter on those nicer Speculations in which so many have in vain
exercised themselves, Aquin. 3. part. Qu. 27, etc.
Whether she was Conceived in Sin? And if she was, How far it was restrained in
her at first; and at what instant totally extinct in her afterward? Whether
she was Sanctified in the Womb of her Mother? And to what degree? And at what
time? Whether before she was Animated, or after; And, Whether this
Sanctification was such as to keep her from ever committing any, so much as
Venial Sin? Yet as the common condition of Mankind does not permit us without
all warrant from Holy Scripture, which they confess is here wanting to them, to
exempt her from all Sin; so neither do we pretend to accuse her of any.

And for her present state, we do not at all question, but that God who showed
her such favor on Earth, has also very highly exalted her in Heaven: So that
among all the Race of Adam, next unto him who was God as well as Man, we think
it very probable that she has obtained the chiefest place in God's Kingdom, who
brought forth the Son of God into the World.

And here then let these our Accusers, who say that we are not of the number of
those of whom the Blessed Virgin in my Text prophesied, That, Behold, from
thenceforth all Generations should call her Blessed, tell us, if they can:
Wherein is it that we are defective in our Opinion concerning the Mother of our
Lord?

Is it that we deny her Immaculate Conception, and suppose her to have in this
been submitted to the common condition of all others since the Fall of our
first Parents, Christ only excepted? But then they must not forget, that this
is no more than what their own Brethren of their own Infallible Church deny as
stiffly as we do. And if there have been Saints, and Popes, and Visions, and
Miracles for it; yet we know there have been also Saints, and Popes, and
Visions, and Miracles against it too: And at this day there is Order against
Order, School against School, about it: And as if the Spirit of Infallibility
had in this Matter forsaken their Church, it could never yet be finally
determined either by Council or Pope, which Side is in the right.

Is it that we suspend our selves as to the Point of her Actual Sins? And see
no cause to conclude, why the Blessed Virgin, though a most pure and holy
Creature, yet should not have been as capable of committing Sins, as well as
all others, Christ only excepted here also, we think must be allowed to be? But
yet in this we do but follow some of the greatest Lights in the Primitive
Church; and Reason according to the common Condition of Mankind, and from which
they themselves cannot produce us any Authority of Holy Scripture to exempt
her. And if some among us have, with Chrysostom in Joan. Hom. 17. page 132, 133.
Edit. G.L. Paris. 1633.
St. Chrysostom, freely supposed, That in some cases she did (...), yet in the
very Instances to which they refer, they have, at least probable, grounds for
what they say: And for the most part we are contented with August. de Not. and
Great. c. 36. p. 284. b. Ed Lugd. 1664. T^m. 7.
St. Austin, to suspend our selves; and for the honor of our Savior, not to
enter into any question at all concerning her as to this matter, whether she
ever did actually sin or no?

Or now, that God has taken her up into Glory: Have we not all that high and
worthy Opinion of her Exaltation that we ought to have, because indeed we
freely profess we cannot believe such extravagant Romances as all sober Men,
even of their own Church, are ashamed of?

Contempl. vii. page 78, etc.
We doubt not but she is at this time in Heaven; Do we ever the more debase her,
because we will not entertain a shameless Legend of her Assumption thither?

We are persuaded, that she is adorned with one of the brightest Aureola's in
God's Kingdom; Contempl. viii. page 89, etc.
That her Crown is more Illustrious, than any among the Daughters of Eve. Is
not this sufficient, unless we will undertake to tell you what her Crown was
made of, how many Stars went into her Achievement, what Badges her Servants
wore, and what Speeches and Complements were made to her upon the occasion; and
to complete all, Offic. B. Virg Antver p. 1631. page 81.
set forth in perspective all the Holy Trinity concurring in this Ceremony; and
all the Powers of Heaven and Earth singing Praises to Her, and adoring of Her.

We make no question, but that as she was very highly favored by God on Earth,
so is she now no less beloved by him in Heaven. Crasset. Devot. envers la ste
V. part. 1. page 10, 30, 31, etc.
But should we therefore set her up as another Mediatrix, that as both Sexes
concurred to our Ruin, so might both concur to our Reparation; and so tie up
the Hands of God, as not to allow any to be saved, but according to Her Will.
Nay, make her so far the Queen of Heaven and Earth, as to give her a Power of
all the Grace that is to be bestowed on Mankind: Of saving her Votaries, if
they do but sufficiently love and worship Her, whatever their Affections or
their Service be to God Almighty: Of fetching Souls not only out of Purgatory,
but even from Hell it self, by her Authority: Of ordering all the Events of the
Fortunes of Men and Kingdoms, insomuch that not a Battle can be fought, or a
Victory obtained, but by the favor of this Pallas, to whom the Success is due,
and to whom the Praise and Honor therefore ought to be returned. These indeed
are the Extravagancies of some of our Adversaries, but God forbid they should
ever be the Practice or Opinions of any among us.

To conclude; It is impossible for any to entertain more honorable Sentiments
of the Blessed Virgin than we do, who will not run out into Blasphemy and
Fanaticism, and believe such things as neither Scripture nor Antiquity have
delivered, nor will either Piety or common Sense suffer us to receive.

Let us see,

Secondly, Whether our Actions be not every way suitable to our Opinions?

Now for this I must observe, according to my Foundation before laid down, That
the Holy Virgin, however highly exalted by God, being yet still but a mere
Creature, our Actions toward her must be no other than what a Creature that is
at such a vast distance from us, and out of all compass of Civil Communication,
is capable of receiving. And so the sum of what may warrantably be paid to
her, will fall under these Three Generals: First, To celebrate the Memory of
those Blessings and Favors which it has pleased God to bestow upon her.
Secondly, To return Praises to God on the account of them. And, Thirdly, To
endeavor what in us lies to imitate her Excellencies.


This is all the Honor she is capable of receiving from us; and it cannot be
doubted, but that we are as careful as any to fulfill the Prophecy of our Text
in every one of these Particulars.

First, We celebrate the Memory of those Blessings and Favors which it has
pleased God to bestow upon her.

Let this day, and the other Solemn Festivals we observe to the same End, be
our Witness, how careful we are as to this particular. We mark it out in our
Rituals, as a Day Holy unto the Lord: We assemble in our Sacred places,
solemnly to recount what the Holy Scriptures have recorded of God's Mercies to
Her: And annually, as at this time, we encourage one another to bless and
praise Him upon the account of them.

But here the Objection made in the beginning, will rise against us. It Is true
indeed, we do observe some of her Festivals; but yet we pass by the greater
part of them: And for the main thing of all, we quite omit it, in that we say
not AVE MARIA so often, and so impertinently as they do; nor other Anthems of
our Lady, as they call her by a new and fantastical Title, never given her
either in Scripture, or by any of the ancient Fathers.

This we confess is in some measure true: We say no AVE MARIE'S, i. e. after
the manner that they do; nor can we imagine what Honor is done to the Blessed
Virgin, by the nauseous tautologie of a Salutation, pertinent in its season,
when the Angel spoke to her upon her Conception; but now as unseasonable in the
Application, as it is vain and absurd in the Repetition. But yet when we recite
the History, and celebrate the Memory of that surprising Salutation, then we
read it in our Assemblies; that is, we do say Ave Maria, as often as it is
either pious or to the purpose to do it. And if for not doing it as they do, we
are to be excluded out of the Number of those of whom our Text speaks; yet God
be thanked we shall run but the same Fortune that the Apostles and the
primitive Ages of the Church did, before it was first, as they tell us,
revealed to St. Dominick, and by him to the Church, how they were to recite the
Rosary.

But now for the other Instances objected against us, viz. The Feasts, and
Anthems of our Lady; in these we may venture to justify our selves: We
celebrate the Memory of all the great Particulars that we know of her Life: And
if upon the mere Authority of Fables, confessed to be uncertain, and disputed
by many among themselves, as not fit to be credited, we cannot be induced to
observe more; yet in this we hope all sober Christians will acquit us, and
esteem us to be very excusable in what we do: It being certainly to mock, not
honor, both God and Her, solemnly to commemorate, and seriously to thank God
for such Blessings as at the same time we are sure He never bestowed upon Her,
nor She ever received from Him.

As to the last Instance, our not reciting the Anthems of our Lady, I shall
only say thus much, That we know but of one Anthem that ever she made; viz.
that from whence our Text is taken; and that we are so far from not reciting,
that we make it a Solemn Hymn in our daily Service. Let them who recite more,
tell us, if they can, whence they had them, and by what Authority they make use
of Anthems in many places hardly to be heard without horror; and such as, to
say no worse of them, do by no means befit either the Humility of MARY, to
receive; or the Piety of a good Christian, to offer to her.

And this may suffice to show that we are not wanting in the first point of our
Honor, to celebrate the Memory of God's Mercies to her. The next proposed, was,

Secondly, To return Praises to God upon the account of them.

And here I am sure no one can say that we are defective: The Foundation of all
God's particular Favors to her being this, That our Blessed Lord was to be
born of Her. And this is the Subject of all our Praises to him: Every
Thanksgiving we put up to Heaven, is begun, carried on, and ended with it: So
that in effect, all that part of our Religious Service which consists in giving
Thanks to God for the Redemption of Mankind, is but a continued Acknowledgment
of the Honor and Favor done to the Holy MARY: And if this be not enough, I
must then again remember what I just now observed, not only that we are very
careful to praise God for his Mercies to the Blessed Virgin, and to our selves
by her; but every day make use of her own words to express our grateful
Acknowledgment of them, by establishing her Song of Eucharist to be the Form
wherein we our selves should give Thanks to God in our Assemblies.

And then,

Thirdly, For what is the last Instance of all, of that Honor we owe to her,
the Imitation of her Virtues.

We may presume to say, that in this we do not come behind her highest
Votaries. Not an Act of Piety recorded in her Life, but our Church exhorts us
to transcribe it into ours. We may, and God knows we do, come very much short
of her in our practice: But it is our own Infirmity, not any defect in our
Churches Doctrine and Directions that we do so.

Such then is the Honor which we now suppose due to the Blessed Virgin, and
which accordingly we pay to Her. Let us go on, and see in the next place,

II.
Secondly, What that additional Worship is, which those of the other Church
pretend is due to Her.

And because I would state the difference as clearly as I could, I will
consider this Point in the same two parts I did the foregoing: I. Of their
farther Esteem in their Opinions of Her. II. Of their Practices in conformity
to their Opinions.


For the former of these:

First, Their Opinions of the Blessed Virgin.

It is hardly to be imagined, to what prodigious Excesses some Men's
Superstition has carried them as to this particular. I have before mentioned
some of the glorious Titles by which they call her, in their very public
Addresses to her: Should I to these add the Sentiments of some particular Men
in these later Ages, famous in their Generation, and for nothing more famous,
than for their extraordinary Devotion to the Holy Mary, I should soon run
beyond the bounds of such a Discourse as this. I will rather choose here to
confine my self to a very few, and those only general Remarks. And,

First, It is the very foundation of all that Superstitious Service which is
nowadays paid to her in the Church of Rome, to suppose the Excellency of the
Blessed Virgin to be incomparably above that of any other Saint whatsoever: So
that whereas all other Saints are to be worshipped only with that inferior
Religious Worship which they call Dulia; the Blessed Virgin alone is to be
served with a Hyperdulia, or a Super-eminent sort of Religious Service. And
that upon these three accounts, which therefore one of their own Authors has
set down for us: (1.) In that when God dignified her with the Excellency of
being the Mother of JESUS, Contempl. on the Life and Glory of H. M. p. 4.
he therewith created her the Queen of Angels, Patroness of the Church, and
Advocate of Sinners; And that therefore as such she ought to be honored above
them. Ibid. p. 5.
(2.) Because the Veneration we give to MARY, redounds to JESUS; all Honor
given to the Mother, tending to the Glory of the Son. And, (3.) For that Holy
MARY, as the Mother of God, is accomplished with all Natural, Moral, and
Supernatural Perfections, which are and possibly may be dispersed among all
pure Creatures, Men and Angels; and therefore as she is more Holy and Perfect
than All, so is she acceptable to God above All; and therefore ought she to be
reverenced by us above them All. From hence it is,

Secondly, That they look upon her as a Person most worthy to be called upon in
all their Devotions: Insomuch that the Author I but now mentioned, recommending
to his Votary the practice of Piety toward her, lays down, among others, Ibid.
p. 13.
these Two Rules: (1.) That he should have a private Oratory dedicated to the
Veneration of Holy MARY: And (2.) That he should not enter on any Business, of
what ever Nature, Contempl. page 15.
without first consulting MARY by humble Prayer; recommending its whole
Progress to her Protection, and assuming her as a Guide in the pursuance
thereof. And indeed though they do as they have occasion, pray to other Saints
too as well as to the Blessed Virgin, yet such a peculiar Confidence have they
in her, that in all their public and private Addresses, the beginning and
ending, and in a Word, the whole Performance, for the most part, is divided
betwixt God and her. Thus in the Canon of the Mass; in all their Liturgies, in
the most solemn Exercises of Confession, Absolution, Thanksgiving; in their
Litanies and salves, still Holy MARY is set up as no small part of their
Worship: And the reason whereof their Council of Basil tells us is, Crasset
devot. envers la V.M. par. 1. p. 20, 21, etc.
for that she, as she is the most exalted, so she is the most ready to regard
us too: And Suarez stating this very Point, Whether we ought to pray to the
Blessed VIRGIN? tells us it is a matter of Faith that we ought so to do; that
the Church is sensible how much the Intercession of the Blessed VIRGIN above
any others is the most useful to us; and therefore that she, above all others,
ought to be invoked by us.

Now this being without Controversy, both the constant Opinion and Practice of
the Church of Rome, That the Blessed Virgin is to be called upon in all Places,
and upon all Occasions, and by all Persons; they must by consequence suppose,

3. That by whatsoever means it is, some way or other she does know, and can
attend to all the Prayers that are every where made to her; and is capable of
affording them such Assistance as they encourage their Votaries to ask of Her:
And by consequence, that she does partake of the Immensity of God; and is
Omniscient, Omnipresent and Omnipotent as well as he. For else, if either she
cannot distinctly attend to all the Requests that are every where made to her,
or be not capable of knowing them; or though she does understand what is demanded
of her, yet should chance not to have it in her Power to grant it to them: It
must follow, That they pray at all Adventures; and to no more purpose than if
one of us here, should ask a Favor of, or make a Request to one of our Friends
and Acquaintance in the Indies. And whatsoever Piety there might be in so
doing, yet I am persuaded the number of her Votaries would soon decrease, did
they not hope for such an Effect of their Addresses to her, as must imply her
to be all that which I before inferred, as the Consequence of their calling
upon her.

4. But this is not yet all: For in calling thus upon her, they do not only
suppose her to be a fit Object of their Adoration, but by committing themselves
to her Intercession for them, they do particularly set her up as an Advocate or
Mediatrix in Heaven, and accordingly have recourse to her as such.

It Is true this is no more than what they do to the other Saints as well as the
Blessed VIRGIN: They pray to God through their Merits and Intercession, and by
their Mediation, as well as that of our Savior Christ, both desire and hope
the better to implore his Mercy. But then, as I before observed, That in the
Business of their Prayers they look upon the Holy MARY to have a particular
Right to them above any other Saints whatsoever; so much more in this Case,
they esteem her not only to be a more effectual Mediatrix than any of the rest
of the Saints, but to have a more peculiar Right to that Title and Dignity: And
which from one of their own approved Authors, I will therefore here crave leave
to explain to you.

To be a Mediator, says he, and to discharge the Office of such a one, Crasset
ver. dev. part. 1. p. 14.
it is requisite that he who asks any thing in that respect, should have *
merited that which he desires to obtain; that he should have * offered his
Merits to that end, and that God should have * accepted of them. It is this
which renders Jesus Christ, our only and true Mediator. But the Saints have not
* merited any Good for us during this Life, they have not * offered to God
their Merits in favor of us, nor has God * accepted them to any such End. It Is
the Blessed Virgin alone that has any part in this Glory with her Son: * For
she obtains nothing for us but what she merited during her Life: -- * She has
also offered all her Actions and Sufferings jointly with those of Jesus Christ
for the Salvation of all Men; * And God has accepted this Offering, as S.
Bonaventure and other Divines teach. And again -- She is therefore our
Mediatrix, Ibid.
inasmuch as she offered her Son freely and voluntarily to the Death, for the
Salvation of Mankind.

Such is the Title which they suppose the Holy MARY has to be our Advocate, not
only above all other Saints, but in the same manner that our Savior Christ
himself is: and the consequence of it appears in these two Advantages which
they imagine to be in her Mediation above that of any other Saint: viz. first,
"That it is more extensive: Crasset ib.
The Merits of the Saints are limited to certain Graces, to certain Countries,
and to certain Persons. But the Blessed Virgin is a universal Cause, the virtue
of which extends over all Places, in all Times, to all sorts of Goods or Evils,
and to all sorts of Persons. Her Charity is in some sort infinite, and has
neither Bounds nor Measure. Secondly, That it is more efficacious. The Saints
are not always heard, nor do they always obtain what they desire. But the
Blessed VIRGIN obtains whatsoever she demands. And her Quality of MOTHER gives
her a Power in some manner, to alter the Decrees of Providence it self.
Crasset, p. 15, 16. Suarez. tom. 2. in 3. disp. 23. 2.
Insomuch that Suarez doubted not to say, That should all the Saints of
Paradise ask one thing of God, See Lucians Dialog. Mars and Mercury.
and the Virgin Mary alone oppose it; or should she demand any Favor, and all
the Saints be set against it, her Interest alone would carry it against them
all, upon the account of that Prerogative which is due to her Dignity as
Mother, to the excellence of her Grace, and to the Perfection of her Charity.

And thus one would think they had given her a sufficient Authority in the
Court of Heaven; and yet we must go one step farther: For,

5. If we may conclude any thing either from the Tenor of those Addresses that
even by public Authority are made to her in that Church; or from the open
Declarations of some of the chiefest Persons that have been in the Roman
Communion, She has even her self Power to Remit Sins, and to Confer Grace, and
to Save those who call upon her, and trust to her for their Salvation.

For the former of these their public Addresses to Her: What else can we make
of them, but that they are plain Suppositions of such an Authority in her, as I
have now observed. If they confess their Sins; they do it not only to God, but
to the Blessed Virgin too: If they absolve their Penitents, the Merits of the
Mother are joined to the Passion of the Son for their Forgiveness. If they
pray, it is that Mary and her Son would bless them: If they salute her, the
Complement is, Hail Queen, Crasset. devot. ver. par. 1. p. 11.
Mother of Mercy, our Life, our Sweetness, and our Hope, all hail. We miserable
Children of Eve, send forth our Cries to you; to you we sigh, weeping and
groaning in this Valley of Misery: Go to therefore O our Advocate, and turn
those merciful Eyes of yours toward us, and make us after this our Exile to
see Jesus the blessed Fruit of your Womb. Amen. In short, such is their
Extravagance as to this Matter, that I scarce know any one part of their
Religious Service, the Sacrifice of the Mass only excepted, and even that too
they offer to her Honor, and in her Veneration, in which they do esteem her
worthy an equal share not with our Savior Christ himself, and therefore in
reason ought to suppose the same Power in her, as they do in him, seeing they
worship them both alike.

And for the Opinions of their learned Men, in conformity to this Superstition,
I should be infinite should I repeat the one half of their Excesses. I will
offer to you a short Specimen of the Questions only which a late Author among
them has stated with great Approbation, and from thence leave you to judge of
the rest. * Whether to be devoted to the Blessed VIRGIN be not a Mark of a
Man's Predestination? And though without a particular Revelation no one can,
according to their Doctrine, be sure that he is of the number of the
predestinate; yet as they allow that there are certain Marks whereon to found a
probable Conjecture: so among those, which is as much as can be said in this
Case, he doubts not to place this in the first rank, to be devoted to the
Virgin MARY. Crasset. par. 1. p. 39, 40. Ibid. p. 54.
Secondly, * Whether a Christian that is devoted to the Blessed VIRGIN can be
damned? To which he answers roundly, That he cannot. Thirdly, * Whether God
refuses any thing to the Blessed VIRGIN? And indeed we need not wonder that
they are peremptory in this, that he does not, when their Church it self calls
upon her to show her self to be a Mother; and once at least did pray to her,
that by the Right which she had over her Son, she would command him? Fourthly,
* Whether the Blessed VIRGIN loves Sinners? i. e. so as to save them. And of
this the Blessed VIRGIN her self has given us an Assurance: In this famous
Revelation to one of the Saints of that Church: I am, Crasset. ib. p. 86. Ex
libr. vi. revelat. S. Brigittae.
says she, the Queen of Heaven, I am the Mother of Mercy, the Joy of the Just,
and the Gate by which Sinners must go to God. And there is no Sinner so far
from God, but what shall return to him and obtain Mercy, provided only that he
call upon me, and put his Trust in me.

But I shall pursue these Extravagancies no farther; from what I have said we
may see what their Opinions are of the Holy MARY in that wherein they differ
from us; viz. That she is to be honored with a Religious Worship above any
other Saint: That she is to be prayed to as an Advocate and Mediatrix in
Heaven; that she has Authority to do what ever she pleases there, and in effect
does partake of the most proper and peculiar Attributes and Prerogatives of the
Divinity. Let us enquire in the next place,

2. What their Practices are toward her, in conformity to these Opinions?

I shall need say the less as to this Point, having already in great measure
exhausted it in the Account I have given of the foregoing. There is so near a
connection between the Opinions of the Church of Rome and their Practices,
founded upon them, with reference to the Blessed VIRGIN, that it is impossible
to mention the one without inferring the other as consequent upon it. He that
says that the Blessed VIRGIN ought to be prayed to, does imply, That if he
believes himself in what he affirms, he must then pray to her: And so of all
the other Instances I before mentioned. But yet because this will still the
more clearly show the true state of the Difference between us, I will make a
few Reflections upon the Practice of Piety which is found in the other Church
toward the Holy MARY, in two Considerations; 1. Of the public Worship that is
offered to her. 2. Of the private Devotion which is usually practiced and
recommended by them toward the Blessed VIRGIN.


For the former of these,

1. The public Worship that is given to her in the Church of Rome.

It runs through all the Parts of their Offices; and scarce any holy Exercise
performed among them that is not infected with this Superstition.

If we consider the public Prayers of the Church; sometimes we find the Mass
it self said to her Honor; and in the very Canon of it, God is constantly
desired, That for her Merits he would grant them the help of his Protection. In
all their Hours they close with a particular Salutation and Address to her; and
once every Week, Card. Bona. de Div. Psalmod. c. 16. p. 551.
if no more, a particular Office is publicly said to her.

If we look into their other solemn Acts of Devotion; I have already observed
what a Share she has in their Confessions and Absolutions: Three times every
Day, at the sound of a Bell, all her Votaries are taught to fall down and
worship her. What the Allowance and Encouragements have been to the Practice of
her Rosary, Crasset. par. 2. p. 309.
and what a mighty place this Devotion has among them I need not say. In their
solemn Sermons to the People, the Preacher never fails first to invoke the
Assistance of the Virgin MARY, in the angelical Salutation: and lest Men should
not by all this be sufficiently encouraged to a public. Devotion to her; there
have been particular ways found out to carry them the more readily thereunto.
'Twas for this that the Order of the Scapulary was set up about 400 Years ago;
Crasset. ib. p. 314.
and to which Men are encouraged by no less a Promise than that of a
Deliverance from Damnation by the Blessed Virgin; and from Purgatory, by the
Promises of five or six of their Popes. To the same purpose, Crasset. ib. p.
321.
in the last Century, Pope Gregory the xiiith first, and Sixtus the vth
afterward, set up another kind of Order, the Congregations of the Annunciation
to the same End: And the solemn Admission into which is made by the Dedication
of him that enters to the Service of the Blessed VIRGIN, whom he there chooses
to be his Lady, Patroness, and Advocate, and vows to honor, Crasset. ib. 329.
serve and love unto his life's end.

I might to this add that other long Catalogue of Superstition; Crasset. par.
2. trait. 6. Contempl. p. 7. etc.
the building of Churches, and setting up Altars and Images to her Honor.
Their Pilgrimages that are made to them; their Litanies and Processions, in
which she bears no small part of the Service: The dedicating whole Countries
and Kingdoms to her, as her own proper Inheritance: The glorious Titles and
Attributes which they give her in all their Prayers; and many other Instances
no less superstitious than these. And by all which it plainly appears, That
they have too much divided their Love, Service and Obedience; nay their very
Faith and Hope between God and her; as if the End of Christianity had been no
less to teach us how to magnify the Mother, than how to serve and honor and
believe in the Son; and the Duty of a Christian were as much to set forth her
Praise, as our Savior's Glory.

But I shall stop here, and add only a Word or two.

2. Of that Private Devotion which is usually practiced by, and recommended to
her Votaries.

Many are the Instances that I might offer of this, but I shall take a few
only, as they lie together in the late Directions that have been given by one
of their own Authors to this purpose.

Contempl. p. 8.
1. To have a high Value for her sublime Dignity; to congratulate her in the
full Possession of it, to make a public Profession of this our high Esteem of
her incomparable Perfections; and to invite others to the like Valuation of
them.

Ibid. p. 9.
2. To express these inward Affections, by external Acts of the Worship of
eminent Servitude toward her: By frequent visiting Holy Places dedicated to
her Honor: By a special Reverence toward Images, representing her Person: By
performing some daily Devotions containing her Praises, congratulating her
Excellencies, or imploring her Mediation: And by often calling upon the sacred
Name of Holy MARY.

3. By having a firm and unshaken confidence in her Patronage, Ibid. p. 9.
amidst the greatest of our inward Conflicts with Sensuality, and outward
Tribulations from the adverse Casualties of this Life.

4. By inducing enormous Sinners to this firm Confidence in the eminent Power
of the MOTHER of JESUS, Ibid. p. 10.
to redress the greatest of their Evils and Miseries by their being under her
Protection.

5. By referring all the wonderful Effects of our Predestination to Glory, Idem
ibid.
Election by Grace, and Redemption from sin through the Blood of JESUS, to the
excellent Perfections of MARY as a most effectual means of all.

6. By accustoming our selves to some set Form of Devotion daily to be
practiced in Honor of the Mother of JESUS: Ibid. p. 12.
And,

Lastly, By entering a solemn Covenant with Holy MARY to be for ever her
Servant, Client and Devote, Idem ibid.
under some special Rule, Society or Form of Life; and thereby dedicating our
Persons, Concerns, Actions, and all the Moments and Events of our Life to JESUS
under the Protection of his Divine MOTHER, choosing her to be our Adoptive
Mother, Patroness and Advocate: And entrusting her with whatever we are, have
or do, or Hope in Life, Death and through all Eternity.

Such is the public and private Devotion taught by them to the Blessed VIRGIN.
I might very much have increased the number of these Reflections, should I have
pursued all these Extravagancies that they have been guilty of in this kind.
For indeed, who can repeat all the Legends of her Miracles, the Excesses of her
Votaries, the numerous, and too often scandalous Stories of her Actions and
Apparitions to them? What Kindness she has shown to her Servants, and what
Civilities she has permitted them to show to her? I might to these have added
the Flights of their Poetry, and sometimes of their most solemn Devotions to
her; nay, and have shown you the Psalms of David; and all the high and noble
Strains of Devotion to God expressed in them by a strange Impiety, turned all
to the Honor of the Virgin MARY: Nay the very Creeds of the Church burlesqued
to her Service.

But these are things that can neither be spoken or heard by any Christian,
without Sorrow and Indignation, at such wild and endless Freaks of
Superstition, Great is the Corruption certainly of that Church, which not only
suffers these Abuses, but avows and encourages them: And as we have seen at the
Beginning of this Discourse, reviles us for not believing and practicing such
Abominations. But upon what just Grounds it is that we herein depart from them,
if the very mention only of these Impieties be not sufficient to convince you;
I shall not doubt but most plainly to show, in my third and last Point now to
be considered: Wherein I am

III.
Thirdly, To offer some of those Reasons for which we think such a Worship as
this to be unlawful, and therefore refuse to give it to her.

And this I shall do according to the Order I have hitherto observed, 1. With
reference to their Opinions concerning the Blessed VIRGIN. 2. To their
Practices, consequent to these Opinions.


I begin with the former of these Considerations.

I. Whether the Opinions before mentioned, wherein those of the Church of Rome
differ from us, as to the Point of Honor to the Blessed VIRGIN, be such as we
may warrantably entertain of any mere Creature?

And because I would now reduce my Discourse within as narrow Bounds as the
Nature of the Argument will allow of, I shall examine this Matter in three
Instances only, and to which the most considerable Differences between us may
be referred; viz.

1. Of her capacity to understand all the Prayers that are every where made to
her. 2. Of her Right and Title to intercede for us: And 3. Of the Reasons and
Grounds upon which they give her those Titles, and ascribe to her that
Authority, which in their public Addresses they allow to her.
And first let us enquire,

1. Whether we may warrantably ascribe to the Blessed VIRGIN, a Capacity to
understand all the Prayers that are every where made to her.

It is a Subject that has long entertained the Minds and exercised the Pens of
the Votaries of the Virgin MARY and the Saints, How or by what means it is that
they understand all the Prayers that are any where made to them by any of their
Suppliants on Earth. And I do not find that either they yet are, or seem at all
likely ever to be agreed on this Point. But thus far they appear to be all of
them well assured, That by whatever means it is, their Prayers are some way or
other most certainly conveyed to them, because that otherwise it would be a
most senseless and absurd Practice to call upon them.

Apol. for the Contempl. p. 74, 82, 83.
I shall not here dispute the Power of God, what he can do as to this Matter, or
what, for ought I know, he may do at some Times, and on some certain Occasions;
in extraordinarily revealing many of those things to the Saints above, which
are done by us here below. It is plain this can be no sufficient Foundation of
constant Prayer to them in all Places and on all Occasions, Bellarm. de Purg.
l. it. c. 15.
that God may possibly sometimes communicate some things to them: Unless we
could be sure what things, and at what time, and to what Saints he did this.
God may, if he please communicate what I speak here, to my Friend abroad in
another part of the World. But he would hardly be thought very well in his
Wits* who should on this possibility every Day in a very solemn manner entreat
his Prayers, or ask some Courtesy of him.

To render all the Prayers, of all Men, Bellarm. de Eccles. Triumph. l. 1. c.
20.
at any time, or in any place, a wise and rational Service, it is plain they
must suppose that the Saints above, and in particular that the Blessed VIRGIN
has a certain and distinct knowledge of all the Actions, Words, and even of the
most secret Thoughts (forasmuch as they allow of Mental, as well as Vocal
Prayer to her) of all Men here upon Earth. But to ascribe such a Power to her,
is to raise Her above the state of a mere Creature, to invest her with some of
the most proper and incommunicable Attributes of God, and in effect to make,
what some of them stick not freely to style her, a Goddess of her; which
certainly cannot be done without a very great Impiety.

It is one of the great Reasons why God requires the Service of Prayer from us,
because the very Exercise of it keeps up in our minds the most lively Idea's of
His infinite Nature, his unbounded Providence, and his incomprehensible
Perfections. Whilst by calling every where upon him, we do in effect
acknowledge the Immensity of the Godhead, which is every where present: By
lifting up the Aspirations of our Hearts toward him, we profess the Belief of
his Omniscience, That he searches the Heart, and knows the secrets of all
the Children of Men: By asking all sorts of Blessings of him, whether to
deliver us from any Evil, or to grant us any Good, we confess the Sovereign
Authority of his Providence over us, and declare his Omnipotence who can do
whatever he pleases, and manifest our trust and dependence upon him. In a word,
By all Creatures doing this, in all places, and at the same time; we set forth
the vast capacity of his immense Nature, that is able to attend, without
distraction, at once, to all the Affairs of the World; and can, without
confusion, both hear and answer whatever Requests are made to him.

But now to suppose that any mere Creature can do this, what is it but to
confound that infinite distance that above all things ought the most carefully
to be kept up in the Minds of Men, between God and Us: And leave no Perfection
in the one so proper to him, as not to be communicable to the other? And yet
however they may think fit to palliate this matter, it is plain, he that will
pray with any tolerable reason or confidence to the Blessed VIRGIN, must
suppose all this: He must in effect esteem her, what the very act of his
calling upon her supposes her to be, Omniscient, Immense, Omnipresent, and even
Omnipotent too. It being otherwise a most stupid thing for millions of Men
every hour to pray to one who has no power to hear their Prayers; to offer up
the motions of their Souls to one that cannot search or know their Hearts; and
ask all manner of Blessings of her, who has neither Ability nor Authority to
confer any upon them.

Now it is upon this ground then, that, without considering of what kind the
Requests are that are made to the Blessed VIRGIN, we look upon the very Act it
self of Invocation, to be an Act, indeed one of the most proper Acts, of
Religious Worship, and by consequence such as ought to be paid to God only. And
though they may pretend, that it is no more to pray to the Holy MARY in Heaven,
than it would be to desire the Prayers or Assistance of some Friend on Earth;
yet it is apparent from what I have now been speaking, that there is a very
vast difference between these two; the one supposing no Power or Perfection in
our Friend, but what may without danger be ascribed to a Creature; the other
necessarily implying such as are peculiar to God only. For to consider this
Pretense in a Reflection or two:

First, Does any Man that is well in his Wits discourse with his Friend at a
thousand Miles distance from him, with that seriousness that those who worship
the Blessed VIRGIN pray to Her? And yet why is the one esteemed a piece of
Piety, while the other would be thought mere madness, but only that they
suppose the Blessed VIRGIN, though absent from them, nevertheless to be capable
of knowing what they do, while they think the other is not in a capacity of so
doing? For as for Gods communicating it to her, I presume he is as well able to
do it in the one instance as in the other; and I think I may say, he has as
much promised he will do the first as the last; that is indeed, there is no
grounds that he will do it to either.

Or, Secondly, Were this a rational thing, would yet they themselves endure
that a Man should, in the House of God, and in the midst of his solemn
Devotions to him, not only desire, but in the same breath with which he
addresses to God, invoke the Assistance of a pious Christian yet living upon
Earth? Would they think this no more than an act of Brotherly Charity, and
which one Christian might warrantably use toward another?

Much less, Thirdly, Would they permit the Images of a living Christian to be
set up in their Churches; Candles to be burnt before them; and Incense offered
to them; his Name to be put in the Liturgies of the Church, and all the
Faithful upon Earth be directed and encouraged every where to pray to Him, as a
most useful and innocent piece of Piety: And with the same opinion and
confidence of his hearing their Prayers, and answering their desires, as they
now call upon the Blessed VIRGIN? Would they say that this were no more than to
ask a private Friend, as we have opportunity, to pray for us; or to desire by
Letter, the Supplications of our absent Brethren in our behalf?

And yet much less, Fourthly, Would they permit this living Christian, not only
to be thus called upon to pray for his Votaries, but to bless them too, to keep
them in their Lives, and to receive them at the hour of Death?

If indeed these are Instances of Brotherly Charity, I shall for my part be
content to allow, that their Devotion to the Holy MARY is no more. But if the
very Supposition of such a Power as this be something beyond the natural
Abilities of any Creature on Earth, with what Conscience can it be said, that
when they consecrate the Images of the Blessed VIRGIN, burn Tapers and Incense
before them, list themselves under her Protection, commit all the care of their
Salvation to her, call her the Queen of Heaven, and Sovereign Lady of Angels
and Men; put her Name into their Liturgies, erect Congregations to her Honor,
set apart Festivals and Days for her particular Service, and then call upon her
at the same time in all Parts of the World, and this as expecting no small
benefit from their Prayers; and therefore certainly in a confidence that she,
though Ten thousand times farther off from us, than one Christian on Earth can
be from another, does nevertheless know what they call upon her for, and can
and will grant their desires; I say, with what Conscience can it be pretended,
that in all this they do but entertain a Brotherly Communion with her; and in
effect do no more than when a Christian here below desires a Fellow-Christian
to pray for Him.

It remains therefore, that to ascribe to the Holy MARY such a Power as is
necessary to receive our Prayers, and to attend to our Petitions, and to search
our Hearts, and know the motions of our Souls toward her, and answer us
accordingly; is to raise her above the state of a Creature, and therefore
unlawful for us so to do. And it is observable, that when the Ancient Fathers
first began to make some kind of Addresses to the Holy Martyrs, not only the
Subject of them was innocent, but the Supposition on which they went, as to
this Point of the Saints or Martyrs hearing them, however fanciful, yet was
such as did not ascribe any undue Perfections to them. They called upon them,
not in all places, and at all times indifferently, but only at their Monuments,
at the places of their Suffering, where their Bodies or Relics were interred,
and about which they had a conceit that their Souls hovered for some time; and
therefore being present with them, were capable of knowing their desires. In
process of time they began to multiply the places of calling upon them; and
then there grew a Question in the Church, Gratian. c. 13. q. 2 de Mortuis, c.
29. p. 1304, 1305. Par. 1585.
Whether the Dead know the things that are done in this World by the Living?
And in particular, Whether the Saints do hear the Prayers of Suppliants, so as
to understand the Requests that are made to them? This was at first resolved in
the Negative; but by degrees it grew to be more a doubt: Sent. l. iv. did. 45.
Lombard thought it was not incredible, but that they might know our Affairs as
far as was requisite either for their Joy, or our Help. But Scotus went
farther, and esteemed it probable, Scotus in Sent. iv. did. 45. q. 4. Rubio in
Sent. l. iv. d. 25.
that God does specially reveal to them such of our Prayers as are made unto
them: And so it continued for some time, till at last it was found necessary to
have the thing certainly believed, for the Reason I before gave: And then
Cardinal Bellarmin roundly concluded, Bellarm. li. cc. See above.
That seeing otherwise it would be in vain to pray ordinarlly to those that we
could not be sure were ordinarily able to receive our Prayers, and understand
our Desires; therefore it is certain the Saints above do know them. And another
tells us, Pesant. in 1 Thom. qu. 12. ar. 10. disp. 7. Conclus. 6.
That it is a Matter of Faith, that the Blessed above do know the Prayers that we
pour out unto them, seeing otherwise they would be made in vain. And even our
late Expositors are not only contented to allow all this to the Saints, by a
Light communicated to them by God; but give us some insinuation, as if they did
not know why the Saints might not be allowed some knowledge even of themselves,
of what is done here below, Exposit. of Bishop Meaux,. iv.
as also of our secret Thoughts.

And thus have we at last these Blessed SPIRITS invested with the Power and
Attributes of the Divinity: And, as some have not doubted to call them, made
Gods by Participation; Bellarm. de Cult. ss l. 3. c. 9. p. 223^.
that is, Partakers of the Immensity, and other Prerogatives of God.

But let those who presume to allow this to any Saint in Heaven, consider a
little who it is that has said, I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory
will I not give unto another: And certainly then they will see some cause, if
not to correct their own ungrounded Error in this Matter, yet at least to think
a little more favorably of us, that we dare not presume to join with them in
it. But,

Secondly, The Second Point wherein we suppose them to have erred in their
Opinions of the Blessed Virgin, is, That they ascribe to her the Right of a
Mediatrix to intercede for us.

Now by a Right of Interceding for us, I do not mean such an Intercession as
the Faithful here upon Earth many times make for one another; when they put up
their Prayers to God to forgive their Sins, or to grant them any Blessings
which they stand in need of. Whether the Saints above do in general pray for us
or no, is a Point which none of us can certainly resolve, and therefore is not
fit to be disputed by any. That they have a great deal of Love and Charity for
us, is not to be doubted; but how they express it, God has no where thought fit
to declare to us, nor is it therefore either fit or needful for us to enquire
into it. The Intercession which I here mean, is of another nature; and implies
such a kind of Prayer as is founded on the Merits of the Person that
intercedes; whereby he is able to plead a Right to Gods Mercy: So that we may
entreat God for his Merits to grant us his Pardon and Forgiveness.

Now, that this is the true Notion which those of the Roman Church have both in
general of a Mediator, and in particular of the Blessed VIRGIN, when they
address to her as their Advocate; is not only clear from the very Addresses
themselves which they make to her, but is moreover acknowledged by themselves
in the accounts they give us of this Power which they ascribe to her. I have
before observed from one of their own Authors, Crasset, par. 1. p. 14.
That to be a Mediator, and to discharge the Office of such a one, Three things
are required: viz. First, That he who intercedes should have Merited that for
which he asks: Secondly, That he should have offered his Merits to that End:
And, Thirdly, That God should have accepted of them: And all this, they say, is
true of the Virgin MARY. She has merited all that she asks for us; She offered
her Merits to be joined with those of her Son for our Salvation, and God has
accepted and ratified the Offering, in order to that End. Now that in this they
attribute that to the Virgin MARY, which the Holy Scriptures have every where
reserved as the peculiar Prerogative of our Savior Christ, not only St. Paul
plainly declares, but the whole Analogy of the Old and New Testament assures us
of it.

1. If first we consider the express Words of Holy Scripture, what can be more
plain than that Declaration of S. Paul to Timothy, 1 Epist. ii.5. That to us
Christians there is as but one God, so but one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. For if there be but
one Mediator, and that the Man Christ Jesus, how then is the Virgin Mary too
our Advocate in Heaven? If the Foundation of Christ's Intercession for us be
built upon his Death, as this Text plainly declares, so that he is therefore
our Mediator to intercede for us in Heaven, because he was our Sacrifice and
Propitiation, i. e. our Mediator of Redemption on Earth: If the Intercession
which he makes for us be this, That God having covenanted with him to forgive
us, if he would lay down his Life for us, our Savior Christ having done this,
does therefore now, in Right of this Covenant, represent his Death and Passion
to his Father for our Forgiveness; then it must follow, That as the Blessed
VIRGIN has neither any Merits of this kind to plead, nor did God ever enter
into any Covenant with her to accept of any thing she did in order to our
Salvation, so neither has she any Right to intercede for us in Heaven, nor
ought we therefore to pray to her so to do.

It is I know a Distinction which some here make use of, when forced by the
evidence of Truth to confess Christ to be our only Mediator, That there are two
sorts of Mediators, one of Redemption, the other of Intercession: That Christ
only is our Mediator of Redemption, and alone can plead a Right to our
Forgiveness; but that others, and especially the Virgin MARY is a Mediator of
Intercession, to implore God's Favor by humble Prayer and Supplication for us.
But besides that it is evident from what I have before observed, That this is
not indeed all the Opinion they have of the Blessed Virgin as our Mediatrix,
whom they allow to have Merits to plead as well as her Son, and to intercede by
a proper Right and Title for us; this Distinction is wholly frivolous: Since as
I have now shown the very Foundation of Christ's interceding for us in Heaven,
is founded on his Suffering for us upon Earth; and no one can appear in the
Presence of God to ask our Pardon there, but he only who died and gave himself
a Ransom for us here.

2. But secondly, this will appear more clearly, if we consider the Analogy
which the Author to the Hebrews makes between the two Covenants, and compare
the Highpriests interceding for the People under the Law, with our Savior
Christ's interceding for us in Heaven.

It was the Ordinance of God, under the Mosaical Dispensation, that upon the
great Day of Expiation the High Priest should offer a propitiatory Sacrifice
for the Sins of the whole People: And then carry the Blood of the Sacrifice
into the most Holy Place, and present it before God, and so make an expiation
for them. Now the Law having a shadow of good things to come, we are hereby
taught to make this plain Application; That Christ, our High Priest, having
offered up himself as an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World,
is now ascended into Heaven, the most Holy Place, there to appear in the
Presence of God for us; and by presenting his Blood before the Throne of Grace
to make an Atonement for the Sins of all the true Israelites, who trust in it
for their Forgiveness.

And as under the Law, no one was to appear in the Presence of God, but the
High Priest only, under Pain of Death, and he only once a Year, having first
offered up the Blood of the Sacrifice; so now under the Gospel, Christ only
appears in the Presence of God, with his own Blood, to intercede for us; and
it is through his Merits and Mediation alone, not through that of any other
whatsoever in Heaven or Earth, that we ought therefore to apply our selves to
God for Pardon and Salvation.

But still the Distinction before made will recur upon us: For be it that
Christ only has a Power to plead the Satisfaction of his Death for our
Forgiveness; yet may not the Blessed Virgin and the Saints too pray for the
same thing, and in this Respect be called our Advocates and Mediators? To this
I answer, first; That what the Blessed VIRGIN and the other Saints may do, as
to this Matter, is unknown to us: In general they may possibly pray to God, to
endue us with his Grace, whereby we may repent and be saved; But then neither
have we any Assurance that they do this, much less that they do it in
particular for every single Person that calls upon them; neither if they did,
would this entitule them to the Name and Dignity of Mediators, properly so
called, nor warrant us to pray to them as such. Secondly, much less would this
be sufficient to engage us to put them in an equal Rank of Mediation with
Christ himself: to join his Merits and theirs together; and pray to God* that
for our Savior and the Virgin's sake he would forgive us; which yet the Church
of Rome most notoriously does. And besides, for what concerns our present
purpose, Thirdly, This is not all they allow to the Holy MARY, when they call
upon her as their Advocate: No, they tell us plainly, as you have before seen,
that she obtains nothing of God but what she has merited for us, she having
joined her Actions and Sufferings to those of Christ for the Salvation of
Mankind, and God having accepted of them for that End. And this I suppose I
have sufficiently shown to be utterly repugnant to the whole tenor of the
New Covenant, and to the Analogy which the Holy Scripture it self has made
between that and the Old.

Let us therefore go on, and enquire in the last place,

Thirdly, Whether there be any reason why we should give her those Titles, and
ascribe to her such an Authority as in all their Solemn Addresses they allow to
Her.

And, First, For what concerns those Titles which they give her, we shall need
no long search after them: The Litany of the Blessed VIRGIN alone contains
above forty of them, and scarce one of which can without a very favorable
Construction be allowed to her. But indeed having formed all their Devotion
upon this Foundation, of turning the Kingdom of Heaven into an Earthly Court;
having set up the Saints as Masters of Requests, to receive Addresses, and
present them to God as King; it was but fit afterward to keep up the Decorum,
by raising the Blessed Virgin to the Dignity of QVEEN there; and then they
ought not to address to her, without all the Titles and Ceremonies that became
the Quality to which they had raised her.

Now it is to this Vanity we may ascribe the Eight last Compellations we meet
with in her Litany; and by which she is set forth to us as Queen of Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all Saints:
And in all which, if there be not some Excess, yet doubtless there is a great
deal of Presumption, and of the vain leaven of Humane Folly and Ambition. To
call upon God Himself in a multiplicity of Attributes, which are neither
pertinent to our purpose, nor otherwise apt to raise those Affections in our
Souls that are proper to the Holy Exercise we are about, is an argument of our
Weakness and Vanity, rather than an instance of a reasonable and religious
Respect. But to set up a poor, humble Woman in such a formal Pageantry of
Majesty and Glory: To address to Saints in Heaven, as if they valued the little
Ceremonies and Titles to which Men on Earth aspire, this is at best to show a
mind too much affected with the Vanities of this World; but to do it without
all warrant from God, or so much as the least signification of his Pleasure in
it, is, I think, too near a presumptuous Impiety.

But these are not the Titles that the most offend us: Others there are which
we esteem by so much the more dangerous, by how much the more they encroach on
the peculiar Attributes of God and our Blessed Savior. For indeed, to whom
else can it belong to be esteemed the Help of Christians, the Comforter of the
Afflicted, the Refuge of Sinners, the Gate of Heaven, the Ark of the Covenant,
the C^^se of our Joy, the Seat of Wisdom, and Mirror of Justice; but to Him
alone who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, from whom all Help, and
Comfort, and Refuge to Sinners, does descend; and who alone, by being the Gate
of Heaven to us, is thereby the Cause of all our Joy.

I will not deny but that it may be possible for those who have found out a way
to reduce all the Prayers that are made to the Blessed VIRGIN to that one
sense, Pray for us; to find out some convenient meaning for all these dangerous
Titles too. But in the mean time, to what a desperate state, O God! must that
Church be arrived; That those things should be a part of their Solemn Service,
which cannot be uttered without Impiety, nor be excused but by this shameful
Pretense; that in their Public Devotions, when one would think, if ever, they
should take the Advice of Solomon, Eccles. v.2.
not to be rash with their mouths, nor hasty to utter any thing before God,
even there they speak one thing and mean another; they speak little less than
Blasphemy, but still with a very pious and innocent meaning, and such as no
body would suspect to be intended by their words.

Secondly, As for the other thing here to be considered, the Attributes which
they ascribe to the Blessed Virgin, these are yet more dangerous than the worst
of all their Compellations of her. Such are,

1. Their ascribing to her a Power not only of hearing their Prayers, but of
dispensing also Blessings unto them: Let MARY and her SON bless us: Hail, Holy
Queen, Mother of Mercy, our Life, our Sweetness, and our Hope: To thee do we
cry, poor banished Sons of Eve: To thee do we send up our Sighs, mourning and
weeping in this Valley of Tears. Turn then, most Gracious Advocate, thy
merciful Eyes toward us; and after this our Exile ended, show us the Blessed
Fruit of thy Womb.

2. Of delivering them from danger. So in her Office; We fly to your
Protection, O Holy Mother of God; despise not our Prayers which we make to you
in our Necessities, but deliver us from all dangers, O ever Glorious and
Blessed VIRGIN!

3. Of enabling them to praise Her, and to overcome Her Enemies: Vouchsafe that
we may be worthy to praise thee, O Holy VIRGIN; and grant us strength and power
against thine Enemies.

4. Of succouring them in their greatest Necessities: MARY Mother of Grace,
Mother of Mercy, do thou protect us from our Enemy, and receive us in the hour
of Death.

5. And lastly, not to mention any more: A capacity to receive Praise and Glory
together with God and our Blessed Savior, in our most sacred returns of
Thanksgiving to them: So a late Author in our own Language: "Open my lips, O
Mother of Jesus!
Contempl. of the B. Virgin, p. 23.
"And my Soul shall speak forth "thy praise.
" Divine Lady be intent to my aid;
"Graciously make have to help me.
" Glory be to JESUS and MARY.
"As it was, is, and ever shall be.


Now in all these Instances, and many others that I might have mentioned,
either they really intend what their words signify; and then what can all this
be but a most desperate Superstition, to give all those Attributes, the Power,
the Glory, to a mere Creature, that is due only to God: Or, if they do not,
what is it then but to mock both God and the Blessed VIRGIN, to complement her
with such Titles, and ask of her such things, and offer her such Praises, by
which at the same time they neither seriously intend to signify any thing; but
on the contrary, believe they should be guilty of a great Impiety, should they
really mean what their words do certainly denote.

And if this be the case as to the Foundation of all that Service which these
Votaries of the Blessed VIRGIN give her beyond us, it must then necessarily
follow, that their practice built upon it, can have no very good Establishment.
And I shall need say very little to Apologize for our Church, in that other
instance wherein we are thought to be defective,

Secondly, In our Actions built upon these Opinions.

Now these may be reduced to Three general Points, correspondent to the Three
Instances I before laid down, and upon which these Actions are founded; viz. I.
Of our not Praying to her. II. Our not flying to her Merits and Intercession.
III. Our not paying her those other Expressions of Worship, which those of the
Church of Rome allow so profusely to her.


For the first of these;

Our not praying to the Blessed Virgin.

I have already said, That we look upon this to be a proper Act of Religious
Worship, and such as does necessarily imply a Supposition of such Excellencies
in her, as cannot be supposed in any Created Being, how great and glorious
soever it may otherwise be. And therefore that it ought to be reserved as
solely due to that God who alone is infinite in Power and Knowledge; and who
alone, by being present every where, is every where fit to be called upon.

And this I say, with reference to the very thing it self, without considering
what kind of Prayers they are that are made to her. But now, Secondly, Not only
to call upon the Blessed VIRGIN to pray for us, but that she would her self aid
and assist us; and which it is evident, that in many, if not all the Prayers of
her Office they do; this does yet more increase the danger of such a Service,
and yet more justify our refusal of it.

When therefore it shall be proved to us, either that we can with Faith call
upon the Blessed VIRGIN, and yet not suppose that she is able either to hear
our Prayers, or to answer our Desires; or that we can without Impiety suppose
that she can do either: When it can be showed, that there is any manner of
warrant in Holy Scripture, or so much as Encouragement to pray to Her; or that
it is possible for any Benefit to accrue to us by so doing, which we might not
as certainly and readily obtain by going immediately to the Throne of Grace,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. In a word, when it can be made appear to us,
either that Prayer is not a proper Act of Religious Worship, or that all such
Acts are not reserved by our Holy Religion, as due to God only: Then will we be
content that our Adversaries should accuse us as Enemies to the Holy MARY, for
not joining with them in this Service. But till then this one Consideration
shall be of more moment with us, than Ten thousand of their Anathema's, That
seeing to pray to any one, does imply the Person so called upon, to have such a
Knowledge and Power, and Presence, as no finite, created Being, is, or can be
capable of, we ought to give this Service to that God only who alone is
infinite in all these Perfections: Whom alone the Scripture sets forth to us as
a God hearing Prayers, and searching the Heart; and therefore to whom alone, in
all such Addresses, all Flesh must come.

For the next thing proposed,

Secondly, Our not flying to the Blessed VIRGINs Merits and Intercession.

What I have before offered, may suffice for our Excuse: 1 John ii.1, 2.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the
Propitiation for our Sins. This is our Mediator, who has promised us, Joh.
xv.16.
That whatsoever we ask the Father in his Name, he will give it us. Who has
invited us to come to him in all our needs; Heb. iv.1^. and v.2.
who was in all things tempted as we are, that he might know how to have
Compassion on us in our Temptations; and to whom therefore the Apostle exhorts
us to address on these Occassions, Let us therefore (says he) come boldly unto
the Throne of Grace, Heb. iv.16.
that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. And whilst
this Savior lives continually to make Intercession for us, we cannot imagine
either what Reason or Piety there can be in seeking to any other.

If indeed these Votaries of the Blessed VIRGIN can prove to us, either that
the Holy Scripture has commanded us to join the Merits and Intercession of the
Mother, See Crasset, par. 1. p. 14.
with those of the Son for our Salvation; nay, or but produce the least Example
or Encouragement to warrant our doing of it: If they can give us but any shadow
of Reason, why the Merits and Intercession of Christ should not be alone
sufficient to obtain whatever we stand in need of, without the help of any
others Merits to make them the more effectual; or being so, why we should seek
to any others Intercession: If they can show, that notwithstanding all the
Promises before made to us, yet really our Savior Christ does not love us so
well as the Virgin MARY; nor is so ready to hear us, and pity us; to accept our
Prayers, and present them to God, as he has declared himself to be; and that
the Blessed VIRGIN is more willing, and kind, and ready to do it for us: Then
indeed it may be worth our considering how to provide another and better
Advocate for our assistance; but till then, we shall think it enough for us
that we have an Advocate whom we know, who we are sure does hear us, and who
has promised to assist and succor us; and that therefore we need not seek to
any other* of whom we can never be sure; nay, have all the reason in the World
to believe that She can neither hear, nor help; nor will take any notice either
of our Prayers, or of our Wants.

For the last thing to be considered;

Thirdly, Those other Expressions of Worship which they allow to the Blessed
VIRGIN.

They are both too many in number, and too considerable in their weight, to be
particularly examined in this Discourse; and the same Answer will serve for
them all, That they are Instances of Worship either in themselves unlawful, or
not fit to be paid to any but to God only. I shall give an Example or two in
either kind, and so conclude.

And, First, Crasset Devot. verit. par. 2. trait. 6. p. 34 i, etc.
It is no small part of their respect to the Blessed VIRGIN, to consecrate her
Images, and set them up in their public Places of Worship; to light up
Candles, and burn Incense before them; to carry them forth in Procession, and
go on Pilgrimages to them; and report strange Miracles that have been wrought
by them. Now all these are Acts of Worship which the Word of God has expressly
and utterly forbid, and which therefore we think it to be absolutely unlawful
for any Christian to join in. God having plainly declared, that he will not
suffer any Image to be set up and honored by us; nor hold them by any means
innocent, that shall upon any account whatsoever presume so to do.

Secondly, They burn Incense to her; They build Chapels, and Altars, and
Oratories to her Service; they offer up the Mass, i. e. if they are in the
right, the Body, Soul and Divinity of the Son of God to her Veneration; They
put themselves under her Protection; Enter into Orders and Congregations for
her more particular Worship; They Vow themselves, and all they have, or hope to
have, to her; They Swear by her Name; They Pray, Confess, Absolve, in short,
apply all the most solemn parts of their Devotion to her: And by all these, and
many other Instances too long to be here particularly enumerated, they give
that Worship, and Honor and Glory to the Holy VIRGIN, which the Christian
Religion teaches us, and the Practice of the best and purest Ages of the Church
directs us to give to God only.

Now if these things be indeed so as we suppose, and as I think I may presume
to say I have in some measure proved them to be; then certainly it cannot be
wondered, if we refuse to give that Service to the Virgin MARY, which we are
persuaded belongs to God alone. But if we are mistaken in our Opinions, and
that all this which I have here mentioned, these Doctrines and these Practices,
be no more than what may be ascribed to a mere Creature; let this be once
evidently made out to us, and then they may with some color of Justice pass
that Censure upon us, which till then will be nothing but an ungrounded
Calumny; that for not doing such things as these, we are none of those of whom
that Blessed VIRGIN prophesied in the Text, That behold from thenceforth all
Generations should call her Blessed.

I have now done with the several Points I proposed to speak to; and shall
perhaps be thought by some to have insisted more than was necessary upon the
discovery of these kind of Superstitions. But from this Suspicion I doubt not
but you will soon clear me, if you will please only to go along with me in a
few Reflections arising from what has been offered, and with which I shall
close up this Discourse.

And the First is, of the great Importance of this Subject, upon many accounts
to us. The Errors I have now been encountering, are not of any ordinary kind:
They represent to you one of the greatest of Sins, the Worshipping of the
Creature with the Service due to the Creator; and which I had rather thus
describe, than (...) by its proper Name to you. And what the sad Consequence of
it ^as been, appears in this; That while they have thus labored to set up the
Veneration of the Blessed VIRGIN, they have but too much debased the Honor of
our LORD; and lessened His Glory, to raise Hers.

I need not say how much more Piety is shown by many of that Communion,
especially among the vulgar sort, to MARY, than to CHRIST himself. How many
more particular Votaries she has, and how much more trust and confidence is put
in her Intercession, than in that of the Blessed JESUS. I do not charge the
whole Church of Rome as guilty of all this; but I must needs say I could
heartily wish they were not all too much accessory to it. Whilst by such
Principles and such Practices as these, they not only give occasion to the
common sort to run into undue Excesses; but permit their more learned Guides
even to encourage them in it.

It is well known, how far Father Craesset abroad, and one of our own
Countrymen nearer home, has but very lately revived the almost forgotten
Excesses of former Ages. And when one of their own Communion, Widenfelt's
Advices of the Bl. Virgin.
afraid, and indeed ashamed of these Abuses, put forth some Advices for the
Correction of them, instead of encouraging the Admonition, all the Powers of
the Church were thought too little to overwhelm him, as if he had preached some
new Gospel, or denied the Son of God to be come in the Flesh.

And now when this is the Case, I do not well see how they will be able to
clear themselves altogether of those Follies, which they so readily encourage;
and not only neglect to correct themselves, but will not suffer those who
would, to do it.

Nay, but we must not stop here: They have given a yet greater encouragement to
the dishonor of our Savior than this. If we look into their Churches, and
there view their Pictures, and their Images, those Books of the Ignorant, as
they are pleased to call them; what can be either more wretched in it self, or
more apt to seduce unthinking Votaries, than every where to see Holy MARY with
our Savior still an Infant in her Arms; as if he were never to get out of the
state of his Pupillage.

And this were yet tolerable, if they thereby took care to call back their
Minds to the condition of his Infancy once when on Earth. But alas! I must add,
what exceeds all Extravagances besides, that they set him out still as a Child
in Heaven. Nor is there any thing more common in the Lives of their Saints, in
the Records of the Miracles of the VIRGIN, and even in their Offices and Books
of Devotion, than to hear of the Son of God brought down in the Arms of his
Mother, and still behaving himself as a little Child toward her Votaries. And
what mean and low Opinions such things as these must needs create in
Superstitious and Ignorant Minds of the Savior of the World, is very natural
to conceive; and the Devotion of the People toward the Blessed VIRGIN,
compared with their Notions and Zeal toward the Holy JESUS, does but too
fatally demonstrate.

But, Secondly, This Consideration is not only thus important in it self, but
of a more especial concern with regard to us.

Were the Votaries of the Blessed VIRGIN content with a Speculative Opinion of
her Excellencies; or would they be satisfied to pay her what Homage they
thought fit themselves, without forcing others to join in it; this Matter,
though very Scandalous to our Religion, yet would not so much concern our
Practice. But now that the very Public Devotion of the Church is wholly
overrun with this Abuse; so that it is impossible to pray to God with them,
unless you will be content to pray to Holy MARY too: it was certainly very
necessary for us to understand the danger of such an Error, which is thus
combined with the most public and solemn Piety of a whole Body of Christians.

And then, Thirdly, This is a Point not only of very great moment in it self,
and of a particular concern to us; but very plain too, and easy to be
understood.

In other things, though our Arguments are strong to those that comprehend the
force of them; yet many times the Subject is obscure, and the Disputation past
the Capacity of the ordinary Christian. Thus in their Doctrines about the
Church; the Authority, Unity, Infallibility, and other either real or pretended
Privileges of it: The Argument is nice, and easily perplexes an uninstructed
Capacity. But here the Advice is evident, and the whole Subject easy: The only
hardship is to bring them to own their Doctrine, but afterward the most Vulgar
Christian is able to discern the falseness of it. Those first Rudiments of
Christianity, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou
serve: How shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed? There is one
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and the like, being
abundantly sufficient to show how impossible it is that those should not have
departed from their first Faith, who give Religious Honor to the Virgin MARY,
and set her up as a Mediatrix in Heaven.

Now this being once proved, it will from hence presently follow,

Fourthly, That all the Pretenses of the Church of Rome against us, are vain;
and that we not only had sufficient Reason, but that it was our Duty to reform,
as we did from them.

For to consider this Argument in one word. If the Church of Rome be actually
and undoubtedly Erroneous in this Point, then let her fancy what she please,
it is plain she can Err, and is not what she says, Infallible.

If she be not Infallible, then there can be no Obligation to believe and
follow her at all Adventures; without examining what she teaches, whether it be
true or false.

If we may examine her Doctrine, then the End of all Examination being to find
out the Truth, and to cleave unto it; it must follow, that when upon the
Enquiry, we had discovered her to be involved in grievous Errors, it was our
Duty to abandon her Corruptions, and to declare against them.

And thus this one Point alone being well cleared, does in the Consequence of
it, plainly prove a Vindication of the whole Work of the Reformation; and is
alone sufficient to satisfy any unprejudiced Mind, what just Cause we had for
it.

And let us then Bless God, who has opened our Eyes to discover such Abuses as
these, and which had almost subverted the very chief Principles of
Christianity. And let us as we ought, value nothing so much as that Purity of
Religion in which we have the happiness to exceed most Christians in the World.

Let our Adversaries, if they please, revile us; let them call us Heretics and
Schismatics, Despisers of the Church, and Haters of the Blessed Virgin; let
them fill Heaven and Earth with their Anathema's against us, because we will
not join with them in these and the like Abominations. But let us stand fast in
the Lord, and in the Religion which we have received, knowing from whom we have
received it, and what is the rule and measure of it: And that though, I do not
say They or We, or any other Church or Society of Men whatsoever; but though an
Angel from Heaven, though St. Peter himself should come to us and preach any
other Gospel, Galat. i.9.
he is to be accursed.

I shall conclude all with those excellent words of an Ancient Father of the
Church, against some who began in his time to Honor the Blessed VIRGIN, though
not with any part of that excess that these Men now do; yet more than he
supposed was fitting for them: It Is true (says he) MARY was Holy, but she was
not therefore God: She was a Virgin, and highly honored, but she was not set
forth to us to be worshipped: And therefore the Holy Gospel has herein armed us
before hand; our Lord himself saying, Woman, what have I to do with thee?
Wherefore does he say this? But only left some should think of the Blessed
VIRGIN more highly than they ought. He called her Woman, as it were foretelling
those Schisms and Heresies that should arise upon her account. But God permits
us not to worship Angels; how much less the Daughter of Anna?

Let MARY be held in Honor, but let the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be
Worshipped. Let no one Worship MARY; for though she were most fair, and holy,
and honorable, yet she is not therefore to be adored. To conclude; Let MARY be
held in Honor, but let God be Adored.

Now to this God who alone has infinite Perfections, and is a God hearing
Prayer; let us ascribe, as is most due, Salvation, and Glory, and Power, and
Praise, and Thanksgiving, for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT Of Books published by the Reverend Dr. WAKE.
THere having been lately a little, trifling Discourse, concerning the Blessed
Sacrament, published and spread abroad in the Name of Dr. Wake, dedicated to
the Princess of Denmark; it is thought convenient here to let the World know,
how great an injury has been done to him in it. To prevent such Practices for
the time to come, the Reader is desired to take notice, that the Doctor has yet
published no other Books than what are here subjoined; nor will ever hereafter
set his Mark, where he is not willing to write his Name.
Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] 4to. A Defense of the Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux,
late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. A Second Defense of the Exposition
of the Doctrine of the Church of England, against the new Exceptions of
Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. The FIRST PART.
Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindicator. The SECOND PART. A Discourse of
the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points of the Real Presence, and the
Adoration of the Host: in Answer to the Two Discourses lately Printed at
Oxford, on this Subject. To which is prefixed a Large Historical Preface,
relating to the same Argument. Two Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the
Dead. A Continuation of the Controversy between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, being a full Account of the Books that have been of late
written on Both sides. Preparation for Death; being a Letter sent to a Young
Gentlewoman in France, in a Distemper of which she died.
Printed for William Rogers.
A Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry; in which a late Author, viz.
the Bishop of Oxford's true and only Notion of Idolatry, is considered and
confuted. 4to. The Sum of a Conference between Dr. Clagert and F. P. Gooden,
about Transubstantiation. Published by this Author with a Preface.
Printed for Richard Chiswell, and William Rogers.
TWo Sermons; One before the King and Queen; the other before the House of
Commons: Both Reprinted in this present Collection.
Other Tracts by the same Author.
A Sermon Preached at Paris, on the 30th of January, S.V. 1681/5. The Present
State of the Controversy. Sure and Honest Means for Conversion of all
Heretics; and wholesome Advice and Expedients for the Reformation of the Church.
The Preface by this Author. A Letter from several French Ministers fled into
Germany, upon the account of the Persecution in France, to such of their
Brethren in England as approved the King's Declaration touching Liberty of
Conscience. Translated from the Original French.

