George Fox Dug out of his Burrovves, Or an Offer of DISPUTATION On fourteen
Proposalls made this last Summer 1672 (so called) unto G. Fox then present on
Rode-Island in New England, by R. W.

As also how ( G. Fox slily departing) the Disputation went on being managed
three days at Newport on Rode-Island, and one day at Providence, between John
Stubs, John Burnet, and William Edmondson on the one part, and R. W. on the
other.

In which many Quotations out of G. Fox and Ed. Burrowes Book in Folio are
alleged.

WITH AN APENDIX Of some scores of G. F. his simple lame Answers to his
Opposites in that Book, quoted and replied to By R. W. of Providence in N. E.

BOSTON Printed by John Foster, 1676.

TO The KINGS MAJESTY Charles the IId: etc. Whom the King of Heaven long and
eternally Preserve.
Royal Sir,
THE Most High has adorned you with an High Birth, with a gallant Temper, and
Endowments of Nature, with Princely Education, and rare Experiences etc. The
Crown of all, the Sanctifier of all must be L'esprit de Djeu, or else all that
is under the Sun in fumum abeunt.

Touching this most holy Spirit, and other heavenly Points in difference
between the Protestants and the Quakers, I present your royal eye with a
Lantskip of a Battle fought this last Summer in your Majestyes New England,
between some of the eminentest of the Quakers and my self, three days at
Newport on Rode-Island, and one at Providence on the Main in the same Colony.

I am humbly bold to present it to your Royal Hand,

1. That your own precious Soul (infinitely more precious then thousands of
Britains or Worlds may see the Grounds and Roots of these Protestant
Disquisitions.

2. That your Majesty may see what your New-English Subjects are doing under
the gracious Wing of your wonderful Favor to us etc

3. Because your Majestyes Name is often mentioned and concerned in these
Concertations.

4. Because it was affirmed by some of my Opposites in public, that there were
scarce any of their Books came forth, but the King had one: I thought it some
obligation on me, to present the Protestant Truth (thus publicly and solemnly
asserted) more justly then my Popish and Arminian Opposites to offend your
Royal eyes with Smoke out of the Deep Pit.

Gracious Sir, I know your precious Spirits and Minutes are exhausted in
managing your Wars abroad, and in preserving your Dominions in Peace at home;
I cannot therefore hope for one glance of your eye upon any more then this poor
Epistle.

Charles the Great was one of the greatest Princes of that name in the world.
And Charles the fifth (both Emperors) had his wonderful Trick at Helm also;
but both (and all) turn into the Cabin and Pit of Rottenness. Charles the 5th.
in his 58th. year, Charles the Great in his 72d. year: But were every drop of
water between your Old-England and New, a million of years, yet Mors ultima
linea, and it is but Momentum unde pendet Eternitas.

By Gods most wise and righteous Permission, the Pope and Quakers pretend their
Enthusiasmes and Infallibilityes: I know and have detected much of both of
their Impostures, and I beseech him who is the eternal Pater Luminum, to
preserve your Royal Spirit from both their Cheatings, that is from the Oracles
of Hell in their mouths.

And I humbly importune your Majestyes continued Grace and Patience to this
poor New England, which (though a miserable, cold, howling Wilderness, yet
L'eternel has made it his Glory, your Majestyes Glory, and a Glory to the
English and Protestant Name: and if the most High please, Old and New England
may flourish when the Pope and Mahomet, Rome and Constantinople are in their
Ashes.

Providence in N-England, March 10th. 1672/3. ( ut Vulgo,) Your Majestyes most
loyal and affectionate Orator at the Throne of Grace. Roger Williams.

To the People called Quakers.
Friends and Countrymen:
1. THe occasion of these Discourses you may see in the first Page: the 14
Proposals in the second Page, and the occasion of the Title in the 34.

2. The truth is (as Edmund Buroughs, and others of you say of your selves)
from my Childhood (now above threescore years) the Father of Lights and
Mercies touched my Soul with a love to himself, to his only begotten, the true
Lord Jesus, to his Holy Scriptures, etc. his infinite Wisdom has given me to
see the City, Court and Country, the Schools and Universities of my Native
Country, to converse with some Turks, Jews, Papists, and all sorts of
Protestants, and by Books to know the Affairs and Religions of all Countries,
etc.

3. My Conclusion is, that be of good cheer thy sins are forgiven thee, Mat. 9.
is one of the joyfullest sounds that ever came to poor sinful Ears: how to
obtain this sound from the mouth of that Mediator that spoke it, is the great
dispute beween the Protestants and the bloody Whore of Rome: this is also the
great point between the true Protestants and your selves: as also (in order to
this) about what man is (to the utmost) now by nature, what the true Lord Jesus
Christ is, and all other controversies (discussed in this Book, not unworthy
this your serious weighing (as Mary did) in the hearts and spirits, etc.

4. Bear with me while I say, that as the Jesuits pretend to deifie the Pope,
but it is known, the end is to deifie themselves under the cloak of the Popes
Name: so Satan pretends to exalt and deifie you, under the name of God, and
Christ, and Spirit, etc. but his end is as Peter tells us, to exalt himself,
and fill his hellish Paunch with Souls.

5. I endeavored, but could not procure a Shorthand writer, so that I am
forced to recollect Transactions from my Memory, and I believe (as in the holy
presence of God) that I have not failed to present the true substance of
passages without advantage to my self, or disadvantage to my Opposites.

6. I have used some sharp Scripture Language, but not (as commonly you do)
passionately and unjustly: I sometimes call you Foxians, (as Nicolaitans from
Nicholas) because G. Fox has appeared the greatest Writer, and the greatest
Preacher amongst you, and the most deified that I can hear of, sure it is that
here he subtly run for it: he ordered that my Letters to our Deputy Governor
Captain Cranstone (in which my Proposals to G. F. were, should not be delivered
to the Deputy, until G. F. was some hours under sail, that he might say he
never saw my Paper, though it is as clear as noonday that he knew all matters
by Copies, Letters and Relations, perfectly many days before his departure.

7. My disadvantage (in our Contests (especially at Newport) were great and
many: for though I. Stubs. and I. Burnet were more civil and ingenious: yet W.
Edmondson was nothing but a bundle of Ignorance, and Boisterousness, he would
speak first end all (though all three were constantly on me at once) no man
might speak at all in favor of my Positions: any might freely speak against
them: they sat in the midst of the Governor and Magistrates (of their Opinion)
and the whole Assembly (of their way) W. Edmundson (though I. Stubs twice said
in public, that I had not inter-interrupted them) yet W. Edmundson would
frequently and insolently interrupt me: so that I was not only forced to bear
patiently (through Gods only help) but to suppress my thoughts, which here I
have added in some places. 8. I know that a great weight of your Opinions and
Actings lie upon your believing your selves guided by the immediate Spirit of
God: but I believe that I have proved that it is no more the holy Spirit of
God, that speaks and acts in you, then it was the true Samuel that spoke such
heavenly words in the appearance of Sam. Mantle amongst a cloud of other
witnesses you shall never persuade Souls (not bewitched) that the holy spirit
of God would persuade your Women and Maidens to appear in public (streets and
assemblies) stark naked, etc. of which I have spoke more particularly in our
disputations. 9. It is hard to persuade a Fox or a Wolf that he is so, etc. or
that he does Rob or Steal, or Murder; it is hard to persuade a man while he
dreams that he is in a Dream: yea though he be a filthy Dreamer as Gods Spirit
speaks: In our Dreams we believe lies and impossibilities to be true as that we
are many thousand miles of, that we talk with dead men, etc. that we are at
Marriages or Burials and are Kings and Queens. etc.

10. All that I can hope for (without Gods wonderful mercy) is to give my
Testimony in my generation: for (as Solomon speaks of the Whore) few or none of
you return. Yet I know Gods foundation is sure he knows who are his amongst you
as amongst other persuasions. I have proved, and will prove (if God please)
that spiritual Pride, that is Pride about spiritual matters, is the Root and
Branch of your whole Religion, and that the King Eternal, who did cast out
proud Angels out of his Palace, will hardly open his Gates to proud and
scornful Dust and Ashes:

Providence, March 10. 1672/3 ( so called) I am one of your best Friends, R. W.

To those many Learned and Pious Men, whom G. Fox has so sillily and
scornfully answered in his Book in Folio
Especially to those whose Names I have been bold to mention in the Narrativt
and Apendix, Mr Richard Baxter, Mr John Owen etc.
Sirs,
THrough your sides the Devil by the Claws of this wily Fox, has tore at the
heart of the Son of God; it is no wonder then if he tear at the Heart of his
Love Letters, and Institutions, and the true Professors of his name, who are
innumerable in Abraham's Bosom, and the rest traveling uprightly thither.

For Brevity sake I was forced to omit many excellent Passages, selected by Fox
out of your Writings and to select short Sentences of yours unto which he gives
short Answers. As to matters in Difference between yourselves and me, I
willingly omitted them, as knowing that many able and honest Seamen in their
Observations of this Sun (one picture of Christ Jesus) differ sometimes in
their Reckonings, though uprightly aiming at, and bound for one Port and
Harbor.

Eternally praised be the Father of Lights, and mercyes, that we are one in
that most glorious ever fixed Cynosura (about whom his true Prophets and
Messengers ever have and do and shall move: and he holds them in his right
hand.

I humbly beg of you. 1. That you will more and more earnestly, heartily and
christianly study the things that differ without reflecting upon Credit,
Maintenance, Liberty and Life it self, remembering who it was that said it; He
that loves his life shall lose it. 2. More and more to study the Prophesies and
the Signs of the Times, You know when it was that sive Bishops, twenty-two
Ministers and almost three hunared other precious Believers in the true Lord
Jesus, were sacrificed in the Flames, for his ever blessed sake, against that
monstrous Man of Sin and bloody Whore of Rome. These Foxians fancy is but a
feather to to those high Pico's and Tenariffs, the Pope and Mahomet whom some
of you may live to see flung into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

Were it not that the infinite Compassions of Heaven had made our gracious
Sovereign the Breath of our Nostrills, the fiery Furnace had certainly burnt
seven times hotter against Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah: Surely as for
Conscience sake we ought to obey, so sor Conscience sake we ought to be Instant
and Constant at the throne of Grace for his Royal Preservation and Salvation.

Prove. March 10, 1672/3. I am unworthy to be yours R. W.

A Narration of A CONFERENCE OR DISPUTE, This last August 1672 (so called) in
the Colony of Rode-Iland and Providence, Plantations in N. ENGLAND, between
Roger Williams of Providence (who Challenged Fox by writing (which follows)
and all his Friends then met on Rode-Iland, (and G. Fox withdrawing) John
Stubs, John Burniat, and William Edmundon (three of their ablest Apostles) on
the other, that is, (on the pretended Quakers) Party.
HAving long heard of the great name of G. Fox, (a man cried up by the People
called Quakers) and having read his book in Folio (some years since) against,
The Occasion of the Disputation.
as I think above six score Books and Papers (written by pious and able pens
against them) and now this Summer hearing of his coming into these Parts of N
England, and the poor cheated Souls the Quakers with joy expecting his coming,
G Fox his Book in Folio weighed.
as the coming of an Angel of light from Heaven: I read over his Book afresh
(as in the holy presence and eye of God, (with a single Eye and Heart) and more
clearly finding his Answers so weak and silly, so Antichristian and
Blasphemous, and yet so Imperious and Scornful, so Cursing and Censorious, [2]
Damning and Reprobating all that bow not down to their new Upstart Image, my
Spirit rose up within me, and I believe the holy Spirit of God (in answer to my
poor Petitions and Meditations) resolved and quickened my Spirit to the present
Undertake and Service. And therefore for his most holy Names sake, and the name
of his most holy only begotten, the true Lord Jesus the God-Man and Mediator
etc, And for the honor of the most holy Spirit of God (so horribly torn in
pieces by this foul Spirit of the Quakers) For the vindicating of many of the
precious Truths of the old Christian purity, and for the sake of so many
precious Souls lying slain and bleeding before me, I made this Offer following
to G. Fox, and any or all his Followers or Associates, then together at
New-port on Rode-Iland. It Is true G. Fox, was at Providence some few days
before, and spoke publicly; and it was free for me publicly to have heard
him, and opposed him; But going the last year to one of their general
Assemblyes at New-Port, A Spirit of Confusion in the Quakers Meetings.
and having begun to present to them some Considerations about the True Christ
and the false, the True Spirit and the False and being cut of in the midest, by
sudden Prayer of one, and the Singing of another, and then by the Prayer of
another and the sudden dissolving of the Assembly, I resolved to try another
way, and to offer a fair and full Dispute, according to Ed. Burrowes (and
therein G Foxes) Offer in his large Epistle to Foxes Book. To this Purpose I
drew up my thoughts into fourteen Propositions; and knowing that New-Port was
the chief Town on Rode-Iland and Providence on the Main, and that G. Fox had
spoke at both places and bewitched many with his Sorceries, I sent this Paper
following to G. Fox at Newport, viz,

TO G. Fox or any other of my Contrymen at New-Port who say they are the
Apostles and Messengers of Christ Jesus, My Offer of Disp. on 14 Propositions.
In humble Confidence of the help of the Most High, I offer to maintain in
Public, against all Comers, these 14 Propositions following, to wit, the first
seven at New-Port, and the other seven at Providence: For the time When, I
refer it to G. Fox and his Friends at New-port.

Only I desire

1 To have three days Notice, before the day you fix on.

2 That without Interruption (or many speaking at once) the Conference may
continue from Nine in the morning till [3] about four in the afternoon. and

3 That if either of the seven Propositions be not finished in one day, the
Conference may continue and go on some few hours the next day.

4 That either of us Disputing shall have free uninterrupted liberty to speak
(in Answers and Replies) as much and as long as we please, and then give the
Opposite the same Liberty.

That the whole may be managed with that Ingenuity and Humanity, as such an
Exercise, by such Persons in such Conditions, at such a Time, ought to be
managed and performed, the Propositions are these that follow.

First That the People called Quakers are not true Quakers according to the
holy Scriptures.

2 That the Christ they profess is not the True Lord Jesus Christ.

3 That the Spirit by which they are acted is not the Spirit os God.

4 That they do not own the holy Scriptures.

5 Their Principles and Professions, are full of Contradictions and Hypocrisies.

6 That their Religion is not only an Heresy in the matters of Worship, but
also in the Doctrines of Repentance Faith. etc

7 Their Religion is but a confused mixture of Popery, Armineanisme,
Socineanisme, Judaisme etc.

8 The People called Quakers (in effect) hold no God, no Christ, no Spirit, no
Angel, no Devil, no Resurrection, no Judgment, no Heaven, no Hell, but what is
in man.

9 All that their Religion requires (external and internal) to make Converts
and Proselites, amounts to no more than what a Reprobate may easily attain
unto, and perform.

10 That the Popes of Rome do not swell with, and exercise a greater Pride,
then the Quakers Spirit has expressed, and does aspire unto, although many truly
humble Souls may be captivated amongst them, as may be in other Religions.

11 The Quakers Religion is more obstructive, and destructive to the Conversion
and Salvation of the Souls of People, then most of the Religions this day
extant in the world.

12 The Sufferings of the Quakers are no true evidence of the Truth of their
Religion.

13 That their many Books and writings are extremely Poor, Lame, Naked, and
sweld up only with high Titles and words of Boasting and Vapor.

[4] 14. That the Spirit of their Religion tends mainly,

1 To reduce Persons from Civility to Barbarism.

3 To an Arbetratry Government, and the Dictates and Decrees of that sudden
Spirit that acts them,

3 To a sudden cutting off of People, yea of Kings and Princes opposing them.

4 To as fiery Persecutions for matters of Religion and Conscience, as has
been or can be practiced by any Hunters or Persecutors in the world.

Under these forementioned Heads (if the Spirit of the Quakers dare civilly to
Argue) will be opened many of the Popish, Protestant, Jewish and Quakers
Positions, which cannot here be mentioned, in the Dispute (if God please) they
must be alleged, and the Examination left to every persons Conscience, as
they will answer to God, (at their own Perils) in the great day approaching.

Roger Williams.

THis Paper abovesaid I sent enclosed in a Letter to my kind friend Capt.
Cranston Deputy Governor of the Colony, that being such a public person, he
might timely be informed of such a public Assembly, and as also might
vouchsafe (as afterward he carefully did) to afford his Countenance and
Assistance to such Peaceable and Pious Exercises. But before the Boat went down
with the Letter aforesaid from Providence to Newport, I sent a Copy of my
Positions to a Neighbor I T. whom I heard was inclining to them. The sirst
usage to the Author and his Proposals.
He takes a Copy of them and reads them in their Meeting, before John Crosman
Master of the Boat (one of them also) who presently the same hour, called me
Blind Sot in the open Street, upbraiding me, how I durst send my 14 Lies to
such a man as G. Fox (one of them called him) the eternal Son of God; so that
before my Letter went to Newport (which Crosman carried) by Letters, and
Crosman his and other Relations, The deceit fullness of Fox and Foxians.
all was known, even long before my Letters were opened, or delivered to the
Deputy Governor: For in the Iunto of the Foxians at Newport it was concluded
for Infallible Reasons, that His Holiness G. Fox should withdraw, seeing there
was such a Knot of the Apostles of Christ Jesus now at Newport together,
(especially John Stubs, a man knowing the Greek and Hebrew) Therefore that it
might appear that such a Nehemiah as he would not fly, it was [5] agreed that
my Letters should not be delivered to the Deputy Governor, until G. Fox was
gone; so that it might be truly said, that he never saw the Paper which I sent
unto him. I had a touch of this Legerdemain trick in our Dispute at Newport,
one of the subtle Tricks of this subtle Fox viz. to steal handsomely from the
Dispute and yet not to seem at all to run for it.
and the Deputy Governor did publicly testify that my Letters to him were
dated the 13 of July (which he said he wondered at) but were not brought to him
until the 26th of the said Month, and until G. Fox was some hours departed.
John Burniat professed that that he knew nothing of the detaining of the Letters,
only he knew that G. Fox never saw my Paper. G. F. supposed I would be forced
to be as plain in my Proofs as I was in my Positions. He knew that I was
furnished with Artillery out of his own Writings. He saw what Consequences
would roll down the mountains upon him from his proud and Insolent, yet poor
and bald Writings; and how far some of his present practices were fallen out
with his Writings, and therefore this old Fox thought it best to run for it,
and leave the work to his Iourney-men and Chaplains to perform in his absence
for him.

Before I come to Transactions between those three left behind him [Iohn Stubs,
John Burnet, William Edmundson, and my self] I think fit to tell the Reader
what a preparatory Conflict the most holy and only Wise Lord, A great private
Conflict before my public.
was pleased to exercise me with, before I came to the Public.

My former ancient Neighbor and friend I. T. being bit by such infectious
Teeth himself, fell on me, as a man would fall upon a Toad or Serpent, and sent
me this following Letter, notwithstanding he was but newly bitten by them; and
for forty years pretended no small love and respect to God and me.

He first gave fire upon me in this following Letter.

Providence. 18. 5. 72.
Roger Williams
THy Scurrilous Paper in thy Propositions to G. Fox. I T. his Letter to me upon
the sight of my Propositions to G. Fox.
and others (who in scorn are called Quakers) I advise thee to refrain any
further publishing thereof, and as it is written keep thee far from an evil
matter, thy paper being full fraught with impudent Lies and Slanders, with high
flown airy imaginations, which if thou should live the days of Methuselah,
thou could not perform. In Love to thy Person and Name, [6] which ought to be
precious, I advise thee not upon a sudden motion (as thou termest us to act by)
but from the spirit of Truth and tender love unto thy soul, which Spirit by thy
writing appears thou art a stranger to. Consider thy latter end, least with
Cardinal Mazarin, A Note of Card Mazarin
thou cry out in a dying hour Oh my poor Soul, what will become of thee?
whither art thou a going? And said if he should longer have lived, he would
leave the Court, and be a Capuchin. Time is precious, Repent, Repent, and mind
the manifestation of the Spirit, which is given to every one to profit
withal., and knocks at the door of thy Heart, for entrance, which being
rejected will be thy Condemation. If thou rejectest this my faithful witness
for the Lord, I then say with John in the Revelation, let him that is filthy be
be filthy still, and so remains.

thy friend and Neighbor I. T.


Having read this Letter, and knowing this my Neighbor of late to have
declined much from his former profession of Godli, ness, and many ways by his
Looseness had grieved my Soul, I wondered not much at his Lines, (though now
much unexpected of him) as knowing the Quakers spirit, to be a ready Ditch or
Gulf, that readily sucks and draws into it Souls afrighted easily to skin
over their Sores; Proud and Self-conceited ones, who gladly close with the
Spirit of, Fuel for the Quakers Fire of Hell.
and Children of Pride, and Loose fading Professors, of which sort the Quakers
Meetings do much consist, as not being able to walk close with God, not daring
to turn wholly Profane, or Atheists, and so daube up the breach with untempered
Mortar (the wild and foolish notions of the Devils Whisperings, under the cloak
of the immediate Inspirations of Gods holy and heavenly Spirit) Many thoughts I
had to pass by his Affronts, and Insultations: But considering that it was not
my Name (not worth the while) but the most High, Eternal Majesty; and his most
holy Spirit thus foully pierced and debased, I returned this Answer following.

My ancient loving Friend, My Answer to the foregoing Letter from I. T.

IF you pluck out the eyes of your Understanding, Profession, and Experience,
yet (through the mercy of the Father of Lights and Mercyes) I cannot do so with
mine. You tell me my Paper to G. Fox, is Scurrilous, etc. full fraught with [7]
Impudent Lies and Slanders, etc. And you say you write in Love, from the Spirit
of Truth, to which (you say) I am a stranger. You mind me of Death etc. and
bid me Repent, Repent, or else be filthy still, and be damned.

To which I will not Answer as G. Fox answered H. Wrights Paper with a
scornful and shameful Silence. Thus I say in general, you are my Witness,
that I have long said with David (and I humbly hope have made it good) I hate
and abhor Lying, but thy Law do I love, for which I have lost in my time
something, etc If I had not loved his Law, and abhorred Lies, I had long ere
this bowed down against my Conscience, Crying sins in N. England.
yea I had fired the Country ahout this barbarous Land (as some in this Colony
have done) I had murdered the Indians, and English by the Powder and Liquor
trade, to which you know I had Temptation, as much as your self, or any others
in N. England, but I loved the Name of God.

For your self, if the God of heaven have terrified your Soul, (which I believe
is the case of most Quakers, and of the Devils themselves) and made it tremble
at the Wrath to come, you must not think to run from his flaming Eyes and Hand
(as Adam) amongst the Thickets; The infinite Justice of God must be satisfied.
you cannot talk of Mercy without a way of Satisfaction to an insinite Justice.
(Who pays the Old Score)? It is impossible that all created Powers, in Heaven
or Earth, can discharge for one sinful Thought. There must be an Equivalent
discharge, not by filthy Rags, and menstruous Clouts of our own Holiness; which
must he thought of before we can say, We can sin no more against God, than he
can sin against us; as you know who Blasphemously and Horribly maintain it.

In your lines I pray you to Consider,

First. Your Irrationality, for how can you imagine that a serious Christian,
in humble Considence of the of the merciful Presence, and gracious Assistance
of Gods holy Spirit, The Brutish Simplicity of the Quakers Spirit.
and of no little Afsliction and Suffering, should be so easily stird (as a
Rock with a Feather) by your bare crying Repent, Repent or be Damned, hearken
to the Light within thee? etc.

2. Can Reason imagine, that after much struggling within my self, and the Birth
of my Propositions and Resolutions, that I can so suddenly strike Sail, and
bear up, and immediately [8] Stifle, and Smother, and Burn my Conceptions and
Resolutions, as soon as I hear your simple and childish spirit Countermand me?

3. Is it not unmanly Childish and effeminate, to cry out a Scurrilous paper,
Lies, Lies, impudent Slanders and.c. and yet give me not one Reason or one
Scripture against any one of them? Is it not too like the irrational and
brutish Answer of Humphrey Norton (to a sober and Sollid Paper of Thomas Olnys
sen.) crying out, Lies, Lies, 224 Lies, without any serious Examination of
Particulars?

2. I charge your Lines with Impiety, The Manifestation of the Spirit. 1. Cor.
12.
where you infer that the most holy Spirit (from that Scripture [The
manifestation of the Spirit and.c.) is poured forth upon every Individual
person in the World. Did the Oil most precious and holy, the holy Ointments and
the Blood in the Law, respect the whole world, or the Messiah the anointed and
his Members (Christians or anointed also)? Was not 1. Cor. 12. written to the
Christians, or Saints gathered into the Christian slock or Congregation at
Corinth, unto whom the Father of Spirits (as in that place) vouchsafes those
three heavenly Favors.

1. Gifts which he shows there to be different. 2. Administrations, Ministeryes
or Offices. 3. Operations, Works or Successes, all wrought in the Saints by the
holy Spirit, for the Glory of the same Father, Lord, and Spirit, the mutual
comfort and edifing of the Saints, yea and for the Convicting and drawing of
other poor Sinners, out of the World to God.

The Lord mercifully awaken your Souls to the Love of God, and the Love of his
holy Truth, for the not beleiving of which but the profane playing with it,
Gods wonderful Justice.
the most high and righteous Judge of the whole world (in a way of Judicial
Sentence) delivers up poor Souls to believe Lies, and that so strongly, as to
give their bodies to be burned for them.

The Papists catch hold upon a Letter [This is my body] You as simply as do
the Generalists catch hold upon the Letter [All, every man that comes into the
world and.c. The words All and every one, Considered.
] whereas the Scope and Connection in all writings, and in all matters in the
world are rationally to be minded. The Sense and Meaning is in all Speech and
Writing, (in our own and other Languages) the very Speech or Writing it self.
These Words [All and every one] in our own and other Tongues, [9] are often
used figuratively: it is so all the Scripture over, and thrice in one verse,
Colloss. 1. 28. where Reason cannot imagine that Paul did literally and
individually admonish every man, teach every man, and present every man that
comes into the world, perfect in Christ Jesus which could not, cannot possibly
be true without another Sense and Exposition, then the words literally hold out.

4, Again, you are dangerously bold to say that you write from the Spirit of
Truth, wherein you Father these your childish Irrationalityes, your profaning
of the holy Majesty of God, his holy Scriptures and writings, and your rash
Judging and Examining of others, upon the holy Spirit of God: But I do humbly
hope to evince, that the Spirit you boast of, is so far from the Spirit of God,
that it falls beneath the foot of a sober and well grounded Humanity. At
present I only Instance in that whorish and monstrous act of your Women and
Maidens, The Impudency and Uncleaness of the Quakers Spirit.
stripping themselves stark naked, by your Spirit, and with a face of brass
coming into the open streets, and public Congregations of Men and Youths. This
Spirit (though defended by G. Fox and others) is such a piece of unnatural and
brutish Impudence, that I cannot hear of the like amongst Jews or Gentiles,
yea not amongst the most Savage, Base and Barbarous of them all (all
Circumstances considered).

5. In the last place I observe your Fickleness and Inconstancy, what, and how
often have I heard you speak of the Chief of the Quakers now at Newport? How
lately and how much have you uttered of John Crosman his Cross and froward
spirit (even since he pretended the Spirit) yea how inhumane and injurious to
your self in the way of his Calling? now all on a sudden (for I heard but
little until I saw your Lines) you are got up into the lofty Chair of Judging
and ready to say, God I thank thee I am not as this Publican, I beseech the
Lord to make you savingly to remember that Word [God resists that is sets
himself in Hostility against the Proud, but he gives Grace unto the Lowly] so
prays.

your old unworthy Friend R. W.
Providence 18th. 5th. 72.

I had hoped that I had Conjured down (at least for the present) that Waspish
spirit, but he flies out against me (within a few days) in this second Letter
following.

10] Providence, 23. 5. 75.
ANcient Friend and Acquaintance, I. T. his second Letter to me.
I read thy Note four days after the subscribing it, that so thy Counselors
might thoroughly be informed of thy continued Zeal in a dangerous Case. What I
write to thee in Love has a contrary effect in thy Spirit, being so prejudiced
against us; according to the Proverb, Nothing is well spoken, that is not well
taken. Upon Discourse thou did say the Quakers could not be believed on their
Words or Writings, having a secret Reservation within them, which gives me to
conclude, that we are Judged before we Speak. For my charging upon thee
Slanders and Lies, Examine but thy Positions, which will make manifest what I
say. As for the Terror which thou speak of etc. I leave it to thee to
consider what thou art about, least thou be called to Account for it before
thou art ready. As for charging me with Irrationality for not alleging
Scripture for what I write, yet I alleged three Scriptures, one of which thou
wrestest, adding what I wrote not, so that if I had urged more, I should have
had the like Catching: But we both must come to give an Account of what is done
in the Body. In this my Letter thou may see my witnessing against most of
thy Slanderous Propositions. Concerning the Spirits manifestations, 1 Cor. 12.
13. I freely consent that they were the Saints by Calling, who are there
Considered. As thou alleadgest the Papists Catch at a word [This is my body] so
we catch at a word [All] and misapply Scripture; so that I perceive thou have
not a Guide to thy mind, but utterest thine own Conceivings. John. 3. 16. The
Promise is to them that Believe, and not to All.

Again, Thou find fault with my rash judging thee, and abusing Scripture:
Take it to thy self, for the word Damning, thou foistest in thy self, neither
dare I pass Sentence of Damnation upon any: For Judgment belongs to the Lord,
and we must stand or fall to our own Master. As for my Fickleness and
Inconstancy, Lay thy hand upon thy mouth and Consider thy Windings and
Turnings, in thy Judgment and Practice, how thankful thou wast to J. Burnet,
whom thou highly commendest after thou came home, and now reproachest the
Truth, which then thou assentest to: and in thy 14 Positions, thou hintest (by
thy wicked Surmises) what the sudden spirit of the Quakers is, to take away the
Lives of Kings, and.c. but I told thee in my first Letter, thou art a stranger
to that holy Spirit we act by.

But further thy Malice appears in going to one thou said, that [11] if the
spirit of the Governor were to cut of his head, he must do it. Call to mind
what thou did to thy peaceable Neighbors seeking their Blood, crying out
Treason, when the Court discerned thy Blood-thirsty spirit, which thy friends
at Newport were ashamed of, and thy Accusations proved Invalid. How childish
did thou act to swear against One, when another told thee of somewhat spoken
to allay thy fury against William Harris? Call to mind thy Books written, and
see thy Fickleness, wanting a Guide to thy mind, being for and against
Persecution. Thou chargest me to have gotten into the Chair of Judging: thy two
Scripts I return upon thy self, Physician heal thy self. The Wisdom of man
puffs up; but the Wisdom of God humbles, that God may be all in all. I
desire thee to look back to thy Lines, and where thou mentionest the
Satisfaction of infinite Justice: who pays the old score? The high Opinion G
Fox his Followers have of him yet he saild and run for it.
and.c. Also to consider my Irrationality, that thy great Education, great
Search and.c. as also thy great Travels and Struglings to bring forth thy
Positions, all being in thine own will, and in the Apostasy wherein the great
Whore has made all Nations drunk with her Fornications, which the Lord will in
his Time, consume with the breath of his mouth. I know thou have undertaken a
great Burden in Challenging G. Fox to answer thy Positions; I wish thee to
provide thy Armor of Proof, as Golias that defied the Army of Israel. G. Fox
is furnished with that Armor that thou have no skill to make use of; having
also the Sword of the Spirit to cut down all thy airy Imaginations: Therefore
cease from further troubling thee: a Word to the Wise is Sufficient, if thou
have a heart to make use of it.

thy Friend and Neigbour, I. T.


To this Second Letter I Replied in this following.
Neighbor, in this your second Letter (misdated as well as mine) you pass by
many Particulars which I wrote concerning G. Fox, Hump. Norton, your self, and
the stripping your Women Stark naked in public, etc. you insist upon my
Irrational dealing.

2. For your charging my Positions to be Lies, and Impudent Slanders, without
giving me one Scripture or Reason to prove them so; Unreasonable kind* of
Reasoning.
and here you say [For my charging upon thee Lies and Slanders, examine but thy
Positions, which will make manifest what I say] But is this any more Rational
or Manlike? or is it not brutish to say, you are a Liar because you are a
Liar; [12] Or you are a Liar because you say these Positions are true, and
offer to prove them. It is a Man-like spirit to lead a Beast with an Halter,
but a Man with Reason; but to lead or drive a Man with an Halter or Cudgel, and
not with a Reason, (in Naturalls and Rationalls, most of all in Spirittalls) is
not the Spirit of God nor of Humanity: For what will my Chargings, and Censures
and Clamors, and Cursings, and Damnings effect and beget upon a rational Soul,
without a proof of Reason, but an Opinion of my wicked false brutish and
irrational spirit?

3. It Is true in your Exhortation to me, you bid me hearken to the Manifestation
of the Spirit which is given to every man etc. This I acknowledge Scripture. You
say I wrested and added to an other Scripture, but you mention it not, so I am
in the dark what you mean. And for this of the Manifestation of the Spirit,
your self now consent to me, that it was spoken to the Saints or Christians at
Corinth, and therefore I spoke true in saying, that as to my Positions (by you
called Impudent Lies and Slanders) you gave me not then, nor now any one
Scripture or Reason to prove any one of my Positions to be so.

4. As to John Burnet, I said before him and afterward, that he delivered many
Truths: yet withal, I can give many Instances of their abusing the Ordinance
and Name of the Spirit of Prayer for a sudden Silencing of their Opposites.
I then at the same time (in their Public Assembly at Newport) I told them,
that it lay upon them to manifest to their own Souls and others, 1. That their
Christ was true 2. That their Spirit was Gods, and the rather because they were
charged with denying the Institutions of Christ Jesus, and with the setting up
of many Will-worships, as Preaching of Women etc. And I went on purpose to
Discourse of these matters (this being the time of their General Assembly, and
a great Concourse) I was stopped by the sudden praying of the Governor's Wife,
who also told me of her asking her husband at home (meaning Christ which I had
touched upon) I rose up and said, if a man had so alleged, I would have
answered him: But I would not Countenance so much the violation of Gods Order
in making a Reply to a Woman in Public: Hereupon I. Nicols stood up and said
[In Christ Jesus neither male or female etc.] I was Replying to him and to I.
Burnets Speech also concerning their Spirit, but I was stopped by John Burnets
sudden falling to Prayer, and dismissing the Assembly. I resolved (with Gods
help) to be Patient and Civil, and so I ceased, not seeing a willingness in
them for me to proceed; which experience made me not to trouble [13] G. Fox and
the Assembly at Providence, but rather to make a fair and Solemn offer of
Dispute about these matters: so that it is notorioufly false, that I Owned or
Countenanced any of their Opinions.

5 You tell me of my foisting in that word Damning, and I tell you that those
words of Condemnation and Damnation are all one in your Greek and Latin and
English and other Languages: So that in your telling me if I hearken not to
you, it will be my Condemnation, you (all one) tell me it will be my Damnation.

There are two Damnations, one which all Mankind is under, (He that believes
not is condemned already) the other, that final Sentence [Goe ye Cursed] my
Charity bids judge that you meant not the latter: But my Knowledge tells me
amongst Jews and Turks, Papists and Protestants and Pagans (with all of which I
have conversed) I never met with such a Judging Censuring Reviling spirit as is
the spirit of the Quakers.

6. As to my saying in my 14th Position, that the spirit of the Quakers tends
to a sudden Cutting off of people, yea Kings and Princes: It lies upon me to
prove it, and you do only upbraid me with it but offer no disproof, nor can you
or any other evade it, when the Roots of Affairs and Actions are dig'd up and
examined.

7. Next you cry out against my Blood-thirsty spirit in William Harris his
Case: and I answer that it is not the sign nor the part of Loyal and grateful
subjects having received such wonderful Favors and Privileges from so mighty
a Monarch, so to Slight and damn, to Null and make void such Royal Grace and
Favor. W. Harris his late Case of denying that the King has power to dispense
with his Subjects in Religious matters.
Is it not high and monstrous abominable Presumption for any man to quarrel
with Sovereign Majesty for granting Favor and Mercy to the Souls and Bodies of
their Subjects (which he ought to do, even in Conscience to God) and for
dispensing with Laws made for Superstitions and Oppressions. I think you have
been an Officer your self in a Corporation in England: I question how you durst
then (or durst now) omit to take Cognizance of such Actings, against your
Corporations safety, and the Honor and royal supreme Authority of his Majesty.

I was in place and engaged more than others to maintain the righteous splendour
of the Kings Crown and Majesty and Prerogative, and the Colonyes safety peace
and Liberty, and yet I acted not without the Counsel and Concurrence of all the
rest of the 14] Magistrates who did no more but what belonged to our Duty and
Alleagiance as faithful Officers to his Majesty and this Colony under him: nor
did we any more then Necessity and common Prudence compeld us to, for who
knows what after Reckonings may befall us? Did not W. Harris (when in place)
more than justify us, by judging himself bound to hurry your self, and about
twenty more to Newport, to answer for Contempt of the Kings Authority, though
but in an accidental, peaceable, and (by his Covetous violence) occasioned
Meeting. Was not Mr Clark (though favorable to W. H.) so amazed at W. Harris
his desperate Presumptions, that he readily acted with us in Examination and
Commitment? Yea did not W. Harris (upon the point) Confess that we could not
but Commit him, and therefore provided beforehand his Bedding, and other
Conveniences for a Prison?

8. It is not true that either in Word or Writing I cried out Treason against
him. But it is notoriously known, that he and his Accomplices lay in Wait, and at
Catch at every word as Foxes and Lions for Mr Greens Blood and mine, as
Traitors against King Charles for our pleading the Colonyes proceeding against
W Harris in the time of the Parliament, and Oliver Cromwell.

Oh Friend, whither will thy poor Soul next be hurried? His Majestyes
Declaration against W. Haris his presumptious Attempt
Is not the Gap and Gate now left open for W. Harris or any man to Dispute
openly against the Kings Prerogative, and tell him that he knows not, nor his
Council nor Judges the Laws? that he cannot dispense with penal Laws on the
Consciences of his Subjects, Papists or Protestants, at Home or Abroad? But see
the Finger of the most High! the Kings Majesty (as if he knew all our
proceedings against W. Harris his presumptions, debasing the Kings Power and
Prerogative) in the present juncture of these Affairs, sent forth his Royal
Declaration to the World, asserting his Supreme Power and Authority in such
matters, and by virtue of many Statutes and Acts of Parliament.

9. In the last place, that your self and others may admire your new spirit,
how much, and how often, and how long has your own Mouth and Hand (and Capt.
Fenner and diverse with you) declared and remonstranced to the General
Assembly against W. Harris (which Assembly therefore fined him and outed him)
as the restless Firebrand of Town and Colony and who has with all his power
now kindled and blown this Fire between [15] Conecticut Colony and our selves.
Yet now in your, and the Quakers bosom, must W. Harris be hugged, as an innocent
and peaceable Soul, and the Kings faithful Officers reproached and threatened
as Bloodthirsty and cruel Oppressors.

10. You bid me mind my Books, and my being for and against Persecution: But
through Gods mercy I can look at them with humble Thanksgiving and peace,
without any recoiling thought to Persecution (as you falsely intimate) from them.

11. As to G. Fox his Armor, Sword, and Cuttings with which you threaten me; I
desire to think as low of my self, and.c. as you or G. Fox can think high of
himself. It is infinite mercy that I live, and as a Living Dog may wait for
Crumbs of mercy, clearly to See, dearly to Love, uprightly to Follow, and
constantly to Maintain the eternal Crown and Glory of the true Lord Jesus
Christ, and his most holy Spirit and Scriptures, with whose gracious Assistanee
I hope to prove that the Quakers spirit, and Christ have no Communion.

Roger Williams.


THe Ingenious and upright Reader might now well suppose that the Contest were
over: but it is not the Light of Truth or Reason or Scripture or Experience, or
the Testimony of the Prudent or their own Consciences that will satisfy this
white Devil of this pretended Light and Spirit within them, and therefore must
I crave the Readers Patience while I produce I. T. his third and last Letter to
me and my Answer to it.

Neighbor,
COncerning the mistaking the Date of my Letter as thou writest, I. T His third
and last Letter to me.
which could not be, seeing I sent it thee the same day I writ it, but thine, I
heard of it some days before I received it. As for my passing over many
particulars (which did not concern the matter in handling) I willingly omitted
them, discerning thy subtle spirit, in no respect answering by scripture or
reason my loving Admonitions to thee: But in thine own words, is it not
brutish, irrational, childish to affirm we are worse then Barbarians, which
thy sordid Positions do hold forth? How childish, yea how foolish do thou
show thy self in thy first Position, for G. Fox to prove what he and all
friends disown, and in scorn thou call Quakers. And in thy 12th Position
do affirm, That our Sufferings are no Evidence of the truth of our Religion,
Thou might have spared thy pains in bringing [16] forth this Brat, a Whore
is as bold in her whoredoms, as a Chaste Wise in her Inocency.
which is of thine own begetting: But we are sure it is an Evidence against
thee, and all other of thy Spirit, which persecute, that they have drunk deep
of the Cup of Fornication, upon whom the Violls of Gods wrath are powered forth
in spiritual Fornications.

How dare thou find fault with me in not alleging scripture, nor reason in
declaring against thy impious Charges mentioned in thy railing and impious
positions? Would thou have me to take the matter in hand (which thou
challengest G. Fox to answer) to give like a fool scripture and reason for what
thou assignest another to do? Oh what Serpent-like spirit do thou act by,
that do not own my plain dealing with thee in owning the scripture and
wrestest and foistest in, as I meant not, nor writ: If thy spirit were real
(as before men thy words seem to import) thou would not then show a smiling
Countenance when War is in thine heart, in witnessing against thy Neighbors
secretly, against that Golden rule, Do as thou would be done by. Thou
countest it open violence for a Woman to speak in the Church: but if thou
knew what Woman that should not speak thou would have spared me these
lines writing, and have eased thy self of thy great struglings and strivings
within thee to bring forth on Abortive. Thou chargest me in making a great
Outcry against thy Blood-thirsty spirit, concerning W. Harris, as though thou
did at no time cry out Treoson Treason. Answ. how do thou shift of as one
that is guilty, and dare not mention the case I writ upon, shufling it to be
his last imprisonment, which I know not the ground of, but as I had it related
by thee: But the Circumstances considered, it cannot possibly be paraleld (as
my Letter declares) with this last Case of W. Harris. First, thy taking Oath
against my wife upon an other man's word on purpose to allay thy furious spirit
against W. Harris, he not thinking thou would have prosecuted against her,
as also against sixteen of thy peaceable neighbors, Can thou deny that at that
Court thou cried not out Treason Treason, making all as guilty as W. Harris?
Thou say I bid thee mind thy Book written against Persecution, and yet thy
self a Persecutor of thy peaceable Neighbors even unto death. Answ. How can
thou in peace (through the God of peace, (as thou say) look upon thy wicked
Travels to murder the Innocent as thou did at Newport, crying out Treason
being President.

Also what I have spoken against W. Harris touching his firing the Town and
Colony, I thought so, and therefore contended against him, but I never sought
his life, If there were any Color for any of these horrible Outcryes, I should
have heard of them from W. Edmunson who raked up all he could against me both
in the Dispute at Newport and Providence.
note that R. W. Thou say [17] thou art not conscious of any recoyling in thy
spirit, so much as in a thought. Here thou manifest's an impious spirit that
seeks to murder the Innocent: what Fury possesses thee to talk of the God of
peace and yet retainest a murtherous mind, not having repented of thy
wickedness, how is thy heart hardened in seeking the lives of such as thou thy
self have confessed to be the Children of God? Oh murtherous man that has not
any Remorse for thy long-lived Wickedness, I am sorry for thee, though thou
slight all my writings and counsels, and take all in the worst sense; yet I
beseech thee to consider thy latter end, and my desire for thee is that the
Lord would awaken thy Soul and give thee Repentance unto life.

In the last place thou writest how highly I esteem of G. Fox. and thou
desire to think as low of thy self: How will this agree with thy boasting of
great Education, great Experiences, great struglings and strivings within to
bring out thy Positions and Conclusions, which all my loving Testimonies
against (as issuing from a diabolical spirit) did no more take place with,
then a Feather against a Rock. Call to mind the preaching of Jonas to Ninive,
yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed (a short speech) yet they
repented and the Lord pardoned: And so I desire thou may repent and find
mercy with the God of mercy.

Thy Neighbor I. T.


THus Reader it pleased the Infinite Wisdom of the most holy and only Wise, to
pierce through my heart with the thrusts and stabs of a of a foul-mouthed
slanderous spirit, by the hands of long professed friends and lovers, yet
pretending the name of God and of Scripture, as well as my self. How does it
behoove us then to make sure that we can in truth say as Jeremiah, Lam. 3. Thou
art my portion says my Soul O Lord; Thou and none else, Thou alone without
Health, Strength, Beauty, Honor, Lands, Goods, Friends, and.c. How should we
make sure that with Thomas, we may say unto the Lord Jesus, my Lord and my God?
for whose sake we ought joyfully to bear what false Christ's, false spirits and
their Soldiers can dart from Earth or Hell against us.

My Answer was as follows.
My Answer to I T. his 3d Assault upon me.
MY ancient Friend, it pleases the most High to give to all mankind (his
Children also and them especially) many bitter Cups, and that oftentimes by the
hands of dear friends and [18] dear Relations, that we might fall more in love
with himself then ever who isinfinitely more sweet, and even Holiness and Power
and Wisdom and Love it self.

Your Lines (in this your third Fury against me) being full of Bitterness in
themselves, are more bitter to my Spirit upon diverse accounts. But the most
High and only Wise will have it so, and your judgment and Conscience (and mine)
will have it so, yet that will not acquit us, we both say we must come to
another Bar, and there stand or fall eternally.

In this, First. You tell me you willingly omitted the Particulars I mentioned
as not concerning the matters in handling: A deceitful way of Answ.
I am not of your mind, it is an Easy yet a Suspicious way of answering, and
implies not only unwillingness, but a willing Ignorance and Guilt also: For is
it not concerning the matter in hand (especially when so personally provoked)
to vindicate our selves and friends, our Teachers and Apostles, our Spirits and
Religion also?

2. Next you blame my subtle spirit, for not answering by Scripture or Reason
your loving Admonitions: I gave you my Reason, showing how simple it was for
you to give fire upon me, and tell me my Paper was Scurrilous, full fraught
with impudent Lies and Slanders, and yet give me not one Scripture nor Reason
to prove any of them to be so. 2. I showed you how irrational it was for you
to think, that I should so suddenly renounce my understanding and Conscience
and Positions upon the sudden sound of your Outcry Repent, Repent.

3. You tell me it is childish, The horrid Nakedness of the Q Women shows the
worse then barbarous nakedness of their Spirits.
brutish and irrational, to say that you are worse then Barbarians: Answ. I
said not so in general, you and all the world ought to abhor the particular
case, viz. the stripping Naked of your Women and Maidens; a case worse then
Savage and Barbarous, only practiced by the Bruites, and sometimes by Indians,
and Whores in their drink, when all Modesty and Reason is overwhelmed with more
then common Drunkenness. Who can but abhor to think of such whorish and
monstrous Immodesty, such an hellish Incentive to filthy Lusts, and that under
the most holy name of the Spirit of God.

4. As to my first Position, you now tell me that it is childish and foolish
for G. Fox to prove (I suppose you mean, the name
for me to desire G. Fox to prove) what he and all friends disown, Quakers.
and thou in scorn call Quakers: Answ. I know the Quakers say [19] that name
is given them in scorn, and yet we also know it it has its denomination from
those great bodily Shakings which have been believed to have come in mightily
upon them by the power of Devilish spirits (for many Reasons of which
afterward) However G. Fox in 370th. page of his Book in Folio writes thus in
the title of each page [The Quakers answer. The Quakers Answer] I know what may
be said; and I know may be said and justly to that excuse, and what shall be
said in the Dispute following.

5. As to my 12th. Position, of Suffering of the Quakers, The Quakers
Sufferings.
and you say it is a Brat of mine own, and that is an evidence against me, and
all os my Persecuting Spirit. Answ. I shall (by Gods assistance prove that you
do make it an Evidence of your Religion, and then it must be your one Brat and
Bastard.

As to my persecuting spirit, the most High has been a holy witness to my
Travels and losses and hazards and other sufferings, in my vindicating and
procuring Soul-liberty: and I humbly hope in his mercy, he will preserve me
from being like many Quakers, foully fallen from their former Christan Religion

6. You say, How dare thou blame me for not giving Scripture or Reason
against thy railing and impious Positions, when thou challengest and assignest
another to do it G. Fox, and.c. Answ. I only blamed I. T. for being so fierce
and furious, so hot and hasty in crying out a scurrilous Paper fraught with
lies and impudent slanders, and yet gave me not one Scripture or Reason against
any one of them: common Modesty and humane Sobriety would have taught a little
Patience, till G. Fox had answered, or until you had answered something of
Scripture or Reason your self.

7. Nextly you tell me of my Serpent-like spirit in witnessing against my
neighbor secretly: To which I lay before the most High, I know not what you
intend 2. I know it not to be any Crime (much less a serpent-like spirit as
your railing pen phrases it) to give a true testimony, and witness in private
and public, even against the highest and dearest, in the matters of God and
Truth, which ought to be only High and only Dear unto us.

8. As to Women's preaching Women's Preaching.
in the Church, you tell me that I know not what that Woman is, Answ. I know
the allegorical Interpretations given of both those Scriptures, to the
Corinths and Timothy, But where the holy Scripture is plain, and agrees 20]
even with Nature it self; where the holy Spirit of God gives Reasons why
Scripture should be fo expounded (which is an extraordinary signification of
Gods sovereign will and pleasure) where else one part must be Literal and an
other part Allegorical, (which is most improper and not suiting to the Majesty
and Purity of Gods Spirit) what can be soberly in the fear of God and with any
sober reason collected, but that the most High, the God of Order (and all Order
and Wisdom it self) is pleased there to set down the Order of his Worship in
the Christian Congregations.

9. Concerning W Harris you tell me I shift of the matter, for you meant not W
Harris his last Imprisonment: You prove it by my taking Oath against your Wife
upon an other man's word on purpose to allay my furious spirit against W Harris.
These are your words, which may be taken three ways, but neither of them can I
call to mind: God knows I truly desire to See, Lament and forsake every Idle
word or thought, which my soul may be satisfied is so: for I dare not go
beyond (as you proudly do) that Direction of the Lord Jesus, daily to cry
[Forgive us our Trespasses] I dare most confidently deny that simple Charge,
viz. that I should cry out Treason Treason, against your Wife and others,
laboring to bring them into the same guilt with W. Harris. whose facts and
courses others (of no small Authority and Prudence amongst us, with whom I
advised) saw to be desperate high Treason against the Laws of our Mother
England, and of this Colony also. When W Harris, sent his writings or Books to
the Main and to the Island, against all Earthly Powers, Parliaments, Laws,
Charters, Magistrates, Prisons, Punishments, Rates, W Harris his former
practices against all Government but that of Saints as the Quakers now speak.
yea and against all Kings, and Princes, under that Notion that the People
should shortly cry out, no lords no masters; and had in open Court protested,
(before the whole Colony assembled) that he would maintain his Writings with
his Blood. Was it my Fury (as you call it) or was it not Honesty and Duty to
God and the Colony and the higher Powers then in England to act faithfully and
impartially in the place wherein I then stood Centinell?

And it is not true that I sought his life as you upbraid me, much less theirs,
who purposely (as the most high God is witness) were presented, that some
prudent course might be taken by the Court for the preventing of their greater
danger, and the Colonyes also. By your reason the Kings Majesty, his Judges
(yea all Judges) [21] yea the King himself, yea the most High, and King of
Kings shall be condemned as Blood-thirsty, bloody seekers of the lives (though
of high handed wilful and dangerous Transgressors) as though Justice and
Mercy, true Pity and just Severity might not harmonize, and make up the
blessed concord of Peace together.

10. You mind me again of my Books against Persecution, and yet my self a
Persecutor of my peacable Neighbors to the Death, murdering the innocent, yea
that I still retain a Murtherous mind, and you cry out against me, Oh
murtherous Man and.c. To which I say, I am not better than David, nor (in this
case) are you better than Shimei, who raked up Stones and Dirt, and flung them
with Railings at David, crying out Come out thou bloody Man, and this in the
name of the holy Spirit also.

As to W. H. I never appeared In Town or Colony against him for any private
matter (although many ways extraordinarily provoked and wronged by him) but
always in Witness (as I humbly appeal unto God) I say in witnessing against
his running down and destroying the Public, My Righteousness as to my dealing
with W. H.
(as at this day) for his Private Covetous and Contentious Ends.

And for your self, The horrible Murdering of the Indians by Liquors which the
Qu: have notoriously practiced.
who cry out so much of Blood and Murder for my being impartial to God, to
the King and the Country: I heartily wish that your hands were washed from the
bloody trade of Liquours to the Indians, which even the Quakers have practiced,
telling the Indians that the Quakers only know God, and therefore would sell
them Powder and Liquors cheaper, and they would not mix water with Rhum as
others did: so that by many sudden deaths, what by Consumptions and Dropsies,
the Barbarians have been murdered, hundreds, if not thousands in the whole
Country, and more in this Colony than in any part of the Country beside that
I have heard of, against which I have witnessed from Court to Court in vain.

11 You ask me how I can think as low of my self, as you high of G. Fox, when I
boast of Education Experience and.c.

I answer, I boast as Paul did, who confessed himself the least of all Saints,
and the chief of Sinners; and yet reckons up the Privileges end Favors,
which God had vouchsafed to him, against the foul Clamours of his malicious
and envious Opposites, the false Apostles.

12. You conclude with advising my Repentance, and you propose to me the case
of Nineve, telling me that forty days is a short Speech.

22] Answ. I humbly beseech the Lord to help you and me, humbly and faithfully
to examine our true laying of that Foundation of a true Repentance, which is a
total turning of our Soul or Spirit unto God; not out of Fear or self ends, as
Dissemblers do; but in Mariage-love with God that it might be said unto us, thy
Maker is thy Husband.

As to your special Hint to me of forty days, I can say it (through infinite
mercy) that more than forty or fifty years, I have been acquainted with Death,
and have (not seldom) familiarly discoursed with the Grave and Pit of
Rottenness: I have desired to be ready at a minutes warning, waiting for a wind
to transport me (as Paul speaks) unto Christ Jesus in Abraham's Bosom which is
best of all. I pray you to know that I believe there is a black Familiar that
haunts the Quakers, it may be he whispers to you that within forty days you
shall be ridd of me except I repent; They were the Dog-dayes when these hot and
doged barkings were made at me.
he may see into the crazy temper of my house of Clay. (These Dog-dayes not to
continue and abide a little of that time) Or God may suffer him by some
immediate Revelation to employ some malicious soul to Murder me, that this
foul Liar and Murderer may extol and predicate himself in print by your Pens,
that he was a true Prophet, applauding and triumphing in the righteous Judgment
of God against a Blasphemer of your gods and godesses. I believe that every
Hair of mine head, and every Minute of my Life is in the merciful hand of the
Father of Spirits. I do not simply and blasphemously think as G. F. that my
Soul is a piece or part of God; Death and the Resurrection.
nor can I (as the unbelieving Quakers) slight the Rising of my body; Steven
fell asleep, and so (among Stones or whatever his holy Wisdom pleases) I
humbly hope shall I, and rise again in the Morning.

R. W.
Providence, July 30. 1672. (so called)

HItherto (gentle Reader) have been the Skirmishings of my Forlorn-Hope; I
hasten now to the relation of the main Battle, for after this my third Letter
and Answer, I heard no more of that foul and slanderous spirit: I should
rejoice to be isntrumental to his casting out of my ancient friend I T.
however he plucked in his horns as G Fox himself did, and I have yet heard no
further.

Within some few days after that our Deputy Governor had [23] delivered my
Paper to them, the strange Quakers (as was agreed with G. Fox) came to
Providence. The first Intervenience at Providence of the Qu. and my self.
John Stubs, John Burnet, and others, and came to my house six or seven
together: their Salutations were (like the meetings of their dumb spirit) in
silence. I bid them welcome and.c. John Stubs began and said, they had received
a Paper from me, and they came to me to tell me, that they accepted my Offer,
and that they had appointed (according to the liberty given them by my self in
my Paper) the 9th. of the present August to be the day at Newport. I told them
they were welcome, and the more welcome because they brought me tidings of
their Resolution: for I longed for Opportunityes of such Exercises, to which I
thought the most High invited us by our precious Libertyes and.c. I added that
my Paper was in the first place directed to G. Fox: but they suddenly caught at
my word, G Fox his cunning Departure.
and John Burnet told me that G. Fox was departed before my Letters were
opened, and that G. Fox never saw my Paper (and probably as afterward in the
dispute he spoke honestly not knowing the Mystery) John Stubs added that my
Paper gave liberty to G. Fox or his friends. I sai^ therefore I would not fail
(if God pleased) to meet them at the place, and by nine in the morning, on the
day they had appointed.

They departed (after drink offered and accepted by some) but the next morning
being the first of the Week I sent them word in writing, that diverse of our
Neighbors were grieved that the Conference should be carried away from
Providence to Newport wholly, My care of engaging them to my whole Offer and of
discussing the latter seven at Providence.
(as some of them had also spoken) I told them that the accepting of my Proffer
necessarily included the Conference about the latter seven at Providence: I
told them their Consciences and Credits lay on it, and therefore desired them
to six on a day for the dispute of the latter seven at Providence before their
departure hence. This Paper was delivered to one of their Company in the room
where they were together, but whither on purpose or (as it is possible) by
mistake, they say the Paper was lost: so receiving no Answer from them, I late
in the evening sent them another writing, signifiing, that I could not hold my
self engaged to meet them at Newport about the first seven, without their
promise of discussing the latter seven at Providence. Then they wrote to me
that I had seemed willing, and that they had given notice, and the Country
would come in, therefore they challenged me to appear and prove my malicious
[24] and bitter charges against them, and withal promised that upon the
finishing of the first seven at Newport, some of them would give me a meeting a
Providence and.c. Upon the receipt of this, I sent them a third writing
signifiing that I rested in their Promise, and therefore (if God pleased) I
would not fail to be with them at the time and place appointed. And God
graciously assisted me in rowing all day with my old bones so that I got to
Newport toward the Midnight before the morning appointed.

Then I sent them a fourth Paper (with a Copy of my first that miscarried as
they said) and signified to them, that it would be convenient to agree about
some Order of Transition, or passing from one position to another: as also
since they were many and I but One, I presumed their Reason told them that I
expected but One at once, and that if another desired to speak, the first
should hold his peace; as also I signified that some were scrupulous of going
into the Quakers Meeting House, Scruples about meeting in the Quakers Meeting
house at Newport
and therefore I desired some thoughts about it: they thought it convenient to
send H. Bull to request me to go to his house to them; I went; they urged the
Capaciousness and Convenience of their house, and I told such as scrupled, that
it was one thing to go into a Jewish Synagogue, or a Popish Chapel to
worship, or countenance their Worships: another thing to Profess and Contest
against them, in which respect Paul disputed many days in the Jews Synagogues
against them, and I could freely go into the Popes Chapel, to dispute
against the Pope and his Worship.

I knew our aged Governor Mr. Nich. Easton and other Magistrates (of their
judgment) would be there, the way to Conquer.
and so the Civil Peace maintained, and I had a strange assurance given in to
my spirit from God in answer to my poor requests and.c. viz, that by Moderation
and Patience I should conquer their Immoderations and impatiencies, I therefore
thought it in vain to spend time about a Moderatour: It Is true they gave me no
Answer either by Speech, or writing concerning their coming on me one at once,
but to their seeming great advantage they constantly fell on me all at once,
and one of them William Edmundson with grievous Language and insulting.

When I came into the place aforesaid I found three able and noted preachers
amongst them, The Persons disputing with me.
viz John Stubs, John Burnet, William Edmunson sitting together on an high
Bench with some of the Magistrates of their Judgment with them: I had heard
[25] that John Stubs was learned in the Hebrew and the Greek (and I found him
so) as for John Burnet I found him to be of a moderate Spirit, and a very able
Speaker. W Edmundson described.
The third W. Edmundson was newly come (as was said) from Virginia, and he
proved the Chief Speaker, a man not so able nor so moderate as the other two:
For the two first would speak Argument, and discuss and produce Scripture: but
William Edmundson was very ignorant in the Scripture or any other Learning: He
had been a soldier in the late wars, a stout portly man of a great voice,
and fit to make a Bragadocia (as he did) and a constant exercise merely of my
Patience: he would often Vapor and preach long, and when I had patiently
waited till the Gust was over, and began to speak, then would he stop my mouth
with a very unhandsome Clout of a grievous Interruption: so that sometimes I
was forced to play the Moderator, and to protest that such practices were
against the sober rules of Civillity and Humanity. It pleased God to help me
with such Patience to weather them, that John Stubs openly confessed twice, I
Stubs his Ingenuity.
that though some others had given them some interruptions, yet that I had not
done it.

I took my Seat at the other end of the house opposite to them, The beginning
of the Dispute
and began telling them that the most High was my witness, that not out of any
prejudice against, or disrespect to the persons of the Quakers (many of whom I
knew and did love and honor) nor any foolish Passion of pride or boldness (for
I desired to be sensible of my many decays of my house of Clay, and other
ways) nor any earthly or worldly ends I had that occasioned this trouble to my
self and them.

I was first commanded this work from Heaven: The Occasion of it.
Why should not this Argument be good for me and for others as well as the
Quakers? they say their commands are immediate (for Interpretations are
immediate) but I say they herein suffer Satan to cheat them; for they say they
pray, they fast, they wait, they listen, they judge of the motions that arise
within them, and so have I done. The great maker and searcher of all hearts
knows, that none but his holy Majesty was privy to the Conception of this
business.

1. My end was, My ends.
the vindicating his most holy Name, which my Soul saw was trodden in the dirt
by Satan clothed with Samuels Mantle, and the bright garment of an Angel of
Light, which once he was, but pride deceived him.

26] 2. I had in mine eye the vindicating this Colony for receiving of such
persons whom others would not, we suffer for their sakes, and are accounted
their Abettors: that therefore together with the improvemeut of our Libertyes
which the God of Heaven, and our Kings Majesty have graciously given us, I
might give a public testimony against their Opinions in such a way and
Exercise, I judged it incumbent upon my Spirit and Conscience to do it (in
some regards) more than most in the Colony. I may also truly say that

3. I had also in mine eye, Nicholas Davis drowned at Newport a little before
the Dispute.
that this exercise might occasion some Soul Consideration in many. I told them
that we had a doleful Alarm and instruction lately, we were taught what
Salvation and saving was, in the late death and drowning of a person so known
to us (and all N. England) Nicholas Davis. I told them our case, and the case
of all mankind is his (in Spiritual and Soul matters) Oh a world for an Oar, a
Rope, a Plank. Only it must be to all of us our work, to try whether our
Savior our Salvation be real, and not failing in so great a Straight.

Some of these blessed ends it has pleased God to propagate by this occasion
all this Colony over, and all of us round about have put forth our selves in
Disquisitions and Searchings after the true grounds of the Christian Religion
and Worship.

I had many thoughts of beginning such an exercise with Prayer unto God for his
Presence: What Prayer was used.
but I knew I could not join with them nor would they own my Prayers: I had
thoughts (as Eliah among the Baalites) to have prayed in the singular number:
But some Considerations made my spirit content with this kind of Petition unto
God: For not only in my Closet and my heart, but publicly before them all I
said, I do humbly hope and beg of God the Father of Spirits so to order and
direct our Spirits in these our Agitations, that his holy name may receive
glory, and the Souls of all of us some Soul-profit and Advantage.

I began with the first Position, which I think W. Edmunson also read out of
the Paper. viz.

That the People called Quakers are not true Quakers according to the
Scriptures. The first Position.


1. I said I knew they did not own that name Quakers, as imposed on them by
God, or taken up by themselves, The name Quakers.
but given them in scorn and derision, as G. Fox, Ed. Burrowes (and I had heard
John Stubs who joined with them) declared, and that 27] one Gervace Bennet, a
Justice in Derby first so called them in the year 1650 And yet I had cause to
judge that the name was given by Justice Bennet and others to them from that
strange and uncouth possessing of their bodies. with quaking and shaking of
their Bodies even in public Assemblyes and Congregations, which extraordinary
motions I judged to come upon them, not from the holy Spirit and Power of God,
but from the spirit and power of Satan for diverse Reasons.

First. Although they pretend that Moses and David and Habbacouck and Daniel
were Quakers, yet as to the Christian Profession, and the days since our
gallant Forefathers in Germany (at Spiers) protested against the whore of
Rome, and from that Prostestation, by the Papists, they were called in scorn
and wrath the Protesters, or Protestants (about 150 years since) unto this day.
The Rise of the word Protestant.
I say as to the Protestant Professors and Confessors, the Quakers are but a
new upstart party or Faction risen up little above 20 years since in the
northern parts of England, Lancashire etc. It Is true, it is probable they are the
Offspring of the Grindletonians in the same Lancashire about two years before,
The Grindletonians.
who held those two grand Points (though many wicked paths of Doctrine and
Practice were amongst them) viz. 1. That God does all. 2 They could not sin,
taking it according to the Letter. These Grindletonians were the Offspring of
the late Nicholaitans, (as all of them are in truth justly so called) from
Henery Nichols who put forth his Books of the same Poison in K. James his time,
(which long since I read) and were confuted by many, and by Mr Ainsworth and Mr
Robinson, precious and powerful Witnesses of Christ Jesus. H. Nichols and his
Nicholaitans were the Litter of those Spirittualls and Libertines which spread
in Germany and France in Calvin's days; The Libertines.
against whom that heavenly soul, gave his powerful and heavenly witness in
his Book against the Libertines. These Libertines Satan raised up about the
Protestant Reformation from the ruins and rubbish of the old Manicheans and
Gnostics, and other blind Guides who swarmed in the first third and fourth
Christian Centuryes, until the Pope swallowed up all the lesser Serpents, and
so became a Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, forcing all with fire and
Faggot to deny Christ Jesus, and to martch under Antichrist (the Antichrist
the man of sin) his Colors.

Some of these Particulars I could not then express, but think [28] fit here to
remember the former days, for Information of such as do desire it.

These People came from Lancashire and other northern parts to the Southward of
England and to London. I spoke with some of their Chief then in London, I knew
it was the old proud spirit which had appeared in so many foul lies in their
former deceived and deceiving Leaders, and I was the more confirmed in my
thoughts when I saw their foul spirit so transport them, not only in lying
Doctrines, but lying Quakings and Tremblings, lying preaching through the
Streets Repent, Repent: and lying and abominable Nakedness of men and women,
until their ugly Child and Daughter Rantisme rose from their Bowels and
practiced Nakedness of men and women in the Streets and in their religious
Meetings, The Ranters are but the Quakers Daughter
as Adamites: when it is notorioufly known they fell into many uncleanness
and Adulteryes. To my face and to the world in print they maintaind, there were
no sins in them: Saying That the Saints could not sin, and God did all and was
all, and they were as pure as Adam and God himself, this is known by the
Writings extant etc.

2. Again I said unto my Antagonists that the manner of these quakings and
shakings were not as of those quakings and tremblings of David, Moses, and the
Corinths receiving Titus with Trembling, or the working out Salvation with Fear
and Trembling: True Quaking
for that may many ways be proved to be the Soul and Spirit, out of a holy Aw
and Dread of the Majesty of Heaven with whom we have to deal, who only can
pity and help us in our deplorable and forlorn conditions: He it is who
works the Will and the Deed, and therefore with deep impressions of Aw and
Dread we ought to attend upon all his holy means appointed, wherein (as of old
in the Tabernacle and Temple) he has promised to come to us. Beside, as it is
natural for the Body to tremble when the mind does, as we see in many Persons
in the beginning of a Battle, or going over a deep Water, or going to suffer
Death, or looking over a high Clift into the sea etc. So when the Bodies of
those holy men, or any now do so tremble Experience proves it that it is no
ordinary motion, but extraordinary, and upon extraordinary occasions, and those
holy and heavenly Occasions, as may be instanced.

But the quaking and shaking motions of the Quakers (as I shall prove) they
proceeded not from those holy Affections [29] proper to Gods Children, The
horrid shaking of the Quakers.
so also they were horrid and monstrous casting their bodies into horrid and
monstrous motions and Gestures which mine eyes have seen: Besides the abundance
of notorious Instances, what strange horrid motions are those which Theora John
(as he madly calls himself) and John Toldervy were tossed and tumbled up and down
with? which cannot be imagined to proceed from the holy Spirit of God, but from
Satan to delude and cheat poor sinners with.

To this purpose I told them at the first coming of this spirit to London and
Westminster, some Parliament men told me that themselves went to one of the
Quakers Meetings about Charing Cross, but were so affrighted with the shaking
of their own bodies, and of their Chairs and Stools under them, that they
could never again be got into their Assemblyes.

I added, Satan's Counterfeit motions.
that such Shakings, Motions, Ecstasies, etc. were known to be the frequent
workings of Satan upon his Servants in all ages, Such were the furious motions
of Baals Priests, the motions of the Possessed mentioned in the Gospells, and
other Historyes, and known to be amongst the Barbarians, The Quakers Answer.
our Neighbors about this time. John Burnet and William Edmunson rose up and
said that I had laid many deep and heavy Charges upon the people of the Lord,
which I should never be able to prove: I had denied them to be Christians, and
so had wronged the good Spirit of God in them, and their Profession of
worshipping God in the Spirit: Yea I had taken away their being (as men) out of
the World, as a dangerous People to Nations and Kingdoms and Commonweals,
yea to Kings and Princes, and so not fit to live amongst men in the World.
These Speeches were often uttered and enlarged by one or other of them, and
that with Zeal (and Passion in W. Edmunson)

I waited patiently till these Gusts of their angry Spirit was over, and then I
told them I had not wronged them in a tittle: But by the help of the most High
I would make all good against them, and toen leave it to every man's and women's
Soul to judge at their own Peril.

About this time John Stubs alleged that of Paul, Phil 2. Work out salvatson
with fear and Trembling.

I replied I in no way opposed the awful and most serious impressions of Gods
Majesty in all his appearances and ordinances upon the Souls and Spirits,
Quaking and Trembling
yea and Bodies of Gods Children. [30] But I denied that those places to the
Corinthians and Philippians concerned any such bodily shakings and quakings as
we now debated.

Beside I said if Quaking and Trembling were a Command and an Ordinance, No
Ordinance of God
and institution of God to be practiced, then was it constantly to be practiced
(as the Jews say of Cain that the Mark which God set upon him was a constant
Trembling) Or if not always, yet always in Worship, or if not always in
Worship yet at some certain times. But the plain truth is, Counterfeit Quaking
and Trembling
the Devil will be Gods Ape in most things: He subornes and substitutes a
bastard Quaking and Trembling of the body in Imitation of David, Moses etc. on
purpose to thrust out the true Fear and Trembling which ought to be constantly
in us, raising up all our Affections and all within us to a due sense of the
Terror of the Lord, the dreadfulness of our Danger, and the wonder of our
Deliverance (which we can never make too sure) from sin and wrath to come to
all eternity.

I also declared, that the most High and holy one, was free as he pleased to
cause the trembling of the Souls of his People to over flow with influence
upon their Bodies also, asin Moses, David, Daniel, Habakkuk, Paul, etc. this is
like to be in some extraordinary cases and Conversions or turnings to God, as
Paul's was, and that especially in bringing of great Sinners or old Sinners
unto himself etc.

There were some few Speeches, some from the Governor and his Wife, and some
few others that spoke, some in favor of, and some against the Quakers, but
neither did my Opposites nor I so far attend them as to engage with them,
excepting some Turns that were between William Edmunson, and William Hitchcock
(an Inhabitaut of Newport) who (as others did) witnessed against their
upbraiding me with my age (Old man, Old man etc.) as also for their
Interruptions.

Mine own Brother Mr Robert Williams, Schoolmaster in Newport, desired to
speak: nor he nor others dissenting from them could be permitted, except they
would set their hands to my Paper. A Paper put in of two great Considerations
My Brother (unknown to me) put in a paper to them, which he took the liberty
to read, desiring that two things might be answered by the Quakers. 1. The
matter of the true sense of Sin as Sin. 2. Of the Materiallity of such a Person
as the Lord Jesus Christ, and the materiallity of his [31] Bloudshedding. This
Paper they took but waved it. W. Edmunson openly charged me with breach of
Covenant, viz. That if any would speak on my behalf, they should set their hand
to my Propositions. It Is true it was desired by one of them at my house at
Providence, that if any joined with me, they should subscribe to my Paper. The
unequal Terms of the Quakers enjoining Subscription.
But I answered that I was alone in the Business, I had not consulted with any
others but the God of heaven himself: so that I denied vehemently that there
was any such agreement, or any color for it. Besides it was ridiculous to put
either such a Bar and Limit upon any man's spirit, and least of all upon Gods
Spirit, viz, that no man should desire leave to object or querie etc. except
first he would subscribe my Proposalls But I took the boldness justly to charg
them with palpable and gross Partiality viz. that W. Hitchcock and others,
(opposing or dissenting) might not speak, but W. Harris, W. Dyar or any
favoring of them might speak without exception, and their open Partiality.
because all that speak for their ptetended light, it must be supposed that
they speak from the Spirit of God himself: others out of Ignorance, Malice and
Envy: this will appear more afterward.

However, there were these few debates about the liberty of speech in the
Auditory and Bystanders, and the Quakers denial and enjoining of
Subscription: yet the most High, Father of Spirits did so compose all spirits,
that it was wonderful that such Opposites should go through such a work and
Conslict all day until night, without more Interruptions and Disturbances.

I was ready and waited to put forth my third Reason to prove they were not
true Christian Quakers, it was from Isai. 66. To this man will I look that is
poor and contrite, and trembles at my Word. I told them that G. Fox in his
Book all along was so far from trembling at the Word of God in the holy
Writings or Scriptures, that he could not endure they should have that name,
The Quakers evil spirit toward the holy Scriptures.
or be once called the Word of God, It Is true I know his pretense, that Christ
Jesus is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. But I know it is true also that he
grants the Scriptures to be true, and inspired from the holy Spirit of God, and
to be Gods words, though not his Word. Well, to pass by the simplicity of the
Distinction, and let us take what he grants, and is it not prodigious and
monstrous Contempt that these holy Words, this holy Book and Writing of God
should be so undervalued and slighted, The Light of each man in the World above
the Scriptures.
yea vilified [32] and nullified, if compared with their pretended new found
Light within them, which was (say they) before the Scriptures, and gave forth
the Scriptures, and therefore was above the Scriptures and gave forth the
Scriptures, and therefore was above the Scriptures, and therefore is not judged
or tried by the Scriptures, but they by it. Yea, and this light must be in
every one of mankind in the whole World: Hence it was that these holy Writings
were so disused in their own private Readings, in their Public Worship, The
Pope and the Quakers great affection and ownness against the holy Scriptures.
and in their Families.

I told them God was little beholding to the Pope and the Quakers for their
humble Reverence and great Affection to his holy Letters, Declarations and
Proclamations. The Pope had his Infallibility as well as they, his immediate
Inspirations as well as they: They both owned, and yet did not own the holy
Scriptures, the Pope and they only must interpret Scriptures, they only give
the Sense, they only judge all Controversies: yea they dispense with the
Scriptures, and if they were quite lost and burned and not a Copy of them left
in the World, yet there were no loss but a good Turn, a good Riddance, for then
the Pope and the Quakers Infallible spirit and its immediate Inspirations,
would be more esteemed and set by.

I produced an Instance of one Thurston an Apostle of theirs who came to
Providence with extraordinary long hair hanging over his shoulders; An Instance
of a long-haird profane Qua. slighting Nature and the Scriptures.
It was so long that an aged Soul (captivated for present amongst them) the
wife of C.S. demanded of him why he ware it so long since Nature it self did
teach it to be a shame for a man to wear long Hair, as the holy Scripture
affirmed? He would not say, He cared not what Nature or the holy Scriptures
said, but he said as much in effect (as she told me her self, and may with true
fear and trembling still think on it) viz. when that God that bid me wear it,
bids me cut it off, the will I cut it off. As if he would say, what tell you us
of the teachings of Nature (as we see in that monstrous case of their women's
Nakedness) or what tell you me of Scripture? I have a Light within me that made
that Light, was before it, gave it forth, and is above it. This man's hair was
so offensive and odious, that meeting of me, and saying, Fear the Lord God, I
could not but answer him in these words, viz. What God do thou mean a
Ruffians God? alluding to that of Paul to Titus, They profess to know God, but
in their Works they deny him.

33] I told them the rage of the Devil in all Ages had been most fierce
against these heavenly Records, in which the most gracious God and King, out of
the infinite depths of his Wisdom and Goodness, had provided for the Ages and
Generations to come the glorious Appearances of the eternal Invisible King in
the former Generations of mankind from the Creation of the World, as also the
Wonders yet to be finished till time should be no more, all which were in the
holy Scriptures.

I remembered them of a profane bloody Wretch in Ireland who in the late horrid
Massacre, An horible Instance in Ireland against the Holy Scriptures.
hunting (among other bloody Wolves) after the Goods and Lives of the
Protestants, found a Bible, and with Indignation (the same which I believe is
in most Papists and Quakers) he flung it into the Kennell, and stamped upon it
with his feet saying, A Plague of God take this Book, this has caused all the
Quarrels among us.

Whether I spoke all these Particulars at one individual time or Turn I cannot
clearly remember, only I am certain thus I spoke and more.

My Opposites once and again had Turns of Speech, but still the only sum of
all was, that they owned the Scripture, but yet the Spirit that gave it forth
was above it, withal they urged that I could not prove where in the Scripture,
the Scripture was called the Word of God.

I Answered, The Scriptures the word of God.
That many things were infallibly so, and true although not in so many Terms
and Words mentioned: But yet there were abundance of Scriptures wherein the
Prophets did expressly say, Thus says the Lord, The Word of the Lord came unto
me, and Hebr. 1. The Lord spoke diverse ways, and at diverse times in the
Prophets, but now he has spoken by his Son. Sure his Speech is his Word: Hence
the Word of God is the Word preached, as Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1. Not as the word of
man, but as it is indeed the Word of God, Act. 19 which preaching of the Word
and growing of the word were not competent and proper expressions to be
affirmed of the perfon of the Lord Jesus; especially I told them I would use
the words of the Lord Jesus when he fought with the Devil that famous Combat,
Math. 4. No other Weapon did he use against him but (...) It is written, and
again, It is written, It is written, here Christ Jesus quotes Dut 8. Man shall
not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God: where Moses and Christ Jesus affirm [34] that God has many words,
contrary to what some Quakers has affirmed to me saying, that God has no more
words but one, and Christ Jesus here affirms, That every appearance and
providence of God, is a word proceeding out of the mouth of God, as well as
this holy Scripture he alleged. Though yet it is true, that Christ Jesus is
the Word, or declared Mind of God, incomparably above all his spoken or written
or providentiall Words and Expressions: He came out of the Bosom of the
Eternal Father, and brought the brightest Revelations of his eternal Godhead
and Councels, and therefore is most justly and eminently styled the Word of God.

I urged that the Word or Words of God were Figurative Speeches, for properly
God had no Mouth, nor Tongue, nor Lips, nor Heart nor Brains etc. but as our
Kings Majesty his Declaration touching Religion, his royal Charters, his
Letters from Breda are often insisted on and urged by the Quakers as the word
of a King, though his writings contain many hundred words; so it is with the
King of Heaven his Scriptures and writings etc.

I had often occasion to mention G. Fox and Ed. Burrowes their Book in Folio
called The great Mystery etc. upon which W Edmundson reproved me for speaking
of G. Fox and E. Burrowes in scorn and derision (so his words were) I guest he
took me as if I had scornfully intended G Fox in his Burrowes, The Occasion of
the Title of this Book.
but I had openly purged my self, protesting before the Lord, that I had no
such thought, yet this Passage was the occasion of the Title of the Book: For
the finger of Gods most wise and holy Providence is often wonderfully seen in
small, unexpected and inconsiderable Turns and Occasions: In such poor shells
oftimes may be found the Kernels of rich and useful Observations. Sure
(thought I) Gods holy Finger is in it, that G. Fox and Ed. Burrowes (Men so
qualified and named) should so notorioufly conspire against the true Lord Jesus
Christ in their dark and subtle hellish Contrivings and Imaginations. It was
also Gods overruling hand that VV. Edmundson should so upbraid me, and first
put the Conceit and thought of such a Consideration into me, which I
apprehended as Digitus Dei the finger of God directing and pointing me to so
proper and pertinent an use and Application.

Thus the only Wise and Righteous King catches the craftiest Foxes in their
own Burrowes, and turns their proud Surmises and Censures upon their own Pates.
This occasioneth me with Amaze- [35] meant and Astonishment to cry out O God how
deep are thy Being, thy Attributes, thy Providence, thy Self and all thy ways
beyond our thoughts and finding out!

To proceed, I had observed and prepared many Quotations out of G. Fox his
Book, but they desired not to hear them read, as in the following days of
Conference they were read by my continual importunate Urgings: I say at first I
could not get opportunity to insist upon some Particulars, a Taste whereof I
think now fit to present the Reader with.

In Page 155. of G. Foxes aforesaid Book he brings in one I Stallam their
Opposite saying [To say the Light in every man gave forth Scripture, and will
open Scripture to us, is palpable Darkness, and contradicts the Scripture] G.
Fox answers, [All be in utter Darkness and know not the Scripture, until they
come to the Light that every man was in that gave forth Scripture, for the
Light lets them see to what it was spoken, and Christ the end of them.

The english of that Answer is, G Fox his prodigious Folly and Impiety.
That every man, that is all Mankind Men and Women if they will, can give forth
Scriptures, or write holy Scriptures: I know they call this Light, God, and
Christ, and Spirit, the Covenant of God, the Life, Truth and Grace of God.
Pertinent Queryes and unanswerable.
I asked them in public [Since this Light comes into this World in and with
all Mankind, whether it comes into them at the Conception, or at the Birth, or
when else?

Whether it was in all Mankind before the coming and death of Christ Jesus or
whether to those that are in the world since his coming, or both? Whether it be
in the Understanding, Will, Memory, Affections in any of them severally, or
lodgd in all of them jointly? For it was a prodigious Fable to imagine such a
Sun to shine in every Room of an house, and yet none of the Inhabitants, nor
any that come into the house discern and see it: Christ Jesus says, as the
mouth is, the heart is, and before a true turning unto God, we are in darkness,
we are darkness, we hate the light of God and endure not to see it, but wish
there were no God, no Father of Lights to discover and plague us for our dark
Courses: yet our Hearts are so cunning and cheating that they will tell us that
we have Light and Christ and God within us, and that we can speak and write
holy Scripture, not remembering that (as Christ Jesus said of the Temple) our
hearts are Dens of Thieves and (like painted Tombs) full of dead men's bones and
rottenness, [36] until a second Birth by the Word and Spirit of Christ Jesus.

Again, in the same Page G. Fox brings his Opposite saying, [And to say every
man's Light is the true word of Prophecy is an old Fable, no man shall be able
to spell out a syllable of the Gospel by all that is written in a man's Heart.]
This subtle Fox answers, [The Light that enlightens every man is Christ, and
the sure Word of Prophecy to him he shall find it] In this Passage who can but
see their horrible and simple profaning and wresting of plain Scripture: Is it
not clear as day to him that is not willingly blind, that this word of prophecy
in Peter, is the Word which the Prophets spoke and writ of Christ Jesus, unto
whom the spirit of God in Peter sends us, as being a more sure and convincing
word to us then that voice which Peter and John affirmed that they heard from
heaven in the Mount of Transfiguration? But thus profanely and simply do others
of them affirm this Light to be that Prophet which Moses wrote of, Deuteronomy. 18.
whereas the holy Spirit in Stephen Acts 7. applies expressly that Prophecy to
the person of the Lord Jesus, that God-man in one person, whom Moses and
Stephen preached the great Messiah, or Christ the anointed Prophet, Priest and
King unto all that receive or believe in him.

Now diverse observing and publicly expressing how unsuitable it was that
three of the ablest Speakers amongst them should Consult openly and whisper and
utter themselves one immediately after each other, The tumultuous spirit of the
Quakers in Disputing.
and sometimes all together as one man against me: W. Edmondson answered and
excused it saying, that it was mine own Paper (which he often produced) which
expressed my Offer to make good my Positions against all Comers: But I replied
(once and again) That as God is a God of Order, and does all things in Number,
Weight and Measure, in most admirable Order and Method, so I had thought that
(according as I writ and spoke to them) they would have had so much Ingenuity
to conceive, that nor I nor any man was so simple as to offer to Dispute with,
to oppose and to answer twenty or thirty or one hundred at once: But thus like
subtle and impudent Foxes and Jesuits they pleaded and practiced from the
beginning of the It Is hard to hold the Foxians or any guilty disputant to a fair
Dispute.
Conference unto the end of the 4th day, resolving to make use of and (like
dying men by drowning) to catch at any ridiculous Advantage though unchristian
and uncivil.

But the truth is, this and many other Discouragements and Disadvantages and
Difficultyes the Lord Jesus graciously and faithfully [37] (For his name sake)
enabled me to cut through, otherwise I saw the Debate would not have held on so
many Hours as it did Days, I knew they had as much mind to this work (no nor
any guilty Soul in the world) as Bears to be tied to a stake to be baited; and
I must humbly declare and predicate it (to the praise of the Father of mercyes,
and for the encouragement of others to be Patient for Christ Jesus sake) that
an hand from heaven carried me through to the end of each day, and to the end of
the whole business.

Sometimes I offered to proceed to an other Point, but all this first day was
spent upon the first Point of true and false Quakers: For though many upon a
sudden spoke as Mr. Coddington Mr. Easton (then Governor, who spoke sharply)
William Dyer, William Harris and others against me, yet I minded closely what
my Antagonists vented, who were placed on high in their Desk against me: John
Stubs and John Burnet were more sober and manly, but VV. Edmundson (who was the
junior of three) would speak all like Solomon's foolish woman, loud and
clamorous, simple and knowing nothing, being in truth nothing but a flash of
wit, a Face of Brass, and a Tongue set on fire from the Hell of Lies and Fury.

One Instance here fell out, for when I urged that it was not what man had
within him already, and brought into the world with him, that made a true
Quaker, but the Spirit of God accompanying and blessing the Reading and Hearing
of the writings of God preached and opened: I said the Heart of man was shut up
locked and barred up in willing Ignorance and darkness until the finger of God
in the use of those and other blessed means, pick open in a more gentle way,
or break open by great afflictions and and terrors the Soul and Spirit of man.
I said that Paul preached the word by the River side, but the Lord opened the
heart of Lydia: and while I was saying that, It was not Paul nor Paul's
Preaching nor the word that he preached -- at this word VV. Edmondson clamoured
out, He speaks Blasphemy: But it pleased God to move the heart of our
Deputy Governor Capt. Cranston justly and seasonably to witness against this
Interruption saying, W. Edmondsoo justly reproved by the Deputy Governor Capt.
Cranston
Let him have liberty to make out his mind: So I proceeded and said, it may be
VV. Edmnndson is offended as thinking I spoke against the word Christ; but
Christ Jesus knows that I had no such thought, but of the words which Paul
spoke. And I added that it was not Lydia nor all her Light within her, nor Paul
nor [38] his Preaching, nor the word nor words that he uttered, but the Finger
of Gods Spirit (according to Election) that set the word or words of Paul home,
opening her heart, and not every heart, (showing what free grace is against the
Popish and Arminian and Foxians exalting of Cursed Nature) and then it was that
she being by the Lord turned, she turned to attend and apply to her soul the
words which were spoken by Paul, as a poor Rams-horn made use of in the hand of
God.

Toward the end of the day VV. Edmondson fell into a long Invective, how I had
falsely slandered the People of God, The Foxians boast of their Number.
not only in this place, but the whole Body of the People of the Lord called
Quakers in all parts: For said he we are a great people, many thousands in
England, many thousands in London, besides in Virginia and Barbados and other
places, and N-England. And he and they said, have thou any more to say to make
out thy Lies against them.

I Answered (as at other times) that the Papists the common Protestants, the
Jews and the Mahumitans and Pagans, etc. fited the world with their Numbers,
and yet we jointly opposed them in Religious matters notwithstanding their
innumerable numbers: And as for more proof that they were not True Quakers, and
so truly Feariug and Trembling before God, I told them I would produce an
Argument, that they were so far from being Christians, that they were a to be
exploded and abhorred of all Mankind, as being fallen beneath the common temper
and nature of the Humanity of men and women, yea of the Savage and Barbarous in
the world, viz. their stripping stark naked their Men and Women and Maidens and
passing along in public places and Streets unto the Assemblyes of Men and
Youths and so were beheld and gazed upon by them! and this under a pretense of
being stirred up by God as a Service or Worship unto God, as an act of
Christian Religion proceeding from the immediate moving of the most holy Spirit
of God, most glorious in purity, and purity and holiness it self.

At first W. Edmundson seemed to make strange of the matter as if it could not
be proved that any of their women should so appear in the Assemblyes of People.
Two of the Foxian women naked in New England.
I told them the matter of fact was so notorious that it would be loss of time
and Impudence to question it, being so foully and openly practiced both in Old
and New England.

39] Also I added further, that G. Bishop of Bristow, one of themselves, in the
second part of the Persecutions of New England, relates in print the names of
two women in N-England that did so practice: and he complains of N-England
Persecution because those women suffered Whipping for those actions by the
Courts and Officers of N-England.

John Burnet said that the People called Quakers, were a People known to abhor
all Impurity and Uncleanness and the Appearance of it, and if any of their
women should so practice, they should condemn it in them, yet nevertheless if
it should please the Lord God to stir up any of his Daughters so to appear as a
Sign and Testimony against the Nakedness of others, they durst not condemn it.

John Stubs said, that they did condemn all immodest Appearances in women, both
in Behavior and Gestures. But if God stirred them up and commanded them to
this service to discover the Nakedness of others, they could not but
acknowledge Gods hand, and submit to it: And he further added, that it was a
great Cross to a sober woman's spirit so to act, as well as an affliction and
suffering to her body.

John Stubs likewise alleged the Prophet Isaiah, (as also did W. E.) and the
Sign of the Prophet Ezekiel: and John Stubs read the 20th of Isa. where Isaiah
was commanded to go naked for a Sign to the Egyptians and Ethyopians, to
prophecy and denounce that they also should go naked with their buttocks
uncovered as the words are: and this is (said they) a proof that the People of
the Lord might be stirred up by God to such actions for Signs unto others.
Isai. 20 discussed touching Nakedness


I Answered, that this was in the days of Figures and Signs, Shadows and
Ceremonies: And though this was G. Fox his Answer (in his Book which I had
there by me) yet G. Fox throughout all this his Book in Folio, turns of the
Allegations and Arguments of many of his Opposites with this Answer, to wit,
The Substance is come, the Body is come, Christ the End of the Law, the End of
the Command, the End of the Scriptures, the End of the Prophets, and of all
Signs and Shadows and Figures.

2. Although it were so threatened that the Ethiopians and Egyptians should so
go totally and stark Naked, and that Isaiah did so, which is much questioned:
yet it is not to be questioned but that the Egyptians and Ethiopians in their
flight, would cover [40] their Secret parts with the first clothes or rags
they could get, as it is no question but the Prophet Isaiah did.

3. The difference of Nakedness of Mankind and Womankind is very great in all
Nations. The Sex of Women is more fitted and framed by God for a Covering, for
Retiredness and keeping at home and for Modesty and Bashfulness; nor do we ever
read that ever God commanded such a thing to Women, or that ever it came into
his heart, or that ever any Godly Woman did so practice: there is no shadow or
color of Proof from the holy Scripture, nor from any Civil and sober People,
no nor from the naked Barbarians themselves, who though they suffer their Male
Children to go naked till about seven years old, yet cover they their Females
from their birth: It Is true it is said in Brasil and other brutish places some
Savage bruits go so, but they are Canibals, Men-eaters, etc. and other
Barbarians do not so except in Drunkenness and Madness.

They still answered, that they would not Countenance any such Practice but if
the Lord God so commanded his Sons and Daughters it must be obeyed.

I demanded of them how it should be known that it was the voice and command of
God, the God of Holiness, The true voice of God, and many false and pretended.
and not the command of the unclean spirit? for I told them that under that
Cover that one of them might be so commanded, and sent of God in such a posture
and behavior amongst men, why might not ten or twenty, yea all the women in
this present Assembly be so stirred up as it were by the Spirit of God to the
horror and amazement of the whole Country yea of the whole World?

They seemed to me to be Confounded with this Argumnet and weary to hear of it,
Imme^iate Inspirations and Revelations.
and not willing to speak to it: I therefore took occasion my self to say that
it was true in former Dispensations. The Command of God came to Abraham to kill
his own Child, his son Isaac, and this fact enjoined him did seem as horrible
unnatural and cruel, as this Nakeduess of the Women unwomanly and unnatural.
But,

1. It was in the day and dispensation of such wonderful Signs and figurative
teachings unto men.

And 2. I said God did furnish them with a Spirit of discerning the true dream
from the false, the true voice from the false, the voice of God from the voice
of Satan: But in our day wherein God had altered his Dispensations and
Revelations which he [41] used to the Fathers, and had spoken to us by his Son,
and had left his mind both in the old and new Scriptures or Writings: We have
the example and President of the Lord Jesus, that is, to attend to the holy
Scriptures only, and to use the weapon of [It is written it is written] against
Satan's immediate Inspirations and temptations.

Here W. Edmondson fell into a great heat against me and said that I spoke
Blasphemy, in saying that Abraham and the Saints then had a way and Spirit of
discerning the Spirits which we had not, implying that Gods Spirit was not the
same: He added, that I had kept them long and had proved nothing, and yet we
had not done with the first Position. I replied, that I had produced such
Grounds as should never be shaken, and that I presumed did appear to the
Consciences of many, and I heartily desired might also appear unto their
Spirits, Souls, and Consciences. Some of the Auditors spoke to this Purpose,
especially W. Hitchcocks who insisted upon the Water Baptism.

And thus by Gods Mercy and Patience the Discourse of the first day ended:
which very day was notable and significant as to the created Sun in the
Heavens, The Eclipse of the Sun in the midst of the first days Disputation.
who in the midst of our Contest was eclipsed, and hid his Face remarkably, and
preached aloud to us, that although the true Lord Jesus Christ the Sun of
Righteousness do suffer (in his infinite wisdom and and Patience) false Christ's
and false Prophets and Herod and Pontius Pilate, and his enemies of all sorts,
Jews and Gentiles, to cloud his Face and Glory a little from the World and his
own People, yet he will break forth again in his eternal brightness, splendour
and glory.

When that heavenly young Martyr or Witness of Jesus Christ William Hunter was
burnt at Burntwood in Essex it was a close and gloomy day, A Note of W. Hunter
burnt in Essex at Burnt wood.
but this gallant young Champion of Jesus Christ crying out aloud at the stake,
Son of God look on me, Son of God shine upon me! immediately that most
wonderful Light and Fire of Heaven the Sun tore the clouds and brake forth and
shined gloriously and remarkably upon the face of this blessed Witness at the
suffering of the flames of fire, for Jesus his truth sake against the whorshi
Principles of both the Papists and Quakers: and thus do the holy writings tell
us, that this most glorious light the Sun of Righteousness, visibly appeared in
his glorious and glorified Form and Shape to the visible eye of his servant
Steven while he patiently suffered for the true Lord Jesus sake the murdering
Stones to lay him down to sleep.

42] THE second day of our Spiritual Contest and Battle being come, (being the
tenth of the sixth Month August (so called) I heartily wished that I might
rather have kept my Bed then have gone forth to a whole days fresh Dispute
with such (reputed) able and noted Champions. Not that the most high Lord Jesus
whose cause and Name I was that day to manage, for the next point was about the
true Lord Jesus Christ) not that I say he faild me in my Resolution to march on
against Men and Devils for his Name sake; nor that he faild me in my cheerful
Confidence that he would carry me in the everlasting arms of his Power and
Goodness through that days Conflict (as he had done the day before) but that
he was pleased to try me with more than ordinary Weakness and mouldring of my
house of Clay, My great Indisposedness of body to the second days Contest.
that so my strength might be in a great respect immediately from Heaven,
considering my great unfitness for this days Service: for thus it was, My
continued loud Speech all the day before had left an impression of Hoarsness
upon me, and much rain falling that afternoon (after the Eclipse) I took some
wet in my feet that evening, so that my Hoarseness increased, and all that day
my Head was afflicted with pain, and my voice with a painful Hoarsnefs. I
looked up to heaven, Prayer and Patience.
and desired to wait as a Beggar at the Gate, and as a Dog under the table of
Mercy, and my Spirit was cheerfully resolved not to give occasion of
Reproaching the name of God to them who (I knew) waited and watched for it, nor
any Disappointment to such as were resolved to attend the Meeting.

This day I chose a middle Seat nearer to the Seat of my three Antagonists I.
Stubs, I. Burnet. W. Edmondson that so I might be heard the better with less
straining of my Voice and Breast.

I began and stood up and said, the holy Scriptures by the Prophet Jeremiah
told us of certain Bow-men, Spiritual Bow men and Gunners
some that bent their Tongues as Bows for Lies and complained that none were
Valiant for the Truth: I told my opposites that they and I were met as Bow men,
and I could heartily desire that all our Arrows might fly one way, to wit in
the defense of the true Lord Jesus Christ against the false: But since I had
charged them in my second Position to have set up a false Christ in stead of
the true Lord Jesus I should address my self to make probation of my second
Position. Yet before I enter upon it, I pray the Readers Patience to be
acquainted with some Particulars.

43] First. Though my head was ill, and my voice and speech hoarse and
painful, yet the Lord graciously carried me through the the whole day with
little hindrance in my self, and little disadvantage to the understanding of
the Auditors.

Secondly. The second days Contest.
This days Discourse was but accidental and additional; for they and I desired
to have finished the the whole first seven Positions in one day at Newport,
only in my paper I added, that if the whole seven were not finished in one day,
the Conference might continue some few hours the next day following: on this
second day therefore was a great Assembly, the Governor, Magistrates,
Inhabitants and strangers, Men and Women, etc. And this days Contest also held
unto the Evening.

Thirdly. As I had begged of God a Spirit of Patience to bear all their
Censures, Reproachings, Revilings, Vapourings and Insultings, so it pleased God
to exercise me with one notorious though private, though private "Vizt." R. W.
Ms. Ann.
That I was Drunk, A black and senceless Imputation.
and could not speak that day as I had done the day before: But my Daughter
Heart, at whose house I lodged, and John Trip sen. who lodged with me can
testify that I complained of Illness, and eat but a few spoonfulls of milk
with Mr. Trip at Breakfast: and though my daughter kindly offered me a Dram for
my Illness, but I refused it knowing it might curdle the milk I had taken, and
so increase my cold and Obstruction: and this the most holy God knows, and
these Witnesses know was all I took that morning which might conduce to that
foul Slander, of being so Drunk that I could not speak plainly that day.

Fourthly. The confused spirit of the Quakers.
This day also I encountered with that Disadvantage of all the three aforesaid
Disputants at once with all their might fighting for their Idols and Images
against me: I spoke of it, and so did others again and again; In the copy of
this book belonging to the Library of Brown University, are many manuscript
erasures, corrections and annotations, in the well-known handwriting of Roger
Williams. They were possihly made with the intention of correcting a second
edition of the book, if such had proved desirable. These alterations will all
be noted in this reprint and will be designated as Roger Williams' Manuscript
Annotations.
But W. Edmundson still bruitishly pleaded that it was mine own Offer to
undertake all Comers: I answered as before, that I took them to be rational
Men, and by all Comers not to understand ten or twenty or an hundred confusedly
at once, but in a fair and equal way, one after an other: it was grievous and
often expressed by some of the Audience: But as before on the first day I
resolved not to lose time, or suffer a Breach: and the Lord was pleased to make
my Yoke easy and Burden light.

Now to the proof of my second Position which was, The secon^ Position.
That their Christ was not the true Lord Jesus Christ.

44] Here I prayed their patience to suffer me to tell them that they were not
Christians, Concerning true and false Christ's
nor Professors of Christian Religion: They might (with Jews and Turks and
Papists) profess one God, yet Christians they could not be: but as the true
Lord Jesus told us, many false Christ and false Prophets should come, who like
Mountebanks instead of true Physicians, Traitors and Rebels against the King
eternal and Murderers of him.
and false and counterfeit Money instead of true, should with Satan's power and
policy pass up and down and deceive Peoples and Nations, so I must affirm and
declare that for their parts they had cut of the head of the Christian
Religion, the true Lord Jesus Christ, and they had set up a false Christ, a
false King, an Usurper in his stead, they had like Michal put a wooden Image
upon a pillow of goats hair in David's bed, but David himself was gone, the true
David, the true Lord Jesus Christ was not to be found amongst them: this I
spoke expressly and they did hear me awhile.

My proof was, First. Because the Description and Character which the holy
Scripture gives to the true Lord Jesus, no way agrees with the Image which they
have set up. I told them that it was known that the word Christ was a greek
word signifiing anointed, The true Lord Jesus Christ
as the word Messiah in the Hebrew did. I said this true Lord Jesus was one
Person made up of two Natures, God and Man united into one person, I said one
Individual person, whatever S Fisher blasphemously utters against it. That as
to his humane Nature or being Man, all the Figures and Ceremonies, all the
Priests and Sacrifices pointed to him as the great Prophet, the great anointed
King and Governor etc. His humane nature which G. Fox al^ night long so barks
against.


2. As to his humane Nature and being a man and One Man Moses and the Prophets
wrote of him: of his Mother a Virgin, of the place of his birth Bethlehem, of
his bringing up at Nazareth: of his Scourging and other sufferings, drinking
Vinegar and Gall, the piercing of his hands and feet, the numbering of him with
Malefactors, the parting of his Garments and casting Lots, his burying, rising
and Asscending etc. and I said all those Prophesies and many more were exastly,
literally, and punctually fulfilled in and upon that Individual Person: so that
I affirm, there is such an exact material and literal Harmony between the
Prophesies and the historical Narration of his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, etc. that he must needs be an Unbeliever, (Jew or Gentile) that
does not acknowledge the admirable Consent and Music of [45] them in a literal
and historical Declaration.

On the other hand I affirmed their Christ was but half a Christ, The Quakers
Christ allegorical and merely Fancy, destroying the History.
a Light, an Image or Picture or Fancy of a Christ made up of the Godhead and
their flesh, I said they had set up a Christ within them which was but an
Imagination, an Image, a Christ in the mystical Notion: but in reality Nothing:
For as the Papists make use of the name Christ, and the Pope says he is
Christ's Vicar and Lieftenant, and he does all for Christ, and the Jesuits
(soaring above all Christians) pretend the name Jesus, and yet the Protestant
Witnesses have made it to appear that in many respects the Papists are
infinitely against both Christ and Jesus, and so are not Christians but
Antichristians: so I told them did they, they blew a Trumpet for Christ Jesus,
God in Man, the everlasting Father, that we are bone of his bone and flesh of
his flesh, that he was so born at Bethlehem and dyed at Jerusalem etc, And yet
all these fair Flourishes and Colors are but as an English Flag in a Spanish
or Dutch or any other Enemies Bottom: For do not all their Books declare that
Christ is Spiritual, that Christ, God and Man is within us, that his Birth, his
Life, his Death, his Burial, his Resurrection, his Ascension are wrought within
us, so that like the Oracles of Apollo, and the Echoes of the Jesuits the
Quakers say Christ was born at Bethlehem and dyed at Jerusalem, but intend in
truth and reallity no other birth nor life nor death etc. but what may be
extant and wrought in the heart of man.

To this purpose I told them that Humphrey Norton Humphrey Norton deals
plainly against the Person of Christ
(one that blew the Trumpet and beat up the Drums in the Name of Christ Jesus
as loud as any of them) expressly writes openly in his Book printed at London
after his return from hence, to wit, Is not Christ God and is not God a Spirit?
you look for a Christ without you, from what coast or Country shall he come?
what Countryman is he? You stand gazing up in the clouds after a man, but we
stand by in white chiding of you. So that if you fix now really and truly upon
a Man the Manhood and Humanity of Christ, and that he did consist and still
does of body and soul (as we do) then you are gone from, (and Christopher
Houlder in his late Answer to Nathaniell Morton) are gone from your former
Religion, The Equivocation of the Foxians.
Tenants and Principles, or else you are miserably bewildered in your Souls and
Consciences, and some of you most fearfully equivocate, and others must be
fearfully up to the ears in Boggs and Swamps not knowing what to hold between
this Christ without, and the [46] Christ within which you so much charge upon
all except they be Reprobates.

I told them I acknowledged Christ within as much as any of them, and
infinitely more, for I did confess that every believing soul did bring home and
apply the power and virtue of Christ's Birth, Ephesians 3. 10.
and Life and Death etc. The true Union that is ^etween Christ Jesus and
Believers.
according to that clear Scripture Ephesians. 3. 10. That Christ may dwell in your
Hearts by Faith. I said there was a nearer union between Christ Jesus and a
Soul believing on him, then between a Man and his Wife, and between the Soul
and the Body. That Union is Earthly and dissolving: but that between Christ
Jesus and the Believer, it is eternal in Gods Decrees and Counsels, it is
temporary in Gods calling of his chosen out of the World, to Repentance and
belief in the Mediator Christ Jesus, and it perpetuated and continues to
Eternity.

I told them that (as the holy Scripture says) they preached not Christ Jesus
but Themselves, yea they preached the Lord Jesus to be Themselves: that
whatever were their Pretencse (as the Papists) of God and Christ and Holiness
and Mortification, yet they held not the Head (as the Scripture speaks) and if
their head be but a painted and an Imaginary Head, The Quakers painted Christ.
they are but a painted and Imaginary Body. Their Sun of Righteousness they
talk of is but a Sun painted upon a Sign or Wall which is not the true Sun, but
the picture of the Sun of Righteousness.

I told them they set up this Christ within, opposite to Christ without, as
Opposites and Contraryes, Denying and Destroying one an other: for as it is
with a King and his Palace, Christ winhin and Christ without.
if his person be without, his person at that time is not within, though he be
within by his Right, Authority and Influence: if his Person be within the
Palace at that time it is not without. But the most clear Truth is though these
subtle Foxians sometimes speak of a Christ without that dyed at Jerusalem
agreeing with the Christ within, yet they presently declare their meaning to be
Mystical: For ask them but these two Questions, Two Questions to Quakers.
and if they make any Answer you will see the Cheat, the Equivocotion and the
Mystery of Iniquity in it.

1. Do they not hold the Light within every man to be All, to do All and to
suffer All within which the Christ without, Is or Did or suffered without.

2. Ask them now what is become of this Man, this person that thus suffered at
Jerusalem, and they are forced to confess he [47] is within, and can give no
other account of him, as they answered to me at Newport the last day of the
Conference.

But to return, I told them what I said I would prove out of their Writings,
and especially out of G. Fox attested by Ed Burrowes his large Epistle, and as
it was thought by John Stubs present.

John Burnet declared not, (nor any of them) against what I spoke: but said (as
said the rest) if G. Fox have spoken or written any thing that is not right and
truth, we profess not to follow him: and they were willing I should produce out
of G. Fox his Book what I could that might make for my proof, viz. That they
did not profess the true Christ.

I said G: Fox had picked out some particular Lines, Sayings and Sentences out
of the Books and Writings of his Opposites, G F^x his Book in Folio produced.
Page 3.
(it is not to be questioned but to his utmost Advantage, as knowing best how
to Answer what he chose and culled out) and since they were free and willing, I
would produce some Instances: I took up the Book and read in the 3d. page,
where he brings in his Opposite Samuel Eaton saying [The Saints have not Christ
in the Flesh] G. F. his Answer is [Contrary to Christ and the Apostles
Doctrine, who said they were of his Flesh, and of his Bone, and should eat his
Flesh, and they that eat his Flesh have it in them.] Whence I affirmed that
Christ Jesus had such a Body as might be really and materially in the Saints,
and ii was clear that they were one with the Papists in their Sayings and
Doctrines denying the Flesh, Body and Person of Christ Jesus: For as the
Papists in stead of a Spritual feeding upon his blood and Merits, The Papists
and Quakers destroy the Person of Christ.
they substitute and bring in a Real, Material and Carnal, in their horrible
and fantastical Transubstantiation; so do the Quakers professing to eat Christ
spiritually, wholly destroy his material and fleshly being.

I proceeded saying, in the 4th Page G. Fox brings in the same Opposite saying,
The Saints do not see Christ, the Heavens contain him. And G. F. Answers And
the Apostle says they sat with Christ in heavenly places: so he is contrary
to the Apostle, and Christ was in them and walked in them, and God dwelt in
them and Christ in you except you be Reprobates. I said that as the Papists
were up ridiculously and odiously with Hoc est Corpus meum, The being of Christ
in the Heavens
This is my Body etc. so they with The Light within you, the Light that
enlightens every man, Christ within you except you be Reprobates etc.

48] For if the Heavens do contain that Man Christ Jesus bodily, (as they grant
in word) saying They believed he dyed, rose, and ascended: then in that same
sense and respect the Saints cannot now sit bodily with Christ in heavenly
places, and therefore to allege Christ within, and their sitting with Christ
in heavenly places, was but irrational Nonsense and Jesuitical Equivocation:

The truth is they were gravel'd with these Considerations, and they were
willing that G Fox his book and his Answers should answer for them, The Quakers
endure not trying but are willingly ignorant.
and although the oppositions of G. Fox his Opposites were mighty, and G Foxes
were mere simple barkings of dogs or foxes compared with the rational and
prudential Answers of a man, yet when I began to open and compare the
Assertions of the Opposite and Fox his answer, they would cry out (especially W
E. like a galled horse winching) Why do thou make thy Observations upon G.
Fox his words? G. Fox his words need not thy Expositions, let G. Fox his words
alone they are able to speak for themselves.

I told them it was a senceless business for me to allege, (and they to be
willing I should) G. Fox his sayings and his Answers, and we should not debate
and discuss the Sense, and I make out my Proof out of G. Fox his words, and his
Adversaryes compared together: when they had spoken they knew their liberty to
take of my Answers with their own, and leave what was spoke to every ones
Conscience in the sight of God.

They were Obstinately (that is in Greek Heretically) resolved to avoid this
Course, Willing Ignorance.
therefore I was glad to hale my Tacks and Bolings close home, and make my best
of a bare Wind and now and then loof up into the wind, and get liberty to say
something and omit abundance of my Thoughts.

Once I was forced to say to W. Edmondson: Friend yesterday you quoted the 9 of
Nehem. how it pleased God to send them his good Spirit to guide them: I pray
remember now a word in the 8 of Nehem. Nehem 8 they gave the Sense
They read and gave the Sense and caused the People to understand the Reading.
Without this searching for the Sense and meaning, the Pith and Marrow of the
holy Scriptures, or any other Scriptures or Writings we make use of, The
Quakers nonsensical Spirit.
what are our Readings but the Papists Latin, the reading Ministers, the
prattling of Children and Parrets? yet notwithstanding all that I could say and
urge, it is known to all the Audience the Song was, let G. Fox words alone to
speak for themselves, if thou have any [49] more to bring forth let us have
them: so that as before I was forced to wave my Observations and Intentions,
and pass on to new Allegations: Though now I shall crave liberty to touch and
point at (as with the finger) the Opposites Assertions of Truth and G. Fox his
unsavory and rotten Answers

In Page 8. John Bunyan Christ's twofold Presence.
He brings in John Bunyan etc. saying [The Lord Jesus Christ is afar in his
bodily presence] and G. Fox answers, [And yet he says the Lord is at hand, and
the Apostle said he was in them and Christ said he would dwell with them] I
here observe and reply, the holy Scripture abundantly tells us of a twofold
presence of Christ, 1. His bodily visible Presence, which John Bunyan speaks of
and the Quakers in words grant. The 2. His Spiritual, invisible Presence, of
which many Scriptures speak and that most clearly. Ephesians. 3. 10. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by believing etc. Concerning this visible bodily presence,
of which the Question is. First. G. Fox his impertinent and silly Answer is not
to the Point no more then the East and the West is to one point of the Compass.
The Quakers Conjure with Christ's Body.
2. He fallaciously, (most unchristianly and impiously) denies the body of
Christ Jesus to be any where, and as Conjurers do (Hocas Pocas) that which all
now see is gone and vanished, so that with the ancient enemies of Christ Humane
Nature, the Manicheans, they say and unsay and at last affirm a Christ only God
and Spirit dwelling in them, and in all mankind also.

About this time these subtle Foxes minded to spin out Time, and wave the close
Fight of examining Particulars concerning Christ's humanity. The Quakers endure
not Senses or Meanings just as the Papists and yet talk all of light
G. Fox his Book was brought forth (the same with mine (John Burinat took it
and went along with me in the Quotations, I read and always endeavored to
make my proof out of the Allegation: But W. Edmundson kept strict watch and
stood Sentinel, that no Observations of Senses or Meanings should pass,
resolving to keep out the Fire and Light of Christ Jesus with Stand, or I Will let
fly a Fire (from Hell) upon you. Well, I knew what froward Children and
brutish Spirits I dealt with, and resolved to go softly and to speak softly,
and as I could gain ground by inches (at least) for liberty to give my witness
for the Lord Jesus.

In Page 9. He brings in John Bunyan etc. affirming that the Son of Mary, The
old question of Christ's Presence.
God-Man is absent from his Church, G. Fox answers, but never touching
Scripture about it. [contrary to [50] Christ's words, I in them and they in me:
and I will be with you to the ends: and Christ the Head of the Church. and
where two or three are gathered etc. and the Saints are bone of his bone and
flesh of his slesh.

I Reply, here half an eye may see as before, how he gives no other Presence or
Absence of a Christ but invisible and Spiritual, and subtly affirms that
Christ Jesus has no bodily Presence at all, in the sense which all Christians
of what sort or Sect soever (but these Iuglers (and themselves also in word and
horrible hypocrisy) do acknowledge and profess,

In Page 10 He brings in the same Author saying [Christ was not in his
Disciples when he said I am the Light of the world] G Fox answers. Fox and
Bonnet no difference.
[And so corrected by Christ, I in you and you in me.

Page 12. He brings in the same Author, saying [The Body of Christ is out of
the sight of all his Saints,] G. Fox Answers, (they sat with Christ in Heavenly
places, the Saints are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, were the
Church which he is head of his Body:) The Quakers pretend to own^ Christ's Blood
and yet in truth allow him no Blood to shed.
In which I Answer, and all his Book over (though he own a Christ without, and
that died at Jerusalem in word yet he allows in effect no other Body to Christ
Jesus but what is Mistical and Spiritual: so that with notorious Iugling, and
Iesuitical Impudence, they would make their simple Followers believe that they
own such a Christ as shed his Blood at Jerusalem, and yet leave him in his Body
no more Blood to shed then is in a Spirit which has no Bones, Flesh nor Blood
to shed at all.

Page 17. He brings in Enoch Howet Enoch Howet.
Affirming [That it is Blasphemy to say that Christ is in Man as God Man,] G.
Fox Answers (still like the Cuckoo in one silly Note) How are they of his Flesh
and of his Bones: And does not the Scripture say, Christ in you, and God will
dwell in you, and walk in you, and are not his Saints of his Flesh, and of his
Bones, and there is one sentence added, are they not partakers of the Divine
Nature?

I Reply, The divine and humane nature of the Lord Jesus.
this Participation of the Divine Nature is (says Peter) in the Saints by
those precious Promises, that is by receiving Christ Jesus, by believing in him
according to that Ephesians. 3. 10. (That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
Believing) not that the Divine Being or Essence and Nature or Godhead is
communicable to a finite Creature: from hence these proud Simpletons fancy
(and some have been such bold Bayards as to say) they are Christ and God, as
much as he that died at Jerusalem, Christed with Christ and Godded with God.

51] It is remarkable that Nicholas the Deacon Nicholas the Deacon and Nicholas
Fathers of the old and new Nicholaitans.
was the Father (as I believed) "believe." R. W. Ms. Ann.
of the old Nicholaitans and Henery Nichols in King James his time the Father
of the new Nicholaitans in London and other places, crying up their perfection,
their Spirituality and Godhead, all leading from the purity of Gods Worship and
Authority of the Holy Scripture, and at last to carnal Filthiness as the
Daughters of these the Ranters declare evidently.

This Humane Nature, So Cristopher Houlder he boggles at the word Manhood.
humane Soul and Body of Christ Jesus is so cross, opposite and contrary to
their new whimsical Christ Jesus (the Light within them) that G. Fox in all
this Book cannot endure to hear of the word Humane, as being a new Name and
never heard of in the Scriptures.

As to the word Humane, such an odious Word and Bugbear to G. Fox in all this
Book: The word Humane considered
I said in public; many Words truly and properly English were well and
commendably used that were not in the Scripture in English: it is true the word
Humane comes from the word in Latin Humanus, signifying partaining or belonging
to Man: so a Humane Soul or Body is no more but such a Soul or Body as all
Mankind have. Used in the Scripture, 1 Cor 10.
Hence I told them, that the word Anthropinos peirasmos, 1. Cor. 10. (I
presumed John Stubs knew) might have been turned Humane, but is truly turned
no Temptation or Trial but such as is common to Men. This Fox knows, that if
Christ Jesus be granted to have had such a Soul and Body as is Humane or Common
to Men, down falls their Dagon before the Chest or Ark of God, viz. their
Horrible, Monstrous Idol of a Christ called Light within them.

We went on thus in alleging Quotations, though not in a close Examination of
them which they endured not, though ever and anon I made some sallies out upon
them and had some Skirmishings, and sometimes sharp Disputes before I would
retreat from the Quotation.

In Page 282. He brings in Daniel Gaudry saying [We shall not see Christ as he
is until he comes to Judgment, Dan. Grudry Christ not seen as he is until the
day of Judgment
and then and not before we shall see him] G. Fox Answers, (You where you are
see him not: nor know him as he is, we do believe you: but the Saints the true
Church whom he is the Head of, in whom he is in the midst and in whom he is,
etc.

I was not desirous to trouble the Audience with more Quotations, but they
still urged, haste thou any more, have thou any more, etc. upon their
provocation I Quoted many more (to [52] make up an overwhelming Cloud of
Witnesses against these Protestant Jesuits and Iudasites, Betrayers of the Son
of God the true Lord Jesus Christ.

In Foxes Answer to his Opposite Daniel Caudry it is clear that he affirms the
contrary to his Opposite, to wit, that Christ Jesus is as much now seen visibly
as ever he shall be seen: in which I believe he speaks the heart of all the
Antichristian Wolves and Foxes who quake and tremble at the thought of Christ's
return again to judgment: The personal coming of the Lord Jesus.
and therefore these deluded and deluding Souls in their dark Prisons of
willing Blindness, and the hellish Chains of the pride and hardness and
security of their hearts, they dream they sit in Robes of Glory themselves and
now keep open the high Court of eternal Judgment and pass Sentence upon this
Christ without as a poor Outside Christ and all that worship him.

2. I observe in Fox his answer that he can not keep out of his Burrow of
confounding a visible eye and a Spiritual, A visible and in visible eye and
object.
a visible and invisible seeing: you see him not says he where you are, that is
you that look upon such a real person indeed, such an one born living and dying
as the History sets forth, you cannot see him as he is, but we that look at
Christ Jesus and the history of him as Mystical, immediate, invisible, though
we use to please you children and fools with the words of Christ dying at
Jerusalem: we see him he is in the midest of us: and he is the invisible Head
of the Church in God, while you talk of Visibles and seeing him as Visible etc.

In Page 276. he brings in Richard Meyo saying, Christ ^ithin and Christ
without.
that he did believe in a Christ that dyed at Jerusalem: and that he does not
believe in a Christ within, and preach Christ within, is a Reprobate. Colloss.
2. 2. Cor. 13. And he is not in a true Belief of Christ without, that does not
believe in a Christ within, but is in the Devils Belief, and believes as the
Devils do.

In this his answer an humble Soul may see how this subtle Traitor under the
golden name of Christ, and Christ within in the heart, he stabs at the heart of
the true Lord Jesus, who suffered for poor Mankind in man's own nature at
Jerusalem.

2. I observe his virulent and venomous Mind and Pen stabbing damning and
reprobating all that truly believe in the true Lord Jesus, The Papists and
Quakers Christ is no where
whom he confesses to have been a real man dying at Jerusalem, etc. except
they can believe that he is now no where to be found but in every man's heart
that comes into the world, that is no where.

53] In Page 246. He brings in Christopher Wade saying, Christoph Wade.
[It is whimfical to say Christ God and Man, Flesh and Spirit is in them] He
answers, [Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine who said they were of his flesh and
of his bone, and Christ in you, and he would walk in them, and he that has not
the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and they are of his slesh and of his bone,
and Christ in you the hope of Glory]

In the same Page he brings in the same Author saying [Flesh and bone cannot be
a measure in one and a measure in an other] He Answers [wheras the Apostle
says, we are of his Flesh and of his Bone, here thou art contrary to the
Apostle, and that was more then one that had the Flesh of Christ, and his Bone
and his Spirit.

In Page 248. He brings in the same Author saying, [It is a false thing to say
Christ Person is in man] He Answers, [which is as much as to say, none are of
his Flesh nor of his Bone nor eat nor had not his Substance.

And Page 249 The Saints bodies are not Christ's body. He Answers, How are they
Christ's? How dwells he in them? and how are they of his Flesh and of his Bone
then? and how brutish are you b^come in Knowledge? has he not bought them
with a price, and are they not his?

And in the same Page he brings in the same Author saying, that neither Gods
Essence, nor Heaven, nor Christ's Person was in Peter's holy body. He answers,
but the Apostle said God will dwell with you and walk in you, and again, our
conversation is in Heaven.

And once more in the same page There is not whole Christ God and man in men.
Answ. Then how must men grow in the measure of the fullness of the stature of
Christ: and Christ and God will dwell in man and walk in man, God that made all
things, and Christ by whom all things were made.

I Reply, this Author Christopher Wade I know not many of his opposites (living
and dead, whom he here vapors to answer in his Book, The Author whom G. Fox
opposes and in Pride and madness rages against.
I know were worthy of Christian esteem and honor for the grace and Knowledge
of Christ Jesus in them, and for other worthy respects: and whither this
Opposite or any other whom he pretends to puff at or Answer, have thought
this audacious Quacksalver worthy of any Reply, I know not: For certainly (as
he commonly concludes his Answer in his Book (Thy many notorious Lies and
Slanders and Blasphemies are not worth the mentioning: however for the proof of
my Position I am occasioned [54] to follow this Fox into his holes and
Burrowes, and to hale him out before God, Angls and Men as a most greedy
audacious Fox and Wolf, not sparing the Son and Lamb of God, nor his precious
Lambs and Sheep.

Now to all these last Quotations, I say (as the Opposites to Fox said) that
this Notion of Christ wit hin opposite to Christ without is a most Frantic and
Whimsical, The Quakers Christ but a whimsical Christ
Gross and Blockish Fancy: For though he grant Christ Jesus to be a Man which
died at Jerusalem, yet making him only Spiritual, and such a Christ as is whole
Christ, God and Man in every man in the World, he makes Christ Jesus to be but
Whimsical Christ, and that Man that died at Jerusalem but a Babylonian Fancy.

In Page 221. He brings in the Author to a Book called Hosanna to the Son of
David, Hosanna to the Son of David
saying, [Christ is without the Saints in respect of his Bodily presence,] He
Answers, (They are of his Flesh and of his Bone, and eat his Flesh and drink
his Blood: and how have the Saints his Mind and Spirit, and he with them and
they with him, and sit with him in Heavenly places, and he is the Head of the
Church: how then is he absent? the "Ye" poor Apostates. R. W. Ms. Ann.
poor Apostates from him who feel not Christ with you, but he is with the
Saints, and they feel him.)

I Reply, I observe this Viperous Tongue saying to the unknown, heavenly
Author, and Fox his other Oppositee [Ye poor Apostates etc.] what is it but a
height of Devilish Pride going before destruction and condemnation? this proud
swelling Bladder puffed up with a Timpany of Wind and Vanity, what a huge
swelling show he makes? what a breadth of confident boldness and brutish
impudency he carries before him? what a gross, Frantic Papist is he become,
that cannot, will not distinguish between Christ's Spiritual presence and his
bodily? The Spirit of the Papists and the Quakers but one.
that cannot, will not consider the difference between Spirits and Bodies, a
Spirit that has no Flesh nor Bones, and a Body which has both, as Christ his
Body had? that cannot, will not distinguish between their sinful Flesh and
Bones, and the sinless Flesh and Bones of that Man Christ Jesus? that cannot,
will not distinguish between God manifested in the Flesh and Bones of that Man
Christ Jesus, and manifested in the Flesh and Bones of Believers in him: O most
Holy and Righteous are thy Judgments, O thou most High Judge of the World, who
art a devouring fire and Justice it self, who thus castest down the Proud and
Self-conceited into the Dungeon of such Black and Hellish Ignorance!

55] Page 217, Out of a Book mentioning the Quakers Cause, saying, [To say
Christ within is never to mention Christ without] He Answers, There is none
knows Christ within, but he knows him without: the same yesterday, and to day,
and for ever: And there is none knows him but they know him within, revealed of
the Father, which is beyond Flesh and Blood.

I Observe, This foolish Fox (for all his hiding Craft) is here found out: The
Quakers notoriously dissemble, for they do own and not own the Christ that dyed
at Jerusalem.
He professes (against his Will and Heart) a Christ that died at Jerusalem,
and therefore is he forced to name a Christ without: but when the Hole and
Borough is Dug the Fox is found: For Examine what is this Christ without?
is he that litteral, real and material Person the Son of Mary (as all
professing Christ's Name generally agree? Is this he whom the Quakers
acknowledge to have lived and died at Jerusalem? and do they intend a Material
Cross, a literal Death, a literal and real Jerusalem? some of them will say
yes, but therein give the lie to others of themselves, and also to the rest of
their own story, in acknowledging no other Christ but such as is in every man:
such a Christ as really and bodily died at Jerusalem, they scorn and hate and
fly from as the Devils did, crying out, What have we to do with thee Jesus thou
Son of the most High God, art thou come to torment us hesore the time? Hence
the former Archdeacon or Archbishop of these parts Humphrey Norton: he mocks
at an outward Christ, Humph. Norton more plain in words then other Quakers.
he asks what Countryman he was and shall be: He reproves the Fools that have
their Eyes abroad, and gazing after a man into Heaven, he jeers at the Cross,
and asks what manner of wood it was made of, seeing we must take it up daily?
And Fox says, this Jesus Christ without and within, is Jesus Christ yesterday,
and to day, and the same for ever: therefore in the Logic or Reason of this
Brute, Christ yesterday and to day.
Christ had no body that was born at Bethlehem, or died at Jerusalem: For he
was born yesterday, and to day, and he is born forever: he dyed yesterday, and
he dies to day, and he dies forever, which is a most Heavenly Truth relating to
Gods purpose, Christ's Merit, and to Forefathers, our present times, and such as
yet must be born and follow after us.

But such Mystical and figurative Scriptures (which are in themselves like
Sampsons Lion and Riddle) through Satan's Policy, and the proud simplicity of
these simple Foxes, are made the common Holes and Buroughs where you may be
sure to find them: just like the Jesuits (whose Cosens, if not Brethren of one
belly of Hell [56] they are) who usually confound clear Scriptures with
Spiritual and Mystical Illusions, and sly from Distinctions and openings
necessary in places more dark, figurative and allegorical.

In page 211. He brings in John Burton saying, That the man that was crucified
his body is now in the presence of his Father, absent from his People as
touching his bodily presence. He Answers. Does not the Apostle say he is the
Head of the Church? and does not the Apostle say they are of his Flesh and Bone
and sit it heavenly places, with Christ, and Christ says, they must eat his
flesh, and he is in them.

As I remember at the reading of this Quotation, I urged that herein G. Fox did
plainly deny (as indeed in all the rest I have quoted) Christ Jesus to have had
such a body as could be born of a woman, The Quakers endure not to be searched,
temer of false and thievish spirits.
wrapped in swaddling Clothes, etc. as could be hungry, weary, sleep,
discourse, Interline "be." R. W. Ms. Ann.
apprehended, buffeted, whipped, nailed to the Gallows, die, be buried, arise
and ascend up visibly into these visible Heavens, now in the presence of his
Father, and absent from his People on Earth, as touching his bodily presence:
But one of my Opposites, (I think two of them) bid me not wrong G. Fox by my
Observation, for his words were not so. I Answ. In effect and Substance they
were, for G. Fox here, (and in all his Answers) maintains the Negative to what
his Opposites Affirm. The Quakers and Apolloes Oracles the same.
And 2. As to the grounds of his denial it is clear that sometimes they are
most plain and clear, and sometimes most subtle, and commonly such as will bear
a twofold Sense, on which they commonly ground some Iesuitical equivocation.

In Page 210. He brings in John Burton saying, John Burton.
Christ went away into Heaven from his Disciples, and so not within them. He
Answers, Did not he say that he would come again to them? Did he not say he was
in them, I in you? And did not the Apostle say Christ was in them except they
were Reprobates? the hope of Glory? was he not revealed to the Apostle and so
in him? and did not the Apostle Preach Christ within, and you preach Christ
without?

Again in the same Page [Those Believers that are in the body at this day are
absent from the Lord:] He Answers again, If ever there Equivocating Jesuits in
the world the Quakers are.
Does not the Aposte say Christ is in them except they be Reprobates? and he is
in them the Hope of Glory? and they have fellowship with God, and God will
dwell in them, and walk in them, and he that believes believes in him, and
Christ and so notabsent.

Again in the same Page, they say [He is absent from them as touching his
slesh, He Answers, Does not the Apostle say they [57] are of his Flesh and of
his Bone? and he that eats not his Flesh, has no life in him, and they sit in
heavenly places with him, and he that eats his flesh has it in him.

And again in the same Page they say [There is not any Heaven within into which
the Man Christ is ascended, or can any man contain a man four foot long?] He
Answers [Christ is a Mystery, and is he not to be revealed within who is a
Mystery? He who did descend to be revealed and made manifest in his Saints in
slesh and Spirit, that did descend, which is now manifested, that the World
wonders at: that is ascended far above the Heavens, who is the Saints life
living Bread and Drink: and where ever used the Ministers of Christ any such
expression as thou does, which shows that Christ to thee is a Mystery?

Reply, The Quakers wonderful juggling about the true Christ
In all these four Passages G. Fox expressly denies that Christ is ascended into
Heaven from his Disciples: That Believers now in the Body are absent from the
Lord: that he is absent from Man as touching his Flesh: that there is a Heaven
into which Christ is ascended: and that Christ's Body is not containable in a
place according to his stature and proportion.

2. In his Answers he notoriously jugles and equivocates as if he maintained
Christ in Truth, he that lived and died at Jerusalem, and visibly ascended into
Heaven though the whole scope and the plain open faced meaning of his words,
with loud cries tend altogether to another business, to wit, to set up himself
by setting up the Image and Picture, this Imaginary Christ which he calls the
Light within them.

The same Author says, Page 206. [A false Christ has a new false Faith to
apprehend this Crucified Christ within, John Burton:
] He Answers, [Which is contrary to the Faith of the Apostles which Preached
Christ that is Crucified within and not another; Him that was raised from the
dead was risen that Lord Jesus Christ within, the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, by whom the World was made glorified with the Father before the World
began: it was he that was manifest in the Saints, that was, and is not another,
for the other is Antichrist.]

Again in the same Page, it is a Sceipture of the Devils making to apprehend
this Christ within: He Answers, Now I say if there be any Christ but he that
was crucified within he is a false Christ, and the Scripture holds forth this,
and the Devil never made it, but he and his Messengers are against it: And he
that has not this Christ [58] that was risen and Crucified within is a
Reprobate though Devils and Reprobates may talk of him without.

This Quotation was read again in their own Book by John Burnet, and they
magnified the Christ within, The Quakers Traitors and Rebels against the true
Lord Jesus
but they would not suffer me to observe the sense and argue from it, saying,
G. Foxes Words were plain concerning the true Christ; And so indeed I say they
are to any penitent Soul truly (like Paul) unbottom'd from weak and filthy
self, and his own Dunghill Righteousness, and burning with sincere Affection to
the true Lord Jesus: For these subtle Foxes, and their Words discover (as the
Sun at noon day) that as plainly as ever Absalom, Achitophel, Shimei, Sheba
rose up in conspiracy and Rebellion against David, etc. as plainly as ever
Judas and Peter (for a time) and Alexander the Copper-smith, and Hymeneus, and
Julian the Apostate denied David's Antitype the true Lord Jesus: so under the
Cloak and Color of Christ Crucified within, do their Rebellious Traitors bear
Arms against the Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: For
although it be Scripture Phrase, that we are Crucified, Dead and Buried, and
Risen with Christ: yet what a poor proof is this, that Christ was Born and
Crucified etc. yesterday, and to day within us, and there is no other Birth nor
Life, nor Death, nor Grave but what is within us, and all are Reprobates and
Devils that bow not down to this painted devouring Monster.

Still my Opposites were caught in their own Craftiness they seemed well
pleased that G. Fox should be heard in his Answers to his Adversaries, I have
known the poor Lobsters catch the Foxes.
and I restrained and stopped from making out my Proofs from the Sense, and Scope
and Meaning: I was yet glad that so much was discovered, that I had (by
Catches) liberty to give fire sometimes, and intended to make use of this
present Advantage (which I from the first intended, when I saw I should be
stopped, and they would not afford me the liberty I gave to them without the
least Interruption) as John Stubs confessed.

Page 135. He brings in Thomas Moor saying [Christ is absent from us while we
are in this Mortal Body] He Answers contrary to the Apostle, who says, the
Life of Christ is manifested in their mortal Flesh.]

And Page 136. The same Author says [Christ is distinct from every one of us,
and without us in our particular persons,] He An- [59] swers, [The Apostle said
Christ was in them except thed were Reprobates: and they were of his Flesh and
of his Bone, and they eat his Flesh and drank his Blood, then it was in them,
and he is distinct from none but Reprobates who hates the Light.]

Reply, I wondered not so much at this Thunder, and Fire, The wonderful
blindness and hardness of my Antagonists
and stinking Brimstone from this Foxes mouth, and that all are Reprobates with
him that bow not down to his Carved Image: but I wondered at my Opposites, who
declared (publicly as before) that they would not follow G. Fox but in the
Truth, etc. and yet when I read all their "the plain Evidences." R. W. Ms. Ann.
plain Evidences to them of Foxes denying the true Lord Jesus, God and Man; and
making only a Spiritual Christ, a Mystical Invi^ible Jesus, etc. that yet they
should be so blinded and hardened, as to cover, excuse and plead for G. Fox in
all particulars, and stop me from drawing the Curtain and letting in the Light
by Opening and Arguing from the Sense and Meaning.

I do not remember that any one of my three Opposites gave any positive answer
to any of my Observations on Foxes Principles, Answers, and Evasions: All their
work was to keep themselves within their Trenches or Buroughs, and to cry out
[Thou must keep to Foxes Words] or, Will thou go on to another?

In Page 71. He brings in Frances Higginson saying, Frances Higginson
[Christs Humane Nature] He Answers, [Where does the Scripture speak of Humane,
The Quakers endure not the word Humane
the Word Humane where is it written that we may search for it: Now we do not
deny that Christ (according to the Flesh) was of Abraham, but not the word
Humane: And Christ's Nature is not Humane which is Earthly, for that is the
first Adam.]

Reply. This ignorant and simple Cavil (as I have before proved it to be from 1
Cor. 10.) is often brought by G. Fox in this Book, in an horrible equivocation
to overthrow and destroy that Humane Nature, that Flesh and Body of the Lord
Jesus, who yet had such a Body they say that died at Jerusalem: These
Traitorous Jesuits or Iudasites tell us Humane is of the Earth or Earthly, and
that is the first Adam, but Christ Jesus is of the Seed of Abraham according to
the slesh, that is, in their mental Reservation, according to their slesh, God
in their flesh, Christ in their flesh suffering at a Mystical Jerusalem within
them: They are Abraham's Seed, Isaaks Seed in whom all Nations (by this Christ
the Light within them) must be blessed: And all that are not this Seed, this
Flesh, [60] this Christ (which they are) are in the Serpents Nature and
Reprobates. Acts 13. Opened of Christ's Humanity.
But amongst all the most full and heavenly Scriptures for the Humane Nature of
the Lord Jesus: I shall touch but one at present, Act. 13. at Antioch, Barnabas
and Paul in a Synagogue of the Jews made the Humane Nature of the Lord Jesus,
(as also in other places) the great Subject of their Discourse and Preaching:
and concludes ver. 38. Be it known unto you therefore Men and Brethren, that
through this Man is Preached unto you the Forgiveness of sins, and by Him all
that Believe are Justified from all things from which you could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. By the meritorious Sufferings, Death and
Bloodshedding of this Jesus (literally in the History born at Bethlehem as the
Quakers say, etc.) is only forgiveness of sin, and justification, etc. and not
by a Chimical and Diabolical Christ and Fancy within us, begot by the Devil on
a proud and lazy Ignorance: Let therefore (as it follows) the Proud Despisers
wonder and perish, believing not in him the true Light of the World, the true
Brazen Serpent to all that look up unto him.

In Page 37. He brings in Thomas Collier saying, Tho. Collier
[If the very Christ God Man be within those called Quakers he cannot come down
from Heaven] He Answers, [Here he stands against the promise of Christ, that he
shall come and dwell in you, and walk in you: I will come again unto you. And
he has revealed his Son in me says the Apostle, and know you not that Christ
is in you except you be Reprobates: and the Spirit of the Father speaks in you,
and see how contrary thou art to the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles.

I urged that here G. Fox did plainly deny the expected personal coming of the
Lord Jesus: The second coming of the Lord Jesus
but they charged me to give none of my Senses and Meanings to G. Fox his
words: but now I have leave (by Gods merciful hand) here to say, that their
Hypocrisy and Deceit (whereby they cheat themselves and others) is so much the
more gross and abominable, because they pretend in words to own Christ Jesus
Humane descending, or Ascending as a Man into Heaven, and Christ's there abiding
until the time of the Restitution, and Christ's return the second time: They
know also that all those Scriptures they produce (as Christ in you except ye be
Reprobates, etc.) concern an inward invisible and Spiritual presence, and yet
they bruitishly cry out contrary to the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles.

61] It comes to my mind that in reading and urging some of these Passages
concerning these Foxians denying the Humane Nature and Person of the Lord
Jesus, one of my Opposites John Stubs insisted upon that 9. of Isaiah where
Christ is called the Everlasting Father: The Everlasting Father Christ I^su.
and how
and yet he said, He was the Son of Man born of a Woman, etc. I Answered, the
Hebrew word rendered by our Trans^ators, the Everlasting Father is Translated by
some, the Father of an age, or the Father of Ages, alluding to the great
increase and spreading of Christ's Name, and the mighty increase of his
Spiritual Seed (as the Lord promised to Abraham and Isaac) as the Stars of
Heaven. John Stubs said the Hebrew word was [Abi Haad, etc.] and it was rendered
Pater Eternitatis: I replied that it was rendered (and that more near the
Hebrew) Pater seculi, or seculorum: But I told him it was not a seasonable time
and place for him and me to spend much time about the Translation of the word:
The Quakers wonderfully changed and yet but in Dissimulation as to learning and
the Scriptures
he said he had brought the Hebrew Bible with him, and it may be he understood
the Hebrew and the Greek and other Languages as well as my self and better too:
I was about to say that they were wonderfully altered and changed from their
former principles and practices, for heretofore they have professed to me that
they had no need of Books, no not of the Scripture it self, for they had the
Teacher within them that gave forth Scripture, etc. if now they were persuaded
to study the Holy Scripture and the Translation of it, and to examine the
Translations and the Copies of them, then they did err and sin before, (which
they say the Saints cannot) in so wonderfully neglecting and slighting them as
useless and needless things.

Yea the truth is if their Light be so Alsufficient as they make it, to bring
them to Heaven, to guide them immediately and infallibly etc. what simplicity
is it in them to stoop to Pen and Ink, and men's fallible Translations, yea,
many ways charged with many failings.

I know their Pretenses of becoming All to All to win the more, and of removing
the offense and stumbling block, viz. as if they denied the Scriptures, but the
truth is, they look at the Holy Scriptures still but as the Ceremonies which
the Apostles dispensed with for a season: they care no more for the Scriptures
then the Papists do, they are forced to make use of them for an end, but all
their hope is in their Interpretations, which both Papists and Qua- [62] kers
bend their utmost to secure, viz. the Privilege of Interpretation, and chair
of Infallibility to themselves, or else down they tumble, for most sure it is
the Holy Scriptures, and both Papists and Quakers are at irreconcilable
difference, if the one stand the other must fall for ever.

Although I desired to finish all the first seven Positions that day, and
offered once or twice to proceed, W. Edmund. leaves the Dispute and is hurried
into Preaching
yet W. Edmundson (especially) upbraided me that I kept them long, and that I
proved nothing, and upon a sudden a violent, tumultuous disorderly Wind or
Spirit filled all his Sails, so that he rose up and fell into a downright
Speech or Sermon to the People and Auditory: and first he declared how
notoriously I had wronged them, in laying and publishing so many false, and
some of them dangerous Charges against them. 2 And how they had been so long
patient toward me and suffer me to produce so many Allegations out of G. Fox
his Book, and yet they speak nothing for me, but G. Fox his words cleared him
from all my unjust challenges and charges. 3. He Appealed to the People, how
willing they had showed themselves to own the Scriptures, and to have all their
Tea^hings and Differences tried by the Scriptures. 4. He fell upon the two
Hinges of all the Quakers common Discourses.

First, An Invective against the Priests, False Teacher, False Apostles, who
had got on the Sheeps clothing, and sold the words of Scripture for their Game
and Lucre and he amplified this much how all their care and study was to get a
good Living or Benifice of 50. 6^ 100. or 200 pounds a year (more or less) and
he that complained how I took up time, now (tediously) made us all to hear a
Story, which he said he knew himself of one of the Priests that lived not many
miles from the place where W. Edmund. W. Edmund. his story concerning Benefices
lived, who told with his own Mouth unto William Edmund. viz. how that having a
good Benefice, another Priest of his acquaintance came to visit him, whom he
entertained kindly, and this his Guest told him, that he was going to the
Bishop of Dublin, who was his Friend: and the Priest the Host was afterward
informed that this treacherous and ungrateful Guest, did use all the art he
could with the Bishop of Durham (or Dublin) to get his Friends (that had
entertained him) his Living from him.

2. The second part of his Sermon was (as usually it is of all their Sermons)
an extolling and magnifying of that Light which [63] he said had appeared to
him, which he advanced as the Principle and the Foundation, the Light, etc. he
added how they had left all the Glory and Pleasures of the World for this
Light: And his vain extolling of their Idol Light
and how they had endured and suffered much for Preaching this Light to ungodly
and ungrateful men, who had ill requited them: for their Message and Work was
only to bring good News unto them, to tell them that they should be free from
sin and have Christ Jesus live and dwell in them. I kept silence until this
famous Apostle and Preacher of Christ Jesus had done this Speech or Sermon
which he said he was moved in his heart to make unto them and (as he often
said) to give an account of his Faith which he performed with very great zeal
and fervency, both of mind and body.

I had thought then to have spoke, John Stubs his sermon
but immediately Io. Stubs stood up being moved (as he said) to Declare his
mind and Thoughts unto the people also, and so he began a large Oration, Speech
or Sermon also (though not so long as William Edmundsons) he declared how
pleasant a thing the Light was, and how pleasant a thing it was to behold it?
And he said, are you angry because we bring you the Tidings of the Light? This
was the principle, this was the Foundation of all, the Light, etc. He added
(for John Stubs his was but a Repetition of William Edmundsons his Sermon) that
they had forsaken all the Glory of Honors and Pleasures of this World for this
Light: and they had left their Wives and Children, and exposed themselves to
hard Travels and to many Hardships and Sufferings for the Light sake: I heard
him also patiently and gave him no Interruption (as he twice openly confessed
that I had not interrupted them: but when he had finished his Sermon and I had
gained a little calm and liberty of Speech, immediately before I could finish
one Sentence; that Pragmatical and Insulting Soul W. Edmundson stopped and
Interrupted me, The Quakers unruly and rash interruptions
so that I openly complained of incivility and inhumanity: that hearing
patiently their two Sermons, they were set down, and common Reason said that it
was my turn to speak, and every body desired what Answer I could frame to hear
it, that then I should be disturbed and stopped was no way befitting the
Societies of Civil and Morral men: I then Answered, A short Answer to 2 Sermons
that those very Sermons or Orations which they had now made to the People were
so far beneath the merit of an Answer to them, that they ministered and afforded
to me a mighty and invincible Argument, that the Spirit of God [64] was not the
Author of them: For we all knew that the Spirit of God was most purely
Rational, and a Spirit of pure Order, and did not prompt or move men to break
Hedges and leap over one Ordinance into another: We were engaged in a mutual
Conference and Disputation, The motions of Gods spirit not those of the Quakers
we were in the midst of it, how came we then to fall into Popular Orations and
Sermons? is it comely when persons are Disputing to fall upon our knees and
Answer an Argument with a Prayer (as it is a frequent practice with the
Quakers,) is it proper to break off Prayer and fall to disputing, or out of
Disputation into Preaching?

But I said my Opposites Spirit was far from the Holy Spirit of God: The
Quakers not orderly nor patient
and his movings are far from the Motions with which my Antagonists were acted,
for they had neither power to keep civil Order, nor to be patient, for not
being able to answer nor bear my words W. Edmundson said expressly what should
we sit here and suffer him to vent his Blasphemies and Lies? he has kept us
here two days, and have proved nothing, etc.

I took a little boldness and told them, that if Paul himself were present, or
Jesus Christ himself in their bodily presence which they confessed he died in
at Jerusalem, yet they would say unto them, even unto Christ himself, thou have
falsely charged but thou have proved nothing: Paul himself should be an Enemy,
and Jesus Christ should be a Blasphemer and a Beelzebub because he brought glad
news of the Truth from Heaven to them.

I further said, that I had more to offer in the name and in the cause of the
true Lord Jesus Christ, and after I had got liberty of speech, I said that as
they which denied the person of the true Lord Jesus denied the true Lord Jesus
himself, The Offices of Christ Jesus
so they which denied the Offices which God the Father had invested him with
and designed him to fulfill, the denied the true Lord Jesus Christ.

They demanded of me wherein they denied the offices of Christ Jesus: I
Answered, I had many things to declare in which they denied the Offices of
Christ Jesus (as well as the Papists for which we separated from them as
Antichristans, not holding the Head the true Lord Jesus the Sacrifice and
Sacrificer, the only Prophet, Apostle and Messenger, bringing in the last
times, the last Dispensation and Will of his Father: contrary to the Papists
who set up (some of them) the Pope and (some of them) the general counsel above
the Lord Jesus declaring his mind in the Holy Scriptures: and con- [65] trary
to the Quakers who set up a voice or motion within them over topping and over
pouring the voice of Christ Jesus in the Scriptures, some of them maintaining
that this Light within them is that great Prophet that was to come which Moses
Prophesied of, Deuteronomy. 18.

I said I would contract my thoughts, The Kingly office of the Lord Jesus.
and speak at present only a little of his Kingly power and Office, and I
plainly denounced that they were all notoriously guilty of High Treason against
the King of Kings, the Lord Jesus, yea as far as in them lay, they robbed him of
his Crown, and Life and All.

In particular I told them I had abundant proof there ready to bring forth from
G. Foxes Book, that he and his Associates denied (yea all of them) that visible
Kingdom and Church and Institutions which he as King over all his Subjects
has Sovereign Right unto, and most faithfully and wisely ordained to continue
until his coming again.

I told them that G. Fox his Book and all their Books and Professions denied
any visible Church of Christ at all: The visible Christian Church and
Ordinances.
and though they maintained and kept up Congregations (of pretended Christan)
Worships and Worshippers (in a direct contradiction unto their own Tenants,
yet) they maintained the Church was in God and so not visible: the Officers of
the Church were invisible and immediately made by the immediate and invisible
Spirit. The Baptism was within, and only the Baptism of the Spirit and of
Fire: The Lords Supper appointed by the Lord Jesus to be a Spiritual Feast
remembering him until his coming was with them nothing else but Spiritual joy,
which they have one in and with another, which they have by the second coming
of the Lord Jesus to them, who they said was come again to the Apostles the
second time, and unto themselves also.

Upon this (as I remember) there fell out some words between my Opposites, and
some of the people called Baptists: But some of them (especially John Stubs)
demanded of me, why I thus charged them and was my self so guilty, not living
in Church Ordinances my self.

I Answered, Touching the several Churches extant.
that it was one thing to be in Arms against the King of Kings and his visible
Kingdom and Administration of it, and to turn off all to Notions and Fancies
of an invisible Kingdom, and invisible Officers and Worships as the Quakers
did: Another 66] thing among so many pretenders to be the true Christian Army
and Officers of Christ Jesus) to be in doubt unto which to associate and to
list our selves.

After all my search and examinations and considerations I said, Churches
nearest to Christ Jesus
I do profess to believe, that some come nearer to the first primitive
Churches, and the Institutions and Appointments of Christ Jesus then others, as
in many respects so in that gallant and heavenly and fundamental Principle of
the true matter of a Christian Congregation, Flock or Society, This was and I
hope is the principle of the N English Church.
viz. Actual Believers, true Disciples and Converts Living Stones, such as can
give some account how the Grace of God has appeared unto them, and wrought
that Heavenly Change in them; I professed that if my Soul could find rest in
joining unto any of the Churches professing Christ Jesus now extant, I would
readily and gladly do it, yea unto themselves whom I now opposed.

But Thirdly. Not finding rest, they themselves knew, there is a Time of purity
and Primitive Sincerity: The various appearances of Christ Jesus
there is a time of Transgression and Apostasy, there is a time of the coming
out of the Babilonian Apostasy and Wilderness: there is a time of many Flocks
pretending to be Christ's and saying. Lo here he is, etc. and a Command of
Christ Jesus, go not into the Wilderness, go not into the private Chambers:
There is a time when Christ Jesus his Doves and Loves cry out to him, O thou
whom my Soul loves, tell me where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flock
to rest at noon; for why should I be as one that turns aside to the Flocks of
my Companions? I do not remember that any Reply was made to this by any of my
Opposites, nor heard I any more of this Objection.

I now prayed there " their."R. W. Ms. Ann.
patience to hear me a few words: I said we had spent two whole days from
morning to night and had proceeded no further then the Debates of the two first
Positions, My offer in the end of the second days conference
I told them if they were free I would attend them again in the Morning (being
the first of the week) to fall upon the proof of my other five positions
remaining for Newport: or if they were not willing to that, I would (if God
permitted) attend them there on the second day called Monday, in the Morning to
proceed upon the rest.

W. Edmundson said, they had spent so much time already upon but two of them:
Lying pretenders to Gods service
and both he and John Stubs said they had other business in hand then to attend
unto my false Charges which in all 67] this time I could not make out: they
said they must go about the work of the Lord to which he had called them.

I told them I had used all diligence, I failed not to meet them about the
exact hour appointed, and always before the audience was come. I never
withdrew nor absented a Minute, but put my old Carcass to constant pursuit of
my promise which lay on me to fulfill, and to make out my proofs, The Authors
just Apology against the unjust clamors of the Quakers
although they had spoke never a word until I had finished: I used all possible
brevetie, and often times suppressed my thoughts pressing in upon me for
Utterance and Audience; I rather chose thus to Apologize for my self, then down
right to blame them, on whom (they saw well enough) I laid the blame of our
long proceeding. I told them I had spoken nothing to them but the Eternal truth
of God, which sooner or later would arrest them, and using aloud the words of
the Lord Jesus [viz. The words that I have spoken shall judge you at the last
day.] I withdrew.

Within a quarter of an hour they sent one to me to desire my coming in again
to them, and William Edmondson (commonly their proud mouth) told me that I had
deeply charged them and laid many false Accusations upon them, and some of them
dangerous, both as they were Christians, and as they were men: they had used
long patience in hearing of me, and yet because it should be seen that they
were willing to hear the utmost that I had to say they would meet and spend a
few hours with me on the second Day following at nine in the Morning, only they
would not endure any long and tedious Discourses.

I answered that their own souls knew, A mutual agreement for a third days
conference.
and the Auditors knew I used to be brief: and if they had pleased to have
given me leave, I would have finished the whole seven by noon the first day:
and I would now promise them (by Gods help) to finish what I had to say to the
other five remaining in a quarter of an hour, so that in five quarters of an
hour I would present them with what I had to say: W. Edmundson said they would
expect I should so do, and all of them seemed well pleased that I offered to
dispatch each Position in a quarter of an hour; I said they must not count me
false and a Promisebreaker if I was not exact to a quarter of an hour possible
I might be within a quarter, possible I might something exceed it, but I hoped
not to exceed above a quarter.

W. Edmundson replied, Nay Roger thou must be punctual if [68] thou will be a
Christian: and indeed afterward at Providence he unjustly more then once
upbraided me saying, A quarter of an hour much canvased.
Is this your quarter of an hour? I answered that Christians nor any prudent
man would be so curious and critical as to raise Censures and Accusations upon
the nicityes and uncertaintyes of a few Minutes, for unless we had Clocks and
Watches and quarter-Glasses (as in some Ships) it was impossible to be exactly
punctual: however by Gods help I said I would study such Exactness, that I
would rather omit much I had to say then fail in my promise to them.

After this (as I heard) W Hitchcock of Newport held dispute with them about
Water-Baptisme, I was withdrawn being evening and weary.

I was told by many of Providence, that I knew them they would not stand a
Disputation: or if they did they would not continue without great Advantages
and be as slippery as Eeles, and break off abruptly, as their spirit hurried
them, I therefore studiously endeavored to tole and drive them to the
finishing of my remaining five at Newport, The Quakers spirit and policy
and the other seven at Providence. And thus by the most wise and gracious hand
of God we came to the end of the second days work, and the second Position and
the end of the Week.

It was queried by some why (at Newport and Providence afterward) they
appointed the end of the weeks for the Disputation? and why since it was not
finished they would not proceed on the first day? It is not immaginable that
they cordially own that day, The Quakers would not dispute on the first day
and why.
(for the Quakers work upon it) but they wisely resolved to have the whole
first day with the People to make up their Breaches, stop Leakes dress wounds
that might be in the foregoing Agitations against their Consciences and
Credits. It is doleful that men of excellent parts, and of great knowledge in
the Scripture, should yet so ly under a Sentence of Gospel justice, that they
cannot but deceive as they are deceived, that they cannot but believe Lies and
tell Lies, horrible and blasphemous Lies, as confidently as the Purest Truths,
and suck in and, power out the poison of Dragons, the great red Dragon, the
Father of Lies, instead of the sweet Milk and Wine from the Breasts of the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, the son of God Christ Jesus.

69] THe third day of our Conference being come, The third days conference at
New-port
being the second of the Week as was appointed, W. Edmundson began and said to
this effect, Roger, we have waited upon thee two days already to hear what
thou had to say to prove thy false Charges against us: we are here according
to promise to spend some hours about the rest of the seven which yet remain: we
must tell thee that we will not give thee leave to make a long work of it: if
according to thy promise thou will dispatch each af the other five in a quarter
of an hour, we will keep our promise and hear thee.

I knew it was in vain, (as in the other two days past I found it) to insist
upon their obstinately continued Advantage of three constantly engaged against
me (beside their accidental speakers who had liberty when others were
forbidden) I say notable and Chief men in their way and Sect: A Letter sent in
to all of us.
and having just then read a Letter as I sat there directed to my self and all
of us to be read in the Assembly, I begun with presenting the Letter to them,
and told them that just now it was delivered to me etc. I knew not certainly
from whom it came, nor of one Tittle of the Contents of it: only I judged it
to be my Brother Robert Williams (Schoolmaster of Newport) his hand: I read
the Superscription and offered if they pleased to unseal and read it, or I
would deliver it into their hand so to do.

W. Edmundson answered that they came not thither to hear Papers, but to hear
how I would make out my false Charges against them and this he speaking none
would whist against it, and this he did speak because my Brother beyond my
expectation and thoughts spoke some words the first morning against their
Insulting and domineering over me, as also delivered a paper to them which was
with much ado handed and delivered to them but never read, containing these
two great Points in every true penitent Converts eye, viz. the sight of Sin as
Sin. And 2. The sight of the material Lord Jesus as the true Messiah or
anointed, these were the two Daggers which they knew stabbed at the heart of
their feigned Christ and Light within them.

I knew my Brother patiently waited there the two first days, The Letter
refused to be opened by the Quakers
and was (with others) silenced: and now I guessed he had sent them his mind
and would trouble them no more. I told them [70] the whole Assembly had
Interest in the Letter, as directed to us to read to the rest.

W. Edmundson and the rest desired the Auditors to speak if they desired to
have it read: some of the Quakers said it might be read when the business was
over: so I to make no breach put it up, and in the end of the day offered it
again, claiming their Promise, but they regarded it not, so that after the
Conference ended (we of Providence being called away by a Boat preparing to
depart) I stepped to my Brothers house and acquainted him with Passages, who said
that not only the Superscription was his hand but the Letter also, and I might
open and read it, and (if it might be) present it to the intended Assembly at
Providence: of which we shall hear when it pleases the merciful hand of the
Lord to bring us to those Transactions. The Sum of the Letter
In short, it was refused there also, and therefore I have judged it fit, since
it was so solemnly flung out both at Providence and Newport that it should have
as solemn a Publication to the whole world, My self reproved in the Letter in 3
particulars
and the rather because it is a witness of Truth as to the two first days
transactions, impartially reproving my Opposites and me also where he conceived
we were failing: It is true I am not of my Brothers Conscience as to the
Discipline of Christ, viz. that I ought to have admonished the Quakers in
private, before I had so publicly etc. since they proclaimed their sin like
Sodom on the house top: and it is preposterous to run from House-top-sins to
closet Concealments and Admonitions.

2. Nor can I own the Quakers in their ways and worships to be Servants of the
Lord (as my Brother calls them) any more then the greedy Wolves, devouring the
souls of the Ephesians, Act. 20. were the meek and innocent Lambs and sheep of
Christ.

3. Nor do I think I charged them too deep or too sharply, The d^fference of
the Quakers
as my Brother speaks: I knew the Foxes and Wolves (the able Leaders amongst
them) do not run away with Pigs and Worldly Swine only, but that some Lambs and
Chickens of Christ Jesus are carried away in their (Soul bloody) jaws also,
whom I beseech to remember themselves, and I humbly beseech the God and Father
of mercies to pull them out, and help all that love his Name, to help pull them
out as Brands from the Eternal Burnings. Sharpness sometimes a duty.
As for the Wolves and Foxes the Blind Leaders, the Chapmen that by feigned
words make Merchandise of Souls (2 Pet. 2.) their [71] mouths must be stopped,
and the Prey rescued from their Jaws, and because we ought to save what is
saveable, and to recover poor sinners Leaders and Followers from their corrupt
and rotten Profession we ought to use Sharpness, Tit. 1. Reprove them sharply
(Apotomoce, cuttingly) that they may be found, or recover in the Faith of Jesus.

These three words I thought fit to say as to my self, let the Quakers answer
for themselves, who I fear will answer to my Brother as they did to me [Lyes,
slanders, false Accusations, etc.] However the Reader is here presented with
the Copy of it.

The Superscription. To his Loving Friends Roger Williams and the Quakers now
assembled at Newport deliver, Humbly desiring the reading of it to public
Audience for the Truths sake of Christ Jesus. The Letter it self.

LOving Friends, though the Lord in his Wisdom has denied me from Nature the
gift of utterance, yet in his infinite mercy he has vouchsafed to me his free
gift as to writing, whereby the private motions arising between God and my own
Soul (without knowledge unto any) may be declared, being moved hereunto out of
a sensible sadness, which is upon my Spirit in beholding the Cloudings and
Vailings of the most precious Truths of my Lord and Master Jesus Christ: But
(Loving Friends) herein mistake me not at first: This is no charge nor
discharge, but an appearance unto my Soul, even unto the moving of my Bowels
within me: For my Beloved at his putting in his hand at the hole of the door,
when all my Lovers, Priests and Elders gave up the Ghost in the City: (for
gladness) is taken away, and joy out of the pleasant field, and in the Vineyard
there is no (true) singing, and the Treaders tread out no (pure) Wine, for the
Lord has made the Vintage shouting to cease: But to avoid Prolixity, I write
not to charge nor admonish, neither for contending Argumentation, it being
against my understanding, and as the taking of a Dog by the ear: But ^incerely
unto edification, in signifying the appearances unto my Soul in what I have
gotten from these your so earnest and tedious Debates.

72] Therefore I am humkly bold to speak, unto all the contending Disputants in
the plainness of my heart.

And First unto the Complaining Disputant it appears unto my Soul, that you
have not dealt as a faithful Servant of the Lord Jesus, with your fellow
Servants, for you should have admonished them both first and second time in
private, and if they would not have heard you then to have told it to the
Church, the great Congregation of God.

2. It does appear unto my Soul, that you have assumed and presumed too much,
being so large and high proposals, which do appear unto me not as charges, but
in this first Appearance as Proposals, until they are maintained as charges by
sufficient proof, wherein they may be molified: But in truth herein I am at a
stand, for against whom were the true Apostles more bitter than against the
False? which if the Defendants be so (which in charity I have reason to hope
otherwise) your Conscience will be more cleared in your Lord and Masters
service: yet know there may be a zeal without true knowledge, therefore let
true zeal appear that is not in persecution, but for the Glory of God and
truths sake, as it is in Ie^us.

2. Unto the Defending Complainants (the loving Quakers) which I pray take not
as a charge, but as appearances unto my Soul in that you never dealt faithfully
in your Lord and Masters service, for both Complainants and Defendants are all
but Servants unto one Lord and Master, and you must do that service which is
ordained by your Lord and Master to do in your several stations (either in
truth or falsehood) there is no hindering of it, and when you have done all you
can, you are but unprofitable Servants, falling short of your Lord and Masters
infinite Glory, and in the end of your service, you shall as the Grass wither,
and as the Flower fade, but unto our everlasting comforts the word of the Lord
shall stand and for ever.

First, That you have not done your Master faithful service by assuming and
presuming beyond the bounds of Moderation and Christianity: but as I said
before take not these as charges, but as proceeding from your own Expressions
and Behaviors in your late actings which have not been for that solid
edification of the Auditors which was expected but for defending and advancing
of self, which appeared:

1. By your limiting the Holy one of Israel, contrary unto your Lord and
Masters Commission.

2. By breaking an Apostolical Command (so far as in you lay) as not to quench
the Spirit.

73] 3. You have not dealt faithfully and Christian like with your elder fellow
servant, and then what would you do with the Heir.

To the first appearance you would not begin before you had stated by forced
Covenant that none should speak (though with leave in modesty and sobriety) but
those that would join issue with the complainant, and that under hand writing.
True librety infringed
And herein (loving friends) you have infringed upon those great Liberties and
Mercies which God has bestowed upon these parts, and which you do enjoy, and
cannot enjoy else where: And will you now shut up your common Wine-presses that
we can have no fruit nor refreshing but what comes from your private Presses?
Know (Loving Friends) this is a sad grievance that lies upon us. Y^a, you do
infringe not only upon our Souls but upon our Temporal Liberties.

For in our Courts of Judicature there is a fundamental liberty stated for any
to speak freely for Conscience sake in any Cause in the Bounds of Sobriety and
Modesty. But this appears against the Rules and Practices of all Christianity,
not practiced by the Judicial Convocation, nor by the high Commission Court in
our Native Couutry, where often I have been, and the Metropolitan with the rest
of the Bishops in Gravity and Christianity (though their pleadings were by
Proctors, yet) gave liberty especially for Relations to speak: As in one
Instance of a person whom you all have heard of, when he was to come upon
Examination, his wife being big with Child came with him, the Archbishop
(though otherwise he might be improper, yet herein showed great civility by
considering the Woman's condition, and gave liberty for speaking to the full,
with replying no discomfortable Words, yea in Christianity delayed further
prosecution until she was delivered, though afterward they acted their
improper persecution.

But into what a condition shall we be brought (I hope not into an high
Commission nor Inquisition Court) if this Imprimator goes on, that none shall
speak, no not so much as suffered to desire to speak, though they are great
with Child with the Man Christ Jesus: But I hope the People will see their
Liberties, and your selves know this was not the true Apostles practices.

2. Your sad quenching of the Spirit when the motion of it arose in any for
Soul-satisfaction in any to speak, Quenching of the Spirit
you would not suffer them to be expressed but stifle them in their coming
forth: O dear Friends consider, you would not be so dealt with: For what did
you know but [74] the Lord might bring forth from any of the Auditors for
witnessing his Eternal Truth and Glory? therefore as your Heavenly Master is
bountifully free, be not you Niggards in shutting up his Bounties and suffering
none to pass but through your own Purses: I speak as the Apostle did after the
manner of men.

3. Your Indecorum Behaviors both in words and gestures unto your elder
Fellow Servants and aged Father complaining as not performing your duty as
young men according unto Rule of honoring gray hairs* The insulting Spirit of
the Quakers


1. But by unseemly smiles of Derision, saying often (for a time) Thou old Man,
thou old Man, thereby appearing to provoke to passion:

2. When that would not move his exceeding great patience, then charging of him
with Blasphemy, and to prove his Blasphemy:

3. Again (not Apostle or Gospel like) seeking and taking advantages against
the Aged, and contrary to Covenant by three or four baiting him at once, unto
the confounding of his memory, or stopping of his utterance, under the pretense
of challenging all comers (when reasons considers of coming in Order) But your
defense was that you were but one Man, then you should have been but one Mouth.

Again your improper charging of the complainant with mispending of time, The
true cause of our long discourse at Newport
when in Truth it was your selves (in not suffering of him orderly to proceed)
But by your often Iterations, Tautologies, Indecorum Behaviors and
Expressions, with improper Preachments at that time, and yet lay the defect
upon the aged, and would not be satisfied with his substantial Proofs, divine
Reasons and Argumental Demonstrations. And herein your Conscience (if
unsatisfied) had liberty in timely Order, to have made your substantial
Desence, if patience had been suffered to have had her perfect work. It is
acknowledged by Auditors, that as the Complainant brought substantial proof
(for so far as he proceeded) so you the Defendants also brought substantial
defense (in what was substantial) but now who shall judge? ye will not suffer
the Gospel rule, that the standers by, the Spirits of the Prophets shall judge.
Then both of your own private Interpretations does aim to be judges, and so
will be endless and true judgeless: And by proceedings, the cause of Christ
Jesus (being now at stake) much dishonored unto the sadness of my Soul and
unsatisfied Conscience, and also the expectation of the Auditors which was for
Soul-edification frustrated, and unto public shame (as yet) only self
contendings has the supreme Appearance. Therefore (Loving Friends) [75]
pleading and defending for your Lord and Masters sake, show your selves
faithful Servants of Christ Jesus in all Humility, self-denial, Love, Charity,
Tenderness, in bowels of compassion, in Gospel Peace and Unity: only unto your
Masters praise and Glory: that the Auditors may receive the plain naked Truth
of the Lord Jesus unto their Souls Edification, even the real Truth as it in
Jesus, and not as words of man which is only Vanity and vexation of Spirit
under the Sun of eternal and universal Righteousness, whose infinite glory is
witnessed by

Robert Willams.
Newport August. 6. 1672.

THis was that poor Letter (condemned unheard by these high Saints who now keep
Judgment day) to the fire and everlasting silence: this was the two edged
Sword which smote in the honest upright intentions of the Author every way
reproving me, The modesty of this letter
reproving them, and yet having so much Sugar with his Vinegar and Honey with
his bitter Powder, that had it been unseal^d and read at Newport, or read at
Providence, whose taste could it have offended, but theirs only who like the
men of China, judge all the World to have no eyes but themselves excepting the
Men of Europe to whom they will grant one eye, and that is more then our proud
Pharisees will do to any that bow not down to their most gross Phylacteries.

But from this finger of God this providential Letter appearing upon the Wall
before us: I return to the work of the day, which was the Discussion and
Probation (on my part) of the other five Proposals remaining.

I therefore (after the Letter was put up unread into my pocket) requested
their Patience, The third Position against the Quakers spirit Discussed
while I produced my Proof of the third Position, which was, viz. [That the
Spirit by which they were acted was not the true Spirit of God:] It Is true I had
many things in my mind and memory) some of them I here express) but I was
forced to pick and chufe and lay by: for I told them that according to my
promise, and their expectation I would present them with the Substance of my
proof of this Position in the compass of about a quarter of an hour.

76] I reminded them first of the nature of the Word Spirit in Latin Spiritus,
The word spirit
in Greek Pneuma, in the Hebrew Ruch and Ruach, signifying sometimes Breath,
sometimes Wind, and from thence applied unto God himself, unto Angels, unto
Men, as denoting a spiritual, powerful, invisible fine Substance distinct from
flesh and earthly Bodies: Hence God was said to be a Spirit, not properly but
that his Being was pure, powerful, invisible, etc.

1, Whether God was properly a Spirit (as the Quaker affirmed) we had some
controversy at Providence of which hereafter.)

2. Concerning Spirits, I observed two great Sects: 1 Those of the Pharisees
(who were accounted the most Orthodox, Sound and right, holding such a
Spiritual Substance in Angels and Spirits and a Resurrection. 2. The Sadduces
which held neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor Resurrection, as at this day, etc.

3. It is clear there is a twofold Spirit: 1. Holy and pure: The quality of
Spirits
such a Spirit is God himself, and the Holy Spirit proceeding from the Father
by the Son, such are the Spirits of the Angels, the Spirits of Gods Children in
part, and the Spirits of just men made perfect (the Quakers say here, we say in
the life coming.)

The other Spirit is a wicked Spirit, a lying and a murtherous Spirit in Satan
and his Children, yet often counterfeiting the Holy and pure Spirit, like the
Oil and Ointment which God prescribed and forbad the like of it to be made on
pain of death. Therefore we are commanded not to believe every Spirit, but to
try even the very Spirits, not only of men but of Doctrines, Churches,
Religions, All spirits must be tried
pretending the Name of God, (as do the Turks, Jews and Christians) and of the
Son of God, as do all the Antichrists and Antichristians extant.

4. The Holy Spirit of God (being the seven Lambs of Fire, the seven Eyes, and
seven Horns, Rev. 5.) he is pleased to work variously.

First in an ordinary way of Regeneration and Sanctification, etc. common to
all the lowest and youngest of Gods Children, (John 3. that which is born of
the Spirit is Spirit) Hence we read of the Spirit of Prayer, and of Holiness
wrought in the Soul by the finger or power of God: so that the knowledge of
God, the fear, the love, the trusting to and in God, the calling upon God is
natural to all Gods Children, Gal. 5. Abba Father, etc.

77] The second is extraordinary and immediate, such as was poured upon the
Lord Jesus, Isai. 11. such as Christ breathed upon the Apostles, and by the
Apostles hands upon others when they spoke with Tongues, fortelling things to
come, and penning the Holy Scriptures or Records, as did the Prophets of old,
and the first Messengers the Apostles of Christ Jesus.

I told them I had many things to say as to the false Spirits of the false
Christ's, and false Prophets, the Spirits of Devils as well as the Spirits of
God (in the Revelation) and the three ways of deceit mentioned, 1 Thessalonians. 2. by
Spirit, by Word, or by Letter: but I would contract my self, I say that their
Spirit by which they were acted was not Gods Spirit.

1. Because the Holy Spirit of God was given by means, Gods Spirit given by
Gods means
but the Quakers pretended all along in G. Fox and other Books, that their
Spirit was immediate or without means: I said in the 8th of the Romans was a
Golden Chain of Gods Order or Method of Working from Predestination to
Glorification: In the 10th. to the Romans was a Golden Chain of the Means
appointed, etc. How shall a Man be saved? by calling upon God? The Spirit of
God working by means
How shall he call on him except he believe in him? how shall a Man believe in
him except he hear of him? how shall a Man hear of him except some Preach? how
shall a Man Preach except he be sent, etc, Hence Peter Preaching Christ Jesus
to the first Converts, they were some thousands brought to Christ, when they
were pierced to the heart, and cried out what shall we do? Peter sends them nor
to a light within them, but bids them Repent and be Baptized, Act. 14. Paul so
spoke that many believed, The Quakers at Newport appealed too publicly
Act. 16. while Paul spoke the Lord opened Lydias heart: and I appealed to the
Consciences of those called Quakers at Newport there present, whether in a
contradiction this Spirit they now professed, descended immediately upon them
from God (as they spoke) or was not conveyed unto them by the Ministry of the
former Preaching Quakers* that came unto them: so that these now are but the
waterers and confirmers of this Doctrine of the Spirit in them.

2. As Believing and Conversion comes by hearing, etc. so these extraordinary
gifts and powrings forth of Gods Spirits was generally by means also: Christ
used Breathing upon the Apostles: the Spirit of God descended, Act. 8. 19. in
the laying on of hands: in Peter's Preaching, Acts. 10. the miraculous Spirit of
[78] Tongues and Prophecy descended upon Cornelius and his company, and not
before, yea, and what is that waiting in silence used in private, and in the
public Assemblies of the Quakers, but a confessed means in which they wait for
the Spirit of God (as poor Souls they think) descending on them.

I was then forced to omit the Allegations out of G. Fox his book then by me
and ready, but I will now recite a few of them.

In page 6. of this Book in Folio, G. Fox brings in Samuel Eaton Samuel Eaton
saying [The Prophets and Apostles drew people to an outward Word] He Answers,
Now is that which lives and endures forever, outward? and did not they bring
them to Christ the power of God, which is the end of words which is immediate.

Again in the same Page Samuel Eaton [Is not the Gospel an External way] He
Answers No, the Gospel is a Living way which is revealed within, and is the
power of God to Salvation.

In the same Page Samuel Eaton [Are not they seduced who are drawn off from the
External means by which the Spirit is given and Faith wrought, to wait for the
receiving of the Spirit without any Word to convey it to them, which Spirit
when they have it is not the Spirit of Truth but of delusion] For Answer, [The
Spirit and Faith is not conveyed to any Man without the Word, and they are
seduced which rests in the External from the Eternal, and the Spirit is not
given by Eternal means, neither is Faith wrought.]

I Reply, and observe how the wisdom of Men is enmity against God, and how
witty this Fox is to catch himself and others in the Traps of eternal Howling?
how does he here confound the audible words or preachings of Gods mercy in
Christ Jesus, with the inaudible, invisible, mystical and metaphorical word,
Christ Jesus himself.

2. Who sees not his gross and impudent denying of the Spirit and Faith to be
conveyed by means from God unto us.

In Page 15. G. F. brings in Henoch Howet Henoch Ho^vet
saying [There is nothing in Man to be ministered to but man] He Answers, How
then ministered the Apostle to the Spirit? and Christ spoke to the Spirits in
Prison: and Tim. was to stir up the Gift that was in him and the Spirit of the
Father speaks within them: and the Light shines in the Heart: and the Son of
God is revealed in me says the Apostle: that which may be known of God is
manifest in man, for God has showed it unto them, Romans 1. and the Apostle was
[79] manifest to every ones Conscience in the sight of God, and that was of God
which the Children disobeyed.

I Reply, 1. (As in his late Book exalting his Heathen Light above the Holy
Scriptures) he simply and profanely joins the Philistian Priests, and Egyptian
Conjurers with Holy Job and his Friends, etc. so here he confounds and jumbles
together the natural powers and faculties and Humane Light in all Mankind with
the Grace and Spirit of God both ordinary and extraordinary as may be seen at
the first view.

2. His Scope is (abominably and horribly,) to make the holy Spirit of God
capable of being preached unto, to be converted and turned unto God, yea to
refuse and be damned, for it is not Man he says that is preached unto.

3. How Sottish and Blind does this Deceiver proclaim himself in the Christian
Doctrines of Preaching, G. Fox ignorant of the true spirit of God
Conversion, Faith and the Grace and Spirit of God confounding Gold and Dross,
Pearls and Pebbles, Harps and Harrows ( as all one) altogether.

In Page 136, 137. He brings in Thomas Moor, Tho. Moor.
saying [ Nor are we to wait for a further Revelation to be given forth then
the Scripture for the Word of God came not first immediately to the Gentiles
but to the Apostles:] He Answers, The Apostles that Preached the Word of God,
it was immediate to whomsoever they preached it, for they had read it
immediately, for the Word it self is immediate with more that follows to the
same senceless and absurd purpose.

Reply, As if all that receive G. Fox his Book simply pretended to be from the
Spirit of God receive it without G. Fox his Brain and Hand, The use of means
and Pen or Paper, Printing and Letters: or because a King delivers his mind
to his Secretary, and commands him to Pen it in a Proclamation, Declaration,
etc. therefore the Kings Word or Will comes to every man immediately without
any such means, as the Secretaries composing his Clarks Transcribing, the use
of Printing, Letters, Paper, etc. to talk after this sort, what is it but to
talk Frantic and Bedlam, and without the guidance of a common rational Spirit.

In Page 5. he brings in Samuel Eaton, saying [Though all the Saints have the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, which is Eternal and Infallible, yet that
this Spirit should do all which Saints do, and should say all that Saints say,
and should judge for them, both persons [80] and things after an infallible
manner, Fox and the Quakers above all Kings and Princes, Popes and Emperors
Saints and Angels
and that they should neither say nor do any thing by any understanding of
their own but the Spirit: all this we deny] He Answers, [Which is contrary to
the Apostle, who says, as many as are the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of
God: and Christ acts all in them and for them: and the fruits of the Spirit,
etc. and the Spiritual man judges all things: And that is it which leads the
Saints to divide and discern all things both temporal and spiritual; the
spiritual Wisdom of God which gives them a spiritual understanding, which men
must rule withal, but not with their own which comes to naught: and you that
have not that which is infallible to judge in you, know not the Spirit of
Christ, neither can you judge of persons or things that have not the infallible
judgment, nor have the Spiritual man: neither have you the Word of God in your
hearts, nor Christ which is eternal and infallible all which the Quakers have
to judge persons and things.]

I Reply, Mahomet the Grand Segnior, or Elder, and Prophet transcending Moses
and Christ (as he and his followers Mahumetans say) he pretended that he had
the mind of God by immediate Revelation, The Mahumetans and Quakers considered
and found one
and that by Revelation of the Holy Spirit in the shape of a Dove, he wrote the
Mind, the Word or Scriptures of God the Alcoran: But poor silly Souls were
Mahomet and all his Disciples compared with the Seraphical Doctors, the
Foxians, who neither say nor do any thing with any understanding of their own,
but the immediate and infallible Spirit of God says and does all in them: who
are fit to be Kings and Princes, Governors and Judges, Masters of Ships and
Families, etc. indeed of any place of power or trust, but these walking Gods,
and Christ's, and Spirits, even the meanest of the Quakers? The Quakers Gods
upon Earth and all other Beasts Reprobates and Devils
May not the meanest Youth or Wench, if but a pretended Quaker (according to
this rule or rate of being immediately inspired in all they do or say)
transcend all other Teachers, Translators, Interpreters, Kings and Counselors,
Navigators, Historians, Geographers, Rulers and Judges, etc. It is true that
Thomas Munster and Becold, and Knipperdoling, and Fifer pretending immediate
Revelations, and so have other Leaders of these Nicolaitans in France and
England, etc. but none were so large and open hearted as to communicate so
freely and bountifully to all their followers, the immediate Inspirations of
their pretended holy spirit, as these [81] foolish and filthy Dreamers do: for
so says Fox [All the Quakers say or do is by the infallible and eternal
Spirit] but how horribly their Spirits, Principles, Divisions, Miscarriages (in
many sinful practices) and Apostacies amongst themselves give the lie and
contradict this their infallibility is notoriously proclaimed on the house top:
and I may say something more to this Head afterward.

At present I return to my Antagonists, who (while I was Arguing against their
immediate Spirit) could not hold until my quarter of an hour, and this Head
(about their Spirit) was finished but brake silence, and they said (especially
John Stubs) does not the Scripture say, The leading of the Spirits debated.
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his: And as many as are
led by the Spirit of God they are the Sons of God, and ye have an unction, and
need not that any man teach you, and you know all things?

I then answered that there was a leading of a Beast by an Halter or Bridle,
and there was a leading of a Man with a Reason when his understanding and
judgment is satisfied, and if so, I presumed they intended, that the leading
of the Spirit did not lead them as Beasts, The trial of Revelations
but as Rational, satisfying their Reasons and Judgments: and if so Reason
grants that there are false Spirits, lying Prophets, Seducers and Deceivers,
etc. Reason therefore further says, that every Soul must be satisfied, whether
this Leading, or Anointing, or Teaching of the Spirit be by means of Praying,
Reason sanctified and rightly improved
Preaching, Reading, Meditating, Conferring, etc. or immediate without the use
of these: if motions without the use of these be pretended Reasons tells us
that a Rational Soul must be able to try whether the Spirit pretending to be
true or lying Spirit, and that it must have some Rule or Touchstone to make
their Trial by, that the Rule must be my own Reason, or some Testimony of
unquestionable Witnesses satisfying my Reason, or some heavenly inspired
Scripture or Writing which my Reason tells me came from God: Reason also tells
each rational creature, that it is very suspicious to be a false, lying and
develish motion, which slights the Holy Scripture and other holy means wherein
the Holy Spirit, Presence and Power of God has appeared to Gods People
formerly Reason tells me, that if I find my self weak (as who does not) to
fight against the Devil (the roaring Lion and old Serpent) and I am bound to
seek out for help, and what help more powerful [82] and proper then that of the
eternal and all powerful Father of Spirits: and that it is best to take James
his Counsel, if any Man wants wisdom let him ask of God who gives to all Men
liberally and upbraideth not: if so, then Reason tells us, that except we
suffer our selves to be led as Beasts by Satan (as the poor Quakers are) we
must come to the use of Means, or a mediate leading and teaching, and then what
is become of these hellish fancies of only immediate Teachings and Inspirations?

I told them that beside this Counsel and Command of God in James, the Lord
Jesus tells us by an admirable similie, that the holy Spirit of God is given in
the use of means, The Spirit gotten of prayer
Luke 11. If you who are evil give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? and that
is Isa. 11. the Spirit of Wisdom, the Spirit of Knowledge, the fear of the
Lord and all Graces of the holy Spirit. The Quakers Spirit
It is clear that the Penmen and holy Scribes of Gods will unto us (in whom
God did speak, and by whom he wrote immediately and infallibly those blessed
chosen pens of his were not infallibly guided by an immediate Spirit in all
that they said and did about this Scripture, as these poor Dreamers say of
themselves, and therefore must necessarily dash against the Holy Scriptures,
and all holy means formerly used by the first Christians, yea and all rational
means to pieces; for all that they say or do is the immediate Spirit, and
Christ and God himself as Fox here affirms.

I answered further, The omnisciency of the Quakers
that if that Scripture alleged by John Stubs [To know all things] be to be
expounded literally, and (as G. Fox in this Book) viz. that the Saints know
all things as God, then why are not the Quakers Omnipotent and Almighty as well
as Omniscient: Their in humanity^ and cruelty
yea as it is said of the Pope, if he can deliver all Souls out of Purgatory
(if he please) without Money, surely he is very inhumane, impious and cruel
that he does not: so I said what impiety is it, what cruelty and inhumanity is
it in the Quakers said I, so insallibly knowing all things as God, not to
reveal unto Men, and especially in their public Assemblies so many deep points
of the Godhead, of Creation of the Holy Three in Heaven and Earth, (which they
confess) and all the deep Mysteries and Prophecies in the Holy Scripture
especially in John and Daniel their Revelations, etc. the Most Holy,
Omniscient, and Eternal Jehovah knows that the Pope and his Purgatory, the
Quakers and [83] their Omnisciency are but Childrens and Frantic Persons
Dreams and Fantasies, and that the Saints knowing all things is the same with
their doing all things through Christ which strengthens them that is not all
things literally, Knowing and doing all things
(for that were ridiculous and blasphemous to affirm it) but all things
figuratively and Comparatively, which his holy Wisdom thinks fit to require
them to know and do in order to his Glory and their Salvation.

But John Stubs insisted how they knew the Mystical number of 1260 days, the
42 Months, the Time and Times and half a Time, and that the Woman was come and
coming out of the Wilderness in them, and that now they were Preaching the
Everlasting Gospel to them that dwell upon the Earth.

I Replied, it is notorious how many excellent men have been bewildred, and
missed in the opening of these Mysteries. I said that if their infallible and
their all-knowing Light The Light within.
could open all things and was now the Everlasting Gospel or Glad News, the
Word Eternal, etc. and that it was not only in the Quakers and their Saints,
but in all Mankind, I desired to know what they meant by this Word within,
whether they meant in the understanding (the eye of the Soul) or in the Will,
or in the Memory, or in the Affections, or in all of these jointly: for Light
is only seen with the Eye, not with the Tongue, nor Ear, nor Hand: it is true
in the 2 Cor. 4. it is said; that God has shined in our Hearts, 2 Cor. 4 God
has shined in our hearts
but there the heart must be understood the Understanding the Mind which is
properly and nextly the seat of the Light and Knowledge of God, and this
shining (though Fox make it to be natural or born with every Man) is said to be
by Paul's Preaching as is there abundantly proved where it is as clear as the
Noon day shining, that God shined, Christ shined, and Paul shined before the
Light or Notice of the glad news of a Savior come to the heart or ears of poor
Sinners, and so thereby are turned from their natural hellish Darkness to a
Supernatural Heavenly Light.

Who knows not (with Jeremiah) the heart of Man to be naturally dark, The
darkness within
deceitful, desperately evil and wicked, and Genesis 6. the imaginations of the
heart of all men to be only Evil and that continually, and that it may be said
of all men (as it is said of the holy God, in him is Light and no Darkness so)
in them is Darkness and no Light, so that to hearken to, to turn to, to listen
to any voice or motion within in heavenly things, in matters of supor- [84]
natural light, is as proper as in matters of law to go for Counsel to a
cheating thief or rogue, in matters of health, to a known cheating Mountebank,
as to turn within to a man's heart which was the arrantest Iugler and Cheater in
the world.

At this word W. Edmundson cried out, Blasphemy, He speaks Blasphemy. I
conceived he meant I called their immediate holy spirit which they pretend to,
An Evidence that the Quakers spirit and a deceitful Heart are one
the arrantest Iugler and Cheater in the world: My heart was warm, and my
tongue breaking silence, and longing to show him his willing mistake, and that
I mentioned not nor thought of the Holy Spirit, but every man's own deceitful
heart (though clearly I have thought and proved their holy Spirit is no other
but Satan himself and every Man's own deceitful Heart: but I was prevented, for
some of the Auditory spoke aloud that he mistook me, and amongst others our
Deputy Governor Capt. Cranston openly said that W. Edmundson mistook me, The
testimony of the Deputy Governor C^pt. Cranston and others against W. E.
slanderous rashness,
for I expressly said that the Heart of man was the arrantest Iugler and Cheater
in the world.

This did not satisfy W. Edmundson, but he replied, let the words be read then
by him that took them in shorthand: so they called upon one of theirs to read
what he wrote: now I knowing what shorthand could do as well as most in
England from my Childhood, and that it is impossible for any to write Verbatim
so fast as I then spoke with vehemence, I concluded he had not exactly my
words: yet I am confident in a faction and partiality he seemed to read some
words favoring my calling their spirit the arrantest Iugler and Cheater in the
word, extremely contary to my certain knowledge of my intentions, and of what I
uttered, beside the s^dden and quick exception of our Deputy Governor and
others: but alas this was a small business: but I was about to say (as before I
did say) from the holy Scripture Pro. 28. He that trusts to his own heart is
a fool, and till a spirit of Regeneration and Conversion change the heart of
man, there is no other Christ nor Spirit within, but the spirit of Satan,
which is the spirit by which the Quakers are acted, and is the arrantest Iugler
and Cheater in the world: The great Cheater who cheats all Cheaters.
This Iugler is so cunning that he out-jugles the Iuglers, he catches the
craftiest foxes that catch so many others, he takes Captive and leads away in
chains the Wise and Prudent, the High and Mighty, til the holy Spirit of Christ
Jesus discover and break his snares and lead him Captive also.

85] 2. I was adding another Argument from Isai. The great Magna Charta xi I^a.
59.
59. and I did mention the place where the great promise, Grant or Charter is
given by God the Father to Christ Jesus and his Posterity, viz. that his word
and his Spirit should be in Christ's mouth, and in the mouth of his Seed, and in
the mouth of his Seeds Seed from thenceforth and for ever.

I said that that blessed Son of God and Son of Man the man Christ Jesus, lived
and dyed a Batchelour, he never had any natural Seed or Issue: Believers are
his Offspring, his Seed, his Children and Grandchildren and so downward to as
many as the Lord shall call. The true Seed.
And that Fox should not say the Word and the Spirit are all one (as commonly
G. Fox does) and that the Father and the Son are one without Distinction (as
boldly and Babilonically he does) Here is (most distinctly and exactly
distinguishing) 1 The Father promising. 2. The Son the Mediator receiving this
Promise. 3. The Promise it self, which is of a Word to the Son (though that
blessed Son is also called the Word) viz. of the revealed Doctrine, Will and
Mind of God recorded from and by the holy Scriptures, viz. that this Word
should be in his mouth and in the mouth of all his Seed, or Christian Children
after him, especially his Messengers and Preachers to the end and Consummation
of all things.

I told them it was notoriously known how they slighted this holy Charter, how
they joined not the holy Word and Spirit together but trod upon the Word of God
under a cloak of advancing the Spirit, etc. But of this I shall speak in the
next Position following.

I was also mentioning a third Argument against their spirit from the
Irrationallity and Unruliness of it, contrary to the Wisdom and Rationallity
and Order and Holiness of the holy Spirit of God: this is apparent from their
bitter Reviling, and often senceless and frantic Reviling in some of them,
Devil, Devil, Devil. The devilish Inquisitors, Monks and Friars, The railng
spirit of the Quakers.
etc. exceed them not in spattering out Diablo, Diablo against such as dare to
oppose them: indeed they are both Possessed by one spirit of blasphemous
Railing and Reviling against the Witnesses: far from the holy Spirit of the
Gospel who in Meekness instructs those that oppose themselves. Was there ever
fouler Language given by any poor Oister-woman at Billingsgate than is given by
M. F. Their Cursing.
[86] against Capt. Wiggan (to be seen in print to the shame of the Quakers
Spirit) of all their womanhood? What is all their notorious common censuring
and cursing even of eminent and learned and holy persons) for Cains, Iudases,
serpent Pharisees, dumh Dogs, Witches, Blasphemers, Reprobates, Devils, but a
fruit of wicked and rotten flesh, deny and defying the holy Spirit of God.

It is true the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture is pleased to use Censures and
Curses but not to every one, Men's and Women's Nakedness
nor in such a manner as this foul-mouthed Spirit does: I mentioned before
their Impudency (which stinks up to Heaven and cries for vengeance) in the
stripping stark naked of their Women, and discovering of themselves in the
Assembly of Men and Youths, under the Cloak and Cover of the Spirit of God: as
also the unnatural Preaching of their Women in public Assemblies and
Congregations, contrary to so many Reasons from Nature and Grace, Their Women's
Preaching.
so positively expressed by the Holy Spirit in Scripture.

What Spirits are their Dumb Spirits in their Dumb Meetings but those foul
dumb Spirits mentioned in that Gospel, Dumb Meetings.
which the Lord Jesus will cast out and tumble down to Hell (whence they came)
in his holy season. The monstrous Singing of the Quakers.


What is their monstrous way of Singing and Toning and Humming many at once, as
they often do and notoriously did at Portsmouth on Rhode Island this last year,
when no man is edified, nor understands what they say, and it may be not
themselves (and this under color of singing in the Spirit) what is it I say
but rendering their Tongues which should be their Glory and the Glory of God,
their scorn and shame, and the holy Name of Gods holy Spirit contemptible also.

4. I did also mention a fourth Reason against their Spirit, The true Spirit
willing to be examined by the Scripture and every man's Consceence.
and had prosecuted it but I knew that (by reason of my Adversaries
interposure) I had exceeded my quarter of an hour: It was taken from the Holy
Spirit of God subjecting it self to be tried, commanding all men to search the
Records, commending the Bereans for examining Paul's Preaching and Spirit by the
Holy Scriptures, and this is the true meaning of the Spirit of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets, not that a true Prophet or Messenger of God can
subject the truth of God (which he believes so to be and will rather suffer
many deaths then relinquish) to be sentenced by all the Prophets in the Church
to be false, and he acquiess or rest in, [87] or subject his Spirit and
Conscience to that Sentence: but that the true Prophets of God are willing to
have their Teachings questioned, examined and made clear by the holy Records to
the Souls and Consciences of all men. The false and Iuglers endure not
searching.


Hence it pleases God to give Rules for the trial and discerning between the
true Spirit and the false, 1 Job. 3. and 4. chapters.

On the contrary, I would have showed (which indeed all men know) that the
thief endured not searching the galld Horse endures not rubbing, the guilty
Debtor endures not Reckoning, the false and juggling Spirits escape in a Mist,
and by the help of dark Lanthorns, and under the covert of the night: who may
not see this in G. Fox. all along his Book, running into the Thickets and
Buroughs of Words of diverse significations, Scriptures notoriously wrested,
general, The Quakers cry is Light but they dare not come to it.
and sometimes uncouth and barbarous Language, which has been the trade of the
false and lying Murtherous Spirit in all ages, and will be until that short
time be finished wherein the Lord will tread him under the Saints feet, and
cast him into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone.

How often have I been visited by the Quakers, crying Repent, Repent, hearken to
the Light within thee, etc. And I never could persuade them to sit down and
examine their sayings by the Holy Scriptures, but when their Cuckoes note and
song was over, The two pretended Witnesses Reeve and Muggleton.
and their Fools Bolt shot, then fell they to Cursing and pouring out the
Thunderbolts of Gods Judgment: and so be gone no less then Reve and Muggleton
(pretending to be Gods two last Prophets and Witnesses) about twenty years
since in London whose Cursings were notorious.

But to return, while I was beginning to urge the trial of the Spirits, W.
Edmundson said the Spirit of God was above the Scriptures and not to be tried
by them: for it gave out the Scriptures etc. And I said and say it is easy to
boast of the Spirit, The Quakers would set the Spirit and Scripture at odds.
but the true Spirit (in a Sense) and the holy Scriptures are one, as the
Father and Son are one, and therefore can not but be willing to be examined by
the holy Records, as every man or author will stand to his own scripture, work
or writing; for the Writers were but Pens of Heaven writing, and used by the
hand of the holy Spirit. And I remember that I said to W. Edmundson, Friend,
You yesterday in your long Sermon alleged that holy Scripture viz, Men will
not come to the light, least they should be reproved, [88] because their deeds
are evil: This is the true cause of your quarrel against the Scriptures, and of
exalting the Spirit above them that is upon a true balance, your own Spirit,
yea the Spirit of Satan to be God, and Christ, and Spirit and all.

After some few interchanges and altercations, The 4th Position concerning the
Scriptures.
we descended to the fourth Position, which they read out of the Paper (as they
did all the rest) which was this, viz. That the People called Quakers did not
own the Holy Scriptures.

In one Copy it was written Really own, viz. They did not really own the Holy
Scriptures.

I said there was a twofold owning the Holy Scriptures or the Writings of God
as there is a twofold owning the Scriptures or Writings of men, A twofold
owning of any scripture or Writing.
the Proclamations and Declarations of Kings and Princes: The one is verbal and
literal, viz. that such a writing or Declaration, or Treatise is extant, and
that it proceeds from the Kings Authority and Command.

The second is real and actual, when the Authority of it is in all humble
obedience submitted to and obeyed: when the Justice and Equity, and the
excellency and goodness, as well as the royal Authority is embraced and
magnified.

I said the Jews owned verbally and wonderfully that Writings of the Old
Testament and the Papists owned both old and new but it is known that in many
particulars they do in effect deny and damn them. 1. They both set up their
rotten Traditions, their unwritten Verityes (as they speak) of equal authority
with, if not (in cases) above the holy Scripture. The Jews and Papists and
Quakers all of them in effect deny the holy Scriptures.


2. They set up the Papists by the authority of the Council of Trent, a most
defective Translation, notoriously false in many places all over above the
first Copyes of the Hebrew and Greek whence all Translations as Counterpanes
and secondary Copyes or Duplicates ought to flow.

3. The Papists set up the Pope as the only infallible Judge and Interpreter in
all Questions about the Scriptures and the Jews make their Rabbis as so many
Popes also.

4. Their Interpretations are so foreign and strange and many of them so
absurd and monstrous from the genuine and proper Sense of the Scriptures, and
adulterated with Wresting and allegorizings etc. that is truly said of them
that they bring not their Doctrines, Disciplines and Conversations to the
Scriptures but force the [89] holy Scriptures of God to attend and wait upon
their Abomination as a Negro Slave and Lacquey.

I said the Jews and Papists did not more disowne the holy Scriptures upon the
account of their Popes and Traditions and Interpretations than the Quakers did
upon the account of their Light and Spirit and Interpretations also. The
Quakers slighting the holy Scriptures in many horrible Particlars.
Who knows not that in the beginning of their Profession, they generally fell
from the reading of them by themselves or in their Families, or in their
Public Assemblyes, only crying up the Light within, the Spirit within, the
Scriptures within, their Teacher within. They still say The Scripture was not
the Word of God, the Scripture is but a dead Letter, they have no need of
Paper-Teachers having the spirit that gave it forth? Yea as the Papists say, if
the Scriptures were lost and burnt out of the world, the spirit within them
could give new Scriptures.

It Is true the Quakers in this Dispute professed to be tried by the Scriptures,
A dissembling Show of Quakers respecting the Scriptures.
which the first Quakers among us wholly denied, but only by the Spirit within
them: But what avails this Confession? Is it not but a subtle trick of
Equivocation, when still they profess to own G. Fox all along, and he
professes the Souls of all men to be a part of God and the divine Essence,
and that their is no distinction between God, Christ, and Spirit and
themselves; what should hinder but that the Scripture is but a dead Letter, and
(compared with their spirit) a weak and needless Paper unto them that has such
a light and Spirit within to guide them?

I told them before and now that there was an Irish Papist in the late wars
that spoke the very heart and soul of Jews, An Irish Papist confessing the
Truth.
Papists and Common Protestants, and the Quakers themselves, as to the holy
Scriptures. In plundering and rifling a Protestants house he found a Bible and
flung it in the Kennel, and kicked and trod upon it saying, The plague of God
take this Book, it is the cause of all these Quarrels.

My Opposite said they owned the Scriptures in their place as a Declaration of
the Saints Conditions, and John Burnet took a Bible and read publicly that
Passage in Luke 1. where Luke calls his Writing a Declaration. I urged that
this will of God. (for this Declaration of what Christ said and did, and of all
the rest of the Scripture, was a Declaration and Revelation of Gods Will to his
People and to the whole World) this written and revealed [90] will of God I
said was the Judge and Decider of all Questions, the tryer of all Spirits, all
Religions, all Churches, all Doctrines, all Opinions, all Actions. They
answered they did own the Scriptures, and would be tried by the Scriptures
(which is a new trick, meaning according to their own not to be questioned
Interpretations) I urged that they set up their Spirit above the Scriptures,
(fathering all their Revilings Cursings and Abominations upon the holy Spirit)
I asked whether they owned the Scripture as the square Rule or Guide according
to whose sentence all the Knowledge of God and of our selves, the Knowledge of
Gods Worship and Service and our own Blessedness and Salvation was to be
determined, yea and the Spirit within them to be tried, determined, approved
and condemned also.

They still fled to this Borough, The Scriptures miraculously preservd to be
Gods standing outward Record and witness.
the Spirit that gave forth Scripture is greater then the Scripture: the spirit
is in us, that Spirit only opens the Scripture: the Spirit is immediate and
infallible and they only who have this Spirit know the Scriptures. I answered
that I maintained the inward breathing of the holy Spirit more than themselves,
for I quoted before Luke 11. viz. that we ought in all our Preachings,
Hearings, Readings, Prayings, etc. to beg the help of the Spirit called the
Finger and Power of God: and yet I also maintained that this Record, this Word
Will or Mind of God written and penned by chosen Penmen as Pens in the hand of
his holy Spirit, and so miraculously preserved from the Rage of the Devils
fiery Instruments, Babilonian, Assyrian, Roman and Popish Tyrants and that
much among the Jews and Papists (and much by their means also though they
hate it) I say this Record is the outward and external Light, Lanthorn, Judge,
Guide, Rule by which God witnesses himself and his Truth in the World,
comfort and feeds his saints in their Dispersions, discovers and reforms
the defects and wanderings of his People (as in Josiah his finding this Record,
and Ezekiel and John eating the Book, out of which the holy Spirit inspired
them to prophecy to Kings and Peoples etc.

It Is true who doubts it but that God and the Spirit were before the Scriptures,
and so he was before the Creation, before Christ Jesus was born, and his
Redemption actually accomplished: are the works of God therefore, and the
several Dispensations and Institutions and Instruments of God in their several
times and [91] places of any whit less power or esteem because the most holy
God and his most holy Spirit were before them? John the Baptist says that
Christ Jesus was preferred before him, for he was before him and he was not
worthy to unloose the Shoe-latchet of Jesus the Lamb of God; and yet for the
fulfilling of all Righteousness the Lord Jesus must come to John to be baptized
of him, and the holy Spirit of Light will declare himself to be true by the
holy Scriptures, and discover all other Spirits to be spurious false and
Bastards and notwithstanding their cracking and prating of Light if they slight
this outward standing Record and Witness of God in the World it is because
there is no light in them,

One of these two must be done either we must subscribe to the Papists and by
their pretended Spirit and Church find out and authorize the Scriptures, The
holy Scripture the only outward standing Rule and Record like the Records in
the Tower
just as the Foxians say, or else we must with Luther and his Associates,
Calvin and his followers maintain Learning study the Scriptures, search the
Originals, Copyes and Translations, and vindicate their Purity and Perfection,
their Authority and sole external Direction how to judge of all pretending
Christ's and Prophets and Doctrines and Churches and Spirits.

While we were thus discoursing W. Edmundson propounded this Similitude, The
Holp Scriptures are Gods Love Letters
if I should write a letter to a friend and subscribe my name W. Edmundson,
does it follow therefore that the Letter is W. Edmundsons? I answer that the
Quakers do affirm that the Scripture is within them, what is the english of
that? but that the Light which they and every man in the World has within them
(the Christ the Spirit which every one has) is Scripture, and in a sense I
said it was a Truth that W. E. his letter to his friend was W. Edm. not only a
Declaration of his word, mind or will to his Friend, but in a respect his mind
and will it self that he sent in Writing to his Friend, and so the Scripture in
a Sense is Gods mind and Will to us.

Upon this occasion I told them that the Scriptures were the Love Letters of
Christ Jesus to his Church, as the Love Letters of some mighty Monarch to his
Betrothed Queen or Empress, they are dear, not as common Paper and Ink, but as
the Good Will, the dearest Love and heart of the King and Emperor himself: and
thus are holy Scriptures highly prized and embraced, and laid up in the heart
and bosom of the true Children of God, 92] believed listened to, and followed
as the voice of Christ Jesus to his true sheep and Spouse: the Bastard Children
and the Wolves covered only with the sheepskins: they have other Words, Letters
and Spirits, 2 These. 2. whatever they prate of Scripture, and speak brave
swelling empty words as Jude speaks.

It Is true as G. Fox all along in his Book vapors that the Spirit was before
Scripture, and gave forth Scripture: but I proved before, that their Spirit,
their Light, their Christ, were but hellish Darkness, the spirit of Satan, and
a false lying Christ, etc. 2. The Dispensations of God were many and diverse (as
before the Law and after (but in this last and third dispensation, he has
spoken (that is his word, mind and will whatever) the Quakers as well
childishly as Blasphemously prate to the contrary by his Son: The admirable
excellency of the Scripture
And as the Son himself the Lord Jesus in his own person, when he personally
maintained that famous combat with the Devil used no other weapon but Prayer
and Fasting and the Holy Scripture, so he left written this holy pattern and
example, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 14. Luther being demanded how he gained such knowledge and abilities
in such blind Popish darkness, Luthers Light
he freely confessed that the holy Scripture was his first help, the second
Meditation, the third earnest Prayer to God to vouchsafe his Spirit to bless
the two former unto him. The Lord Jesus therefore not only ordained his
Messenger or Preachers of his glad Tidings to Jews and Gentiles, Ioh 20. 2.
considered
but his Penmen also, Ioh. 20. for those two great ends (as to us) to wit,

1. These things are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ (to
wit, that that individual person and man called Jesus was the Christ, the
Messiah so long promised and expected (contrary to the Blasphemous Fancies of
the Quakers.)

And 2. That Believing in him (that individual person called Jesus, and not in
a Fancy within) we might have Life and Blessedness.

It is no wonder therefore, that the Devil (the great Thief) as he compasses
Sea and Land with the Pharisees, Jesuits and Quakers to make Proselytes, so
wherever he comes he labors to blow out the Candle of the Holy Scripture.

It is the Spirit Breath or wind of the Devil in the lips of Atheists, Jews,
Papists, Quakers, Ranters, etc. that puffs and blows [93] against this Holy
Light (more precious infinitely then the Sun in the Heaven:) it has been most
wonderfully to amazement, preserved like the Sun in the Firmanent, and shines
most gloriously again and again, after the blackest and longest storm and night
of Apostacies and Persecution.

The Turkish Hystory tells us of a Woman appearing in the Heavens with a Book
open in her hand, A famous vision in Turkey
some of their Mahumetan Priests dared to say (for which one greatly suffered)
that the Woman was the Christian Church, and the Book was their Bible or
Scriptures which threatened ruin to their Mahomet and Alcoran: John was not
commanded (and in him the Protestant Witnesses) to stand still and listen to a
Light, to a motion or voice within, but to eat up the little Book open (once
again) in the hands of Christ Jesus, Rev. 10. and after this eaten up to
prophecy to Peoples and Nations, to Tongues and Kings.

Whether this Book be the Book of the Revelation or the Book of the whole Bible
or Scripture, The two Witnesses eat up the book of Script.
it is apparent that during the 42 Months of the the Papal Reign and Darkness,
Christ Jesus has given. Authority and power to his Witnesses to search after
the Holy Records in the Original, Hebrew and Greek Copies, and to bring them
forth by Translating and Preaching the Doctrine of them, etc. for which they
have suffered Death and Burning, Tindal the first heavenly Translator burned
as Tindal and many other excellent men of God. The Walls of Rome, yea the
Gates of Hell have shaken and felt the might of this Heavenly Artillery: It
lies therefore the Devil and all his Messengers in hand to break to pieces, or
to nail up their "nail up this." R. W. Ms. Ann.
heavenly Ordinance.

It has been observed that there never were any (more than others) famous for
Christanity, The Jews outward reverence to the Script.
but they first were famous for an admirable Love kindled by God in their
Hearts to the Holy Scriptures: It is true the Jews (to whom the Oracles of God
were committed, to wit in the Old Testament: how studious have they been in it,
even to every Word, and Letter? they accounted it a crime for any Book to ly
upon it, but this always to lie uppermost. My self have seen the Old Testament
of the Jews most curious writing whose price (in way of trade) was threescore
pound, which my Brother a Turkey-Merchant had and showed me: But I speak of an
inward love, a Soul-love, etc. It is wonderful what Luther relates of that
blessed Duke of Saxony, The first Protestants affection to the Scripture
whom [94] God stirred up to favor and cherish Luther, etc viz. that he caused
his six Pages each of them to read to him daily everyone his hour in the Holy
Scripture. This was the affection in all the first Witnesses the Waldensians,
the Bohemians, the English, French, Dutch, Scotch, etc. who together with the
Scriptures had mighty Affection to the study of the Hebrew and Greek in which
golden Cups and Bowls the King of Kings was pleased to convey the Wine (like
Ahashuerosh) of his Eternal Majesty and Goodness to us.

It is wonderful to consider how much the study of the Scriptures and of the
Hebrew and Greek Tongues confounded and put to flight the Papists, The
Scriptures put both Papists and Quakers to flight
and forced them to study the Scriptures and the Tongues also, both which the
barbarous dark Spirit of the Quakers hate, as darkness hates the Light.

It is no wonder this Spirit of Lying cries out so fiercely against the Schools
of Learning in Old and New England, it knows that the right and regular
propagation of natural, of civil, and especially of Divine Knowledge scatters
the thick Fogs of the Quakers affected hellish ignorance.

The blessed Martyrs and Witnesses of Jesus in all ages have been ravished with
holy delights like David in the holy Scripture, in Q Mary's days, that famous
Ridley (called Bishop of London) he had got most of the holy Epistles in Greek
by heart, Christ's Martyrs or Witnesses love to Scriptures
even before he left Pembrook Hall in Cambridge: and as the fire of persecution
grew hotter, so did those blessed Witnesses (like Jesus with Moses and Elias,
and Paul at Troas) spend hours and nights in Prayer and holy Conference upon
the Scriptures, and those things which the Lord Jesus should and has now
accomplished according to the Scriptures.

It is true (in print) James Parnel spoke like a Papist an Atheist, and a
Quaker of the holy Martyrs or Witnesses of Jesus Christ, and of the book of
Martyrs it self. James Parnel his horrible sin and Judgment
It is no wonder that the most Righteous and jealous Lord left him not to dye
the common death of all Mankind, but to Murder himself by a proud
presumptuous attempt of declaring himself to be Christ by fasting 40 days and
40 nights, I believe this to be a Truth from the Testimonies I have seen of
Parnels case (being my self then in London) whatever, Fox and the Quakers
impudently affirm to the contrary.

95] It is true that James Parnel, and Fox, and all of them sometimes miserably
(and after the Devils Method) make use of Scripture as a Shield or Buckler to
fence themselves against the Scripture, How the Quakers own Scripture
and as a Sword to run through the Heart and Bowels of the Scripture, the
Saints, and Christ, and God himself: they make use of it as Stirrops, and
Ladders, and Scaffolds for their counterfeit Christ (in pretense but in
reallity themselves) to mount up into their Saddles and Thrones of the Eternal
power and Godhead that so the Earth may be theirs by Authority: 2. King. 17.
the Samaritans feared the Lord and yet feared him not.
So that as the Lord speaks of the Jews Sacrifices that they were not his: and
of Iehoiakim that he did not know the Lord, Jer. 22. and of the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 11. that they did not eat the Lords Supper though they did eat it: so I
affirm (from all the premises alleged) the Quakers do not own, that is truly
and Christianly (as they say Bona fide and in reality) but slight, and
villifie, and abominate, and nullify the holy Scripture, that their unwritten
Lies and lying Spirits may be exalted.

We have a great word in use amongst Merchants and others, to wit the word
[Effects] they desire to see effects of money or Goods, The word Effects
for want of a real and effectual prizing and loving and obeying and magnifying
the holy Scriptures. The Jews and Pharisees, the Papists and Quakers do not
own the perfection and Authority of the holy Scriptures, but set up their
Traditions and Popes Councils and Spirits above them, and therefore the Jews
and Papists and Quakers do not own the holy Scriptures.

I freely acknowledge that many of these Particulars I could not then express
because of my Confinement to a quarter of an hour, and sometimes the
Interposure of my Opposites.

I remember I urged that dead and rotten esteem that both Papists and Quakers
fling as dirt in the face of the holy Scriptures, The Papists and Quakers call
the holy Script. a dead Letter.
calling it a dead Letter, a Nose of wax, a leaden Rule which may be pincht and
bowed to every man's Opinion: But First, They horribly bow and pinch that holy
Scripture, 2. Cor. 3. which meddles not with all the Scripture but with the
Covenant of the Law and Justice, opposite to the Covenant of Grace and Mercy,
and calls the Law a killing Letter compared with the Grace and Mercy of an
offended God now reconciled by Christ Jesus.

But Secondly, These poor Foxes fly to their Buroughs and confound the matter
of the Scripture or Writing; being Paper [96] and ink, etc. with the contents
the purport, and (as I may say) the matter contained in the matter: The power
of Writing in all Affairs.
we use to say what have you to show for it? what evidences have you? what
Records, and sometimes when no Witnesses are living or can be had, an old poor
Record is produced which proves the life and spirit of the business: what
Simpletons do these (only) wise ones show themselves in affairs of men that
know not, that (as Solomon says of the Tongue, Life and Death is in the power
of the Tongue so) Life and Death is in the power of a piece of Paper: what has
an Executor (yea many thousand Executors to show for their Estates sometimes of
hundreds, yea thousands years but a little paper, and ink, and wax from the
Testators? what gives life to a condemned soul but a Pardon or Reprieve in a
piece of Paper? who knows not that a Writ or Paper signed by his Majesty, the
Lord Chancellor, the Lord ceief Justice has Death in it, and fetches off the
heads of many, yea the highest Offenders?

The Quotations out of G. Fox which then I could not insist on, I shall present
a few and then pass on to the fifth Position.

In the 47th. Page G. Fox brings in Ios. Miller saying, Josh. Miller.
It is an Error (if not damnable) to say Christ is the means, and that there
is no other means of Salvation.

He Answers, And Christ says no man comes unto the Father but by me: and he is
able to the uttermost to save? and he shall be my Salvation to the end of the
Earth says the Lord: and says the Apostle, God is in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, and he that has the Son has Life, and the Father and the
Son are one, and there is no salvation in any other.

I reply: I shall now freely declare to the Sense of this Allegation, though in
the Dispute my Adversaryes would not suffer me to meddle with the Sense of G.
Fox his words, contrary to our Covenant in my Writing, The Quakers notorious
Covenant-Breakers.
viz. that each Party should speak as long as they pleased, which Liberty they
enjoyed without my Interruption: and first I do not think that Ios. Millers
words run so loosely in his own Book: I do not think that a man of Wisdom would
call it an error to say that Christ is the means of Salvation: But to the
second part, to which G. Fox opposes, I believe it is an Error, and a damnable
Error, and a Doctrine of Devils, to say there is no other means of Salvation:
for this wretched Iugler subtly confounds the Instrumental Causes of
Salvation with [97] the Efficient in God the Father, Means of Salvation.
and Meritorious in God the Son, Christ Jesus. It Is true, there is no
Redemption and Forgiveness of sin, but in his Blood, Ephesians. 1. though I know
this Iugler (as before) means not a Christ, nor his Blood, nor Death as we do
mean, but Imaginary within, etc. And yet as Means and Instruments: Christ's
Messengers are said to save themselves and others: The holy Scriptures are said
to make wise to Salvation: A man may be Gods means or Hand to save his Wife and
the Wife her Husband: We are saved by hope says Paul, and saved by Baptism
says Peter, A Union between the Meritorious Cause and means, and the
Instrumental and Efficient or worker.
yea, Women are saved by Childbearing, as God blesses those painful Curses to
be blessed means of bringing to, or growing up in Christ the Savior. All these
subtly and wickedly G. Fox sets at variance with the Meritorious Salvation by
Christ Jesus, between which there is an Heavenly Union and Concord, as between
a man saving his Brother by throwing a Rope, or Oar, or Board unto him, etc. or
a Midwife saving both Woman and her Birth in Childbearing by the Means of
Women, and Helps which her Skill and Labor administreth to her. To talk of this
Immediate Christ and Spirit without Scriptures, without Preaching, and other
holy means, is as silly, as Impious, as Blockish, as Blasphemous, and as
Bedlam, and Frantic, as wicked and Antichristian.

Would not every body laugh at G. Fox, if he should say, that because the Kings
Majesty graciously pardons Condemned Rebels at the Mediation of the Prince his
Son, therefore the Composing the writing, the proclaiming of the pardon, the
bring- of it to the Rebels hands written and sealed with the Kings broad Seal,
are no means of their Salvation and Deliverance?

In Pap. 221. he brings in the Author of Hosannah to the Son of David, Hosanna
to the Son of David.
saying, [The sure Word of Prophecy the Apostle speaks of, is the Prophecy of
Scriptures.]

He Answers, Does the Scripture shine in a dark place until the Day dawne? Are
they them them that must be taken heed unto as to a Light? Can any see the
Scripture, and know the Scripture, but with the Light within? Can not a Cain, a
Baalam, a Core bring Scripture that is gone from the Spirit of Prophecy
within, and then put the Letter for it?

98] I Reply 1. I know that Fox makes their Idol within called Light, The more
sure Word of Prophecy.
to be the more sure word of Prophecy, and his usual proof is, [The Testimony
of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy,] But first, why must all the Prophets or
Messengers of God, who from the beginning of the world were Gods mouth and
Pens, Concerning the Birth, Life, Death, Burial, Resurrection, Ascension and
coming to Judgment of the Lord Jesus be here cast out from the Word of
Prophecy? Is it nothing, Luke 1, that God spoke (surely Gods speaking is his
word) God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, Gods speaking by his
Prophets is his Word.
which have been since the World began. And Heb. 1. God spoke sundry times and
in diverse manners in Time past unto the Fathers, but how did God thus speak or
utter his word, but by the Prophets: And Romans 16. But now is made manifest, and
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment, etc. Therefore
how often is it written concerning the Lord Jesus. These things were done that
the Scriptures might be Fulfilled,] in which regard, (as to our satisfaction
and belief) the written word of Prophecy of the Prophets are a more sure Word
and Evidence to us concerning the Lord Jesus then the Miraculous Appearance
from Heaven of Moses and Elias, and the voice from Heaven of which Peter here
speaks; though in it self a true Testimony, yet not so sure, so firm and
pregnant as the Word that God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets from the
beginning of the World, etc. Hence the Answer of Abraham, and indeed of Christ
Jesus: If they, hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe
though one should rise from the Dead.

2. How sure is the Quakers Light, The madness of leaving the Scriptures and
turning to a Spirit within.
their Word of Prophecy? A sober mind can not but admire that Face and
Forehead of Brass and Adamant with which God the Righteous Judge of the whole
has plauged Satan and his Followers, so that they blush not to prefer such a
simple Image, a mere Babie and Child's Puppet of their Immediate Word of
Prophecy before the Word, the mind and will of God by the mouth of all the
Prophets?

For is it not known in the holy Scripture, in all Histories, in all Ages, in
all Nations, what Cursed Opinions, horrible Uncleanness, Bloody Murders and
Slaughters have been Conceived and brought forth from the Spirit within, and
Revelati- [99] ons from Divilish Lights and Spirits, and the horrible End that
generally the Authors and Promoters of such Spirits and Inspirations have come
to?

3. This Scripture, The workings of Satan by Spirits and Inspirations in all
Ages.
Revel. 19. The Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, what is it but
Goliahs Sword to fetch off the head of this proud Philistin, for, does not the
Angels forbid John worshipping of him upon this ground, viz. that the Angel was
his Fellow Broker, Fellow Servant, Fellow Worshipper, Fellow Witness? Is not
this the Argument whereby he prohibits him, viz. that one Testimony of Jesus
was the work of Gods Spirit in the Angels, in their way, as well as in John's
and Peter's in theirs, etc. and shall we say that the Angels too are Quakers,
and Christ has enlightened them also, as well as every man that comes, etc And
Revel. 22. Does not Christ threaten the Adders to, and Diminishers from the
word of this Book of this Prophecy: what Affinity has a written Book a
written Prophecy with Immediate whisperings and Inspirations?

2. Why should G. Fox here mention Cain, The Devil and the Quakers alleging
Scriptures
Balaam, Core? what Scriptures could they bring? what Scriptures were written
in their times? I think it no breach of Charity to guess that the Quakers and
G. Fox are so used to Cursing and Censuring their Opposites (at the first dash
for Cains, Baalams, Cores, that they could not well tell how to miss them: Such
persons no question, and the Foxians, and the lying Spirit, the Old Fox and
Serpent, bring Scripture: But does the Devil cordially prize and love the word
of Prophecy, the Testimony and Witnesses of Jesus? However he plainly here
Confesses that the holy Scripture is so powerful that the very Counterfeit,
the picture and Name of it will do him good Service, with such whom he desires
to cheat and Ruin. And yet secondly this shows the Quakers horrible
wickedness, that although they love the holy Scripture (for the general of
them) as well as does their lying Father, yet turn they the Truth of God into a
lie, and with the ugly Spider sucks that which he turns into poison, even from
the same Flowers of Paradise, the holy Scriptures, from whence the honey Bees,
the true Believers, suck the pure honey of Eternal Truth and Comfort.

3. Again, what madness is it for this blind Dreamer to ask his Opposite,
whether the Scripture shines in a dark place until the [100] dawne? and whether
they must be taken heed unto as to a Light? For, how often is the holy
Scripture even the very Law before the Gospel, No Light in the bold pretenders
(to so much) the Quakers.
or glad News was preached, adorned and beautified with the Illustrious Title
of Light? and all the subtle Foxes in the world must know that if they attend
unto whisperings and peepings, Isai. 8. and leave the written Law, the Word,
and other Prophesies of Scripture, or written Prophesies, Words and Oracles of
God! For all their Childish Vapourings and pratings of their Light, the Eternal
Father of Lights proclaims them to be Children of howling darkness and that
there is no Light within them: I speak it with horror and Amazement, and also
with sorrowful Confidence that he that shall find a spark of true Light either
of the knowledge or grace of the true Lord Jesus in this their Fantastic
Light, he shall find the Living among the Dead, he shall prove the Prophets
that spoke, and the Lord God of the Prophets whose word was spoke, to be Liars,
for saying there is no Light within them.

But Fox again demands, (Can any know the Scripture but with the Light within?]
The pure Scripture filthily abused.
And I ask him what Light have the Papists and Jews, and the Devil himself,
when they and he bring Scripture to Christ himself? I know very well what he
means in his Iesuitical, Diabolical Reservations, by the Light within and by
knowing the Scripture, his meaning is known and Common, viz. except he be one
of those dark Souls called Quakers: But did not the Devil bring a pertinent
Scripture and promise to Christ Jesus as ever Papist or Quaker could have
alleged, though pointed and directed as are the Papists, Jews and Quakers
Allegations to a Venomous and poisonous End.

He brings in Henoch Howet saying, Page 14: Henoch Howet. By the Weapon of the
Scripture only Christ Conquered the Devil-
[The Scripture to be the only Weapon whereby Christ overthrew the Devil.]

He Answers, who bruiseth his Head, and was before Scripture was, yet the
Scripture is for Correction and Doctrine, furnishing the man of God in his
place, and Christ the Seed was before the Scripture was: And all them that has
Scripture and not Christ cannot overcome the Devil, you and the Papists doing
his work: for they that overcome him that is with the Power, and those have the
Scriptures of Truth, which the Devil is out of.

101]* I Reply, How does Christ's bruising of Satan's Head, and being before
Scripture was, disprove Fox his* Opposites saying, viz. the only weapon whereby
Christ Jesus overcome the Devil was the Scripture? what is this to the point of
the Compass? may not half and Eye see what a simple Sophister this is, to make
such Yawes as not to come near the Ships Course and point in hand.

2. Who sees not Fox in his Borough of the diverse Acceptance of the Word
Christ? For in the Sense of his Opposite that man Christ Jesus who fought the
Devil, and Fox Confesses died at Jerusalem: was not before the Scriptures, But
his Birth, and Life, and Death, and.. were Proppesied and declared by the
Scripture long before he was born.

3. As for this saying, [They that have the Scripture and not Christ can not
overcome the Devil] What News does Fox tell the World, which no Body denies?
and how does this deny that Christ Jesus overcome the Devil by the Scripture?

4. Is all Scripture or writing given by Inspiration of God, The Scripture mosh
fit and proper Weapon against the De.
and is profitable (though Fox alleges this Scripture by halves) for
Correction and Doctrine, etc. then it clearly follows, that as Christ Jesus
overcome the Devil by the Scripture, so by the same Weapon this subtle Fox, and
all other of Satan's Foxes must be Corrected, Confuted Caught and destroyed,
(except they repent) for ever: But what is this Confession that the Scripture
is profitable for Correction, etc. but a kind of grant to his Opposite that
Christ did overcome the Devil by this Weapon, for he Confesses it profitable
for Correction, etc. though yet all this running about in and out into his
holes in this Answer is a whispering, The Devil a Fox too Crafty for all the
Foxians.
and yet loud enough to be heard, viz. that Christ did not overcome the Devil
by the Scripture,

5. As for the Quakers Power here pretended in Opposition to the Scripture, as
being those that have Scripture within them, and so overcome the Devil? How
does the Devil deal as one that pretends to Fight, with Children who lies down
and Cries as if those poor Childish Souls had Overcome him? Thus sometimes a
Devil of Drunkenness, of Swearing, of Stealing runs away from the Sermons of
the Quakers, as a naughty Devil, sometimes at the Chiding and Conjuring of a
good Witch! That he may get the faster hold by spiritual pride, hypocrisy,
[102] self Conceit, and Contradiction to the Scripture, by will worship and
Superstitious Inventions against the holy Institutions and Commands of the true
Lord Jesus Christ.

Page 289. He brings in Francis Duke, Francis Duke.
saying, [When Christ told the Devil that man should not live by Bread alone,
but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, that was believing
the Scripture: And this Word of God in the Scripture was the Ground of Christ's
Faith, and so to all that are his

He Answers, Many may have the Scripture and never hear the voice of God, as
the Jews in the fifth of John, and they said they believed the Scriptures
though they were out of the true belief: But receiving the Word from God, is,
as they that gave forth the Scriptures: which man lives by and not by bread
alone, and so knows him who was before Scripture was given forth: And for
saying that the Scripture was the Ground of Christ's Faith, he was before the
Scripture was writ, and so fulfils their Words, and is the Author and the
Finisher of the Saints Faith, which was before the Scripture was given forth,
him by whom the World was made, and is the Author of the Saints Faith, that
bruised the Serpent under his feet, which was before the Scripture was.

1. I Reply, The Quakers Rieiculous for and in their Tautologies.
How Notorious for Tautologies are these brutish Clamours? Thrice in this small
Answer have we of Christ, which was before Scripture was, who was before
Scripture was, etc. shall we believe their Notorious Lies, viz. that the Light
within them gave forth Scripture, and that they speak and write as they are
moved by the most holy and Infallible Spirit, when their writings are so weak,
lame and Childish, just like the talk of Aged doting Women, and so full of Idle
Repetitions?

2. What Answer is this, how brutish and Impious, viz. that a man may have the
Scripture and yet not be in the belief, therefore the Word of God was not the
Ground of Christ's belief, so again, the Devil and wicked men may have the
Scripture, and yet believe not in them, therefore Christ Jesus and his saints
believe them not neither: this Inference is clear, you say Christ was before
Scripture was, etc.

I Reply, He was, and he was not,: But let Heaven and Earth Hear and abhor the
Sophistry of these Deceivers, The Quakers mad Fancies as to Christ and the
Scripture.
they would fain [103] have no such Christ as man, a Christ without, an
outside Christ, but a Spirit and God only, and that in their Flesh: yet again,
(for shame of the world) they are forct to Confess that there was such a man or
person, etc. and yet to Cloak and Cover that Confession from Crossing their
Principle, they say; that before Scripture was Christ bruised the Serpents
Head, that is Christ that made the World, Christ the Light, the Word,: But this
again., we say is false also, for the Promise is, Genesis 3. that the Seed of a
Womau which was Christ in his Manhood, born in the Fullness of Time, Gal. 4.

And let G. Fox or any of their Iuglers Answer: If they speak honestly, and
(bona fide) if there was really such a man called Jesus at Jerusalem, etc. as
there was such a man called G. Fox lately in New England, was there not such a
man called Jesus, after the Scripture was written or penned? The Humanity of
Christ.
was dot this man forty days tempted of the Devil, and did not this man called
Jesus Christ Overcome the Devil by the Weapon of the writing or Scripture: and
was not the holy Scripture the Ground of his Faith, as he makes the Will or
Word of God declared in this holy Writing or Record the Ground of his saints
Faith also?

He brings in John Timson saying, Page 16. John Timson
[The Scripture is the Rule of Life.]

He Answers, Contrary to Christ, who said, the Spirit should lead them into all
Truth: And they that are the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of God: and the
Churches was to hear what the spirit said, for the spirit lead them to speak
forth Scripture.

I Reply, If among the seven things that God hates, The holy Scriptures the Rule
he is an Abomination that sows Discord, what is he that would Oppose and set
at Odds the most holy spirit, against the holy scriptures Inspired by him? and
in Effect declares that Gods Children are not to attend to the voice of God in
these his holy Inspired writings, but to a secret Voice or whispering within
them: Contrary to the scriptures Voice both before and since Christ's coming, as
I have and shall further manifest.

2. As to the spirits leading into all Truth, and the sons of God are led by
the spirit of God: Is not Fox here in his Borough, not distinguishing between
the Extraordinary leading of the holy Apostles Appointed to be the Eye
Witnysses of Christ's Death [104] and Resurrection, (...) leading of the Spir it.
etc. and the first Messengers or Apostles to the Nations, in which Respect,
the one Author of those three Gifts, Administrations, Operations, 1 Cor. 12.
peremptorily asks the Question, Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, have all
the Gifts of Miracles? and yet all Gods Children are Regenerated, are
sanctifi^d, are guided and built up an habitation of God through the Spirit:
and yet also the gracious presence and working of the holy Spirit, may be
hindered and quenched, by neglecting of the holy Fuel of the holy Scriptures and
other holy means appointed. And therefore the Lord Jesus Commands us to pray
for the Spirit: Gods Spirit given by means.
and Daved cries out, Thy Spirit is good lead me, etc. and take not thy holy
Spirit from me. And this is the Devils (the Old Fox) his Devilish Subtlety to
make the Cloak of the Spirit Extraordinary Assistance, and the Angels
Extraordinary protection, a ground of Christ Jesus, and his Servants flinging
themselves down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, and this I say from the God of
Truth will be the Breack neck of the People called Quakers, (without
Repentance) every Soul of them.

We now descend to the proof of the fifth Position with their Consent, The
fifth Position
which was, their Principles and Professions are full of Contradiction and
Hypocrisies.

I told them, that they knew well, that the Spirit of God had given us abundant
Warning against false Gods, false Worships, false Christ's, false Spirits, false
Prophets: He Commands us in Scripture not to believe them, The danger of being
deceived
etc. but to try them, to try all things, as we do with Touchstones, and with
Balances, yea, with Fire it self. For, some Counterfiet Coin has been so
like pure gold, so double guilt in the middle, and the Ring round about pure
gold, Depths of Hipocri^y
that it has deceived the Touchstone. The Devil himself as black a Fiend as he
is, the Spirit of Darkness, yet he knows how to wear Samuels Mantle, and the
white Robe of an Angel of Light, etc. I told them it was Common for Spanish,
Turkish, or any other Enemy in Time of War to hang out English Colors, the
more easily to deceive and Catch the poor Merchant man, and Judas the Traitor
gave no other sign to the Jews in his betraying of his Lord and Master, the
Lord Jesus, but God save my Master and a Kiss.

105 In the copy in possession of Brown his autograph across the outside edge
of University, Roger Williams has placed this page.
] Most of this I Remember I spoke, Lies in Hypocrisy.
and then I told them that Paul tells Timothy of some that should speak Lies in
Hypocrisy: I told them of these, there were two sorts.

1 Such as knowingly (for wicked and Devilish Ends of Profit or Preferment)
take the Leading Staff in hand, as it is more then probable, that the Misleader
of so many Millions of Mahumetans did: and as one of the Popes in Merriment to
his Cardinals Confessed it, saying, Quantum Lucri fecimus ex hac Fabula Christi?
Two sorts of Soul Deceivers
What gain have we made of this Fable of Christ? Thus Judas knowingly, for his
Gain sought Opportunities to betray Christ Jesus. Thus the Schechemites (and
Millions are their Successors as they are to Nebuchadnezzars Idolaters)
underwent that painful and shameful Ordinance of Circumcision, partly to please
their Princes, and partly for that hope as (Schechem told them) that all that
Israel had should be theirs.

A second Sort of Soul Deceivers that are, and yet know not in their
Consciences that they are blind Guides or blind Followers, but for not loving
Truth God has given them up to believe Lies, for Truths: false Christ's and
Spirits, for true Christ's and Spirits; yea, and with Paul to think that they
verily ought to do many things against Jesus of Nazareth, yea, and as the Lord
Jesus Positively Foretold they shall think to do God Service to kill himself,
in killing his Servants.

I told them my Charity, bid me hope that the Quakers and themselves present
were not of the first, but of the second sort, and I prayed them to be as
patient as they could while I must prove that their Principles and Professions
were full of Lies and Contradictions, and of Hipocrisies, and Dissimulations. I
wondered that my Opposites and Auditors bare all this Load so silently? But at
this word W. Edmundson and the rest brake out saying, We regard not what thou
think and say of us, nor do we need thy Charity, but go on to thy proofs,
etc.

I then said, The Quakers of late have Changed much of their Spirit, or else
more notoriously Equivocators.
that their many Books, and G. Foxes (that thereby me) and their Professions,
did so exceedingly Clash one with another: and some of their latter Books (as
Christopher Houldsworths) and some of these latter Professions and Practices
were such that many of their Observes Conclude, that either they had altered
their Religion in many of their Principles [106] and Practices, and were turned
from what they formerly held, and were amongst us: Or else their Hipocrisies
and Dissimulations were more and more prodigiously Abominable. The Juggling of
the Quakers about Christ.
I came to Instances, and told them that when they were Charged to deny that
man Christ Jesus, they profess and preach they are wronged, for they believe in
that Christ which was born of a Virgin, and died at Jerusalem, and yet for all
this, it is but in Truth a Spiritual, and Mistical, and Allegorical Christ,
which under board and in the bottom) which they hold. For, in New England
(before G. Fox came) H. Norton and others say, is not Christ God, and is not
God a Spirit, and is there not a Spiritual Virgin, a Mistical Bethlehem, an
Heavenly Jerusalem? And do not G. Fox and Ed. Buroughs all along hold out such
a Christ, whose Body is not now to be found? and such a man as is in every
Saint, or Quaker? and in every person in the world except he be a Reprobate?

Again, About the Church and Ordinances.
2. They say, they hold the Christian Church, the Christian Ordinances, the
Christian Ministry, the Christian Baptism, and Supper the Resurrection, the
Judgment, the Life Everlasting, but search their Books, Examine their
preachings and professings, and you shall see, and may admire their Juglings
and Dissimulations: Do not Fox and Buroughs all along disclaim any Church
Ministers, Baptism, etc. but what is Immediate and Invisible? Do they really
own any Supper but Christ's inward Supping with them, and they with him? Or any
Resurrection but the tising of their Bodies to perfect Holiness? or any
Judgment and Eternal Life, but what they have now attained, and are now
passing Judgment upon the world?

3. Again, though they do deny any Church but Invisible, yet their Churches and
Congregations are known and Visible and stated (not attending Invisible
Motions) both first day and other days with prayers and Preachings, and
singings, and real joynings or Addings to them and Castings out: These things
necessitty forces them to practice, or else they cannot possibly keep
together, although in Monstrous Dissimulation they disclaim it.

4. They profess that their Saints have an Unction, Inward and outward
Preachers.
yea, that every person in the world is so enlightened by Christ Jesus, that he
has Christ and Spirit, and the Kingdom of God in them, [107] (as the Pharisees
had, and the very same the Saints have) and if they will, they have Teaching
enough to Justify, Sanctify and save them: and yet again what a noise is
there in the Worid about the Quakers, Teachers, He Apostles, and she Apostles,
snch as the Lord Jesus never sent either the Twelth or the Seventh, or their
Successors. How do they boast to be the only Ministers of Christ Jesus sent
into Old England and New England, into Scotland and Ireland, yea, into Italy
and Turkey, and other Nations as diligent and zealous as the Pharisees to
pervert and poison Souls with a false Conversion and Salvation.

5. You profess the Scriptures to be the words of God, As to the Scriptures
but not the Word of God, and yet now you profess to be tried by them: Anon
again, you need not the Scriptures, you have that Light and Spirit within you
that gave out the Scriptures, and if all the Copies in the World were burnt yet
you have the Scriptures within you, G Fox his last Book Exalting the Heathen
therefore you not only (as the Spirt of God says) deceitfully handle the
Scriptures by deceitful Interpretations, but by deceitful owning, and not
owning, and as G. Fox in his late Book in Exalting Heathens above Christians
owning them, and yet Exalting the Spirit in the Philistian and Egiptian
Sorcerers above them.

6. As to Magistrates, how full are their Books and Sermons against Persecution
and Persecutors, As to Magistrates
and yet how plainly do their Principles persecute all others that subject not
to their Light, when they have attained such godly Magistrates as they arc (as
they speak) in the Light. I told them I was Concerned to make this out more
fully in the proof of my Fourteenth Position, and therefore at present I would
trouble them but with one Quotation out of G. Fox, Page 170. where I Read, Page
170 John Stallam
and John Burnet Read also, how G. Fox brings in John Stallam saying, [And the
Magistrate is not to Level the Law with the Light in every man's Conscibnce,
Again, The Quakers Principles are for Persecution
if the Magistrate be in the Light and discern the mind of Christ, and discern
his Law, is ^e to Compel all the Nation and Commonwealth to come to the
practice of his Light?]

G. Fox Answers, the Magistrate of Christ, the help, Government for him, he is
in the Light and power of Christ: and he is to subject all under the power of
Christ, into his Light, else he [108] is not a faithful Magistrate: and his
Laws are agreeable and Answer according to that of God in every man: when men
act contrary to it they do evil, so he is a Terror to the Evil doers, discern
the precious and the just from the vile, and this is a praise to them that do
well.

I urged from hence, that the Quakers (and G, Fox in his Book in many places)
own no Magistrates but such as are godly that is in their dark Sense, The
Quakers Zealous Persecutors.
that be Magistrates for their Christ, be in the Light and Power of Christ, for
then say they, their Laws are agreeable to that of God in every man.

2. These their Magistrates (in the Light) ought to subject even the
Consciences and Souls of all that be under them, by Corporal punishments to
come under the Power of Christ into the Light.

3. This is Confirmed and sealed with a peremptory Doom upon the neglecter and
failer, viz. [Else he is not a Faithful Magistrate.]

4. I observe the Reason and Equity which they allege of this subjecting all
Subjects to the Light of Christ, because such Magistrates, Laws and Edicts are
witnessed by God in every man, and therefore he sins against God himself who
breaks such a Magistrates Command, and therefore is justly punished, etc.

Upon my urging of some of these particulars some of them desired to hear the
Quotation read again: Yet will not own it.
so John Burnet read the whole passage again, and said, that G. Foz spoke not
there of matters of Religion and Conscience, nor of the Magistrates compelling
men to be of his Religion and Conscience, but of punishing them for matters of
wrong between man and man, which are against the Light in every man's
Conscience, as Drunkenness, Whoredom, Murder, Stealing, and the like.

I Replied, the Terms were such both of the Question by the Opposite, and the
Answer by G. Fox which argue and Comprehend the matters of Religion and
Conscience, viz. If the Magistrate be in the Light, and discern the mind of
Christ, etc. and G. Fox his Terms are the same about Christ and the Light and
bringing them subject to Christ.

2. It is not Imaginable, that the Opposer would question whether the Civil
Officer ought not to punish such incivilities and [109] Incivilities and
Inhumanities as Drunkenness, Whoredom, Stealing, Murder, etc. Therefore G.
Fox must intend that their Magistrates for Christ must Fight for their Christ
against all their Opposites, though they cry Persecutors, Persecutors, etc.

In Page 221. G. Fox brings in the Author of the Book called Hosanna to the Son
of David, The Quakers Perfection, and yet in Measure Page 221. Hosanna to the
Son nf David.
faying, [They know not absosolute Perfection that are admitting of Measures
and Degrees, nor come to the Day and the bright Morning Star, is not Risen.]

He Answers, did not the Apostle speak that they were Children of the Day, and
the night was over, and knew the whole Body, and yet said, he would not go
beyond his Measure? And does he not speak of the Stature and Measure and
Fullness of Christ? and were they not come to Perfection, and spoke wisdom
among them that were perfect?

I Reply: As to their Monstrous pride I shall speak, when I come to Compare the
Pope and them in the Tenth Position: At present I Ask them, whether Paul speak
of his Measure in Holiness and Grace, or no? Some of them say that they are not
only perfect as God in Holiness, but also in Power Omnipotent, The Old Romans
with their Dii Minores or lesser Gods and the Papists and Quakers all one.
Omnipresent, Omniscient, etc. But if Paul be not brought in to speak of such a
Perfection in Holiness as is in God, G. Fox beats the Air, and comes not near
the Question: to save their Doctrine of Perfection from being a perfect
Contradiction and Lie, and they would fain make themselves and others believe
that they are as truly perfect in their Holiness as God is, though their
Holiness be not so much: As if they were perfectly Gods, (though but little
Gods) as God himself being a great God, The Perfection of the Godhead
and so are forct to show their Contradictions, and wheel about to Perfection
of parts as a Child is mankind though not a perfect man, and a drop of water is
true water, and may be as Salt as any drop in the Ocean: having the Quality of,
but not the Equality with the Ocean As otherwise G Fox foolishly and
blasphemou^ly speaks of God in this Book, Moreover, since these high minded
Souls dare to say that they are as pure as God, and (some say what they think)
that they can no more sin against God, then God can sin against them, etc. I
Ask them whether there be any Measures and Degrees in God? whether his
Perfection in Holiness be not Holiness it self? Wisdom it self, goodness it
self, unto which there there can be no Addition or [110] growth as we are
Commanded to grow in the grace and knowledge of Christ Jesus. To talk therefore
of Measures and Perfections, is as silly as for G. Fox when he has begun to
sow a Shoo, and has as yet taken but a few stitches, yet to boast Confidently
that the Shoe is perfect.

We deny not, The Quakers Fallacious Perfection.
but a Dram Cup may be as perfectly full of wine as a Pipe or Butt, and so
John's little Children as perfectly, that is, as truly Gods Children, as his
strong men or Old men: But to say this Cup or Spoon is equal in quantity to a
Pipe or Tun, a Child is equal to a strong man, much more for a poor Potsheard
to say he is equal with his Porter, and a Worm of the Earth equal to his Maker,
what is it but a bloccish and blasphemous Fallacy and Contradiction? and a
wheeling about to a Perfection of parts which none deny. Hosanna to the Son of
David.


In 222. He brings in the same Author saying, [Christ is without his Saints in
respect of his bodily presence.]

He Answers, How are they of his Flesh, and of his Bone, and how do they eat
his flesh, and drink his Blood? And how have they his mind and Spirit? And he
with them, and they with him? and sit in Heavenly Places: And he is the Head of
his Church, and how then is he absent? yea, poor Apostates from him feels not
Christ, but he is with the Saints, and they feel him.

I Reply, and Ask, is this Eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood after
a Corporal, G Fox his Falla-Presence of Christ
Bodily manner, visible and real as to other Senses Or is it Miraculous and
Spiritual? Or is it Spiritual and Mistical by Faith, and by believing as the
Protestants say? After the first Corporal way the very Papists affirm not:
Visible and Natural or Miraculous and Supernatural Eating of Christ.
After the second way you will not say it is: Nor would you be thought to be so
gross Papists as to hold Transubstantiation? and therefore must it be the third
way whichis by believing: and then you poor Iugling Souls, what is it to a
Bodily presence, that you Eat him by believing?

2. Whereas you say, you fit with him in Heavenly Places, you are one w^^h him,
etc. he is Head of the Church, etc. Here I must Ask you you hold him to be such
a Visible Head of the Church, as the Pope says He is, and if you say yea, I
then Ask you where will you direct us to such an Individual Man, Christ Head of
the Church
or person as the Pope is, and may be directed to, as we know from so great Art
all the World over, If you say No, what is this then to talk of a bodily [111
presence of Christ (which is the point) and then Flap me in the mouth with a
Fox Tail, and tell me (in a Childish and Equivocating Contradiction) that you
mean not a Bodily presence but a Spiritual.

3. As for the poor Apostates, and your feeling of Christ, which the poor
Apostates do not.

I Reply, An Adulterous Wretch, Accused Joseph of Whoredom, who was a pattern
of pure and holy Chastity: For, whom do this Whorish Brood of Foxians thus
brand for Apostates, and sling among them Firebrands, Arrows and Death? Are
they not all the Children of God that are, or ever were, or shall be called?
Are they not the Souls under the Altar who have been slain Thousands and Ten
Thousands for the Testimony of Jesus against these horrid Delusions? His Bodily
presence.
Are they not the very first Churches, and the Apostles of Christ Jesus, from
whom Christ in his Bodily presence was departed, as he often Forewarned them,
The Quakers Count all Gods Children Apostates.
and (as the holy Scriptures abundantly Records) is Fulfilled? For, see the
Juggling of these Deceivers, when this Bodily presence is Examined, they mean no
such Individual Man and person, but a mind and Spirit, and such a Christ as
has no Individual Bodily Presence, as we and all men have.

If G. Fox when he is in New England should say he is in London in his Bodily
Presence, and that his Friends feel (as he speak) his Bodily Presence there, G
Fox his Juglings and dreams about the person of Christ
because they feel his Love and his Affections in their minds and Spirits: What
Hocas Pocas and Iugling Christianity is this? All the Saints and Children of
God must all be Apostates, fallen from God and Christ, and Grace, that cannot
Skill and Feel this Horrible Egiptian Canting Language.

I will turn my Thoughts higher. O thou most glorious Sun of Righteousness,
Truth and Holiness shine forth, and let it be seen, how the Devil called the
Lord Jesus Beelzehub: The Treacherous Revolters and Apostates from thee, they
call thy self, and thy Saints Revolters and Apostates. They boast with the
bloody Papists and other Traitorous Rebels against thee, An Apostrophe or
Pe^tion to the Lord Jesus
of their Right and Interest in thee, of their possessing and feeling of thee,
feeling thy Scriptures and thy Bodily presence within them: Oh let thy glorious
Light declare, who these poor Apostates and Revol- [112] ters are, who break
down thine Altars, burn thy Temples, scoff at thine Institutions, Cry up a
false and Hellish Christ within them, Christen him with the Name of Light,
though he be thy Conquered Slave the Devil, telling us he is thine Angel of
Light, who with his Counterfiet Soldiers of Light, Crucisie thee and pierce
thee, and mock and Curse thee, (the only true Son of God and Son of man) as
ever Herod and Pilate, the Priests and Judas, the People and Soldiers did.

In Page 259, 259 James Brown
he brings in James Brown saying, [the Kingdom that is in the Saints, is not
in the Pharisees.]

He Answers, [That is, in the Saints, is in the Pharisees in a Measure, though
it be but as a Grain of Mustard Seed, which is like to Leaven little.]

I Reply, 1. What If I should send you to some of your Margents, Christ's
Kingdom in, or among the Pharisees
where the Greek word [Entos] is rendered amongst you: that is, unto you, upon
you, as Luke 11. If I by the Finger of God cast out Devils, surely the Kingdom
of God is Come upon you? The Pharisees expected (and so did all the Jews, and
Christ Disciples were not free) I say look for a glorious Temporal King that
should make his Ingress with Pomp, and [Meta pur oteresio] as the Scripture
speaks with Observation, but he came in as some Kings in disguize, and (as they
speak) Incognito, and yet his Kingdom was among them, in the midst of them, by
his per^onal presence, his power sulp eaching, and his glorious Miracles.

2 Since (in Opposition to Christ's Visible Kingdom his Church) you predicate a
Kingdom within, Consisting of Righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Spirit: do you think indeed that the Hipocritical Cursed Pharisees were snch
Righteous, peaceable and joyful Souls as your selves: As sure as God is Light:
They and their Successors your selves, will find your selves when you wake, in
horrid Quaking, and except you repent Hell Flames about your Ears, as the Lord
Jesus told those whited Walls and painted Sepulchers.

3. Must you take Measure of the Pharisees, Horrible and hipocritical
Chistianity
and tell us that the Pharisees in a Measure as a grain of Mustard Seed and
Leaven are the same with your selves? Do not you Cry out that you are perfect,
not in Measures and Degrees, but that you are all one in Quality and Equality
of Power and Glory with God? and must [113] this must be the same with Christ
Jesus and his Saints, and you and the Pharisees all together? Can two walk
together, live and love together, board and bosom together and not be agreed
together, no other ways then Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial,
Righteousness and unrighteousness? What stinking work do these proud Pharisees
make of Christianity? How justly does the Son of God give them their proper
Titles, Ye Fools and Blind?

4. If it be the same Kingdom in Christ Jesus and in Saints, and in the
Pharisees, and every wicked man in the world, A Monstrous King and Kingdom of
the Quakers.
though but as a grain of Mustard Seed, and Leaven, what is the Reason this
Mustard Seed grows not up, this Leaven spread not in them? Can a Nation be
subject to the King of England, of Spain, or any osher Ptince or Monarch, and
yet not know how, nor have no knowledge nor feeling of it at all? Can there be
such a God, such a Spirit, such a Fire? yea, but such a Mustard Seed, or
Levven, such a Teacher, Abominable lies in hypocrisy.
and yet not grow, not prevail, not prosper, nor be perceived? ye Fools and
Blind are all your Mustard Trees stunted all the world over, no Shelter for the
Heavenly Birds, your pure flower of Holiness and sincerity, mixed and-blended
with the black Weeds, Cockle and darnel of open Idolatries and profaneness,
and Pharisaisme, and Hypocrisy: What abominable Contradictions and Lies in
Hypocrisy are here? The Pharisees have Christ and his Kingdom of
Righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit within them, The Pharisees and
Quakers hypocrisy wonderful
and yet live in pride and Covetousness, and Extortion, and Excess, and
Cruelty, and Hypocrisy, and Blasphemy, and all this Rottenness and Dead men's
bones stinking and ruling all within, notwithstanding all the white and paint,
and garnishing without your selves, (their Hipocritical Off spring) have, and
live in, you say, this Kingdom of Christ Jesus, this Kingdom of Righteousness
and Joy in the holy Spirit, as perfect and pure as God himself: all one with
us, Infinite in Majesty, Holiness, Power and Glory, not only in Quality, but
Equality, etc. (as this wretched G. Fox affirms) And yet within and withont
Idolatrous and Superstitious, Inhumane and uncivil, passionate and sierce,
Censorious and Cursing, and most Impudent and worse then Barbarous, in some of
your Impudently, monstrous and avowed practices

Having dispatched our Agitations about the fifth Assertion, [114] and the
Quotations out of G. Fox which I could not then Insist on in public, The sixth
Position.
I descended to the sixth Position which was, viz. [The Religion of the Quakers
is not only an Heresy in the matters of Gods holy worship, but also in the
Doctrines of Repentance, Faith, etc.

This Assertion has two main Branches: First, that the Quakers Religion is an
Heresy, and themselves Heretics in the matters of Gods worship. The Heresy
of the Quakers.


2. Not only so, (about the Circumstances of which Gods own dear Servants
themselves greatly differ) but also (which is more Lamentable and dangerous) in
the Doctrines of Repentance and Faith, and the rest of the graces of Christ
Jesus.

I told them first, that the word Hairesis Heresy, in Greek, (from whence the
word Hairetikos an Heretic) signified an Opinion or Opinions, chosen and stood
in by one or more against the Christian Religion. I said the matter might be
aggravated, and a ugmented from the Greatness and Vitallity of the matter of
the Opinions, but the Formality and Nature of it lay in the will and obstinacy
thereof.

John Stubs stood up and said, that Heresy was defined by some to be an
Opinion obstinately stood in against the first Christian Purity: Heresy what
I Answered, yea, and the Opinion of some was, that Heresy was an Error in the
Foundation obstinately stood in: But I said we had not time to enter upon a
Dispute about the word or thing at this time, the Substance of my Affirmation
was, that their Religion, Sect or way was false, and gone from the Institution
and way of the Lord Jesus delivered by himself and his Apostles, or Messengers:

1. As to worship, they denied the Converting and gathering of the Saints into
visible Assemblies, or Congregations: affirming the Chnrch to be Invisible, the
Ministers Invisible, the Baptism and Supper Invisible, etc.

The second (which was aur Position) was in those two great Fundamentals, the
Beginning, or A. B. C. of the Christian Religion, The Quakers Heretics against
all the Christian Principles, and more Heretical against the first Christian
Religion then any Protestauts or Papists.
viz Repentance from dead works and Faith toward God: As for those two
Doctrines of laying on of hands, and of Baptismes they concerned the Church,
and worship, (concerning the Circumstances of which God is pleased to permit
his [115] Children to be lovingly differing and discussing; the other four
Repentance, Faith, Resurrection and Judgment (in which generally Gods Children
agree) in these also as well as in the matter of worship, these wandering Souls
are Heretics, that is, obstinately maintaining Notoriously false and
Antichristian Abominations, In so much that the many Sects amongst the
Protestants, yea, and the Papists themselves do not so differ from a true
Protestant and true Christian as do these wilful, ignorant, and wandering Souls.

1. Then as to Repentance, The Quakers Heresy in matter of Repeutance.
I said it was the first heavenly and saving work of God upon the Soul, wherein
he turned back home again the whole Soul unto himself, being revolted and run
from him into the Arms of Rebellion in the Fall of our first Parents.

This was the great point preached by Moses and the Prophets, and more
expressly by John the Baptist, and by the Lord Jesus himself: and when he sent
abroad his Apostles or Messengers into all Nations, they were to preach the
Gospel or glad News of the Forgiveness of sins according to Luke 24. This 24th.
of Luke I earnekly Insisted on.
viz. that Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name unto
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Here about I remember they told me that it was known that they preached the
Doctrine of Repentance and of turning from all sin unto God, etc.

I Answered, that the Papists and they made a show and Color of Repentance,
but it had not the Life and Substance of Repentance in it: It was no more but
an empty Title and shadow of Repentance: The Papists and Quakers Repentance.
we know the Papists define their Repentance by these three. First, Contrition,
Secondly, Confession, and Thirdly, Satisfaction or Restitution.

But I said the Protestants protested against this Repentance of the Papists,
and so against the Quakers, for, who knew not the sorrow and Confessions of
Saul, and Ahab, and Pharaoh; and the Philistines, and Judas, yea, and also the
Restitution which Judas made, (not daring to keep in his hands that which he
had unjustly and wickedly gotten) and yet who can truly ascribe unto these men's
Repentance, the Character and blessedness of a true Christian returning and
coming home to God.

2. I said it is known in daily practice, that when some times [116] Notorious
and openly Flagitious Persons profess to be Quakers, (for all their craking of
fear and trembling and Quaking) there has appeared no Sense of godly sorrow,
of godly Contrition and brokenness of heart in them, for their sinful Nature
and Life against so Infinitely pure an Holiness and Majesty? but immediately
(upon their bowing down to Satan, and owning him as a Light, The Quakers
Converts.
and Christ, and Spirit within them) they are, having less Profaneness now
pure and holy as God is, they can no more sin then Christ can! the Mystery of
godliness is God manifested in their Flesh, I know some of them say they come
to perfection by degrees, yet they say the least of their newborn Quakers can
not sin, and what is that but Perfection? yea, they are Christ and God: and
therefore why should they give respect to any King, or Kings, etc. why should
they not Thee and Thou the Aged, Learned, holy, and High, why should they not
sit silent even scores and hundreths of them (possessed with a dumb Spirit) as
in a Form and Order of Christian worship waiting for this Spirit, and then be
perfect Christians?

3. The Protestants both English, French and Dutch, etc. have manifested
against the Papists, and therein against the Quakers, that Repentance is a
turning of whole Soul from all sin as sin to all of God as God: The Protestants
true Repentance.
from the sin of Nature, and that Heart filthiness which we bring into the
world with us, and from whence, even from within, as Christ Jesus tells us?
what ever Satan and the poor Quakers prate proceed our evil thoughts,
Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit,
Lasciviousness, an Evil Eye, Blasphemy, pride, Foolishness, Mark 7, etc.

4. I urged that their Proselites and Converts are but like the Pharisees of
old, though oftentimes dearly bought by Sea and Land, I say, but t^rned from
one sin to another, from one Image to another, from one Devil of Drunkenness of
Swearng; etc. to a Devil of Pride, horrible pride, the worst of all prides in
Earth or Hell, to wit, a Spiritual Pride swelling with the Dropsies and
Tympanies of their Conceited knowledge, Conceited Repentance, Conceited Faith,
Love, patience, joy, holiness, Justification, Sanctification, Mortification and
Salvation.

2. How horribly do they despise the true broken hearted Pub- [117] licans, who
can see nothing but sin and Damnation in themselves, The Quakets despiling
and cry out for mercy and Forgiveness? How do they Superciliously and
Pape-like belch out as from Hell, God I thank thee that I am not like these
Publicans?

3. How bitterly do they Instantly rail and revile, And Revili others.
Condemn and Curse, breathing out Fire of Damnation as Fire and Brimstone from
the Mountains in Sicily, or else Hell it self against all that oppose them? as
far from the Teaching of Christ and his first Mess^ngers as Lambs and Doves,
are from the Ravenous, popish and Devilish Lions and Eagles.

4. To name no more at present, How does the Devil of worldliness and
Covetousness domineer over many of them? Their Covetousness.
By a strict Profession all persons are taken off from Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Swearing, etc. und put on Theiftiness and Industry, and if their hearts Center
and fix not on Christ Jesus, and the Heavenly Records of Christ, the
Scriptures: and on the Life to come, but upon Self, Exalting self, a self
Christ, and Spirit, and Heaven, and Resurrection, etc. which is the Truth and
bottom of the Quakers Religion, what can the most of them run in but a Course
of greedy gaping after, and getting, and raking, and gathering the muck and
dung of this present Life?

It is true, that many that hold the same Fanciful Notions with the Quakers,
yet are of Ranting, jovial, spending Spirits, but the Spirit that haunts the
Quakers most is a sour, A sour Spirit is the Common Spirit of the Quakers.
proud, and Melancholy Devils, and his Commission is to turn such persons into
the Gadarens Swine rooting up all that ever they come at for their own Ends and
Belly: How many are the Instances even in this Colony in some especially, as
able and as active Souls as any in this Colony or Country, and as guilty of
murdering the Natives by the Liqour Trade as any: and as suddenly and
strangely snatched away by the hand of Gods Power and Justice, as any usually
can be, but being departed I will touch no more upon this string.

From their Doctrine of, and their Heresy or Obstinacy in a false Repentance,
I touch next npon their false Faith: The Quakers False Faith.
I said it was true they spoke much of Faith and Justification, etc. as the
Papists did, and as G. Fox in his Book (by me) did: yet if they pleased, I
would demonstrate by Instances out of his Book all along that he Confounded and
made all one, both Faith and Ju- [118] stification, yea, and Sanctification,
and made believing in Christ Jesus but a mere Babel and Chaos of Nonsense and
Cnnfusion. For although (which is Foxes Common Borough) he that Faith has
Repentance, has Justification, G Fox his horrible Confounding of Faith and all
other Chistian Virtues and Graces together.
Sanctification, and all Christian graces, yet to Confound and make them all
one, is as to go into a fair Garden, and say a Rose is every Flower in the
Garden: or to say, that the Letter A, or O is every Letter in a Printers Box,
or Book: Or to say, that a Rebels receiving the Kings pardon, that is the King
himself: his receiving it is the pardon it it self, that is the Rebels
Conviction, Conversion, Condemnation, Execution, Resurrection, Acceptance,
Exaltation, and Adoption into the Favor and Communion with the King for the
Future. All this Monstrons and Nonsensical Language is the Tongue or Speech of
the Quakers, and G. Fox especially.

2. I told them that although (with the Quakers and Papists) G. Fox talked much
of Faith in Christ: yet I had proved and further should, True Faiah what it is
that the Quakers put out and obliterate the true Christ or Object to be
received and believed on, as before in the matter of Faith, they put out the
true living Eye of Faith, and put in a painted, or Glass Eye in the Room of it.

True Faith is a Receiving of Christ Jesus as my only King, Priest and Prophet:
It is a believing on, The Quakers Transubstatiarion worse then the Fantastic
or receiving of Christ distinct from God, John 14. You believe in God, This
true Lord Jesus Christ the Quakers turn into a mere Fiction, Dream, or
Imaginary Christ in the mind of a man, or Woman: a Popish Transubstantiated
Christ, all Spirit and no Body, Tran^ubstantiation of the Pepists
and so not consisting of Flesh and Spirit: He has no Flesh of his own, as you
make him: and yet Flesh of his own, because your Flesh is his Flesh, and yet
your Flesh you say also must dye and rot, and never rise again, and so you have
blown up and Jugled away the Flesh of Christ Jesus, both his and your own also
altogether.

This is a Trick of the Father of Lies, and Iuglings beyond that Monstrous
Fancy of the Papissts Transubstantiation, for although they turn the Bread into
the Flesh of Christ, yet they turn not the Bread of Christ, nor the Flesh of
Christ into their own Flesh: The Quakers can give no Account what is become of
the Flesh or Body of that man Christ Jesus, these Foxes have devoured the Lambs
of God. Miraculous and Monstrous is [119] the Papists blasphemous and Bloody
Fancy of Transubstantiation, but not more miraculous and monstrous, etc. then
that of the Quakers, which grants Christ Jesus to have been born, lived and
dyed as We, etc and yet now Transubstantiated into a Spirit, and the Quakers
Flesh. So that in the Upshot, the Christ in whom they believe is vanished (by
an Hellish Chimistry) into themselves, and it is most certain, (the Lord open
in great mercy some of their Eyes to see it) they do believe on themselves, and
that lying Spirit within them.

I remember, that hereabouts John Burnet said, that it was not true that they
preached not true Repentance, John Burnet his Sermon
and herein he fell into a Speech or Sermon to the People, professing that the
Quakers maintained Repentance toward God and Faith in Christ and Godliness, and
Righteousness, etc. and he continued I Judge above half an hour, (though not so
long nor so furious as William Edmundson the day before.

I listened carefully and watched his Ending (being desirous to say something
least another of them should fall into a Sermon also and put me by) and I
speedily said (to this Effect) Friend you have here delivered many holy Truths
of God (at this there was deep silence, And my Answer
as if I had turned a Proselite* at least it pleased them to be applauded, I
went on and said concerning Repentance and turning from all sin, of the Blood
of Christ, and of being saved by his Blood, of living soberly, Righteously, and
godly in this present World, etc. but withal I said, they did not reach me nor
any thing that I had spoken as proof against them, for I and all their
Adversaries the Protestants preached Repentance and Faith, etc. but theirs was
an Antichristian Repentance, and Faith, The Quakers and the Papists general
Faith and Repentance
etc. because either not true Repentance and Faith as Protestants argue against
the Papists and Quakers, or else in general Terms not distinguishing between
true Repentance and false, and showing the difference between the true Faith
and the false: So that I said you might have preached this Sermon even in Rome
before the Popes face in his own Chapel, yea, the Pope and the Cardinals and
Friars, The Juglings of the Papists and Quakers
and Jesuits deliver the same Doctrines (in general Terms) daily: But as
Thieves Iuglers, and Counterfiets when they come to Examination, their Impudent
sayings and Swearings prove but the paints of Whores and Har- [120] lots? So do
the Devilish Doctrines and Devilish Conceit and Fancies of Papists, Quakers,
and all Fantastic, Formal, Carnal Protestants, who Cry Lord, Lord, etc. but
are Answered by Christ Jesus with I know ye not, Depart from me ye that work
Iniquity.

I cannot Affirm that I spoke all these Individual words, nor have omitted
ought that I or they spoke: yet I remember no more, though being Confined (by
their great desire and my self) to a puarter of an hour, for each point I was
forced as all may judge to omit many Amplifications and Illustrations which now
I crave the Readers patience, while I present him with some of them.

I intended to have Charged them with the falseness of their Hope, The Hope
peace and Joy of the Quakers
and Love, and Peace, and Joy which they often Crake, (though they pretend
quaking and Trembling) their Heaven consists, and all the Eternal Life to
come, they look for, they are now in present, full Possession of.

What Scripture is more common in the mouths and pens of the Quakers, Christ
the Hope of Glory
then that of Paul to the Colossians, Chap. 1. which is, Christ in you the Hope
of Glory: whereby they Insinuate two of their grand Deceits and Lies, First,
that their is no other Christ but what is in every man in the World. Secondly,
That there is no other Glory to be hoped for in, or by, or with the Lord Jesus,
but what the Saints, that is the Quakers enjoy, and are already possessedof
within them in this Life.

To which I say, how many painted Anchors and painted Hopes are there? How many
Hopes as in Job like the Spiders web swept away to Eternity? If there be e're a
painted Anchor or e're a Spiders web in the world Interline "it is" after
world. R. W. Ms. Ann.
this of the Quakers.

Hope is one, as in time I may furthet demonstrate.

For, do they not overthrow the very Nature of Hope which they prate of, and
give the Spirit of God Romans 9. the Lie, which tells us that Hope is not of
things in possession, or which we see? does not Paul there tell us almost in
plain Terms, that it is simplicity and Nonsense to talk concerning Hope after
such a Rate? The Simplicity as well as Impiety of the Quakers Hope
Does not 1 Pet. 1. tell us of a Living Hope (opposite to painted and dead
Hopes) and this Living Hope called in other places the Hope of Righteousness,
the Hope of the Redemption of our Bodies? the Hope as of Heirs for an
Inheritance? of the Glory that [121] shall be revealed in us, which is a state
of the manifestation of the Sons of God, though says John, We are now the Sons
of God, 1 John 3. we know not what that is, all that is now enjoyed is but as
the first Fruits to the Harvest, as the Spirit speaks.

2. Again, what Ignorance and simplicity is it to call Christ or God, the Glory
or the goodness, or good things which we hope for, Literally and properly upon
the Promise, and the Power, and goodness of God, no Christ Jesus? Can the
Eternal God in any Literal Sense be called the Hope of Israel, Jer. 14. but in
the same Figurative Sense whereby Moses calls him Our Life and the Length of our
Days? and we in Common Speech call such a man, or his Promise, or any
Creatures dear to us, Our Hope, our Love, our Joy, etc. that is the Ground or
the Object of our Hope etc

Their great Blunderer Humphry Norton he deals as plainly and roundly as G. Fox
(his aemulous Corrival) falsely and fraudulently, Humpry Norton his Hope
when that holy Scripture [ If in this Life only we have Hope, etc.] was here
objected to Humphry Norton, he clapped his hand on his Breast saying. He had it
there already, that is opposing it to (and denying the Hope in) the Life to
come, especially, as to their Bodies which are not raised up (they say)
Spiritual Bodies, being (though of late) more subtly and hipocritically all one
with those deceived Souls that said the Resurrection was past already. It is
true, they will pretend to own the Scriptures, Christ's humane Nature, the
Resurrection, and Judgment, and Faith, and Hope, ahd Repentance, etc. as true
and sound as any Protestant: but still it is no otherwise, but as G. Fox and
Ed. Buroughs say in this Book, that is, (as I have and shall open) in a most
Iugling and deceitful Sense and meaning. The Quakers Hope of life to come


It is reported that some of them at their Death have used those words [Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit,] some have Charitably thought that they intend thereby
their going presently into the presence of Christ Jesus, but as the Truth and
bottom, however they blind the world, and the weakest of their Followers,
(until they be fit to wean and fall to strong meat) others of them Covertly say
and write, and others of them more plainly say, viz. That they believe no more
Rising of their Bodies then the rising of a Dog: and as to their Spirits they
believe Souls are [122] patts of God, and go unto God and into God: and
therefore their saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, is no more then Lord
Jesus receive thy self, according to some of their plain Expressions: To whom
should I pray? my self? to whom should I give Thanks? my self? wherein their
woeful, black, and filthy Spirit Contradicts it self amongst themselves,
though they agree in the Devils Bait, The Quakers bait by which Satan takes them
(which Caught himself, and with which he Caught our first Patents and all his
Posterity) viz. Ye shall be as Gods, live as God, know as God, be Gods and
Christ's for Evermore.

I shall now crave the Readers patience to hear some few Quotations out of G.
Fox, John Bunyan
which my quarter of an hour would not then permit) declaring their Apostacy
and Heresy in the matters of Repentance, Faith, etc.

In Page 127. he brings in John Bunyan saying, [It is a Counterfietlng of the
New Birth for men to follow the Light wherewith men coming into the World are
enlightened.]

G. Fox Answers, [which none comes to the New Birth, but who comes to the
Light, wherewith every man, etc. which believing in is a Child of the Light:
believing and receiving comes to receive power to be the Sons of God.]

I Reply, The new Birth of the Quakers
none are truly Converted, born again, etc. but in a true Sense they come to
Christ Jesus: For the Scripture says, he gives Repentance to Israel, He is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith: But that Jesus Christ as God, (so the Quakers
own him) and as man (for so they also own him) should be in every man, and
Woman, and Child in the World, I have proved and shall prove it to be a
blockish and Devilish Fancy.

2. If this Light, this Christ the Mediator between God and man be only a
Spirit and not man, why do the Scriptnre, why do the Quakere madly say there
was such a man, though they cannot tell now what is become of him except he be
(as they say) within, etc.

3. If this Light, this Christ, this Mediator be in every man, what should be
the Reason that so many Thousands and Ten Thousand of Millions see him not?
Only a few persons Cursing and Reviling all the rest, and that say all but the
Quakers are deceived? Can the Sun be in a Chamber and persons not blind, but
[123] seeing and awake, and using his Light and yet not see it. Certainly it is
but a painted Sun that does not shine equally on all, it is but a painted Fire
that does not burn, and the Quakers are but Pictures of Christians, and
pictures of men to argue aftet such a Rate, that Christ not only as God, and
Creator should be in every man, but also as the Mediator, as the Spirit, and
yet not operate according to the Nature of the Sun and Fire: It is true, the
Lord Jesus came into the dark world, and their darkness comprehended him not to
be He that was to come, the true Messiah: but when Christ Jesus as Mediator,
the true or only Light shall dwell in the Understanding and Will, and Memory,
and Affections of a man or Woman, and those persons be savingly enlightened by
him as you write, and yet not Converted and saved by him, it can be the
Language of none but those that peep and mutter Isai. 8. but have no true
Light, but a false and painted Light within them.

Lastly, The true and false new Birth.
says Fox this turning to the Light within is the New Birth: But the Holy
Record says, that till the preaching of the Word, or Gospel, or glad News come
to the mind of a man, (ordinarily by the Ear, and hearing, and preaching, Romans
10.) there is no Faith, nor Covenant, nor Christ, nor God in the Soul, Ephesians.
2. and we are not only in darkness, but darkness it self, Ephesians. 5. and only by
the holy Word and Spirit preached Interline "is" after preached. R. W. Ms. Ann.
the blessing, Isai. 59., God shines in our hearts, and not by any such
Immediate Fantastic Faith or Spirit, as the Anti Christian Quakers dream of,
The Quakers put out the Eyes of their own Experience.
yea, against the Light of a twofold Experience in their own Souls.

1. That many of them being enlightened and formerly Convicted by the reading
or preaching of the Doctrine, Word or Will of God revealed in the holy
Scripture.

2. That of their new Light (as they falsely and foolishly prate) pretended to
be brought unto their Ears and knowledge by the means of these new Apostles,
Preachers, and Ministers, so pretended of Christ Jesus.

When God hides (that is by Spiritual Judgments) the Light of Scripture, of
the Spirit of Reason, and of Experience, etc. who can find it out? No man, no
nor Devil can subsist one minute without the power of Christ's Eternal Power and
Godhead: [124] but when Christ Jesus comes into the Soul as Mediator of the
new Covenant, and be thus idle and not operative in all mankind in the World,
and not to Convert, and work belief in them, which must be either because he
cannot, or because he will not, as the Leaper said, is as black and blasphemous
a Fancy as any Atheistical or AntiChristian Soul can harbor.

He brings in George Willington saying, Page 44. George Willington
[He is Justified by Faith alone without good works] He Answers; [What without
Faith that works by Love.]

I Reply: In this passage, and in many others, this subtle man clearly
discovers what he makes true Justifying Faith to be, viz. not one hair breadth
more then the Faith that may be to God in the first Covenant, the Covenant of
works, and a looking to be Justified and saved be God for a man's own Abilities,
performances and Righteousness, far from the Faith of the Gospel, which though
good works in Love follow it, yet not one good work in the world goes before
it: Nor one good work in the world goes with it in the point of Justification,
The Quakers mere Jewish and Popish
or pardon of our Transgressions: and therefore G. Fox has not only George
Willington his Opposite, but the express word and Declaration of the Spirit of
God saying, [Rom. 3. Therefore we Conclude that a man is Justified by Faith and
not by the works of the Law.]

Alas porr Bankrupts who owe more Infinitely to God then we are worth: The
doleful state of all men till mercy not justice pity them
who are over head and Ears in Debt to God, to our own Souls, to Men and
Angels, and the whole Creation, having sinned against Heaven, etc. that have
not one farthing toward the discharge of so many Infinite Millions of Talents:
God of his rich Infinite mercy convinces some of the proud Sons and Daughters
of men of their deplorable Condition, makes them cry for mercy, and for Christ
Jesus sake and Mediation, he freely Iustifies and forgives them. Thus says the
Scripture all along, and that our Faith, our believing or receiving of this
grace though it be followed with Mary Magdalens Love, contributes not one
farthing toward the payment of our Infinite Millions, no not so much as one
good Thought.

He brings in Joseph Miller saying, Page 47 Joseph Miller
[It is an Error to say, we are Justified by that which Christ does in us. He
Answers, Contrary to the Apostle, who says, We are Justified by Faith in his
Blood: [125 And the Faith is in the Heart, and the Blood is in the Heart that
purifies it, and held in a pure Conscience: And the Word of Faith is within,
Romans 10. And Faith gives Victory over the World, The Quakers Justificatson
within us.
and that which gives Victory Justifies, And Christ is within you who is
Justification, Sanctificotion and Redemption: either of them is found within,
and thou art in the Error, and not fit to talk of these things thou
understandest not.

I Reply: Grant that in a true Respect and Sense, Faith is within, and the
Blood within, and the Word of Faith within, and Christ within, and
Justification and Sanctification within, will it therefore follow I say, Fox
his Babilonish tumbling of all in a Crowd and Heap together.
will it therefore follow with any Color of Common Reason, that therefore in
one and the same Sense they are all within, and they are all one, and they were
not without before they were within? I know this subtle Fox and he that helps
his deluded pate to bind up such a Bundle of wrested Scriptures, would have it
so, that he may jumble and blend all together in a Babilonish Mystery, and
subtly deny the Truth of the holy Scriptures History.

It is true, Cheist dwells in our Hearts by believing, Ephesians. 3. and
Consequently his Cross, yea, his Manger, yea, his Blood, yea, his Grave are
within, etc. But that Christ Literally shed his Blood within us, as a Ransom
to his Eather for the sins of the whole world, is as Fine and brutish a Fancy,
as that the Cross, the Spear, the Soulders, the High Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees and People, Pilate, the Romans, Jerusalem, Jude, and the whole world
(as some of them have idly and ofteuprated) are Literally within us.

It is true in a Sense, the King and his pardon, and Counselors and Scribes,
and writings, and Seals, etc. are all in a Rebels heart, Justification opened.
as he believes and applies all these within him, and his belief works by love:
But if they be within otherwise then we Affirm, etc. and as G. Fox would have
it, then they are not withont also, (which is the mark all these Arrows from
Hell fly at,) and Consequently Christ Jesus and his Blood shedding, and a
Literal Jerusalem, and a true and real man Christ Jesus, and the holy, real
Literal Scriptures are blown up and vanished altogether.

Page 10. He brings in John Bunyar saying, [It is not Faith and works that
justifies a man before God, but it is Faith and good works which justify in
the sight of men only, and such works will not [126] justify in the sight of
God: and he says, that works is only to justify their Faith to be true before
men.]

G. Fox Answers, Abraham was not Justified only to men by his Obedience, The
Quakers Popish Justification by works.
but to God: And where there is Faith there is Justification which works by
Love: And the Saints Faith and works were not only to Justify them in the
sight of men. For the work of God is to do what he says, and the will which
who does not is not Justified by so doing, but to be beaten with stripes: who
seek to be Justified by their Faith and works in the sight of men are dead,
Faith and works both.

I Reply, He that reads this passage may without doubting Conclude that G. Fox
and his Foxians are as perfect Pharisees (Jewish and Popish) as ever burroughed
in Rome or Jerusalem, The Papists and Quakers see no need of Christ.
maintaining a Covenant of works, Justification by works, and renouncing Christ
Jesus his Blood and merits: For if Abraham was Justified and received his
pardon by his Obedience to God what need was there for him and us, to look out
for a Surety, a Redeemer, a Mediator to pay his Blood for our Ransom, and to
fetch us out of the miserable state of Sin; Death, and Hell, etc.

2. Whereas G. Fox asks what is the work of God, but to do what he says.

I Reply, The Papists and Quakers know not the difference between the two
Covenants
1. The work of God (according to Christ's Doctrine) is to believe on him whom
God sent. It is true, it is the Command of God to keep his Commands, but since
the deadly Fall of man, none, not one being able, Romans 3. (though Fox deny it,)
it is the work, the great work of God to fly to that blessed Propitiation for
poor sinners, (throughout the world:) But G. Fox cannot distinguish between the
Covenant of works, of Justice, and of Debt, and that of mercy, and of receiving
all as a Beggar, and Condemned Rebels, poor proud Souls they know not any
difference between the Blood of Christ Jesus and their own Blood, as we shall
see afterward.

3. Whereas he says, that they do not Gods will are not justified in so doing:

I Answer, therefore it follows ronndly as his Conclusion, that they that do
Gods will are justified in so doing: that is their sins are pardoned as David
and Paul by pardon of Sin describe justification,

127] Who sees not the subtlety of this Fox cheating himself and others with
the diverse signification of this Latin word Justification? Fox his playing with
the word Justification
It is true, a man can not be justified or defended for Thieving, Whoring,
Murdering, etc. Does it follow therefore, that they that do not Steal, whore,
murder, etc. by this abstaining from Sin, and by this their work they obtein
the pardon, and stand by this their work, legally right and justified in the
Court of Heaven!

I Conclude, that by these hints a broken hearted sinner, who has seen Sin as
Sin, the sin of his Nature, his chief sin, etc. will see how far from the
Doctrine of true Repentance, true Faith, etc these men's Teachings be, and (for
all their boasting) what need they have to Examine themselves whether they be
in the Faith, and whether there be any other Christ Jesus within them then a
Countersiet and painted Messiah, and whether their Countersiet and painted
Faith, Repentance and Hope will yield them another Fruit then a dolefully
Counterfieted and perishing Salvation.

At last by Gods merciful held I come now (with their glad Consent) to the
seventh and last Position propounded to be discust at Newport, The last of the
seven Positions at Newport
viz. that their Religion was nothing else but a mixture of Popery,
Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Iudaisme, etc.

Herein I knew I was not to exceed my quarter glass, and there. fore I take
liberty now a little to enlarge, to remember the Reader of the old Proverb,
that where God has his Church, the Devil will have his Chapel. And that where
Christ Jesus has his Field of good Seed, The Quaker Religion pieced up ^ many
old Heresies
while the Servants sleep, the Enemy will sow the Tares, of rotten Doctrines,
and rotten Professors, who like Windefals, and Revolting Rebels fall from the
holy Truths they have professed, being loose and weak believers or only
affrighted and Terrified Hipocrites, by Gods righteous Judgment delivered over
to listen too, and believe Lies as the only heavenly Truths of Jesus.

I had purposed to have showed how in matters concerning God, the Son of God,
the Spirit of God, etc. the Quakers have followed, the Cerdonians, the
Priscillians, the Valentinians, the old Gnostics, and Manicheans: but I
Confined my self to the Terms of the Position, and declared that the Quakers
were downright Papists in many points, some I then Insisted on, and the rest
[128] intended, I shall now mention. First, In magnifying the rotten strength
and Arm of dead and rotten Nature: when it is Objected to G. Fox in his book,
that by Nature we are all dead in sins and Trespasses:

G. Fox Answers, by d,viding all men into three sorts: Some are born holy from
the womb, as Ier. Some the Saints that is, Of Natures its Impurity
only their Children born holy without any sinful corruption. Thirdly, the
wicked who will not turn to the Light within them, and they are only the
Unbelievers dead in sin. But the Protestants, David and his Followers Confess
their Natures, Births, and Conceptions to be all defiled with sin, and with a
sinful proneness to all Iniquity, though miraculously some are Sanctified, or
set apart to God from the womb as Jeremiah, John the Baptist, etc. Some after
a more peculiar and miraculous manner, as the Lord Jesus: Some by New Birth,
and the wonderfal Supernatural Power of the holy Spirie Changing, Regenerating,
and as it were New Creating the Soul and Spirit, in Everlasting, Unchangeable
Holiness and Righteousness after the Image of his first and second Creator.

It is true, The Papists righter then the Quakers
that the Papists come nearer the Truth as to Birth, Corruption and Defilement
then the Quakers, acknowledging all, ^ be Conceived and born in Sin, not that
the Devil or the Papists care to acknowledge this Truth, but that they may use
it as a Cridge over which they may pass to the Necessity of Baptism on pain of
Damnation: on which they may also build many other Superstitious Fanciee as to
the holy Ordinances.

But the Quakers, although they hold only their own Children to be Conceived
and born holy and without Sin, The power of Nature in Spirituals
yet they jump into one step with the Papists, as to the Power of Nature in
Spirituals, ane that every man and woman in the world has a sufficient Light
within him to see God and Christ, etc. and to turn themselves unto them to
Eternal Life. Contrary to the Protestants, who from the holy Scriptures
maintain man's Natural Blindness and Darkness, Ephesians. 5. Man's Natural Deadness,
Ephesians. 2. and that our wisdom can not difcern any Spiritual thing, that is,
Spiritually, 1. Cor 2. That our Quintessence of Nature, our very wisdom is
Enmity to God: He hates us as we hate him, and are at deadly fewd and mortal
Hatred like two men of War [129] giving Fire one upon another, we resolving to
sink by Ejods side, The way of Conversion both of the Papists and the Quakers
rather then to yield to God: but God in Infinite pity, seeing our weakness
and madness, and certain Destruction hangs out a white Flag and offers a Parley,
on purpose to save us from our desperate mind and Ruin, which by many
heavenly means of Free mercy he Effects? The Papists speak more like Men, and
at last yield that men and Women have left them (since Adams Fall) power to
listen too, and obey Moral Persuasions, and offers which God makes: The Quakers
talk only (like Bruits) of no means, no means but Immediate Revelation of the
Spirit: and yet in Contradiction to themselves they make the Spirit an inward
means, and their Apostles or Messengers an outward means, or else they make
themselves idle Embassodors, in vain and to no purpose. The Protestants affirm
from 2. Cor. 3. that we have not one good Thought but from God, The way of the
tr^e Protestants
that it is God, not we, that turns the will, Phil. 2. that when the Word of
Faith is preached, Romans 10. and Faith or Belief is wrought by hearing,: yet is
it Gods free Grace that makes the difference, 1 Cor. 4. when several Hearers
are Assembled, and God opens Lidiahs heart and not others, Acts 16. the learned
Academians mock, and only Dionisius and Damaris, Acts 17. Romans 9. 2.
and a few believe, because God shows mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will, he hardneth.

The Papists and Quakers both maintain that dolefully, Falling from Grace
uncomfortable, and desperate Doctrine of falling away from true and saving
grace: The Truth is, neither of them seem to know Experimentally what true and
saving grace is: It is true, they differ, the Papists make Saving Grace the
Property only of the Regenerate: The Quakers say it is in every man and Woman
in the world, they have it, though they know it not, and will not turn to it,
and believe in it: yet both agree that they loose it, whereas the true
Protestants though they grant great Failings and Falls, and Desertions of Gods
Children, yet they hold the Seed of God, The true Protestants Doctrine as to
Falling away.
the holy Spirit and Word of God, Isai. 59. and 1 Cor. 3. that Incorruptible,
Eternal Seed, of which they are begotten, never Final-[130] ly? nor Totally to
be Ecclipsed, and they justly account that Doctrine of Intercession, viz. when
Sonship or Childship is cut off by Sin, and Renewed by Repentance, to be a
simple Fantastical Notion, as if David were a Child of God to day, a Child of
the Devil to morrow, a Child of God this hour, and a Child of the Devil the
next, etc. only they fix this impiously upon mortal and great sins only, as if
Adam Eating of an Apple were not sufficient to his and our Destruction, as well
as David's sinning with Bathsheba and Uriah, etc

3. I must be briefer, though not so brief as I was forced to be in our public
probations: The Papists and Quakers agree against the holy Scripture
I told them that the Papists and the Quakers were great Confederates in their
Endeavors to raze the Records of Heaven, and to rob the Saints and the world
of this Inestimable Jewel and Treasure of the holy Scriptures.

1 The Papists own it not to be all the word or will of God revealed, but that
there be unwritten Verities, that is, Gods mind revealed from Father to Son, by
Tradition.

The Quakers will not vouchsafe it the Name of the word of God, out of a simple
pretense, because Christ is the word of God, that is, he isindeed the chief
manifestation of all the Appearances of God.

2. The Papists horribly abuse it, calling it a Nose of wax, a Leaden Rule, a
dead Letter, etc. and so do the Quakers triumphing over it with base
Insultations, as over a deed Letter, a Carcass. etc.

3. The whole world of Papists assembled in eighteen Years Labors, (and
Chemical Laboratories at Trent) at last thundered out their Anathamaes and
Curses against all that should not prefer the Vulgar Latin Copies before the
Hebrew Copies and the Greek (in which it pleased the holy Spirit of God first
to write his mind and will or word unto us:) The Papists and Quakers Enmity
against the Hebrew and Greek
And do not the Quakers as simply and bruitishly bind themselves to the bare
Letter of the Common English? Though they know the Hebrew and Greek Copies are
the Foundation and Touchstone of all other (though millions of) Translations:
Though they know there be more English Translations then one; Though the
English Translations wonderfully [135 differ; Though Ravius (that Famous
Oriental Hebrician, etc.) proclaims above a Thousand Faults, and some gross in
our last Translation: though some of them (as John Stubs) boast of their humane
Learning produced his Hebrew Bible in our Conference: yet will these Ephesians
cry out (like Frantic mad) great is our Latin Translation, great is our
English Translation: Yea, one of them boasted to my self, that the Spirit of
God would teach them Scripture without the Hebrew and the Greek, or the English
either.

4. The Papists set up a Judge in Controversies above the holy Scriptures, The
Papists and Quakers Judge of Scripture
who can dispense with Scriptures and do all that God can do. And say not the
Quakers the same of their Spirit which is above the Scriptures, for it gave
forth the Scriptures, and is in every man

5. The Papists though they will not deny to make the Scriptures the Rule,
Interpretation of Scripture
and profess to be tried by it, yet their Church, and the head of it the Pope
must Interpret: And do not the Quakers herein the same concerning themselves,
though some think more bruitishly, for they will allow no Interpretations, nor
meaning at all, but you must take the words as the Translators have given them
us (right or wrong) and you must not enquire either into the meaning of words,
or the meaning of mind of God in the place. Oh what a black, deaf and dumb,
Lazy Spirit has possessed the Souls of these great pretenders too and
Monopolizers of the holy Spirit of God, both Papists and Quakers?

6 The Papists generally use not, nor have the holy Scripture, (no not in their
Devotions) in their own Tongue, but in the Latin, (the Whores Tongue of
Italy:) therefore no wonder they prize it not: but even the Lights or
Luminaries so pretending, amongst them disuse it, The Papists and Quakers
slighting holy Scripture
Care not for it, read it not, etc. many have it not: So that Luther tells us
that in Thirteen years or more he saw not a Bible in his College at Erford,
until by Gods merciful providence he came to see one, to his own and the
Comfott of Thousands, and Luther tells us that at one great Assembly of the
Emperor and Princes, the Protestants of Germany had Conveyed a Bible on the
Table: The Cardinal being first come he opened the Book, and read here and
there in it, (it is like he had not seen [132] it before in his Life,) In comes
one of the Popish Princes, and asked the Cardinals Eminency what Book he had
there?

He Answerred, I know not: but I am sure it is agaiust us, and it is laid here
for that purpose. Oh the Infinite mercies of God to us in our times, and our
Infinite Debt to his Infinite goodness, and our Infinite guilt in neglect of it:

The Quakers at first took off themselves, The Papists and Quakers would be rid
of the Scripture
Families and Assemblies from any use of it: Their Spirit they Crake that made
the Scriptures supplies all, etc. The Papists and Quakers both have said and
printed, that if the Scripture were consumed and quite taken out of the world,
there would be no Loss, so long as they have the Spirit. The Truth is I could
by Arguments many make it appear that the Papists and Quakers love the holy
Scriptures no better than Goliath loved David's stone and sling? nor no better
then the Devil loved Christ's Gegraptai, It is written: It is written: for the
Papists and the Quakers, and the Devil knows that if the holy Scriptures be
Exalted, as the revealed will or word, or Declaration of the mind of God,
down-falls their pretenses of Traditions and Revelations, whereby the Devil
deceives themselves and himself also.

4. The Papists and Quakers shake hands in the most hellish Doctrine of
Justification by what is within us, The Papists and Quakers unite against the
Blood of the Lord Jesus
by what Christ works within us, in short, by what is called Sanctification put
for Justification, and the forgiveness of sin, in and for the merits of the
Lord Jesus freely imputed and given to us: The Papists use the word Inherent
Righteousness, but the Quakers bogle at the word not finding it in the English
Bible, yet they agree that by the works of Obedience, yea, and also by the Acts
of their own Inventions and Superstitions, they can make a pardon under a hedge
to themselves, and Crake that they have received a pardon and Justification
sealed under the Broad Seal of Heaven to them, but it is against the glory of
the King of Heaven, and against the glory of the Son of God, and his glorious
Sufferings, and their own Salvation.

5 The Quakers are Papists in that Spirit of Infallibility which they arrogate
to themselves, The Infallibility of Papists and Quakers
pretending that the holy, Spirit shall lead them into all Truth, speak
Immediately in [133] them, etc. though herein they differ, the Pope infallibly
expounds Scripture, but the Quakers speaks Scripture, and his word is Gospel,
etc. yea, all men have this Spirit, and need no Teacher, and yet what an
horrible Contradictious noise is there of the Quakers, Apostles, Messengers,
Ministers, Preachers He and she sent into Old-England, and New England,
Scotland, Ireland, Turkey, Italy, to bid people hearken to the Immediate Spirit
within?

6. The Quakers are Papists in that high lofty Conceit of their Perfection, The
Quakers Popish Perfection.
when Calvin's time this Spirit came from Hell under the name of Spirituals, and
when of latter years in Lancashire under the Name of Grindletonians, all their
Religion turned chiefly upon these two Hinges.

1. They could not sin, were perfect, etc.

2. They did nothing, said nothing, The Popish Revelations of the Quakers
but God and the Spirit did all.

7. The Papists and Quakers are great Friends in their Notions and practice of
Revelations, Visions, Dreams, Impulsions and Inspirations: He that has known
so much as I have known of both their Spirits this way, and has read their
Legends as I have done, and can Instance in particulars as I can, will say, it
is a foul, Popish, Devilish Spirit that haunts them (both under this fine
pretense) to turn both off from the words of Jesus, Popists and Quakers one in
Ceremonies and Inventions
Luke 10. How read thou?

8. What Cart Loads of Traditions and Ceremonies have the Papists, and I
believe if the Quakers have opportunities and means (as the Papists have had)
they will not be behind them: what a noise is made about uncovering or bowing
the Head, Knee, for Courses of wearing of Lace, (yea, Bands and Hatbands by
some of them:] Of saying you or Thou, of using Music, Carving, painting, of
sitting silent, (some hundreths together) of sighing and shaking of the Body?
all which, as relating to Religion and Christians: etc they are but simple,
Insignificant, and Idle, popish Trash and Trumpery.

9. The Papists and Quakers are Brethren in Iniquity in their Affirmations that
the Pope is not Antichrist, and that [135] the Church of Rome is not the great
Whore: The Quakers and Papists agree that that hge Pope is not Antichrist
The Papists Affirm that Antichrist is not yet come, and that he shall come
just in the end of the world, and shall finish all those wonders in the
Revelations in three years and a half: The Quakers though they hold Papists and
Protestants (all except the Quakers (to be Anti-Christians; (and as Fox does)
cast back all the Prophesies of false Christ's, false Prophets, and Antichrist
to the time of the Apostles themselves: yet the great Whore and the Devil, and
sin, (upon the point) they simply Confound and make all one; as may be seen in
Fox his Title to this great Book, and other of his and their writings.

10. It may be wondered why the Popes when made or created by an h^mane and
Devilish Fiat, The Quakers not owning freely their Names.
they change their Name, and why the Quakers guided by the same Hellish Spirit
and Fancy, are so dainty and tender about owning their Old names: The Histories
say, the Original with the Popes was with him who was Os porce, or Swines
snout, by Name, and was not thought fit being raised so high to bear so low and
fordid a Title. If it were so then, yet it is nothing now but their horrible
pride being in their Conceits so high, so Infallible, so perfect, to scorn to
be like other men that are but Hogs Snouts, etc.

11. The Papists and Quakers are led by one Spirit of feigned holiness, The
Quakers and Popish Monks and Munns all one.
Devotion, monkish Solitariness, etc, Their Monks and Friars and Nunns must be
sequestered from the world, meddle with no faecular and worldly business, which
is no more but the Beggars Life, and therefore justly called Fratre Mendicantes
Begging Friars, and the Indians Life, formerly the men laying all Labor upon
the women; and all this is no more than hunger and Ease, the Dogs Life also. It
is true, the Apostles by a true Light ought to have worldly maintenance, but
Paul wrought day and night with his hands, which I never read of any of these
lying Apostles, Quakers in all their Travails to have done.

12. The Papists and Quakers tongues are both spitting and belching out Fire
from one Fire of Hell: The Papists and Q^akers Cursing
All that have [136] not the Church their Mother, our Church say the Papists
have no God to their Father: the Protestants hope and speak Charitably of the
Salvation of many among the Papists, but the Papists have no Charity for any
that bow not to the Image: and the Quakers (as G. Fox for the rest) Judge all
that differ from Christ that is themselves to be in the Delusion, in differing
from them, and if they dare to oppose them, Dogs, Serpents, Reprobates, Vipers,
Cains, Pharisees, Devils, etc.

13. The Papists and Quakers are Firebrands both in the matter of Persecution
or hunting such as differ from them. The Persecuting Spirit of the Papists and
Quakers
It is known that the Papists cry out that they persecute none but the Tares,
(the Lottards, the Hugenots, the Wolves, the Heretics, etc.) That the Quakers
as do all Papists and Protestants cry out against all Persecution when it is
their own Cases, I say the Quakers most vehemently cry out against violence,
against Creatures, but against their Corruptious and Corrupt Principles: And
yet as for the Papists let it be considered whether there be any one Religious
state known in the world that Answers that woman drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, and Witnesses of Jesus Comparably so near as does the Estate of the
Romish Church and Profession.

And for the Quakers two things I say:

1: Their Tongues are the most Cutting and bitter of any that I can hear of
professing the Protestant Reformation, The Quakers Tongue and hand.
and it is certain, where the Tongue is so, that the Heart is so first, and
where the Heart is so, the Tongue and Hand do never part Company: and therefore
they will be as bitter and Cutting in Hand also, where God pleases to permit a
Sword to fall into it.

2. I have proved, and shall prove in this discourse, that G. Fox, Ed.
Buroughs and John Stubs, etc. maintain in their writings not only a
Magistratical Power in the Quakers, and in none else, rashly not only to punish
by the Material Sword Transgressions against men, but also sins against [136
God, his Church, his Christ, his worship and Religion.

2, As for the Agreement between the Arminians and the Quakers, I told them
that the Papists and the Arminians, the Pelagians and Semipelagians, and the
Quakers were so Confederate and one, that in naming one I named the other

1. As to the Power of Nature and Free Will in heavenly and Spiritual matters

2. As to the loosing of true Saving Grace.

3. As to Election and predestination in time, The Quakers Oneness with the
Arminians.
upon Obedience, and Rejection and Reprobation. upon Rebellion and
Disobedience. Contrary to the true Protestant Doctrine of a Certain Number of
Gods Elect or Chosen drawn by mercy, out of the Lump of Lost Mankind according
to Gods Appointment from Eternity, by his Call in Time, by his holy Word and
Spirit: and all from this Grace and Spirit of Regeneration, or New Birth, it
was not, it is not possible that David or Peter, or any Child of God be
un-Childed, can Finally or Totally depart and Fall.

3. The Quakers are Brethren with Socinas and the Socinians following him, in
making Christ a Type and Figure, a pattern and Example how Christians ought to
walk. The Quakers and Socinians Oneness
Not that the Blood which he shed upon the Cross at Jerusalem was a sufficient
price and Satisfaction unto God for the sins of the whole world.

Thus all the Quakers more Explicitly or Implicitly speak, and Humphry Norton
in print, viz. Can one man's Obedence and Suffering pay a price to God for
another man's sins? It is true, Socinus magnifies the Free Grace of God in
pardoning Sin, and sending that man Christ Jesus to be a pattern and Leader. to
all that will follow him.

But they endure not to think that the Flesh and Blood of one man being Finite
should be able to ^atisfie Gods Infinite Justice, and to pay a price of
Infinite worth and Value. What is this but the Sum and S^bstance of all the
Quakers Teachings? For although they preach Gods mercy and Grace, and talk of
such a Thing as the Blood of Christ Jesus: Yet upon the point, Christ Jesus but
a Fancy with the Quakers
that Body, that Blood, that Death etc. is nothing but a Fancy, and Christ
Jesus his Birth, his Life, his Death, his Burial, his Resurrection, his
Ascension, his [137] Return again to Judgment are all but a Mistical and
Allegorical, and not a Literal, Real and Substantial matter; And when they are
forced to Confess such a man to have been (though the Term Humane, G. Fox does
bogle and start as at a Rattle Snake) yet then examine them (as I have done)
what is become of him: then he is vanished into a Spirit and Ghost, and there
was never any such thing as a Man you talked of: And this is a Devilish
Iesuitical Trick the Quakers have beyond the Socinians concerning the Body and
Sufferings of Christ Jesus.

I might here Insist upon the Quakers Notorious Sabellianisme, The Sabellians
and Quakers all one.
taking clearly away (with Sabellius) the distinction of the Father and the
Son, and Confounding Father, Son and Spirii in One, as G. Fox in all his Book
does. At present I Insist upon the Position in my Paper, viz. that there is
much Iudaisme in the Quakers Religion.

1. In that great point of Righteousness, Reconciliation with God, and pardon
of Sin: They were Zealous (as the Quakers are) in the works of Righteousness,
thinking thereby to please and pacify God, and to satisfy his Justice,
putting their own dirt and dung, Swines Blood and Dogs necks upon Gods Altar,
instead of that One spotless Lamb of God, that Man Christ Jesus who alone
Expiateth, and takes away the sins of the World.

2. The Jews were Zealous for their Additions, Traditions and Superstitious
Inventions, The Quakers Judaisme.
which (as the Lord Jesus speaks) they p^eferred before ^he Commands of God: as
the washing of their hands, and of their Bodies, and of Pots and Cups, and
Beds, and Platters, and other things upon a Conscientious and Religious Account.

The Quakers (if they had their Scope) scorn to come behind the Jews, or
Papists for Ceremonies and Traditions, which it was necessary for them both to
add (as Apples and Nuts, etc. to still poor Children from Crying after Gods
Worship.

1. I named some of the Quakers Traditions and Inventions in our public
Conference, (unto which I shall now name [138] some more) I told them, The
Quakers Traditious and Ceremonies
and now do, of the Un-Christian and unnatural Invention of Women Ministers,
Women Apostles, Women Ambassadors to all Nations: a business that all the
Apostolical first Christian practice, and all sober and modest Humanity abhor
to think of.

2. Their dumb and silent meetings (their dumb and deaf Spirit) without Color
of Common Humanity or precept or practice, Dumb Worship
or promise of Christ to such a worship.

3. Their brutish Salutations of strang^rs, yea, and of acquaintance, Either
none or Immodest Salutations
Foes or Friends: It is true that some of them will admit o^ those two words,
How do you, and Farewell, as if there were some holiness in these two, and in
none other, and they might practice this holiness toward the world, etc.

4. Their New Way of feeling and grabling the hand in an uncouth, strange and
Immodest way, and this instead of kissing, called the holy Kiss amongst
Christians, and a token of Love and Reverence to men also in sober and Civilizd
Nations.

5. Their brutish Irreverence to all their Superiors either in Age, The
Quakers disrespect to a^l Superiors.
or in any other way of Pre-eminence, a most proud and monstrous Bestiality
against so many Commands and Examples of holy Scripture, and against the very
Light of Barbarous Nature it self, for the Indians use both Reverent words and
Gestures toward their Sachims, Wiyouhs and Rulers. Contrary to which, some of
us have heard the Children of the Quakers brought up and taught to say to their
Fathers George thou lie: Mary thou lie to their Parents, a Language which
deserved little less then Death by the Law, which God delivered to the Jewish
Nation, and surely deserves severe Punishment at this day.

6. Their Crying down of Musicians and music, The Qukers against Music.
(so Excellent a gift of God) as a foolish and Devilish practice, though
confirmed by so many Reasons from, and before Christ's time in Scripture, and in
all sober Nature and Civility, though it is abused, as all the gifts of God are.

7. Their own un-Christian, Fantastical singing
Fantastical, absurd, and unprofitable way of Toning and singing.

139] 8. Their Condemning of the Commendable and Ingenious Arts of Carving,
Carving, painting
Embroydering, and Painting, so approved of, and Commended by God himself in
Scripture, etc.

9. Their Crying out against Ornaments of Garments, Ornaments
and otherwise, against that Order God has set in his works, and that Variety
of his gifts for necessity, for Convenience, for delight, even to Astonishment
and Admiration in all his glorious works.

All these particulars (and more) I had not time, nor have I now to reckon up
and amplify, I remember no Material Exception, or Objections I had from my
Antagonists. Only John Burnet spoke against my great charging of them, and
William Edmundson he thundered out continually how deep my Charges were, and how
weak my proofs, and that I had proved nothing.

I told them that if Paul or Christ Jesus himself were there in presence, The
Conclusion of the Conference at Newport
they propably would be Answered as I was, viz. that they made many deep and
false Charges against the people called Quakers, but they could prove nothing:
but I said, I submitted the Examinatoon and Consideration of all passages unto
every man's Conscience, and the praise and Issue only unto God.

After some turns of this sort, The quickest and last turn about where Christ is
etc. I praid their patience to Answer me one question, viz. where is now that
Man Christ Jesus which they had Confessed to me was born at Bethlehem, and died
at Jerusalem, etc. At this they were all a while silent, and then John Burnet
Answered saying, he is where the Scriptures say he is.

I Replied, where do the Scriptures say he is, John Burnet Replied, the
Scripture say he is within: I rejoyned to this purpose: Then must his Body be
Ubiquitary, (as the Transubstantiators and Consubstantiators are forced to
hold:) Then must he have Infinite multitudes of Bodies, then must his Monstrous
Body or Bodies come from within his Saints, yea from within all mankind to
Judgment, etc.

Just here it pleased God so to Order it, that from the Boat (ready to set
Sail for Providence) I and others were [140] called upon to depart: An
Unexpected yet Seasonable and true Testimony from Elizabeth Williams
So I was stepping down, the Lord opened the mouth of Elizabeth Williams my
Brothers wife, one of the Society of the Baptists in Newport, who hearing their
Clamours, their only Refuge, he has proved nothing and said aloud: The man
has discharged his Conscience: He has fully proved what he undertook to prove
against you, and the words that he has spoken shall Judge you at the last day.
And thus the Father of Lights, the first and last, the Alpha and Omega
graciously carried me through all alone these three days Contests, as in a
shadow of Death with these Deceived, and Deceiving Souls: through my Labors of
making out my proof* the burden whereof lay wholly upon me though they had
been silent, (through their Censures Reproaches, Falling on me so many at once,
their Interruptions, and other Disadvantages and Provocations, his holy Name be
ever praised and magnified.

141] Our Conferences and Disputes at PROVIDENCE upon the seven other Positions
mentioned in my Paper sent to G. Fox and his Associates.
AFter we were thus (as above said) parted: They Remembered their Promise to me
of discussing the other seven at Providence, and accordingly John Stubs and
William Edmundson sent me a Note of their willingness to come to Providence the
last day of the next week being the 17th. day of the sixth Month called
August. The Conference at Providence^


I Returned them from the Shore side another Note signifying, that (if God
permitted) I would then and there be ready to Receive them.

That day it pleased the goodness and patience of God to bring us to, and being
met thus at Providence, I first presented them with the Letter which was sent
to them and me (God knows) without my thought or knowledge, at Newport, in
public Assembled. But there they thrice refused it, and here at Providence
William Edmundson Answers, that they came not to Pro- [142] vidence to hear
Papers, but to hear me make out my Charges against them: One of my Neighbors
Thomas Olny Senior an able and Leading man amongst the People called Baptists
at Providence, Passages about Reading the former Recited Letter. Thomas Olny
moved also for the Reading of the Letter, William Edmundson said to him who
art thou? Art not thou a Baptist? have not thou seen it already? and further
said to him, Thou art an Envious and filthy man, upon no other Provocation but
his Rational desire the Letter might be Read. William Edmondson thongh he had
on either side of him an able John, viz. John Stubs and John Cartwright spoke
all, and at last was forced to say that if the Letter Contained matter tending
to prove my Positions it should be read. But in the End I put up my Letter
again, at the motion of Captain Holden of Warwick, as I did at Newport, in the
morning of our third days Conference, for I observed that for all their
brutish Clamor of Diana, their Light or dark Lanthorn, ^hey could not endure
to be Informed, Admonished, Counseled, least of all Reproved by any: and I
also resolved to wait upon Gods mercy for a Season of publishing it on the
House Top, and therefore the Reader has it Faithfully presented in the Eighty
seventh Page in the beginning of the third days Conference at Newport, About a
strange Query put to my Autagonist by Captain Green.
this time stood up Captain John Green of Warwick one of our Magistrates, who
observing the Insulting Carriage especially of William Edmundson, he desired
leave to propose one Query, which being granted he said, he spoke not as a
Magistrate with Authority, but as an Auditor and sitter by, and he said, I
desire ^o know whether Mr. Williams be here as a Delinquent Charged to Answer
at the Bar, or as a Disputant upon equal Terms.

This Query they waved as well as they could, and I waved it also, and bore
what seemed Intolerable to some that we might not be discouraged to go on in
our business, about this time Mr. Caverly of Warwick desiring leave to speak, A
Moderator motioned.
motioned for the Choice of a Moderator between us, William Edmundson Answered
that Roger Williams had himself pro- 143] vided a Moderator, and he produced
and Read my Paper of Position,, wherein I desired that all matters might be
left to every man's Conscience and Judgment. etc.

I knew with whom I had to deal, and therefore purposely waved, what ever I
thought they would bogle at, and purposely gave them all possible Advantages,
etc. and I humbly waited on God for patience for his sake to bear with all
Inconveniences, Insultings, Interruptions, etc. and then, I knew there would be
no great need of a Moderator.

Having thus cleard the way, The first of the Positions debated at Providence
I told them, I would briefly fall on my proof of the first, of the seventh
Positions to be debated at Providence, William Edmundson took forth his Paper
and Read it, viz. [The People called Quakers in Effect hold no God, no Christ,
no Spirit, no Angel, no Devil, no Resurrection, no Judgment, no Heaven, no
Hell, but what is in man.

I told them that it was true, that in words and Terms they professed and
maintained all these, as other Protestants did, but if their writings were
Examined, and especially this of G. Fox which I had there by me it should
appear that what they professed in one place they overthrew in another: I told
them that they had there George Fox his Book as well as I, and if John Stubs
would turn to them I would name the Quoted Pages, and read them and he might
read them also.

I named Page 273. where George Fox brings in Alexander Ross saying, Alexander
Ross
[It is horrible Blasphemy to say the Scripture is not the Word of God, and to
say the Soul is a part of God.]

He Answers, [The Scriptures are the words of God, Exodus 20. and the four
Books of the Revelations, but Christ is the word in whom they End. And it is
not Horrible Blasphemy to say that the Soul is a part of God, for it comes out
of him, and that which comes out of him is of him, and Rejoices in him, G Fox
his Non-Sen^e
I said here what George Fox meant by the four Books of the Revelations, I knew
not, and if they did they should do well to declare.

145] But they past it by and so did I and I insisted on the matter which was
that G. Fox imagined such a God and Godhead as is partible and divisible,
Quakers blasphemous opinion about Goa and the Soul
which might be divided into parts and pieces, and by this strange
communication of his Essence, made him dissolvable, and so corruptible, etc.
against the Purity and Majesty and Eternity of God: For this renders the
Essence or Being of God capable of falling from his purity as man has done and
does, and capable of punishment and condemnation in Hel-Fire as the Soul of man
is; all which and more necessary Consequences of of that opinion are horrible
and blasphemous to imagine, much more to be uttered of the eternal invisible
and infinitely and only Wise God.

John Stubs here read the words of G. Fox and said, About Gods Breath.
the reason was to be weighed which G. Fox used which was; For it came out of
him, and that which came out out of him is of him, and rejoices in him. To
this end he desired the word in Genesis 2. might be viewed, which he turned to and
read, viz. God breathed into him the breath of life and man became a living
Soul.

About this time Sam. Gorton sen. desired to speak, and said, If it be affirmed
that God can be divided, and that man was a Part of God, the Godhead was
destroyed and the Soul of man, and upon this Basis all the rest would follow
which was asserted in this Position. And whereas John Stubs read it as it is in
our Translation, viz. God breathed into him the breath of life, Mr. Gorton said
it was Lives in the Margin, the breath of Lives, which John Stubs acknowledged.

It is frequent in their Books, (when they will speak plainly) for them to
confess that God breathed forth himself into Adam, and that there fore man's Soul
or Spirit is a part of the Divine Essence, The Quakers Gross conceit of soul
and body
that the Soul is an increated substance: that as for the Body, it comes from
the Earth, and returns to the Earth, and dust and rottenness, and however they
sometimes preach and print hat the Body shall rise again, yet others again of
them speak plainly, that as the body of a dog or beast so it vanishes: But as
for the Spirit, they say that returns to God, that is into God. And although
they talk to blind our eyes of a Resurrection and Judgment, and of Souls being
punished with the Devil and his Angels, yet others of them affirm that all
Souls return into God, and that the soul of Judas is now as happy in God as the
Soul of Peter, yea others of [146] them speak plainly that they are Christ and
God: therefore one of them being desired to give thanks at dinner, asked
roundly, to whom should I give thanks? to my self? and Calvin relates how
(long ago) one Quinitinus in his time a Leader this way, Their high blasphemies.
being demanded how he did? resolutely answered, How can Christ do but well?
and yet at that time he was very sick.

About this time W. E. said, what do thou tell us of stories what this man
said and that man said we will not believe thee! But just here rose up a
neighbor Joseph Iinks, who said he had no prejudice against the Quakers, yet
he could witness to the truth of these speeches of the Quakers, for one of them
had spoke as much to his face lately at Newport on Rhode Island: but I still
labored to keep down heat and therefore I told them I would not trouble them
with Proofs from elsewhere, but from their own writings, and from that of G.
Fox there present, and therefore I prayed them to turn to Page 39. where G. Fox
brings in Magnus Bine saying, Page 89. Magnus Bine.
The Saints are neither in the fullness of the Godhead nor part, away with this
Blasphemy which says this is, etc. Fox answers, The work of the Ministry was
to bring People to the Knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the
unity of the Faith, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ:
and Christ will dwell in the Saints, and God will dwell in them: and thou
say they have no part of the Fullness of the Godhead, and John says, of his
fullness have we all received, in whom dwells the Godhead bodily, and ye be all
in the Blasphemy, that be out of this part of the Fullness.

I said, that G. Fox rose up contrary to what Magnus Bine affirmed, to wit,
That the Saints are not in the fullness of the Godhead. About the fullness of the
God head.
But W. E. bid me let G. F. his words alone, his meaning alone, and keep to the
words. I told them the substance of my proof lay there in the substance of G.
Fox his answer to his Adversaryes: I took Fox his own word for the Quotation
out of his Adversary, which may be thought to be taken with as much Favor and
advantage to himself as may be: Unreasonable Reasoning.
and therefore if they stopped me from opening and comparing the words in a
rational and just way, they stopped me in the bringing forth of my Proofs and
Arguments.

I think here it was that W. E. said further, If thou go on to make out G.
Fox his Sense and meaning, we tell thee that we will stop thee, etc.

147] But since our business is with G. Fox, as well if not more than with W.
E. especially because of his Book, we shall now more freely enlarge upon the
words etc. and Sense and Meaning also.

For the Fullness of the Godhead is one thing, and another thing our (and all
his works and Creatures) partaking of that Fullness, in some merciful likeness
and coformity, as Moses and we behold his Back or dark Resemblance, and by
Re^lection, (as we behold the Sun) take in some weak low thoughts and conceits
of the Eternal and Invisible incomprehensible and inconceivable Power and
Godhead.

Thus to partake of some drops of the Ocean of his Wisdom, The great temptation
of knowing and holy People.
Power, Goodness, Holiness, etc. is not to become an Ocean of Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, Holiness, yea Wisdom it self, Power it self, Goodness it self,
Holiness it self as God is. This devilish Pride was the Sin of the Devils, or
wicked spirits, this was the Sin of our first Parents unto which the Devil
beguiled them; and this is Satan's bait still to catch all Wise and Rich and
High, and especially Holy People with, viz. to be as God, to be in the fullness
of the Godhead, to be God himself.

2. However this Iugler speaks here of the Fullness of the Godhead bodily in
Christ, The Quakers make themselves God and Christ.
yet if he be examined and searched it is clear that by Christ he means the
Body, the Quakers and every one of their Bodies is Christ in whom the Godhead
dwells bodily: and the great Mystery of which the Holy Scripture speaks, 1 Timothy 3. Is God manifest in their flesh, and therefore Sam. Fisher uses in his
Writing, Christ Jesus) as Peter did in his denying of him saying [that Person
whom you call God-Man] is as high Treason against the King of kings, and King
of Saints, as has ordinarily been acted since God most wonderfully gave life
to a lump of Clay, which now perks up to the eternal Power and Godhead.

Page 90. G. Fox brings in the same Author saying, Magnus Bine.
There is a kind of Infiniteness in the Soul, and it cannot be Infiniteness it
self, He answers, Is not the Soul without beginning, comeing from God and
returning into God again which has it in his hand? which hand goes against him
that does evil, which throws down that which wars against it, and Christ the
Power of God, the Bishop of the Soul which brings it up into God, which comes
out from God, has this a beginning and ending, and is not this infinite in it
self, and more than all the World?

148] I Reply, The Soul of man infinite
in these few lines, let him that has his senses make common sense and English
of some of them.

However this is express that the Soul is without beginning or ending, coming
out of God, and returning into God: [Hath this (says Fox (a beginning or
ending, and is not this infinite in it self and more than all the World]

I know I have had better Opinions and better Reasons from these poor Natives
of America then this poor self conceited God and Christ. G. Fox expresses
concerning the Soul and Spirit of Man: what is here but a brutish notion of
the Spirit of man, and a brutish notion of the Eternal Power and Godhead?

Among the six or seven Opinions of the Soul of man, this is one (and one of
the grossest) viz. that Man's Soul is an efflux, efflation, that is a flowing or
breathing out of the Essence of eternal and infinite Godhead. This worst and
most Blasphemous Opinion of the rest, the old Serpent has taught these
Foxians, in so much that these bewitched Souls say and print, The Quakers are
the old Manicheans
that this World is God, and the Godhead, manifest no Change "no" to "in," R.
W. Ms. Ann.
variety of appearances, and returning all again into the center of the
Godhead: in which they show horrible ignorance and Blockishness in heavenly or
earthly matters: Municheus his 2 Principles
for reason tells us that Finites be innumberable and yet numerable in time,
but Infinite is but one. The Quakers and Manicheans are but one in many
particulars Manicheus held two infinite powers or princes: One infinitely good,
the other infinitely as bad, which they say is the reason (in some Disputes I
have had with them) why God nor the Devil, good nor evil gets the final victory
one over another in this World. But this notion of two infinite or boundless
Beings, is soon found simple and brutish for an infinite or boundless Being,
cannot possibly receive a Neighbor a Competitiour, or second infinite or
boundless, for then the second would terminate and bound the first and it self
also and so not one infinite at all be granted. Beware of Dogs says Paul and
the Holy Spirit says (Cant. 2. beware of Foxes [take us the foxes] sure it is:
The infinite patience of God
we are to sly from brutish fellowship, with them in these brutish Fancyes,
so also to fly from these their brutish Barkings and Blasphemings against the
infinitely Glorious and inconceivable Excellencies of God, and among the rest
his incomprehensible patience, which could not bear such horrible provocations
were not his patience himself, infinite and incomprehen- [149] sible: Alas poor
lump of clay and dust and ashes: poor finite vapors we are, that are so far
from being infinite that (in a sense) we are infinitely Blocks and Beasts, and
not able to give a guess at what Infinity, and an infinite Majesty and Godhead
is. The Quakers obstinate in horrible fancies and Blasphemies


I quoted Page 67. where against Fr. Higinson he says [Again thou make a
great Puddir that one should witness he is equal with God] G. Fox answers that
the English Divines in their Catechism say [that Holy Ghost and the Son are
equal in Power and Glory with the Father] yet if any one come to witness the
Son of God revealed in him: or come to witness the Holy Ghost in them as they
that gave out Scriptures to witness the mind of Christ and witness that
equality with the Father, that equality which you speak of you Priests destroy,
that which you have put forth to the Nation, and cry out horrible Blasphemy.

I Reply, let these horrible Blasphemous lines be examined, and when the black
and hellish juice is pressed out of them, will it not be this, viz. [The Quakers
say that they are equal in power and Glory with God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit?

Page 182. I will add to this Page 282. where G. Fox brings in Daniel Gaudry
saying, Daniel Caudry
surely they cannot be perfect here nor hereafter in equality but in quality.
G. F. answers, Christ makes no distinction in his words but says, be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, and be you Merciful as he is, and
as he is so are we in this world. etc.

I Reply, whether it be G. Fox his Ignorance of the difference between Quality
and Equality, or whether it be his flinty Impudence, The Quakers challenge an
equality with God.
or both, sure I am there is an horrible, monstrous Brat of hellish Blasphemy
hatched amongst them, viz. that poor dust and ashes may not only (by infinite
Grace) be like the King of Glory in Holiness, etc. but he may be (and the
Quakers are) cheek by joll with him as great a King, Prince and Monarch as he,
equal in Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Holiness, Mercy, and all these
Eternal, Infinite and Incomprehensible.

G. Fox would not endure this in his own stinking Dignity and Pre-eminence: for
although he suffer his Inferior and petty Saints to be like him in (his
pretended Holiness, Goodness, etc.) yet he is so great a Diotrephes, and so
jealous of his Crown, that Humph. Norton himself must not dare to touch that
simple Babble, but himself and blind followers must all adore the Godhead, and
[150] none must dare to be equal; or Corrival with him.

Unto this I add, Page 248. where G. Fox. brings in an unnamed Author saying.
To say that God is substantially in man, and essentially one with him, can be
no other but the Man of Sin, the Devil himself has transformed himself into an
Angel of Light, and if it were possible would deceive the very Elect. G. Fox.
Answers, That God will dwell in man, and the Saints had unity with the Father
and the Son etc.

In which Answer it is plain, 1. That G. Fox maintains that the Godhead is
essentially and substantially in man.

2. That his Proof is only some Mystical and figurative Expression, as viz. of
Gods dwelling in Man, and walking in man, etc. whence he impiously and
ignorantly confounds that relative union by believing in the Son of God, into
an Essential or Union of Beings with the eternal Creator himself: a Union of
finite and temporal shadows, with the most Infinite and Eternal Creator; of
visible and vanishing and foolish dust, with the invisible immortal and only
wise God, which no truly humble Soul can but tremble to hear and think of.

It is clear in these Passages, The Quakess make themselves Father, Son and
Holy Spirit
1. That the Quakers make themselves Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

2. They make no other work of Redemption on Justification, etc. but what is
wrought in their spirits, minds and fancyes, called within them.

3. They make no other state of Heaven, Resurrection, Judgment or Life to come,
then is in them and their Bodies at present.

Now concerning their bold and blasphemous ascending into the Throne of God we
shall hear a little more in G. Fox making no Distinction between the Father and
the Son, with that known Heretic Sabellius. and 2. In his making no
distinction between Christ Jesus himself, and his Saints or Believers in him.

In Page 246. He brings in Christopher Wade saying, God the Father never took
upon him humane Nature. Christ. Wade
G F. answers, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself And art
ignorant of the great mystery, God manifest in the slesh; and his name is
called the everlasting Father. As for the word Humane, which is from the
ground, it comes from thy own Knowledge which is Earthly, And Christ took upon
him the seed of Abraham and David according to the slesh, and this is
Scripture Language.

151] I reply, H. Nortou more plain then G F.
in the former part of this Narrative I have shown how simple and irrational G.
F. his clamor is against that word Humane, and that the bottom is their
impious, unchristian and hypocritical denying of Christ Jesus to be a man, one
individual person as every man is: therefore Humph. Norton (G. Fox his
Corrival) is more plain and down right, saying, is not Christ God, and is not
God a Spirit, and chiding us for gazing after a man, etc.

I ad to the former page 293. where G. Fox brings in one Fergison, Fergison.
saying, that Christ and the Father and the Spirit are not one, but are
distinct, etc.

G. Fox answers, G F against the mystery of Father Son and Spirit
this is a denying of Christ's Doctrine, who says, I and my Father are one: and
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: and he was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, and they are all one and not distinct, but one in unity: that
which comes out from him leads the Saints into all Truth that ever was given
them from the Spirit of truth, and so up unto God the Father of truth, and so
goes back again from whence it came.

Again the same Author says, it is Blasphemy to say the Son is not distinct
from the Father, etc.

G. Fox Answers, the Father and the Son are one, the Father in the Son, and the
Son in the Father: so that which is in him is not distinct from him, and they
Blaspheme which say, the Son is not in the Father, and deny Christ's Doctrine.

I reply, The Quak blasphemies as to the most holy Spirit
G. Fox all along his Book calls that blasphemy which the most holy and eternal
Lord calls heavenly Truth. He has like some Witches and other notorious
wretches so inured himself to poison, that it is all one to him to swallow down
the most sensual and senseless Dreams, even concerning the fearful mysteryes
of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, when the holy Scripture tells us concerning
these Mysteryes, that in this life we know but in part, as through a glass
darkly etc.

2. For his Proof, it is the Child's song in the streets, they are one and
therefore not distinct: I fear he knows, but will not know the nature of several
respects and accounts, viz. that in one respect Christ Jesus says, I and my
Father are one, and in another respect my Father is greater then I; thus in one
sense a Father is one with his Children, an Husband with his Wife, a Captain
with his Soldiers, a Skipper with his Seamen, a King with his Subjects. And
yet in another respect, the Son is not the Father, the Wife is [152] not the
Husband, the Master is not his Servants, the Captain is not his Soldiers, the
Master is not his Seamen, and the King is not his subjects.

And thus though GF. and MF. be one in marriage, and one in a spirit of
notorious railing, yet she her self will not say but she is the Woman and he is
the Man, Tee Quak^rs Chaos and babel.
she the wife and he the husband, and this Distinction God in Nature the Law of
our Country and all Nations will force them (will they, nill they) to
acknowledge: otherwise (like the man possessed in the Gospel) I fear no Chains
of Humility nor Modesty would hold them from throwing off all Chains of
Conscience, and from flinging all upon heaps of confusion without all due
respective respects and distinctions.

There are four great points of the Christian Belief: The Quak. dig up the root
of al Christianity in the 4 great Doctrines thereof.


1. The Doctrine of the Father, Son and Spirit, and these they will not
distinguish but make all one, and all to be in man.

2. The Doctrine of the Fall, Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, etc.
and these are all in man by their Tenants.

3. The Doctrine of the Church, the Officers, Baptism, the Lords Supper, and
these (say they) are all invisible, and within man.

4. The Resurrect on, eternal Judgment, Eternal Life. Heaven and Hell, Angels,
Devils, and these their Professions and Printings proclaim to be in Man also:
yea, so within him that they are only within him, and that without Interline
"man" R. W. Ms. Ann.
there is no God, no Christ, no Heaven nor hell, etc.

In Page 38. G. Fox brings in Tho. Collier, Tho Collier
saying [The Kingdom is not come, nor the refreshing from the Spirit of the
Lord.

G. F. Answers, which shows they are unconverted, gadding here and there,: And
Christ tells them the Kingdom was in them. And they that are not turned to the
Light which comes from Christ the Refresher whereby refreshing might come, and
so are not come to Repentance yet.

Reply, Who sees not that G. F. speaks not here of the Kingdom of Christ (so
often promised in the future and to come, and the time of refreshing, Act. 3.)
but that he cuts off all future hopes and expectations to come, and
appropriates and confines and fixes, and stakes down all to the present moment
of this vanishing life, and to what is (in this moment) in the minds of Men and
Women?

153] The Holy Scripture tells us, and Experience tells us that Hypocrites have
no solid peace and joy here, The Quak. hold no Heaven nor Hell to come
nor solid hope of joy or glory to come: and yet (to still the deen and clamor
of Conscience) abhorring the thought of a judgment and reckoning to come, they
foolishly and atheistically please themselves with a childish Dream of no
Heaven nor refreshing, no Hell nor torment but what is now within us.

Page 101 he brings in John Clapham, saying [To witness Heaven, John Clapham
and Hell, and Resurrection within is the Mystery of iniquity.] G. Fox Answers,
[which shows thou never knew Heaven in thy self nor hell there, nor Christ the
Resurrection and the Life, which they are blessed that are made partakers of
the first Resurrection, on them the second Death shall have no power, and the
Scriptures do witness Heaven within, and if Christ that was offered up, the
Resurrection and the life be not within thee thou art a Reprobate]

I Reply, If G. Fox would speak of Heaven, and Angels, and Hell, and Devils,
and of the Resurrection and Life to come, by way of allusion and similitude, or
by way of first Fruits or Taste of them, he might profitably do it, but to speak
of them in opposition to a rising again, an Heaven, an Hell, etc. to come, what
is it?

I say, what is it but to proclaim their Revolt from, and their Rebellion
against all the Christian Faith and Religion, and their wonderful hardening
against whatever is yet to come, either here or in the eternal State
approaching?

Page 214. He brings in some (nameless, saying, [To say Heaven and Glory is in
man, which was before man was, they are sottish and blind.] He Answers,
[There's none have a Glory and a Heaven but within them, which was before man
had a Being.]

Unto this I add, Thomas Pollard saying, The Pollard
for a perfection of Glory to be attained to on this side the Grave, I utterly
deny.]

G. Fox Answers [Where Glory is (in the least degree) it is in perfection,
The epicurian Philosophers and the Quakers one Sect.
and who have not Glory, and does ^ot attain to Glory on this side the Grave
they are in a sad condition: for the Saints rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, etc.]

I Reply, as the Swinish Epicures and Dives's of this World, what ever they
formally and loosely profess) have no solid hope of peace and joy to come after
this life, and therefore (like B^uit Beasts) practically confess it saying, (in
their hearts and Life) [154] let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye:
so do this cynical and doggid kind of Philosophers (the Quakers) profess
plainly (though some would cover it) no hopes of a rising of the Body but what
they have here, no hopes of a Heaven but what they have here, no hell but what
they (in their minds) have past through: no Judgment but what (as Saints) they
are now executing.

I know that some of the Quakers will not believe that G. Fox and others of
them deny the Resurrection, etc. but (if they will not willingly fish Change to
"err." R. W. Ms. Ann.
) let them read and consider these my Quotations from G. Fox, Ed. Burrowes and
John Stubs their Book in Folio, and let them also know that whatever they
profess against this that I have said, that is but horrible Hypocrisy and
Deceit, for they would not in all our Disputations depart one hair from those
horrible and monstrous Blasphemies, and brutish Reasonings in G. Fox and
Edward Burrowes. The 9th Position proved


We came to the ninth Proposal, the second in order to be debated at
Providence, viz [all that the Quakers Religion requires externally and
internally to make Converts or Proselytes, amounts to no more then what a
Reprobate may easily attain to and perform.]

I did not (the Father of Spirits is my holy witness) sling this in as a
Firebrand of Reprobation against either Teachers or Followers called Quakers:
it is true they do so against all that ever were not or are not or shall not be
in their Opinion, but my hope is, that many amongst these misled and wandering
Souls may come to Abraham's Bosom, etc. yet this I assert, that thousands and
ten thousands may be of their Religion, and may have gotten all that their
Religion requires or performs, yea, all that their Principles call for
outwardly or inwardly, and yet not be accepted but rejected from the holy and
gracious presence of God.

I told them that I had this notion from a man famous in his day (Mr. W.
Perkins) who having been a deboist young man in Cambridge after the call of God
to him he proved famous in Preaching and Writing, M^. Perkins saying of the
Papists and mine of the Quakers.
and (with a lame Club hand) he wrote admirably against the Papists, and
maintained that all Popery preached to the making of Converts or Proselytes
amounted to no more then what Reprobates may easily attain unto.

I say the same of common Protestants, and of the Quakers, they may have a
great measure of sorrow for sin: great resolu- [155] tions, great Reformations,
great Rejoycings, great and wonderful performances endure great persecutions,
endure burning of the Body in the Flames, and yet be far from the true
Protestant Religion either in the true Doctrine and Principles, or in the true
life and practice of it.

For the Foundation both of the Papists and Quakers Faith is laid upon the Sand
of Rotten Nature which they (both) only adorn and trim as the dead Carcasses
and Coffins with Roses and Lillies and other Flowers and Garlands, Neither
Papists nor Quak skill ^ow to pay Gods justice
their own penances satisfactions, Alms, Prayers, Fastings, Sufferings, which
are but Women's filthy Clouts, and Dung of Men and Beasts put into the balance
of Gods infinite Justice, instead of the infinite Righteousness and
Satisfaction of the Son of God: poor Souls, they know not that the whole
Creation (visible and invisible, seen and unseen, known and unknown, cannot
reach Gods most holy and inconceivable justice, for the least evil word or
thought. Neither of these (nor millions of Protestants, much less millions of
millions in one evil word or thought, then in all the sorrows and calamities
felt in this life, or justly feared in the li^e a coming.

With the Quakers it is known, that if a notorious Drunkard, The Character of a
Quaker
etc be convinced, and come to hearken to a Spirit within him, to say, Thou and
Thee, and think himself equal and above all his former Superiors, etc. he is
Justified, he is Sanctified, and so Holy that he cannot sin in Thoughts,
Interline "or." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Words, and from this high Mount looks down on all others (especially if
opposite) as Pharisees, Publicans, Cains, etc. Thus they pretend Repentance,
Faith, and a change of heart because they have changed their talk, their
Garments, etc. But,

1. I told them that true Repentance lay in a discovery of sin as sin, as
greater than the greatest filthiness in the world: no poverty, no shame, no
loss like unto it, etc.

2, In an utter inability to contribute one mite, What true turning to God is.
either from self,, or from the whole Creation toward satisfaction to infinite
Majesty and Justice for the least evil thought or imagination.

3. That as blessed John Bradford said to God: Lord thou art Heaven, I am Hell,
viz. that in the best natural Soul in the World, there is nothing but a Kennil,
an Hogstie, a den of Atheism, Murder, Theft, Fornication, Adultery, and all
kind of Wickedness.

156] 4. That I have not so much in me as to desire Deliverance, nor to be
sensible of any need of it.

5. That it is only mercy and rich free Grace that works in me or any Soul a
Sense of my Condition a Sense of Justice a Sense of Mercy. Jacobs Ladder of
true Christianity.


6. That it is Mercy only works a willingness, a new desire, new Affections
toward my Maker, toward my Ransomer, who paid his Blood, his Heart-Bloud, the
Blood of God to ransom and redeem me.

7. That in this work, Mercy not only works a Sense, a thirst after Pardon
and Peace with my Maker, but also after a Conformity and Likeness unto God.

8. Because I cannot reach this, the Mercy and Pity of God works in my Soul
a longing after God, and after the turning of the whole Soul unto God, and
after those seven Evidences of true Repentance, 2. Cor. 7.

9. This is in true Christian Repentance and turning of the whole Soul unto
God, viz. to receive every thought, every motion, every desire upon the account
of Mercy and Pity, as ever poor Dog received Crum or Bone under the Table.

Much of this I spoke publicly, as also that no Papist nor Quaker by their
grounds could get up this Jacobs Ladder, much less upon those higher grounds
and steps of casting off Self, of doing all purely for God, and in Gods eye: of
meekness and Mercy to other poor drowning Souls, of pure Love to God for
Himself for his Holiness, The Quakers and most men's Shipwreck
Mercy, Goodness, yea for his Justice: of quiet and patient and thankful
resting in his holy Pleasure, whatever he take from us or bring upon us.

I said and say, that neither the teachings of the Papists or Quakers will help
them to get up one Step of this heavenly Ladder; for by the utmost strength and
activity of Nature no man can advance and climb higher then to love God and
Christ and Heaven for it Self, and Self Ends, which is no more but Flattering
of God, base and dog-like Fawning and Hypocrisy.

I cannot call to mind ought that was opposed by my Antagonists against these
Considerations: The Quakers Min^sters and their Plea.
but John Stubs said, Do thou count our Religion an easy Religion, for my
part said he, we have not found it so easy to forsake all the glory and
pleasure of this world, to forsake wife and children etc. to go about the work
of the Lord in strange Countries, etc.

157] And W. E. said thou say our Religion is an easy Religion: For my part
said he I have not found it so, A close fight as to Religion
I have not found it so easy to forsake all the glory and honor and pleasures
of this World, and to expose our selves to hardships, to forsake our Wives and
Children, Friends and Relations, and to go about in strange Countries etc. And
W. E. further said in that thou say our Religion is an easy Religion, it is
a plain evidence that thou that talkest so much of Religion, and of the
Religion of the Quakers thou yet never knew what Religion is, with more to
this effect: and they (according to their wild spirit) insisted vehemently on
the wrong which I did them, and the People called Quakers: and that as for
themselves they were but a few, but the people called Quakers were a great
Body: they were many thousands all over England, they were many thousands in
London, as also in Barbados, and New England and Virginia, and other places.

I replied, that my time would not give me leave as they knew, to say much to
their greatness and number, The easiness of the Quakers Religion
yet I said their Religion like the Papists, was easy and agreeable with
Nature, they had the wind and tide of natural corruption to join with their
spirit, which knew this well enough.

1. It was easy to persuade the Quakers to change one foul Spirit and Devil
for an other, One Devil changed for another, yea sometimes one for seven
a Devil more gross and ugly, for a Devil more refined painted and gilded:
their pride in Clothes and fantastical Fshions, to pride in self conceit and
fantastical Opinions, their Drunkenness and Gluttony, with Wine and Flesh to
Intoxications, with high and proud Vapors: How many millions travel on the
broad way to Destruction, and yet prate of a strict and narrow Path? What
wonderful hardships do both Turks and Papists endure in their religious
Pennances? How do they macerate and whip themselves, even till the blood of
their tender Women has streamed down upon the ground from them? Yea how
zealously (in the cause of their Religion) have the very Jews themselves cast
away their Lives, as Spain and Portugal can witness.

Besides, I told them it was a poor lame thing to talk of numbers when the
Council of the only Wise was so clearly revealed concerning his Little Flock,
opposed to the vast and monstrous Herds both of civilized and wild Nations.

158] I put them in mind of the innumerable multitudes that followed after that
stupendous Cheater Mahomet, The Quakers simple boast of numbers
even thirteen parts of the world, divided into thirty, as very knowing
Cosmographers or Describers of the World have computed. And if so be that the
Pope, and Church of Rome be the eight Head, the great Whore that sits upon many
Waters, Kingdoms and Nations, what a poor Slut is the Quakers Fancy compared
with the Baals Priests, the Romish Proselites; the Beast whom the whole world
wonders after?

3. Again it is to me and may be to all men, wonderful that since the Religion
of the Quakers is so easy etc. that ten thousands more of people in old and
new England, Scotland, Ireland and other parts, have not lifted themselves
under this new Mahomet, pretending so much from the Dove from Heaven as Mahomet
did.

It Is true G. Fox and Foxians, The carnal weapons
pretend the two horns of the Lamb, and that their weapons are not Iehues nor
Baals Priests, but that they have forsaken all Carnal Weapons: but this I shall
show to be an horrible Lie when I come to the last Position.

The Devil and the Papists and the Quakers know that the Quakers only want a
Sword to subdue as many Proselites as either Mahomet or the Pope has done. The
Quakers some prate subtly, others childishly against Carnal Weapons, Carnal
Weapons etc. but I shall show (if God please) in my 14th. and last Position,
what a Devil of Pretense this is.

At present the Devil knows they want but a Sword (not Hearts nor Hands nor
Principles) whereby to subdue as ma^y Proselytes as the Pope or Mahomet has,
and literally and materially thrash the Mountains with Flails of iron, and make
the Nations turn (in an easy Hypocrisy and Dissimulation) Dissembling
Quakers. I wonder and adore the Councels of the Eternal, that any of these
three should be Cheated by this spirit.

First, Any of those truly fearing God; for their Principles spirit and
practices being so notoriously opposite to the meek and patient Spirit of true
Purity and Holiness, The Quakers Spirit far from purity and Holiness.
and evidencing them to be lead by a dumb and dogged Spirit. 1. Their high and
shameless Pride and Vapouring is notoriously known, of which in the next
Position. 2. Their mouth full of Cursing and Railing above any or all that
profess to march under the Christian Name and 159] Colors. 3. They spit not
out their Venom so fiercely against any as against the most conscientious
Preachers and Professor of the Protestant Faith, as appears all along in this
railing of Fox in Folio against them.

4. They easily fall in with openly profane and ungodly persons, and with
carnal and lukewarm Laodiceans, The Spite og the Quakers Spirit
who can swim with the tide, sail with every wind. If they can but say Thee and
Thou etc.

5. It is wonderful how their spirit (professing to be Protestants) can so
wickedly strike in with the bloody spirit of the Papists, against the Witnesses
and Martyrs of Jesus, compiled by that heavenly I. Fox. in the Book of Martyrs
which this bloody spirit (in James Purnels Watcher) upbraidingly calls [Your
Record] as if it were none of theirs, nor the bloody Papists, against whose
bloody practices under their Popes, and the old proud Romans, the Roman Gods
and Emperors, that heavenly Book shows how those heavenly Martyrs or Witnesses
over came by the Blood of the Lamb, the word of their Testimony, and not loving
of their Lives unto the Death.

6. That most Savage and worse then Indian Spirit of their stripping their
women stark naked, and so to enter into the streets and Assemblyes of men and
youths, which Piety Christianity and common Womanhood and Modesty abhor to
think of.

Secondly. As I wonder how any godly Soul, so how any Learned Soul, who has
studied the primitive Copyes of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, The ignorance
of the Quakers
can yoke with such rude Bablings and Repetitions of simple ignorant Praters.
It Is true the Lord Jesus and his Ambassadors were not all traind up as Paul was
at the feet of Gamaleel, yet had they before the whole World the miraculous
effusions of Fiery Tongues, and heavenly Oil upon them, which these poor
Simpletons ridiculously like Puppets in a Show pretend too. Beside, the Commons
among the first Christians were as learned if not more then our primest
Academians, the Hebrew being their Mother Tongue, and the Greek and Latin
familiar, by the Greek and Roman Conquests over them, all which Helps the most
of the Leaders of the Quakers want, only pretending to understand supernatural
and miraculously (in a trice and immediately) what is to be gotten by honest
and faithful labor and industry, the holy will and mind of God from the true
Original Copies.

160] Thirdly, I do admire that any sober, modest Woman (made so by nature, and
much more by Grace (should ever dare to come into their Assemblies: The
abominable Spirit of the Quakers nakedness
it is certain that the Ranters is a Sister or Daughter of them: though they
quarrel, and fight, and scratch one the other: The Ranters more plainly
(according to their Principles make the Nakedness of Men and Women, a part of
worship unto God, unto which they say they are restored by Christ Jesus the
second Adam. This Adamites Foul spirit is no New-come spirit, I have know nit
almost sixty year, and what a motion was made and urged by some (whom I can
name) for Plantations in warmer Countries, where they might practice that
Ordinance of God viz, Of Nakedness of men and women in Gods worship.

These our Adamites are led by a more Savage and Barbarous, and Monstrous
Spirit, the which under the vizird and mantle of Religion deceives them, and of
being a sign to others: And this very brutish practice have kept some Women
(too much inclined to them) from falling into their filthy puddle, and of
returning some which were left by Gods Justice to go too far amongst them sure
we are the holy spirit of God (all along) abhors the appearance of uncleanness,
Quakers driven on by the old Spirit of the Adamites
and commands the vailings of Women (especially in Christian Meetings)

I have been too long upon the easiness of their Religion, and of the agreement
of it with corrupt and rotten Nature which slides into it as easily as Brooks
and Rivers slide and run down into the Ocean.

There be two other causes of falling into false Religions or ways of
worshipping God.

1. Hope of Gain, which was the Sechemites Bait: (the sweet Music propounded
by Nebuchadnezzar.) etc.

2. The fiery Furnace, etc.

These moderate times have not driven the Quakers to bow down to their Spirit
for fear of persecution, and the fiery Furnace but Satan knew well enough that
the Corruption of Nature, The rising of the Quakers
and the hope of Gain and Glory would cheat to purpose (as all may see it has
done:) Satan knows that some have a moving and traveling Spirit, and cannot
rest in a sedentary or quiet life:) Some are of a rising, aspiring Spirit
(though neither from Birth nor Breeding, nor abilities) and therefore cry down
all Honor or respect to be given to any (but themselves) some are false and
[161] rotten in their Profession, and ready to fall and tumble when any strange
wind of Temptation blows upon them.

7. Some may be Sincere and upright to God in the Root, but Weak, and not so
rooted in the Holy Scriptures, as the Disciples themselves, who wondered for a
time what the Rising from the dead should mean, Diverse Sorts suffered by God
to fall into the Quak Ditch.
and had need of their Lord and Masters Take heed and beware of the Leaven of
the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Sadduces, etc. Some truly fear God, but have
neglected the purity and chastity of Gods holy Worship, and have reserved in a
weak Conscience a liberty of playing the Whore against a jealous God and
Husband.

But generally they that are taken by the Quakers Bait are such as never loved
Christ Jesus in Sincerity as the Scripture speaks, neither within nor
without, and therefore sucked in Nicolds and Nailors, and Foxes dreams of a
Christ, within them opposite to Christ without: But especially for Male and
Female Protestants.
of a Christ a Light a Spirit within, which had no Humane Body, or if he were
humane, or a man they know not now what is become of him.

The Lord Jesus tells us that some will plead with him at the last day, that
they have heard him Preach, that they have been at his Table, that they have
prophesied themselves, cast out Devils in his Name, and in his Name done many
Wonderful things: should not this make every Soul that calls it self
Christian, startle and look about them, especially when they hear Christ Jesus
say, depart from me I know you not ye workers of Iniquity.

I told the Quakers that their Theora John pretended to write after the Spirits
Dictate, a volume in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Arminiack, etc. which he confessed
he understood not: what if it should please Gods infinite Wisdom, to suffer the
Quakers or others to speak and understand all Languages, to work great
Miracles, yet if they come under the Note Christ gives them, of Workers of
Iniquity, they fulfill the terms of my Position, and prove but False and
Reprobate.

This is the true and infallible distinguishing Character between the true
Legitimate and the Bastard and false Christian: The great distinguishing
Character of true and false Pretenders
The soul of the True is broken for Sin, as Sin, as opposite to God, as filthy
in his eye: The soul of the False is broken for Sin as bringing temporal Loss
or shame, or pain, and beside temporal, Eternal. The soul of the true, is broke
off from Sin, from the least Sin, [162 from the appearances of sin from the
occasions of Sin, from the thought of Sin as worse then all the Afflictions of
this life, or the Torments of Hell to come. The soul of the False, has secret
Friendship and Correspondence with Iniquity (as Church-Papists with Popery etc)
in the secret chambers and Closets of the heart, at which they willingly wink,
and to find it (when they are put to it, yea and seem to do it) they are
willingly remiss and negligent.

Hence it was a famous Principle of the first New-English Reformers, viz. to be
Christianly careful that their Members gave Christian Evidence, (so far as
godly eyes of Charity could reach) of the truth of their Conversion and turning
unto God, which for ought I know is not changed by their Successors.

It is dolefully true that many seemingly Elect, prove Reprobate, and many
truly Elect fall into many great Sins and Sorrows. How black and doleful then
is their Condition (such as the Papists the Quakers and others) whose Religion
Principles and Practices, arise no higher then what a Reprobate may attain unto.

We came to the tenth Position, The 3d Position debated at Providence.
(the third in order to be discussed at Providence) which they read out of
their paper, viz. That the Popes of Rome do not swel with; and exercise a
greater pride then the Quakers have expressed, and would aspire unto, although
many truly humble Souls may be captivated amongst them.

I have here two mighty Fields to expatiate and walk in, Two great Competitors
the Popes and Foxians.
viz. The pride of Christ Jesus his pretended triple-crowned Vicar, and the
pride of the new Papists pretending to be Christ himself: of which the holy
Spirit speaks, There is a Generation, oh how lofty are their eyes and their
eye lids are lifted up? In public Discourse I knew I was but to take a short
turn of a quarter of an hour, I am now at more liberty of inserting what I
intended, but was forced to abridge wlth all possible brevity at that time.

I told them there was a pride in outward and external things, in Parentage, in
Person, in Beauty, Strength, Wit, Aparrel, Houses, Money, Shipping, Land,
Cattle, Offices, Relations, etc. this I now past by: All these (like Diogenes
on Platoes carpets) the Quakers say they tread on etc.

There was 2. the devils pride, Spiritual pride the devils pride
and the devils Condemnation, a pride in Spiritual Knowledge, spiritual Gifts,
spiritual Privileges and Excellencies: This was the Devils Break-neck, and
will be [163] of the Popes and Quakers, and of all that aspire to the Eternal
power and Godhead; for God or they must fall to all eternity.

I named then diverse Parallels between the Popes and Quakers, I will now name
all I can remember I named, and will name some more at this present,

First, The Popes have exalted themselves above all that is called God, The
Popes and Quakers pride compared
above all Civil powers, Kings and Princes, riding upon their backs, disposing
of their Crowns, making them lead their horses, hold their stirrups, kiss their
toes, yea lie down under their feet bodies and souls, and submit their neck to
this abominable foot of pride, as the Scripture calls it.

As to the Quakers they know it is not yet time to put on the Lions and the
Eagles, but the Sheeps and the Foxes Skin: but no man need question that if God
should please to let loose the Quakers spirit to the full length of its tedder,
The Quakers host of their number.
as he has done that of the Popes, the spirit of the Quakers would scorn to
come behind the pope: For who sees not how at the first, fledging and creeping
out of the Shell how they boast and vapor of their numbers? We (said W. E. to
me in public at Newport) are a great People, many thousands in England, many
thousands in London, besides Virginia, Barbados, N-England and other places:
what would they say and do if they had the popes Universality, and could boast
of the many Waters, Peoples, Nations, Tongues and Multitudes upon which the
Whore sits?

Beside, W. E. (a man fit to make a Bonefacius or a Hildebrand) John Stubs also
though of a more prudent and moderate spirit) was up with the same boasting of
their Numbers, and all of them are ready to cry up their Diana whom all Asia
and the world worshippeth. But,

2. In their first creeping (like Hercules out of the Cradle, The audncious and
impious faecs of the Foxians
how does this Spirit dare the Spirits of Kings, and Keyfars, and Popes
themselves (under the pretense of Translations and acceptations of words) to
Thou and Thee to the faces of mighty Monarchs? with what Brazen Faces have they
addressed the Royal presence of our Gracious Dread Sovereign, without either
bowing the knee, or baring the Head (signs of English reverence and civility)
and this out of an horrible and lying pretense, that Christ's amity (even in
Civil things) respects no man's person, that they may trample as Gods on all
mankind, etc.

164] 3. I can say what mine eyes and ears have seen and heard, Pope Edmond
commanding and silencing the Governor
viz. our Honored and Aged Mr. Nicholas Easton, Governor of this Colony under
his Majesty, offering to speak once and twice in our late Contests at Newport
(and no question would have spoke for the Quakers against me, yet) Pope
Edmundson put forth his hand imperiously toward the Governor, saying, Whist,
Whist, which whisting and silencing Language if they use to their Friends in
Authority, what will they say or Thunder to their Enemies if ever they get up
into the Papal Chair?

2. The Pope sits in the Temple of God, A second Parallel between the Pope and
Quakers
as over the Churches and Consciences of the Christian Name and Worship, giving
Canons and Decretals to be observed by all Christian People on peril of loss of
Earth and Heaven, etc.

And do not their "these" R. W. Ms. Ann.
new Popes (not regarding as the Apostles and Bereans the Holy Scripture) lay
on the common Quakers Consciences and Congregations their Decrees? it is true G.
Fox in his Book in Folio gives the immediate Spirit of Infallibility to all his
Saints: yet must they (in a ridiculous contradiction) sit still possessed with a
Dumb Devil, except some He or She Apostle come amongst them, who send word of
their coming to call the Country in many days before, and seem to have a
Command of their Diabolical Spirit more then other Quakers have, though they
(as I said before) in a ridiculous Contradiction) ascribe it unto all their
Saints and Quakers.

Thus did Humphrey Norton (a Pope) in his day in these parts) overtopping and
rating W. Brand at Newport, The Pope and Quakers usurp over the Souls of all men
he confirmed the Decree for the weekly Meetings not only on the first days,
but on the week days at Newport and Providence: he ordered their sitting and
departing Dumb, unless a He or She Apostle came amongst them, he left in
writing (which I can produce) an overthrow of all civil Order and Government
except in the hands of his Saints, entituling his Paper thus, the Saints Law
and the Sinners Law as G. Fox. his decree under the title of the Law.

G. Fox succeeds (as Pope) Humph. Humph Norton and G Fox compared.
Norton in these parts, and being angry with his Predecessor (as some Popes
have been) he lets loose the Dumb Devil and gives Liberty to all to speak as
the Spirit gives them utterance: this shows what a lying Spirit of Unity they
boast of (such an one was in Nailors business) though they most proudly deny
Unity to all but to themselves, as [165] the Papists do: G. Fox. also gave
forth his Decree of loosing them from that brutish and doggid Behavior which
W. Brand and Humphrey Norton left them in, and by Word and Example commanded
them to be more sociable and manlike, so that many of them will speak in
Salutations, and show some reverence by bowing the Heads, G F. a subtler Fox
then. Hum. Norton.
or uncovering it, as Fox himself did after his Sermon at Providence,
uncovering his Head and bowing to the People, and passing through the midst of
them (his Hat in his hand) with much respect and civility. And he blames those
(as I hear) which violently and madly have flung themselves upon unnecessary
temptations and dangers: whence follows (in the eyes of the whole World) that
either the latter or the former Spirit was not Gods, and perfect, and the
Spirit of Unity of which they childishly so crake and vapor, as the chiefest
Flower in their Crown of Pride.

3. The Pope lifts up himself as God over the Holy Scriptures: A third parallel
between the Pope and Quak.
He is the sole Judge and Interpreter of them, and the sole decider of all
controversies in Religion about the expounding of them: yea, he has power to
dispense with Peter and Paul, etc. yea, what Christ and God can do that gave
forth Scripture, that can the Pope their Lieutenant do: hence all this
Dispensations of Oaths, of Marriages, etc.

Do not the Quakers also tread this Holy Scripture, this inestimable Jewel of
Gods Writing and Book under their proud feet, Both Papists and Qukers their
Pride above the Scriptures
as formerly I noted upon the fourth Position of their not owning the Holy
Scripture? Do they not (upon the point) say that they made, they wrote and gave
out the Holy Scripture? and though in our late Conference they said they would
be tried by the Scriptures, yet (as the Papists) they admit no Interpreter but
themselves, for the Spirit within them they say gave forth the Scripture, and
is above the Scripture, and both they and the Papists have said that there
would be no loss if they were gone out of the World, for the Papists say their
Traditions, and their infallible Spirit would supply the loss: and the Quakers
say the Scriptures is within them (in effect) they say that all that they do
and say is Scripture: so far are both Papists and Quakers from a Christian and
Candid Profession of being tried by the Holy Scripture: that they most Horribly
and most Hypocritically trample it under their proud feet.

166] 4. These Romanists or Proud ones (as the Hebrew signifies) both Papists
and Quakers most insultingly lift up themselves against the Servants and
Children of God all the world over that bow not down to their Images: The Pope
aad Quakers horrible revilers Slanderours and cursers of the Righteous
be a Soul never so humble and penitent, never so holy and mortified, believe
the Scriptures, etc. and give his life for the truth of of them, yet he is
damned if he believes not the Pope to be the head of the Church: and say not
the Quakers the same of all that believe not in their pretended Lights: your
Repentance is nothing, your Holiness nothing, your Zeal, Praying, Preaching,
Fasting, Sufferings nothing: and they think they have reason to say so, because
you believe not in the true Christ, and therefore you are in Cains Nature, in
the Satanical Delusion, Reprobates, etc. so that all the blessed Souls under
the Alter calling for vengeance against the shedders of their blood the Roman
Emperor, or since the Roman Popes, they are all branded with a black cole of
damned Souls and Reprobates by G. Fox, because they professed, preached and died
for a Christ without them though that Christ without them dwelt in their hearts
(Ephesians. 3.) by believing and for his sake they loved not their lives to the
Death.

I told them that the Pope and they were one in the great point of the
Infallibility: The 5. parallel
they both pretended the Spirit of God as did the Apostles, etc. but I have
proved their pretense is as true as that of Apollo's Worshippers, by whose
Priests the Devil gave Oracles (Extripode) from their threefold stool, The
infallibility of the Popes and Quakers Oracles
and that so subtly and cunningly that whatever Oracle or Voice it was, and
whatever the event were yet the Devil would save his own: Apollo should be the
true God of Wisdom, and Apollo's Priests true Prophets.

At last when Christ came Apollo being consulted and failing to give answer,
the Devil was forced to answer that there was an Hebrew Child borne that stopped
his mouth: I am sure this Hebrew Child (the true Lord Jesus Christ) has often
also stopped the mouths (in one sense) of Pope and Quakers, for their
Predictions have not come to pass, (though some which the Devil could guess at)
have: and he will shortly stop their mouths forever.

It was truly said of (that long eighteen years hatching) Devilish Junto of
Trent, The Holy Spirit in a Cloakbag at the Council at Trent
that the Holy Ghost, (that is the Popes Holy Ghost) came every week from the
Pope at Rome, etc. to his Legates at Trent, in a Cloak-bag: and do not G. Fox
his Books [167] and all their writings declare for their corrivality and
competition with the Pope for this their pretended Holy Ghost: The Pope and
Quak the two great pretenders and corrivals for the pretended Holy Ghost
do they not upbraid all other Ministers and People for being out of the
infallible Spirit: Do they not say their Ministers and their Commissions are
invisible because immediate and infallible? do they not assign this to be the
cause of all the Sects and Divisions among the Protestants, because they have
not the infallible Spirit as the Quakers have?

Here (as I remember) John Stubs stood up and alleged that place in 1 John 4.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, because he has given us of his Spirit.

And again, you have the unction and know all things. And W. Edmondson
boastingly, and proudly said, that they had the same immediate and infallible
Spirit which the Apostles had, and that John and Peter were but their elder
Brethren.

Unto which I answer, The Quak pretending to be Apostles
Peter I know, and John I know, but who are you? For 1. They were Eyewitnesses
of the Lord Jesus his Life and Death and Resurrection. 2. They were immediately
endowed with fiery Tongues, and fiery hands to preach in all Languages, and to
pen from Gods mouth his holy word and Pleasure and to work real Miracles, not
metaphorical ones only (as G. Fox said at Providence the Quakers did, F F his
Counterfeit mirrcles
that is open the eyes of the Blind by Conversion etc.) I added that it might
please the infinite Wisdom of God to send higher Pretenders to Apostleship then
the Quakers, who should speak all Tongues Interline "and." R. W. Ms. Ann.
do Miracles: But as Gods Servants had a Rule Isa. 8. the written Law and
Testimony, and were not to believe their Dreams though they came to pass,
Deuteronomy. 13. So have Gods Servants now, viz. The Doctrine of Christ Jesus both
concerning Faith and Order, and to strive earnestly for the Faith once
delivered.

The Pope like Baalam says, A 6 Parallel between the Pope and the Quak.
he is the Mouth of God: whom he blesses, they are blessed, and whom he
curses etc. therefore sends he his Curses like Thunderbolts, yea among Kings
and Kingdoms in other Nations, and our own as K. Henery 8th. K. Edward. 6th.
Queen Elizabeth experimented etc. and is there any People bearing the name
Christian, so like the pope their Father as these, whose Mouth (says David) is
full of Cursing and Bitterness, like Floods out of the Dragons Mouth, and
firebrarnds arrows and Death crying out against the most Humble and Con- [168]
scientious Cain, Saul, Judas, Viper, Serpent, Reprobate Dragon, Devil (yea one
of their Shee-Apostles, Devil, Devil, Devil, all at once to one that opposed
her amongst us) and such foul stinking exprefsions (like the Quakers in London)
about the Dung of Mankind, that modesty especially the bashfulness and modesty
of Women would have been far from.

A seventh is that great point of horrible Pride in both Pope and Quakers, A 7
parallel between the Pope and Quakers
exalting the Dung and Dirt of their own Qualifications, Excellencies, Graces,
Labors, Fastings, Satisfactions, Believings, Suffering as a price and
satisfaction to Gods Justice, as a Merit or Desert for the pardon of their sin,
for though they both Sophistically and Hypocritically mention the Blood of
Christ; yet they count the business of this Christ (as the Pope said) but a
Fable, and indeed and truth through the Pride of their high spirits they think
God is beholding to them: I have spoken to this already, 8 Parallel as to the
sinless condition of the Quakers
and of that devilish Pride of their being without sin: yet in this Doctrine of
perfection the Quakers exceed the Doctrine of the Papists: for generally the
popes attribute this purity but to some of their rare Saints. And 2. Generally
the Popes themselves confess themselves to be sinners. 3. They give respect and
civil honor to all estates, although in Spirituals and Civills too they
overtop them: But the high and lofty Devil of the Quakers pride transcends all
this: G. Fox makes all his Saints born of God, that (literally expounded) they
cannot commit sin; yea, G. Fox tells us that the Saints (that is his Foxians)
are as holy and perfect as God, not only like to God in quality, but in
equality also. They have the fullness of the Godhead in them bodily. G F his
proud Blasphemy as to God himself
That the mystery of godlinefs is God manifest in their flesh! Hence he says
there is no distinction between God and Christ, and the Spirit and themselves.
Hence it follows, that they are the Father, Son and Holy Spirit (which by
Devilish Chemistry) they can prove: and that they are the Three that bare
Record in Heaven, and the Three that bare Record in Earth: The Scripture is
within them: They made it, and all that they say and do is Scripture, what they
say God says, what they advise God advises, what they do God does, etc.

It is true, this is not believed (no not by some Novices among them but this
and more, many of their lying Foul mouths and Books express, which may make a
Soul that is truly humble to quake and [169 rend his heart at such Blasphemy, H
B the first Perf^ctist in these parts, and most notorious for Imperfections.
the first Perfectist in these parts was one H. B. who came from Boston to
Providence, who affirmed that what he spoke God spoke, what counsel he gave God
gave, etc. It pleased God to leave him (though a subtle man) to ridiculous
Folly amognst us, and at Barbados and London since, to worse practices: as
commonly God punishes such height of Pride even in this present life before
Death seize upon them.

I remember while we were declaring their proud Disrespect to all men, John
Stubs said, That it was their practice to pay tribute to Caesar, and to give
Honor to whom Honor belonged. And I answered to this effect, that it was
against their Principles and practices to show respect to any man's Person in
the World. As for tribute they paid none but what necessity and policy forced
them to, and notoriously backward here: But they knew that I and G. Fox knew,
and all the world might know out of Fox his Writings, that the Quakers are the
Higher powers, the Dignityes, the Most High God, The difference amongst the
Quakers as to these things.
and ought to have all Honor and Tribute paid to them by all the whole
Creation. It Is true there seems to be a Change and some relenting and Giving of
the Weather in G. Fox his own practice of Courtesy, and others from him: but
while they own what G. Fox has written, and that he writ it with a perfect
spirit: I say until they do make some Recantation or Retractation: or show the
Reasons why they do not, H. Norton who keeps more plainly to his Principles is
to windward of them, and the Foxians do but strip themselves naked to be more
derided and scorned as the more notorious Iuglers and Dissemblers.

We came easily (with their Good Will) to the 4th. The 4th of the seven last
Positions.
Position of the latter seven, which they read out of the Paper (as willing to
be out of there pain) viz, The Religion of the Quakers is more obstructive and
Destructive to the Conversion and Salvation of Souls of People than most of
Religions that are at this day extant in the World.

I said for the proof of this it was requisite to take a short view of
Religions and Worships in the world. We knew that the Sons of Men were justly
divided all the world over into two Sorts,

First, The Indians Religion.
The wild and Pagan, whom God has permitted to run about the world as wild
Beasts all this great fourth Part of the World, and in some of the other three.

170] They acknowledge a great supreme God and Deity, Maker of all things, yet
they acknowledge (as other famous Civilized Nations formerly have done) that
there be many other Petty-Gods and Deityes in Heaven and Earth, yea within
their own Bodies, yea whatever is extraordinary, excellent or strange to them,
they are presently apt to ascribe a Deity unto it, though it be but Beast,
Foul etc. A Deity or higher Power acknowledged by Indians.
and say it is a God. It is commonly known that as their garments hang loose
about their Bodies, so hangs their Religion about their Souls: So that (to my
knowledge) they are so far from hindering any to come to God, that when they
have seen the grave and solemn Worship of the English, they have often said of
themselves and their own, that they are all one Dogs in comparison of the
English.

The second sort of men are the Civil brought to Clothes, to Laws etc. from
Barbarism: these also the infinite Wisdom of God have pleased to leave to
variety of ways of Worshipping the Heavenly Majesty,

Amongst others we find four most known and eminent,

First, The four chief Religions of the World.
The Jewish Worship famous from Gods own appointment by Moses etc. 2. The
Turkish, famous for spreading from Mahomet to most of thirteen parts of thirty
in the World.

3. The Popish, famous for spreading over Europe and other western parts of the
world. 4. The Protestant famous for so wonderful a Revolt and Separation from
the Popish. All these four profess one God and supreme Deity: but they differ
in two things, 1. In the Prophet or Means by whom God speaks to man; the Jews
cry up Moses, the Turks Mahomet, the Papists the Pope, the Protestants Christ
Jesus in the Scriptures,

The second great difference is in the Form of Worship, which every one of
these four great Parties practice in various and different ways as they are
persuaded.

Our selves the Protestants are divided into two Parties,

The first is entitled Episcopal and Presbyterian in Parochyal or Parishional
Assemblyes.

The second is Separate from those National and Parochyal Assemblyes, some more
some less, and those are now known to be First, the People called Independants.
2. The people called Baptists.

We that pretend the Christian Name against the Jews and the [171] Mahumetans,
The religious Diff^rences among the Protestants
we mainly differ, 1. In matter of Doctrine, as Repentance, Faith, etc. 2. Of
Worship, Discipline etc. And we generally agree, that as the Mahumetan and
Jewish Worship have little in them to tempt a Soul to turn into them compared
with the Christian, so those Christians that differ each from other in point of
Doctrine and Worship both, as the Papists and the Quakers do to be farther
from the truth of the Profession of Christ Jesus, and more obstructive and
destructive to the Souls of men then the other parties; yea and the Papists not
so much as the Quakers, who wildly profess all Ordinances and Ministers to be
invisible, and yet are hypocritically and ridiculously found to be as visible
and open as any.

If the true Foundations of Repentance and Faith be cast down it is in vain to
talk of saving of Souls, Fundamental Differences.
it is in vain to talk of Worshipping of God. The Quakers (for all their
craking of Quaking and Tremhling) their way is more easy of Worshipping God,
and of bringing persons to their worship of God, then the way of Jews or Turks
or Papists, who to my knowledge take more pains in Religion then do the common
Protestants: I confess they all do but paint and guild over natures old and
rotten Posts, only the real Protestants have and profess the greatest care of
any in the world for true Faith and Repentance.

The Quakers came not near that care of N-England (I am sure at first) for the
personal true Repentance and Holiness of their Church^s and Congregations: For
it is notoriously known, that if persons notoriously Deboist, come but to
acknowledge a God and Christ within them, that is in English, The Quakers easy
Conversion and Churches, not comparable to the way of N-England.
that themselves are God and Christ, and can practice Thou and Thee, and Cheek
by Ioll with all their Betters, and can rail at and curse all that oppose them,
and can come and bow down to a dumb Image and Worship without any great
business of Contrition and Brokenness and Godly Sorrow, they are enrold and
canonized for Saints and Gods etc. they are free from Sin, born of God and
cannot sin, they now sit upon the twelve thrones and judge the unbelieving Jews
and Gentiles in their heavenly places.

The wound lies here (as it is with Papists, Arminians, and indeed with all
mankind) in the soothing up and flattering of rotten Nature, from whence (from
within the Lord Jesus tells us) proceed all the rotten and hellish Speeches and
Actions.

172] I told them it was in this case as it was with Kings and Princes, there
were two great Enemies that haunted the Palaces of Kings and Princes. 1.
Traitorous Spies etc. 2. Traitorous Flatterers.

Just here it was (as I remember) that W. Edmundson stopped me saying, Flatterers
of Kings
thou have here been telling us Stories of Turks and Jews, but what is that to
thy Charge against us? we are none of those that flatter Kings and Princes, we
deal plainly with all men.

I said they mistook me: for I did not say they slattered Kings, I used a
similitude only, viz. that as Flatterers, etc. of Kings and great men, were
their deadliest Foes, so such Religions and Doctrines as most slatter and sooth
up our rotten hearts and natures they are most dangerous and destructive to us:
I intended to add that the Quakers pretended to be as fine Flower sifted out
from the common Protestants, yea, The whorish Quakers, and whore of Rome.
from the Independants and Baptists, that Satan was too subtle for the
subtlest Foxes of them all, for he knows that by pretense he more easily and
dangerously conveys the Poison of exalting corrupt and cursed nature in the
room of true Soul-saving Humiliation.

I did say as the Whore of Rome deceived whole Towns, Cities, Nations and
Kingdoms with her glorious Trimmings, and her Golden Cup: so that the Painted
Quaker (as a Drunken Whore) should follow the Drunken Whore of Rome) drunk with
the blood of Jesus, etc.) for the obtaining of (the smoke of a Tobacco-pipe)
the Riches and Honor of this World.

There are two sorts of godly Souls caught up a while by the Devils Craftiness.

1. Weak and unstable (for there are Children, strong Men, and old Men in
Christianity.)

2 The unwatchful and secure. The Devil a roaring Lion
The holy wisdom of God discovers in Holy Scripture, what the Devil, that
Satan an old Serpent is, viz. not only a Roaring, but a vigilant Lion. David
(Gods beloved as his Name is) he fails in his managing of Government, therefore
the Devil stirs up Ioab and Achitophel to help (the grand Rebel) his Son
Absalom: and afterward Sheba, and all in wonderful Figures, in all Ages, an in
this our age and day.

A famous Jesuit prints it, that all the Religion in the World lies in
competition between the Jesuits and Puritants, etc. About [173] this time John
Stubs told me that they (and I say so do the Jesuits pretend to do) had left
the Glory and Pleasure of this world their Wives and Children, Friends and
Relations, to Preach the Everlasting Gospel; For the Woman had been 1260 years
42 months in the wilderness, and she was now come and coming forth, and they
were now preaching the everlasting Gospel, and therefore they advised me to
make haste and dispatch and not to hinder the Lords work.

I spoke what then I thought fit, The Quak pretenses to outgo all pretending
Preachers
and now add that the Pharisees, the Apostles, the Quakers and Jesuits do
compass Sea and Land: but the Pharisees, Jesuits and Quakers will be found at
last to be the Apostles Messengers, Heralds, Envoys, Ambassadors, and
Emissaries of Satan sent out from Hell to predicate the goodness of rotten
nature, hell and damnation, and that false and hellish Gospel (or good news) of
poor rotten Natures Righteousness, Satisfaction, Penances, and to the damning
of Souls, etc.

The Devil knows that after the witnesses have done their work against
Antichrist, True Preachers or messengers
and after their slaughters! the Lord Jesus will send abroad his Messengers to
other Nations (Jews and Gentiles) and New Jerusalem, or a new vision of peace
shall then come down from Heaven among the Sons of men: but for the present he
stirs up these Jesuits and Quakers (with brave titles and pretenses) like so
many Mahomets (under pretense of Diogenes treading on Platoes Carpets) to fish
for the smoke of this Worlds Sodom, and no doubt but the Quakers will use the
Sword as much as Mahomet or the Jesuits, under the cloak and colors of love
to Jesus and saving of Souls.

I confess that Charity hopes and believes all things, and yet I say, cursed is
that charity that puts out the eye of Reason, the eye of Experience, the eye of
true affection to Christ Jesus, his Father and his Wife to the Souls of his
followers, and the Souls of poor sinners Jews and Gentiles.

As to the saving of Souls, The Earthly and Heavenly Sword
it was a Thunder from the heavenly mouth of Christ Jesus. They that take the
Sword shall perish by the Sword: as if he should say, the Sword is not a saving
but a destroying Tool, in Soul-humbling, and Soul-saving: making worlds of
Hypocrites, but not true Protestants, true Christians and Followers of the true
Lord Jesus, and of his Father, and of his Holy Spirit.

174] The Spirit say the Quakers, why that's our Weapon! the Sword of the Spirit
the Word of God, why that's the word of God Christ Jesus our Weapon: So says G.
Fox and all our Fantasticks out of weakness and madness, not weighing what a
person the holy Records describe Christ Jesus to be, A great mystery amongst
Papists and Protestants
but as foolish Children and Anticks in the Lord Mayors shows, they cry out
Christ and the Spirit only for a show and color, I know it that the true Lord
Jesus his holy Father, and Holy Spirit is as odious both to Jesuits, and most
Papists and Quakers as the Devil, yea infinitely more then the Devil himself,
as with Gods help I have and shall make it as clear as the Noon days Sun.

O you considering Protestants, see you not how the Devil would rob you of that
Sword with which Christ Jesus overcame him [The Holy Scripture] under the
color and cloak of the Spirit in the mouths of the Quakers? A word to the
Protestants
how, if the Holy writings must yet live, why he has Fisher, and Stubs, and
Pennington, and Bishop, and others that skill Tongues, and yet own the blockish
Spirit of the Quakers: how if you blame the Popish Devil for a Blockhead, he
can puff up his Bladders the Jesuits, to a late wonderful swelling of Tongues
and Histories, and all kinds of Knowledge, as in Bellarmine and his Associate
and Followers and of late in those great Writers Petavius and Morinus.

The eternal Word, The mystical Farmers
and Son, and Sun of God the true Lord Jesus will more and more discover who
are his true friends, his true Loves (that love Alexander more than the King)
that are true Christians, true Jesuits, and that truly love and pity poor
Souls: he will discover who are the great Farmers, who having a mind to the
Farm themselves consult and say, come, this is the Heir (that is Christ Jesus
in his true Messengers) let us kill him: kill him with Tongue, and Pen, and
Sword, etc. the Inheritance of Heavenly and Earthly Glory shall then be ours,
etc. and to this end only they talk of Souls, etc.

We now descended to the fifth and sorrowful point of suffering which they
read, The 5th. of the last 7 positions
viz. [That the sufferings of the Quakers are no true evidence of the Truth of
their Religion.]

At the reading of this they told me, that although their Sufferings were great
in all places whither the Lord had sent them, yet they made not their Suffering
an Evidence of the truth of their Religion, and therefore I might have been
better advised then to 175] put this in among the rest of my Lies and Slanders
as not considerable, The sufferings of the Quakers
and now not worth the mentioning, etc.

I Answered, that I understood what they said, and I undestood mine own
affirmation also; and desired their patience also while I offered my Proofs to
two Particulars,

1. That in their Books and Writings etc. they do make their Sufferings a great
Evidence to themselves and others of the truth of their Way and Spirit.

2. This their Suffering is not valid as to the proof of their Religion, Way
and Spirit to be of God. So then they bid me prove it if I could.

I told them that I could find no Jews, Paul's and the Quak sufferings
no Papists no Protestants, that did so magnify and so exactly insist upon
their Sufferings as the Quakers did. It Is ^rue that Paul did more particularize
his Sufferings then other Saints in Scripture; but it was also true that they
were so exceeding great that Paul seemed a Nonesuch; but beside that it was
upon some great Insultings of the False Apostles against not only himself, but
against the Truth of Christ Jesus: neither of which is the Quakers case.
Beside, the Quakers Sufferings generally were not to be compared with Paul's,
and yet they set down such exact accounts of every hour in prison every Stripe
in Whipping, The Quak. sufferings in Hystory of G. Bishop recorded.
every pound lost: and this published to the world in print, as if it were a
Sign hung out with this Inscription, Lo people these are the Evidences of Gods
holy Truths, and Gods holy Spirit, of our Persecutors wickedness, and our
Christian Faith and Patience, who for his Truths sake can endure all this. I
said it was not rational to think, that men professing such high Wisdom and
Conscience, should declare such Lysts and Catalogues of Sufferings (as G.
Bishop does to the world, of the Quakers Sufferings in N. England, in his first
and second History) only in a childish Vapor, Ostentation and Vainglory, much
less in hopes of Reparation or any worldly advantage, either in England old or
new, Scotland or Virginia, etc. and therefore Reason persuades that these
Sufferings are held forth (as the holy Spirit speaks of the Sufferings of the
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) as a manifest Token of the righteous judgment of
God rendering Tribulation to their Persecutors, and Rest to themselves
suffering for the Kingdom of God.

As I remember, John Stubs said, they did not boast of their [176] Sufferings,
but bare them patiently for the Truths sake which they preached and professed.

I said I did not charge them to say in express terms, We have lost so much
outward Gain, Favor, Friendship, Worldly Advantage for the Name of Christ
within us, can you say the like for the Christ without you? We have endured
Imprisonments, Whippings, etc. have you done the like? only this I say, that as
all Religios Jews, Papists, Protestants etc. are confirmed in their
Perswations by their Sufferings, and do predicate them to others as Arguments
and Signs of the truth of their Doctrines, and of Gods presence and Assistance
with them: so do the Quakers and that with more Particular and exact Accounts
then most of all the rest have done.

I told them, I had observed much to this purpose in G. Fox and E. Burrowes in
the Book by me.

They bid me allege what I could out of them: E. Burrowes his Epistle quoted.
I took up the Book, and they theirs, I directed them to the 12th. Page of Ed.
Burrowes his large Epistle to G. Fox his Book in Folio where I read this
passage viz. And this we did with no small opposition and Danger: yea
oftentimes we were in danger of our Lives, through beating, abusing, punishing,
haling, casting over walls, striking with staves and Cudgels, and knocking down
to the ground: Beside, Reproaching, Scorning, Revilings, Hooting at, Scornings
and Slanderings, and all abuse that could be thought or acted by evil hands and
tongues, and often carried before Magistrates with grievous Threats, and
sometimes put in the Stocks, and whipped, and often imprisoned, and many hard
dealings against us, the worst that tongues or hands could execute, sparing
life. Of this all the North Countries can witness. And all these things are
sustained and suffered from People and Rulers because of our Faithfulness to
the Lord, and for declaring against the false Deceivers. For nothing save only
the hand of the Lord and his power, could have preserved us and carried us
through all this: neither for any Reward outward whatsoever, or advantage to
our selves would we have exposed our selves to sufferings, violence and dangers
which befell us daily. But the Lord was our exceeding great reward through all
these things, and kept us in the hollow of his hand, and under the shadow of
his wings, and gave us dominion in Spirit over all our enemies, and subdued
them before us: and though Rulers and People were combined against us, and
executed their violence and in- [177] justice against us, yet the Lord made us
to prosper and grow exceedingly in Strength, Wisdom and Number, and the hearts
of the people inclined to us, and the Witness of God in many stirred for us:
for to that in all Consciences, Words and ways we did commend our selves to be
known and approved.

Hereto they suddenly said, What can thou make of this, but that Edward
Burrowes said the truth, that the Sufferings of the people called Quakers were
very great, and that he acknowledged the powerful hand of the Lord toward them
in supporting and delivering them: But this was far from boasting or making it
any Evidence of the truth of their Religion and Principles.

I replied, I prayed them to consider why pious and conscientious Souls (as
they would be reputed) should give so large a Catalogue of their Sufferings.
The Quotation weighed.
2. Profess it was only for their Faithfulness to the Lord. 3. Declare that it
was the hand of the Lord that kept them, 4, That he only could do it: I said
the Weaving and inter-weaving of these Particulars, speak plainly that for
their Faithfullness to the Lord and his Truth in declaring and suffering for
it, the Lord had been faithful to them in supporting them and comforting them
in all these Sufferrings for his Name sake. Why should wise men use all these
words but to this end, of Evidencing their Faithfulness to God, and Gods
Faithfulness to them.

After some words had about these kind of passages in Ed. Burrowes and other of
their Writings, I told them that we must come to that ancient and true Maxim,
What true Suffering is.
Causa facit Martyrem, not the Suffering of Burning it self that is the
evidence of a true matter. I therefore told them that as it was in the case of
Signs Interline "and" R. W. Ms. Ann.
Wonders Deuteronomy. 13. though they be Signs which false Prophets give, which come
to pass, yet God commands his Children not to be moved from his written word,
and his holy revealed and recorded Ordinances and Institutions.

I told them that I had other places which I had turned down in Edward Burrowes
to produce; but these I had suppressed in my thoughts for expedition sake, and
would if they pleased pass on to my proof of my next Position, to this they
readily assented: but being now out of my Shackles of a quarter of an hour (to
which I winked to draw them on) I crave the Readers Patience and leave to hear
me say something now which then I could not say.

178] First. True Scripture Language.
To what I have said before of E. Burrowes insisting so largly on the
Sufferings of the Quakers, and yet my Antagonists denying them to make their
Sufferings an Evidence of their Truth, I present the Reader with a witness of
G. Fox his words in his Page 64, [And there is a Proof to thee that the Quakers
are sent of God who speak to thee of the Scripture right as they are] He that
reads the place shall see that G. Fox uses these words against his Opposite
Jeremiah Jews, because that his Opposite had said, viz. That the Word of God
was contained in the Scripture: and G. Fox checks him for it and says if he
had said [the word which it speaks of] he had spoken right etc. And this G. Fox
makes an Evidence of the Quakers being sent of God, that they only can speak
properly. How much more is what I have produced (and have much more to produce)
a Proof that they do roll their Souls upon their Sufferings as an Evidence and
Confirmation that they are sent of God?

2. It is wonderful what the Jews and Papists have suffered for their Lies
and Blasphemies: The wonderful Sufferings of Heretics
What a wonderful Story does Manasseh Ben-Isrel relate of a Noble man, a
Portugal, turned Jew, burned in Portugal for the Jewish Faith? What Devotion
and Zeal have many of the Popish Party shown at Tiburn? Sure it is that a
natural Valor and Magnanimity, a natural Melancholy and Stoutness, a natural
Pride and Vainglory will give wings which fire and Burning cannot scorch and
conquer.

3. I doubt not but that it is possible for not only Christians, but also Jews
and Papists etc. like Paul in his mad Conscience, to be zealous for his
Conscience, and to put others to death for their Consciences, and yet neither
of them to sin against their Consciences, but ignorantly as Paul did.

4. I believe that not only Paul, Great failings of Gods Children in this life.
and such as he, in Unbelief may so practice, but even the true Saints and
Children of God. He that shall ponder the Fathers Poligamy, the best Kings of
Judah suffering the High places, David's slaying Uriah, Asahs imprisoning the
Prophet, Peter's rash using the Sword, David's and Nathans unadvised Advise to
build God a Temple, the Disciples calling for Fire from Heaven, and shall see
cause to reprove the Quakers for their rash damning of others from whom they
have suffered. For,

5. As it is possible for Gods own Children to hold, and that [179] obstinately,
false Principles, so it is possible for other of Gods Children as obstinately
to afflict and punish those others to Death, and so bring Affliction and
Destruction one upon an other which is that the Devil aims at.

6. Because the Quakers do so abundantly glory in their Sufferers, and (in
comparison of them) slight the Saints under the Altar (in our Book of Martyrs,
as James Parnel impiously calls it) casting all that differ from them into the
Satanical Delusion, and Serpentine nature, as Fox does, Page 5. and 253. and
99. Who forbids to receive into their Houses, no not Kings and Princes, nor to
bid them God speed that are not in their Light. True and False Sufferers for
the Name of Christ.
I think it fit to observe at this Turn some Differences between true Sufferers
and false, both pretending the Name of Christ Jesus.

First, The Persons whom the heavenly man John Fox describes, they were men
and women known to be of holy and heavenly Spirits toward God, and of low and
meek Spirits toward all, yea their very enemies. I would I could say so of the
Quakers (though no question but a a gold Ring may fall into the Channel, The
Quakers described.
and Interline "a." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Jewel into the Dirt of worldly and Antichristian errors) But for the Quakers I
have cause to fear that generally they are Proud, ambitious, and Worldly-minded
Wretches. Some of them have literal Knowledge of the Scripture, and some
stirring Affections with the stony Ground, others with the thorny Ground have
suffered formerly, but the Cares and lusts of this world have drild them into
this way of Antichristian Worship. others are Fierce, Pragmatical* Discontented
etc. and they must travel and be Apostles to preach and bring in Proselites. I
Fox and G Fox their Martyrs the contrary causes of their Sufferings.


The Cause of John Foxes and G. Foxes Martyrs differ as much as Day from Night,
and Light from Darkness: For it is known that I. Fox his Martyrs or Witnesses
(those blessed Souls under the Altar) were slain for maintaining the Authority
and Purity of the Holy Scriptures as the revealed word or will of the Eternal
God against the Traditions and Inventions of men.

But G. Foxes Sufferers have generally suffered for their Childrens Baubles,
fantastical Traditions and Inventions, for setting up a Dream of a Light and
Christ within all Man kind, above the holy Scriptures, above the Son of God,
above all Earthly Dignityes, and all their Betters: endeavoring (with the
Pope) to trample all souls and Bodies under their proud feet.

180] 3. The carriage of these two Sorts of Sufferers differ as much as East
from West, and Heaven from Hell.

1. The ground of John's Sufferers was that which John so much writes of, viz.
love to the Heavenly Bridegroom, without which Paul slights burning it self:
Heavenly love carried on. G Foxes even felf, God and Christ and Spirit.
this appears in their wonderful Love to the holy Scriptures, (the
Love Letters of Christ Jesus) and unto all that loved Christ Jesus also. The
Quakers are known to be Fierce, Heady, Proud, Self-conceited, Stout, Bold, and
driven on by an Audacious and Desperate Spirit (which G. Fox and some subtle
Foxes with him have of late bla^^ed in H. Norton etc.) No question but some of
them have a notion of Wrath yet to come, and therefore rather then to endure
Hell Fire they will give up their lives to the Flames, others of them fast 40
days, Virgin love to God, etc.
and yet be far from true Virgin Love to the Son of God. A Virgin that loves a
man for Himself, will not slight his Love Letters, nor his Near Relations
(least of all abhor them, and sink and burn them as these Foxians do.

2. The carriage of I. Foxes Witnesses, though (in respect of Gods holy Truth)
it was courageous and gallant, yet their lowliness and humility did shine forth
gloriously also.

1. As to God, being more sensible of their sins then of their sufferings:
con^essing with many tears that although God did turn their sufferings unto his
Glory, The humility of Christ's sufferers
and although ungodly men (like Foxes and Wolves) hunted them like innocent
Lambs and Chickins) yet they had deserved and called for this Storm by their
unthankfulness for their former peace and liberties, by their drowsiness and
sleeping upon the Earthen bed of worldly Profits and Pleasures.

Contrarily it is known to all, that although sometimes the Quakers will say we
come in love to your Souls yet (the Quakers are far from confessing their sins,
Devilish pride
as having no more sin then God has, and (according to their Principles and
some of them say it) they can no more sin against God then God can sin against
them.

As to Men Christ's sufferers were meek, patient; respective, contented,
thankful.

But as the Quakers hearts have an insensible brawniness and hardness (like
frozen Rivers come over their hearts) in matters of God so as to men.

181] 1. Was there ever a People (Men and Women professing such an height of
Christianity) so fierce so heady, so high-minded and though generally not
hardened) so censuring, reviling, cursing and damning: and so savage and
barbarous as in the stark nakedness of men and women, etc.

2. As to Revenge, how patient, and pitiful, and praying for their Enemies were
I. Foxes Martyrs or Witnesses, The predictions of the Quakers
and G. Foxes, how spitting Fire and Brimstone? (witness the second part of N.
England judged by G. Bishop) because Christ in them is come to judgment)
wherein he pronounces Destruction to Bodies and Souls of N. England men,
saying in his Epistle, that their judgment lingreth not, nor does their
damnation slumber.

It Is true some of their Predictions have and may come to pass as do many also
of Conjurers and Witches, for the Devil knows the Complexion of persons and
things, and what is like to come to pass (as in Saul's case and in other events)
and still the poor Quakers (and other his Captive Slaves) with such Bables as
these. I told you what weather it would be, A blessed saying of blessed Mr. Dod.
I told you where the Wind would blow: I told you what would come to pass,] and
yet as blessed Mr. I. Dod used to say, though the Devil was up early, God was
still up before him: for the Proverb is here true, God has sent cursed Cows
short Horns: his infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness is pleased to put an Hook
into the Jaws of Satan: he shows himself the pitisui sparer and preserver of
men: When the Devil is a Fisher longing for troubled and bloody waters, yet God
has graciously proved many of the bloody prophesies of his waspish Prophets
and Prophetesses, (as I can prove) to be lying and false already.

We now descended to the thirteenth Proposal (the sixth to be discus'd at
Providence) which was read by them, The 13 position discusd.
and is this, viz. [These many Books and Writings are extremely Poor, Lame, and
Naked, swelld up only with High Titles and Words of Boasting and Vapor.]

I told them that I had not shunned (as in the presence of the most High) to
read any of their Books or Letters I could come at: but the truth is, I could
never pick out any Wheat (of solid, rational and heavenly Truth) out of their
heaps of Chafe, and Dreams, and Fancies of new Christ's, new Spirits, etc.

It is true that W. Edmund. said, that the Word of the Lord [182] was a Fire,
and a Hammer, etc. But I said the word they meant was but a painted Fire, and a
painted Hammer, and that never broke nor burned up sin as sin.

Let a man read the Works of the Papists, Lutherans, Arminians, The Quakers and
other Authors compared
and amongst our selves, the Episcopal and Presbyterian Writings: a man shall
have wherein to exercise his Judgment, Memory, etc. he shall have Scripture
proposed, Arguments alleged, yea he shall read Answers and Replies, whereby
to satisfy a rational Soul and Understanding.

But in the Quakers Books and Writings, Peter and Jude tells us (what I have
found) clouds high of an imaginary Christ and Spirit: high swelling words,
strange from the Holy Scripture Language, and all sober and Christian Writers
and Speakers.

Let Io. Chandlers Writings, and the Writings of Theora John (that Monster of
Delusion) be viewed, whose bodily Raptures, and frantic Writings of the
Quakers Principles, and of the Jews (in Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Arminiack
Writings (which he confessed he understood not) and let the rest of their
Writings be brought to the Touchstone, and see if an honest Goldsmith can find
ought else but the Dross, Dreams and Fancies, in stead of the solid Gold of
Heavenly Scripture.

I have read Nichols, and Nailor, and Howgel and Burrows, and Parnel, and
Farnworth, and Fox, and Dewsbury and Pennington, G. F. his Writing^ poor and
lam^.
and Whitehead, and Bishop, etc. And I could readily and abundantly prove my
position out of all of them, but my desire and intention was (as by my Paper to
G. Fox appears) to have made it good to G. Fox himself, and to all Christians,
how poor and lame, and naked G. Fox his writings are, who seems to be as
Pighius and Echius amongst the Papists, and as Bellarmine the greatest Writer
amongst them.

I told my Opposites I would therefore Answer this Bellarmine, G F his book in
folio considered
and I would not say Bellarmine thou lie: but I would by Holy Scripture show
G. Fox and his deluding Foxians, how the old Fox the old Serpent was too crafty
for them all, and had brought them and their Followers to the brim of the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone.

First. then I said, let who will that understands true English, and are able
to read and write true English, (though he know no more) take G. Fox his Folio
Book in hand, and tell me whether [183 (through his whole Book) he writes like
an Englishman: And though he upbraids all his Opposites scornfully and
ridiculously (as poor Children that know not the Bible nor their Accidence in
saying you to a singular, etc.) whether in many scores of places in his Book he
confounds not the singular and the Plural: I confess when I urged this in
public, my Opposites desired of me no proof of this out of Foxes Book and
therefore (remembering my quarter hour Glass) I fpared Quotations, but now
(through Gods patience and my Readers) my Tedder being longer, I shall give one
or two brief Proofs and Instances.

In page 282. in G. Fox his second Answer he says, [You where you are sees him
nor] where it should be the Plural see him not, if this Proud Bruit had known
either his Accidence or the Bible.

In Page 300. he says [The Scriptures is able to make wise unto Salvation]
which should be are able, etc.

In Page 16. [The Churches was to hear] for, were to hear.

In Page 110. G F his ignorance of common English
[As thou doth] which should be, as thou do: And abundance more of this Boys
English all his Book over, which I cannot impute to his Northern Dialect
(having been so long in the South, and London, and read and answered (as he
dreams) so many English Books: nor to the Printer (the faults of that kind
being so numerous) but to the finger of the most High, and most Holy, whose
property it is, and therefore delights to run thwart and cross the shins of
proud and insulting Souls and Spirits.

2. I observe throughout his Book a Devilish Black Line of despising those
that are Good (as the Scripture speaks) He counts none Godly but himself and
his Foxians: yea there is no God, no Christ, no Spirit, but what is in him and
them feelingly, though they say he is in every man and woman in the world, and
Christ Jesus the Sun of Righteousness, Horrible contradiction
and the Holy Spirit, and the Kingdom of God, which they confess consists in
Righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirits, "Holy Spirit." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
and yet (as they impiously and simply speaks) these Inhabitants and Hosts to
all these Guests know nothing of their lodging and dwelling within them.

G. Fox gives a shrewd suspicion that he never knew what the true fear, The
excellent men.
and love, and peace, and joy of God mean; if he did, is it possible that he
could puff at so many Writers (excellent for great Knowledge and godliness,
Whom G F in his book in folio trampleth ^n as Dishclouts Dogs and Devils
denying any thing of God or 184] Christ, or Spirit, or Grace to be in them:
some of them (eminent servants of God) I have known: of others of them I have
smelt the sweet Odor of an Heavenly report from the mouths of others and in
their Writings.

But as G. Fox will be found to adore an Image and Crucifix for the true Lord
Jesus, so whatever he say of others will his Faith, his Love, his Spirit of
Discerning, and Hope of Glory and Salvation prove (without Repentance)
dolefully false in the latter end.

For, does not this Proud Censor know that men may be true Saints in their
persons, and yet be subject to sudden Epileptical and Falling Fits? may not
David walk with God with a perfect heart, and yet in the matters of Bathsheba
and Uriah (and many other particulars) fall down like a Jewel into the Dirt?
that Christ Jesus owns Peter and his Confession, etc. and yet in another case,
get thee behind me Satan? That Peter resolves to dye for Jesus, and yet denies
with Cursing and Swearing, that he never knew him, and after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, even Peter plays the Hypocrite and Dissembler.

Yea did not the high Fathers in Godliness, famous Kings in Gods Church live
long in the incivility of many Wives, and the impiety of Worshipping in the
High places, A difference of Sinners
etc. to what purpose does the Lord inspire his holy Penmen to write these
holy Histories: was it to shame his Saints departed, or to shame his own
Holiness, and to cast a stumbling block, and a protection for after sinners and
transgressors? or amongst other holy ends to teach us (like Moses) to
distinguish between an Egyptian whom he slew and the Israelites whom he chid
for wronging each other, G. Fox no true Goldsmith.
since they were their Breth^en; so that he is a poor Christian Goldsmith, that
knows not to discern the Gold of Holiness, and the Copper of Hypocrisy; yea,
and to give the best Gold in the World its due allowance, with which it will
pass current in Earth and Heaven with God, and such who truly know and love him.

But with G. Fox. in all this great Book, the most humble and able, godly and
conscientious are with him but Vipers, Serpents, Cains, Iudasses, false
Prophets, Pharisees, dumb Dogs, Sorcerers, Witches, Reprobates, Devils, etc.

3. In this Book of G. Fox (all along) he denies the Scripture to be the Word
of God: and he said, that every man in the world has that Spirit that gave
forth Scriptures, and that all Saints are [185 acted by the same Spirit
immediately that moved the Prophets and Apostles and holy Penmen of the holy
Scriptures, all tending to vilify and nullify the Holy Scriptures.

Besides, his Impiety in these Assertions (which half an eye of Mahumetans, Fox
his subtilty and yet simplicity in granting the Script* to be the words of God.
and Jews, and Papists, and Protestants will see) I note his Simplicity (for a
Fox though he be crafty is but a Beast still) For out of his Piety he grants
the holy Scriptures through all his Book to be the Words of God, though not the
Word of God: and for this his Grant he quotes Exodus 20. God spoke all these
Words, and the four Books of the Revelations, which I nor my Opposites could
tell in public what to make of: But if they are the Words of God, and foam of
them fearfully written by the inconceivable Finger of God once and twice, then
every particular word of these words must needs be the Word or Will or mind of
God every grain of gold is gold, and every drop in the Ocean is Water and Salt
too, as I urged to them before concerning every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God) else the Words of God when brought to particular examination,
they are not the word of God, but of Angels or Men or Devils.

How sweet are (not Words but) right Words: every man shall kiss his lips that
gives a right Answer, how dirty then, how filthy and bloody are those Lips that
in so many places, debating with so many wise and learned and pious men, drop
not Honey and Milk, but Wormwood and Gall the Venom and the Poison of Asps to
them that lick up such deceitful and destroying Doctrines.

4. In G. Fox his Book I observe that all along he notoriously nibbles ar
Words and quarrels at Words, which he says are not Scripture, as that wicked
word [Humane] relating to the Person of the Son of God and man.

Also the word Trinity and Sacrament. The word Humane abominable above all
words to the Quakers
Oh how zealous is this Fox for the purity of Language? Why may not the word
Humane be used as well as the word Sabbath and Sabbath, and Bethlebem and
Jerusalem which are Hebrew words, and as well as the words Baptism and Jesus
Christ which are Greek words, Scribes and Scriptures and Pretorium which are
Latin words. That word Humane is odious etc. for Christ Jesus sake, and
therefore the more I love and honor it, as expressing the appearance of God in
Flesh, in that personal, Individual Flesh of Christ Jesus the [186] Mediator
petween God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

5. I observe the loose and wild Spirit of G. Fox in dealing with so many
heavenly Champions, the Leaps and Skips like a wild Satyr or Indian, catching
and snapping at here and there a Sentence, like Children skipping ore hard
places and Chapters, picking and culling out what is common and easy with them
to be paid of and answered.

6. Any sober Soul may read in most of their Books, The simple tautologyes of
the Quakers.
and in G. Fox his Book such Tautologies and needless Repetitions that may even
Turn his Stomach, and make him abhor to touch a Quakers Book more. How many
hundred times have you, Christ is within you except you be Reprobates: Flesh of
his Flesh and Bone of his Bone etc. and I presume near a thousand times if not
a full thousand times repeated [That lightens every man that comes into the
World, that lightens every man that comes into the world] etc. G. Fox had many
Bullets flying about his ears, and therefore at every turn (like a man
fighting for his life) he is forced to hold out a Pretense a Buckler a
Breast Plate, simply called Light, and at every turn to cry Oh the Light, the
Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World.

7 Through all his Book like some great Commanders or Generals by Land or Sea,
The inju^^ing and wild imperiousness of G. Fox.
yea like the Emperors or Dictators among the Romans, so does this wild
devouring Soul give forth his high and haughty Sentences: this proud Bladder is
big with Simon Magus his thoughts of being Some Body.

I shall pre^ent one Instance,

Page 253. Hen. Haggar.
His Opposite Henry Haggar says, you call [all men Dead and Carnal, in the
Serpents nature in what form soever they differ from you] this proud Soul
Answers, [All that be not in the Light that enlightens every man that comes
into the World, which is the way to the Father, differs from us, such be
dead, such be carnal in the nature: for none comes to the life but who comes to
the Light, in what form soever they be, and such as differ from us differ from
Christ, for none comes from under the Satanical nature but who comes to the
Light] what Julian the Apostate, Bloody and devilish Pride of the Foxians.
what Duke D' Alva, what Wolsey could have spoken more imperiously, insultingly
and bloudily then this wild Fox has done against all the true Servants and
Witnesses of the Most High that ever have been or shall be to the end of this
world? they differ from Fox and therefore are Devils etc.

187] 8. I observe that G. Fox all along his Book powers forth a flood of Fire
and Brimstone against all his Oppsites and tells us that it is not Railing etc.
for (his chief Adversary) the holy Scripture gives Instance of Christ Jesus
himself giving such Language; and also it is no other then the Opposites to the
Quakers give unto them: but Godly and Sober Souls will consider,

1. That Moses and the Prophets, and Christ Jesus and his Apostles do not
universally absolutely and promiscuously fling out Firebrarnds, Fox his
horrihle railing.
and shoot Arrows and Death into the Sides and Souls of all that differ from
them, as here G. Fox does.

We may observe in the holy Scripture, that generally they were high handed
hypocritical and hardened Sinners against whom the holy Spirit thundered out
such Titles, threatenings and Judgments: But Fox in this place makes no
Distinction, but as boldly as Blind Bayard says all that differ from us etc.

2. This is no rare business, but Fox and his Foxians common Language and
Barkings: Thou Cain, thou Serpent, thou Devil, (Devil, Devil, Devil, as one of
their She-Apostles have said amongst us.

3. It is G. Fox his brutish and ridiculous Song in the close of his Answers
(and sometimes in the beginning) without any Truth, Humanity or Modesty, to cry
out saying [And as for the rest of thy Lies and Slanders, Fox his brutish and
ridiculous Song.
they are not worth the mentioning] when he has picked out a few Sentences or
pieces of Sentences (easy for himself to carpe at etc.) his conclusion and
Burden of his brutish ridiculous Song is [As for the rest of thy Lies and
Slanders] instead of holy Scripture, or solid Arguments with Answers to his
Opposites Reasons and Replies and Rejonders that an humble soul may see some
footing to rest on.

4. As we say in the death of the Martyrs or Witnesses of Jesus, What Railing is
it is not the Suffering, but the Cause and Spirit and Carriage is to be
considered: So in bitter Language, it is not lawful to call every Prince or
King, Fox, as Christ called Herod: nor every Opposite Viper and Serpent, Fool
and Blind and whited painted Wall and Sepulcher etc. They seemed to speak
Reason to Christ upon his Cross [Thou that savest others, thou that destroyest
the Temple etc. come down now save thy self] etc. and yet Gods Spirit calls
this Reviling and Railing at him.

9. All may see what a simple Craking Sound of vapouring and [188] boasting
runs through all this Foxes Book: Doubtless Sysera and his Mideanites, Goliath
and his Philistines, Rabshekah and his Assirians were types of these Children
of Pride, Instances out of G. F. his Book
whose Vapors whose Prophesies (so me notoriously false, already proved) whose
promised Victoryes, Spoils, Threatenings lie like black foul Blots of ink or
grease over all his Papers and the Papers of most of them, far from that Closet
Content and Sincerity of the true Saints who are content with the eye of God
alone in secret.

10. For a more full proof of the Lameness and Stark nakedness of their
Writings, I shall select and mention some Particulars out of this Grand Alcoran
of G. Fox 1. His Opposites Words, then his Answer. And, 3. My Replies etc.

Page 1. He brings in Sam. Eaton saying, [He does not believe that there is
Substantial, Essential or Personal Union between the Eternal Spirit and
Believers.]

G. Fox Answers [Though the Scripture says the Spirit dwells in the Saints,
Sam. Eaton.
1 Cor. 6. And he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 John 1. As though
the Saints had not Union with God which the Scripture say they have.]

I Reply: concerning the Essence or Being of the Immortal, Invisible, Infinite,
Eternal, Omnipotent, and Omniscient, and only Wise: we know no more then a Fly
knows what a King is, and therefore 1 Timothy 9. "1. Tim. 6." R. W. Ms. Ann.
He dwells in the Light that no man can approach to: how fully does the Holy
Spirit in the Book of Job, and especially in that dreadful Word or Voice of God
in a Whirlwind knock out the brains of all these proud Fancies? let this proud
Fox, or any of the stoutest Lions or Lionesses amongst them, look but a few
minutes upon the glorious Sun in the Heavens, and then tell us how their eyes
do: and yet thus like proud and prattling Children do they make a noise about
their Bibs, and Aprons, and Muckingers: and how they are one with God his Being
and Essence, etc.

Is it not enough for Sun, Gods being out of our reach
Moon and Stars, and Men to be enlightened by his Infinity, but they must be God
himself, and Light it self, in the highest sense, because God is Light, etc.

What impudence would it be in a Wife, because she is one with her Husband in
Relation, to say, She is the Husband himself, and not to keep her just
distinction and distance? or in a Subject (because the Subjects and the King
are Relatives, and in a sense one) [189] therefore to say, that they are the
King himself.

Again, we know that the word Spirit is taken in Holy Scripture for a Spiritual
Nature. Hence it is said that God is a Spirit, not that God is properly a
Spirit, no more then he is Light (though my Opposites in our Dispute affirmed
he was) but of such a Heavenly and Spiritual Nature: The nature of Spirits
For the Devils also are Spirits, though defiled with sin and wickedness: thus
Ioh. 3. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, not that Spirits beget
Spirits, and that a new Creature is a young holy Spirit or God himself, as I
told one of the chief of the Quakers at Newport,

And that 1. Cor. 6. shows us in what respect he that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit: For know you not (says Paul) that your Bodies are the Temples of
the Holy Spirit: How God and Christ of is in us.
and Ephesians. 2. For an Habitation of God through the Spirit.

Thus God dwelt in his Temple of old, as a Man in his House and a King in his
Palace: not that a Man's House, or the Kings Palace is of his Substance or
Essence no more then an house is of the Suns Essence, etc. and no more was Gods
Temple of old, nor his Temples his Saints now, after the blockish and
blasphemous nonsense of the Quaker.

In Page 2. Sam. Eaton
He brings in Sam Eaton saying [The Scripture is to be judge of Doctrines and
Manners.]

G. Fox Answers [The Jews had not the infallible Judgment, that had Scripture
but stood against Christ the Light, The Scripture the Rule.
and judged him to be a Devil, that judgment was not infallible, and that
Doctrine and Manners of theirs was not right which goes against Christ the
Light.]

I Reply, as the Sun in the Heavens is the Epitomy or Center of all Natural
Light, though some eyes are sore, look a squint, or are stark blind.

And as the Rule or Canon (though Fox simply bogles at that as not a Scripture
word) is the same, for it is in the Greek, though millions know it not, and
millions (as the Pharisees) pervert and misapply it.

The Holy Scripture is granted by G. Fox to be Gods Words (though in a subtle
fancy, The Holy Scripture a Lanthorn
not his Word,) but if it be every word of their. Gods, then is every Word as
D^vid says a Light to our feet, and a Lanthorn to our Paths, though we despise
it and wilfully refuse it (as some sometimes do Lanthorns) and wilfully stumble
[190] into the Ditch Eternal, and other poor Souls after us: Thus the Heavenly
Sun-Dial is one and constant in its guidance and direction to us poor
Travelers, though we neglect to look on it, or be ignorant of the figures and
lines of it, Try all things
and be willingly ignorant, etc.

We are not only commanded to read and meditate in the Holy Scriptures, and to
search them as the Bereans did, but we are commanded to try all things, to try
the very Spirits. The Papists slap us in the mouth with the infallible Spirit
of the Pope, and that he is not to be judged: the Quakers say the same of
themselves, which is no more then as I said in the Dispute (when W, Edmund.
interrupted me, crying out Blasphemy) for a Man to go for Counsel to an arrant
Cheater and Jugler (then cheating most when he calls all others Cheaters.)

In Page 3. Sam Eaton
He brings in the same Author saying [That God did not intend immediate
Teaching, nor to give out an immediate voice in after ages, which should direct
and guide men in the way of Salvation.

He Answers, which is contrary to the Scripture, which says, All the people of
the Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and he that is of God hears Gods word,
and that is immediate and living, and does endure for ever, there is no
fallibility nor delusion in the Revelation of God, but all fallibility and
delusion is out of it.

I Reply, Gods mediate teachings his word and voice manifold and specified.
it is granted that God speaks mediately unto us by the light of Nature within
us; does not nature teach you that it is a shame for a man to have long hair,
etc.

2. By his works of Creation.

3. His Providence without us in his mercies and judgments, so that every drop
of Rain and crumb of Bread, and grain of Corn is Gods word and witness:

And 4. The pains of the Body, and Dreams in the night have much of Gods word
and voice in them, Job 33. God speaks once and twice but man hears it not and
is not Gods speaking his Word?

And 5, All grant that the words of Scripture are the words of God.

And 6. The teachings of men, Ephesians. 4. are granted to be means, etc. both for
the gathering of the Church, as Apostles, and for the Governing of the Flocks,
as Pastors and Shepherds, etc.

191] 7. The Water, the Bread, the Wine, etc. are appointed by Christ Jesus to
be means while profession of Christ Jesus is made on earth to hold forth a
remembrance of him until his second coming.

8. The private Prayers and Fastings and Meditations of the Saints day and
night, are holy Means in and by which the Eternal God speaks Peace,
Instruction, Reproof and Comfort to to them that fear him.

9. Sometimes it pleases God by the Ministration of his Ministering Spirits
(the invisible Angels) to work by unknown and unseen ways to us: thus in Paul's
Light and Voice and Blindness, Paul's wonderful mediate and immediate conversion.
and the Iailors Earthquake, but afterward in Ananias his sending to Paul (as
Peter to Cornelius) and Paul to the Iailor, it pleased God to use his holy
means and instruments of Men to men (Gods sweet and familiar way to men: the
immediate Teachings of God by Dreams, by Vision, by Voices, by Motion, the Holy
Scripture mentions many before and since the coming of the Lord Jesus, the
Question is not whether it may not please the most Holy and infinite
Prerogative of the most High, Immediate teachings
so to teach where, and when, and whom he please.

But whether it be Christian obedience, or Diabolical laziness to fling off all
means (as Fox all along teaches) to sit still and listen to immediate
Teachings (that is say I to the Devils whisperings) I believe the Papists and
Quakers would give much to be rid of the Scriptures: I know also, that
notwithstanding their pretense of Spirit, yet both of them are forced to use
means, Praying, Preaching, Congregating, and (in stead of the holy means by
Gods Spirit) have appointed many Inventions and Superstitions from a Satanical
Spirit.

G. Fox says, there is no Fallacy in the Revelation of God?

Ans. True, but will he say these seven things:

1. That all the pretended Revelations are the Revelations of God.

2. That Revelations may not pretend Angelical Light, Revelations considered in
7 particulars
and yet be Diabolical Darkness.

3. That we may receive any Revelations and Teachings (as Children and Mad
Folks do) without chewing, and rational weighing and consideration.

4. That God has not appointed his old Scripture and Writing [192] new since
Christ's coming as a Standard, Rule or Touch stone to try all our own and others
Inspirations by?

5. That Mahomets Inspirations are not one of the most prevailing Snares,
Traps, and Engines, whereby he has caught whole Nations and Kingdoms, and the
greatest part of this poor world at this day.

6. That when God reveals his word or will in writing (which G. Fox grants to
be the words of God, and they are slighted) it is not common and most righteous
with God to deliver up proud lazy Souls to strong Delusions to believe Lies (as
at this day it is most wonderful)

7. Whether there be any way in this world to escape the snares of Satan's
Whisperings but by humble attending to the search and Meditation of the
heavenly Records, The great business of Revelations
by humble cries to the Father of Spirits for his holy Spirit and help in all
the Means by himself appointed, in Love and Pity to the Souls of men.

A 4th. Sam Eaton
Instance of G, Fox his lame stuff is in Page 4. Where he brings in the same
Author Sam Eaton saying, [The Gospel is the Letter, etc.] He Answers, [And the
Apostle says, it is the power of God etc. and the Letter kills, and many may
have the Form but deny the Power, and so stand against the Gospel which is the
Power of God.

I reply, we all know that the word Gsopel from the old Saxon is as strange to
us English, What is the Gospel
as the word Evangelium or Euangelion (the Latin and Greek) are: but we all
agree that it may be turned (according to its meaning) Glad News. This wise
cunning man tells us the Glad News is not the Glad Newes' Why so? Because it is
the Power of God. who sees not here the simple subtelty of this Deceiver? The
Gospel or Glad News preached is the power of God unto Salvation to every one
that believes etc. Romans 1. Therefore this Glad News told, written, printed,
preached, is not the Glad News: would he now persuade himself and us that
Moses and the Prophets that wrote of this Glad News, and those four heavenly
Penmen (or Pens) which by the finger of God, (his immediate Spirit) wrote the
History of the Life and Death of the Lord Jesus, etc. wrote nothing of the
Gospel or glad news, for the glad news is the power of God.

2. I know the trick of these old Cheaters and Juglers to hide [193]
themselves, and their cheating in the Bushes and Thickets of words of diverse
Significations, The horrible Cheat of the Foxians.
or figurative Speeches, which all honest Reason teaches carefully to
distinguish. I know it is Fox his trick, and all their tricks in his and their
Writing, to make God and Christ and Spirit and Gospel and Covenant and
Justification, (as before I proved) to be all that one cheating Fancy called
Light in them and in every one that comes into the World. Why the Gospel is
called the Power of God.
These bewitched souls will not own a figurative speech when it makes not for
their Idols. 3. Is it not that the Lord calls the preaching of the Glad News
the Power of God, because of the wonderful effect of it to him that believes
this Glad News, which few or none believe, as being a foolish thing to believe
(as the Jews and thousands others say, to believe in a beggars brat, laid in a
Manager and a Gallowes-Bird etc. 4. Paul calls this Glad news, How it is called
Paul's Gospel.
his Gospel or Glad news, Romans 2. Will the Foxians therefore say that either
Paul lied, or else it is not Gods Gospel nor Christ's, but Paul's although it is
most true that as Paul had charge of it (as a Shepherd of another man's Flock,
or a Mariner of an other man's Ship) it may "by" R. W. Ms. Ann.
be common Phrase of Speech (though not literal but figurative) be called Paul's
(or any other Messengers of Christ) Glad news or Gospel. 5. There is a wild
beast called a Fox, Three Foxes.
a subtle and pernicious creature: there was a famous heavenly Man, a famous
writer of the Book of Martyrs, John Fox, and there is this poor deluded and
deluding Soul G. Fox, to whom I am now replying, ought not these to be
distinguished? Is there not such a mischievous subtle Beast called the Fox
because G. Fox bears (and that most justly and by a finger of Gods providence
bears it) the wild Beasts name: or was not such a learned and heavenly and
wonderfully deligent and zealous man as I. Fox, The Scripture the word or glad
news from Heaven written.
because G. Fox bears that name also? 6. But further, If the Glad news may not
be called the Glad news when it is Scripture (that is written) or preached, then
not Glad news when spoken. 7. The Law denounces Sentence of Death against a
Traitor etc. this Sentence is written, and in a Sense may be called a Killing
Letter: the King pardons this Traitor, and this Sentence of Pardon is written:
this gracious word of a King is not less his Word because it is Written then it
was when first spoken by him; and this word or pleasure of the King written may
be called Gospel or Glad news, the Glad news or Gospel of his Temporal
Salvation: will any sober man say as G. Fox impiously and frantickly, that the
writing of the Pardon and the Broad-Seal is a Dead letter and a Killing letter
etc. because Paper Parchment etc. If G. Fox from hunting after Souls by Sea and
Land, arrive at [194] any Port in England and send a Letter Post to his Wife
and Friends, containing his many Deliverances, many Experiences, Counterfeits
destroy not true ^eirs and owners for ever.
his safe Arrivail and his Purpose and Hope shortly to see them: shall now this
Glad news (or Gospel) though but a few rags made (Paper) be styled a Dead
letter yea a Killing letter though it contain nothing (as the Christian Gospel
or Glad news does not) but glad news or Tidings. 8. Hence it is that we read so
often of Preaching the Gospel, of Believing the Gospel, and that as before Paul
calls it his Glad news, or Gospel because it was his work to tell it.

Yea but says this Deceiver throughout his Book A man may have the Letter and
Form, without the Power and Life. etc. I Answer Who knows not that? and that a
Form and picture is not the man himself? who knows not that Judas
notwithstanding his pretended Love and Kissing of Christ Jesus that yet he had
not the Life and power of true Love and heavenly affection: but does it follow
that living and moving Bodies have not Souls and Spirits within them, because
that pictures have not? That none preach Christ Jesus truly because that G. Fox
preaches an immaginary and Allegorical Christ, in order to establish himself
the only true Christ, and the Eternal Son of God as many bewitched Souls call
him. 9. What is this but to cheat poor Birds with the Chaff and Falacy of
dividing the Body from the Soul, the Letter from the Meaning, the Instrument or
Tool from the Workman or Husbandman using it, A word to all Foxians.
the Gospel or glad news from Believing of it. Ah poor cheated Souls (called
Quakers all of you) why do you willingly (out of pretended Enlightnings and
Experiences) shut your eye of common Sense and Reason, not daring to call good
news, good news, because some, or the most will not Believe it? was it not so
with the women preaching or telling the good news or gospel, although few or
none were found to believe that Christ was risen?

10. The truth is (search your cheating Familiars narrowly and) you will find
that your selves and the Papists would make an Holy Day of that Day, in which
all the Bibles in the world were burnt, that you may establish your infallible
spirits and Traditions.

I know I wrong you not, I have too much proof of it, which you would se if
the heart were not the arrantest Cheater in the World, Gods wonderful
preservation of his word or will to poor mankind
and your selves not willing to be cheated. It Is true Antiochus attempted the
burning of Moses and the Prophets out of the world: some of the bloody
Emperors followed on in Antiochus his bloody Steps raging against the
Scriptures also, the Roman Popes in theirs, and common reason may tell all
men, and the Quakers themselves, [195] that if the same power come into their
hands as Antiochus and the Roman Emperors had the holy Scriptures shall not
if they can effect it trouble them or others one day in the world longer. But
of this more in the next and last Position.

A 5th Instance is page 10 where G. Fox brings in John Bunian saying, John
Bunian.
It is not Faith and works that justify in the sight of God, but it is Faith
and good works which justify in the sight of men only. etc.

He answers, Abraham was not justified to men only by his Obedience, but to
God, and where is Faith there is Justification, The great Position of
Justification.
which works by Love: and the Saints Faith and works were not only to justify
them in the sight of men? for the Work of God is to do what he says and his
Will which who does not are not justified in so doing, but to be beaten with
Stripes: who seek to be justified by their Faith and Works in the sight of men,
are Dead Faith and Works both.

I Reply, In this great business of justification and Pardon of Sin (which
Luther called the great Wall of Separation between us and the Papists) I humbly
hope to show how lame this Fox is, and that he and his Foxians agree with the
Papists, Arminians, Socinians against the true Protestants in this fundamental
business. For what is Justification but a Pardon written and sealed and
declared from the King of Heaven to poor condemned Traitors. Justification what
it is
That this Pardon may be merited by any Price that we or all the World can
offer, is denied by true Protestants, but affirmed (in effect) by the proud
unbroken Souls of Papists, Arminians, Socinians, and these Foxians called
Quakers. It is true after a condemned Soul has received a Pardon or
Justification from his King freely without Desert (upon the Princes Mediation)
he declares his loyal and thankful Obedience etc. but is this his Pardon and
Justification as our subtle Simpletons imagine?

Again that Abraham was pardoned (or justified, it is all one) for his Work
sake as this blind Soul ^aith, how does Romans 3, 4. and the Epistle to the
Galathians cry out, and the experience of every true broken Heart cry out Liar
against such proud and Popish Blasphemies. Further, If all the Righteousness of
the best of men, that is their good Thoughts, good Words, good Actions Aims:
Prayers, Preachings, Sufferings, be but as Women's Menstruous and filthy Clouts,
(as the Most High calls them) what Popish and frantic Madness is it in Fox to
talk of Justification before God by works or by Obedience?

A 6th. Instance is Page 16. where he brings in Henoch Howet saying, It is an
Expression of a dark deluded Mind to say that God is not distinguished from the
Saints. G. Fox Answ. But God and Christ is in 196] the Saints, and walks in
them, and he is is a Reprobate and out of the Apostles Doctrine. I reply to
this Canting Gypsy, The proud Quakers affirm no distinction between God and
themselves
in Page 74. He denies the Position of Ralph Farmer, viz. That God the Creator
is eternally distinct from all Creatures, and that Christ being God only in one
Person, remains a distinct person from all Men and Angels. Also in the same
Page, that God is distinct in his Being and Blessedness from all Creatures. I
Answer, is it not Sufficient that poor Dust and Ashes, poor Chaff and Stubble
may be admitted to a Parley with the Heavenly Majesty, and receive Smiles of his
Countenance, in the Face of the only begotten Prince and Mediator? to be
clothed with the Virgins diverse Colors, and heavenly Affections, but with
the Devil and our first Parents, we must aspire to the throne of the
Incomprehensible Majesty and Godhead also? Besides, Let man's Common Sense be
Umpire, is there no Distinction between Infinite and Finite? between the
Infinite Ocean of Majesty power, goodness, Wisdom etc., and the poor Dross
"Drops." R. W. Ms. Ann.
of which Men and Angles are Partakers? The King dwells in White Hall and in
other of his Royal Palaces; is therefore no Distinction between the King and
his Houses, though some may be braver then others: And yet Fox says his
Opposite is a Reprobate. I ask why? The only Reason Fox gives is, because he
licks not up the filthy and hellish poison of Foxes childish and hellish
Blasphemy against the Eternal Godhead.

A 7th. Instance is Page 22. where he brings in Joseph Kellet saying, [They be
all alienated from God, and Enemies until Faith] G. Fox Answers, Joseph Kellet
[So they have denied their Schoolmaster, which is until faith which will keep
them out of the Alienation which is the Law.

I Reply with Joseph Kellet, (and the rest of those excellent men whom Fox
uses as Dishclouts that by nature our Alienation from God is so great, Our
natural Alienation from God
that the finest and sweetest nature in the World is so alienated and opposite
unto God, that it resolves like some Ships (against a Turk or other Enemy) we
resolve to kill or be killd, yea and to sink by his side before we will yield
to be taken by him: therefore does the Holy Spirit so often speak of man's
hating of God and Gods hating of him, yea of man's abhorring of God, and Gods
abhorring of him, and Romans 8. that not only man's wisdom is at enmity but
enmity it self against God. Hence it is, few Kings, few Counselors, few
Nobles, few Scholars, few Merchants, etc. (who use to be the wisest of men)
relish the Doctrine of the Manger and the Gallows for the more natural Wisdom
the more aversation from the foolishness of the glad news to poor, Few
excellent men saved
lost, drowned and damned Mankind. 197] 2. Again, I say as Solomon, the legs of
the lame are not equal, etc. for how does it follow that we deny the Law to be
a Schoolmaster, pointing unto Christ, because we deny the Law can bring us to
Christ, which is so indeed in the English, Gal. 3. but is not fo in the Greek,
yea, how could the Law of Ceremonies, pointing out the Lamb of God, or the Law
of Do this and live, keep out of the Alienation, do they (more then the Law of
Creation) leave any converting Impression from the Soul, until Gods hand open a
door of Believing?

The Dyal points to the Sun, etc. but who receives benefit by it but he that
skills it, and looks upon it, etc. and yet the Dyal is not the Sun, etc. but
points as all the Proyhecies, Ceremonies, Commandmen^s, (before his coming unto
that God Man, the Sun of Righteousness) Christ Jesus. As to the rest of his
Answer, viz, [Which will keep them out of the Alienation which is the Law] it
is a piece of brutish Nonsense (as are not a few more in his Book) and it may
be taken (like the Answer of the Devil at Delphos) many ways: for it may be
taken, that Faith will keep them out Alienation: or, the Schoolmaster will
keep them out of the Alienation: or whether the Alienation is the Law, or Faith
is the Law, is doubtful, and if his meaning should be that thy "Ye." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
Law either of Ceremonies, Our alienation from God
etc. should keep them from being Alienated from God; and so being actually to
God, how not only will all the Holy Scriptures but all Mankind, Jews and
Gentiles call him a simple ane destroying Liar?

An eighth Instance of Foxes poor, lame Answer is in Page 27. Richard Baxter
where he brings in Richard Baxter, saying [To say that any is perfect and
without sin is the Devil speaking in man:] G. Fox Answers, contrary to the
language of the Apostles and Christ, who bid them be perfect, and the Apostle
spoke Wisdom, among them that be perfect: and said they were made free from
sin, and it is the Devil speaking in man that speaks for sin while Men are upon
the Earth, for the Devil holds him up that makes men not perfect which Truth
makes men free again from the Devil, and speaks in Man, and says be perfect.

I Reply, The matters of perfection
(whether this willingly ignorant Soul knows or no) I know that the Devil knows
that there is a Fallacy in this word Perfection. 1. Sometime in Scripture, it
signifies no more then Sincerity and Uprightness, (and so is translated)
sometimes Compleatness and Fullness in its kind, though but in a small Vessel;
sometimes Fortified, Strong and Armed; and sometimes the Fullness of the
Godhead, to whose incomprehensible Ocean not one Drop can be given, nor one
Drop taken from him. In Mat. 5. Be ye Perfect, etc We are not exhorted [198] to
be equal with God in Holiness, for that is to be God our selves, and being set
down in the throne of the Godhead, to thrust the Eternal God out, for there can
be but one in the Throne of the Godhead: But we are commanded to labor to be
like unto God who not only is kind to his Friends but his Enemies also: As
when we are bid to be like the Sun to shine upon the Bad as well as the Good:
will a sober Soul imagine that we are bid to be as Pure, as Glorious, as Vast,
as Swift as the Sun is: but the Spirit tells us of a Generation that are pure
in their own eyes, and yet are not cleansed from their filthiness. Yea, but
says Fox, Paul spoke Wisdom amongst them that were perfect, Phil. 3. about
perfection
Phil 3. I answer, what if the Translators had turned that word among them that
be strong intelligent, capacious as the word often, and there signifies, why
does Paul also speaking of such a strength or capacity as the Saints may attain
to in this life profess that he was yet (as it were but clambring up the Hill)
this is the vote of all the highest Saints in Scripture lamenting their
Brethren and Erase "Brethren and." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Inabilities, and the Battle between the old Man and the new: Of which Battle
G. Fox and his Foxians know not: for Satan having Possession all is in peace.
It has been ever known that all Gods Children are like high and glorious
Queens and Empresses who wittingly endure, not as the Holy Scripture speaks)
that such an ugly Fiend as the Devil should touch them, no not in an evil
thought. 3. They are like Fields and Gardens in which the Husbandman and
Gardener allows not, The estate of Gods Children upon Earth
nor endures not a Weed but with grief and endeavor of their extirpation. 4.
And this is far from being Proctors and Advocates for sin (as G. Fox most
simply and impudently urges) for the known truth is, that Fox and his Foxians
fall most foolishly and fiercely upon such as profess most holiness, most
sincerity, and most Mortification, most love to God, and his only begotten the
Spirit of Holiness, and the Holy Scriptures or written Will of God.

A ninth Instance is in page 28. where G. Fox. tells how the same Author
preached an external word [Which the Scripture speaks not of, Richard Baxter
but of the word that lives, abides and endures for ever, and of the Scriptures
of Truth that cannot be broken: and of Gods words and Christ's words, and that
is not external: this is not agreeable to sound words that cannot be condemned:
but that is like his Doctrine that knows not the Eternal: but the Ministers of
Christ did not tell of an external word, but you being made by the will of man
speaks to the People of an external word.]

I Reply, The word (whether external, internal, or eternal) is a [199]
similitude, for we know God has no Mouth, nor Tongue, nor Words as we have:
but as Kings, and Generals of Armies or Navies, or any Commanders in chief
signify their minds by Speech, by Writing, yea by sign (at a distance) this
Word or will, which was before in the Kings breast, and internal is now outward
or external. Hence Christ Jesus above all other ways of Gods manifesting
himself externally or outwardly is called the Word of God, and the Word which
was God. Hence in common speech we call our Thoughts our selves [So I think,
etc. this is my Word, my Vote, or Mind.]

And as it is the Field: If a General himself who first gave the external Word
from his own internal Thoughts: The great consequence of a word
if he forget the word in the night a common Sentinel will make him stand, or
fire upon him: and shall men be so careful in these transitory businesses, and
shall we suffer open Enemies to the true Lord Jesus presumptuously to pass
without the external word or mind of God, and audaciously to deny such a word
at all to be? When Christ Jesus Luke 4 spoke out of the Prophet Isaiah: and
when Paul disputed three Sabbath days out of the Scriptures, and when Apollos
mightily convinced the Jews from the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ, did
they not use external, audible Expoundings and Applyings of that written word
or mind of God as the external and outward manifestation of his internal and
eternal holy Pleasure.

A tenth Instance is in page 32. Ellis Bradshaw
where G. Fox brings in Ellis Bradshaw saying [The Quakers Spirit does teach
them to honor no Man.] He Answers, [That is a Lie: for it teaches them to
have all Men in esteem, and to honor all men in the Lord; yet they are
convinced by the Law to be Transgressors if they respect Men's persons as you
doe]

I Reply, I have spoken of their proud and lofty behavior toward all men, the
Highest, the Eldest, the Holiest, upon the 10th. Position, of their Pride etc.
and therefore briefly say, 1. That all men may see how truly they honor and
esteem all men in the Lord, and what Lord and honor it is that they mean: when
G. F. his first word to his Opposite is in that most provoking Term, viz. [That
is a Lye] in his very pleading and the very first words of it. The honor which
the Quakers give to others
It is true Christ Jesus and his Servants the Prophets and Apostles used sharp
and bitter Reproofs, Similitudes etc. but thus suddenly at the first dash to
give fire Thou Lie, That is a Lie etc. It shows neither Religion nor Civility
but a Barbarous Spirit, for they that know the Barbarians know how common that
word is in all their mouths. It Is true of late diverse of Fox his followers have
followed him in courtesy [200] looking toward you, taking you by the hand,
bowing and half uncovering the head more or less etc. But this is but a Revolt
and Apostasy from their first Rigid Spirit and Carriage as Humphrey Norton
rightly maintains against them. Yea. 2. it is against all Foxes and their first
Writings, and this very place of James here urged, viz. they are convinced by
the Law if they respect men's Persons.

Again, it is true in Christ Jesus there is neither Bond nor Free, Male nor
Female, and consequently no Master no Man, no Father no Child no King no
Subject, but all are one in Christ Jesus, and the second Birth: as all are of
one kind in the first Adam, and the first Birth.

1. Yet first how full is the Holy Scripture of Commands and Examples of Gods
Children, Civil respect
giving respective Words and Titles, and Bowings, even to persons that knew not
God? 2. Fox grants difference of gifts, and says that some (in comparison of
others of them not so grown, etc. are Elders, and sure this is some respect of
persons, according to that of the 1 Cor. 12. Are all Apostles, are all
Prophets, are all Teachers, etc. Therefore how ever they Hypocritically lie,
and pretend to honor all men in the Lord: yet the most Holy and only Wise
knows how proudly, and simply, and barbarously they have run into uncivil and
inhumane Behaviors toward all their Superiors, the eldest and highest, how
that they have declared by principle and practice, that there are no Men to be
respected in the World but themselves as being Gods and Christ's. It Is true our
English Bibles and Grammar (as Fox his great Learning often objects) makes thou
to a single person, and Thou in Holy Scripture is used in a grave and
respective way unto Superiors, unto Kings, and Parents, and God himself: But
1. (As I have said) the Hebrew and the Greek signify no more Thou then You,
and so may be truly turned. Thou and Thee
2. Every Nation, every Shire, every Calling have their particular Properties
or Idioms Speech, which are improper and ridiculous with others: Hence these
simple Reformers are extremely ridiculous in giving Thou and Thee to every
body, which our Nation commonly gives to Familiars only; and they are extremely
and insufferably proud and contemptuous unto all their Superiors in using Thou
to every body which our English Ideom or propriety of speech uses in way of
familiarity or of Anger, Incivilities ought to be moderately punished
Scorn and Contempt. I have therefore publicly declared my self, that a due
and moderate restraint and punishing of these incivilities (though pretending
Conscience) is as far from Persecution (properly so called) as that it is a
Duty and Command of God unto all mankind, first in Families, and thence into
all mankind Societies.

201] Having thus through Gods merciful help gone through the 13th Position in
public and this private supply of some few Instances of their Lame writings of
out G. F, reserving the liberty (if God please) of presenting the Reader with a
further Apendix or Addition of some few further Instances out of G. Fox his
Writings. I hasten to the 14 Proposition, the last of the seven at Providence.
They read it publicly, viz. the spirit of the Quakers tends mainly to the
reducing of Persons from Civility to Barbarism, The 14. Position debated.
to an Arbitrary Government, and the Dictates and Decrees of that sudden Spirit
that acts them. 3. To a sudden cutting off of People yea of Kings and Princes
that oppose them. and 4. To as fierce and fiery Persecution in matters of
Conscience as has been, or can be practiced by any Hunters or Persecutors in
the World.

I told them I could add more Branches to this Head, as unto the peace and
civil Societyes of Mankind in the world: but I remembered my promise of Brevity,
and W. E. was often remembering me saying Is this thy Quarter of an hour? for I
believe they stood here upon Coals and were not willing that I should insist
upon it my full Quarter; and they hasted me on to prove that their spirit
tended to Barbarism: they said (one and an other) that their spirit was an
Holy Spirit, W E. etc standing upon coals.
the Spirit of God, and the Grace of God had appeared to all men and had taught
them to deny all ungodliness and wordly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world.

I told them that in our Native Country, and in all civilized Countries, the
civility, Courteous Speech Courteous Salutation, and respective Behavior was
generally practiced, opposite to the carriage of Barbarous and Unciviliz'd
People. Civility and Courtesy.
This I said was according to the command of the holy Spirit in Paul Ephesians 4. and
in Peter, 1. Pet 3. Be pitiful, be Courteous, etc. Such a Spirit was Christ
Jesus of, even to his greatest Opposites, and to the greatest Sinners, insomuch
that for his Courtesy and Gentleness and Sociableness with open Sinners, the
dogged proud and sullen Pharisees counted him a Drunkard and Glutton, a friend
and Companion of Publicans and sinners. We English were our selves at first
wild and savage Britains: Gods mercy had civilized us, and we were now come
into a wild and savage Country, without Manners, without Courtesy, so that
generally except you begin with a What Cheer or some other Salutation, N. Eng.
one work to civilize a Barbarous People.
you had as good meet an Horse or a Cow, etc. And has not the Quaker spirit
been such a Spirit amongst us? have we not known persons formerly loving,
courteous etc. and as soon as this Spirit has come upon them have not our eyes
seen them pass by their Familiars, their Kindred, [202 their Elders and
Superiors, and though kindly spoken to, not give a Word or a Look toward them?
as if they were not worthy of a word or a look from such High Saints etc. The
Quakers monstrous Incivility.
How like indeed have they been to the Popish Saints in a Procession, they See
not, Hear not, Speak not etc.? or like these very Barbarians, and therefore I
said, 2. G. Fox in his book affirms that the Conversation of these very
Barbarians, in many things were better then his Opposites etc. I mused in my
self (being much acquainted with the Natives) what G. Fox should mean, he not
having been in N. England when he wrote that passage; but since I have heard
that the Quakers have commended the spirit of the Indians, for they have seen
them come into English Houses and sit down by the fire, The Indians and Quakers
of one Spirit.
not speaking a word to any body: But this carriage of the Indians proceeds from
a brutish spirit, for generally they have boldly come in without Knocking or
asking of leave, and sit down without any respect in word or gesture to the
Governor or chief of the Family whosoever (just the Quakers general fashion
and Spirit)

Further I told them, that in some respect the spirit and carriage of the
Quakers was worse then that of the Indians, for if they were sd by the English
in the highway or coming into an House, they are very ready to receive your
Salutation kindly, and return you another: But commonly we know that it is not
so with the Quakers brutish spirit. 2. The Indians morning and evening, and
upon all meetings, they give a respective and proper Salutation to their own
Superiors, and sometimes in gesture as well as speech. 3. Although the Indians
are bruits in their Nakedness both men and women, yet they never appear (no not
in private houses) stark naked as the Quaker men and women do: yea they so
abhor such a bruitishness, (except it be in their mad Drunkenness, for then
they will be stark naked) that as to their Female kind, they will carefully
from their birth keep on some modest covering before them. W. E. rose up and
said they did abhor Uncleaness as well as our selves or any, their women were
sober, holy and Modest, and would not endure (some of them) to have a Toe to be
seen naked: but he said if the Lord God did stir up any of his Daughters to be
a Sign of the nakedness of others he believed it to be a great Cross to a
Modest woman's Spirit, The Quakers again maintain their women's Nakedness.
but the Lord must be obeyed. John Stubs immediately seconded him, and quoted
again the Command to Isaiah, Chap. 20. to go naked, and he added, whereas I
said at Newport that it was in the time of Signs, Types, Figures etc. He would
now prove that all Signs were not abolished by the coming of Christ; for Agabus
Act. 20. took Paul's [203] girdle and bound himself. I replied that was indeed
one of my Replies at Newport, and I was yet far from binding the sweet
Influences of the holy One by Dreams, Visions, immediate Impulses Revelations,
Signs etc. but withal I said that before the coming of the Lord Jesus and at
his coming was the time and season of such Appearances from God: Signs and
Figures discussed.
now he has fully declared his mind to us by the Personal and most wonderful
coming of his Son out of his Bosom: who had commanded his Penmen to write his
Birth, his Life, his Life his Doctrine his Miracles, his Death, Resurrection,
Asscension and promise of Return to us: he had also preserved these holy
Writings and Records most wonderfully that (Ioh 20) We might believe in him,
follow him and live with him. But 2. I said what did this concern the monstrous
stripping their women naked, of which we never heard a tittle either at coming
of the Lord Jesus, or in those proper seasons of such Administrations before
his Appearance. The Quakers spirit enraged.
John Stubs said he had been a Quaker 19 years and yet had never seen a woman
Naked, and some of the Quakers said to me aloud, when did thou see any of our
women Naked? and another of them said, We did not think that thou would have
been such a wicked man. These two (though of the Quakers spirit) yet of long
time had been Loving and respecttive to me, but now they were enraged, so that
I said unto my Antagonists, seeing some Heat is risen about these matters, I
will if you please go on to the second Branch of this 14th Position. The
Quakers spirit tending to Arbetrary Government.
I told them the 2d. Branch was,

That the Spirit of the Quakers tends to bring in an Arbetrary Government. I
said we all knew how it had cost the blood of thousands and ten Thousands this
matter of Government and Laws: that the Most High and only Wise choosing one
People and Nation of Israel to be his own, he wrote them Laws (some with his
own inconceivable finger written) and some by Moses his inspired Penman, it
pleased him not to leave their Wisest and Holiest Kings and Governors without
written known Laws, with Rewards and Penaltyes annexed. But I argued if that
were true that all the Quakers were guided in all they said and did by the
immediate Spirit of God (as I proved Fox maintained) then if they obtain higher
or lower Governors of their Spirits, Surely it shines clear that there is no
need of Laws for them to rule and act by, The Quakers have no need of Scripture
much less of the written Laws of men
for they had no need of Scripture, and seeing the Immediate Inspirations of God
would not suffer them to err in Judgment, for as they said of the holy
Scripture, they had no need of it, for they had the holy Scripture within them,
their Teacher within them, and all that they spoke was Scripture, and the voice
of God, etc. So I said much more [204] might it be said of Men's Laws and
Writings; that surely they had no need of them: for what could be more just and
equal, more pure and holy in all Cases Controversies and Businesses, then the
immediate Voice of God? W. E. said, what do thou fill peoples ears with
strange Notions, as if the People of God called Quakers were a lawless people
and would bring all Government and all Laws to nothing? We are for righteous
Government, and righteous Laws, we are not for any to rule by Force, and more
he spoke to this purprse.

I Replied, The Quakers and none else in the World fit for Gonrnment as they
judge
that he mistook me, by an Arbetrary Government I did not intend a Government
ruling by Force (for there could be no Government in the world without the
Sword) but Arbitrary I said came from Arbitrium which signified Will or
pleasure: and so my Argument was, that Persons immediately speaking from God,
it was impertinent and profane to clog and cumber them with Laws, for the
Voice of God (the Law of all Laws) proceeded out of their mouth, then which
there could be none more Just, more Wise, more Holy.

Here stood up an Aged man (and as able as most in the company, T. A.) though
much of late adhering to the Quakers and said, Methinks there is Weight in Mr.
Williams his Argument. He being a noted man, and his voice very audible (and
so heard by all) VV. E. was forced to take notice of his speech, and said,
wherein is there any weight in it? T. A. Answered, why if a Magistrate be
immediately inspired by God, T A his Testimony
and speaks Gods Laws and Sentence, sure there seems to be no need of any other
Laws. They saw they were in a Pound, and I perceived it, and yet (not being
willing to grate upon them but) watching my time (as I was glad all along) to
pass handsomely from one Point unto another, I said unto them: if they pleased I
would pass on to the Third Branch, The 3d. Branch
viz. That the Quakers Spirit tending to the sudden cutting off of People, yea,
Kings and Princes that oppose them. I here told them that I must crave their
patience whiles I must profess my fears, least that Spirit by which they were
guided, might run them upon their own and others temporal Destruction. I told
them I thought they had no such thing in their Thoughts or Eye at present: but
if power of the Sword come into their hand, it was easy to imagine that whom
their Spirit (infallible) decreed to death, Peasant or Prince, if it were
possible, he must be executed, etc. W. Edm. said, Thou here make a false and
lying charge against the People of God, who are peaceable and quiet and
yielding to Magistrates, etc. I Replied, I charge them with no matter of Facts:
but I charge them and their Spirit with a tendency, etc. For why [205] might
they not say, that Abraham, with an impulse was killing Isaak, Moses the
Egyptian, Ehud killing Eglon the King of Moab, Samuel hewing Agag the King of
Amelech in pieces, and Paul, Ananias and Saphira, etc. and why not Satan stir
up his Instruments to pretend the like Spirit, as we know he has done both in
former and latter days?

My Antagonists jointly bid me show when any of the Quakers had done so:
Immediate impulses
I Answ. They spoke not to the point, etc. for I did not charge them to have
done so, but that their Spirit tended to it: I was saying that Faubord at
Grindleton was killlng his Son in imitation of Abraham, if his Sons crying out,
and the breaking open of the House had not prevented: and that James Parnel
moved by this Spirit to Fast forty days, etc. perished the eleventh day, etc.
but perceiving more than ordinary heats, and that W. Edm. charged me that I had
a false heart of mine own, and would measure others by my bushel: I told them
of the wonderful actings of Tho. Munster, and I. Becold, and Fifer and
Knipperdoling, etc. in Germany, and of their Pretenses, Murders, Poligamies,
and all by the Spirit, etc. The Kings Grandfather H. 4. of France murdered
upon pretense of a vision of Angels
I told them that our Royal Sovereign his Grandfather Henry 4th of France (that
famous and wonderful Man) he was stabbed to death by a Friar pretending a Vision
of Angels on Christmas night, who commanded him from God to dispatch and kill
the King, which he most desperately effected. W. Edm. interrupted me, and spoke
(to this effect) why should we suffer this man thus to wrong the innocent
people of God? we will measure him with his own Bushel: For thy Book declares
thy approving of the killing of the Kings Father, and said where is the Book?
At which word W. Harris (a Firebrand of Town, and Colony and Country) rose up,
and carried a Book (which they said was mine) to W. Edmundson: W. Edm. and W.
Harris their malice toward me
I perceived that W. Edm. and W. H. who was for any Religion, and a malicious
mortal enemy to all good, had been a plotting: and I said openly I knew what
malicious bloody counsel had been between W. Har. and themselves: but they
would find themselves befooled, for there was nothing in the matter but
ridiculous malice: for all of us knew that W. H. loved the Quakers (whom now he
fawned upon) no more then he did the Baptists (whom he till now fawned on) but
would love any, as a Dog for his Bone, for Land, which he had a long Suit for
as was known to all the Country and their cost. Hereupon Capt. Green of Warwick
(Magistrate) desired that such matters might be forborne, and others spoke to
the same purpose: and I, Stubs and others are said to speak to W. Edm. to
forbear, so that the Book was laid aside and delivered again to that [206]
malicious bloody Soul W. Harris. I challenged them again and again to read and
improve what possibly they could, which I knew was no more then foam words
applauding the Parliaments Justice and Mercy: which these Bloody Sophisters
would (like Wolves and Foxes construe as my approving the Kings Death, which
God knows I never approved to this day. Upon this Occasion I may now inform the
Reader, how easily the malicious Spirit of W. Edm. W Harris his character and
practice
and W. Har. met in one: formerly no man amongst us had spoken more scornfully
of the Quakers then W Harris, now he extremely, privately and publicly fawns
upon them, seeing them my Enemies, who had ever been his Friend, and never his
Enemy but in his outrageous practices against Town, and Colony and Country. He
was a Pretender in Old England, but in New my experience has told me, that he
can be one with the Quakers, yea Jesuits or Mahumetans for his own worldly ends
and advantage. He is long known to have put Scorns and Ieers upon the eminent
Inhabitants of Town and Country. He has been notorious for quarrelling, and
challenging, and fighting, even when he pretended with the Quakers against
Carnal Weapons; so that there stands upon Record in the Town-book of Providence
an Act of Disfranchisement upon him, for fighting and shedding Blood in the
street, W H and the Q the higher powers as they simply affirm
and for maintaining and allowing it (for ought I know) to this day. Then he
turns Generallist, and writes against all Magist-ates, Laws, Courts, Charters,
Prisons, Rates, etc. pretending himself and his Saints to be the Higher Powers
(as now the Quakers do) and in public writings he stirred up the People (most
seditiously and desperately threatening to begin with the Massachusetts) and to
cry out no Lords, no Masters, as is yet to be seen in his Writing: this cost my
self and the Colony much trouble. Then (as the Wind favored his ends) no man
more cries up Magistrates: then not finding that pretense, nor the People
called Baptists (in whom he confided) serving his ends. He flies to Connecticut
Colony (then and still in great Contest with us) in hopes to attain his gaping
about Land from them, if they prevail over us: to this end he in public Speech
and Writing applauds Connecticut Charter and damns ours, and his Royal
Majesty's favor also for granting us favor (as to our Consciences) which he
largely endeavors by writing to prove the K. Majesty by Laws could not do. My
self (being in place) by Speech and Writing opposed him, and Mr. B. Arnold then
Governor, and Mr. Io. Clark Deputy Governor, Capt. Cranstone and all the
Magistrates, he was Committed for speaking and writing against his Majesty's
Honor, Prerogative, and Authority: He 207] lay some time in Prison until the
General Assembly, where the Quaker (by his wicked, ungodly, and disloyal plots)
prevailing, he by their means gets loose, and leaves open a door for any man to
challenge the Kings Majesty for being too Godly or Christian, in being too
favorable to the Souls of his Subjects against his Laws, etc.

I had thought to have declared thus much publicly, W Edm. his ignorant and
impudent zeal and upbraidings
and how seasonably the Kings Declaration came over against him: also how that
one General Assembly, and another, and another had been troubled with him, etc.
and fined him, etc. but now my Lord Edmundson grew hot, and told me that I had
charged the People of the Lord with many great and grievous Charges, which he
said I could not prove, yea, he said he would speak it before the Lord, I had
not proved one of them, and therefore he warned me, being an old Man, that I
should not carry such a Burden on my back to my Grave, and (among other angry
insultings) he said he heard I had been a Magistrate, and said I was a fit man
to be a Magistrate that would so wrongfully charge the Innocent. Io. Stubs
spoke to the same effect, and how I had hindered them from going about the work
of the Lord: he said also, that it was only the Light which they had spoke for,
and that some had interrupted them, but he confessed that Roger Williams himself
had not done it: I saw God in their Confession.

And for the last point and Branch of the 14 Position, The point of persecution
viz. [Their Persecuting Spirit) having spoken to it before, and finding them
unwilling to mention it, I urged it not, having (at Newport) showed from Page
170 of G. Fox his Book, [That the Magistrate (that is the Magistrate in their
Light) ought to Subject the Nation to his Light, else he is not a faithful
Magistrate.] In page 90. and 96. G. Fox. sets up his Saints (as formerly. So
many Quak. so many Popes
W. Harris his Antagonists) to be the higher Powers, as knowing who Worship God
aright, and who not, and only able to judge of Powers, Magistrates, Kingdoms
and Churches. Herein W. H. and the Quakers are one, The pretended meekness of
the Quakers.
etc. It is true that W. Edm. declared that the People of God were not to
meddle with Carnal Weapons: as also that before time, many of the People of God
called Quakers, had been Soldiers, Captains and Colonels, yet now coming to
the Light, they had laid down their Carnal Weapons: but if Fox say true in his
Book, either they Mope or Equivocate: for Fox speaks of the Magistrates for
Christ in the aforesaid Page 170. he discerns who be Idolaters, who not, which
true Churches, which not, and are to praise the Well Doers, and terrify the
Evil Doers with the Carnal and Material Sword, or else they talk nothing.

208] But 2. If this Confession and Profession of theirs were not; yet if Chrst
Jesus say true, viz. The Tongue tells to all the World what the Heart is: was
there ever People professing the Name of Christ Jesus (except the Papists) so
Reproaching the Protestants, The tongue of the Quakers is the Vipers what will
their hand be
and amongst the Protestants was there any ever so Reproaching and Reviling the
Professing and Conscientious People as Quakers do: was there ever any known
(professing the fear of God in so high a measure) so sharp and cutting in their
Tongues even to eminently, knowing and Conscientious persons, [Thou Liar, thou
Serpent, thou Cain, thou Judas thou Hipocrite, thou Devil] etc. Shall we
rationally question whether their hands (like Simeons and Levyes) will not be
as fierce and cruel, if the most holy and only Wise permits Whips and Halters,
The Quakers common language
Swords and Fagots to fall into their Hands? and what did Sam. Fisher, and Ed.
Burrowes write less to the Soldiers at Dunkirk, that if they received the
light they should on to Rome.

3. Have we not known the deceitfulness of men's hearts fly out into greater
matters then Persecution? Hazael earnestly asked whether the Prophet thought
him a Dog that he should do such matters etc. The cheating of man's heart
Pendleton vowed his Collops should fry ere he would to Mass in Q Maryes days,
and yet to Mass he went and persecuted others also that would not bow to the
Image as he had done.

Just here Capt Green of Warwick desired leave to speak to two things,

1. To immediate Revelations, such as Abraham and Moses and Ehud had.

2. As to the Soul being a part of God: Capt Green his 2 points with my
Antagonist
I was weary and withdrew, but afterward Capt. Green told me that none of them
were willing to speak punctualy to either of these two, but rather desired to
wave them as a bstruse and high matters and Mysteryes.

Then Pardon Tillinghast (a leading man among the People called Baptists at
Providence) he pressed against them the continuation of Christ's Ordinances until
he came. Pardon Tillinghast his discourse with my Opposite
The Quakers said Christ was come again to his Disciples. He replied, that
after Christ's Ascension he spoke of another Coming, his second Coming, Heb 9.
W. E. fell to Prayer, (as with me he ftl to Preaching) Pardon Tillinghast (as
himself told me) declared to them, that he was free to discourse with them, but
he was not free to join with them in Worship: so he departed, and after W E.
his Prayer, the whole Assembly.

And thus it pleased the God and Father of Lights and Mercyes to bring us to
the end of this 4th days Contest, The Conclusion was ordered by the Father of
Mercies with much peace and quietness which had not been if I had ininsulted
and upbraided as W Edm. did.
and the end of the whole matter, in much Peace and Quietness, and the
Consideration of matters left to every man's Soul, and Conscience, and so do I
this Narrative, which God knows is the Sum and Substance of all our
Transactions:

Unto his Eternal Majesty therefore I humbly offer Eternal Praise, by and in
the Eternal Son of God, the true Lord Jesus Christ: whom I desire joyfully to
expect to return from Heaven, as literally and personally as all true
Christians hold (Act. 1.) he is ascended.

AN APENDIX OR Addition of Proofs unto my thirteenth Position, Viz.
That the Quakers Writings are Poor, Lame and Naked (not able to defend
themselves, nor comfort the Souls of others with any solidity.)
I could produce most of their chief extant, More Proofs of the Quakers lame
writings
but I have been occasioned to deal with G. Fox, their great Goliath, in some
Scores of Passages of his Book in Folio, in the Narrative aforesaid.

Unto which I judge fit to add the Scores following, faithfully presenting his
Opposites, Words (as he quotes them) his Answers and then my Reply: let him
that Reads understand.

I Have chosen out the short Assertions of G. Fox his Opposites as he quotes
them, and his short Answer for brevity sake, etc.

1. The first of this Addition I name, is in page 6. of G. Fox his Folio Book,
where he brings in Samuel Eaton saying [The Apostle faying to the Saints, You
know all things, it is [2] an excessive speech] G. Fox Answer [contrary to
John, 1 John 2. You know all things.
and would make him a Liar, the Minister of God: so he is in the false spirit
gone out into the World, contrary to 1. Ioh. 2. Who know all things]

I Reply, 1. I cannot learn that they literally hold, that they know all
things knowable as God (though G. Fox writes that they know all things as God
(yet I can not think them so gross as to imagine that they know all things,
past* present, and to come, (as the Devil pretends he does, and offers to
reveal so much to some Conjurers) but I judge they must come to some figurative
meaning, as their opposite writes.

For 2. What hinders (as before) but if the Quakers be Omniscient, and know all
things, but they should be also Omnipotent and do all things, for so Paul
writes, Phil. 4. I can do all things: I know they say, they are one with God
and Christ, and they know all things, and can do all things; and yet this sense
which literally is so Proud and Blasphemous, must be made out by a meaning and
by a figure (which they cry out against in others.)

3. Therefore does not the Spirit of God in Prove. 28. About knowing all things.
open this to us, saying, Evil men understand not Judgment, but they that seek
the Lord understand all things: that is, God answers their Prayers, and inables
them to know and do, all that he calls them to, when the proud and scornful are
rejected.

4. Therefore I believe it is that the most Holy and most just and wise Lord
leaves these poor proud and scornful Souls to seek wisdom and not to find it,
The Quakers proud of knowledge yet knowing nothing.
to be ignorant, knowing nothing, (as Gods Spirit speaks,) and to discover
their Ignorance in so many Fundamentals of Christianity, and in so many
practices immodest, irrational, and more then savage, as I have proved against
them.

2. In page 11. G. Fox brings in John Bunyan, etc. saying, [The Scripture
plainly denies that Conscience can justify though it may condemn. Page 11. Joh
Bunyan.
[He Answ. [which is contrary to Scripture, where the Apostle says Romans 2.
their Consciences either accusing or excusing.] Conscience condemning not
Justifying.
And again, herein do I exercise my self to have a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Men, and the Light condemns, which you call Conscience,
etc.

I Reply, The Quakers confessed their light to be Conscience.
Conscience (in greek Latin and English, etc. signifies a Knowing together: a
Re^lexion, or looking back of a man's mind or Spirit upon it self, in point of
Justification or pardon of sin [3] Conscience looks upon a cursed rotten
Nature, then upon millions of sins of Omi^^ion and Commission, which how to
satisfy an infinite Justice for, and to attain a new heart and nature is the
high business and out of the reach or thought of that poor Conscience, The
great Trial of the 3 greatest actual Sinners that ever were
which every man Jew or Gentile Civilized, or Pagan comes into the World with.
In the great Trial of the three greatest sinners that ever were in this World,
the Devil, and the first Man, and first Woman: two of them their Consciences
condemned them, and they confessed the Fact (though with extenuation and Excuses)
could this their condemning Conscience (especially with mincing of sin as all
men's natural Consciences do) I say, could this Conscience or Consession pardon
their sin, reniew their hearts and be their Justification (or clearing) and
Salvation?

It Is true Abimelechs Conscience justified him from the Fact of lying with
Abraham's Wife, as well as Joseph's Conscience justified him from the falsely
imputed guilt of lying with his Mistress, The excusing of Conscience
or attempting of it: But was this the Pardon of Abimelechs sin, his
Justification and Salvation after the Canting Language of this poor Fox, and
all the Foxians that I have seen (and I have read all I could come at etc.)

Oh how little do these poor Beasts seek what infinite Justice, infinite
Punishment, infinite Payment is! what Conscience truly pacified is, upon the
Pardon of Sin, and true peace of Conscience Sprinkled with the Blood of that
only Lamb of God Christ Jesus.

Amongst the Indians I have known some falsely accused of stealing English Men's
goods, of killing English Men's Cattle, yea, of Murder; and I have heard them
say that Manit: that is God and their own Souls know they are Innocent. This
Innocence who questions but that it is their plea and excuse and discharge from
that guilt falsely charged on them: If this be all that G. Fox says! he beats
the Air and has no Enemy: No, no, It is a Conscience Justification within, a
Christ shedding his blood within; (in a subtle fly opposition to the pardon
without us from the K. of Heaven for the sake of his Son without us) this is
the business which these Traitors to the K. of Heaven aim at: Now they will be
perfect and never more admit a sinful thought; and this their present Honesty
shall pay the old score of a Cursed Na- [4] ture, and millions of Treasons, and
Rebellions in Commissions and Omission against the God of Heaven.

It was a pertinent Similitude used before Q Elizabeth. A fit Simlitude used
before Q. Eliz^beth concerning pardon of sin or Justification, which I had from
one that heard it being near the Queen
A King sent for his Lord Deputy of a Province to come home and give account
etc. The guilty Deputy goes to a great friend desires his Company, etc. he
said, He was sent for also himself, and feared his own Issue: He goes to others
desires their Company, etc. They make excuse and promise to have him or the
way, etc. Then goes the Deputy to an old friend, who promised to go with him,
and what he could speak for him: only, if the K. asked, he must speak the
Truth, and that will be (said he) your Destruction, and therefore adviz'd him
to make the young Prince his Friend and Mediator for whose sake the King would
deny no Favor, no pardon, no Honor, etc.

The Application may be large and useful: but in short, Conscience the greatest
Friend or Foe.
A Soul Summond to Death and Judgment, looks to Relations, etc. they all
Answer, they are in the same Case, etc. It looks to Wordly Estate, etc: they
tell us they will go with us as far as the Grave and provide a Coffin, and a
Sheet, and a Burial, etc.

3. The old friend is Conscience, who will go with us, but can be a thousand
witnesses against us, etc. It follows then clearly that the young Prince is the
true Lord Jesus Christ, not vanished away into a Light in every dark dungeon in
the World, but Conscience says he is literally ascended up into Heaven, and
will as literally make his speedy Return again to Judgment.

The third Instance, Page 2. Jo. Bunyan, etc.
G. Fox page 12. brings in the same Author, saying, [the Light does not shine
in the Consciences of them that be lost.] The Answer, [But John says, he Light
shines in darkness but the darkness cannot comprehend it, and there is that of
God in the Children of Disobedience and Reprobates, as in Romans 1. and 2.
Chapters.] I Reply, G. Fox is here in his Borough, and takes not the word
Light in the same Sense his Opposite does, (the Common trick of Cheators): His
Opposite takes it not for the heavenly Lights Sun, The various meanings of the
word Light
Moon, nor Earthly Light of Fire, Candles, precious Stones, nor the
Metaphorical Light of men's minds differing them from Beasts, Birds, Fishes: Nor
the Light of peace joy and Prosperity, called in Scripture Light, etc. Nor the
Light and Evidence of witness or Reason in Cases depending: Nor the Light of
the holy Scriptures, and the preaching and offering of a [5] Savior to poor
lost Sinners: But, for that awakening, saving Light, convincing all men's
Condition to be miserable and damnable: of Grace and mercy offered and applied
to a Soul by the good News of a Savior someway heard of, and the holy Spirit
the finger or power of God.

G. Fox says, this saving Light is in mankind: only persons don't mind it, and
so Christ Jesus is Crucified, and slain in them, and God, and Christ, and
Spirit, and Light, etc. are all captived, hindered from working, yea, altogether
killed and slain in them because a Soul does not mind them, and hearken to
Christ in them.

Ah poor simple brutish Imagination that ever it should enter into the
thoughts of Men professing to be Christians, Romans 1. and 2? Nor favoring
Christ in all mankind
etc. or of men professing to know more than the Wolves and Foxes in the
wilderness: I have spoke to this before, therefore a word only to G. Fox his
proof, Romans 1. and 2. Chapt. From these two Chapters he proves that there is
that of God in the Children of Disobedience, and Reprobates, who denies it. For
there is something of God, that is from the power and wisdom of God in the
Fallen Spirits the Devils themselves. But I know by that of God, G. Fox means
God himself (pressed down as a Cart with sheaves) the holy Seed Christ Jesus,
(under the Clods,) the holy Spirit in prison, for the Soul is a part of the
Essence or Being of God himself.

But that there is here a word or title of Color to any of this dirt and filth
flung in the face of the Majesty of Heaven?

This Scripture speaks of the work (or working) of the Law written in their
hearts: but what is this to a second writing of the holy Scriptures, or writing
inspired into the heart by the most holy Spirit? yea, Four writings considered
what is this to a third writing of their Names written in Heaven in the Lambs
Book of Life? yea, what is this to fourth writing, the writing of the new
Covenant Consisting of Sin and a new heart, a heart of flesh, in which his Law
is written as formerly in Tables of Stone, and yet we poor men of Iabesh Gilead
must leave the Testimony (as Gilead imports) and suffer Nahush (the Serpent) to
put out our right eyes, and believe that every man has the new Covenant Christ
Jesus and the Kingdom of God, etc. with the Pharisees in every man's heart and
yet he never knows of it?

4. Instance: In the same page 12 he brings in the same Author, saying, [It is
a Counterfeiting of the new Birth for men to [6] follow the Light wherewith men
coming into the world are enlightened: G. Fox Answ. [which none comes to the new
Birth but who come to the Light, which every man, etc. in which believing is a
Child of the Light, etc.

I Reply: Several Expositions of the Light in Jhon 1.
G. Fox runs round agian and again, like the windmil Sails: It is says he, no
Counterfeiting of a new Birth, why, because it is no Counterfeiting: [none
comes to the new Birth but who comes to the Light, etc.]

As to the words in John 1. Insert "W." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Hitchcock at Newport alleged, that it was not in his Bible [enlightneeth
every man, but lights every man, etc.] John Stubs locked in his greek
Testament, and confessed it was Photizes which is not inlightneth but Lights.

2. As to the Light, We know there are two Opinions how Christ lights every
man, etc. First, as God in the Creation. 2. As God man and Mediator, and that
the Greeks word Erchomenon does not relate to the word [anthropon] the man or
every man that comes into the world, but [phoce] Light, and that it must be
read in this Sense, viz that Christ Jesus the true Light comes into the world
lights every man that is in the world freely that will receive him: Even as
many (whomsoever) look up to him, (as John 3.) the stung Israelites to the
brazen Serpent: and that Christ Jesus is the Light of the world, The World All
Men And Every Man
John 8. and 12. to as many as receive him according to 1 John 12. and that the
mere phrase imports no more then a Light held forth to all in the world, as the
Sun in the Heavens, and Christ's Followers, Math. 5. are called by Christ Jesus
the Light of the World. Thus the word all and every man (as I hinted before) is
used not absolutely, but Comparatively, and is figuratively taken in many
places, and four "3 times." R. W. Ms. Ann.
time in that one ver. 1 Col. 28. viz. warning every man and teaching every man
in all wisdom that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, which
literally cannot be true.

Now G. Fox runs into his Borough of the many significations of the word
Light, Christ as Mediator enlightens none but the Elect.
and the word all, and the word inlightneth, willingly ignorant that Christ
Jesus as Mediator of the new Covenant inlightens none but those whom his Father
gives him: unto whom he gives Repentance, to whom he opens the door of Faith,
and gives them to believe and suffer, etc.

So that G. Fox Confounds the Elect and the World together and brings in a
Counterfeit new Birth, a Counterfeit Christ, and at last a Counterfeit
Salvation.

7] 5. Instance: G. Fox page 20. brings in Henock Howet, Henoch Howet.
saying, [It is a fancy to say the Covenant of God is to all men in the world,
and the grace of God has appeared to all men, etc. He Answ. [contrary to the
Apostle, who says, the grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared to
all men: and contrary to the Prophet, who says, I will give him for a Light
unto the Gentiles, a Light to the people, Salvation to the ends of the Earth,
and a new Covenant to the house of Israel and Judah, and they that do not
believe this are Condemned:]

I Reply in these Considerations presented to the Conscientious:

1. All mankind being fallen from God: He graciously gave the Word or call to
Abraham, and made Promises both to his Natural and Spiritual Seed, Jews and
Gentiles
hence came the distinction of Jews, (or the Children of Abraham) and the
Gentiles [as we English it.]

2. It pleased God to make two Convenants or Bargains with mankind. The two
great Bargains of God with mankind.
1. that of Justice and due debt, to any man that yielded obedience in all
things, etc. Rewards according too, yea, above desert. This Bargain was made
with our first Parents: and with all mankind to this day, yea, even with the
most savage and barbarous. The second is of mercy and pity, etc. The Labans of
the world change Covenants and Bargains ten times, and still for the worse,
etc. but the Father of mercies pitying Man's Misery and Inability offers a New,
and Infinitely easier and sweeter Bargain upon the Terms of only Mercy and free
grace and pity.

3. It is one thing for God to offer this Covenant or Bargain, [wherever the
sound of this Gospel or glad News comes] and another thing to embrace and
receive it as all the Elect of God do, and another thing to work freely and
give freely the Means and Power to fulfill this Covenant: as God does by the
Merits of his S^n, and his own powerful working of Repentance and belief in the
hearts of all his Chosen.

4. It is Common with the holy Spirit to speak Figuratively in the holy
Scripture. Scripture language
To call the Sign the thing signified, and the Instrument or Means, the work
done. Thus the Lamb is the Passover, the Bread is Christ's body, the Cup is his
Blood: God and Christ is called the Hope of his people, and Christ Jesus the
Mediator of the Covenant, called the Covenant it self. The King pardons Rebels
for his Sons sake, his Son may in a Sense be said [8] [though not literally] to
be the pardon it self: A man drives a Bargain between two Chapmen that are
absent and distant drives on a marriage between a Man and a Woman absent each
from other, and may in a Figurative Sense be called the Bargain or Covenant,
and yet not literally and properly as the poor Quakers would their Christ to be.

5 The grace and mercy of God, God offers the Gospel diverse ways
the Gospel or glad News is many ways offered: some are invited gently to come
to the heavenly Wedding and Supper: other Messengers (more vehement) even force
persons in, and the Kingdom of Heaven is taken by force; many seek to enter,
many run; It is not in him that wills, nor runs but in God that shows
mercy, and the rest he justly hardens that God may be All in All.

For as God walks in the midst of his (most wonderful) Creation, Two Feet and
2 Fingers of God
with his two feet of Mercy and Justice; so he has his two fingers; and with
one he wrote the Covenant of Justice in the Tables of Stone, and with the
fingers of his Mercy and Grace he freely writes his Mind and Will in the Tables
of Flesh and Hearts of his Chosen: Many offers of Bargains and Marriages are
made which never are embraced etc. but in the New Covenant God gives a new
heart to his Chosen, and gives not, and is not the Covenant to any but his
Chosen all the World over, even to the ends of the Earth.

6. For is it not a monstrous Dream of the Quakers, to say, that God and
Christ, Spirit and Covenant is in all Mankind, and that in a Gospel sense? it is
true as I said, if G. Fox mean that the Knowledge of God in a sense is offered
to each man's Conscience in the World, though more expressly and gloriously where
he sends his Messengers, Wisdoms Virgins, etc. G. Fox beats the Fire, "Air,"
not "Fire." R. W. Ms. Ann.
I oppose him not, but to say the Covenant or Bargain and the Mediator of the
new Bargain, and the Applyer of it the Holy Spirit, is in every of Mankind,
and if they will turn to it, and^* and yet persons know no such thing, nor
never heard of it, and none ever had it so as to be saved by it but these
Foxians; is as wise as for a Man to have Fits of the Stone or Gout, The Quakers
monstrous Marriages
or a Woman have Pangs of Childbearing, and yet neither of them know any such
matter, no nor how she had any such Marriage Covenant or Husband nor ever any
Word or Thought of it.

7. The Bottom is this, G. Fox cares not for the Jews nor [9] Gentiles, G. Fox
and the Quakers pretenses of Soul kindness are Soul cruelties
no more then the Fox cares for Lambs and Chickins but to make a Prey of them,
he pretends Love to all Mankind and tells them they have Christ and the New
Covenant and the Spirit within them; yea, he tells them, he means not the
Covenant of works, but the Covenant of Grace, he means that Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, but when it comes too, they mean no other Christ but a Spirit (as
Humphrey Norton more plainly then Fox confesses) and this Spirit will be found
to be an Evil Spirit by Gods most wonderful, wise and righteous hand (as one
says) upon them.

A 7th Instance. Page 24. Joseph Kellet
G. Fox brings in page 24. Joseph Kellet, etc. saying, [The Scriptures are the
means of Faith,] He Answers, and have thrown out Christ the Author of it, and
God the Giver, and the Scripture is but a Declaration of the Saints Faith: and
men had Faith before the Scripture was, as Instance Abraham and Enoch.

I Reply, G. Fox Answers three things;

First, That his Opposites throw out God, if they make the Scripture the means
of Faith.

Secondly, He slights the Scripture with a But, it is but a Declaration of the
Saints Faith.

Thirdly, He slights the Novelty of it, saying, There was Faith before there
was Scripture.

I reply, I have had many Occasions to speak of the Scriptures already, I shall
therefore briefly say, it is wonderful what an aching Tooth against the Holy
Writings of God: The old Serpent and all the Wolves and Foxes of this World
have had, who has more or less damned and cursed it, and longed to have it out
of the World.

The Jews, the Turks, the Papists, the Common Protestants, the Quakers, etc
make use of it for their ends; but none can rightly use it, but as a blessed
Candle, Lanthorn or Torch sent down from Heaven into this dark Dungeon of the
World, to guide us out unto the Saving Knowledge of God, and Eternal Ble^^edness
with him.

For how does this follow, God is glorious in the means appoints.
that if God has appointed the Holy Writings as means that God and Christ are
thrown out; can there not be an Harmony between the first and all subordinate
Causes? Did Moses throw out God because he took the Rod in his hand, when he
wrought all those Wonders? Did Solomon [10] throw out God because he used (as
Moses about the Tabernacle) so many means in rearing that Wondrous and Glorious
Temple? The Quakers simple and wild boldness with the eterna power and Godhead
Or did Samson throw out God when he made use of the Jaw Bone of an Ass, etc.
Or Christ Jesus throw out his Father, when he made use of Clay and Spittle? O
what a throwing Spirit is this wild Fox, and his wild Foxians of; who toss and
throw the Eternal, Immortal and Invisible God, and his only begotten Son in
their wild Fancies, as if they were the Wool and Feathers of Lambs and Chickens
which these Foxians have devoured.

Secondly, How is it that G. Fox here says, That the Scripture is but a
Declaration of the Saints Faith? For, is it not a Writing or Record of Heaven:

1. Of the Being and Names of the Eternal Power and Godhead.

2. Of his Glorious and Incomprehensible Works, The wonderful^ Revelations of
and in the Script.
Creating and Forming the Heavens and all that is in them; the Earth, and all
that is therein, the Sea, and all that is therein out of nothing; which Mystery
the Quakers have only from the Scripture.

3 Of the special and more particular framing of Men and Women above all his
visible Creatures:

4. Of the Fall of Mankind from their glorious and first Making and Creation,
which some talk idly to be every day.

5. Of the gracious Promise of the Father of Mercies, of a Redeemer and
Restorer of undone mankind.

1. By his Threatening to the Devil, and promise to the Woman of a Savior, to
be born in time of a Woman.

2 By Erecting such a state of Israel (prevailers with God) with all their
Typical Lands, Governors, Worships, Wars, Captivities, Deliverances, etc.

3. Fulfilling of that Promise in the Wonderful Birth, Life Doctrine, Miracles,
Death, Burial, Resurrection and Assention of the Son of God, the Man Christ
Jesus, etc.

4. The Estate of the Believers in him after his Assention, called the
Primitive Church.

6 Of the great change since his coming, in the rising of his many Enemies, or
Antichrists especially, of one with seven heads and ten Horns, and of another
with two horns, etc.

7 Of the Protestant rising and witnessing against these Devilish Heads and
Horns of which the Revelations speak, and of [11] the burning up of the Whore
and of all Christ's Enemies and Antichrists.

8. Of the never-ending Joys of the Righteous after this life, and the
everlasting Worm and Fire of the ungodly, which shall never dye nor be quenched
until the Eternal Power and Godhead (revealed in the Holy Scriptures) come to a
Period and Dissolution.

It may be G. Fox will say, we Quakers grant all this?

I Answer, I question whether you speak bona fide, and in Truth without I
suitical or Foxian Equivocations.

For 1. Wonderful Guids
What means this But [The Scripture is But a Declaration of the Saints Faith] O
blind Guids that undertake (as in Lincolnshire, etc.) to guide men through the
Washes upon Life and Death, where K. John of Englands Treasure and Supply
perished; to guide Souls through Hells Eternal Washes! what is your But, but the
Jews, and Papists, and Quakers cry Crucify him, Hang up Christ Jesus, burn up
the Scriptures, and all Bibles, Old and New-Tements, etc?

2. What is this Saints Faith? You acknowledge none but the Faith of the wild
Souls called Quakers or Foxians! we poor Jews, and Papists, and Protestants,
though we own the Scriptures, some a part, and the rest all, yet we are all but
Infidels, Devils, etc.

3. What is this Faith, Wonderful faith of the Quakers
this Saints Faith, this Foxes and the Quakers Faith? is it any thing else but
(as before I have said) but a mere Babel or Confusion of God and Faith, Christ
and Faith, Spirit and Faith, Light and Faith, Justification and Faith,
Sanctification and Faith, Salvation and Faith, etc. and this in every one of
Mankind in the World, if they will believe it, etc.

The third Branch of G. Fox his Answer is, [Men had Faith before the Scriptures
were.]

I Answer, Neither Abraham nor ever any Man had Faith before it pleased the
Eternal and Invisible Deity to disclose himself by Word, Gods several ways of
revealing himself
or Sight, or Dream, or Motion, or Writing, as Heb. 1. at several times and
ways it pleased him to speak, and last of all by the best and clearest of all,
his only Begotten Christ Jesus.

2. When it has pleased the incomprehensible Majesty to Command his
Appearances by Words, Visions, The mad fancies of the Quakers as to the Holy
Scriptures
Dreams, etc. [12] to be written to stand upon File and Record, (for all
Generations) shall we be such Fools and Franticks as to say it was his Word
when God spoke it to, and in his Prophets: but now it is written, it is but
pen, ink and paper, it is but a dead Letter, it is not Gods word, God has but
One Word, Christ. The Scripture is his Words, etc. Oh the audacious
brockishness of the foul Spirit in these wild Foxians: They dare not (though
what dares not their hellish Spirit against the K. of Heaven yet) they dare not
(they do not deny but predicate) that the Kings Letters from Breda are the
Kings Word, The word of a King and the word of God
that the Kings Speeches and Declarations are his royal Word: shall a Bargain,
a Covenant, a marriage, a Last Will, be our mind, our will, our Word, when it
is spoken! But when it is written, fairly drawn, and engrossed, subscribed and
sealed unto before many Witnesses attesting, then it is not our word, mind, or
will, but words, etc, The bottom and Truth is: The Spirit by which the Quakers
are acted would be glad that there were not such a person called the Word of
God, nor such a writing declaring so sweetly, so plainly, so fully, and so
heavenly of him:

8. Instance: Page 25. Joseph Kellet etc.
In the 25. page G. Fox brings in the same Author, saying, [that the Power
which justles out the Form is an Error:] He Answ. which was the Apostles work
to bring of the Form into the Power, the substance Christ which was not an
Error, but you bring in the Error, keep people in the Form out of the Power,
and not in the Apostles work:]

I Reply: G. Fox is in his Borough of the various Sense of the word Form: The
word Form debated
It has respect to Nature, to Art, to Civil, Natural, and Divine matters:
Shall I now (like a Fool and a mad man) Cry down all Natural, Civil and Divine
Beings? Are not all the internal and external Forms, shapes, or Beings of the
Creatures in Heaven, Earth, and Sea, of Angels, Sun, Moon, etc. Men, Birds,
Beasts, Fishes,, admirably glorious and stupendous? G. Fox runs to the
Picture, or Forms of these Forms, and says childishly, that the Form or
picture without the Life is nothing: who knows not that, that as to Life it is
good as nothing.

1. But to come to worship, was there not a Form, or manner of Circumsion, the
Passover, the Tabernacle, the Temple, etc.

2. Did ever the Servants of God when they inveighed against the Customariness,
the Carelessness, the pictures, and the mere [13] Formality of the Worshippers
(Jews or Christians) inveigh against the worship it self, and the Appointments
of God and of his Son Christ Jesus.

3. Did the Servants of God ever labor to bring and hale off Gods people from
the worship it self, Gods Ordiances and Institutions
but only from the dead and merely formal using of them, until the time
appointed by God himself for their withdrawings, disappearing and abrogation.
What a shameless falsehood is it that any of Gods Messengers brought Gods people
off from those heavenly Fabrics which God erected by their Ministry or Service
all the World over?

4. May not Gods Messengers now Cry out against the apish Imitations and
Formalities of the Papists (so horribly and bloodily) abusing Prayer,
preaching, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Excommunication, etc. but (like the
Assyrians or Babilonians, Psalm. 74. All these Christian Appointments must be
broken and tumbled down with Axes and Hammers. etc.

5. This is Treason and Rebellion in any Atheists or whomsoever, The Quakers
gross Hypocrisy
but more abominable Hipocritical in these Pharisaical Foxians, who Cry out
against the apish Imitators, and yet themselves practice, preaching, praying,
Congregations, or Churches, singings, Conventings, and (implicit though real)
Addings to Castings out, etc Full well (as the Lord Jesus speaks) abrogating
the word and Appointments of God, that they may set up and establish their own
Traditions, etc.

6. It Is true, the Protestants have made separation from the Church of Rome, as
whorish and Bloody: in order to the Return to the first Primitive purity, from
which the whore of Rome has departed.

7. G. Fox Cries out against all Scripture and Common Sense, against all Forms,
that is, ways and manners of Gods Worship: Cries up a Christ within, Scripture
within, Church within, Ministers within, Baptism and Supper within, yet
practice they most of these [so many as their Idol requires] and will serve his
turn) as outwardly and visibly as any in the world.

8. I know it is the observation of one of G. Fox his Opposites [a man of
excellent knowledge, A passage of Mr. Baxters weighed
piety and industry, M Baxter] viz. that the Churches of the Independents, and
Baptists have been the source and Spring whence have flown the Generation of
the Quakers. For my self I have observed the contrary in these parts, [14] and
that [although some rotten Professors, or weak Souls though true] have been
bewitched by those Soul-witches yet generally [where they have any Liberty] the
National Church fills up their numbers: Whence the Quakers Proselites do arife.
My Reason I gave them in public, when W. Edm. Boasted of their Numbers, viz.
their Religion is so easy, never coming near the Roots of rotten Nature, but
so wonderfully agreeing with it, and changing one Devil for another, as I have
before instanced, so that I told them I adored the Infinite Power, wisdom and
goodness of God, that they were not ten thousand fold more, and I say Millions
more, then they are: For, I can demonstrate that if G: Fox (for all their
hypocritical prating against Carnal Weapons) get a Sword (as Mahomet did) most
of the Popish, and Protestant and pagan World, will easily be brought to dance
after him.

9. As to the point of Separation: I pray Mr. Baxter and others of G. Foxes
learned and godly opposites who are yet (in their Judgment and Conscience
persuaded to the National Worships] to hear me patiently four words.

1. I pray them to remember what the word Nazarite is in English. The word
Nazareth and the word [Iesus of Nazareth] and in plain English. Add "ye savior
of ye separate." R. W. Ms. Ann.


2. Was there ever Child of God in this world but he was a Nazarate, separate
from worldly persons, worldly practice and worldly worships, as he comes to see
them, etc. and endures not that the evil one should touch him?

3. Is not Gods name Jealous in this end of the World, not the west-world, as
well as since he first proclaimed it in the East.

4. Has not his Jealousy raged against the Jewish whoremongers, Consideration
touching separate Churches
who defiled his first Bed, and will he wink at the Christian Adulterers and
Adulteresses either in Worship or Conversation?

5. With what good Conscience can I (a national Protestant) separate from my
Father the Pope and my mother the Church of Rome, and my Brethren and Sisters
the Papists, and yet it must not be Christian for other Souls to see further
degrees of that Separation necessary, and I must bring up the foot of every
man's Light, and Sight, and Conscience to my Last.

6. This is the main ground of my Controversy with the proud Quakers, they stir
up in their Illuminations in themselves, and [15] Condemnations against others,
The Quakers Converts
but they magnify (with the Papists and Arminians) Cursed, rotten Nature: their
Converts and Proselites have but a painted, formal Repentance, Faith, etc. Only
if they can come to their Church, etc. and Thou and thee, and disresp^ct all
Superiors then are they high Saints, cannot Sin, etc.

7. This (as before I hinted) was the heavenly Principle of those many precious
and gallant Worthies, N. E. glory the very top bough of it
the Leaders and Corner Stones of these New England Colonies, viz. they desired
to worship God in purity according to those persuasions in their Consciences,
which they believed God had lighted up.

8. They desired such for their Fellow Worshippers as they (upon a Christian
account) could have evidence that to be true and real Worshippers of God in
Spirit and Truth also.

But I forget this is but an Appendix, and therefore I return to another
Instance of G. Fox his poor. and lame, and naked Answers, etc.

A 9th. Instance, is page 32. where G. Fox brings in Ellis Bradshaw, Ellis
Bradshaw
saying, [The Spirit of God does not teach to judge before the time] and he
adds that others of them say [The Saints shall not Judge while they be upon the
Earth.] To which he Answers, [But the Spirit did teach the Apostle to judge,
and his Time was come; And he tells some that they were of old ordained for
Condemnation, and their Damnation slumbred not, and they went on to Eternal
Judgment, and it is high Time not to judge.]

I Reply, Some of this his Answer, is some of his wonted Nonsense, or the
Printers oversight, etc. But to the point the great Jugler has taught G. Fox
and his Foxians a trick to outface Death and Indgement. They now keep the great
Sessions and call all the world to their Bar and Judgment. Thus did the poor
cheated Souls in London lately Reeves and Mugleton thunder out their eternal
Sentence of Damnation upon the Souls and bodies of their Oppo^ites, The two
pretended last witnesses Reves and Muggleton
and that with such Seriousness, Confidence and Majesty, that I have known
sollid Christians put into a fright by them.

It is true there is a lawful judging not according to rashness or pride (as
the Quakers is) but according to righteous Judgment.

It is true, The Juggling of the Quakers to make themselves eternal Judgs
the spiritual man judges and discerns all things, that is, looks into the
Causes and Natures of things, Times and persons: But what is this to the
Natural Death of all mankind. [16] Heb. 9? I know the Foxians would turn this
Scripture, and that golden Chain, Heb. 6. the first Christian Principles and
the Eternal Judgment into Mysteries, and that they now Judge the Secrets of
Men, Romans 2. by Paul's Gospel: (therefore by looking on a man they can discern
the inward parts, and what each person is:) For the Lord is now come says
Enoch and Jude in ten thousands of his Saints, and now is the Day appointed in
which God judges the World by that man Christ Jesus [which man they are] of
which the word of God has approved, in that they are raised from the Dead in
Souls and Bodies to keep the Eternal Judgment: This Mystery many of their
young Scholars and many that are truly fearing God amongst them will not
believe. But they spare not to own their high Court of Justice [when they were
put to it] by Speech and writing, and were it not for some obstacles
(especially two) this were a fine Color for their Courts, like a Company of
drunken Sots that kept a Court in Hartford-Shire, A dangerous counterfeit Court.
and feigned themselves Judges, and Justices, and Officers, and had almost
brought themselves all to the Gallows, etc. by hanging up one man until he
began to look black, and some of them began to fear their own Necks, and to
repent of their rash madness.

The first Obstacle against this their pretended high Court of Justice, Two
great Bars to the Quakers high Court of eternal Judg^.
is their own Confession, viz. Christ Jesus was real a Man as any of us, and so
continues, except they can give an account of what is become of him, which at
Newport they could not do.

The second is, their own Spirit and Practices, which I have proved to be so
far from Jude and Enochs 10000 Saints, that their Pride and Scornfulness, their
Rash, Revilings and Railings, their Rash Cursings and Judgings, their
Superstitious and New Inventions, their Blasphemies and Hypocrisies, their
Inhumanities and Impudencies, such as render them so far from being the high
Saints and Judges of the World, that they fall under the Judgment of all sober
end modest persons.

The 10. Iustance, is in page 38. where he brings in Tho. Collier, saying, [All
that has been, are, or shall be Converted since the Gospel Ministration are
Converted by the Apostles words] He Answers: P. 38. T. Collier
So he has thrown out the Spirit which does regenerate, and Christ the way to
the Father, the Word that Sanctifi- [17] eth, and Christ the power of God to
Salvation: who said that they would not come to him that they might be
converted, so if they get all the Apostles Words and come not to Christ they
are not Converted, and none are Converted by the Apostles Words, but who comes
to the Life that the Words come from.

I reply, and ask G. Fox what color of Truth or Modesty is in his Inference,
viz. That if God please to appoint the Words his first Apostles used, to be
still the means of Conversion to he end of the World, that then he has thrown
out himself, etc.

For 1. Is not this Gods Covenant with Christ and all Christians, that his Word
and Spirit should be in their Mou^hs to all Generations: woe be then to these
wild frantic Inserences which disjoyn and separate what the most powerful,
most wise and holy has joined together.

2. For, may there not be as before many Agents Employed by one glorious
Efficient: G. Fox his throwing God overboard and his own Reason and Sense also.
as in Moses building the Tabernacle, Solomon the Temple: Kings in their Royal
Navies and Armies, Fights and Battles; is Moses here thrown out, Solomon thrown
out, and Kings thrown out etc? when Abraham sent his Servants or Kings their
Ambassadors to Espouse Brides to their Sons and Heirs, must Abraham and all
wise Princes be thrown out, etc. Does not rather this mad Soul throw out Moses
and Solomon, and Abraham, and all Kings and great Efficients or first Causes,
yea, and his own Brains (in a mad, proud Frolic) all overboard together?

3. For, does not Paul tell the Corinthians, that they were Gods Husbandry and
Gods Buildings; inferring that under God (not throwing him out) he was a prime
Husbandman, yea, (as himself says further) a Master Builder; yea, does not
Paul tell the same Corinthians, The Harmony between God and his Messengers.
that they were the Messengers, were co workers or Laborers together with God.
Hence Paul Preaching, the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia and Philip Preaching,
the Lord opened the heart of the Eunuch, and Panl so speaking, Joh, "Acts," not
"Joh. 14." R. W. Ms. Ann.
14. and Barrabas, that a great Multitude both of Jews and Greeks believed.

4. It is true that without God and Christ, God does all, yet his means must
be used by which he is pleased to work.
Paul's Planting, and Apollos Watering is nothing, who denies this? but
therefore shall not Paul Plant and Apollo Water, though much in vain, as it was
with the Lord Jesus, his own heavenly Preaching and amazing Miracles.

18] 5. Do these Foxians themselves throw out God and Christ when (as they say)
they use the Apostles words, to gather Stones, and build up the Church of God;
do they not say as much for their new fresh Foxian as ever was spoken of the
Apostles, or any pretending to succeed them? I could give many Instances.

6. There have been many Conversions to the Christian Name in these parts of
the World called Christendom.

These the Papists brag to have effected in all the four parts of the World,
The Papists brag of their Conversions.
both in the East and West Indies, Asia and America, as also in Africa and
especially in Europe, where their Man of sin chiefly resideth: these
Conversions have been wrought sometimes in parts and by degrees, and sometimes
of the whole Nations, and this sometimes by the Sword, sometimes by the
Marriages of Princes, all which are easily effected; because (as in the
Shechemites and Samaritains case) whose Peoples, Nations, Tongues and
Multitudes will easily turn to the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns; and
that very formidable Beast also for Fear, and Gain, and Hope, etc. will easily
suffer the Whore of Rome to ride him.

7. From these Peoples, Tongues, and Nations, etc. it has pleased the most
Holy and only Wise, The Protestant Conversions
to gather out a Peaple to Himself by his Heavenly Witnesses; the Waldenses in
France, the Wickclevists in England, the Hussites in Bohemia, the Lutherans in
Germany, the Calvanists in France etc. out of the bloody Romish Whores
Dominions (144000. Virgin Protestants thirsting after the Blood of Christ Jesus
only for Salvation)

8. The Father of Spirits has stirred up some Witnesses in all Protestant
Nations, to preach against a Formal, National or Parochial Conversion, to
witness against the Formality and Profaneness of the Common Protestants, (all
one in Life and sometimes worse then the Papists,) and to bring thousands and
ten thousands (even the one hundred, forty four thousand Virgins) to endeavor
after purity of heart and Life, The Je^uits and Puritans the two great Corrivals
purity of Doctrine, purity of worship, purity of Churches, etc. These the
Jesuits call Puritans, and Confess that they only among the Protestants, (as
themselves among the Papists) are fit to be thought on as to pretense of the
Christian Name and Religion.

9. At the coming of the Lord Jesus there were two great Com- [19] petitours
for preaching, The two great Corrivals in Christ's time.
First, the Pharisees who by Laud and Sea sent abroad their Emissaries to make
Converts to the God of the Jews and their own Traditions, Secondly, The
Apostles or Messengers of Christ Jesus sent abroad with the glad news of a new
Bargain or Covenant of God with the Sons of men, viz. this second sort; It
pleased the God of Heaven [not to be thrown out as this Fox frantickly barks]
but to go out wonderfully miraculously, yea, also with the private labors and
preachings of private Christians scattered by Persecution, as the holy
Scripture records.

10. For the slighting of this inestimable Pearl of this glad News, The Jesuits
and the Quakers the two great Corrivals abroad.
or Gospel published by God to the World by writing, preaching, professing,
Suffering, etc. It has pleased his Infinite Justice to plough "plague," not
"plough." R. W. Ms. Ann.
the World with Popery, a Religion [a bastard Christianity,] suited [as the
Quakers is] to rotten nature, and fit to carry the world after them as Mahomet
and the Pope have done.

11. In this day the two greatest wonders in the world [pretending to be
Christ's Messengers or Apostles to the Nations] are the Jesuits and the Quakers:
Their Faces look diverse, but they both carry Firebrands in their Tails to burn
up the holy Scripture, all truly holy Christians, yet "yea," not "yet." R. W.
Ms. Ann.
all the world before them. Gods Infinite wisdom has suffered them to be like
Absalom beautiful, False Apostles figured by Absalom.
and plausible, and fit to play Soul Thieves and steal away the hearts of
thousands and ten thousands from the true David the Lord Jesus Christ.

Beside, they are so fortified with the Faces of Men and hair of Women like the
Locusts, Rev. 9. such pretenses, The holy Scriptures the great Box both to
Jesuits and Quakers.
such Illuminations and Appearances, such Assurances and Confidences, such
feelings of Experiences, that it is Gods Infinite Power and wisdom, and
goodness, to preserve the holy Scripture a standing Record of what the first
Messengers and first Churches and first Doctrine and Christians were: or else,
the world would fall down and adore the Images which the Lord has suffered the
Devil in them to set up.

12. I know the Counsels of the Father of Lights are very deep, yea the
Revelation needs a Revelation, Great Conversion of Jews and Gentiles yet
expected.
the Prophecies and Canticles, and Daniel need Heavenly Messengers, and the
most holy Spirit or finger of God to untie such knots: Sure it is that Millions
[20] of Jews and Gentiles must yet enquire with tears of blood after the Blood
of a Savior: Sure they shall not awake out of their pits of Rottenness,
without some means and Messengers sent from Heaven to rouse and wak^n them:
Sure their shall be no other words in their Mouths then what were in the mouths
of the first Messengers according to the Prayer of the Lord Jesus on his Death
bed to his Father, through whose Word all that have believed the report ever
since have believed, Ioh. 17 and with which blessed word the Spirit of God will
be in the mouths of all true Christians, The true Apostles and Fox and his
lying ones Compared
Isai. 59. 20. etc. Surely the true Messengers of Jesus will say no other word
then what Moses and the Prophets foretold and wrought, Act. 26. therefore Fox
and his Foxians that tells us they have all by the Spirit and need no Record,
are Thieves and Robbers, whom, Moses, and the Prophets, and Paul, and the
Apostles abhorred to think of.

A 11. Instance, I. Deacon.
is in Page 40. where G. Fox brings in I. Deacon, saying [The enjoyment of
Immortulity is not till they have put off the Body.]

He Answers, [Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who says, Immortality was
brought to light through the Gospel: this was when they were upon the Earth,
and the Word of God was in them which was Immortal.]

1. I Reply First, G. Fox affirms an Immortality (that is a not dying of the
Soul and Body) As for the Soul, The Quakers dream about not dying or
Immortality.
all true Protestants affirm that the Soul once raised up to Spiritual Life
never dies, no more than Christ Jesus, Romans 6. as for the Body Papists and
Protestants, and the Quakers and all the World grants, that all Flesh is as
grass, etc. and the Sentence of Death, by sickness, Age or Casualty is
impartially executed upon the Foxians as well as other C^ttel: As to the Soul,
who of sober Papists or Protestants questions the Immortality of it: and of the
Body also, in joy or Sorrow to Eternity.

As for the Body the Quakers say when the Soul is gone into God, yea, the Soul
of Judas as well as the Soul of Peter as some of them say, and all of them by
Argument will be forced to say, the Body returns to Earth and Rottenness, never
more to be raised, and no more then Bodies of the Beasts, Birds and Fishes,
(though we know who holds the Bodies of Beasts, Birds and Fishes shall live
again as the Soul mortalists do) what is it then [21] that G. Fox sputters out
for Immortality, or a not dying in this Life? If he speak of the Soul who
denies it? If of the Body he speaks a Beastly Contradiction to the doleful
Sense of all mankind, and their own also, who die and rot as well as them.

2. It is true, 1 Timothy 6. God only has Immortality dwelling in the Light which
no man can approach unto, what ever these Foxians bruitishly fancy of no
distinction between God and themselves their Light and his. The Doctrine of
Immortality.
It is true, yet also that Jesus Christ, 2 Tim^ 1. has brought Life and
Immortality to Light through the Gospel. But what is this but the joyful
Condition of the Souls and Bodies of the godly? their Souls and Bodies raised
up with Jesus to a Spiritual holy Life in this World, their Souls going to
Jesus, and their Bodies sleeping in Jesus, and the rising of their Bodies and
uniting to their Spirits in a Life Eternal?

3. As to this Immortality of G. Fox: all that can be known of his mind is old
H. Nichols and the Nicolaitans mad fictions and fancies of their becoming God
and Christ. A Charitable hope of some Quakers.
I hope charitably of many of them, that run in their Simplicity, Ignorance and
weakness with a true Love to the true Lord Jesus as some did with Absalom Put
"as some did with Absalom," in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann.
who truly loved David but as for Absalom himself the Politicians, the subtle
Plotters, and Ahitophels who love not the true Lord Jesus in sincerity, I fear
instead of their fancied Immortality before the Grave they will meet with a
dreadful Mortality, or death of Soul and Body to Eternity.

A 12. Instance is, Page 47. where he brings in Joseph Miller, Joseph Miller,
saying, [The wise heathen Philosophers had a greater Measure of Light in them
(which is the first Adam) then I can think any man has now]

G. Fox Answ. which shows, that he knows nothing of Christ the second Adam, the
quickening Spirit. He knows no New Creature, for who are in Christ are new
Creatures, nor none of Christ the Covenant of God, of Light, of Life, of Peace,
who was glorified with the Father before the World began, which is beyond the
first Adam, and has shut himself forth, not to be as high as his heathen
Philosophers. And many witness Christ in them in this Age, as in the days of
the Apostles, which is above the heathen Philosophers.]

I Reply, The Ancient Philosophers Considered.
1. I know it pleased God (in all Ages) to stir up the Spirits of some Men (as
the Philosophers amongst the Greeks [22] Socrates, Plato, Aristotle) to improve
that excellent Light of Reason which he had given them as Men, and in so great
a measure above other men.

2. This wily Fox he runs to his hole and Confounds this Common Light of
Reason, with Christ and God himself, who also are called Light by Similies from
the Creature.

3. The Question then follows: If this Light of Knowledge were Christ, as God,
and King, and Mediator: why is it that none of these excellent Men knew
nothing of God, nor Christ, nor Spirit, (Name nor Thing) but only of the first
Creation: The mad^ness of George Fox his Fancy about them.
Can such a Court be kept, a Palace furnished, and such Royal and heavenly
Guests be entertaind, and no Body know any thing of it, nor themselves neither;
when Christ Jesus came into Jerusalem (though but in a poor Contemptible way)
all Iorusalem was moved at his coming: and shall this most glorious King (now
Infininitely more glorious) make his Ingress into the Souls of such wise and
Excellent Men, and neither they, nor others hear of it until just now, (twenty
years since) Some cheated Souls dream of it.

4. The utmost of Reason in these Excellent Men, it is known I say; that the
Activity of the highest Reason in this World falls short in two grand
particulars. The failing of the highest Reason in this world in many,
especially in two particulars


1. As to the Creatures: For some of them must needs fall short, when Plato
granted a Creation, and a kind of Father, Son and Holy Spirit in the Creation
of it, Aristotle pretends to see further then his Mr. Plato and all his
Arguments. and asserts the World to have no Beginning, nor Ending, etc. Some of
them maintaind the Soul of man to be procreated by the Parents: others (as the
Quakers) that it was part of the Divine Essence, others that it is created and
infused by God, etc. Some that the Center of the World is the Terrestrial
Globe, The drep knowledge of some.
and that the Sun and heavenly Bodies move about it, others, that the Ceuter of
the world is the Sun, and that this Terrestrial Globe moves about the Sun, and
many other such, natural Mysteries.

2. However that Paul tells us Rom, 1. That by the Creation some come to know
there is an Eternal Power and Godhead, yet 1 Cor. 1. he tells us that the World
by wisdom knew not God, which must be expounded (or else swallow a
Contradiction as the Quakers guise is) viz. that by the highth of their wisdom
[23] they could not see God so as to make him alone their Summum bonum and
Blessedness, The greater depth of the Creator himself, the Trinity, the Fall,
Redemption Incarnation, Resurrection, etc.
so as to glorify him as God: So, as the holy Scriptures and the most holy Son
of God from his Bosom has revealed him, so that in the highth of Reasons
Reasonings the Spirit of God concludes, that the natural man can not reach or
perceive the things of God, (and yet this foolish Man makes every man's heart in
the World the Court of Heaven) a thing which every Kingdom and all men may
abhor to think of, but men are vain in all their Reasonings, and their foolish
heart is darkened, yea, their wisdom is Enmity, hating God himself, as the
Scripture concludes, etc.

It is true: We re read of Noah Ark, of Moses his Tabernacle, Solomon his
Temple, and we see many glorious Fabrics and Works of the Sons of men in his
world, The Excellent Gifts of Nature reach not heavenly and Spiritual things
Spiritually.
which argue excellent Gifts of God to them, both of wisdom, Prudence,
Fortitude, Patience, Temperance, etc. but do they all amount in the Total to
more then Natural parts, good Education, and Industrious diligence can reach
too? What are all these to the enlightening of my Soul, with my natural undone
and damned Condition? to a sight of Sin as Sin? to a sight of my utter
Inability to pay (or all the whole Creation for me) one farthing to Gods
Justice, or to work my desire to have any thing to do with him? What are these
to the changing of, and a total turning of my whole Soul unto God? to an humble
sight of my Infinite necessity of the alone Sufficiency and Excellency of the
Lord Jesus the great and only Mediator, and of my becoming one with him in
Loves Eternal?

Beside, what a single "Simple" not "single." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Consequence does this high Illuminiated Doctor give to his Opposite, viz. that
because I magnify the Gifts of God to many (yea, thousands of Excellent Men
whom I, nor G. Fox are worthy to hold the Candle to) therefore I shut my self
out from Christ and those wise men too: It may be his Opposite had somewhat
more in his Assertion, but this is all this high wise man in his own eyes
prints and Answers to:

Who knows not how full the World is of admirable Men and Women that are not
Christians? And yet what a base esteem has this proud Spirit of all men, yea
of all Christians too that dance not after his foolish pipe, etc.

A 13th. Instance, I mention (though Instances are as Leprosy spread over his
whole Book) is in page 48. where he brings in the [24] same Joseph Miller
saying, Joseph Miller
[The Prophets are more certain then any other Revelation.] He Answers, [was
not the Son of God revealed, the end of the Prophets? Did not God reveal him
which came in the Volume of the Book to do the will of God? And so the
Prophets, and the Law, and Types, and shadows, which they that had the Law, and
Types, and shadows, knew not the Son of God that was revealed, that was their
End spoken of in the Prophets, end Epistles, who is now revealed.

I Reply, G. Fox (to pass by his un-English Nonsense obvious to any that
understand public writings) I say G. Fox either ignorantly or willingly knows
not that the Question is not here, The Prophets witness of Christ how stronger
then the Apostles, their own Speeches: were
whether Christ be the End of the Law and the Prophets, in a true sense: or
whether Christ was not more revealed at his coming in the Flesh, then before in
the Prophecies, etc. But, whether the written word of the Prophets, of which
Peter speaks and I have spoke before be not a more sure word of Command and
Comfort to us then any now to be expected, yea, then that Revelation which we
have upon that holy Testimony of Peter and John themselves?

As it is with an Anchor strong enough to ride a Ship in most weathers, yet
some are as the Seamen spoke second and third Bowers, Bebaioteron Iogon a more
sure Word.
and one the best and Sheet Anchor: and as it is in Witnesses some speak the
Truth and Substance of the matter: and yet others speak more plainly and fully,
etc. So speaks Gods Spirit in Peter of the Infinite Fullness of the Prophecies
of Scriptures, or the written foretellings and utterings concerning Jesus
Christ. The Word of God Considered.


Thus the God of Heaven most holy and only wise stoops to our weakness, and
calls his mind his word, his works his word, his Providence of mercy or
Judgment, his Word, the Lord Jesus his only begotten his word, his writings
his Word; and this in a way of Condescension to our Capacity, seeing that all
the World over Kings and Rulers, Fathers, Masters of Families, of Ships, etc.
give the word, that is the manifestation of their mind and will, The Sripture
or written Testimony.
and this as the Spring in Clocks and watches turn about all other wheels and
motions. Hence it is, that if ancient Records and Deeds with Hands and Seals be
produced at the Bar of Trial, all mouths are stopped at such Evidences. Thus the
Word of God in the mouths of the Prophets written for after Generations, Much
more their feigned Spirit of Prophecy the Quakers prate of
is (Comparatively) beyond the Report of Peter [25] and John themselves is in
all Religions. Erase "is in all Religions." R. W. Ms. Ann.
The Jews have their Talmud, the Turks their Alcheron, the Pope his Decretans,
and the Protestants the Written Word, or Scriptures.

When therefore a Pardon is written and Sealed with the Board Seal of a King or
State, what a fancy is it for a condemned Wretch to hearken first to a Pardon
revealed within: The Quakers Sandy Quicksauds
to a voice within, to a King within, to a Writing within, a Seal within, and
so slighting the true pardon in the Kings way to be conveyed from without to
the Mind and Spirit within, to lose his Pardon and Deliverance as thousands of
such poor cheated Souls must do.

A 14 Instance G Fox brings in Page 49. his Opposite Ralph Hall saying [It is
against the Light of Nature for Women to Preach: P. 47. Preaching of Women
Ralph Hall
etc.

G. Fox Answers Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and the mind of God and the
Prophets, who said, God would pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his
Sons and Daughters should Prophecy: So that he is a limiter of the Holy one, a
quencher of the Spirit, and in the Darkness, and this is above the Light of
Nature.

I Reply, First, What is the Light of Nature, but the Light in which every man
comes into the World with (as the Foxians speak) a Light differing from that
Light which Beasts, The light of Nature discussed
wild and tame, and Birds, and Fishes have: And Insert "there is." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
a Second Light differing from what is Erase "Super." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Supernatural, as that Light revealed from Heaven in the Holy Scriptures, and
infused into the Souls of Men by the Holy Spirit or Power of God.

2. What is the Light of Nature in Man, but that Order which the most Glorious
Former of all things has set (like Wheels in Clocks or Watches) a going in
all his Creatures?

Some have observed that in the Insensible Creatures to which the most High
has only giving Beings, Male and Female
that there may be observed a Male and Female amongst them.

This is more observable in Vegetables or growing Creatures, as in Plants,
Trees, Herbs, Flowers, etc.

More yet in Sensitives, as Birds, Beasts, Fishes.

Most of all in Rationals: Men and Women, whom the most High has so
wonderfully distinguished.

It is true, that in Religious and Christian Matters, there is no [26] respect
of persons with God, as of Man before the Woman: otherwise than to order
Natural and Civil.

The Woman is Predestined, is Called, Men and Women compared
is Justified, is Glorified, and wears that Golden Chain as well as the Wisest
and Strongest of Mankind.

And it is true, the Wisdom of God perfers some Women before thousands of Men,
in their being born of Nobles, in excellent parts (as is observable in the Lady
Jane, and Queen Elizabeth, etc.) in some special favor, The kindness of God to
women
as Christ Jesus first appearing to Mary Magdalen and other Women, and sending
them to carry the first Tidings or Gospel of his Resurrection to his Apostles:
yea, in effusions or powrings forth of an extraordinary measure of his Spirit
before Christ's coming, as on Miriam, Deborah, Anna, Huldah, etc. and at his
coming (according to Ioels Prophecy) on his Daughters as well as his Sons (so
that as my opposites alleged to me in public: Philip the Evangelist had four
Daughters thus extraordinarily end^wed) yet this favor of God toward Women
destroys not the order which the God of Order or Nature has set in those
Bounds, and Limits, and Distinctions between the Male and Female, the Man and
Woman: though the Holy Scripture were silent, yet Reason and Experience tell
us, that the Woman is the weaker Vessel, Women's unfitness for manly employments
that she is more fitted to keep and order the House and Children, etc. that
the Lord has given a covering of longer Hair to Women as a sign or teacher of
covering Modesty and Bashfulness, Silence and Retiredness: and therefore not so
fitted for Manly Actions and Employments.

Therefore because of Ioels Prophecy, or because we must not limit or quench
the Spirit, as G. Fox says, there is no ground in Gods ordinary course of
Nature to permit Women to pretend to be Apostles or Messengers to the Nation,
or Preachers and Teachers in the Public Assemblies.

1. Because we find no such Commission given by Christ Jesus or any such
Practice amongst the first Believers.

2. The Lord has set (as Seamen speak) a preventer to such an unnatural
boldness by express Prohibitions, And for being Preachers and postles
especially.
with the Reasons and Grounds to the Corinthians and to Timothy: and to answer
those Scriptures with a flam, viz. that Eve the Transgressor, and Women that be
Tatlers are forbidden, and the Woman Iezebel, [27] etc. is all one to tell us,
that Paul was not a Man, nor Timothy a Man, nor the Teachers Men, nor Corinth a
City, but all signify Metaphorical and Mystical Business.

3. Why may not Women much more be Lord Majors and Bailiffs, and Sherriffs, and
Justices, and Constables, Captains, Colonels, Generals and Commanders by Sea
and Land. Change the period to "?." R. W. Ms. Ann.


4. That Reason the Spirit gives to the Corinthians, for the vailing of Women
in public Assemblies, makes much more for their vailing and silence in matters
of Prophesying, Preaching and Praying, viz. Because of the Angels: I know not
any fair and sober Exposition of this Scripture (except as the blind Quakers
who swallow down a fly and Camel too) but that of the Heavenly Angels and
Spirits attending on and guarding the Assemblies of true Christians, and
rejoicing in the comeliness, order and beauty of their public Administrations.

Some few years since there came to my House two Mary's, it is said they came
from London: they bid me Repent and Hearken to the Light within me, A memorable
and doleful story
I prayed them ^o sit down, that we might quietly reason together, they would
not; then standing, I asked them the ground of their such Travel and Employment,
they alleged Ioels Prophecy; I answered, that was fulfilled, that was not
every days work; besides their business was not Prophetical but Apostolical,
etc. they regarded not my Answers nor Admonitions, but powered the Curses and
Judgments of God against me, and hurried away; to Barbados they went, and
(being War time, the Ship bound for England) they were set upon by the Dutch,
and though these Women animated the Seamen to fight, and Prophesied that not an
hair of their head should perish, yet they two were both slain, as afterward
came certain Tidings of the whole matter.

I own that it may please the Father of Spirits in cases extraordinary, What
teaching the Lord requires of Women
he may please to alter his common course of Na^u^e (as in Abraham's case with
Isaak) but we must not tempt God; but if God has powered forth the gifts of
Knowledge and Utterance upon some Women more then other, they have three large
fields to walk in mentioned by the Holy Scripture, viz. of their instructing
their Children, etc. 2. As occasion justly calls them from home, of instructing
other women especially the younger. 3. Of confessing boldly the Name and Truth
of Christ Jesus, [28] when he suffers Tyrants to bring Persecution on them, etc.

A 15th. Instance is in page 56. where George Fox brings in Thomas Higinson,
Tho. Higginson
saying, [The sight of the Godhead without Faith in Christ is the Foundation of
all false worships.]

He Answers, Can any see the Godhead? have a siht of the Godhead and ^ot see
Christ, and have Faith in Christ? And who has Faith in Christ, do they not see
the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, Christ? And was not their mind turneh
from that of God in them (which declared the Invisible things of him from the
Creation of his Eternal Power and Godhead) which the Apostle found fault withal
Let all Examine and Judge, and read the Scripture, Romans 1. and try.]

I Reply, In former years I have Conversed with all the Indians of this
New England by Land and Seas, The knowledge of God by nature
and I have read the 1. of the Romans often, and now once again at G: Fox his
motion, and I find that First, there is generally in all mankind in the World a
Conviction of an Invisible, Omnipotent, and Eternal Power and Godhead.

2. That this Conviction does arise from the Creation, (though some of the
wisest of the World as Aristotle, etc. though Confessing a Godhead yet) hold
the world an Eternal Deity it self, and never to have been created.

3. I find not that ever any man or men (by all their natural Light or wit, The
convictions of nature which the 4 Quakers so foolishly talk of
or Christ within,) could find out how the World or himself, Man or Woman were
created: Though James Nailour told us in print, that if never a Letter of
Script^re had been written, yet their Spirit could tell them all things.

4. I find all men confess, that the will or Word, or mind of God is pure, and
as they could come to know, it is to be adored, kept, and observed: and that it
was ever, and is wickedness to Sin against it.

5. All mankind having the Law or without it are persuaded that some actions
are naught, and against Gods will, as to steal, to Murder, etc.

6. None (for all the Light and Spirit in every one) could ever find out how
Sin how Sorrow and Death came into the World: Nor how such Inclinations and
Dispositions to Sin came into themselves, etc.

7. I find in all mankind a Conviction that God is just and [29] powerful, and
does bring plagues and punishments upon persons, and Nations for those gross
Sins of Adultery, Murder, etc.

8. I could never lea^n (for all that Christ in every man Fox sings of) that
ever any man living, The loss of all men as to God and hravenly things
or all the Counsels of men could ever know or learn four things, but as
revealed by God, by extraordinary ways, of Dreams, Visions, etc. or the
ordinary of his holy Records, and the Doctrine of them opened, preached, etc.
1. How to pacify Gods Justice? 2. How to resist the Devils Tyranny: 3. How to
worship God? 4. How to get true Blessedness here, and in the World to come?

9. Hence (according to Foxes Opposite) all mankind have invented so many false
Gods, Men naturally frame a God as the Devils do but cannot love him.
false worships, etc. all the world over, yet out of no more Love to God then
the Lamb bears to a Lion: but out of Fear, as the old saying is, primos in Orb
Deos, etc. Fear made the first Gods. Hence the Philistines sends the God of
Israel a present and offering with Ark or Chest: Hence the Samaritans (with the
Sechemites) for fear of Lions or hope of gain will be of any worship or
Religion, as most this day in the world will be, yea, all and every Soul except
to whom (in and from the holy Scriptures) the holy Spirit reveals that
Incomprehensible Mystery of a Mediator.

A 16th. Instance of Foxes lame writings, is page 56. where he brings in the
same Author saying, [The Justification and Redemption by obeying the Light
within, is the Mystery of Iniquity]

He Answers, [He that believes is justified from all things, and comes not
into Condemnation: and he has the wietnss in himself: and that lets him see
the Redeemer, the Savior, the Light which walking in it he is cleansed from
all Sin, and so no Mystery of Iniquity For the Mystery of Iniquity is out of
the Light. None sees Justification and Redemption, but with the Light within
which comes from Christ who has enlightened him.]

I Reply, This is subtle, but being examined it will be a mystery of hellish
Iniquity, and lighter then vanity it self.

For 1. He usually, Babilonian Juggling, and Egyptian canting
and here (as before I have opened) confounds Justification and Light, and
Christ, and Faith, and obedience, (after his Babylonish wont) all in a Juglers
box within together: So that the English of Faith is Christ, Obedience is
Christ, Justification is Christ, Light is Christ, etc. It is true, sometimes it
pleased Gods Spirit to speak figuratively, and to [30] call Christ sometimes
our Justification, and sometimes a Curse for us: Christ's Name horribly profaned
Sometimes Sanctification, and sometimes Sin for us: But it is a mystery or
subtle trick of Hell to call Faith Obedience, and Obedience to the Light
Justification and Redemption, and yet mean Christ. So that Fox his words may be
in plain English thus rendered, [None sees Christ and Christ but with the Christ
within, which comes from Christ who has Christed him.]

The true Sense, (as Money) Answers all things, but it is a Mystery of Iniquity
to darken any, much more heavenly matters with Confounding and not
distingu^shing aright when matters are in Examination.

2. It is another Gospel (or glad News) yet not another, but is a dream and
dead picture of an Image or Idol to put in our Obedience and working, though I
know they Father this Bastard upon the most holy God himself, saying, it is his
Obedience, his Righteousness, and his working, in the Room of the Death and
blood shedding, the Sufferings and merits of the Lord Jesus.

3. It is a Mystery of Iniquity* The Old and new Bargain to Love.
(subtly and yet churlishly and selfishly with Laban) to change wages and the
Covenant or Bargain so often: to pretend (with the Papists) great abhorring of
the Jewish worship and Jewish Covenant, the Bargain of, Do this and live, the
Bargain of saving our selves, etc. The great Delusion of Quakers as to pardon
of Sin and Righteousness.
and the Bargain of flying out of our selves and only to Gods mercy in the
Mediation of Christ Jesus: And then again to render our selves to be so holy,
so righteous, so obedient, so loving, so Chaste, so meek, so patient, so
Temperate, that in thought word or deed we Sin not, and this our Holiness is
Christ, and God, and Spirit, and Justification, etc.

I know the writers of the Quakers make this high Obedience to be the Crown of
some high Saints amongst them as the Papists do, and that others come not so
high, are taken by the sleshly Spirit, and repent, and Confess, and be more
watchful as they say, in a Contradiction of I. Naylor, but this is
Contradiction to their general grant, viz that every Saint, every one, even the
least that is born again, he can not Sin: and I know also that they have a
foolish Salve or plaster for this sore too, The Quakers bewildred as to
Perfection.
and Contradict their denying of meanings given to the Scripture, and come to
the meanings of the Protestants saying, they cannot Sin willingly, and so, and
so; And yet again, (in a horrible Mystery of 31] Iniquity) they exclaim against
the Protestants for saying, a Child of God can not fall from true grace Finally
or Totally.

4. Here is a Mystery of hellish Iniquity, in that they Confess such a man
Christ to have been, The Quakerr devilish Chimistry
and his blood shedding Insert "according to." R. W. Ms. Ann.
the Types and real predictions and figures of him, a real Death, Resurrection
and Assention, and yet upon the point (by a Devilish Chemistry) evaporate all
these, and leave nothing but a Christ within, as God and as Man, whose Name is
now Light, and our Obedience to the motions of this Light within this is
Justification, Righteousness, Salvation, God, Christ, Perfection, perfect
holiness, etc.

5. It is a Hellish Mystery of the Devil to Cozen poor Souls with a Notion of
the Difficulty and height of their Profession, and of worshipping God in Spirit
and Truth, The feined ^ardness, but the real easiness of the Quakers Spirit.
which they say no Body in the World do but they, etc. and yet the Truth is as
I told them in public, there is an Image in the Bed, but David was gone, yea,
and that their Religion was one of the easiest Religions in the world. For, as
I have seen pluck but forth a small pin or peg in a Harpsycon, and that
wonderful Instrument will delight your Ear and mind with curious and various
Tunes of Music: The wonderful Harpsicon
So if once a poor Soul gives way an Inch, and sets in one thought of yielding
to the voice of a Spirit within them, they are filled and ravished with curious
Notions of Justification, Holiness, God and Christ, and Spirit within them,
they can now Thou the King himself, they need no Scriptures, The vain dreams of
the Quakers and their fools Paradise.
nor Teachers: and thus as in a dream their great Debts of Thousands and
Millions are paid and discharged. The Cage door flies open, and they are
delivered as a Bird, etc. from Sin and Devil, and Hell, etc. yea, Rapt up into
Paradise, and see, and hear, and speak unutterable Joys, etc. I Confess as I
said in the Case of the two hundred following Absalom, I hope there is many a
precious Soul sincerely aiming at God, and as precious Diamonds and Jewels
fallen in the dirt, etc. As I hope in the Parishes of Protestants and Papists
also, who being only ignorant as the Disciples were of main points of
Christianity, yet aim uprightly at God, truly love him, and labor to increase
in the knowledge and grace of Christ Jesus.

A 17th. Inst. is in ag. 63. where G. Fox brings in his Adversary Jeremiah Ives
saying, Jeremiah Jves
[There may be a Light to Convince of Sin, and yet not within man.] He Answers,
there is no people [32] Convinced of Sin, but they are Convinced within
themselves and with the Light within them: It is the Light which makes manifest
to a man when he is Convinced: It Answers to something, and reaches to
something in their particulars, though the words be spoken without them from
the Light.

I Reply, First, it is a doleful Business to read and hear how Satan (in his
Chains of Darkness) yet has Liberty to appear abroad as an Angel of Light from
Heaven, The Devil in Samuels Mantle
thus vapouring and swaggering under the Cloak and Colors of Light, the Light
which is Christ, the Light by which all things were made, the Light that was
glorified with the Father before the World was, An Angel of Light but a Dragon
and Devil of darkness.
the Light that enlightens every man that comes into the World: the Light
within you, etc. the Light which will guide you up to God, up to Christ, up to
Salvation and Eternal Life, and yet all this vapourings and Crakings are but
Cheatings from the God of this World whose eyes being beat out by Gods most
righteous Sentence, he labors to keep all in blindness, or to beat out the
eyes of those whom God has truly enlightened.

2. As I have said before, and I said truly, the word Light is a Similitude
from Light and darkness though my Opposites in the dispute affirmed, that God
was Light in a proper and not figurative Sense, and it signifies and intends
Truth of all Sorts, whether Natural, Truth and Light the same thing.
Moral or Heavenly: The natural Truth or Light is received within by a natural
Light or understandings: The Civil and moral Light or Truth suits and agrees
with those moral and Civil Convictions of the natural Light and understanding?
Hither to Natures Light will reach. But when we mount up to Divine and
Supernatural Truth, here these very Foxians Confess that the Natural Man
perceives not the things of God: Only they say, that beside Natural Light,
Natural Reason, etc. there is the holy Seed God and Christ, etc. within every
Son, and to this Spirit and Seed in Prison they preach, and Fox in our
discourses alleges and affirms God (in every man) to be a Cart laden with
sheaves, pressed under, and as it were in Prison, etc. blasphemous wretches if
they keep not, but go beyond Similitudes and Comparative Expressions Insert
"used by ye Lord." R. W. Ms. Ann.
to make ^s poor worms creep up to Heaven.

3. All Light, or Truth Natural, Civil, or Divine it comes from without, and is
received by the Internal Faculty according [33] to the Capacity, The way of
Truth or Lights goings.
Nature and measure of it. All Truth or falsehood, Light or darkness is first
espied by the watch or Sentinel, Fancy or Comprehension, etc. From thence it is
conveyed to the Court of Guard, where Captain Reason or his Lieutenant, common
Sense* and Experience takes Examination, and Memory keeps a Record of
proceedings which go on by degreen to Actions, etc.

4. When I say it comes from without, I intend not that Truth or Light comes
any other way from without, Where no Receiver no Thief.
as by force and ravishment, etc. I say any Change "any"to "no." R. W. Ms. Ann.
other way then there is a door and Room and Receptive Faculty within willing
to receive, and to make it welcome: This G. Fox urges there must be a
receiver, and something that Answers. I Answer, Natural Truth, or morals, Civil
matters are soon received by all Natural and Moral Understandings, Natural
Understanding in Men and Beasts.
yea, in natural Commands and Threatenings, Beasts and Birds are admirably
capacious and observant. But when we speak of Supernatural Heavenly and Eternal
matters, of Spiritual things to be discerned Spiritually: What a difference is
there as between Heaven and Earth, and Infinitely greater?

When the Lord Jesus asked his Disciples how many loavs they had, An Instance
of a merely Rational and an heavenly Power and Faculty.
their Natural Faculty or Reason could give an Answer: When he asked them whom
do Men say that I the Son of man am? This was a Divine and Supernatural
Question, and for the outside and Truth of the Fact, the Devils could Answer as
well as the Disciples, not only that same said he, was Elias, John Baptist,
etc. but that he was the Son of God: All this exceeds not Natural first Birth
Powers or Faculties: But to give a believing and an affectionate Answer as
Peter did, this requires a Faculty and Power which Flesh and Blood could not
reach too, Change "too" to "to." R. W. Ms. Ann.
but the Spirit or secret working Power of God in the means wrought Peter's
heart and the Disciples hearts, and to this day all Believers Hearts to receive
and welcome all truly Divine and Heavenly Doctrines.

Whereas therefore G. Fox talks of something within which is preached to: I may
Answer as they do, A close Companion between all Faculties and Objects.
viz. that the natural man perceivs no spiritual matter, but when he is born
again then he acts and works, and it is most certain, that as an House receivs
his Master, as Candle kisseth Candle, the Clasp the Hook, the mortise the
Tenant, so do Natural or Spiritual Faculties receive Natural [34 or Spiritual
Faculties receive Natural or Supernatural Motions and Impressions.

The Protestants say, that before it pleases God by some word read, preached,
etc. to set up a Candle of wisdom in the Souls, and to work a spiritual favor
in the Soul, all heavenly matters are nauseous and odious, though as pleasant,
profitable and honorable, to self Ends they are welcome all the word over, yet
as spiritual and heavenly abominable?

G. Fox says there is a something, Nothing truly Spiritual in Nature as now
degenerate.
a Seed, though but as a Grain of mustard Seed, a Seed of God, of Christ, of
the Spirit, to which Christ the Word is preached, and which makes Answer:
Hence (horribly abusing Scripture phrazes) they so often say God is all (within
and without:) Hence they maintain, etc. though men be dark and dead, yet Christ
within is Light and alive in them, and them only.

Hence appears G. Fox his lying Cheats of a Sufficient Light within to lead to
God and to Salvation, a Teacher within all Sufficient, for then no need, yea,
it is a simple Superfluity, etc. to hold a Candle of outword words to awaken
and enlighten such a glorious all-Sufficient Sun within.

5. I ask where this something, this something of God, About the light shining
in darkness.
(yea, God and Christ and Spirit Adds "is" after "Spirit." R. W. Ms. Ann.
) If he Answer, in the understanding he grants it, that Insert "it." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
is dark, and perceives no heavenly matters, etc. If in the Heart and
Affections he Confessieth, all there, is hard and dead: only he says, the
Light shines in the darkness, etc. Implying that in the dark understanding
there is some heavenly Light: in the hearts hardness there is some softness,
and the Light shines in darkness, etc.

I Answer, Christ Jesus the Sun of Righteousness arose with saving Rays or
wings of Salvation, but the blind Jews could not own him for the Expected
Messiah, what is this G. Fox his something? a Light of Christ inlightning every
man that comes into the World, though the man see it not.

2. What is this to all the Generations of the World about four thousand years
before Christ came, and was in that visible person as John says of him, that
lightens every man that comes, etc. what is this to a mixture of Light and
darkness in the same faculty, the eye blind and yet seeing, the man dead and
yet alive? It is true the Lambs wife confesses that her Hear^t was awae [35]
while she slept. But what is this to the heart being dead and no Life at all
and yet waking?

6. The Conclusion is (as before I hinted) and they Confess, when God in his
own Means ordinarily works the will to hear, Gods grrcious workings with and in
the Souls of men.
to turn, to believe, to pray, he then graciously works the work for us, and
being thus turned with Ephraim, we mourn and lament, and say, what have we
done? when he turns our wilderness (wholly a wilderness) into a Garden, then we
bring forth his sweet Fruits, Flowers and Spices: when he turns the Wolf into a
Lamb, then we are meek and Innocent, and patient: but to talk of preaching to
the Spirits in Prison, yea, of the Seed of God and the Spirit of God in prison,
when the Lord speaks of his warning and moving men by Noah's preaching in the
old World, A wonderful Parrots Religion.
as may be evidently evinced,) is like the profane teaching of Parrots to
prate of Grace and Heaven, like that admirable Parrot in France, who could say
her Pater noster, her Creed, and Ten Commandments, and yet knew as much of
grace and the workings of God in the Soul, as her Popish Teachers, etc.

An 18th. Instance of G. Fox, his lame and cheating Answers is in page 64.
where he brings in the same Author Jeremiah Ives saying, Jeremiah Ives
[It is a known Error to say, that a man was in Hell and in Heaven.] He
Answers, who in this shows his Ignorance of Scripture, for it gives Testimony
of men that did witness that they had been in Hell, in the Nethermost Hell, and
witnessed again they were in Heaven, and sat in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, and such were in Heaven, as is spoken of in the Revelations.

I Reply, G. Fox and millions more talk of Heaven and Hell as the Notable
Parrot (above said) Infert "so did." R. W. Ms. Ann.
our Forefathers, Heaven and Hell to come.
and some from the Scripture, and some out of Reasons Light talked of places of
Joy Eternal for the Righteous, and of misery Eternal for the bad and wicked.
But the new Light from Christ Jesus and his penmen is the clearest that ever
shined in this world, especially, that famous Parable or Word proceeding out of
the mouth of Christ Jesus, Luke 16. that of Dives and Lazarus declaring (in
substance) the state of the Life, to Come, and of the two great Parties of the
poor afflicted Righteous, and the wicked living in pleasures, etc.

G. Fox is in his Borough of the various signification of the words Heaven and
Hell: He knows that a state of Sorrow and [36] Bitterness is called Hell. Fox
his Hell and Heaven.
That a state of Death and the grave is set out by the word Hell in the same
Hebrew phrase: And to either of these he wickedly applies the thirst Erase
"thirst." R. W. Ms. Ann.
State, of which the Lord Jesus 1. so clearly speaks: viz. The State of the
ungodly after this Life, in the Life and World to come.

2, Again, he knows the visible State of the true Profession of Christ Jesus is
called Heaven.

3. Such as have Interest in Christ Jesus have sitten down with him in those
Heavenly Mansions and glories into which he is entered bodily and gone to
prepare for their Reception and coming.

4. The third Heaven (the place of Paul's Rapture and Vision) the place of Joy,
and Blessedness and Glory, when these Heavens and Earth are burnt up and
consumed.

It is like G. Fox has been occasioned to these thoughts by the Papists Fables
about Heaven and Hell, The Papists Queries about Hell
and Purgatory, and their curious Questions as whether the Torment of Hell be
as real and terrible as this Elementary and Kitching Fire: Whether the pain of
Hell transcend not all pains of Childbirth, Stone, gout, Colic, Burning? etc.
Whether it be possible for a Creature to Continue in such Torments perpetually
without Intermission? The Scripture, Hell and Heaven but Fables with G. Fox and
other Popish Foxes
Whether there shall not be some end after some millions of years as well as of
the pains of Purgatory: G. Fox knows how the Papists get a world of Money by
these Notions of Heaven and Hell which the Atheistical Foxes amongst them count
but Fables, (as the Pope speaks of Christ) The Devils have a more real Faith or
Belief of these things and tremble: They cried out to the Lord Jesus, why art
thou come to torment us before the Time? etc. But G. Fox not believing (as they
think) these Fables, he fancies that Hell is some apprehensions in the mind of
wrath to come, and that is Hell and wrath it self, and having had slashes of
Pride and Peace in their minds, these are the Joys of Heaven, whereas the Lord
Jesus tells us, that beside the hundred fold of Spiritual Joys (viz a hundred
Fathers, The Heaven and Hell to come.
Mothers, etc.) there remains for his Followers in the World to come Eternal
Life.

They are but short Flashes of Hell and Heaven which some of these poor Cheated
Souls dream of: I know they allow time more or less before they come into the
perfect and heavenly State of Necessity. Erase "of necessity." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Death prevents some from coming to it, and makes the reign of the rest whom
Satan has ticed into these [37] proud Vanities but short, The Foxes mad Fancy
of the Soul and next Life.
as Experience has declared: only they have a mad Fancy of their Souls going
into God, and becoming more God, and yet this some of them grant to the Souls
of all men, to Judas as well as Peter.

The true Protestant believes these three things, First, that there is a State
Eternal of Joy to the Righteous bodies and Souls after this Life: The
Protestants Faith as to the Life to come.
and a State of Eternal Misery of Soul and Body to the ungodly: Although the
exact knowledge of particulars exceed the present sight of our mortal eyes, the
hearing of our Ears, and the Capacity of our Hearts, etc.

2. The first Fruits and a Taste both of the heavenly Joys and the Torments of
the damned are given by God in this Life, to the first, in that Solid Peace and
Joy which they have in God: To the other in that Horror and Despair, and Enmity
against God, etc.

3. Three Sorts of men especially will seek Erase "k" in "seek." R. W. Ms. Ann.
there is an Hell to come, Three Sorts will find Hell
above other Sinners. First, The Volnptuous and Luxurious, above others.
whose God is theii Belly, and their Senses, etc. Ars. potenter. Erase "Ars.
potenter." R. W. Ms. Ann.


2. The Devourers of the Poor and helpless, potenter, Erase "potenter." R. W.
Ms. Ann.
etc.

3. The proud puffed up with foolish Confidences, boldly Crying, Lord open to us,
for we, etc. also the Contrary to these three I might enlarge on, and not
Impertinently, but let him that reads understand, is in Change "is in" to
"in." R. W. Ms. Ann.
page 64. where Erase "where." R. W. Ms. Ann.
G. Fox brings in Jeremiah Ives saying, Jeremiah Ives.
[The Phariseel were far enough from having the Kingdom of Heaven within them]
He Answers contrary to Christ's words, who said it was within them.

I Reply, G. Fox his Tutor and Teacher within him knows, that the Kingdom of
God and the Kingdom of Huaven signify but one, and not diverse things: and yet
also he knows that both of them signify (in a Christian Sense) First, The
Kingdom of God signifying diverse things.
the Kingdom of Government of God and Christ in the Soul. Secondly, The
Government of God in his holy Providence in the World. 3. His Government in the
Congregation or Churches of his Saints called out the World. Fourthly, the
glorious State to come af^^r this Life: He knows that his Journey man G. Fox
is Erase the parenthesis, and insert "a." R. W. Ms. Ann.
(fit Instrument to destroy all these, and to erect (in their stead) a dull,
proud, dogged Confusion, or Babel within, under the Name of God, Christ,
Spirit, Light, Faith, Righteousness, Resurrection.

The Lord Jesus knowing that not the Phar^sees alone etc. but the Jews
generally also, and his own Christian Followers were leavened [38] with a
worldly notion, The false and true Messiah.
viz. thar their Messiah should be a glorious temporal King, that he should
make his Entrance, and Exalt his Throne with great Pomp, Solemnity, etc. The
Lord Jesus tells them their mistake and says, The Kingdom of God within you.
that his Kingdom was not such a Kingdom, but that it was within them: Of
which words I find three Expositions. First, that the Kingdom of Heaven is a
Spiritual, inward and Soul Kingdom, Three Expositions.
concerning God and the Soul, and Spiritual matters, according to the saying of
Christ Jesus, my Kingdom is not of this World, etc.

2. From the word Entos within you, or amongst you, as certainly it was then
amongst the Jews, and in the midst of them in their Temple Streets and Houses,
Hearts and mouths by the most wonderful speakings of the Lord Jesus, as never
man spoke amongst them, and the wonderful power and gracious works which never
man wrought amongst them, nor in the whole World beside

3. The Kingdom of God, that is God and Christ, and the Spirit were literally
in the Pharisees, and so Consequently in every hypocrite in the World, and
every wicked and profane Sinner, though they know it not, yea in all Creatures.

But this is against a former, fair Exposition from the Greek word Entos, The
Quakers Exposition.
which cannot be refused (since so agreeing with the Truth) except Reasons more
prevalent, etc.

2. The Spirit of God asks, what agreement between Christ and Belial, Light and
Darkness, Righteousness and unrighteousness? etc.

And whereas it is most Improperly and Impiously Objected, that the Light
shines in darkness, etc. I have said, The Light shining in darkness.
that it can not be in the same Subject or part predominate, the mind, or will,
or Affections: but the Light is at the window, and the Eye, and the knock at
the door, (by all the ways and means by which God visits poor men) but the
Eye, the door is shut, etc. and the man within is not only asleep, but dead and
rotten in Natures silthiness, and actual Transgressions and Abominations.

3. It is against all Color of Reason to Imagine that the Lord Jesus should
tell the Jews, the Pharisees, and the rest of his bloody Enemies, who some
weakly, some maliciously opposed his Kingdom, and coming to Rule by his Grace
over them, viz. that his grace was King within them, what ever their Heart or
Tongues said, or Hands hid, etc.

4. It is notoriously contrary to what G. Fox, and his so often [39] Clamor
that the Kingdom of God consists in, or its Nature is in Righteousness, and
Peace and Joy in the holy Spirit: as opposite to the Kingdom in the Pharisees,
and all Hipocrites and profane, etc. as Hell to Heaven.

5. The thing is so notoriously childish and ridiculous, The grace of God is
offered to all, but embraced by few that are freely chosen
etc. that a King should affirm he was an actual King in his Enemies Country,
where the whole is up in Arms against him: Or for a Lamb to say, he was amongst
the Wolves and held his Government in them: Or that a man pretending Love to a
Woman in way of marriage should boldly affirm, The frantic fancy of Christ's
Kingdom in his Enemie^ hearts.
(though she abhord to hear of the motion yet) that he was in her Heart and
Affections, as an Husband, Lord, etc. It is true, the motions of War and Love
are made and offered from the King warring, and the man suing, but that their
motions and Commands (that is Government and Kingdom) should be in them is
nothing but impious and impudent, and childish prating.

The 20th Instance, Thomas Weld.
is in page 75. where G. Fox brings in Thomas Weld, etc. saying, [How clear the
Scripture is, that Faith comes by hearing, and not by minding the Light within]
He Answers, Faith how wrought.
Does any man know Christ but by the Light within? And is not Christ the Word?
And can any see without Christ the Word? Does it not make ^anifest? Nay, does
it not give the Light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ? read
2 Cor. 4. 1. from whence Faith comes, and so Faith comes by minding the Light
within, Christ the Author of it, A distracted old woman a picture of the
Quakers.
and brings to look at him, and hear him.

I Reply, mine eyes have seen a poor distracted aged woman walking in State,
boasting of her Majesty, Jewels, and Crown, with a Straw in her hand for her
Scepter, etc. and thus does this poor mad Soul walk even like Nebuchadnezzar
upon his Babel. All is Christ, and he is Christ, Christ is Faith and all, etc
and therefore

1. He slights this so known and unquestionable Record, Romans 10. The admirable
Chain of Diamonds.
Faith comes by hearing, and that heavenly Chain of Diamonds, Romans 10.
concerning true Salvation, true worshipping, true praying, true believing, true
preaching, true sending, which holy writing or Record Fox dares not seriously
and impartially, and in the fear of the most High consider, as to the various
means and ways of Gods sending unto man.

2. For all G. Fox his Scepter of Straw, his mad fancy of a [40] Light that
works Faith, etc. I ask what Faith is, and if it be not First, a believing the
Gospel, True Faith what
or Glad News to be true. Secondly, a receiviving of it and believing in it
mine own particular.

As First, that a pardon is certainly come, Secondly, that my Name is in it, my
deliverance and Salvation is wrapped up in it The great King of Heaven (like
Ahashuerosh) his Ange^ is ev^r: now he has thoughts of marriage Loves and
Joys, and Secondly, I (though a poor Captive Jew, poor Esther) I am she his
Eye has fixed on, and his Soul delights in:

3dly, I asked what preaching is, but the publishing or divulging, telling or
declaring what the Word or mind, Heb. 1. Act. 26.
or will of the King Eternal is, which he has revealed or declared to the
Patriarchs Moses and the rest of his Prophets, or Messengers from the beginning
of the World: And what said the Apostles or Messengers of Christ Jesus declare,
but what Moses and the Prophets did say should come to pass? Act. 26. which all
was Scripture? Was not this Proclamation of Good News, The four sort of Hearers.
or a pardon to be made over all the World, and the first proclaiming of it to
be at Jerusalem, Luke 24. And was there not to be four sorts of Hearers of this
glad News.

4. That receive and believe with a false and overly, and loose, and sandy
Belief: A fourth, only with a deep and rockie Belief, closing and uniting to
God? Thus the men of Samaria told the woman that they did not believe because
of her word, (that must be taken Comparatively, for the Hearing from her this
glad News, was. he first means of their believing) but because they had heard
Christ themselves.

5. I know these poor Foxians do hear a kind of Motion within them, The Quakers
how cheated by Satan as Queen Mary was of her Conception.
but it is but as poor women that go with false Conceptions with Tympanies of
wind and water, or with the mola that will resemble the Motion of a true Child:
but after all their thoughts and fancies by day and night after all their
seeming feellings persuasions, Experiences, and preparations, this false
Conception, false Faith, false Christ, false Light shall vanish in shame and
grief, as did Queen Mary's after the Thanksgivings and Ringings for her
deliverance.

6. For my self I dare these self Confidents to particularize any one Scripture
where the Spirit of God directs any poor Soul to listen and hearken to a Light
and voice within him, Challenges to the Foxians.
affirming that [41 this is the Hearing by which Faith is wrought? I dare them
to clear Heartily and solidly, this, 10. to the Romans wherein (as in the 8th is
the Golden Chain of Election, etc.) so in this 10th Chap. the Golden Chain of
the means of praying, preaching, etc.

3. I ask for some sollid Instances where Souls have been truly Converted (the
whole Soul unto God) by any such Notion, and not by some External means and
outward hearing of this glad News and Gospel?

4. I ask if it be not a ridiculous Contradiction in them to fill the World
with the sound of their new and only preachers He Apostles and she Apostles,
etc.

5. I ask if this Light within (without and opposite to the hearing without
which is the question) be the means of Faith, Paul's famous Case
how is it possible, that so many serious Enquiring men in all Ages should not
perceive a breath of this wind, no not in their own bosoms? and that famous
Paul should be Conscientiously and fully persuaded that he ought to do many
things against Christ Jesus, etc.

If it be said, Paul had not only the Light within him, but he had heard of the
Doctrine of Christ and of his Followers: he heard Stephens Sermon, and yet he
believed not: and therefore it is Grace does all. I Answer, this is something,
but reaches not home, for, if all the men in the world have this Light (which
is s^fficient without hearing) why should not some, (especially the wise and
Enquirours, etc.) perceive it or something of it, as Paul did not, until he had
heard something, (and because God had a purpose to make Extraordinary use of
him, an Extraordinary hand from Heaven humbling and preparing him to publish or
preach unto the Nations.

The 21 Instance, 80 Tko. Pollard.
is in page 80. where G. Fox brings in Tho. Pollard, saying, [To say the
Officers of the Church are Invisible, It is plain of their Father the Devil] He
Answers, The Holy Ghost made the Officers of the Church Overseers, and that
made the Officers the Overseers to be Invisible, for they saw with an Invisible
Eye, and so they was in the Spirit which is Invisible, and not in the Flesh:
else they could not be Overseers in the Church of God, The Fox like and dog
like Impudency of G. Fox etc.
and you are the visible apostatized from them.

I Reply, This is one of the most impudent Fooleries that either Fox, or (as
the Proverb is) any Dog could be impudent in: For First,

42] 1. He acknowledges a public Assembly of Christians; as well as of other
pretending Worsh ppers, Turks, Jews, etc. Also he acknowledges the Ministers,
Officers, and Overseers of their Assemblies.

2. His Reason is notoriously silly and impudent, viz. The visibility of
Christ's Church and her Officers.
because the Church is in God, and the Overseers are made by the holy Spirit:
For are the secret works of God always secret, and never revealed? The Child
in the Womb, the precious Stones, and Minerals when brought forth, are no more
Invisible then the Sun in the Firmament.

3. The Christian profe^^ion and professors, however they were wrought and
prepared, and by diverse means by Gods Spirits: yet the Lord Jesus compares them
to the most visible Conspicuous and glorious things and persons. To the Sun and
Moon in the Heavens, and the Heavens and Stars also, to Mountains, and Cities
on those Hills or Mountains: To Kings, To their houses and Palaces, yea, to
Arms with Banners, etc.

4. Although the Lord Major of London, and the several Officers of the City are
not made and ordained in the public Streets, nor Generals and other Officers
appointed by his Majesty, etc. are they not therefore visible, because their
making and appointing was not Solemnized and performed in Cheapside, etc.

5. It is most true and most sweet, that the Church is in God, The Church in
God.
etc. and is it not also true, that in one Sense, we live in God and move in
God, have our Being in God, and yet the whole Creation is gloriously visible in
another Sense, the Saints, their Assemblies and Officers are in God visible to
the world abundantly, though in an heavenly and spiritual Sense, transcending
the Being of the first Creation.

6. G. Fox denies not, but that although the first Churches were in God, and
the Officers of the Church, and some of them were appointed immediately, yet
they were visible and audible by those with whom they Conversed:

7. Yea, G Fox a most visible and idle prater of Invisibilities.
G. Fox and his Foxians, for all their being in God, and some of their proud
and silly Answerings in Courts, that they live in God, and dwell in God, yet
they disowne not their own visible Congregatings and Assemblings, their visible
Teachers, Overseers, or Bishops, their visible and audible performances and
Worships, praying, preaching, singing, etc. and w^y then does this [43] poor
notoriously visible Cheatour thus prate of Invisibilities especially in times
of peace and not in Elias Case?

The 22 Instance is in page 84. where G. Fox brings in his opposite Magnus Byne;
saying, [The Scriptures may be understood by the help of Tongues. Magnus Byne.
] He Answers, [All Scripture was given forth by Inspiration, and so without the
same Inspiration, it is not understood again, Pilate had the Tongues, yet did
not understand the Scripture, nor Christ the Substance of it: And this you have
set up since the Apostasy, your Tongues, you Raveners from the Spirit.]

I Reply, First, I make use of G. Fox his Confession, viz. that all Scripture
is inspired, God has many words.
etc. therefore say I, he Consesseth that every word, Syllable and Tittle in
that Scripture or writing, is the Word, or immediate revealed will of God:
against his and his Foxians common Song: has God any more words but one?

2. As to the Scriptures, The understanding of the Scripture threefold.
the understanding of them is threefold.

First, Literal: who understands not, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
Steal? etc.

The second is Metaphorical, as I am the Door, I am the Bread, etc.

The third is saving and Spiritual, when it pleases God to set home the
heavenly Commands Promis^s, etc. in particular, Soul Application.

3. I observe the End of G. Fox (and especially of the old Serpent and Fox that
acts him. The Devils End in Cavilling against the Scripture Tongues, yet J.
St^bs vapourd that he understood as many Tongues as I, and may be more.
) It is to destroy the coming of Gods holy Records and writings to poor lost
men to their Salvation, that he may foist and whisp in what his hellish malice
pleases to their Damnation: For if no knowledge of the Tongues in which the
most wise and most holy Lord pend his Letters or writing to us, then no
preaching of the Doctrine in them to the world witout some new miraculous way,
then no translating and reading of them, which is, that the Devil in all Ages
and at this day aims at with all his might.

4. I therefore charge upon this proud Ignoramus, and all his blind Disciples
and Followers the horrible Crime of Unthankfulness, The horrible Ingratitude of
the Foxians.
and Ingratitude: for were it not for Tindal, burnt to ashes, and other
heavenly Spirits set on work from Heaven to dig out the knowledge of the Hebrew
and the Greek, The Transltion of the Scripture.
and to turn it into French, Dutch, English, and now praised be God into the
very [44] Indian Language of this Country, how would these Seraphical Doctors
know whether there were such a Creation of Heavens and Earth, or of man and his
wife, which we now so talk of?

I put this question once to a Soul in this Country, The Quakers Spirit for all
pretenses a lazy Spirit
who told me although they had no English Scripture, Gods Spirit would teach
them Greek and Hebrew: but I can declare to any that ask me the dreadful End of
that party.

5. I Charge upon this Foxian party the horrible Crime of a proud Laziness for
not studying the Original Languages themselves; It is a shameful Trade and
deceitful, when persons have money in their hands, to take up all on trust! I
have known very Eminent Men and Women Independants and Baptists, give
themselves up to serious study of the Hebrew Language: I never knew any of the
Foxian Spirits so inclind, but according to the Lazy fool under the Fig Tree
which I have seen in an Emblem almost threescore year since, they lie down and
cry.

Sweet Figs drop down in yielding w^se
For Lazy will not let me rise.
6. I Judge that G. Fox and his wild Spirit can not prove that Pilate had the
Hebrew Greek and Latin, The three Languages upon the Cross of Christ.
for though he caused by an heavenly finger of God such a Title to be set up in
the three then most known Languages Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, yet he himself
might have no knowledge of any more then the Latin, which was his Mother Roman
Tongue: As a Book seller may deal in Books of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French,
Dutch, Italian, Spanish, etc. and yet understand no more then his Mother
English.

7. I know the Devil abounds with Tongues, and can speak all Languages, The
Devils skill in Languages and Subtlety in Revelations.
and I know, and have seen his Inspirations, and three thousands verses in show
very heavenly, inspired by him, in an English woman of this Country, who had no
such skill, ex tempore. They were taken and written from her mouth, and I have
read them: and do believe from many Reasons which I have to show they were from
Satan, yet I know also that Ignorance is shameful, and that it pleased God
miraculously to infuse the knowledge of Tongues to his first Apostles, or
Messengers, to the Nations, and what he will further do in this kind, [45]
before this Worlds glass is out who can tell? only I am sure these Foxians talk
(like little Children in their grave Consultations) without the least knowledge
at all (genrally) of any thing, but their mother English, and yet as proudly
and imperiously vapouring and triumphing, Theora John
etc. like Theora John proclaming to the World his mad Quaking Revelations,
Inspirations, writing of Languages, many which he Confessed, he understood not,
but Mysteries, Mysteries.

8. G. Fox is no wiser in affirming that Tongues came in place of the Spirit
since the Apostasy. The Lord raises his Witnesses against Babel by his Spirit
and blessing upon Tongues and Translations.
For before the Apostasy the Lord furnished his Servants with understanding of
several Languages miraculously: with the Apostasy, those heavenly miraculous
gifts ceased: In the Apostasy the Father of Spirits gave to his two witnesses
power, Authority and Ability to prophesy, preach, declare and witness to the
Truths of Jesus against the Popish Inventions: with the rising of Luther,
Calvin, etc. The Lord raised up the study of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues in
many heavenly Witnesses, who brought to Light the truth of the first Copies in
Opposition to the Corrupt Latin Translation (bruitishly settled under a Curse
by the Counsel at Trent): The Papists former Ignorance and now their abuse of
knowledge
This mighty work of the Lord in his Protestant Witn^sses drove the Popish
Foxes into their holes, and has driven (for shame) the Jesuits to study the
Hebrew and Greek, and by a new Stratagem partly made up of the pretense of
their Spirit and partly of the pretense of Corruptions and Variations in the
Copies) to assault the Camp of the Protestant Witnesses.

9. I despise not, yea, I praise God for, and honor the helps and helpers we
have in English: yea, I would not discourage the weakest English man or woman
(in Christian humility) to sound forth the praises of God in writing, English
helps a great mercy.
speaking and printing in English what they have Experimented of the Son of
God, No, though they should not write or print, or speak true English, as G Fox
has not done: But when they lift up their Horns on high (or their brutish
Ears as Foxes do, in stead of Horns) then I must tell G. Fox, that although he
prat le amongst the English, A close Query
and they be cheated with his dying Spirit: yet if he go to other Nations, (as
they simply pretend to do to Turks and Pope) they must either be furnished with
the Gift of Tongues miraculously, or they must fling of their lazy Devil, and
study the Tongues of those Nations to whom they carry their (pretended) glad
News or Gospel.

46] The 23. Instance: G. Fox in page 86. brings in the same Author, saying,
[Notwithstanding thy passing through the first and second Resurrection (as thou
says) there remains a Torment so thee at the last day and Woe.]

He Answers, They are blessed that have part in the first Resurrection: 86,
Magnus Byne
The second Death have no power over them, but are made free from Wrath that is
to come, and are passed from Death to Life, and are translated into the
Kingdom of the Son of God, and are in union with the Son of God and the Father
both; and so thou utterest forth Lies.

I Reply, G. Fox here Arrogates to himself and his Foxians.

1. A Passing through the first and second Resurrection. The first and second
Resurrection.


2. He triumphs in their Blessedness pronounced to their first Resurrection,
viz. of Communion with God and Freedom from Wrath to come:

1. The Truth is G. Fox is in his Borough of Words of diverse ^ignifications:
He wrests and winds what is for his wicked ends, but you shall never take him
in Distinguishing and Defineing what the first and second Death is, and what is
the first and second Resurrection.

2. The Truth is, as soon as they hearken to this familiar Spirit, they are so
Elevated, that they be in the heavenly glory, the Resurrection is past, and
(with K. Agags dream) the Bitterness of Death and Wrath is past for ever with
them.

3. But no such grapes will be gathered of these Thorns, The great Expectation
of all the four great Religions.
nor Figs of these Thistles: For if we talk of escaping wrath to come, and of
enjoying Blessedness: we must prove to others, as well as to our selves, that
the Expectation of the Jews, and Mahumetans expecting a Carnal Blessedness to
come, is false: We m^st prove the Papists and Common Protestants (for all their
Prayers and Alms, etc.) are under that Sentence, Depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity.

4. The Lord Jesus being questioned about the great point of Salvation: The
great point of Salvation.
he seems to Answer two things.

1. That the most will hang their Souls upon the Hedge, and venture like the
high ways and hedges.

2. Others will fear and look after Redemption, Deliverance, Salvation, etc.
and of these two sorts.

First, Two great Sorts of minders Eternal Life.
Some that will endeavor and seek to enter I Judge both [47] of Pagans and
Mahumetans, and Jews, and Papists and Protestants, and shall not be able.

The second is of such as sensible of the Narrowness of the way, straightness
of the door, and the Infinite necessity incumbing, and the Infinite Excellency
inviting, fling away Preferments, Profits, and Pleasures, and choose to enjoy
the Mediator, as lost and damned in our selves, and follow him from his Cradle
and Manger to his Cross and Gallows, and laboring to draw other poor drowning
Souls out of the pit of Eternal Rottenness, and howling with us.

5. The Spirit of God tells us of three sorts of perished Souls. Three great
sorts of Me


First, Those without Law, of which are Millions of Millions innumerable.

Secondly, Such as had the Law or Word, or will of God revealed to them in the
Covenant of works, Obedience or Justice, of which sort were Insert "and are,"
R. W. Ms. Ann.
Millions of Millions also.

A third is of such to whom Infinite pity has vouchsafed the joyful Tidings of
the Son of God, his Mediation, Interposition, and Intercession. And "lost in
themselves but saved by grace," R. W. Ms. Ann.


Amongst these the Papists, Jesuits and Puritans the two great Antagonists.
and the Protesters against the Papists are chief: of the Papists the Jesuits:
of the Protestant (thereso called) Puritans run for it: of these the Quakers
pretend the highest, but no otherwise then, O thou Capernaum, which art
Exalted, and Exaltest thy self unto Heaven, thou shall be brought down to Hell,
etc. For Tire and Sidon, Sodom, and Gomorrah, etc. the poor Jews and
Mahumetans, yea, the Papists and common Protestants shall have an easier Cup to
drink off then the Foxians, etc, that are so high, and pure, and lofty, and yet
abound with Luciferian filthiness.

The 24. Instance, is in page 89. where G. Fox brings in the same Author,
saying, [The Saints are neither in the Fullness of the Godhead, page 89. Magnus
Bine.
nor in part: Away with this Blasphemy that says this is] He Answers, The
Quakers in the Fullness of the Godhead of their hellish mouths and pens ay be
believed
[The work of the Ministry was to bring people to the knowledge of the Son of
God, to a perfect man, to the Unity of the Faith, to the measure and stature of
the Fullness of Christ and Christ will dwell in the Saints; and God will dwell
in them;] And thou says, They have no part of the Fullness of the Godhead, and
John says, of his Fullness have we all received, in whom dwells the Godhead
bodily, and ye be all in the Blasphemy that be out of this part of the Fullness.

I Reply, It was doubtless an horrible Crime which the Jews though maliciously
and falsely Objected. 48] 1. Against the Lord Jesus, viz. that be being a man
should make himself God. What shall we say to these brutish and blasphemous
Foxians, vile worms of the Earth, yesterday creeping out of their holes, slaves
and Hellhounds, as we all b^ Nature are, so horribly to set their faces as
David speaks again the Heavens, vapouring themselves to be in the Godhead, yea,
in the Fullness of the Godhead, and that also bodily, so that what was
applicable and proper to the Body of the Son of God, is proper and applicable
unto them, his Body in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.

2. See the horrible Egyptian Darkness the Lord has justly poured upon these
feigned Goshenites. They exclaim against us for using that Title Godman, The
Quakers grutch Christ the Title of God-man
and ask where we find such a phraze in Scripture: And yet they rest not in
that Title Emanuel God with us: nor the Fullness of the Godhead bodily in
Christ, but Sacrilegious Robbers (in Effect) arrogate the Title, and thing to
themselves to be God-men and God-women, the Godhead dwelling in them bodily.

3. Whereas G. Fox here says, the work of the Ministry was to bring men to a
perfect man, etc. Ephesians. 4. The work of Christ's Ministers.


I Answer, He grossly abuses that heavenly Ephesians. 4. which concerns the
Fullness and perfection of all the Elect of God, the whole Body, the Church of
the Firstborn, applying it unto every particular deluded Convert of theirs, as
being as perfect, as holy, as much God as Christ Jesus, God blessed for ever
himself.

4. I may use the Exprobations of Moses against Korah, Dathan and Abiram. Is it
not enough for you, etc. but will you seek the Priesthood also. Is it not
enough that the most High Potter made us Men and Women and not Serpents and
Toads, The horrible pride and Haughtiness of the Quakers.
etc. not Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, etc. but English Protestants, etc. but
we will be also Infinites, and Eternals, Omnipotents and Omniscients? Will not
the Infinite favor of Leave to drink of some heavenly drops of the Infinite
and Inconceivable Ocean of his Goodness, satisfy and content us, but we will
be Gods, with the Devil and our first Parents: We will be the Inconceivable
Ocean it self. Is it not enough for a Proud Rebel to be fetched from the Gallows
by a smile of his Prince, but he must be the Prince and King himself.

5. The Pagans of the World as they are wild to all Civility, The Indians base
esteem of the Godhead.
so to all Divinity and heavenly matters: They apprehend a Doity, [49] as a
Lion, Whale, Dragon, Giant, Tyrant; they feignedly will strive to pacify him,
to make use of his help in Sickness, in Wars, in Plagues and Droughts: but they
will call Men and Women Gods too, yea Dogs and Geese, yea any Creature
Manittoo, God, that is, or does any thing strange unto them: And thus the
Melitans presently cried out of Paul, that he was a God, And the Gods are come
down to us in the likeness of Men, etc.

6. Therefore does it please the most High and only Wise to meet often with the
Pharaoh's the Absolom's the Nebuchadezzars, God and the great Adversary to all
Proud spirits.
the Hamans the Herod's of this World, yea, with whole Nations, Cities Armies
and Navies for their Pride, as he did with Sodom, in signal and remarkable
strokes and Judgments: yea, with his Jobs, and Hezechiah,'s and Paul's in
danger to be puffed up, in voices and questions out of the Whirlwind, till we
more and more come to see how perfect we are in Dirt, and Stink, and Filth of
Death and Hell crawling like Monsters of Pride and self-conceitedness upon this
Earth his Glorious Footstool.

The 25. Instance is in Page 90. He brings in the same Author saying, [There is
a kind of Infiniteness in the Soul, and it cannot be Infiniteness it self.]

He Answers: The Soul of men horribly abused
Is not the Soul without beginning coming from God, and returning into God
again, who has it in his hand, which Hand goes against him that does Evil,
which throws down that which wars against it: and Christ the power of God the
best Change "best" to "rest." R. W. Ms. Ann.
of the Soul, which brings it up into God, which came out from him; has this a
beginning or ending? and is not this Infinite in it self, and more than all the
World?

I Reply, More brie^ly, (having spoken of the Soul before) That the Soul or
Spirit of a Man should be boundless or without limits, without beginning or
ending, is a Blasphemous Monster begotten of Hellish Pride the Father, and
Hellish Ignorance the Mother: for Infinity and Infiniteness in that sense can
be no other but the Infinite and Eternal Power and Godhead transcending the
Capacity or Men or Angels to receive it or conceive the nature of it.

2. It is true in a secondary way (a posteriori) as they say the Spirits of
Angels and men are as a Lamp lighted by the most high and In- [50] finite
Majesty never to go out or be extinguished in joy or sorrow, This Notion dazles
the most sober and steady Eye and Brain; but who can find a Center or Clod of
standing from whence to entertain a thought of no Beginning; no created finite
power can reach to what Infinity is.

3. We see the mighty Kings and Emperors, their mighty Armies and Navies have
Bounds as the-roaring Waves of the Ocean have: the most Glorious Sun and
Heavenly Bodies have their limited Motions: The changes of all things created
and their Periods
the Days and Nights, the Summer and Winter, the Light and Darkness know their
periods of beginning and ending etc. All have their hitherto and no further set
by the Infinite, Eternal Arm, and no further. But all the stars of heaven, the
drops of the Ocean, the Sand on the Sea shore, the Leaves and Grass of the
whole World are all too short to reach to the thought of one Minute of that
which properly is Gods only propriety, to wit, Infinity.

4. Among all the Opinions of the Souls Being and Rise, this of Infinity making
it God himself, commits two horrible Murders: Add "in its tendency though not
in effect." R. W. s. Ann.


First, Two horrible Murders* attempts
It Murders and destroys the Soul.

And Secondly, The Infinite God himself.

For the Soul of Man by such a world of woeful experience being so subject to
change, to sins and sorrows of all sorts. If this should be the Infinity of the
Soul and so of God himself, there would be no Infinity at all so stopped, so
limited by sins and sorrows.

5. We use to say (hyperbollically) that such and such a doing is Infinite
Pride, but surely it is wonderful and devilish lifting up of the mind of a poor
Earthen Pot, though never so high, so wise, so learned, so holy to entertain
thoughts of being the Eternal and boundless Infinite power and Godhead.

The blessed Lord proclaim his Infinite Power, his Infinite Wisdom, his
Infinite Greatness, and Goodness, and Patience to poor sinners (as he did unto
Job out of the Whirlwind) and then for all Jobs Perfection and their own,
(which so simply as well as proudly they prate of) they will with Job see cause
to abhor themselves in Dust and Ashes.

6 Such is the inconceivable Infinity in God beyond the reach of all Creatures,
that he is not only Infinite but Infinity it self, [51] Eternity it self,
Omnipotency it self, Wisdom it self, Goodness it self, Justice it self in all
their eminences and perfections.

7. Therefore notwithstanding most gracious and most glorious Appearances to,
and influences from Infinity, upon poor finite Worms below, sure it is not so
sober a Language as that of Birds and Beasts, who keep their Native Tongues and
Tones: Only men honored with so high Naturals above their Fellow potts, Man's
doleful Degeneracy
the Irrationals, and in many respects above other Rationals; yea, in pretense
and some really dignified with Spirituals in the Mind, Will and Affections by
Privileges, by Promises. Mankind I say so honored and degenerating, we are
not only like to, but Infinitely (as I may say) worse then the wildest Beast
that perish.

The 26. Instance is in Page 93. where G. Fox brings in Robert Simson, Robert
Simson the body of Christ's Church
etc. saying. [The mystical Body may be sometimes subject to Distempers, and
Humors, and Wants.]

He Answers, Are you Judges? can you judge of the Mystical Body which the
Saints are Baptized into? is there Humors, Wants and Distempers in the Body
which the Saints are Baptized into? is not the Wants, Humors, Distempers in
your Body? do you here in this divide the word aright, distingu^sh things in
the Ground, and speak aright of things, and yet you would not be judged, and
say, Judge not: and is not Mystical Spiritual?

I Reply, In our late Dispute at Providence, Io. Stubs and W. Edm affirmed that
God was a Spirit literally and properly, in which for all his boast of
Learning, it may be as he said, above my self, Put "it may be as he said above
myself," in parenthesis, R. W. Ms. Ann.
he showed but little Philosophy or Divinity: and William Ed. affi^med that
properly and really that Scripture of Wolves coming in Sheeps clothing, was to
be understood literally without meaning and expositions; but sober men and
aware know how to unfold Parables, and Similitudes, The Parables and Figurative
Speeches of Holy Scripture
and Metaphors, and Allegories: they know God is called a Son, and a Rock, and
a Father, and a Husband; etc. and so is Christ Jesus, and they know how such
Similies are to be expounded.

They know that Believers in Christ Jesus are called a Body, an House, a Flock,
a Friend, a Center, an Army, and ye are no such properly and literally but by
similitude.

2. The Papists tell us of an Universal, or (as the Greek) a [52] Catholic
Body of Christians: Amongst them are two great Factions. The one maintaing this
Catholic Church to meet in the Representative of an Occumenical or General
Council of the whole World: The other in the Assembly or Conclave of the Pope
and his Cardinals: and in the Pope himself, while he sits in Peter's Infallible
Chair.

The Protestants build also a Catholic or Universal Body of true Believers in
Jesus, The Protestant Churches
scattered over the World, etc. the more Reformed affirm this Un^versal and
Catholic Church to be visible in the Assemblies and Congregations of Christian
Worshippers separate from the Church of Rome and her Abominations.

The Devil seeing the Protestant Witnesses contending about the matter and Form
of the true Churches and Congregations, He (by Gods most holy and wise
permission) sends out his old and known Spirit of pure Invisibles, The Quakers
and Ie^uits Spirit
pure Immediate, pure Worshippers in Spirit and Truth, etc. This Spirit being
Cozen German to, or sworn Brother in hellish equivocation with the Jesuits,
when it serves their turn maintain a Church Invisible, and Ministers and
Officers Invisible: and yet when it serves their turn practice (as well as
Papists or Protestants) visible Churches and Congregations, visible and audible
Apostles, preachers, Ministers, with audible preachings, prayings, singings,
Admissions, Excommunications, (more or less professed and Explicit.

The Qukaers Churches they are (as they childishly vapor) Bodies without wants
or distempers, The Foxian Churches
fair as the Sun, clear as the Moon, terrible as an Army, etc.

1. But this Add "is." R. W. Ms. Ann.
contrary to the nature of all our Natural Bodies, All bodies liable to
Distempers
which turning upon the two hinges of Sins and Sorrows, are full of wants and
distempers, until the dashing of all in pieces by sudden or lingering Deaths.

2. Contrary to all Figurative or Metaphorical Bodies, domestic in Families,
Political in Cities, Nations, Armies, Navies, etc.

3. Contrary to Experience of the Bodies or Churches of Worshippers in the
Scripture Jewish or Christian, who gave up the Ghost, through distempers) into
the hands of Mahumet, who brags he has Conquered Moses at Jerusalem, and Jesus
at Constantinople. etc.

4. Contrary to the Experience of the World in their daily observing of the
Quakers Bodies and Worships. (beside the Char- [53] ges against them for their
wild Doctrines and Disciplines) what known Divisions and Passions about I
Nailors and others Cases? what Envyings Cursings, Apostacies, and moral
Idolatry, as that of Covetousness in this Colony known notoriously?

But since G. Fox speaks so Rationally to his Opposite, The sendency of the
Quak. Spirit
Do you distinguish things in the Ground? I shall remember them of the fairness
of my fourteenth Position against them, viz. that according to the Principles,
Roots and grounds of things I have fairly Collected, that the Spirit of the
Quakers tends to Incivility and Barbarism, and to sudden Assacinations,
murders and Persecutions. etc.

The Eternal Father of mercies (I believe that I have, and can further make it
good:) stops millions of mischiefs in the world daily, which the Natures,
grounds and Principles of men (and the Quakers Spirit also) now Change "now" to
"tend." R. W. Ms. Ann.
to overrun and overwhelm the World withal.

A 27 th. Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is in page 103. Jonathan Clapham,
etcs
where he brings in Jonathan Clapham, saying, [Men may be called of Men
Masters, and it is but a Cavil to deny it, and they may deny to be called
Fathers as well as Masters] He Answers, Thou have in this denied that Doctrine
of Christ, and slights it, who says, Be not ye of Men called Masters, for you
have all one Master which is Christ, and you all are Brethren, and thou have
showed thy self out of the Brotherhood. And there is a Birth to be born which
can call no man Father upon Earth which thou art ignorant of.

I Reply, 1. Amongst other foolish passions and Affections haunting all men,
and the Quakers especially, these two are notorious, viz. pride and a lazy
Ignorance: Those two are the Sire and Dam of most of these wild monsters.

2. For does not this proud man know how many of his excellent Opposites have
laid open their Foxians scornful pride in robbing all mankind of many due
respects and favorable glaunces of Gods care, of order, and prudent
distinctions and differences amongst the Sons of men in Families, Cities,
Nations, Armies, Navies, etc.

3. Sure he can not but remember, and his own and all the Light in the Quakers
(if seriously minded) will tell them, that [54] in robbing all the world of
their several due moderate, and sober Titles and Respects, they do but by a
juggling Hocas pocas; The Pope and Quakers compared.
a back door, etc. rob all others of their points, Ribbons, and Laces,
wherewithal only to adorn and trim, and trick their foolish selves: Just as the
Popish party practice to cry up their Pope, servus servorum Dei, and yet be
Domine fac totum your holiness, etc. and yet the Pope and Papists herein out
shoot the Quakers, for the Papists give all men their Civil and Courteous
different Respects, and Acknowledgements, which the dogged and scornful
Quakers, are far from their Spirit being prouder then the Papists,

4. G. Fox knows how others of his Adversaries have in print told him that the
English word [Master] Answers to many words in the Greek [Kathegerese
Didarkalos, etc.] and that these words Rahbi and Pateer, Of Fathers and Masters.
all show that the Lord Jesus only Condemned the Pharisaical, Popish, and
Foxian Itch of being called Masters, Fathers, Leaders, Teachers in Religion,
undervaluing and slighting others, etc. Thus amongst the Papists their Magister
noster, The Popish priority an^ the Foxian is of and in their Doctors.
their Patres, etc. their Irrefragable, Seraphical and Angelical Doctors: thus
among the Foxians, James Naylor, Hosanna, etc. and G. Fox (at this Town of
Providence) called the Eternal Son of God. Christ Jesus.

5. Half a Humane and sober Eye may see that in all his Declamations against
the Pharisaical, or Popish, or Foxian Rabbis, the Lord Jesus I say, comes not
near in a Title, the Civil and Natural Respects of Inferiors, Mere Civil
Respects
to Heads of Families, Cities, Kingdoms, etc. all of which, the very nature of
man being von politikon Change "von politikon" to "animal politicon." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
a sociable Creature, and the holy Scripture is all over (from end to end) full
of most frequent Examples, yea, Commands, and practices.

6. How Childishly does Fox Answer his Opposite, viz that although it be
unlawful to call Master, yet it is not unlawful to call Father, The Quakers
Masters and Fathers
for there is a Birth which his Opposite is ignorant of, etc. I ask if G. Fox
mean not their Immediate Birth of Light (which for a Cover) they call Spirit
and Christ, etc. in Opposition to that true Christian Regeneration and Change,
True Regeneration
which it pleases God ordinarily to Effect by means, as Paul said, though you
have ten thousand Teachers, yet I have begotten you, etc, Sure it is, their
Immediate denies the mediate.

55] 7. Where there no Ordinary means appointed by God for Natural or Spiritual
procreation: yet how simple is that Consequence, that because God is an
Extraordina^y Father, therefore I may call men Fathers but not Masters! when
God is both Father and Master, and both Titles are forbidden in a true Sense,
by one and the same heavenly Breath, at the same time.

A 28 h. Instance, 106. William Thomas.
is page 106. where G. Fox brings in W. Thomas, saying, [Men are saved, but not
by Christ within us.]

He Answers, [How is man's Salva^ion wrought out but by Christ within? How is
the Justification fels but by Christ wit in? And the Seeds we manifest that
suffered without is made manifest within, there is Redemption and Life: He that
has the Son of God has Life, Redemption to God out of the first Adam, and who
feels Christ within, feels Salvation, and who does not, are Reprobates, though
they may talk of him.]

I Reply, This subtle Fox is in his Borough Confounding (under the Terms
Christ) the person of Christ, The person of Christ and the Grace of Christ
distinguished.
and the Love, and Spirit, and Grace or Favor of Christ, as if they were all
one: As if where the Name and Authority, and writing of G. Fox comes, there of
necessity must G. Fox in person be: Or, to rise higher, wherever the Name and
Authority, of a King, General, or Admiral is, there must their persons also be.

This Popish Ubiquitary Fancy all sober Reasons have long since laughed at,
Christ's person.
and justly, as being most Fancyfull and Frantic: what,

2. What is this, Not Ubiquirary.
but to make the Kings of men, yea, the King of Kings poor Mechanics, yea,
lower, that can do nothing by any Means, Servants, Ministers, Legates,
Ambassadors, etc. except they be personaly present?

3. The Spirit of God resolves the Question, Ephesians 3. He dwells in the Heart by
Faith, or believing in him, Faith not Christ himself.
and Gal. 2. I live by believing, or Faith in the Son of God: This Faith is
given of God to some and not to others: This Faith or Belief is wrought by
Christ Jesus, and ^in^shed by him, and may with as good Sense be called Christ
himself, as a shoo which G. Fox has begun and finished be called G Fox himself.

4. With what Color of Reason or Sense is it that if I believe King Charles
the second to be the King of English Men and my King, K. Charles King ye^ not
personally present in all his Dominions
I must of necessity (because of my belief which He by gracious [56 means has
wrought in me) I believe that K. Charles is personally present, and
Ubiquitarily present in person in all his Dominions and all the world over
where ever his Loving Subjects have their Residence?

5. I grant if we as some Quakers and Humphry Norton by Name resolve Christ
only into a Spirit, Humph. Norton yields Christ ubiquitary
and God only he is Ubiquitary: But as man, why may not the General of an Army
say, to his whole Army, and every Individual Soldier, as Paul to the
Corinthians, though I am absent in Body yet am I present in Spirit, Christ
Jesus is in his Command, and Courage and Example in every Regiment, every
Squadron, every Band and Troop, and every Soldier of the many Millions that
have, and shall believe in him, and that in a Sense, Add "by faith." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
both as God and man.

6. The Hinge and pinch of the Difference lies in the Opposition, Which word
and the word humane they startle a^
which the Quakers make against the Manhood of Christ Jesus to be yet Extant,
many of them alleging: why stand you gazing, Acts 1, etc. as if it were but
gazing after a Manhood and all now were Spirit and Light within.

7. Who ever questiond, Christ Jesus in the Soul makes it a palace for 3 Kings
etc.
but that the Spirit or power of Christ Jesus works in the Souls of his Elect
the great saving change or regeneration, gives Repentance, opens the heart to
Believe, and makes the heart of this Believer a Palace for three Kings, yet but
one, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, in Holiness, Love, Meekness, Patience,
etc. and all these Change "these" to "their." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Royal Attendants.

8. Who questions but Christ Jesus (as the Sun in these Heavens) in^luenceth
all parts of the World in several respects, The variety of Christ's workings and
appearances
and nothing is hid from his heat, He is felt in the bruised Reed and smoking
Flax; in the poor in Spirit, in the hungry and thirsty after Righteousness:
sometimes in the hope of Glory to come, yea, in present joy unutterable and
glorious; Sometimes the Lambs Wife is visibly asleep though her heart wakes,
sometimes she is Alarmed by his knocking and is sluggishly unwilling to open to
him, sometimes she rises and opens but he is gone, and she seeks for him by day
and night and cannot find him.

9. There is also a false feeling of Christ Jesus (as I spoke before of a false
Conception in a Woman) How many are bold to cry Lord, False Conceptions
Lord open; for we have prophesied in thy Name, etc and yet I will not say as
G. Fox. here says, of his Feeling that all that have not my feeling or working
of Christ are Reprobates: yet [57] this I say as Solomon, A Whore is Loud and
Clamorous (not so the Chaste, and Sober, and Modest Women) and the Devil spoke
as Holy and Heavenly words as Angels could have spoken, yet it was but the
Divil in Samuels Mantle.

The 29th. Instance is in page 117. where he brings in Giles Fermin saying,
Giles Fermin
[Paul Swore after Christ, and the Angels Swore, I wonder Paul should so forget
himself and sin so fearfully in Swearing, so the Quakers Light that denies
Swearing, is of Satan and not the Light of Christ.]

He Answers, Christ the Light (which Satan is out of) which is the Oath of God,
ends all Oaths, Sworn by Prophets or Angels whatsoever; and who Swares be
fallen into the Condemnation of the Devil: And it is no where said that the
Apostle Swore, but such as thou art matters not what thou speak; so that Spirit
that Preaches for Swearing is not the Spirit of Christ but is the Spirit of
Antichrist, etc.

I Reply, first G. Fox dares not deny but that the Angel and Paul Swore after
Christ, only he keeps his old Song, viz That Christ put an end to Swearing, and
that it is not said that Paul Swore.

But 1. He waves that Sweareng of the Angel, Paul and the Angels Swearing
or Christ himself, Rev. 10. for there he knows the very term of Swearing is
used.

2. As to Paul, if the attestation of the Name of God be the formality of an
Oath, then if ever any Man Swore in this World Paul did, saying to the
Corinthians, I call God to Record on my Soul, that to spare you I came not as
yet to Corinth, etc.

Secondly, It is true that all Nations have used to Swear by, Of Swearing in
General
or Appeal to the Gods they owned and worshipped. It is true also, that they
have used to put Creatures into the room of God, and Swear by them as the Jews
did; and some write out of a Superstitious Reverence in forbearing the Name of
God, and indeed the Reasons Christ Jesus gives, Mat. 5. look that way.

Thirdly. It is true also that for abuse of Swearing by, and Profaning the
Holy Name of God, a whole Land may mourn as Jeremiah speaks.

Fourthly There seems to be a very fair color put on a universal Prohibition
of Swearing by Christ Jesus, and by his Apostle James, Swear not, etc.

58] This Conjuror Change "conjuror" to "conjecture." R. W. Ms. Ann.
has taken with many precious Servants of God former and latter, even with
many of those called the Fathers, and with those Famous Protesters against the
whore of Rome, the Waldenses, and with Famous Usher, who does more then seem to
vindicate their not Swearing when Convented and Examined by the Popish
Inqui^itors. Famous Usher.


5. Notwithstanding this, and more which may be granted, and though I should
humbly motion to all higher Powers for Christian tenderness, Moderation as to
Swearing.
(as to the holy Majesty of Heaven his Name, and to the Souls of any making
Scruple:) yet I must proclaim against G. Fox, his lame and simple Return to the
Objection of his Opposite concerning Paul and the Angel.

For, why may not Paul and all the Apostles, and Christ and all the Angels of
Heaven, and all the Saints of God upon the Earth (in the words of Paul) call
God to Record upon their Souls, that this, or this was the Cause and Truth,
etc. Considering

1. That neither the most holy God nor the Lord Jesus (who I think is the
Swearing Angel Rev. 10.) nor the heavenly Spirits, the Angels, nor Paul, nor
any of Christ's Apostles, or Messe^gers would have practiced a Ceremony, or a
Shadow (like Circumcision or the Passover) at the Change "the" to "yt." R. W.
Ms. Ann.
time of the Day, etc.

2. Swearing or appealing unto God immediately in Oaths or Vows, Swearing no
Ceremony.
or Lots, or Fastings, though higher and above the practice of ordinary
Invocations, Supplications, Thanksgivings, etc. were never accounted Ceremonies
or Types of Substances to come, but Real and Substantial Services and Addresses
unto the most holy and most high Creator written in the hearts of all mankind
before ever Ceremony or Moses was born, and therefore as the fear of God is put
for the whole worship of God, so also is swearing in the holy Scripture: and we
may as well deny all worship and Service visible, The fear of God and Sw^aring
by him put by God for his whole worship.
and all External Acts of Homage and Devotion of the Body unto God, yea, and
all the fear of God is there Erase "is there." R. W. Ms. Ann.
in the mind, Soul and Spirit, or in any External Obeisance or Reverence, as
this Service and worship of calling upon God, and appealing to his holy
Majesty, as Witness and Judge in some Cases, etc

3. Whereupon it follows, that this high point of Gods worship is as real,
Swearing as real a worship of God as Prayer, preaching, Baptism, Lords Supper,
etc.
as moral, as holy, and perpetual as Prayer it self, as preaching, yea, as
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and no more Ceremonial, though I know the
Foxians make Baptism and the 59] Lords Supper but Ceremonies for a time, and
ere long if they continue to hearken to Samuel within them, they will account
Prayer and Preaching (whether Apostolical or Pastoral) but Types and Shadows
also.

4. It is a most simple and un-Christian and Atheistical whimsie that Christ
was the end of Oaths, Christ not the abolisher of Oaths
the end of the Prophets, the end of the Scripture, the end of Reghteousness,
(in their Sense) though as Mediator he was the End or Perfection of, and
fulfilling of the Law of God, which never Soul beside the Lord Jesus ever kept
in thought, word and deed, what ever the proud Pharisees and Papists, and
Foxians prate, etc.

5. It is a gross Fancy to imagine that the Lord Jesus in the 5 of Math. gave
new Commands, The fifth of Matthew.
or Contradicted the holy pleasure of his Father concerning Revenge, Adultery,
Oaths, Prayers, Fastings, but opened his Fathers Law in the purity and
Spirituality of it against the rotten Expositions, Traditions and practices of
the Pharisees.

6. In particular, let all the Reasons be expended and carefully weighed, which
the Lord Jesus so wonderfully, exactly gives why they should not swear by
Jerusalem, nor the Temple, nor their Head, nor any Oath, to wit of such a
Nature, and half a sober eye may see that the Lord Jesus intends only to reduce
them to an holy Swearing, only by God, in Gods way, etc. and in their Common
Converse, to use yea, and nay, etc.

7. I have read a sober and man like Answer of F. H. called a Quaker against A.
S. called a Doctor, The Quakers plainly Confess Swearing in Cases lawful
concerning Oaths, not like G. Fox his brutish barkings against all his
Opposites and any that prate Change "prate" to "please." R. W. Ms. Ann.
may see F. H. yields to A. S. that himself, (and I presume he speaks the mind
of all the Quakers) could yield to give a Testmony in weighty Cases, by the
Name and in the Name of God, as in the presence of God, and attest or call God
to witness, etc. And he says, that they had offered so to give a Testimony,
and that his Opposite Doctor Snalwood, and I think Bishop Gauden so called,
assented that this was Substantial and Formal Swearing: only the Ceremonies
were enjoined by Law, to which the Quaker could not yield, but suffer as indeed
they have done upon this Account most lamentably in London and Bristol, and all
England over.

8. I have much to add both as to that Fancy of Christ's end- [60] ing Oaths as
Ceremonies, Cases of Swearing
and of Cases that have be^allen my self in the Chancery in England, etc. and
of the loss of great Sums which I chose to bear through the Lords help, then
yield to the Formality (then and still in use) in Gods worship, though I
offered to Swear as F. H. mentions they have done, and the Judges told me they
would rest in my Testimony and way of Swearing, but they could not dispense
with me without an Act of Parliament.

I believe this highly concerns the high Assembly of Parliament and all Law
makers, Sin established by Law, is Sin multiplied and multiplied, Judgment
here and for ever.
to search well and to appoint a Committee of Searchers to Examine, if the Laws
upon new appearances from Heaven have not need of rectifying and some of
cancelling for sin against God or the Souls of men established by Law, is like
Iereboams making Israel to sin, and most commonly after much patience of God
brings double punishment in the end.

The 30th. Instance where G. Fox brings in Tho Moor saying [It is not properly
nor in a full sense that God is manifest in the Flesh of his Saints.] 30.
Thomas Moor.


He Answers, The Saints are the Temple of God, and God dwells in them, and they
come to witness the Flesh of Christ. And they glorify him in their Souls and
bodies: And the Lord is glorified in their bringing forth much fruit. And the
witness is the Seed, the one offering for sin to be manifest within, and such
are not Reprobates, yet witness the one offering Christ Jesus, and them that
have not Him within, they are Reprobates.

I Reply, a great Design of the Devil in all Ages has been to Cavil at, The
Devils great work in all Ages.
and hinder Gods love t^ mankind: Hence he plotted and effected Man's Fall from
God: God Infinite in wisdom and mercy, out-shoots and out-plots him, and
designs a Reconciliation and a Marriage between the Son of God the Prince of
Life, and lost mankind: He promised his coming in our Flesh; prefigured Him,
prophesied of Him, and in the Fullness of Time sent Him, etc.

Against this Lord Jesus, this old Serpent hisseth and rages before his Birth,
at his Birth, after his Birth, and in all Ages ever since, as fearing the
crushing of his Brains, and the downfall of his Throne, Satan's Emissaries to
destroy Christ Jesus.
if the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus stand: Hence not long after Christ's
Assention, he stirred up many Anti Christ's, [61] Simon Magus and his Followers,
the Arrians, the Gnostics, Cerdonians, Manicheans, etc. the great Antichrist
of Rome, and since the Reformation, the new Manicheans, those in Luthers and
Calvin's time called the Spirituals and Libertines, and in our times the
Adamites, the Ranters, The person of Christ Jesus the Devils great Eye sore.
the Quakers, and all in order to his Dragons war against the person of the
Archangel, Michael the word of God, the Individual person, the Man Christ
Jesus, and after him all that should dare to follow him.

Some (as the Arians, etc.) have denied him to be so, but Man, and not God;
some (as the Manicheans, etc.) deny his Manhood, affirming him to be God, and a
Spirit, but, with Christ's manhood and the Scriptures, the Devil and the
Papists, and the Quakers, (for most of them) could with all their hearts make
an Everlasting parting: The Devils and Change "and" to "end." R. W. Ms. Ann.
is to destroy this Savior and Salvation to poor lost man: The Quakers pretend
their end to be the Exal^ing and glorifying of God in the Flesh of his Saints,
The Manicheans the great Opposers of Christ's Manhood.
therefore some of these Manicheans render his Birth, Life and Death to be only
Imaginary, and Allegorical: a Figure of what should be done in, and by
Christians: others of them say it is real, but he only lived and died for an
Example, others, that he was really so born, he so lived and died, but he is
now only within, etc. and after his Flesh no Inquiry.

G. Fox here plays upon the various meaning of the word Flesh. Also he plays
upon those holy Scriptures, viz. God is glorified in the Souls and Bodies of
his Saints, etc.

This subtle Ionadab he knows also, That Individual Man Christ Jesus must have
the pre-eminence of the only Messiah and Mediator.
that the Protestants maintain that the Godhead and the Spirit of God so dwells
not in the Souls and Bodies of his Servants as in that Soul and Body of the
Lord Jesus. It is true he was not Erase "not." R. W. Ms Ann.
born of a Woman, but against their wills they are forced to Confess that he
was not born of a Wife, but a Virgin, though many Fancies are Coined about
that: They Confess that no man was Father of his fleshly Nature: The Godhead of
Christ's Body after a Transcendent way.
He knows also that the Protestants hold that the Godhead dwells in him, and
dwells in him as the great Mediator and Propitiation surety and Undertaker, so
as not in any of the Bodies, or all the Bodies of his Saints, besides, and
after a more high Transcendent, and Inconceivable manner.

G. Fox knows that his Opposite intends such a manifestation of God in the
Flesh that renders the Change "the" to "yt." R. W. Ms. Ann.
one single person Christ [62] Jesus the Head of his Church, etc. And that they
hold that there is as much difference between that one Individual person Christ
Jesus the Head and his Followers, as between our Heads and our Bodies, the King
himself and his Body or Subjects, yea, every one singly in particular: yea, as
between the Foundation and all the building thereon raised.

Now how poor and lame is it, that because the Saints are Gods Temple, The six
great points.
therefore they must be God himself: because 1 Timothy 3. Christ dwells in his
Saints by believing, Ephesians. 3. therefore they are Christ himself: Dreadfully
inverted upon the Quakers.
Because God in an holy Sense, became Flesh: Therefore our Flesh is God and
Christ, therefore will they find those heavenly particulars, 1 Timothy 3. affi^med
of that man Christ Jesus to be inverted and dreadfully turned upon their proud
and divilish Flesh in this manner, viz. The Devil is manifest in their Flesh,
Condemned of the holy Spirit of God: Abhord of the heavenly Angels: The world
shall abhor their memory, and except Repentance, they shall descend with all
the Enemies of the true Lord Jesus into the Lake that burns with unquenchable
Fire and Brimstone.

The 31st. Instance is in page 136. where G. Fox brings in the same Author
saying, 136 Thomas Moor
[Christ is distinct from every one of us, and without us, and our particular
persons.]

He Answers, [The Apostle says Christ was in them, except they were
Reprobates, and they were slesh of his slesh, and of his Bone, and eat his
flesh, and drank his Blood, then it was within them, and he is distinct from
none but Reprobates who hate the Light.]

I Reply, 1. This and the former look face upon face as in a Glass, and yet G.
Fox herein carries two faces under one hood: A Face for God, and a Face for the
Devil; one Face for Christ another for Antichrist. For is it not known by all,
that there be diverse ways of eating Christ's Flesh and drinking his Blood?
Although there be a Mystical and Spiritual feeding upon Christ Jesus his Love,
his Passions, Eating Christ's Flesh and drinking his Blood.
his Merits, etc. which we maintain against the bloody Transubstantiators of
Rome and Hell, yet can ought but Hellish Bewitching and Impudence conclude,
that literally the Flesh profits nothing, and therefore their Flesh is as
good as the Flesh of Christ, and their Blood (as some of 63] the Quakers have
Printed) is of as much virtue as the Blood shed of the Man Christ Jesus: Hence
so many of them contend that Gods Blood, The Foxians horrible pride exalting
themselves to be God and Christ
Act. 20. and Gods Flesh Redeems us, etc. and their Blood and Sufferings are
Gods Flesh and Blood Redeeming, Saving, etc, I know what one of their chief
said [He is a Fool that speaks all at once] and I know also, that in the
Bottom (which their Herod's and Erase "Herod's and." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Apostles know better then I) these Foxians are God, and Christ, and Spirit,
and Resurrection, and Life, and Heaven, etc.

2. But for true Believers in Jesus it is enough for them to believe, Christ's
coming again to them.
Ioh. 16. That for a little while he must leave them, and after a little while
he would come again to them, even the same Man that left them, that God man,
and the Man Christ Jesus.

1. I know these poor Foxians say, that he did come again to them, and I know
also that a Man may feel this Lie with a pair of Mittins: For I Change "I" to
"We." R. W. Ms. Ann.
know that the Comforter came not to them upon his Resurrection (for then he
was forty days with them) but after his Assention.

2. Who knows not that the Foxians maintain Christ's second coming to be
Spiritual, and count all gazing Fools that look after a Man, for he is come
anto them in Spirit, and in them he maintains his great Assizes, and now
passes Judgment upon all the Children of Men by them.

3. If these poor filthy Dreamers lived without Food and Evacuations, without
Physic (which some of them cry down, and no Physic but Faith) without
Procreation, The Foxians natural and spiritual Defilements therefore not God
but filthy Dreams.
and bringing forth of Children without the filthiness and stinks of Nature;
yea without the many thousands of Holy Words, and Thoughts, and Actions
omitted, and the many thousand passionate, impertinent, unreasonable
discontented Words and Actions, etc. then might we say as the men of Iconium
(touching Paul and Barnabas) The Gods are come to us in the likeness of Men,
till then we must look upon the Foxians (eating so Christ his flesh, etc. until
they become Christ himself,) as Simple, and Monstrous, and Blasphemous as the
Papists in their Foolish, Monstrous and Bloody Transubstantiations.

4. Alas! The Foxians in Calvin's time.
these are old tricks played by the Manicheans in former times, by Quintinus and
Pocqueius, etc. in Luther and Calvin's time: Did not some thousands of this
frantic spirit [64] then, say, is Christ in us? how is he Distinct from us?
what need you ask me how I do? can Christ be sick? can Christ do but well?
speaking of themselves: But I observe Gods strokes in the World most just and
wonderful upon three sorts of persons 1. Voluptuous. Gods strokes in this world
wonderful upon three sorts.
2. Oppressors and Tyrants. 3. Ringleaders of Blasphemies, Change "Blasphemies"
to "Blasphemous." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Opinions. Let every Soul consider: I can give abundance of Instances of former
and later times had I here time and season for it, and were not all Hystories
full, etc.

The 32d. Instance is in Page 186. where G. Fox brings in Samuel Hamond saying
[What warrant have you to go out to the Quakers? 186. Samue^ Hammond.
shall a Man go hear the Jews and Popish Mass because Paul bids try all
things? No, No.]

G. Fox Answers [Paul bids us quench not the Spirit, and where the Spirit is
not quenched they may try Papists, Jews, Protestants, who quench not the
Spirit: But who quench the Spirit and draws people from the Light within, they
draw from that they should see withal, then you stuff them up with old Authors
and lying stories, as you permit abroad.

I Reply, 1. And ask of G. Fox and all his Foxians: About true bearing.
Have the Papists the Jews or any Idolaters the Holy Spirit of God amongst
them, whom we may go to hear God speaking in his own holy Promise, Ordinance
and Appointment unto us?

2. May I hear a Papist, or Jew, or any other False Worshippers or Idolaters to
try them when I am convinced and satisfied already that they speak not by the
Holy Spirit, etc.

3. May I go to Worship God with them who either (as I believe) Worship a False
God, or Worship the true and living God, in Ways and Worships of Men's
Inventions and Appointments?

4. May I hear a false Prophet, or be present at any false worship, but with
actual reproving of them, and laboring to reduce them to the true God and his
most holy Institutions and Appointments?

Upon this Reason I went to the General Ass^mbly of the Quakers at Newport the
last year, I queried with them about the true Christ, and the true Spirit: but
I was stopped by a sudden Spirit of Prayer in a Woman, and the unseasonable
Spirit of Prayer in a man, which forced me to stop, and occasioned me to take
this [65] way of offering an appointed and solemn discourse and disputation
with them.

5. I ask, may any Soul out of Curiosity go to hear a strange Preacher, in whom
I have not Faith, that he is sent from God, etc. especially, if there be not a
free liberty for my Queries and Objections, and searchings as the Bereans did?

6. Are there not two great Cautions given, us by the Spirit of God! Take heed
whom you hear: Take heed how you hear, and both of these in reference to Gods
worship and mine own Salvation?

7. What do these Foxians mean by the Spirits quenching? What the quenching of
the Spirit is.
Can the Spirit of God be really quenched, or put out, any more then the Sun in
the Heavens by all the water in the Ocean? Is the Spirit of God Metaphorically
quenched any other ways then by withdrawing the means or fuel which were to
keep the Fire burning that came down from Heaven upon the Altar? why then do
these proud, lazy Souls so horribly slight reading, studying Books, yea, Gods
Book, as one of their chief said to me, (laying his hand upon the Bible of
Iunius, etc. art not thou past these yet? And why do they worship a dumb Devil
in their dumb meetings, and stand still and listen, and lie upon their beds of
laziness for Revelations and Notions, etc.

8. As for G. Fox his scornful sling against old Authors, Old Authors.
what is it but pride and Ingratitude: pride to underval^e, much more to scorn
my Progenitors and Ancestors: Ingratitude to God for so many helps, etc. and to
them who have labored and broke the Ice, and left their Labors behind them
for the benefit of after Comers: yea, what Injustice, when I disregard and
slight their writings, and reproach them, calling them Old Authors, compared
with their new Fancies, as W. Edmundson did me frequently at Newport, Old Man,
Old Man, etc.

The 33 Instance is in Page, 206, where he brings in John Burton, John Burton.
sading, [It is a Scripture of the Devils making, to apprehend Christ within.]

He Answers, If there be any other Christ but he, who was Crucified within, he
is the false Christ, and the Scriptures hold forth this, and the Devil never
made it, but he and his Messengers are against it. And he that has not this
Christ that was risen and [66] Crucified within is a Reprobate, though Devils
and Reprobaes may talk of him without.

I Reply, This is the great dispute between the Christians and the Pagans, The
g^oat dispute about the true Christ.
the Christians and the Jews, the Christians and the Mahumetans, and the
Christians among themselves so called, viz. Who is the great Prophet?

2. To what purpose should I allege the whole history of the Birth, Life,
Death, etc. of the Lord Jesus, since the Quakers acknowledge all true, etc.?

3. Why should I allege the Sermons and Preachings, and Writings of the
Apostles or Messengers of Christ Jesus after his Ascension, all harmonizing
with the four Evangelists, writing his Life and Death, etc.

4. Certain it is, Christ without and within
that he that shall turn over all the former Relations and Histories, and all
the writings and Sermons of the Apostles since, and predicate a Christ that was
risen within, Crucified within, (in Opposition to that Jesus of Nazareth
without) he must have the Forehead of a Reprobate and Devil, (as G. Fox
phrazeth it)

5. G. Fox knows the Protestants predicate (in Life and Death) the believing in
Christ Jesus so born, The Protestants belief of Christ.
so living and dying: And the applying of the price of his Death and merits
unto God for Propitition: And the Applying of the Promise and new Covenant and
Bargain in that Blood for a new Heart, a new Spirit, etc.

6. What shall then become of G. Fox, his believing in a Christ that was Risen
and Crucified within, in Opposition to this Lord Jesus so Promised, so
Prophesied of, so prefigured, so brought forth, so living and dying, so
preached, so believed on, and what a Forehead of Hell must he have that calls
all those Reprobates and Devils that talk of Christ without?

The 34th Instance is in page 214. where G, Churches in Wales.
Fox brings in the Elders and Messengers of several Churches of Ilston,
Abergevenny, etc. saying, [We are Conceived in Sin and brought forth in
Iniquity, etc.]

He Answers, [David does not say, you who were Conceived in Sin, but I, and W.
says, John was sanctified from the Womb, and the Scriptures speaks of such as
were sanctified from the Womb, and Children that were clean. And so you do not
speak as Elders and [67] Messengers of true Churches, or Men dividing the Word
aright, but you are one against another, though you are all against them you
call Quakers, that be in the Truth.]

I Reply, 1. In the Change "the" to "this" R. W. Ms. Ann.
passage G. Fox discovers to any Intelligent and Savoury Spirit, not only a
weak and deluded Soul, The first Cry of every Chi^d of God.
but a Popish and Arminian poison about the Estate of all mankind in their
first Birth, a strong presumption that he never felt what the woeful Estate of
all mankind by Nature is, and what to Cry out in his own particular, with
David, I was Conceived in Sin and brought forth in Iniquity, which Cry is one
of the first Soul Cries of every Child of God.

2. About 120 years since the Father of Spirits stird up the Spirit of his
Famous Servant Calvin to batter down the Babel of a Franciscan Frantic, Whence
Devils and wicked men come.
who maintained, that God from the first Created both Devils and wicked men in
the same Condition of wickedness wherein we now find them: Contrary to the holy
Scriptures Testimony (as that Excellent Soul proved) declaring their pure
Creation, their Fall, and their respective future Estate and condition to
Eternity.

3. In the Reign of our late Royal Sovereign K. James it pleased God to let
loose this Devil of Pelagius, The low Countries hazard by the Pelagians.
who rowzed up the wits of Arminius and his Followers in the low Countries,
(during their twelve years Truce with Spain) so that the Civil Discord about
this point and other Pelagian and Semi-pelagian Doctrines had almost ruined
Holland, etc. but that the Lord mightily assisted them. First, By the personal
presence and Forces of the Prince of Orange, and Secondly, By the Famous
Assembly and Disputes of the Synod at Dort.

4. To follow the Fox into his Borough, David's Conceptions vindicated from G.
Foxes Aspersions
what if David say not you but I? why should the Papists and Arminians, or
Foxians have a more holy Birth then David? Wherein could holy David, Father
Iesse and his mother be charged? Is not the English of the word Devil Accuser,
Reproacher, Slanderer, Is not Nature that Law and Order which the most Infinite
Creator has set, in the propagation of all his Creatures, though the choicest
of them Man be degenerated into the sour Vine, What Nature is
at first a sweet Vine, Nature or Gods Order goes on, though mankind be
Corrupted from the Womb, and the Imagination of the Thoughts of man's Heart be
only evil and that continually, Genesis 6. and millions of [68] Experiences all
the world over Confirm it what the Trade of all mankind is from the Birth. The
Spots of the Leopard, and the Blackness of the Neger comes not by Accident, etc.

6. The perverseness and Crookedness of the motions of Nature may continue,
though Nature and the Course of it run on, as we see in Rivers turned out of
their Channels, in Clocks and Watches, and D^al, and Lutes, and Harps when out
of Tune they give their Natural and Artificial (though distempered) Sounds and
operations.

7. Beside the holy Testimony of Moses, Genesis 6, and David, Psalm. 51. and the
Lord Jesus declaring what the heart of man is, Mark 7. How does Paul, Romans 5.
and 7. declare the Entrance of Sin by the first Man, until by the second Man
Sin and Death, and Hell be Conquered, and at last Sin in Gods Children fully
dissolved, and abolished?

8. I end this passage with Appellation to all that kn^w what Children are all
the world over, The pureness of the sweetest Infants.
the sweetest and the fairest born of the holiest and sweetest Parents, how
froward, how proud, how Revengeful against their Fathers, Mothers, and most
tender Nurses.

1. These rotten and crooked Dispositions in every Child bring forth wild
Asses fruits in Youth, of Rebellion against Superiors, The rottenness of nature
and of wicked desires of Wine and Women, and fighting and pleasures in persons
of greater growth, this rotten Nature appears in their rooting (like Swine) for
earthly profits, or preferments, or fighting like Lions and Tigers in Wars and
Law-conttntions, and oppressing of Inferio^rs, especially if they dare to
reprove or witness their Idolatries, Superstitions and Abominations.

2. The experience of all the Saints of God in the Holy Scripture, The
experiences of Gods Saints in Scripture
who maintained a Battle between the Flesh and Spirit all their days, accordto
Gal. 5. A Battle within them, sometimes the Spirit (or new Man, the new
Creature, or the Grace of Christ) prevailing, sometimes the Corruption or
Rottenness of Nature (like the two Houses of Saul and David) the old Man
getting the victory, as we see generally in Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, Moses,
Aaron, Eli, Samuel, David, Solomon, etc. till we come down to the highest
Saints Paul and Peter: the one shamefully again and again vanquished, and the
other (Paul) crying [69] out, that the good he would do he did not, and yet
when he did evil he had two men within him, the Law of his Spirit Heavenly, and
the Law of sin which dwelt within him, ^tc. they that know not and feel not
this, they are either dead or rotten, and so feel nothing, or if there be any
life of God in them, and yet say in the litteral sense they sin not, their
weakness is such, that like very low and far gone weak bodies their Filth and
Excrements come from them, but they know nothing of it, nor will believe or
acknowledge any such matter.

The 35. Instance is in Page 217. where G. Fox brings in John Iackson saying,
217 John Iackson
[False Prophets and Christ's, and Deceivers, many should come (if it were
possible) to deceive the very Elect.]

He Answers, [Yes, Christ said they should come to the Apostles, which before
their Decease they did come, and went forth from them, which Christ said should
inwardly Ravin, and get the sheeps clothing: which since the days of the
Apostles all the World went after them, as thou may read in the Revelations:
and now are People but coming from them to the Rock, and now shall the
Everlasting Gospel be preached to them that dwell upon the Earth, over the
heads of the Beast and their false Prophet, and they shall be taken, and the
Lamb, and the Saints shall have the victory.

I Reply, 1. As that great Fox, the Pope of Rome and his Foxians (the
Worsh^ppers of that Beast) maintain that Antichrist is not yet come, The great
and little Foxes.
that so he may escape a scouring, or rather a burning or dashing in pieces, so
does our little Fox, G. Fox and his Foxians cry out another Lurry, [Antichrist
why he is come and gone long ago, etc.] As if false Christ's might not be then
and now too: as if there were no more greedy Wolves to be found then in Act. 20
and no more Sheepskins for them in Matthew, 7. etc.

The Spirit of God proclaims, 1 Cor. 11. that there must be Heresies, and Peter
tells us 2 Pet. 2. that there must be false Teachers, false Prophets, and
Damnable Heresies, for the trial of the sincere, etc. And were all the Foxes
hunted out and destroyed in the Apostles days, and none left since John's time
to our times to be hunted after and digd out of their Buroughs.

70] Are there none sound, sincere, and chaste to be tried at this day to the
Lord Jesus the Heavenly Bridegroom, and to his Eternal King and Father, God
blessed to Eternity. Ends with a "?" not a "period." R. W. Ms. Ann.


2. The Protestants maintain that the Pope or Papacy is the great Antichrist,
the Man of Sin, with seven heads and ten horns, etc. why should not the Devil
be able to raise besides the Pope, The Heresies of several Ages.
the Ceredonians, Valentinnians and the Arians, Manicheans, Gnostics, etc. and
since, or at the beginning of the Reformation, the Quintinians, and Munsterian
Mousters? why should he not be able to raise in our time the Nicholaitans and
Foxians.

3. It is true that in the times of warm peace, etc. many Vermin breed,
Concerning false Christ's etc.
whom the cold winter of Persecution utterly destroys. I know also that in the
late times of Freedom to men's Opinions in England, Many Opinions and promoters
of them arose: Sharp times God has to make discovery, I know some say that
Judas, and Theudas, and Barchochas, and Rabbi-Iudah, etc. were the false
Christ's the Lord Jesus spoke of: I know also that amongst the Professors of
the Christian Name, false Christ's and false Prophets, Apostles, Preachers, etc.
must pretend to the Christian Name, also.

4. I know some affirm that though the Pope be Antichrist, yet that he that
let was not the Roman Emperor until he was taken out of the way, Concerning
him who let Antichrists rising
but that he that let was the Holy Spirit to which the Quakers now pretend,
which Spirit being taken away the Popes arose: But in the days of John when
those gifts did most flourish, yet then there were many Antichrists, and the
gift of the Holy Spirit did not hinder their rising; so that all ages are full
of false Teachers.

5. What Ignorance does this little Fox, yet great Boaster discover in saying
[Now are People coming forth from them, etc.] does he proudly look over all
those Glorious Protestant Witnesses of Jesus, before and since Luther, whose
Names many of them, God commanded that Heavenly I. Fox to make Record of.

6. Do the Foxians just now about twenty years preach the everlasting Gospel:
The everlasting Gospel
Now says W. Edm. in our discourse we preach the everlasting Gospel to you,
that you shall be free from sin, etc. But Gods Spirit tells us in Peter and
Jude of pretenders to liberty, while themselves are the Servants of Corruption
or Rottenness.

71] 7. Both Jews and Gentiles have done by the Name of Christ as the Jews and
Romans with Christ Jesus before they murdered him: they mockd him, etc. and
then Murdered him; that so they might be the Heir and Messiah themselves: Just
as the great Fox the pope and these little Foxians pretend to be the sole great
Heir apparent to the Crown of Heaven, and all other Rebels and Reprobates
against and from their Heavenly Majesty's.

The 36. Instance, John Jackson
is in page 218. Where G, Fox brings in the same Author saying, [I hope you
will not condemn the Generation of the Righteous because they are vot perfect.]

He Answers, That which condemns is Righteous; it condemns that which is not
perfect, and the Generation is Righteous and not to be condemned.

I Reply, He Answers four things: First, that which Condemns is righteous.
Secondly, That which is Righteous Condemns that which is not perfect. The
horrible pride of the Foxians
Thirdly, That which is righteous is perfect. Fourthly, The Generation is
Righteous (that is them selves being perfect) and not to be Condemned, the
Sum of his Answer is, Himself and his Foxians are Gods, as pure, and holy, as
God is, and therefore now keep the Eternal Sessions and Assizes at the Tribunal
of their high Court, must all the Generations of the World receive their
Eternal Doom and Sentence, I know they know this is the bottom.

1. But stay, this Fox is in his Borough of Equivocation: for Judgment is
twofold: First, Judgment Righteous: False appearances
Secondly, According to Appearance, as the Lord Jesus distinguishes: How many
are declared by Appearances to their Eyes, Clouded Insert "with." R. W. Ms. Ann.
pride, malice, Envy, Lasciviousness, Covetousness, Ambition, etc. And
therefore away with the Son of God, hang him, and give us Barrabas, though a
Boutefeau and Murderer, etc.

2. It is not true, that all that is not perfect (in the Foxians Sense) is not
Righteous: The word perfect in the greek and Heqrew
For 1. (as has been before observed) the words Tam and Tomjin in Hebrew, and
Telos and Teleios, and Teleion in the Greek, have diverse significations, and
accordingly, must be, and are translated and expounded, Contrary to the proud
Ignorance of these Cheators.

2. The Generation of all Gods Children (in all the holy Scrip- [72] ture) have
ever acknowledged their weakness, folly, pride, and many Transgressions, with
true Quaking and brokenness, and bitter weeping, etc:

3. In a true Sense, The Saints pardon of Sin and Justification perfect.
that which is Righteous is perfect Justification or Remission of Sin for
Christ Jesus sake is perfect, it admits (as they say of no magis and minus)
more or less, the truly humble Ethiopian is as truly and perfectly pardoned
and Justified as David himself, and the blessed Mother of the Lord Jesus, the
Virgin Mary.

4. We maintain, though pardon of Sin and Justification, and Acceptance with
God before Angels, Men and Devils be perfect, and though a poor Child of God be
born of God, The Saints battle and daily Combat
be past from Death to Life, can not Sin in a Sense, nor suffer the Devil to
touch him: yet there remains till Death a Combat to be fought between the Law
of the Spirit, and Law of the members, the old Man and the new Man, the Flesh
and the Spirit, etc.

5. Hence (in an holy Sense) Paul says, it is not I, Heavenly Piradoxes
but Sin that dwells in me, that is in my Flesh wherein dwells no good thing, So
that David might say in one Sense, It was not I that committed Adultery, and
Murder, and Peter say, It was not I that denied my Master with Swearing and
Cursing, etc. but the rotten old man and Sin dwelling in me.

He that knows not to untie these Knots, Devilsh T^nents of the Spirituals in
Calvin's time.
and yet prates of Righteousness and perfection: He is proud and foolish, and
ignorant, and he will proudly and foolishly sooner or later commit these five
great evils.

1. He will not discern what the Generation of the Righteous is.

2. He will say Sin is nothing but Imagination.

3. He will cast wickedness upon God, and say God does all, and what God does
that is good, therefore no Sin.

4. He must call David and Peter fools for Confessing their Guilt and weeping
bitterly, etc.

5. That it is in vain to watch against Sin, and to cry Lord lead us not into
Temptation, etc.

In the last place I Affirm (and have made it good) that the Generation of the
Papists and Quakers: though so pure in their own eyes, The Papist and Quakers
perfection
yet they are not cleansed from their filthiness: The Papists are justly
charged with Superstition and Idolatry and with drinking the Blood of Saints.
And have not the Generation of the Quakers: [73] their Images and Idols also,
(as I have manifested) their pride and Ignorance and Idleness in not using
means, and their passionate Railings and Cursings? and I believe if their
Spirit get a Sword (what ere they ignorantly prate) they will drink the Blood
of all their Enemies as Heretics, Idolaters, Reprobates, and Devils.

The 37th. Instance is in Page 220. wherein G. Fox brings in the Author of
Hosanna to the Son of David, 220 Hosanna to the Son of David
saying, [Man is not able to discern the things of God till he be born again.]

He Answers, the Scripture speaks of discerning the Eternal Power and Godhead,
and that was a thing of the Spirit of God: and the Apostle says not that they
were born again: And yet I say that none knows the things of God but the Spirit
of God, and that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has
showed it to them: For that of God in them was of the Spirit, who is the God of
the Spirits of all Flesh, which brings them to discern the Eternal Power and
Godhead.

1 Reply, 1. With Amazement at the dreadful Justice of God hardening this
daring Soul for playing away his own Light and the Name of God, G Fox his
Judgment from God
and the Light which the Lord has sent him from so many Excellent pens out of
which he has raked nothing but handfuls of Reproaches to fling in the Faces of
his best Friends, and turned Truth into Lies, and poison to murder himself and
others.

2. It is clear, that (as in all Answers to the Quotations of his Opposites
which he picks out) that he holds the Contrary to his Opposite, so here viz.
That a man may be able to discern the things of God before he be born again.

3. He proves his point from two Scriptures, Romans 1. Cor. 2. As to the first, I
will not repeat what I have before written as to the Nature of the holy Spirit,
his Godhead, his Operations, seven Eyes, and seven Horns, and seven Lamps, his
Common workings in all men! his special working in the Elect, Regenerating,
Justifying, Sanctifying, quickening, Comforting,: etc. Nor will I repeat matters
concerning the power of Nature in the Philosophers, and all mankind: Only from
this Romans 1. I observe,

1. That the Eternal Power and Godhead cannot be seen by mortal Eyes.

2. We may reach some mental Light of this Eternal Power [74] and Godhead, by a
serious pondering of his works.

3. All mankind are bound by the Law of their Nature to put forth their utmost
in searching after God. Kom. 1. Discussed as to the Eternal Power and Godhead.


4. We may gain a great sight of the Godhead, and yet not see him nor glorify
him, that is love him as Paul, 1 Cor. 8.

5. Natural men until changed and born again of Gods power and Spirit, do but
prate (as the Devils do and tremble) their imaginations are vain, and their
foolish hearts are darkened.

6. Yet this sight of God which men and Devils may get of God by their own
Remainders of natural Abilities will leave them without excuse whatever
Papists, The natural power of men and Devils.
Arminians and Quakers talk of Gods requiring no more then he gives, for in
Justice God is not bound to give Sampson his Locks or his Eyes when he has
willingly suffered Dalilah and by her the Philistims to cut them off, and pluck
them out.

2. Beside our wills and wisdom are now become Enmity against God, and no man
spends equal Care and pains for God, until Gods Spirit in free grace ch^nge and
quicken him with what he does for these temporary Dreams and Shadows.

The second Scripture is 1 Cor. 2. viz. But God has revealed them unto us by
his Spirit: 1 Cor. 2. as to Gods Spirit discussed.
For the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God: For what man
knows the things of a man save the Spirit of a man, etc. now we have not
received the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we may
know the things which are freely given to us of God.

In ver. 6. the Spirit of God speaks of a twofold wisdom, first, the wisdom
of this world, and the Principles Change "Principles" to "Princes." R. W. Ms.
Ann.
of this world which come to naught. Wisdom.
Secondly, the wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world unto our glory.: Again, ver. 12. God tells us of two
Spirits: The Spirit of the world, Secondly, The Spirit of God. Now this woeful
Cheator finding the word Spirit, Confounds as his Course is all together, and
because Gods Spirit regenerates the Corint^ians, and opens to them a glimpse of
the Godheads power and wisdom, and Goodness by Paul's preaching, and opens their
hearts to it therefore he must also enlighten the world with the same Light,
whereas that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, The Case of G Fox and most
of his Foxians.
and that of Flesh is Flesh; This Change and renewing of the Spirit by the Holy
Spirit, I fear G. Fox and most of his Foxians never Experimened, [74] though
they enjoy in common a Light of Nature, though God has endowed him and many of
them with excellent Natural Parts: yea, with a Light from the holy Scripture:
yea, with a Light of Experience and common Motions from Gods holy Spirit, and
have been lifted up by their own thoughts and others (as Capernaum) up to the
Heaven! and therefore my Soul fears (as to most of them) that God will bring
them down to Hell with the greater Condemnation.

The 38th Instance is in Page 222. where he brings in the same Author saying,
222. Hosanna to the Son of David
[Salvation and Faith are the gifts of God distinct from Christ]

He Answers, They are all of him, and from him, and with him, And how is he the
Author of Faith in whom it ends, and from whence it comes.]

I Reply, as Potiphars wife cries out against Joseph: Christ's Name hotribly
abused
and pretends Chastity, so does this subtle Whoremonger, pretending that all is
pure Christ: the Light is Christ, their Hope is Christ, their Faith, their
Spirit is Christ himself, yea, the Saints are Christ: No distinction between
Christ and them, for they are all of him, from him, and with him?

In short, Colossians 1. Considered.
I pray the Reader to mind with me the first Chapter to the Colossians, where
ver. 1. The Spirit of God declares how Gods Children (poor slaves at first in
Satan's Clutches) are Translated from the Kingdom of Darkness into the
Kingdom of his dear Son: The Nature and admirable Mystery and Excellen-of
Christ Jesus
In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins. I
know the Foxians turn Christ, yea, his Blood also into a Spirit, a God. How
admirably does the holy Spirit of God declare the Godhead, or Divinity of
Christ Jesus and his Manhood or Humanity, unto ver. 21? out of both which I
shall select two or three Attributes of the Lord Jesus.

1. The State of Christianity, amongst many other high Expressions in the
Scripture, is here called the Kingdom of Gods dear Son, which argues a
distinction from all other Kingdoms, and a distinction from his Saints, as a
King is not his Subjects, nor their Gifts and Honors, and Estates, and peace,
and Joy though given by him to them,, and procured by his great wisdom and
love for them.

Oh poor Ungrateful Monsters, not content to be taken from [76] the Kingdom,
from the Dungeon, of Darkness and Hell, and that by the Ransom and price paid
and Blood and Death of his only Beloved the Prince of Life, but we must be the
King of Heaven and Prince of Life our selves.

2. I observe, The Blood of Christ. The Blood of God.
The Instrumental and purchasing Cause or price, is said to be his Blood, which
argues the Infinite value of his Sufferings, in which Respect only it is called
the Blood of God: I know the slight esteem that some of these Foxians have of
the Blood of the Lord Jesus saying, that wicked men the Soldiers shed it; that
it was spilt upon the ground, that there was no difference between that Blood
and the Blood of another Saint: That by Gods blood is only meant godly and
heavenly power, and Spirit by which God applies Mercy and pardon,
Justification, Righteousness, etc.

I have read the Blasphemous Discanting of the Jesuit concerning Mary's white
Milk, The Blood of Christ despised by Papists and Quakers.
and Christ's Crimson Blood, and in the close, his preferring the Milk of the
Mother before the Sons Blood.

I have heard also the foolish Blasphemy of one of my own Neighbors, saying.
That the Blood of the Quakers, and by name of W. B. was Saving and Salvation to
the World.

3. But I pass on, The Lord Jesus is here called the Image of the invisible
God: Christ the picture of God.
If this should respect the Godhead only, which is invisible, how could Christ
be a visible Picture of Invisibility? If the Manhood only? is God a Man, and
Man his Image or Picture, as the old Heretic, and late in London, Reeves and
Mugleton fancied.

The Truth is, as Christ's Blood is but figuratively for an Antitipe and
fulfilling of all the Figures foregoing him, Christ God and Man.
and for all his Sufferings, and many Blood-sheddings both of Mind and Body,
so this Image or Picture, this Blessed Lamb of God, consisting of the Godhead,
wonderfully assuming such a none such Manhood, both which the Papists and
Quakers are forced to confess, I say, it is clear he was the brightest Image or
Picture of God to the World that ever God appeared in, and therefore called the
Word of God the fullest and loudest of all the Words of God in which ever he
spoke, etc.

4. Many more I might insist on, but I must abbreviate, and only mention ver.
18. where the Lord Jesus is made the Palace of [77] the Godhead, Christ
Fullness filling all.
that in him as the Head of the Body, his Church, should all fullness dwell,
reconciling and making peace, through the Blood of his Cross, etc. John tells
us, that of this fullness in him, we receive: all the World receives the Mercy
and Patience of God by him; all his Followers receive his Grace and Spirit,
Converting, Sanctifying, Comforting, etc. so that his most holy and glorious
Manhood, visible amongst us, A wonderful Conduit.
etc. was as a fair and spacious, beautiful Conduit, into which the eternal and
inconceivable Counsels of the eternal Power and Godhead flowed, and from whom
by all those blessed means and Ordinances, as by so many Cocks turned and let
loose, flow and run into poor empty Souls as Pails and Tankards all sorts of
mercies to the whole World, and especially to the Elect, and Chosen, his Church
and Body that believe in him: The proud phrenzie of the Quakers.
what poor Children and Frantic Souls are we then that cry out (poor Pots, and
Pails, and Tankards) that we are the Conduit it self; yea, we the Wellhead,
Fountain and Spring, and (as this frantic Fox in his Book once and again
affirms) no distinction between God and Christ and his Saints, yea, though he
often acknowledge that Christ is the Author and Finisher of Faith; So that the
Gift of God, the words of God, which are his Tokens, Love Tokens, and Love
Letters, they are God and Christ, themselves the heavenly Father, and his Son
the heavenly Bridegroom.

John the Baptist cried out to all such proud Souls, I am not He, I am not
worthy to untie his Shoe Latchet: He it is that Baptizeth with Fire: He is the
Lamb of God, The Papists and Quakers Christ
etc. He, even that man upon whom he saw the Spirit descending like a Dove,
etc. and blessed Paul with Job, abhors himself, and counts his Holy Life, his
Prayers, his Fastings, his Righteousness Dung and Dirt compared with that of
Christ Jesus, in Opposition to that of the Law, etc. In which mud still the
most zealous Papists and Quakers stick, and talk idly of their fulfilling of
the Law now, by Christ's Righteousness, Grace and Spirit in them, which they
will at last find to be no more but the first Bargain or Covenant, let them
pride themselves never so much in their filthy menstrous Clouts and Rags of
Holiness, that is their Christ within them.

The 39th. Instance is in Page 223. where he brings in the same Author saying,
223 Hosanna to the Son of David
[The Light which discovers Sin and Iniquity [77] in Man's Heart is not Christ
the dore] He Answers, [The first Adam was the Door wh^reon all Sin and
Transgression entered: Christ the Light, the second Adam which does inlighten
every man, etc. says, I am the Door, the Way, and the Life, which finish Sin
and Transgression, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness, and the way of Dife
Change "Dife" to "Life," R. W. Ms. Ann.
out of Death, which Light discovers Sin]

I Reply, Edmund Buroughs in his large Epistle to G. Fox thi^ h^s Book, he
tells us that this Light (which they thus boast of) shows man's threefold
Estate, The Estate of mankind
before Transgression: in Transgression and what he is by being saved out of
Transgression: It is true, Christ Jesus does this by many gracious means, but
not Immediately, nor to every man that comes into the world: For the World lies
in wickedness and Darkness. We are not only bleeding in our wounds, but we are
lost in the Wilderness: We are stark dead in Sin, and know no more that we are
dead then a dead man knows of his Condition: what do then these poor deluded
Souls tell us of a Light and Christ within every man in the world discovering
his pure Estate, his foul Estate, and his raised Estate, which no man or woman
in this world that I have read or heard of by Nature had any Spark or shine of
such a Light: no nor these proud Ignorants neither, but they have read or heard
of these things (more or less) from the holy Scriptures and Records.

2. It is granted, Convictions of Nature one thing, Conversion another
that Natures Light discovers a God, some sins a Judgment, as we see in
Indians: Education and preaching discovers more, as in Saul, Achitophel, Judas:
The Word and Afflictions makes Pharaoh cry out I have sinned: Miracles make
Nebuchadnezzar and Darius cry out There is no God so great as Daniels, and to
make dreadful Laws against blasphemers of him, though themselves continue in
their old Idolatries: yea, doubtless Natures Light is able (in self
deceitfulness) wonderfully to Counterfiet true heavenly Light, and the Devil
seem an Angel or Messenger of Light from Heaven!

3. What is this to a saving Conviction which Gods Spirit works in those that
shall be saved, Saving Convictions
when they cry out as the wounded Jews, what shall we do to be saved? and as
the Gaolour, what shall I do to be saved?: until this saving Sense of my
Condition, and Gods Justice, what is Christ, a Physician, a Savior, a
Redeemer, Bread, Water, Wine and oil to me? All is needless, yea, loathsome,
(though an bony Comb) to a full Soul: what talk [78] you of a pardon to an
honest man? or if a Rope or Bar to save a secure Epicure in his down Bed?

4. Again, The State of Adam in his Fall
how poor a plea is this, Adam was the door to sin, therefore Christ is the
door to the discovery of sin? For, look upon Adam in his Fall. 1. He saw his
sin? 2. He had horror of Conscience: 3. He run from God. 4. He hides himself.
5. He He falls to mincing end excusing his sin. All this is revealed to us, and
not a word yet heard of, Christ the promised Seed, or a Light, Christ Jesus to
Convince him of sin: That was another work, a saving work, which we may hope
the Spirit of God wrought in him upon the preaching of Christ Jesus, the
promised Seed and Mediator to come.

5. I know the Song of the great deluder is: Turn to the Light, Satan's Cunning
with the Quakers
hearken to the Light; thou see it chides thee for thy Stealing, for thy
lying, etc. Is not this the Christ, etc. listen to him, be still, sink down,
obey him, he will teach thee and save thee, etc. But the Bottom is, the English
and meaning is, hearken to Satan, the God of this world, be ruled and taught,
and guided by him,: The Scripture is but a dead Letter, the true Christ is
within thee, he will turn thee from these sins, and make thee perfect as God is
perfect, Christ's coming
etc. Christ is come now in us the second Time without sin to Salvation. He is
come in us (Ten thousand of his Saints) to Judgment: He within thee is the
word of God, the Christ of God, the Light of God, the Spirit of God, God
himself, and He seeks Worshippers in Spirit and Truth, for the visible things
are temporal, etc

6. But what is there in all this, but the noise of Fenny bitter in hollow
Canes, Two common Traps and Engines of Satan in cheating the Foxians
etc? What is here but that common Businesses may reach to?

1. The Conscience of good and evil which every favage Indian in the world has.

2. The whisperings, the bl^ndings and cheatings of the Devil, in Samuels
mantle, pretending vowing and Swearing to be the word of the Lord to be Christ
Jesus, yea, and that to your feeling etc.

7. But what are these to Christ Jesus, a door of Hope to poor, wounded, and
damned sinners? God by his Law and Justice, by outward hearing or reading, and
inward Convictions of Natural Conscience has passed Sentence of Eternal Death
and Hell on them: When Christ is welcome
They feel it they cry out now the Gospel or glad news of a Savior, a Jesus is
Honey in the mouth, etc. Now Luke 4. he [80] heals the broken heart, he sets
free the Prisoners, ho gives Light to them that see themselves blind, and Cry
to him as the blind man did, Christ medles not with sound persons who have no
need of his Blood, Righteousness, and Merits, etc.

The 40 Instance is in Page 224. where G. Fox brings in Ellis Bradshaw, Ellis
Bradshaw
saying, [There is more words then one]

He Answers, God is the word, and the Scriptures are the words which Christ
fulfill.

I Reply, 1. As the design of the bloody Pope and Jesuits are to kindle wars
between the Protestants, that the Protestants may do the Papists work and save
labor and Charges, and so the Pope and his bloody Whore of Rome may march away
securely by the Light of the Protestants fires. So deals the Devil the old
Serpent with Christ Jesus, and the holy Scripture or Records which are but One,
Two great designs of Satan
in a Sense, as the Sun and the Sun-dial: His end is to tear down the Sun dial
the Scriptures, under pretense that the Sun is within them, and they need no
Dials and Clocks, no visible thing that are temporal, etc. and so to destroy
the person and Commands of the Lord Jesus, as visible and sleshly pretending
all to be Light and Spirit.

2. The words in the Hebrew Aamar and Dabar, The Word and Words of God
as also the Greek, Logos and Rema signify a word, and diverse other matters,
as I told my Antagonists in the dispute.

1. In both these Languages, and diverse other Languages it signifies the will
and pleasure of the Mind given forth by Command, or Decres, or Proclamation
made by word, or writing from Kings and States, and Commanders of Armies,
Navies, etc.

2. In a Metaphor or Figure it is attributed to God, though he have no word
properly, having no mouth, no Tongue, no Brain, etc. but as Nurses he deals
with us poor Infants and sucklings, etc.

3. It is another Metaphor or Figure to say God is the word for God is no more
a word, then he is a Man or a Spirit, or a Sun, or Shield, or a House, or a
Fountain, or a Shepard literally etc. For as a word or Expression proceeds
from the mind and thoughts within: so are the Thoughts and mind of God declared
many ways, but chiefly by that man Christ Jesus called the Word.

3. The Inconceivable Godhead being pleased to vouch-safe in Infinite Goodness
some back parts and glimpses of his Infinite glory- [81] rious Majesty in the
Framing of this world, and in the restoring of this world, by making a Marriage
between his Son and mankind! all his words and Expressions tend mightily to
advance this marriage and great manifestation, Whether God have any more
wordsthen one.
or Word of God.

4. I was once asked by a poor Foxian, whether God had any more words but one?

I Answered, (and do now) that God has a great many words or Expressions of
his mind and Counsels unto Men and Angels: and so G. Fox, and all the Foxians
Confess the Scriptures to be the Words of God, and therein Confess that all,
and every word of Scripture is a word of God.

The Truth is, when God gives forth a word or Command by Angels, by Men, and by
other of his Armies, (wherein his Infinite Power and Providence daily
appears) his word runs very swiftly, as we see when the word is given in a
Kingdom, Navy or Army, (as in Ahashueros his one hundred and twenty seven
Provinces: etc.) He sends out his word, that is, his mind or pleasure, and
melts them, Psalm. 147.

5. So that I Affirm, Infinite millions of millions of Gods word.
that the two great Lights of Heaven, the Sun and Moon, and all the lesser
Lights the Stars are Words and Preachings, and preachers of God to us: Every
wind and Cloud, and drop of Rain and Hail, every Flake of Snow, every Leaf,
every Grass, every drop of water in the Ocean, and Rivers, yea, every Grain of
Corn, and Sand on the Shore, is a Voice or word and witness of God unto us.

6. Hence (as in that Admirable 107 Psalm, The Voice of Gods works and
Providence
etc. Every Turn of the holy hand of God in Ruling and Overruling all things
in the world upon the two great Hinges of Mercy and Judgment, Psalm, 110. are
but so many Voices or words of God, God speaks once and twice, Job. 33. but man
hears it not, in Visions, in Dreams, in Health, and Sickness, in Ease, and
pain, in wants, in plenty, in dangers and Deliverances, Crosses, Losses, etc.

7. That the Hebrew is most full, viz. that God spoke by his Prophets (or
Preachers, or declarers of his will) diverse ways and diverse times, Gods Spirit
in his word
but now he has spoken by his Son: From the beginning of the world, Luke 1. he
has spoken of the coming of this Son by the mouths of all his Prophets even
from the beginning of the World. Therefore though God have many Sons, Christ
the word of God
yet Christ Jesus (that man Christ Jesus) among the many millions of [82] Sons
is styled the only Begotten Son of God, the Head of all the Elect, purchased to
God out of every Nation by his Blood, etc. so by the same excellency and
eminency (above all the manifestations and appearances of God to the World) no
word or appearances of God is comparable to that appearance of God in Christ
Jesus, and therefore called the Word of God as the greatest appearance of the
eternal Power and Godhead.

8. Hence it follows, that these poor Foxians are so much the more shameless
and monstrous, The shameless wickedness of the Quakers against the Scriptures
and Christ himself
not only in robbing the Scriptures of their most Heavenly and common Title of
the Word of God, common to all Gods appearances, but also in turning this Word
of God Christ Jesus into a Spirit without any body: but what is gone for ever
from us, and by their parting him (his Godhead from his Manhood) into a
Fancy, a Dream, a mere Whimsie, and Devellish Imagination.

9 When we deal with Indians about Religion, The way of dealing with Indians
our work is to prove unto them by Reason, that the Bible is Gods Word, for by
Nature they are much affected with a kind of Deity to be in Writing: That all
their Revelations, and Visions, and Dreams (in which the Devil wonderfully
abuses them) are False and Cheating.

That this Scripture or Writing we pretend to, They see infinite Reason in the
holy Scriptures
is from God by their own experience, because it agrees with their own
Consciences, reproving them for those sins their Souls say they are guilty of:
That the terrible Majesty of Gods Justice in punishing Sinners so shines in it,
and also his infinite goodness and mercy in finding out such a way of
Mediation, and such a Mediator that their Souls cannot but adore Infinite
Justice and Mercy in it. That the Holy power of God so appears in it in working
upon the Souls of Millions, turning them from Dogs, and Swine, and Wolves, and
Lions, and Sheep, and Lambs, and Doves, etc. in Love, Meekness, Patience, etc.

That it could be none but an Omnipotent Arm that has preserved the Holy
Scripture so many thousand years (some part of it) through so many wonderful
changes, The preservation of the Scripture
through so many Bloody Huntings of Kings, Emperors, Popes; and this more
subtle Hunting of these Foxians, to run it out of this World, and by seeming
to embrace it to destroy and kill it.

83] The 41. Instance is in Page 228. Tho. Weld
Where G. Fox brings in Thomas Weld, saying, [There lies a Mystery of Iniquity,
for to say the World calls them so, by such and such Names or gives them their
Christian Name.]

He Answers, [There are Names given by the Heathen, the Heathen outward which
men are called: There is a new Name which the World knows not written in the
Book of Life: Here is the new Man known after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness; Now who is the New Man, and this new Name? the World may call him by
the old, so it is not a mystery of iniquity to say the World calls him so.]

I Reply, As to Christen Names, and Names to Children
1. As to Christian or Christen Names or Things bearing or pretending to bear
the Name, Authority or an Uniting of Christ Jesus (as we know the word
Christian signifies) it is incumbent on every Christian Soul to search into the
Root, and Rise, and Practice, and Warrant of them with holy fear and trembling
in the presence of God.

2. But to the mystery of Iniquity here insinuated against them, Is it not a
proud trick of a Pharisee thus to scorn the poor Heathens and Publicans, The
Foxians scornful pride
as not worthy to know the Foxians high Names, or take up such sacred Names and
Mysteries upon their Lips? yea, is it not a ridiculous Fancy thus to prate,
and (like Pharisees to scold about washing of Hands, and Pots, and Cups,
therein placing invented Holiness, etc.

For, Who are G. Fox his Heathen
1. What are the Heathen, this Heathenish Soul here strikes at? does he mean
the wild Savages, who give Names to their Children, and often times full of
Reason and Significance, etc. Or does he account all Nations Savages and
Barbarians that give Names to their Children, and consequently themselves
Savages and Barbarians also, for they give Names unto their Children also.

2. It is true that by the word Heathen (the Goj in the Hebrew and Ethne in the
Greek) the Nations or Gentiles were signified as distinct from the Holy Nation
or Church of God the Jews, The Words Heathen
but so it is not common in our English Phraze, to call all the Nations Heathen
that are not of the Jewish Nation.

3. Did not the Saints before the coming of Christ give Names to their
Children? did not Leah and Rachael (by Jacobs leave) give all those significant
Names unto the twelve Patriarchs? and [84] have not the Saints of God (as well
as all Nations) still so practiced?

4. Does Christian Regeneration or New Birth destroy Natural Births or
Marriages, or Procreations, or Names, and Educations? (Only as Diamonds in
Gold-Rings, and Aples of gold in pictures of silver) Christianity beautifies
and adorns all these, Natural and Civil Actions, with an heavenly Spirit,
Insert "and." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Carriage in Earthly matters.

5 Can there be any Instances given of any Servants of God before or since the
coming of Christ Jesus, Christ destroys not but beaufies Civility
disowning or slighting the Names which their Parents had given them: yea,
though there were some seeming honor to false Gods in them, Fortunatus,
Apollo, Phebe, etc.

6. Why may we not (though we are for Change "for" to "but." R. W. Ms. Ann.
his Heathens) call the Foxians by the same Names by which they call
themselves? for, in this great Book we find G. Fox and Edmund Borough
subscribed? It is a Query why they so plainly subscribe and yet defend them
that do not, Have they a Privilege? Or do they thus quarrel with us, (poor
Heathens) about straws or things Indifferent? and yet so weighty as the New
Name, and new man created in holiness, etc?

7. But what is this new Creature and new Name they speak of? The new Man and
new Name
How shall the world call them by it if they know it not? Such are their
Nonsensical Fancies of giving no Respect to any in word or gestures: Such are
their Fantastical Conceited Answers, when being asked where they dwell, they
Answer, they dwell in God, and where they live, they Answer, They live in God,
etc,

8. Are not these Foxians a kin to the Popes in this Fancy also, when raised to
the Devils Pinnacle, The Popes flingi^g to the world their old Names.
to the Popedom, they throw down their old Names to the world, and though they
be as subtle as Foxes, yet now they will be called Leones Lions, though they be
as fierce and Cruel as Lions, they will now be called Clement and though they
be as Impious as swine, even as Os pores, they must be called pius.

In the last place, as the Pope cast away his net which he used as the
Remembrance of the Fisherman Peter when he had caught the Popedom, so G. Fox
having made his Fortune as it is profanely called, G. Fox his great change.
having attaind a great Marriage: His new Carriage and Courtesy, and Civility
condemns Humphry Nortons [85] and his own former Rigidity as I am sure they
will do most of them Place "most of them" in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann.
for worldly Advantages, For, as they abuse that Scripture, Eccles. 11.
The World is in their Heart. I may truly use it and affirm the world and the
pride and Advantage of it, though they deny it as the Pope and Cardinals and
Jesuits do Place "as the Pope and Cardinals and Jesuits do" in parenthesis. R.
W. Ms. Ann.
is in their Heart, and is the Body and Soul, the Root and Branch of all their
whole Religion.

The 42 Instance is in page 243. where G. Fox brings in Richard Sherlock saying
[We must not look for an Immediate Extraordinary and miraculous Teaching from
the Lord. 243. Rich. and Sherlock.
]

He Answers, Yet he says all men are taught of God, what Confusion is here?
The grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto all men and this
he calls an outward Teaching by the Lord Jesus Christ. Is that which brings
Salvation outward: All in the Truth may judge this and try thy Spirit: And the
Teachings of the Lord is not mediate, but Extraordinary above all yours, which
are men got up since the days of the Apostles.

I Reply, 1. Although I have spoken before of their Immediate Inspirations: yet
seeing how greedily and boastingly this deluded Soul with scorn and Contempt of
all his Opposites, sucks in the poison of Devil^sh Inspirations in stead of the
pure wine and milk of Christian Truth, and milks out this poison into the
mouths of his poor bewitched Followers, I shall add a few words.

G. Fox here affirms that the Teachings of the Lord are not mediate, The
Teachings of God.
but Immediate, Extraordinary and miraculous, Contrary to the whole stream of
Scripture and Experience.

1. Contrary to the Ordinary and daily, and mighty preaching of the whole
Creation: Psalm. 9. The Heavens, etc.

2. Contrary to the Teachings of God in every man's Nature, and making, being
taught of God, above Gods Teaching, the Fowls of the Air and Beasts of the
Field: Does not Nature teach you, 1 Cor. 11. as to long hair.

3. Contrary to Abraham's Teaching of his Children, and the Command of God to
all Parents.

4. Contrary to Ordinary Teachings of the Priests and Levites Commanded by God,
in so much that Christ Jesus Commanded the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in
Moses Chair to be heard and attended.

5. Contrary to the Ordinary and Constant feeding by Sheep- [89] herds and
Teachers in the Christian Flocks and Assemblies.

6. Contrary to the Teachings of the holy writings or Scripture written by
Immediate breathing of God, for our Instruction and Consolation, etc.

Ob. Yea, but says this great wrester of holy writings: They shall be all
taught of God.

I Answer, 1. Who, or how shall they be all taught of God? that teaching in the
Hebrew applied from the new Erase "new." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah is the teaching of the new Covenant, and that is
the promise of Grace and Mercy to so many as are predestinate and called, etc.

2. That is no Immediate, Extraordinary, and miraculous business, for this is
common to all that repent or turn to God.

3. Many had, and may have the speaking with Tongues, and working with
Miracles, and yet not know what the teaching of the Spirit in a new Birth is.

4. In the Ordinary Teaching to Conversion, the Lord owns his Servants as
Fellow Laborers, Workers, Builders, Husbandmen, Fathers, etc. wherein he is
pleased to open the hearts of one Change "one" to "many." R. W. Ms. Ann.
Thousand and Ten Thousand as he did in the first preachings of that glad News,
and I hope will do so again.

5. The great Promise to Christ Jesus and his Seed is, Outward means.
that there shall be a gracious Continuance in Christ's mouth, and the mouth of
his Seed, of both the word, (that is preached) and the holy Spirit more or
less) accompanying and Teaching, Isa. 59.

6. What is there in G. Fox his wild Notion, [Can that which brings Salvation
be outward?] Against all the Proofs before I mentioned, and so many others
concerning the Foolishness of Preaching, etc.

Object. He says, The grace of God teaches every man to deny ungodly Lusts,
etc. And I ask,

1. If every man in the world has this Immemediate work on them? what is the
Reason we find none in the world (no not the wisest) until they have the
Scripture, or the Doctrine thereof some way opened to them, that have been able
to give us the least Tidings of any such business.

2. What Is the Reason that so few in the world have any show of Repentance,
etc. much less a sound and and saving turning of the whole Soul unto God?

87] Why do the Quakers make such ado about their Apostles Men and Women as if
that glorious Light the Father, Son and Spirit in every man were not able to
teach Effectually (by his Extraordinary and miraculous power) without their
outward speaking to the Seed, that is to God within them?

4. If they themselves teach by such an Extraordinary and miraculous power as
the Prophets of old, Miracles.
and the Apostles of Christ Jesus did, what should be the Cause why we see no
such miraculous deeds done by any of them? The Truth is, God is pleased to
chain up Satan: otherwise, the Foxians would have their longing (which it may
be some shall after them) But if they shall be permitted by God and assisted by
the Devil to do as the Magicians did: yet if their Doctrine be other then what
is written (as I have abundantly proved it to be) while they cry out Light,
Light, there is none as Isaiah speaks, not a Spark of Light within them.

The 43. Instance is in Page 247. where G. Fox brings in Christopher Wade
saying, 247. Christopher Wade
[The written Word is the Sword of the Spirit:] And he makes another Rule
beside the Scripture Place "beside the Scripture." in parenthesis. R. W. Ms.
Ann.
false.

He Answers, which we say is the Spirit which gave them forth, whereby Peace is
known upon the Israel of God: And the Pharisees had the Scripture but had not
the Sword of the Spirit, the Scriptures testifies of the Sword of the Spirit.

I Reply, 1. With all humble Reverence to the most holy Spirit of God, who is
God himself. I affirm, the Spirit or God can not here be the Sword intended.

For 1. The Sword of the Spirit.
This Spiritual Furniture being a Similitude taken from warlike and Military
Provision and Artillery from Head to Foot, the Helmet, Breastplate, the Shield,
the girdle, the Shoes, and every one applied to gifts and means flowing from
Gods Spirit, as Faith, Hope, Sincerity, etc. it were most improper then to
bring in God or the Spirit to be the Sword, or any of the other pieces.

2. For there is no more Reason to make the Spirit or God to be the Sword, then
the Shield or any other piece.

3. It seems too low to the holy Spirit and God to be here in this Similitude,
resembled to a Sword or Instrument in the hands of men to be drawn and
brandished and fought withal for Offense and Defense at men's pleasure, though
in some Sense Insert "from." R. W. Ms. Ann.
God. 88] 4. This was the Sword, the only Sword, is called a Sword with which
the Lord Jesus fought and vanquished the Devil, Gegraptas, Gegraptai: It is
written, it is written, and we may well say of it as David of the Sword of
Goliath, by which David ^nt off his head, there is none to that, etc.

The holy Spirit, Christ and God are Authors of all these heavenly Gifts and
Graces, Not the Spirit himself.
the Beginner and Finisher of Faith, and therefore not Faith nor Hope, nor any
other piece of the Artillery themselves, no more then the Armorer is the
Helmet, or the Cutler the Sword, etc.

6. In Revel. 1. Christ and the Sword with two Edges (which comes forth of his
mouth) are distinct, and can not be the same, as G. Fox usually Confounds and
mixeth all together. Hence the the Word of Christ, Col. 3. can not be Christ
himself, but that which comes from him and tends to him.

7. These great Interpreters are Confounded in themselves, for here in Ephesians.
4. the Spirit must be the Sword and Word of God, But in Heb. 4. Christ must be
the Sword, with two Edges, being the Word of God, and not the Spirit: So like
Iuglers do they shift from one hand to another, to Confound and beguile the
Beholders.

Object. But the Spirit says G. Fox was before the Scripture, and gave forth
the Scripture.

I Answer, what then, G. Fox is before his Book, and gave it forth, is it not
therefore G. Fox his word and writing but G. Fox himself? The Immediate
Inspiration of the Spirit
Or is it not the Kings Majesty before his Declaration, or Proclamation to the
world? Is it not therefore the Kings word, or is it the King himself? This
Immediate Inspiration of the holy Scripture from the Spirit makes it a Word so
powerful, a Magazine and Storehouse so full of Treasury, so rich a Standard,
Touchstone or Weights so perfect, for the trial of all Spirits, all writings,
all Doctrines, all Religions, Worships, Actions, etc.

Object. But the Pharisees says G. Fox had the Scripture, but they had not the
Sword of Gods Spirit:

I Answer, The Jews had, and have, and so the Turks have had much of it, The
Scripture horribly abused
the Papists and the Quakers, and other Blasphemors, yea, and the Devils
themselves may have the Scripture, the word of God in their Hands and mouths:
for may not a true Sword, a choice Sword be in a mad man's hand, whereby he may
[89] mischief and wound, and kill himself and others: Hence men make
merchandise of it, sophisticate and Adulterate, and turn it into a Lie, etc.

On the other hand, the Spirit of God is promised to Gods Children: Gods Spirit
and Word are promised to go together in the mouths of all true Christians, Isa.
55. this holy Spirit is to be praid for, Luke 11. and is therefore powerfully
present with Gods true Messengers, while they Translate, Expound, Preach as
Paul did, Acts 26. No other things but what Moses and the Prophets wrote of.

The 44th. Instance is in Page 253. where he quotes Henry Haggar, 253. Henry
Haggar
saying, [You call all men dead and Carnal in the Serpents Nature, in what Form
soever if they differ from you] G. Fox Answers, [All that be not in the Light
that inlightneth every man that comes into the world which is the way to the
Father, differs from us: such be dead, such be Carnal in the Seepents Nature;
For none comes to the Life, but who comes to the Light, in what Form so ever
they be: And such as differ from us differ from Christ: For none come from
under the Serpents head and Nature, but who comes to the Light.

I Reply, 1. As David said of some whose Teeth were as Swords, and Solomn
says, The Papists and Quakers of a damning and damn Spirit.
there is a Generation etc. of such whose Teeth are as Swords, and if ever
there were a Generation of such in the world the Papists and these Foxians are
the Generations here intended: For it is in vain to tell them of Christ the
Foundation, and of building Wood, Hay, Stubble, etc. If you come not roundly to
the Pope with the Papists: Or to the Light within, etc. nothing remains but
Fire and Brimstone, Damnation, etc.

2. It is true, in some of their writings, and in Edmund Buroughs himself
there seems to be some charitable hopes of some having something of Sincerity
in them, and of breathing after the Lord, but I observe they fall in with G.
Fox again, viz. except that those persons own their Idols Erase "s" in
"Idols." R. W. Ms. Ann.
called Light within them.

3. The Protestants overcome the Papists not only by Scripture and Argument,
The true Protestants Charity.
but in Charity also, for they profess to have Hope of many among the Papists,
as they do also of many amongst the Quakers, But the Papist and Quaker like
Fireships burn and blow up all, that bow not down to these Image, etc.

90] 4. How far are these from the Spirit of Christ Jesus toward the poor
Woman, The Quakers far from the Spirit of Christ Jesus.
the Syrophenician, who by her worship was a dog, (and he told her so) yet
believing in him and content to gather up Crumbs (as a Dog) under his Table, he
grants her Suit, and magnifies her personal Excellency! Thus dealt he with the
Centurion and Cornelius, and with every poor Reed if truly bruised for Sin, and
every Lock of smoking Flax reaking in truth of Love to God, and the Lord Jesus.

He proclaims the Kingdom of Heaven to the poor in Spirit, The meek and
merciful Spirit of Jesus.
who see themselves dead and lost, and damned, and seeing no help, no Grace,
(not a penny nor a patch of any good in them but) waiting as Beggars at the
gate, the beautiful and glorious gate of mercy.

He proclaims Blessedness and Promises to the bleating Lambs as the fruitful
Sheep to the Infants and new born Babes, The differeut state of Gods Children.
that hunger and thirst for the milk of Righteousness, that by the Patience and
Comfort held forth in the writings or Records they may have hope, although yet
they cannot be Consident of any work of God in them, and are not so bold to
Confess Christ Jesus openly, and kiss him in the Streets, but steal to him by
night as Nicodemus, and Joseph, until they saw him bleeding on the Gallows.

He bare with his Disciples though foolish and slow of Heart, hard-hearted,
ignorant of his Death and Resurrection, and loath to hear of such metters.

The 45th. Instance is in Page 259. where he quotes John Brown saying, 259.
John Brown
[And them that bring people to look at the Light within them, are as Korah,
Dathan and Abriam.]

G. Fox Answers, [All that go from the Light within them, are as Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram amongst the Lords Prophets, Exalting themselves and Persecuting.]

1. I Reply, and Examine unto whom this Famous History may most properly be
Applicable, for sure it was a Type and word of God.

1. Then, Number 16. Korah, Dathan and Abirams Revolt applied to the pretended
Quakers.
that which the Spirit of God charge upon Korah, is a rising up, a Revolt and
Rebellion against the Lord, his Appointments and Ministers or Officers, Moses
and Aaron, etc.

I know G. Fox charge this upon all that pretend to any Ministry and
Ministration, and have not the Immediate Spirit of [91] God as the Apostles had
but as (he speaks simply) are Ravened from it, and are still Apostates, etc.

But I Answer, The Protestant Religion Revolted from by the Quakers
the Protestant Religion is a Religion protesting against the abominations of
that bloody man of Sin the Pope both in his Doctrines and Worships and
Conversations: These Protesters have been since the Waldenses, in France and
Germany, and low Countries, and England, Scotland, Denmark, Swedland, Polonia,
Transylvania, Norway, Ireland, etc. Conflicting, Contending with their Tongues,
their pens, and their Blood against the Bloody Whore and Church of Rome,
according to many passages in the Revelations, most wonderfully and
miraculously fulfilled upon them.

From these all their holy Doctrines and Endeavors after Gods pure worship are
the Quakers Revolted and set up a Flag of Defiance against all but pretended
Immediately Inspired persons, Invisible Worships, and Ministers, and a sullen,
proud, and dogged Conversation, (for the general of them.)

2. As Absoloms and Shebahs Conspiracies were notable and Signal against King
David, Conspirators agaiust the Priestly, Prophetical, and Kingly Office and
Power of Christ Jesus
the Prophetical and Kingly Type of the Lord Jesus, so was Korahs and his
Conspirators very Considerable and Eminent against Moses and Aaron Types of the
Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Office of the blessed Lord Jesus Christ: It
is said, Numb. 16. that Korah the Levite, and Dathan and Abiram the Sons of
Reuben, and two hundred and fifty Princes and Notable Men of Fame in the
Assembly thus kindled the Coals of this proud Conspiracy, which had broke forth
into devouring Flames, except that the Sheepherd of Israel (who never slumbers
nor sleeps) had most graciously and wonderfully watched for the timeous and
early Extinguishing of it.

As to the pretending Quakers, The conspiracy of the Quakers
it is known that they are not Sons of Obscurity, (as Bull and Farminton,
Reeves and Mugleton) but for Estate and parts, for Education and Learning, some
of them Place "some of them," in parenthesis. R. W. Ms. Ann.
for pretenses of Piety, Against Christ Jesus.
Conscience, patience, Zeal and Mortification, yea, and also for their Numbers,
all which they predicate in their Books, and in my dispute with them with loud
Trumpets) they are known to be Considerable, and as like to spread as did the
Arrians Papists or Mahometans.

3. Korah and Dathan, etc. they were by Gods righteous Judgment so fixed, and
settled, and hardened in their Persuasion [92] and Confidence, that they
Contemned all Moses meekness, and Answered stoutly, We will not come up, when
he Cited them before the Lord: Korah and the Quakers Confidence and fierceness.
yea, say they, will thou pluck out the Eyes of these men, and they daringly
and desperately brought their Censers to offer Incense and Worship to God: as
may be applied to these proud and Confident, and desperate Foxians.

4. Their Charge was notoriously false against Moses, And lying Charges.
as the Charge of the Quakers against such blessed Instruments which God has
used like Moses to bring the Protestants out of the Egypt of Popery:) viz. a
Charge of Pride and Ambition, will thou make thy self a Prince over us? a
Charge of which the Foxians are notoriously guilty.

5. I observe their horrible Ingratitude both unto the most holy God himself,
Ingratitude.
and unto Moses and Aaron, Gods Servants, by whom he had wrought so many
wonders for this people in so many wonderful and miraculous Directions,
Preservations and Deliverances.

6. Their Impatiencci and Unbelief, Impatience.
etc. Thou have not yet brought us unto a Land flowing with milk and honey, as
if God and Moses had only fed them with Sugared and honied Words, and no Effects
and performances.

7. I observe their subtle and false pretenses and Suggestions: Is no^ all the
Lords people holy every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them, just the
Quakers Language, who so advance every one of the people of the Lord: (as they
call their Proselites) viz. that they are just now born of God, and Literally,
can not Sin, are Immediately Inspired, need no Teachers, no Scriptures, etc.

8. I observe, and I humbly beg of the Father of mercies to cause these poor
Foxians to observe the Conspiracy of the two Elements, The Wonderful Judgments
of God upon the Korathites in this world
Earth, and Fire to Consume and devour these Famous proud Conspirators: I spare
Applications, begging mercy from the Father of Lights and mercies, for their
Humiliations and Salvation: Only I Remember, that every Plant the Heavenly
Father has not planted flourishes it never so green, so high, so long, shall
be plucked up, and cast into the Fire, etc.

The 46th. Instance is in page 262. Where he brings in George Johnson s^ying,
62 George Johnson.
[The Americans were never ordained for Grace and Salvation, and the Grace of
God never appeared to the Americans.]

93] G. Fox Answers, which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, the
grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared to all men, etc. and I will
give him for a Light, and for a Covenant to the Gentiles, a new Covenant to the
House of Israel and Judah, and that he may be my Salvation to the ends of the
Earth; and many in America have received Truth and Salvation.

I Reply, Thoughts about America
1. To the Covenant or Bargain of God with Man, first and secondly I have
spoke, as also to the figurative calling of Christ Jesus the Covenant to Jews
and Gentiles, and that this blind Soul taking it literally, he runs upon the
Rocks of the Arminian general Redemption, and the Universalists general
Salvation, and that with a known Contradiction against their own Foundation of
none having any benefit of Christ, that own not their Light, etc. as also with
a known Contradiction to all Expeiience, which says, the whole World lies in
Wickedness, and this America in Barbarism, and Barbarous Wickedness of all
sorts.

2. I have said Christ is the Light, Now Christ a Light and Covenant.
the Covenant, the Brazen Serpent, the Bridegroom held forth as the Sun in the
Heavens to all the World: So Christians are the Salt, the Light of the World,
and the Church the Pillar and Firmament of Truth, holding it out to all the
World; is therefore all the World seasoned, enlightened, converted, saved. yea,
does he not only deny the Americans, but the Europeans, Asians, and Africans
also any Salvation (though never so holy Professor of Christ) except they bow
down to their new black Image of Light within them?

3. It was a large effusion of the Holy Spirit of God upon so many precious
Leaders and Followers, N Englands Plantaaion
who ventured their All to New England upon many Heavenly Grounds, three
especially.

First, The enjoyment of God according to their Consciences.

Secondly, Of holding out Light to Americans.

Thirdly, The advancing of the English Name and Plantations.

These three ends the most High and Holy God has graciously helped his poor
Protestants in a Wilderness to Endeavor to promote, The Indians of N. England
etc.

And as to these Barbarians, the Holy God knows some pains I took uprightly in
the Main Land and Islands of New England to dig into their Barbarous, Rockie
Speech, and to speak some- [94] thing of God unto their Souls; The Indians of
New England
and surely God has stirred up the Spirit of my ancient dear Friend Mr. Eliot
to gain their Language, to Translate them the Bible, and many other ways to
bring the sound of a Savior amongst them, which I humbly beg of God to perfect
and finish for the Glory of his Great Name, etc.

4. What G. Fox means by saying some in America have received Truth and
Salvation I can but guess at; It is known he owns nothing of God in Indians or
English, until they bow down to their Idol, and that he intends none but such
English in America as he and others have Poisoned and Bewitched with Helish
Sorceries.

5. This last Year a Paper was sent me from the Quakers, The Quakers desire of
perverting the Indians.
desiring me to turn it into Indian, that so it might be Printed in England,
and so dispersed amongst them: it contained two things:

First, That they had a Light within them which told them that it was evil to
Steal, etc.

Secondly, That if they did hearken to this Light, it would lead them to God,
etc.

I returned the Paper, and my refusing in Writing, affirming it not to be
Truth, etc. and I questioned the Quakers themselves for a false Christ, false
Light and Spirit, which they would infect the Indians with.

The 47th Instance is in page 263. Where he quotes John Owen, John Owen 263
saying, [All Truth concerning God and our selves is to be learned from the
Holy Scripture, the Word of God]

G. Fox Answers, There was Truth learned before the Scriptures were written,
and the Scriptures of Truth are the Words of God, which ends in Christ the
Word, and there is no Truths learned but as the Spirit does lead into all
Truth: And many has the Scriptures but know not Christ and the Truth, etc. so
he has thrown out Christ and the Spirit.

I Reply, 1. I have more then once before Answered this Childish Answer. There
was Truth, (and the Spirit, and Christ, and Light) before Scripture, as also
that which no true Protestant denies, viz. that the Scriptures, nor preaching,
nor Baptism, nor the Supper, nor Afflictions avail except the Spirit (the Fin-
[85] ger or Power of God) set them home upon us: As also that many have the
Scriptures yet know not Christ, which who questions? So that his Answers are so
loose and Childish that none but Fools and Children, and Frantic persons can
find any Savor and taste in them.

2. I therefore further Answer to this Quotation, Owens writings about the
Scripture Excellently learned and Spiritual and Invincible
pray the Reader to read some former passages, but especially, those public
discourses of this excellently learned and pious Author, wherein he has
admirably (both in Latin and English) maintained the Authority and perfection
of this Inestimable Jewel, the holy Scripture: both against Atheists and
Papists, and Jews, and Quakers, etc. and proved (as clear as at Noonday) the
holy Scriptures, and every Tittle of them to be the holy Word, or Will, or
Declaration of the holy mind of God.

The 48th Instance is in Page 264. where he brings in Samuel Palmer, 264 Samuel
Palmer
saying, [The State of the Soul in this Life is threefold Creation, Corruption
and Regeneration.]

G. Fox Answers, [In Regeneration the Life is changed from the Life which is in
the Fall, So Regeneration and Corruption is not one in the new Life]

I Reply, who says they be? who says that Regeneration and Corruption are one
in the new Life? Man's threefold Condition in this Life
what a foul Trick is this of a false man to impute that to his Opposite which
he abhors? I guess, or he means that in Regeneration, there is perfection
and no Sin, or Corruption left, etc. Hence the plea of some of their Spirits
for Adams nakedness being come to the State of Innocence: Hence the poor
frantic Souls cry out that the Protestants preach for Sin, for Term of Life,
etc,

I Answer, The Devil too Crafty for the Foxians
questionless the Devil deals with the Foxians as the Pirat does with Ships, he
makes no Opposition against such he has taken, and is possessed of: So that no
question but the Quakers may be freed from many Transgressions and Temptations
to them, which others are assaulted with.

2. These poor Souls foolishly and extreme simply Answer Paul's Complaints and
Cries and bewailing himself, Romans 7. with Paul's giving thanks for his sudden
victory in the last words, as if just then the Battle had turn^d, and Paul had
not spoke of the Constant Battle and Warfare, which all the Saints of God (in
about four thousand years together throughout the holy Scripture) [96]
Experimented: Noah, Abraham, David, Peter, John, Barnabas, etc.

3. It is a mystery which neither Jews nor Turks, Atheists or Papists, A great
mystery.
or Quakers know, viz. how the Seed of all grace may be in the new born, and
yet the Seed also of all sin (except the sin against the holy Spirit) remaining
in them: Therefore when they hear of the Falls of the Saints in Scripture, and
so great? Some question the Truth of the Scripture: The Quakers devilish pride.
others make a sport of them, and pretend a Cloak for their sins, saying, none
are perfect, why may we not as well as they? Others, (as the Foxians say,) We
are come to a more perfect and pure Estate then Paul at first was in: or John,
who says, If we Confess our Sin: or James, who says, In many things we offend
all: or the Father that cried, help my Unbelief, etc. But the Papists and
Quakers are so perfect and Superperfect, that though they be full of pride,
Ambition, Unbelief, Unthankfulness, Intemperancy, Covetousness, full of rash
Anger, bitter Railings, and dreadful Blasphemies against Heaven, yet they can
with the Whore wipe their mouths, and say they are pure from all uncleanness.

The 49th. Instance of G. Fox his lame writings is in Page 275. where he quotes
Richard Meyo, 275. Ricard Meyo.
saying, [To say the Gospel is the Power of God is but a Metaphorical Speech.]

G. Fox Answers, [The Apostle does not say so, for the Apostle says, the
Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one that believes, in plain
words, Romans 1.

I Reply, 1. (As before, and as thousands know) that the word Gospel is in all
Languages glad News, the same which the Angel brought to the Sheepherds of a
Savior born, and laid in a manger at Bethlehem, this is the News, the placid
good News, though set forth and beautified in the holy Scripture with variety
of Figures and Metaphors.

2. The great Fox the Devil who thirsts after the Blood of the Quakers, The
Devils bloody Craft.
and of all men's Souls, he whispers, viz. the Gospel is Christ, it is the
Spirit, the Light, and God himself, why talk you of a written Gospel? of a
preached Gospel the Scriptures are within you, the Gospel is within you,
Translations and Interpretations within you: why gaze you upon pen and Ink, and
after a man. etc.

3. As if the glad Tidings or Gospel to a dying man of a par- [97] don, and of
Life, etc. sounding to his Ear, were not by the External Door of his Ear
conveyed (by that Door) to the inward door and Closet of his mind? The Kings
Declaration of mercy and Liberty.
who but Frantic Souls in Bedlam will say, what need you mind the Kings
Declarations or Proclamations of pardon or Liberty? The King himself is the
Gospel, the Declaration, and the Librty, the King is within you, the Gospel or
glad News is within you?

4. The Devil hates the glad News of Christ Jesus as much as Darkness hates
Light, The Devils two sorts of Soldiers Anti-Christianisme.
therefore he has two sorts of Soldiers.

1. Some that say, what tell you us of Reading and praying, and preaching, mind
the Kernel within, while the second sort are all for the outside, which without
the Inside are but Shells, and Husks, and Shadows.

5. How commonly does the holy Spirit in the Scriptures speak Ridles and
Figures, The Figures in Scripture.
that they that see not may see, and they that say they see (Papists, Quakers,
etc. may be blinded) why is the Lamb called the Passover, Christ the Temple,
the Cup his Blood, the Bread his Body, etc.

There were many hundreds brought before King Henry and Queen Mary, after him,
etc. for Insurrections with Haltars about their Necks: These Princes (and
others) pronounced their inward mind by word External, the Heralds and
Proclamations, and Trumpets were in a Figurative Sense all glad News and
Gospel, and yet the substance of the glad News or Gospel was the pardon offered
and vouchsafed to them?

6. Mine Eyes have seen a Condemned Soul turned off at the Gallows: a Post
comes galloping all drive, A lively picture of the Gospel.
waving his hat, which being espied, Execution is staid: the people cried a
pardon, the Post cried a Reprieve: The Sheriff cried neither no Reprieve, etc.
until he saw the Kings hand or Authority from him, the Post delivers to the
Sheriff a bit of paper, which the Sheriff reading He Commanded the Halter to be
taken off, and the Prisoner to be delivered to the Post: the Prisoner with
joyful lips bid Death and his Fellow Sufferers Farewell, and with joyful Legs
leaps up behind the welcome Messenger of his Deliverance, for, afterward he had
his pardon under the broad Seal of England. I ask here how many passages and
particulars may Figuratively be styled Glad News, or the Gospel to this dying
man.

7. I ask whether the glad News or Gospel which this Post, [98] Messenger or
Preacher brought, might not Figuratively be called his Gospel or glad News, Why
it is called Paul's Gospel.
as Paul Romans 2. calls it his Gospel, and 2. Cor. 4. our Gospel if hid, it is
hid to them that be lost? It is hid two ways.

1. When not by writing or preaching it is preached or declared (as it is not
as yet discovered to innumerable millions in the world.) How it is hid.


2. When the Power or Spirit of God opens not (as he did Lidiahs) the Ears and
Hearts and Spirits of men to embrace the Gospel, or glad News of a Savior to
them: and this outward and inward hearing of this glad News, it is the Devils
and the Jews, and all Atheists, and (these refined Atheists) the Quakers work
to hinder.

The 50th Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is in Page 282. where he brings in
Daniel Cawdry saying, 282. Daniel Gawdry.
[The Saints were come to the Spirits of just men made perfect, but not on the
Earth.

G. Fox Answers, [The just men's Spirits that led them to give forth the
Scripture was the Spirit of God, and that was perfect, and was while they were
upon the Earth: The Saints were come to, (which was Christ the End of all
words) and so to God the Judge of all the world.]

I Reply, I have spoke before, that Spirits are Invisible Beings, both good and
bad, Contrary to the Sadduces, who held neither.

First, The Varity of Spirits.
That, of good Spirits there are three sorts.

1. The Increated God himself: 2. The Spirit of God called (because of his
manifold operations) the seven Spirits of God, etc

2. Those Invisible, holy Messengers, or Angels, called Ministering Spirits, and
Flaming Attendants upon Christ and his, Heb: Opposite to these are the unclean
Spirits spirits of Devils, etc.

3. The Spirits of men, first, saints, as Mary sings, my Spirit has rejoiced
in God my Savior, etc. and opposite to these are the Spirits of the wicked as
Peter tells us of the Spirits of the wicked, Why it is said the Spirits made
perfect.
of the old world now in prison, etc.

2. I observe that in this Heb. 12. the Spirit of God speaks not of the Bodies
of the Saints neither Conjoynd, nor apart. Nor secondly of the Righteous, made
perfect, but the Spirits of First, the Righteous: Therefore it seems to hold
forth not a perfect State of the Saints in this Life, Consisting of Spirits and
Bodies, [99] which our proud Boasters say of themselves, nor that they are
perfect: Nor secondly, of the Estate of the Saints in the world to come, where
all true Protestants hold, that the Bodies and Souls of the Saints shall be
perfected, and Everlastingly (and as to us now) Inconceivably glorified.

But the Estate of the Souls or Spirits of the Elect, who are (as some
Translate) perfected, some Consummated or finished, some grounded, or now
(Everlastngly Established, while their visible part, the Body sleeps in Jesus
until the joyful Resurrection.

2. Thus it appears the rather to be, because we find in all the holy Records
the Spirits, Souls, and Bodies of the highest Saints in this world defective
and subject to great failings, etc.

3. It is said, 1 Pet. 3. the Spirits in prison, not the Bodies nor the wicked,
but those Spirits of the wicked which believed not Noah's preaching, etc.

4. Does the Scripture speak of the Spirit of God here at all? The Devil would
be rid of Scripture and all Learning.
but of the Spirits of men; or of those Penmen of the holy Scriptures, or of
any present state of perfection in this Life at all, which might occasion his
Answer?

5. What Truth or pertinency is in those words, Christ the end of all words:
Does he mean that now there ought to be no more words or writings? or that
Christ ends all Scripture Words, and there is no further use of them? so they
hold out, and yet they say and practice the Contrary. The Truth is, their
horrible unclean and foul Spirit would fain be rid of all Scripture Words, and
all Learning also, etc. that he may bring the more of miserable mankind (under
the cheating sound of Light] into his Eternal Darkness.

The 51th. Instance is in Page 325. where he quotes Timothy Trevis, 325 Timothy
Trevis.
saying, God has ordained to Eternal Life all that shall be saved, before they
had a Being in this World: But none comes to possession of this Salvation, but
through Obedience of the Spirit.

G. Fox Answers, [The ground of man's belief and obedience is Christ, who does
inlighten him to the intent that he might believe and obey the Truth, and who
knows the Seed, knows the Election before the World was made.]

I Reply, 1. If he means that Christ is the Ground or Author, the Giver of
Repentance and Faith to all the Elect whom God [100] the Father has given him,
we say so, etc. But if he put in their Invented Light in the Room of Gods
Election and Predestination, G. Fox destroys the working of the Father and the
Son.
as the Efficient and first Cause, and of Christ as the Mediator and
Meritorious Cause according to the golden Chain, Romans 8. and Ephesians. 1. and the
fifth Chap. He speaks blasphemously of God, and of the Son of God, and of the
glorious work of their Redemption, and poor mankinds Salvation.

2 He is now in the Borough of the Arminians, G. Fox and the Arminians one as
to predestination.
who destroy Gods Election before the world was, and say, that when a man
believes he is Elected, when he is predestinate, or (being obedient) is
Inconstant, he is then Reprobated.

1 Contrary to all the precious beds of Flowers and Spices in the Garden of the
Scripture, which these rooting Swine getting in, they root and tear up all the
ways and methods of Gods Councels and Salvations.

2 Contrary to the wit and skill of men, who framing a Book, an House, a Ship,
a Navy, an Army, Man's wisdom about his Earthly business
or any Sublunary matters, have all in their Thoughts, Minds, and Councels
before they begin their Enterprise, they provide their Materials, their Agents,
their means they fit all to their Ends, though all may fail, all men's Affairs
being but Vanity and Vexations. But to whom shall we liken the Eternal and
Infinite Majesty, to whom all his works and Events are known (in a most
Inconceivable way as to us) even from Eternity to Eternity, his Justice, his
Goodness, his Power, all being Infinite.

3. As to the Seed and Election: We know they make themselves, The Mystery of
the Quakers Seed.
the seed and the Election: secondly, They make Christ the seed, that is, (in
the End) themselves. And thirdly, They make God and the Spirit of God the seed,
the seed in every man which is preached to, by them the Imprisoned Seed, and
when one turns Quaker, then God comes out of Prison: The Truth is, they make no
distinction between God and Christ, and Spirit, and themselves, as Fox in this
Book as before plainly tells us, but when this pretended seed of God, or God
himself is hearkened to, then the soul so harkening, is become Goddified, and
God with God, whose Infinite Being and Essence these poor, proud Bruits, The
Foxians gross Ignorance of the Godhead
have not so much sight of as the Devils have, who cried out to Jesus, I know
thee whom thou art the holy One of God, knowing that God and the Son of God
were Infinitely distinct in them- [101] selves, and all Created Beings: Yet
such is the Inconceivable wrath and Justice of the Eternal God upon these
fallen Spirits who kept not their first Habitation (as the pretended Quakers
many of them have not done) that (as Pharaoh) they can not but lie and slander,
and kill till the time of their Torment come.

The 52d. Instance of G. Fox his slight dealing is in Page 326. where he brings
in the same Author, 326 Timothy Trevis.
saying, [The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man in the Church
to profit withal, and not to every man in the World.]

G. Fox Answers, [The manifestation is given to every man to profit withal
without distinction, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh: For the
Spirit of Truth shall lead the Saints into all Truth: And he shall reprove the
World, and that which does reprove the World is manifest to the World.]

I Reply, I spoke to this Text before, in Answer to the Letter of my Neighbor
I. T. (as is to be seen in the Letters before our Disputes) who declared
himself satisfied with my Answers, The manifestation of the Spirit discussed.
but G. Fox (like a Cow with a Kettle on her head, giving every one warning to
stand clear) he boldly slanders Change "slanders" to "blunders." R. W. Ms. Ann.
on, and tumbles Heaven, Earth and Hell together, etc.

1. This 1 Cor. 12. expressly declares three things.

1. That it pleased God to appoint in his Christian Church and Worship the
Ministry of Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. according to Romans 12 Ephesians. 4,
etc.

2. He bestows several Gifts and Endowments on such persons whom he pleases
to call unto such Ministrations.

3. He vouchsafes to give a gracious Concurrent Operation of his Spirit unto
these his Gifts and Ministrations, The Garden of Christ's Church and the
Wilderness, etc. of the World differ as Heaven and Earth
what now is this gracious promise of the Father of Lights to the Garden of his
Church and Saints, the howling Desert of the whole world, from whence the
Garden is taken in, enclosed and separate? Because a Queen is a Woman, must
therefore all the Honors and kindneffes of a glorions Prince due to his Royal
Consort be dispensed in Common to all the Women in his Kingdom or Dominions?
The Garment in which the Queen is brought, is a Garment of Needle work, richly
and most curiou^ly embroydered with the graces and Operations of the holy
Spirit, does it therefore follow, that those Heavenly Embroyderies, etc. belong
to every nnclean and Lousie Beggar?

102] Yea, but this profane Mouth has something to say for it self, three
things he says full of Profaneness and Simplicity.

1. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.

But, 1. Was this (as he speaks) without all distinction done actually? was it,
Universally so with all the Individuals of mankind in the world at that time?

2. Was not there a wonderful Wall of separation between the Jews and all other
Nations, The partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles.
which the Lord promised by the Prophets to break down, and at the coming of
the Lord Jesus, and ever since has more and more broke down and abolished? Is
not Gideons Floor which was dry (the poor Gentiles and we English among them)
now wet with the Dews of Heaven, while the poor Jews (which were only wet at
first) are dry and barren?

3. What is that Extraordinary Promise of Gods Extraordinary pouring out of his
Spirit, in Fiery Tongues and Prophesyings, fitting some to go unto all Nations
to carry the glad News or Gospel, had others and all Believers those Gifts
[least of all with any show of Reason] belong they to all the Men and Women in
the world, who have never seen and heard of any Glimpse of the Sun of
Righteousness.

4. Again, I observe how vainly and wickedly this deluded and deluding Soul
cheats himself, G. Fox his not cleaving the Hoof though full of Scripture.
and others with this Term, All Flesh, Every man, All the World, and so with
the Terms Light, Christ, Spirit, his proud Fancy plays, etc. not dividing the
Hoof by just and holy distinguishing a Crime that he often upbraids his
Opposites most odiously with in his Book, not dividing, etc. but is most
notoriously guilty as ever was filthy Camel in this world, or any of the
unclean Beasts, etc.

G. Fox his second Answer here is, [The Spirit of God shall lead the Saints
into all Truth.] G. Fox his wonderful Confusion.
I observe here how like a Skittish Jade this wild Soul runs in and out, and
cannot keep to one steady Affirmation: Before he brings in the Spirit of God
poured out upon the Common of the World, now he brings in the spirits leading
the saints, Gods Garden and Paradise: Yet again, in his next words he concludes
every man in the World to have the spirit because says he, [The spirit
reproves the World, and that which does Reprove the World is manifest to the
World.]

I Answer, The holy spirit testifies that he is the Comforter of the saints,
but a Reprover of the World, that he Comforts the [103] Saints in the Promises,
and Assurances, etc. that he Reproves the world in his Threatenings and
Judgments. The Spirit of God and the world are extreme Contraries
That the world knows not, sees not the Spirit, but mocks at, receives it not,
but banisheth, imprisoneth, murthereth such in whom the true Spirit of God
appears: Hence it is, that because of this Spirit of God in any soul, three
are against two, and two must be against three in the same house, the Parents
against the Children, and the Children betray their Parents unto Death: yea,
two in a Bed, and two in a Belly, and yet he whom Gods Spirit chooses,
Prophners of the holy Spirit.
shall be mocked and murdered by the other, and yet this lying Peor tells us
that all the world (without distinction) have the manifestation of the Spirit
of God to prosit withal.

5. There have been persons professing the Order of the holy Ghost, yet far
from the favor of the holy Spirit, there has been a great Ship in the world
full of Sailors and Soldiers, G. Fox, etc. resisting and fighting against the
holy Spirit.
called the holy Ghost, and yet scarce one man in it known to have any
Acquaintance with Gods Spirit: Alas, what are the Babilonish Orders of these
pretenders to the Holy Ghost or Spirit? what are they but a poor Ship full of
Resisters of Gods Spirit, and Enemies to the greatest Enjoyers of him in the
World, the true Protestant Witnesses, whom they professedly oppose under the
Name of Professors, I hope as I have often said, that many of them are of the
two hundred that followed Absalom in honesty and simplicity.

6. But, The striving of Gods Spirit.
Oh what Reproofs of Gods Spirit has G. Fox and others of their Leaders had
in, and by so many excellent Opposites and Scriptures, and Arguments, which G.
Fox here proudly tramples under his profane feet, without any savor of the
holy Spirit of God!

It is true, it pleases God as I said, to strive with men by preachings, by
writings, by their own Readings, by public Judgments and private, and also by
public mercies and private, for Acts 14. every Drop of Rain is Gods voice,
word or witness, etc, but what is this Common grace to that Regenerating and
changing Spirit, The free and powerful working of Gods spirit.
John 3. to the opening of Lidiahs, and so of all saints hearts by his free and
holy spirit or Finger? what is this to the same Power that raised Christ Jesus
from the Dead, Ephesians. 1. that raises any poor sinner unto a new and holy, and
spiritual Cond^tion?

104] 7. Excellent and most heavenly is that similitude, Cant. 1. Because of
the savor of thy good Ointments therefore do the Virgins love thee: Oh how
many prate of this spirit or Ointment, and yet hate the true Lord Jesus, hate
his Love Letters, the holy scriptures, and would be glad to see them in a Bone
fire, hate his poor true Quakers that desire to fear before him, and tremble at
his Word, and to mourn that having received such manifestations of the holy
spirit of God they have profited others so little, and glorified God in their
Generations?

8. I might Insist upon the End which G, Fox insisteth on, The whole world
unprofitable.
viz. to profit withal, and ask why David, Psalm. 53. Complains that all the
Children of men not one excepted, are unprofitable, good for nothing, yea,
abominable, that is, to spiritual matters, heavenly things, the world to come:
All even the sweetest Natures, the fairest, the wittiest, the wisest, the
learned, the devoutest, until the spirit of God come and truly change the
heart and whole Frame of Nature. Till then, we as profitable as Hogs, as Moles
in a Garden, as Water or Fire breaking into a ship, and as devouring Foxes
amongst the true Lambs and Chickens of Christ Jesus.

The 53d Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is in page 328: 328 Hugh Archbal
where he quotes Hugh Archbal, saying, [Christ does enlighten none but them
that do receive him.]

He Answers, Contrary to John 3. which speaks of them that hate the Light,
and are enlightened, and will not come to it, because the Light will reprove
them: so he that hates the Light is enlightened, and will not receive Christ.

I Reply, though I have spoken much of the Light and of receiving Christ Jesus,
etc, yet since this proud Boaster drags his Opposites out of Scotland also: I
pray the Readers patience while I tell him of a manifold Light which the Holy
spirit mentions under a Metaphor or Figure of Light.

1. The Natural perceiving of Natural things, The manifold Light mentioned in
the Holy Scripture
as Christ Jesus says: The Light of the Body is the Eye.

2. The Light of peace and joy, whether Corporal or spiritual, Temporal, or
Eternal: The Jews in Hamans Downfall, and their own Deliverance had Light and
Joy, etc. and Light is sown for the Righteous, etc.

105] 3. The common offers of the Gospel as Light, whence some have observed
that the word (so cried up in John 1.) is not inlightneth but lights: but the
word Photizei may signify both, and yet be no more then the Common offer,
preaching and sound of the glad News, or Gospel: The people that sat in
Darkness saw great Light, etc, As the Light of a candle coming in lightens or
enlightens the Walls and Room but being taken away again leaves no Impression
or change upon the Wall, or as the Sun shining or guilding the Earth being
clouded leaves no Impression of shining on the Earth behind it: The Common
offers of mercy.
So is it with the Common offers of Trading or marriages in the world, and so
of the heavenly Offers of Merchandise and Heavenly Marriage, etc.

4. There is yet a higher Light which some are affected, Tinctured and
enlightened, and yet not the true and saving Light: that in Heb. 6. where some
persons (as the pretended Quakers and G. Fox especially) have seen much of the
Nature of God, his holiness, his Justice, etc. and had a Taste of the Joys of
the next world, but proudly turned from the holy Scripture, from the true Lord
Jesus, and the true, holy, enlightening, humbling and saving Spirit of God.

5. The true Lighting or Enlightening of which the holy Scripture speaks, The
true Illumination.
is that of 2 Cor. 4 (a place foully and simply abused by G. Fox to prove the
Light in every man) where Paul shows, how by the preaching of the glad News or
Gospel God had shined in their hearts, (not in the hearts of all the men in the
world, nor in the hearts of all the Corinthians) and had given them a sight of
the glory of God in the Face, or from the Reflection or means of the face of the
Mediator, As the first Christians were called.
the man Christ Jesus. Hence all those Heavenly Appellations or phrazes, or
Names, Children of the Day: Illuminated, or Enlightened Ones, You were Darkness,
but now you are (not only Enlightened, but) Light in the Lord, that is, become,
(not as Fox pretends Christ's and Gods and no distinction) but of a bright
Spiritual Nature, longing humbly and mournfully in the use of the holy
Scripture, and all other means) more to come out of Darkness into the Light of
holiness and likeness unto God.

Object. G. Fox alleges John 3. They which hated the Light were enlightened:

I Answer, No question, but with the general Offer of mercy, [106] as of the
Candle or Sun to the Eyes of a blind man, which is yet their Condemnation, The
twofold success of the Gospel.
because if they had power, yet their wills and Lusts, and Resolutions refuse
and abhor it, and abhor their eyes should be opened to see it.

Whereas the Gospel or glad News is published or preached, there is a twofold
Effect of it: as Acts 13. and Acts 17. and Acts 28. and through all Experience
in all Ages and in all parts of the world some mock, some demur, some persecute
others, the Spirit or Power of God opens their hearts to fear, to believe, to
submit, and in Gods time to rejoice for ever in a Savior.

The 54th Instance is in Page 330. where G. Fox brings in James Dorram, 330.
James Dorram.
saying [The Believer is not in sin as the Unbeliever is, he sins not as the
Unbeliever does: and in another place he says, the Law is the same to the
Believer that it is to the Unbeliever.

G. Fox Answers, Here any may read thy Confusion, but I say unto thee He that
believes does not commit Sin, but the unbelief is Sin, Romans 11. 20. And Christ
is the End of the Law to every one that believes for Righteousness sake, Roms
10. 4. and yet thou puts both Believers and unbelievers under the power of the
Law.

I Reply, The sight of sin as Sin.
The Devils (no question) know Sin, they see Sin, but not in the true glass of
the holy Scripture: They see sin as Saul and Judas, etc. in the fire of the
Coal, as dreadful in the punishment, but not in the blackness of the Coal, as
against their new Life and Nature, and the purity of the Eternal, who has
begotten them unto holiness. The Robber and Murderer bewails his offense at
the Gallows, though yet his heart is not changed, but, (could he) he would
murder the Judge, and all that had a hand in his Condemnation and Execution.
The Drunkard hates his Sin as a Tyrant over him, only as it brings Discredit to
him, so is it with the unclean person, and every other sinner. But it is not so
with the Regenerate or new Born, who can no more (unless deceived and
Circumvented) touch Sin, The Sins of the Regenerate.
then the Devil the Father of it, nor then Fire can delight in Water, nor Light
in Darkness.

3. It is true, that 7 of the Romans is contended for by the Papists and
Arminians, and in a great measure by the Quakers, [107] to Contain not the
Combat of the Saints, but of the unregenerate within themselves: But the true
Protestants have proved from the Scripture, and the Experience of all true
Saints that sin and grace, Flesh and Spirit, the Law of the Spirit, Whit the
Combat between the Flesh and Spirit in Romans 7.
and the Law of sin may, and do continue Combating in the Regenerate, or New
born, Contrary to that proud perfection of Papists and Foxians in this Life, is
more clear then Paul's Argumentation, and upon that his Conclusion, viz. That
with his mind, that is, his Spirit, will, Affections, (renewed by Gods Spirit)
he served the Law of God: But with his Flesh, which must be his sinful Desires
and Dispositions yet remaining in him, he served the Law of Sin? This was the
Reason of his Cry, O wretched man, etc. and G. Fox his silly shifts saying,
that in the End of the Chapter, Paul was perfect, and gave thanks for victory,
it is like that Fantastical saying, of the Generalists, being forced to Con^ess
Repentance necessary to Salvation, viz. [In a moment in the Twinkling of an
Eye] woefully abusing that holy Scripture about the Resurrection.

4. The same 7 of the Romans, The Sin of the Regenerate as a wound and
Captivity.
and other holy Scriptures, and Experience prove that the Sin of the
Regenerate, whether of Ignorance, as the Fathers, many wives, etc. or of
unwatchfulness as David and Peter's etc. It is as an honest man taken prisoner,
or as Soldiers and Seamen wounded and carried Captive, or as a Virgin by force
deslowred, and crying out, whom therefore both Law and Reason, and the holy
Scripture in a holy Figure declare to be clear and Innocent.

5. Hence Paul shows the Sincerity of the Chaste Will and Affections unto the
Heavenly Bridegroom, The Souls delight in God, and Hatred to Sin
saying, I delight in the Law of God, in the inner man: Delight we know is the
Top and Flower, and Cream of all the Affections, and the siercest hatred flies
in the Face of that which takes away our delight from us. The wicked may
desire, and may act heavenly things for his own self Ends, for his Credit, his
profit, his Salvation, but he can not make God to be himself, and delight in
God.

6. What Confusion is it to affirm that the Saints of God though they see
Christ fulfilling the Law of works for them, Sincerity the Crown of the true
Quakers
which none in the world could ever do but He, yet they ought to strive after
perfect holiness and Righteousness, to love the Lord with all their Heart,
soul, might, strength, etc. as a Child going after his Father, the Scholar or
maiden following their Copies and Samplers* [108 though they never come near
the full Exactness and perfection of them.

The 55th Instance of G. Fox his simple and soul Answer is in Page 338. where
he brings in John Nasmith from Scotland, 338 John Nasmith
saying, [Tha the Evil Spirits are both sinful and Reasonable.]

He Answers, This is a lie, for Reasonable is not sinful, and unreasonable is
sinful? 1 These. 3. they have not the Faith. And if the Evil Spirit be
Reasonable and the Good Reasonable, they are both one: who is then
unreasonable, thou puts no difference between the precious and the vile? Thou
have the mark of a blind guide and of a false Prophet in thy Forehead.

1. I Reply and observe First, the filthy rash Fury of his mind and Pen:
Beginning with that is a lie, and after a silly Line and Answer: Thou have the
Marck of a Blind guide and of a false Prophet in thy Forehead.

2. This proud Pharisee will appear to be a Sadducee also, and to hold no
Angels nor Spirits: It is true, as they pretend to own Scripture and a Christ,
and Resurrection, They with Iesuitical Equivocations name Angels and Spirits,
but the bottom as some of them, The Foxians are both Pharisees and Sadduces.
and that in print discover is, they hold there is but one Spirit, which is in
All, and into which All Return, and the Soul of Judas is as happy as the Soul
of Peter.

3. G. Fox runs into his Borough of the various significations of the word
Reasonable. A man is a Reasonable Creature as Opposite to Wolves and Foxes,
etc. and yet he may be unreasonable in in his Actings, An Item to G. Fox.
as Wolves and Foxes, who though unreasonable in their Natures, yet are not
sinful, though a plague to man since his Fall. Oh happy were it for G. Fox that
he had been of the wild Foxes in the Woods, and had not been so sinful, by so
horribly abusing so great a Talent of Wit and Reason which the Father of Lights
has given him.

4. We know the Admirable Wit and Reason as well as the Power of those unclean
Spirits, the Lord Jesus cast out, The Nature of the Devils
they did believe and Confess the Lord Jesus, and made their Request unto him:
This their knowledge and Ability is from God, though their sinful hardness by
Gods just Sentence, runs them upon such mad and desperate Courses, as it is
with the Sons of men, when the most holy and Righteous Judge delivers them up
to the Councels 109] and Projects of their proud and deceitful Hearts and
Spirits:

The 56th. Instance is in Page 345. where he brings in Henry Foreside (from
Scotland,) 345 Hen. Foreside.
saying, [Concerning those words of Ezekiel 18. 28. If the Righteous turn away
from his Righteousness, his former Righteousness shall be no more remembered,
and he said the meaning of that Scripture was: They thought they had been
Righteous, but were not, but supposed it had been so.]

He Answers, Ezekiel. 18 Considered
[Herein thou art a Minister of unrighteousness thou go about to make God a
Liar, and the Prophets, and perverts the Scripture: For if he forsakes his
Righteousness and commits Sin and Iniquity, and Trespasses he shall dye and not
live in the Righteousness: But if he ^o sakes his Sins, Trespasses and
Transgressions, in the Righteousness that he has done and does, he shall live:
So Gods ways are equal, Ezekiel, 18.] And thou says, they thought they had been
Righteous, but it was not so: And the Lord by the Prophet says it was so, that
they should live in their Righteousness and die if they did depart from it and
Transgressed: Here thou art a diminisher from the Prophets and Apostles words,
whose Name is diminished out of the Book of Life, read Rev. 22. 19

I Reply, The Question is about Falling away from saving grace and
Righteousness, The Spirit of Falling from Grace.
wherein it is notorious, (as I have formerly proved) that the Quakers join
their Forces to the Standards of the Papists and Arminians, though herein the
Arminians (though highly abusing an high wit as the Papists and Quakers do) yet
are they not so guilty and Insufferable as the Papists and Foxians are, because
they pretend not to such an Infallible Chair as the Papists and Quakers do, The
Papists, Arminians and Foxians one in this point.
which is the more wonderful and monstrous, because the Papists are forced to
grant that the Head of their Church the Pope may Himself fall away and be a
Reprobate, and the Foxians are forced to Confess as much, even of diverse of
their Heads and Teachers, some getting Saving Grace again, as they say, and
some never. The Quakers yet are more gross in this point, because they maintain
that the least that hearken to the Light are born again. That they which are
born again cannot Sin, that they which can not Sin are pure as God is pure, and
therefore they Falling away from them, they must necessarily hold that which is
blasphemous of all to be abhorred, that God himself may fall from Grace also,
and is kept down as the [110] as this barking Fox speaks, as a Cart laden with
sheaves (perverting the Scripture) by wickedness and wicked spirits which are
too hard for God and Christ, and Spirit in all the Men and Women in the world,
that do not hearken to their feigned Light, and let loose the Imprisoned Cart
and Seed, etc.

We may make a stand here and observe three things. Whab Grace it is that
Papists Arminians and Foxians Fall from.


1. The horrible abuse of Gods Excellent Gifts of Reason and Acuteness, which
these men so grossly desile in handling the Mysteries and Parables of the holy
Scripture.

2. Gods Infinite Patience in bearing with such a rotten stinking thing as man
is. Necessary Observations.


3. What kind of Grace it is that so easily persons Fall away away from, and
part withal.

2. As to Ezekiel. 18. How does it follow, that because the word Righteousness in
which Fox in his wonted Borough, The Word Righteousness of many significations
signifies diverse things, that therefore in this first place it must signify
the Imputed Righteousness of God in Christ, from which a man really Invested
with it may really, Totally and Finally depart. And Secondly the Sanctifying
Righteousness of Christ Jesus adorning a poor sinner Justified and pardoned,
and of that true Righteousness, a truly sanctified Soul and member of Christ
Jesus may make shipwreck. But is there not beside these a very thirdly, Indian
Rig^teousness, when a Barbarian is Innocent and free from Crimes falsely charged
on him?

4. Is there not a Civil Righteousness when men are free from Gross and
Barbarous Courses, and live Civilly, soberly and justly among their Neighbors?

5 Yea, is there not a Pharisaical Righteousness which Paul prided himself in,
viz that concerning the Law he was blameless, and yet says the Lord Jesus,
Except your Righteousness go beyond this Righteousness, you shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven

6. Again, Is there not a Righteousness of the foolish Virgins, who has a show
and Lamp of Profession, and make as brave a show in building as the house upon
the Rock, it may be fairer) and yet no true work of Conversion of the Soul to
God, God's Covenant with the first man.
nor the Oil of Gods Spirit in the heart for all their boasting of it. The
most High and holy will be clear when he is Judged. Adam shall live if he keep
his Bargain: and so shall all his Posterity if they keep the first Covenant.

111] If any shall say God knows the Bargain is too hard for us: Our first
Father did not, how shall we? etc.

I Answer, what will become then of the Papists and Quakers, who say, they can,
and the Papists more also then God commands?

2. Christ did not mock, but meekly and savingly teach the young man, when he
Answered, If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments: nor does he mock
the Jews, dealing with them upon the Terms of Justice: Obey and live,
Transgress and die.

It is a pertinent question, why was the holy Law of God written and given so
many hundreds of years after man was Fallen and not able to keep his Bargain:
The Law given so many hundredth of years after man's Fall.
The Spirit of God Gal. 3, tells us that four hundred and Thirty Years after the
Promise to Abraham, the Law was written by Gods own Immediate Finger to show
unto man his Sin, and Judgments, and need of a Mediator promised.

3. As to G. Fox Cursing his Adversary as a Diminisher from the holy Scripture.

I Answer, G. Fox making use of the Scripture to Curse his Opposites.
Does this Face of Brass, who has so horribly slighted the holy Scripture: now
adore them? Is he now zealous for them, and against the violation of them? Does
he regard the adding to, or Detracting from them, or the Plagues and Curses
therein denounced against the Adders to, or Detracters from them? Does he not
throughout all his Book, and all of them in word and writing deny the holy
Scripture to be the word of God, and only that Frantic Light or Christ,
(imagined by them to be in all mankind) to be the only Word of God? Their
horrible Contempt of Scripture.
yea, is it of any use or more avail to them that have the Scripture in their
heart, as they say then a dead Letter, and an Old Almanac, etc. O hear O
Heavens and give Ear O Earth, did ever the Devil vomit out more poison (against
God and the Souls of men by the mouths and pens of Jews or Turks, or
Anti-Christans,) then these Foxians do in their undermining the holy
Scriptures? Some know it not: Some of them speak Reverently of it: The very
Papists Confess it to be the very word or Speech of God: But the Devil and the
Quakers abhor to hear them Verbum Dei the Word of God.

These bewitched Souls affirm they have a higher Teacher, yea, [112] every
man in the world has him in them, then the Scriptures are and yet they say in
horrible simplicity and hypocrisy that they are the Words of God.

The 58th: Instance of G. Fox his slight Answer, as in Page 356, where he
brings in a Book from Holland, 456 A Book from Hollaed
saying, [That God has put out the Remembrance of your Sins, and of your
Corruptions within you, wherein you must fight all your Life Time.

G. Fox, whilst the Sins you are fighting withal are not blotted out in your
own particulars, this is not the Life of the Saints: G. Fox his proud Ignorance
They are not fighting all their Life Time, but come to the Kingdom of God
witnessing sin and Iniquity blotted out, and the Everlasting Covenant of Peace
and Life with God

I Reply, This subtle Mountebank having gotten a Scaffold, he acts Tricks
wonderful in the Eyes of the simple, yet as in all his Books he shows no
knowledge of the Hebrew and the Greek (whence our English Scripture comes as a
Daughter from the Mother) so falls he short of most English writers, who scorns
to disgrace their Mother English (by so much bastard and false English) as this
poor Mountebank has done in all his Books.

If ever any poor empty Soul have talked of God without God. An Impious
unsavonry Spirit against the godly of all Nations
Of a Christ, and the holy Spirit within, without them: or any true Savor of
them: of the holy writings of God without any true Reverence and love to them!
Of Light without any Spark of true Illuminations! of sin, without any true
Sense of the Exceeding Sinfulness of it! This Empty Cask this loud Boaster and
Censurer is one of them.

1. His Answer says three things in Effect.

1, That no sin is blotted out until there be no more Root nor Seed of it in
the Soul to fight against. The Pharisees Perfection


I Reply, to this I have spoke much before, and showed how clear it is against
so much holy Scripture: against the Counsels and purposes of God as to his holy
ordering of this present world, 2 Pet. 22
and his Saints in it: and against the Constant Experience of all those high
Saints in Scripture, and of all that ever went before us: All which shows the
Devilish pride of these high Pharisees

2. He adds, saying, the Saints are not fighting all their Life Time.

I Reply, The Saints Continual warfere
if there be no Enemies no danger of Fleshly Lusts warring against our Souls,
as Peter speaks. 113] 2. Why then does the holy Spirit speak of the Combat of
the Flesh and Spirit, Gal. 5. and that Paul did not the things that he would,
and did the Evil he would not, and of his being taken Prisoner?

3. Why then does Gods Spirit furnish us with all that Heavenly Artillery,
Ephesians. 6. 1. And Commands his Servants (even Timothy) to fly youthful Lusts,
if he were past wounding by them?

4. And to stand upon the Guard and watch against Gluttonly and Drunkenness,
and worldly Cares, which would lull the Souls of the Disciples asleep, except
they kept the better watch etc. Luke 21.

5. And why then does the Lord Jesus Command us to pray daily against
Temptations, Scriptural dangers and spiritual Watch.
yea, and to pray daily for the pardon of sin, if his Followers be for ever
escaped out of the reach of Sinful thoughts, words and actions, and many
thousand sinful Omissions?

6. What was the Reason of the Cemmand of Christ Jesus to the Churches to
watch, Christ's Discipline with his Saints and Churches.
to Overcome, to repent, threatening them with discharging, and Excommunication
which we see dolefully Effected upon the Asian Professors, and which was
followed with a rich blessing upon that Ordinance, Executed upon the Incestuous
Corinthian, which brought forth those seven Heavenly Fruits, both in him and
that Church also, 2 Cor. 7.

G. Fox his third Answer is, [The Saints are come to the Kingdom of God
witnessing Sin and Iniquity blotted out, and the Everlasting Covenant of Peace
and Life with God.]

But 1. Take these words in his Sense, viz. that all that are in their Fancied
Kingdom are thus free from Sin, and come to this Peace and Joy: why then do
themselves still Confess themselves to be subject to quaking and trembling, as
if they were at the black and burning Foot of Mount Sinai, where indeed they
are, and not upon the bright and shining Hill of Zion.

2. Is not this Contrary to the Covenant of God with David, The Quakers doleful
mistake
concerning Solomon, and (in the Anti Type) with all Christians, viz. that if
they Sin he will Chastise them with the Rods of men, but not take away his
mercy, as he took it from Saul, etc.

3. Is there not a false Peace, a false Joy as well as a false quaking, a false
Repentance, a false mortification, and Sanctificatio, and in Conclusion, a
false Salvation: and therefore the Lord Jesus tells us of the high pretenders,
Math. 7. yet by him Everlastingly rejected.

114] The 59th Instance is in Page 365. where G. Fox brings in Robert Tuchin,
365. Robert Tuchin, etc.
etc. saying, [The most Faithful Messengers of Christ have acknowledged that
they have come short of their duty.]

G. Fox Answers, [They that are Faithful Messengers of Christ have the Answer
well done thou good and Faithful Servant: where did John, or Paul, or Peter
acknowledge that they came short of their duty: Has not thou slandred the
Servants of the Lord, thinking them to be like yourselves, and falsely accusing
them that you may seem Justified, who are false Messengers and come in his
Name, when you have no Commission from him: and you come short of every good
work: But thus it is not with Christ's true Messengers, for they fulfill his Will
that sent them. It is the Lord that works in them, whose they are, and whose
duty they perform by his Spirit]

I Reply, G Fox prouder and prouder, woe se and worse to the End of his Book^
this deluded Soul (as it is written) must grow worse and worse (except the
Lord wonderfully awaken him) to all Eternity: Instead of seeing any failing
against God and Christ, the Spirit and Servants of God, etc. he claps his wings
upon his Dunghill, and vapors, that in all these Transactions he has not
faild, no not in a sinful word or Thought.

1. But he must remember that such was the Infinite, Incomprehensible Purity
and Justice, and wisdom of God, The Fall of Angels.
that the Heavens were not pure in his sight, and he laid Folly to the Charge
of his Angels, and I am sure, their Natures, their Endowments, their
Employments, G. Fox comes short of, and yet they came short of their duty, and
are now fast in Chains of Darkness, expecting Judgment and Torment to come,

2. I presume G. Fox will grant that our first Parents were Innocent and
perfect, as highly Gifted and as highly Employed as ever G. Fox is like to be,
Fall of Man.
and yet they came short, and We all by them fallen short of the Glory and love
of God into the Dunghill of Hellish Darkness.

3. After the Promised Restoration by the Son of God what Excellent Gifts had
Noah, Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Sampson, Iepthe,
Gideon, Eli, Samuel, Nathan, Solomon, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and
many other glorious Saints, what wonderful Assistance and Extraordinary
Appearances of God had they in their high Services for God, and yet how
grea^ly: (some of them wonderfully foully) did they come short of their 115]
duty? I remember I was once asked by one of these high Boasters whether I would
deny the Scripture: David's sin.
viz that said, David did not sin but in the Case of Uriah: unto which I know
many full Answers may be given. Here only I observe how ready these (willingly
Ignorant) Souls are to Catch at any Word that may Fortify their proud Fancy,
Sacrifice for Sins of Ignorance
though against many other Scriptures and unquestionable Examples, etc.

4. Until the coming of Christ Jesus we know the Command of the most holy God
to private persons, to the Princes, to the Priests, to the whole Assembly to
offer up Sacrifice and Expiation for all sorts of failings, yea, for Sins of
Ignorance, yea, and for their coming short in their holy offerings: Hence David
cries out, Psalm. 143. Enter not into Judgment or Reckoning with thy Servant,
etc. and Psalm. 19. Cleanse thou me from secret sins, for who knows how often he
offends?

5. I know G. Fox uses to say all these were Types and Christ is the body,
and^.

I Answer, There are more Anti-Types then the person of Christ, for the Quakers
themselves, they make themselves Kings and Priests, and the Temple as well as
Christ, etc.

But come to the time of the Lord Jesus, Great failing of Christ's Disciples
and look upon the Famous first Apostles, who had freely left all to follow
him, who enjoyed his personal preaching and praying, his wonderful Miracles,
his Heavenly Converse, his holy and Powerful Spirit in their own preaching,
healing all Diseases, raising the dead, casting out Devils, etc. and yet how
does the Lord Jesus frequently and sharply chide them for their coming short of
their duty, for their Ignorance, negligence, unbelief, forgetfulness,
Inhumanity, Ambition, etc.

6. Yea, as to those three whom G. Fox boasts of, John, Paul, John and Peter,
and all come short.
Paul and Peter: Does not John cry out, 1 John 2. If we Confess our ^ins, he is
Faithful and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness?
Does not Paul Confess and bewail his coming short, when he cries out, that the
good he would do he did not, but did the Evil he would not, and with his flesh
did serve the Law of sin, though it was not Paul that sinned, but sin that
dwelled in him? A Mystery which I more then fear the most High has hidden from
this poor Foxes Eye.

And as to Peter, to say nothing of his stupendous failing of his [116]
Master, etc. even after his awakening, after the Lords rising, and Peter's
seeing and talking with him, his bold profession and preaching of him to the
Conversion of hundreds and thousands: Peter's great failings former and latter
written for our Instruction
yet how is he charged by Paul for coming short of his Duty, for Gross Weakness
and (in a kind) Hipocrisy and Dissimulation? so that such a cloud of witnesses
o'rewhelming these new Gods, (Papists and Quakers) how Righteous is it with God
to make their Faces ashamed with the filth of their own nakedness, in the
highth of the pride of their conceited Deities.

The 60 Instance of G. Fox his lame Answer is in page 372. where he brings in
Thomas Hodges, 372. Thomas Hodges.
saying, [The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men.]

He Answers, The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of the Spirit and to
the Spirit, whereby men may receive him, and know him by the Spirit which
natural men can not.

1. I Reply, G Fox has affirmed the Contrary to all the Heavenly Assertions of
his Opposites which I have produced.
This bewitched and bewitching Soul has all along his Book been picking out
sweet Flowers out of his Opposites Gardens, from whence he has sucked, turned
the sweet juice of Heavenly Truths into the poison and Venom of his proud
Conceits. So here he denies this Heavenly Mystery of Gods revealing himself to
us after the way and manner of men, having Head, and Hair, and Eyes, and mouth,
etc. wherein his Incomprehensible Goodness is pleased to stoop to us (even the
highest and proudest Souls) as Nurses do to Children, or as Physicians to weak
and Crazy and distempered persons.

2. But what shall we say to all those holy Scriptures, which not only liken
God to a man, a man of war, God sets forth to us in Scripture by Natural and
Artificial things.
a Sheepherd, a Warfaring man, an Husband man, etc. but also to a Shield, and
other Insensibles, Natural or Artificial, as a Sun, a Tree, a Rock, an House, a
Fort, a High Tower, etc. When God revealed himself to Abraham, Genesis 15. I am
thy Shield, etc. will this foul mouth say that this similitude of a Shield was
not a Familiar Metaphor, or Figure, wherein God speaks to Abraham's weak
Capacity? Or will he say, that God speaking so to Abraham, spoke not also in
the way the Spirit, Or that God is Literally a Shield?

3. It was a late Speech of one of the best Philosophers, and of the best
Christians that Old England or New ever had: Then shall we know (to wit in the
next life, The great Question what God is.
in the Heavenly State to [117 Come) how to answer that great Question, What is
God? But this poor wild Asses Colt, G. Fox he can resolve the Question: he can
gather up the Ocean in the hollow of his hand, he can weigh the Everlasting
Mountains and Winds in Scales, and Enclose not only the Sun, etc. but also the
Incomprehensible Sun of Glory and Purity within his Iuglers Box, etc.

4. For, The Devil Gods Ape in Inspirations.
what would this little Thief and Fox, or the great Thief and Fox the Devil
have, but blow out the Candle and Torch, and Sun of the holy Books and Records,
that so the Father of Lies and Murders may be heard, (as he has been heard in
the Grecian Oracles in Mahomet, and the Mahumetans, in the Pope and the
Papists) so by his whisperings in the Foxians, as if he were the most holy
Spirit of the Eternal God himself, Immortal, Invisible, and only Wise.

5. For, is it not the Devils Trade to play the subtle Hunter, (as do also his
Iourney-men who ly in wait to catch men) and to trim his Pits and Gins, The
Subtlety of the Devil and his Agents in C^tching of men.
and Snares, with green leaves and Boughs, and Twigs, viz: fair pretenses of
the Spirit, the Spirit, the Immediate Spirit, the Infallible Spirit, the
Teachings of the Spirit, the manner of the Spirit, speaking to the Spirit, and
Christ within you, Christ within you except you be Reprobates, Christ within
you the hope of Glory, etc. These are fair Leaves, and sweet, heavenly green
Boughs, on which the Old Serpent twineth, and from whence he utters even
Scripture it self, and the sweet Names God and Christ, and Spirit, in a
frantic purpose to stab (for he knows he can not) the holy Scriptures, and
God, and Christ, and Spirit also:

6. More particularly, what does he mean, that God speaks not to us after the
manner of men, What G. Fox means by the manner of the Spirit.
but by the way of the Spirit, after the manner of the Spirit? He grants that
the holy Scriptures were given forth from the Immediate Insp^ration of the
Spirit: He knows that we maintain from Isai. 59. the great Promise of the Word
and Spirit together, to the mouth of Christ Jesus and his Seed, and his Seeds
Seed. And also that we affirm that no Reading, no Hearing, no Meditation, no
Afflictions, etc. can do a Soul any good, until God by the Power or Finger of
his own self, or Spirit, makes the means Powerful and Effectual.

All this serves not, but that which Satan drives at, and which alone must
serve his Ends is, Immediate, Immediate Inspiration with a damning, or changing
the means by the most Holy, and only Wise God Appointed.

118] 7. It is one of the Proverbs of the Ancients Sus Minervam docet. G. Fox
his proud Simplicity
The Sow teaches the Goddess of Wisdom. It is most Infallibly true here, this
filthy Sow (that seems to be washed from Common vices and yet wallows in the mud
and Dunghils of Mystical Filthiness) He must teach wisdom it self how to
speak, and appoint him his way, and (by wresting and racing out what he can the
Holy Records) how to reveal himself unto the Sons of men. The Monstrous Ridle
of the Foxians Spirit.


8. It is pertinent to Consider the ground of this his only owning the manner
of the Spirit, viz. [This Immediate Spirit speaks to the Spirit within.] What
is the English of this Ridle [The Immediate Spirit within speaks to the Spirit
within,] But their Spirit will tell us that God and Christ, and Spirit, and
Light, and New Covenant, and Faith, and Holiness, etc. are all in prison
within, in every man, until the Immediate Spirit without means persuade a
person to hearken within to him as to Christ, Light and Spirit, which will
bring him to God and Christ, (round in a Conjuring Circle Christ brings to
Christ, the Spirit brings to the Spirit,) which though it be true, after
Conversion and in growth and Increase of the Grace and Knowledge of Christ by
the use of means appointed by Christ Jesus, yet I deny it ever to be done in
the first turning of the Heart and working of Faith, that is by any such
Immediate Spirit, and Christ and God in every of mankind before, or since the
coming of Christ Jesus, especially, for they say, that he is the true Light (of
which John spoke, then Come, to Inlighten the World, etc.

9. I Conclude this Instance and the whole with a Re^lection upon Gods
wonderful dealing with Job: In the 1. Chap. the Lord boasts of his servant Job
to the Devil to be a perfect man, (as the Foxians often urge this place) But
God Schoold him for his pride and Impatience, Job a perfect man yet abhors
himself for his filthiness.
etc. by Elihu, and by his own Voice out of a Whirlwind: and now Job Confesses
his Pride and Ignorance, and professes his Risolution to prate no more, etc.
but to abhor himself (that is, as some loathsome Thing) in Dust and Ashes, G.
Fox in this his Book abhors the Term of Dust and Ashes, as being Elevatedabove
Abraham and Job (punies to him) with high Fancies of his Immortality, though we
see they die, and stink and Rot as well as others.

But if God please to show him, and me, truly what Sin is, What Gods Justice
is, what an Infinite price must pay for the least Evil Thought and Natural
Disposition, The Authors humble desire for himself and G. Fox
on the Old Score: [119] If God please by any of those many gracious means he
uses to Imprint these and other such Heavenly Considertions upon our Souls! We
shall then for all our pretenses cry out with Peter, depart from me for I am a
sinful man O Lord: and with Job, Once have I spoken, yea, twice, etc. but no
more, etc. I abhor myself as a loathsome, Rotten, stinking Carrion in Dust and
Ashes. But alas I fear G. Fox is so taken up with his sitting with Christ in
Heavenly Places, with Immediate Dictates of his supposed holy Spirit: The
Authors fear as to G. Fox his case
That Gods speaking thus to his poor Worms after the way of Men, and by these
outward means stinks in his Nostrils; which if so, and so Irrecoverably, I
desire, and desire all that love God and their own Salvations, to flee from him
as from Korahs Pride and Korahs Plagues, for his Viol is pouring on him in
spiritual Indgements, and shall be pouring on him in spiritual and Corporal
Torments to all Eternity.

FINIS.

