BEing ill used by False and Mistaken Representations in Writing published in
Coffee-Houses and other Places, of what I said in my Place in the time of my
Speaker-ship in the last Parliament. To prevent Falsities and Mistakes relating
to what I have said in this Parliament; I am Content these Papers be Printed by
Gabriel Kunholt, and that No other Person presume to Print them. Withal, I
desire all Persons to take Notice, that I shall endeavor to bring such persons
to Punishment, who shall hereafter Publish in Writing any thing relating to me
in my present Service, without my Approbation. Under my Hand 23. March, 1680/1.

Wi. Williams Speaker.

THE SPEECH Of the Honorable WILLIAM WILLIAMS Esquire SPEAKER Of the House of
COMMONS, To the Honorable House of COMMONS, Upon the Electing of him SPEAKRER
in the PARLIAMENT at OXFORD, Monday the 21tsh. day of March, 1680/1.

TOGETHER, With his Speeches to His Most Excellent MAJESTY. At the Presenting
him Speaker to his Majesty by the Commons in Parliament.

Upon Tuesday 22th. day of the same Month.

OXFORD; Printed by Leo. Lichfield, for Gabriel Kunholt, Book-binder to his
Highness Prince Rupert, to be sold at his Shop overaginst the Muse, London,
MDCLXXXI.

Numb. 59 William Williams Esquire To the House of COMMONS.
Upon the Electing of him Speaker at Oxford, Monday 21th. March, 1680/1.
GENTLEMEN,
IT were Vanity in me by Arguments from Weakness and Unfit ness, to disable my
self for Your Service in this Chair at this time.

The Vnianimous Voice of the House calling me to this Place, Concludes me, and
leaves me without Excuse. Whom the Commons have Elected for this Trust, is to
be supposed Worthy, and Fit for it. Wherefore I must acquiesce in Your Commands.

Apprehending this Choice proceeds from the Example you have from Your
Countries by Your own Elections, making this Parliament, as much as in you and
them lies, the same with the last; Therefore You have the same Speaker.

I ought not to offer any sort of Assurance to this House, of my resolved
Constancy, Fidelity, and Vigilance, in the discharge of this Duty: The Just
sense I have of the Honor generously given me this day, is Your Stipulation
for my good Abearance. The Trust I owe, and am to answer to God, my Religion,
to England and Englishmen in this Service, must tie me to do and suffer all
that Flesh and Blood can Act or endure, in Your Chair.

This is not the time to speak Much, but to act Well, without more words then
in order to our proper Parliamentary method of Proceeding. Centlemen, Admit me
to make it my first Motion, That Your Debates and Proceedings, may be Regular
and Orderly, without Reflection, without Passion: and that my actings and
Behavior may have your Kind and Candid Construction, and You shall find there
is not any thing so dear to me, which shall not be adventured in the Service of
the Commons in Parliament by me.

Ordered
That the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Speaker, for the Speech by him
made in the House of Lords, upon his being Presented to His Majesty. And that
he be desired to Print the same.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

THE SPEECH Of the Honorable William Williams Esquire To His Most Excellent MAJESTY
At the Presenting of him Speaker by the Commons to His MAJESTY at OXFORD, Upon
Tuesday 22th. March, 1680/1.
May it please Your Majesty,
THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, with Duty and
Loyalty agreeable to Themselves and the Persons whom they Represent, have in
Obedience to Your Royal Pleasure, for the Disposing of Themselves in that Great
Assembly, for Your Majesty's service Considered of a Speaker, and to manifest
to Your Majesty and the World, They are not inclinable to Changes, have with
one Voice Elected me Their Speaker, having had the Honor to serve Your Majesty
and the Commons in that Trust in the last Parliament.

With all Humility I presume again, by Their Command, to stand before Your
Majesty in this circumstance, with an Head and Heart full of Loyalty to Your
Sacred Person: Armed with asettled Resolution, never to depart from Your well
Constituted and Established Government.

The Lord Chancellor by His MAJETIES Command, said to this Purpose.
Mr. Speaker,
FOR so I am Commanded to call You: His Majesty has well Considered the Choice
the Commons have made, and does very much Approve of that Election, and does
Accept and Allow of you their Speaker.

The second Speech of William Williams Esquire Then Presented to his Most Excellent
MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
NAtural Allegiance Commands Loyalty to Your Majesty from every Subject. Your
singular Grace and Favor to me in the last Parliament, Confirmed by the Honor
I have in this, add more then Dutifulness and Obedience to my Loyalty.

I am set in the first Station of Your Commons, for Trust and Quality; an High
and Slippery Place. It requires a Steady Head and a well Poised Body, in him
that will stand firm there: Uprightness is the safe Posture and best Policy,
and shall be mine in this Place; guarded with this Opinion, that Your Majesty's
service in this Trust, is one and the same with the service of Your Commons,
and that they are no more to be divided then Your Crown and Scepter.

They truly and best serve the Crown and Country (which shall be my Care and
Industry) who make the Safety of Your Sacred Person, the defense and security
of the Protestant Religion, the Support of Your Majesty's Government, the
Maintenance of the Laws, and Preservation of the ancient Constitutions of
Parliament; one and the same undevided Interest, one and the same Safety, one
and the same inseparable Security, for your Self and People. These are the
Desires of all Good men; but must be the effects of Good Counsels; for the
Inabling of your Majesty's great Counsel now in Parliament Assembled, to
Complete this Blessed Establishment. With all Humility, I address to your
Majesty, in the Name, and on the behalf of the Commons in Parliament.

1. That we and our servants may be free in our Persons and Estates, from
Arrests and other Disturbances. 2. That in our Debates, Liberty and Freedom of
Speech be allowed us. 3. That as occasion shall require, your Majesty will
vouchsafe us Access to your Royal Person.
I take leave to join this Humble Petition for my self, that nothing by me in
Weakness, or through Inadvertency said or done, may turn to the prejudice of
the Commons, and that my Behavior and Proceedings, may receive a benign and
favorable Interpretation, with your Gracious Majesty.

The Lord Chancellor by Command from His Majesty, said to this effect.
Mr. Speaker,
ALL your Petitions are fully and freely granted by His Majesty, in as large
and ample manner, as ever any House of Commons yet enjoyed them: The King is
very sure the Wisdom of this House of Commons, will make as prudent an Use of
them, as any of your Ancestors ever did. Your own particular Petition is
grateful to the King too, because he knows you will be as Careful to avid
Mistakes, as his Majesty is ready to Forgive them.

And now Mr. Speaker, these Preliminaries being thus over, the King desires you
would hasten to the rest that are necessary to be dispatched, before we can
enter upon business, that so we may husband time, which is now more necessary
then ever; and He hopes this Parliament will come to a very happy and
prosperous Conclusion, and that it may do so, God Almighty prosper all your
Consultations.

FINIS.

