A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Northamptonshire FEAST, NOVEMBER 8. 1683.

Being the First General Meeting of such Citizens and Inhabitants in LONDON, as
were Born within that COUNTY.

BY JOHN WILLIAMS, Rector of St. Mildred's Poultry.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for Benjamin Alsop, at the Sign of the Angel and
Bible in the Poultry. 1684.

To my Honored Friends Mr. John Tooley, Mr. William Foster, Mr. Mark Haughton,
Mr. John Garret, Mr. Thomas Cawcott, Mr. Charles Miller, Mr. Robert Calcot.
Stewards for the Northamptonshire-Feast.
WHatever encouragement there may be for Printing Sermons in our Age (very
fruitful in that kind) yet there cannot be much expected for such as are
Occasional, how pertinent and well-received soever in the Hearing: For being
ordinarily directed to a particular purpose and Auditory, the Public is the
least concerned in them. And therefore since what you were entertained with (at
the late general meeting of our Countrymen) was of that kind, it is the less
fit to appear in the World. But since you are pleased to desire it, it is not
easy for me to deny it, and that to you, to whom our Country owes so much for
the reviving of a useful Society out of a Charitable design; and the Society
owes so much for the prudent managemment of it. To the good order of which, if
this Sermon did any way contribute (as you were pleased to think) or may for
the future recommend the Duties therein insisted upon to others, I shall
neither repent, of First Preaching, nor now of Publishing it at your Request.

I am Your Affectionate Countryman and Servant. JOHN WILLIAMS.

ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 20. read where, p. 16. l, 17. del^ (;) p. 18. Marg. r. Gamb. p. 22,
l. 2. r. yet its.

A SERMON Preached at the Northamtonshire FEAST, November 8. 1683.
PSALM LXXXVII. 6. The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, that
this Man was born there.


1. THere is in all Mankind so violent an inclination toward mutual Society,
that were they set loose from one another, and each man might be supposed to
stand alone, they would be so far from a Posture of War, and at the first sight
contending for Superiority and Propriety (as some have vainly conceived) that
they would soon strive to associate, and contrive ways to bring them to each
others acquaintance and Conversation.

But how forcible soever this propension in Mankind is, yet it being antecedent
to humane choice, and common to bad men as well as good, it has consequently
in it nothing truly Glorious and Praiseworthy; nor is any man Wise, Virtuous,
or Great, for being thus inclined, or for acting as he is thus naturally
inclined.

Natural dispositions are useful and necessary principles of action, by
exciting the powers of the Soul, and pressing us forward to act, and to act in
such a way, and to such an end as may be for their gratification: but the
acting according to such inclinations, being a following of Nature, and in
which all men also are alike; there must be somewhat else that must distinguish
one man from another, the Wise from the Foolish, the Vicious from the Virtuous
herein, and that is the prescribing such Laws and Measures to such
inclinations; the directing them to such Objects and Occasions, as may serve to
wise and good purposes, and which we our selves, or others, or both, may be the
better for.

This is the design of our present meeting, and of reviving that Society (which
for about Thirty Years has been discontinued) that we who are of the same
Nation, and born in the same Division of it, may be by this means the more
united among our selves, and be rendered more capable of being useful and
helpful to others. A Design truly Generous and Honorable, and in a sincere
Prosecution which, we shall bring Honor to our selves; to our Society, to our
Country, to our Church, and to God: And shall all of us be in a Capacity of
having the Text applied in the benefits of it to us; that the Lord shall count
when he writes up the people, that this man was born there.

This Psalm has both a literal and mystical sense; In the latter it respected
the State of the Church under the Gospel (often Prophetically represented under
the name of Sion) when all Nations should be brought into the Communion of it;
and Rahab and Babylon shall be among them that know God, Verse. 4. In the former
or mystical sense it respected the Church of the Jews, and the prosperous state
it should be restored to after the Babylonish Captivity; and notwithstanding
the desolation it thereby sustained. According to which Prophetical Scheme, we
may suppose the City and Temple destroyed and ruined, the Country wasted and
depopulated, the people dispersed and Captivated, and the Church of God in a
seemingly forlorn condition: And yet as deplorable as it was, better things
were not to be despaired of, for the Country should be again Inhabited; the
City and Temple rebuilt; Religion and the Church restored; and the Nation
flourish to the admiration and conviction of their most obstinate Enemies. This
seems to be the subject of this Divine Psalm, written on purpose for the
support and encouragement of those that did suffer under that sore and
intolerable calamity. And it contains,

1. A Confirmation of this, from the relation which the Church had to God.

2. A Declaration of its Privileges arising from that relation.

3. Here is a Duty inferred from it, that they should therefore praise God for
it, verse. 7. As well the Singers as the Players of Instruments, both small and
great should join and say, All my Springs are in thee, that is, this Peace
abroad, this Prosperity at home, Psalm. 68.25, 26.
does all proceed from God as the Fountain of it.

1. The Confirmation is, first, that Gods Foundation is in the Holy Mountains,
verse. 1. There was his Temple built, the place of his fixed abode. 2 dly. it
was the place he above all delighted in, verse 2. The Lord loves the Gates of
Zion, that is Jerusalem, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, therefore its
called the City of God, Verse. 3. 3 dly. There were glorious things Prophesyed
concerning it, and yet to be accomplished, verse. 3. Glorious things are spoken
of thee, O City of God. From all which considerations they might be assured
that the Church of God would revive and flourish.

2. There is a Declaration of the Privileges, or a further description of the
prosperous state of things amongst them.

1 st. As to what it should be in the Judgment of their Enemies themselves.
Verse. 4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to, or rather, among (as our
former Translation very well renders it) them that know, or acknowledge me;
behold Philista, and Tire, with Ethiopia; this man was Born there: that is, the
greatest Enemies shall acknowledge it. Rahab (or Egypt) Psalm. 89.9. Isa. 51.9.
V. Bochart. Geogr. Sac. Part. 1. l. 4. c. 24.
their first; and Babylon their last Enemy. Those that were remote, and those
that were near; even Philistia and Tire, with Ethiopia (or rather Arabia; for
of that is Cush to be understood. V. Bochart. ibid. c. 2. Ezekiel. 28.24. c.
25.15. c. 26.2. etc.
) Those that by reason of their Neighborhood had been Pricking Briars and
grievous Thorns to the House of Israel: Those that ruined them, and those that
rejoiced in it, shall know that He is the Lord, and they his people, as the
Prophet Ezekiel (speaking of this very case) does represent it. They shall all
of them account it *a happy Nation, and those an happy people that he does so
visibly own* Bless, and Protect; and a Privilege to any man that he is Born
there.

This is otherwise, but somewhat more clearly, expres'd in Zechary, Zech. 8.23.
in those days they shall take hold of all Languages of the Nations, of the
Skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you; for we have heard that
God is with you.

2 dly. There is the State of the Church described as it really should be,
verse. 5. Of Zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her; V. Dr.
Ham. in loc. V. Castal. in loc.
and the highest himself shall Establish her, when as the word (...) may
signify a man of Eminency and Worth, in opposition to (...) in the former
Verse; So This and That signifies a multitude: Thus our former Translation
reads it, Many are born in her. And then the meaning of it is, that Jerusalem
and the Nation shall abound with Inhabitants, with men of renown and eminency,
that shall be Honorable for Wisdom, Virtue, and Piety.

3 dly. There is a further Declaration of God's favor toward them, that such
should be honored by him, as in the Text, The Lord shall count when he writes
up the people, that this man was born there; That is, such shall be marked out
by God, be esteemed by him, and be under his special care and protection. For
thus do we find the Phrase used, Ezekiel. 13.9. where its threatened to the
Prophets that Divine Lies, that they shall not be written in the writing of the
House of Israel, neither shall they enter into the Land.

From the Words thus explained, I shall take occasion to* consider,

1. What are the Privileges of a Place or Country that render it Honorable,
and transfer an Honor upon persons there born.

2. What is the right persons owe, and the Honor they should give to their
Country.

3. How far this may concern us that are met together upon this occasion and
solemnity.

1. As to the first, The things that do render a Country or Place honorable
and valuable, may be either, natural, acquired, or providential.

1 st. Amongst the natural excellencies of a Place, that which first offers it
self to our consideration, is its situation, by means of which it becomes
delightful, fruitful, and secure. For an instance in this, we need look no
further than the subject of this Psalm, viz. the Land of Canaan, which was
remarkable for the aforesaid advantages, and is therefore deservedly called the
Pleasant Land, Dan. 8.7. Pleasant it was in regard of its Situation, being in
the middle of the then known World, and in the fourth Climate of the Seven
(which Ptolomy divided the Earth into, as it that time was) and so was as
temperate in its Air, as convenient to serve the ends of Divine Providence,
Isa. 2.22.
which was from thence to disperse the knowledge of himself among all Nations.

Pleasant it was in respect of its fertility, of which we have a full and
excellent description, Deuteronomy. 8.7, etc. and an effectual demonstration of the
truth of what is there said of it, a Land wherein thou shall eat Bread without
scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it, when though it extended not
much above Two hundred Miles in length, and Eighty in breadth, could maintain
its numerous Inhabitants, of the vastness of which, we may conceive by the
computation of Fighting men alone, 2 Samuel 24.9.
made in the time of David, which amounted to a Million and three hundred
thousand.

And as Canaan was thus pleasant, so it was also secure, being compassed with
Mountains; to the North were Libanus, and Antilibanus; to the East, Gilead and
Hermon; ( Psalm 89.13.) and the Mountains of Moab; to the South, the Mountains
of Judah; to the West, those of Ephraim and Carmel; and where it was without,
it had the great Sea.

And what Canaan was to the then known world, that was Jerusalem to Canaan,
being planted near the middle of the Land; therefore its said to be in the
midst of the Nations and Countries round about her, Ezekiel. 5.5. And to be
beautiful for situation, Psalm. 48.3. It was also secure, as consisting of
several Hills within, and compassed with them round about, as we are told,
Psalm. 125.2. only toward the North, from whence its said to be on the sides of
the North, Psalm. 48.3, and Isa. 14.1. as it had a freer prospect to that
Quarter, and not because Sion was on the North side of Jerusalem, as some
Learned men have thought.

2. There are things acquired and accidental, which render a Country or place
valuable; that belong not to it as such a particular place, but are owing
either to the industry and providence, the valor and conduct of the
Inhabitants, or to some unseen and indisernible causes. Of this kind are
Dominion, Wealth, and Populousness; for all which the Land of Israel was famous
in the time of Solomon, who Reigned over all Kingdoms from the River Euphrates
unto the Border of Egypt; 1. Kings 4.20, 21. Cap. 10.21.
and had so many Subjects, that they were innumerable, and in that respect as
the Sand which by the Sea in Multitude; and these Subjects so enriched, that
Silver in those days was nothing accounted of.

Of this sort is Learning and Knowledge, Herod. lib. 2. c. 21. Act. 7.21.
for which Egyt first (said to be the ancient Nursery and Mother of Sciences)
and Greece afterward were highly honored and commended.

But that which above all makes a Country truly honorable, is the Virtue and
Piety of the people, and the care taken for the encouragement and preservation
of it by good Laws, and a vigorous Execution of them. The natural advantages of
a Country are common to the foolish as well as the wise, the slothful as the
industrious: and of these that are acquired, some (as Dominion and Wealth) are
obtained by Boldness and Power, Fraud and Injustice, or stumbled upon by chance
and casualty. But the Virtues of a Nation are truly their own, and make it
Great and Noble wherever it is, and prosperous and successful, for the most
part, in whatever it undertakes. It was an Honor to be a Roman, when that
people were (as the Historians report) virtuous, Salust. Bell. Cat. V. Max. l.
c. 1. n. 9.
not more by Laws than Inclination: when in the first place they were devout in
their Religion, just unto their Enemies, and friendly to all; when whatever
Wars and Cententions they had abroad, there was no other amongst themselves,
than who should exceed in things great and generous. Nay, it was more an honor
to be then a Denizon of Rome, and a Native of that Country, than when in future
times it was made an honor by a Law, and by reason of its Privileges was a
Freedom worth the obtaining with a great Sum. Act. 22.27,


The Franchises and Immunities may be purchased, or descend upon a person (as
it was with St. Paul) by Birth: but Virtue grows upon another Stock, and is the
proper Fruit of their own care, and has so great an influence upon, and does
so discernibly conduce to the welfare of Mankind, and the good of Societies,
that it makes a way for it self, and is more victorious than the Arms of a
Nation; and whom these do leave unvanquished, that does often overcome. So true
is that of the Wise man, Prove. 14.34.
Rightousness exalts a Nation, and does beget reverence, honor, and I may
add, safety, wherever it is. But on the other side, be a Nation never so much
exalted by Dominion and Power, Opulency and Wealth, and all other advantages,
whether natural or acquired, and wanting in that moral accomplishment, that it
be faithless and perfidious, insolent and proud, luxurious and effeminate,
these Vices prove like Weeds in a fertile Soil, that overtop the useful Plants
that are therein, V. Bochart. Geog. part 1. l. 4. c. 2.
which make it rather a Wilderness than an Eden, and the people to be like the
Cushites, who, in Scripture, are said to be strong and numerous, but withal
very Base and Contemptible. For as Righteousness exalts a Nation, so Sin is a
reproach to any People; and as they degenerate in their manners, so they do
decline in their Esteem, and consequently in their Power and Dominion. For
Reputation is the strength of a Nation; and the Reputatation of it depending
upon its Virtue; the one must consequently decline with the other, and make
Them in time as little feared as they are reverenced by their Neighbors; and
then all the Policy and Power of the World cannot secure them, who having cast
away their best defense, by their Vices, make themselves first the Triumph of
their Enemies scorn, and then of their Arms. So that every Nation is secure
according to its Reputation, and is in Reputation according to its Virtue: Let
it be lost to Virtue, its lost to its Reputation; let it be lost to its
Reputation, it is lost to its peace and security also, and has laid its self
open to its Enemies; or in want of such, does by degrees dissolve of it self,
and run into confusion. But then much more is this true, if we consider the
World with respect to Divine Providence, which does Crown the Virtues and Piety
of a People with success and honor (for which reason amongst others, De civ.
dei* l. 5. c. 12.15. etc.
St. Austin says, the ancient Romans were made Great and Victorious) but does
render Vice and Irreligion miserable and infamous, and sooner or later does
publicly dethrone it by its all-powerful and irresistible hand; verifying
therein what God once declared; 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me I will honor; and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed.

3. There are things providential that do ennoble a Place or Country, of this
we have an instance before us in the Land of Judea, which God did choose out of
the World to be the place of his special residence, and in the people whom he
chose, (exercising over them a Theocratical and Divine Government) to be his
Inheritance; from whence that was called an Holy Land, Zech. 2.12* Deuteronomy. 7.6.
etc.
they a Holy People, and their Cities, Holy Cities: By which means they were
invested with several Privileges. Isai. 64.10*


As first they had his special Assistance and Protection, by which, they drove
out the old Inhabitants (as long as they continued steadfast in their Religion)
without any considerable opposition; and were secured in the possession of it,
notwithstanding the ill will, and power, the subtle practices and attempts of
their Enemies; who were either overruled, or defeated by the special
interposal of Divine Providence. Hence God is said to do all for them, Psalm
147.14.
to strengthen the Bars of their Gates, Psalm 76.1.
and make peace in their Borders, to break the Arrows of the Bow, the Shield,
the Sword, Psalm 50.2.3.
and the Battle: And all is said to be issued from the place of his Habitation.

2 dly. They had thereby a greater privilege, Romans 9.4.
which was the Knowledge of the true God, and what was acceptable to him. To
them pertained the Adoption, and the Glory (the Shechina, or Divine presence)
The Covenants, the giving of the Law, and the Service of God and the Promises.
And when such was the City, such the Country, such the people, such their
Relation to God, and such their Privileges by virtue of it; others must needs
say, Ps. 144.5.
Happy is that people whose God is the Lord, and think it no little honor to
be one of that number; and him him happy of whom it could be said, This Man was
Born there.

But this privilege did not die with that State of things: for what Israel was
then to the rest of the World, that is now the Church of God, to those that are
out of it; that is Christianity to Judaism, Turcisme, Heathenisme: And all the
favors and privileges belonging to that people heretofore are transferred upon
Christians, who are as the Apostle says, (applying their Phrases to this
purpose) A chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. So that it is now as
much a privilege to say with respect to the Church of God, or a Nation in
which that is placed, and the Gospel received, This man was Born there, as it
was in those times, with respect to that Nation or City, where God was more
especially resident. And truly what a Church is to no Church, that, in
proportion, is a true and found Church to a false Church, and a Church
dangerously Corrupted; and so much is it the honor and the privilege of a
person Born there, where the Word of God is truly taught, the Sacraments
rightly and purely Administered, and the Worship solemnly performed, above what
it is to be born and Educated in a Church, where Idolatry and Superstition is
Embodied into the Worship, and false Principles are received into the Doctrine
of it. From whence we may easily observe what an advantage we do enjoy that are
born in the Church of God, beyond those that know not the Truth; and what it is
that we do enjoy, in the Communion of our Church, which they do want that are
born and bred up in the Bosom and Communion of the corrupted and degenerate
Church of Rome. This is our honor and privilege; and this does lay no small
obligation upon us: And what that is, I come in the next place to enquire.

2. What is the right persons owe, and what honor they should give to the Land
or place of their Nativity. When some of the wisest and best amongst the
Heathen, such as Socrates, used to call themselves Citizens of the World, as if
they owned no relation to a particular place, it was only to blame that
selfishness too common amongst men, by which they did not care what wrong they
did to others, provided they and theirs were secured; but it was not to condemn
that affection which mankind generally has to the particular place of their
Nativity and abode. (...) lib. 6. n. 44.
This I think is well represented by that great Philosopher as well as Emperor,
who says, My City and Country, as Antoninus, is Rome; as a Man, its the World.
For their Relation to the World did no more lessen a due affection and care to
their own particular Country or Birthplace, than he could be supposed to cast
of all regard to Antoninus, because he considered himself as a Man. Or however
natural inclinations do not stand or fall by the Maxims and Reasonings of
Philosophers; but as long as men be men, and that there is such a thing as a
Relation betwixt men and men, or men and places, there will consequently be
affections in them suitable to those Relations in which they are. From hence it
is, that Parents and Children are naturally prone interchangeably to love each
other; and, to go no further, that mankind has a respect and affection for the
place in which they were born; and for the people, more or less, amongst whom
they received their Life and Education. From whence this proceeds, whether from
propriety, or the possession it took of their first thoughts, and earliest
affections; or from use which renders things connatural to us, is not so easy
to resolve, as it is to observe the potency of this affection: When, whatever
the Country may be, subject never so much to the extremes of heat and cold (if
there be in it things necessary for subsistence) men generally rather choose the
quiet enjoyment of their own, than to have their portion in another that is in
it self far more excellent and delightful: So the Poet observed of old.

Quid melius Roma? Scythico quid frigore pejus?
Huc tamen ex illa Barbarus urbe fugit.
What more delightful than Rome? What less than Scythia? And yet the Barbarous
Native forsakes that for this.

Let it be the Country of the Samoiedes, where for Six Months of the year they
have one continued Night* and are shut up in their pitiful Huts half under
ground, yet the Inhabitants prefer their manner of life before the delight of a
better Climate, as a modern Traveller relates. Olearius.


So that there is no Country so bad, which those that are there born do not
generally choose: And there is no Country so bad, but has a right and duty owing
to it from such as were born there; Therein verifying that of Seneca, Nemo
patriam, quia magna est, amat, sed quia sua. No man loves his Country because
its great or noble, but because it is his: A Duty so necessary and obliging,
that it has been thought nothing could be too dear to part with, nothing too
difficult to be undertaken for its welfare and security; that Parents and
Children, Life and Estate were to be sacrificed in so noble a cause. O
fortunata mors, quae naturae debita, pro patria est potissimum reddita. O happy
is that death, which when due to Nature, is laid down for the Country; before
the other calls for it, said the Orator.

But it is not my intent, as well as it is not so much to my purpose, to
consider in general what is due to one Nation in opposition to another; to the
Land of our Nativity in opposition to what is not, (since we are here assembled
only as a small part of the whole) as what is due to any place which we have a
relation to by birth and education, whether it be a Nation; or Country, or
City, or whatever bounds greater or less it may be circumscribed in. To all of
which there is an Honor due, and which every man does give, that discharges
the duty belonging to his place and station with faithfulness and sincerity;
and like a good man and a Christian, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
does live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world. For as I
have before showed, that Virtue and Piety are the Honor of a Nation, so he
that would do honor to his Country must live virtuously and piously. Other
things we may receive from That, as Birth, a temperament of Body, some
dispositions of mind, privileges and immunities, respect derived from
Ancestors. These are advantages we receive from That, and so cannot honor that
by them; but piety and virtue are our own; and when we are eminent in these,
the honor of it redounds to our Country and all that we are related to. For
the former we are beholding to our Country; but for the latter our Country is
beholding to us. And this is it that we should most of all aspire after, that
we may rather choose to do Honor to our Country, than depend upon any Honor or
Advantage from it; being like Themistocles, that when told by a Native of the
Island Seriphus (a place so craggy and desolate, that Malefactors were Banished
thither) that he had his glory from his Country, and not from himself, replied,
If I had been a Seriphian, I had been Noble and Great; but if thou had been
an Athenian, thou would have been base and dishonorable. It is not in our
power to choose where we will be born, or from what stock to derive our selves,
this we owe to other Causes; but it is, under God, in our power to choose
whether we will be good and virtuous, and do things worthy of a Man and a
Christian; and by being so we do truly honor our selves and our Country. To be
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a Roman, Phil. 3.5.
and a Scholar of the famous Gamaliel, were privileges St. Paul owed to his
parentage, his birthplace, and his education; but to live in all good
conscience before God, to do like an Apostle of Christ, Acts 23.^^.
and to labor in that Office more abundantly than all, 1 Cor. 15.10.
was an Honor that he brought to Tarsus, to Jerusalem, and was therein more an
honor to them than they could be to him. Men may be honorable by what they
receive from their Country, but they are more honorable for things that are
honorable all the world over, and will make them honorable wherever they
are: And its by the same that they do honor their Country, by the things, I
say, they receive not, more than by what they do receive from it. And therefore
he that would study so to do (as every one should) let him begin here, and
first of all to learn to be pious and virtuous as to himself, good and useful
to others, Acts 24.16.
and in all, to have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men,
and he will deserve well of his Country, and in the highest sense be an honor
to it. But on the other side, if these be neglected, and Virtue and Piety be
the last things taken into consideration, the more honorable their Country is,
the more blameworthy are they that do thus detract from the honor of it, and
as much as in them lies, rob it of that it has before acquired. Greece was
famous for a Country, Crete for an Island, Athens for a City and a place of
Learning: But what a disparagement was it to have it said of the people of the
first, that they were false and perfidious? of the second, Valor. Max. l. 5.
that the Athenians had excellent Laws, but perverse dispositions? And of the
last, that the Cretians were Liars, Tit. 1.12.
etc? Let a Country be like Canaan, Ezekiel. 20.16.
the glory of all Lands, and a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; yet if the
Inhabitants, like the Canaanites, are vicious, Lev. 18.28.
and have their manners corrupted, their Land will spue them out, as the Phrase
is, and they deserve to be blotted out of their Records and Memorials, and
never to be mentioned, but as a certain Family is in our Nation, with a Caveat
by the Historian, Nomen vetustae familiae, verum jam damnatae memoriae. Such as
do break the Laws of God and Men, by a vicious life, and infamous acts, do
disgrace their Nature and their Country, themselves and their relations, do
disparage the stock and the place they came from: And let them speak never so
much in behalf of it, do in effect with Coriolanus turn their Arms upon their
Country; And instead of being Friends to it, are the worst of Enemies, since
they join ingratitude to their other faults, and take life from that (for such
is honor to a Country) which gave it to them. What is it then, for a person to
plead the benefit of his Country, and launch out in commendations of that, or
himself from his Relation to it, if in the mean time, he does take from himself
that honor which it does give; and does more disgrace that by his ill
qualities and bad actions, than that can honor him by all the advantages it
may otherwise justly claim, or he may claim from it. Since of the two, it is far
more honorable and glorious to be a Scythian and Barbarian by Country, and a
wise Philosopher as Anacharsis, than to be born in Athens and be a stupid
Meltides; better be a Galilean, and a Disciple of the Holy Jesus, than to be
born in an Imperial City with Julian and be an Apostate from Christianity;
better be found in the roll of those, that from an obscure place and condition,
from a Town that was little among the thousands of Judah, and from the
Sheepfold, with David, have advanced themselves by their prudence and
diligence, their virtue and piety, than of those that amidst the advantages of
Birth, Country and Education, have degenerated from all, and become like the
Sons of the great Scipio and Fabius, the one of which was not suffered to wear
in a Ring the Effigies, nor the other to inherit the goods of his Father. The
latter are a disgrace to their Country, and such as their Friends, their
Family, their Birthplace are ashamed to own: But the former do ennoble their
Country and condition; and what is wanting in those to a person, he makes up in
himself to them, and like the spiritual seed of Abraham, though raised out of
the Stones, are far to be preferred before those that proceeded from his Loins.
Such a man is in truth, what a Jew or a Roman once was by privilege, Free and
Great, wherever he is; and whatever his Country is, how despicable and base
soever, though it be like Istria, which the Venetians were formerly forced to
hire persons to live in, he will bring an honor to it, and it shall be said,
with reputation to that as well as himself, This man was born there.

Indeed, as whatever our Country is, it should be as our Parents, a-like dear
to us, so we should be as Children to their Parents, a-like dutiful to that;
that so if that be dishonorable, we may be an honor to that; if that be
honorable and valuable we may not be a dishonor to that. And if there be an
obligation upon persons to Virtue and Piety, whatever their Country is; for the
Reasons abovesaid, then surely its a right and duty we owe to our Nation, and
the Land of our Nativity, as we are Englishmen: A Land that is great in every
thing but extent, and what it wants in that, Nahum 3.8.
has in its fertility and security ( the Sea being a Rampart to it; as the
Scripture says of No.) A Land that is greater in its Constitution and
Government, which, by its excellent Laws and Administration, so effectually
provides for the security, quiet and comfort of the people, that of no Nation
under Heaven may it be better said, that every Man may sit under his Vine and
under his figtree. A Land that is still greater for the Church of God that is
in it; a Church, that for purity of Doctrine, solemnity of Worship, and all
advantages for Piety, may compare with, if it does not exceed any Church upon
the face of the Earth. So that if Plenty and Security, wholesome Laws and a wise
Constitution, and the blessed effects of good Government in the State: If helps
to knowledge, and means and encouragements to Piety in the Church, can render a
Country valuable, or ^ Nation happy; Ours is the Country, and we are the
Nation. If the being born in such a Country, Educated in such a Church,
Dwelling in such a Nation, can lay an Obligation upon people and persons, we
are the people and persons that are so obliged. What may not then God Almighty,
the giver of every good gift, expect from us by way of thankfulness and
acknowledgment for such Temporal and Spiritual Mercies? What may not the World
expect from us by way of Improvement? What may not the Church of God expect
from us in a way of Exemplary Piety and Holiness? What may not our Governors
expect from us in our Peaceableness and Loyalty? What may we not expect from
one another in Justice, Friendship, and Charity? What may we not expect from
our selves, and what will not our own Consciences require of us in Duty to God
and to others? And what an account for all must we expect to give another day,
when God shall Judge the World in Righteousness? If God has not dealt so with
any Nation, how inexcusable are we, if we are, after all, a Nation void of
Counsel, and a People of no Understanding? And how may we expect to find that
verified in the conclusion, therefore he that made, Isa 27.11.
and thus dignifyed them, will not have Mercy on them; and he that formed them
will show them no favor. So much is privilege and duty interwoven, and so
much the more are we obliged to the latter, as we do receive of the former. But
though these are the Blessings we enjoy in common with the rest of our Nation,
yet there are some things in that part of it, which we owe our Birth and much
of our Education to, that all of the same Nation enjoy not in common with us. A
County that has in it things so remarkable, as would alone be sufficient to
have entertained you, and spent the time upon: But it is not fit for this
place, nor will it answer the honest and good end for which we are now
assembled, to make the place of our Birth, the Subject of a Panegyric. And
therefore I shall only select from the rest, what the Psalm may put us in mind
of, and may serve to enforce our Duty upon us.

1. We may consider the Situation of Northamptonshire, which is to the rest of
England, as Jerusalem was to Canaan, and Canaan to the rest of the then known
World, Cumbden Brit. Bale cent. 5. number. 65.
placed in the middle and heart of it; and to such an advantage, that from one
Hill in it there spring three Rivers, viz. Cherwel, Leam, Avon, that discharge
themselves into three several Seas, as the Historians do observe. From which
situation it has the fittest opportunity of communication with the other parts
of the Nation, and fetching from thence what may be for its use and benefit.
But,

2. However, this is has the less need of from the fertility of the Soil, and
the plenty of all things necessary for Life that it is stored with. So that as
it is with the Rivers of it that arise all within its own Bowels (in which also
it resembles Canaan, properly so called) communicating their streams to many
Countries but receiving from none; so it is with the Country itself, that from
its store does send forth to others, but has no dependence upon any, nor does
ordinarily stand in need to crave help from them.

3. We may add to this the variety that is in it (therein like to Canaan) which
does not a little contribute to the delightsomness of it, being partly for
profit, partly for pleasure; and yet that variety so intermixed, that the
places made more especially for delight have their profit, and those that yield
the greatest profit, are not without their delights also: the consideration of
all which will justify the Character given of it by a Modern Historian (who
else from his relation to it, Fuller's Worthies
might be thought too favorable) that Northamptonshire is as an Apple without
a Core to be cut, or Rind to pare away.

4. Its no little Commendation to it, if we consider that its not only very
populous, but the people generally are very industrious, and whose employment
being for the most part in Tillage and Pasturage, Politic.
bring them within the estimate of Aristotle, who says with respect to those
two ways of living, that they are the happiest people that have from their
Labor as much as is sufficient for Life, and yet they cannot be Idle.

But then there is not only, in the first sense of the Phrase, this and that
Man for Multitude; but also, in the latter sense of it, this and that Man for
eminency in Quality and Condition. If we view the Country within, it abounds so
in Gentry and Nobility, that the great Geographer of our Nation does give it
this Character, Nobilium villis Excultissima; or as the Historian fore-recited
does express it, No Country has more Noblemen, no Noblemen fairer Habitations.

Consider we it again, abroad we shall find it, not only to send forth its
Colonies (of which this Assembly is an instance) but also there have been many
amongst them (as might easily be showed) that have proved eminent in their
Station and Employment, both in Church and State.

Let me lastly observe to you the Genius of the people in the numerous
Foundations, for Piety and Charity. In the former of which, there is no County
in England, that in my observation by Reading or otherwise, does exceed, or so
much as equal it; and that in the circumference of One hundred and nineteen
Miles (which is the compass of the Shire) can show Three hundred twenty six
Parish Churches; or that at one stand can present Thirty to the Eye of the
Spectator, from the Villages planted round about, as ours is observed to do.

From all which considerations that thus do transfer an Honor to the place of
our Birth, there is (as far as such a Relation can do it) an Honor transferred
to those that are there Born; and consequently there is an obligation upon such
(as in the process of this Discourse has been showed) to do somewhat that may
tend to the honor of that; and to forbear whatever may be to the disparagement
of it, and render them unworthy of that Character, and of the Relation they
have to it.

And that you of this Society may be the more encouraged to do what becomes you
(who by your appearance here upon this occasion do intend an Honor to your
Country) I shall add somewhat to what has been already said in General upon the
Argument; and that I may do so with the greater freedom and assurance, shall
take my rise from the Tickets sent abroad for our Invitation to this place and
solemnity, in which it was declared that this Society was revived for the
promoting of Charity.

A design truly worthy and great, and so much the more fit to be revived, as
there is so little of that excellent Ingredient in such meetings, that (however
they may be called) for the want of it, can hardly deserve the name of
Societies. And that I may the more clearly and effectually enlarge upon this
Subject, I shall reduce what I have to say, to Union among your selves, Charity
toward those that want, and Sobriety in your Entertainments.

1. That which ought in the first place to be considered by you is Union
amongst your selves, without which, Societies must dissolve, and the ends of
them cannot be promoted or attained.

There is no sadder object to a Christian and peaceable mind, to one that knows
how much love and Good Will, Meekness and Patience are the Duties and the
Ornament, the Privilege and Blessing of our Religion, than the divisions that
are at present amongst us in this Nation, not only Ephraim and Manasseth
against Judah, but Judah against Judah, there being scarcely (as its said) a
County, Town, or Village, but what is divided against its self, and suffers
under the Malignant influence of these Exasperatons.

A sad prognostic or forerunner at present, and if not timely prevented, a
necessary cause of Ruin and Destruction, according to that observation of our
Blessed Savior, Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation; and every City or House divided against its self, shall not stand.
Matthew. 12.25.

There needs then no Enemy to combine against us, no great Skill or force to
destroy us, for by mutual conspiracies against each other, and endeavors to
weaken and destroy our selves, we shall like Cato prevent the Arms of our
Adversaries, and dye by our own. And They may with more safety to themselves,
and with more advantage to their Cause observe our mutual animosities, than
interrupt them, and take us off from the violent prosecution of them by
displaying their own Banners, and boldly challenging us to dispute it with
themselves. And yet though there is nothing that should be more industriously
kept out of, nor sooner banished from Societies, because nothing is more the
bane of them, than this temper, yet; it too much entertained is and cherished
amongst them; and no sooner can persons come together upon any good and worthy
design, than they become clans and Parties amongst themselves, and what were
intended, and should have been the means of a happy Union, have become the
woeful Nurseries of discord and Dissension.

But, Beloved, whatever may have been the sad fate of others, I hope better
things of you, and that you that are of the same Country by Birth, the same
City by Habitation, and meet by joint consent upon so generous and Christian a
design of Charity, will take all due care to prevent and banish from amongst
you all such evil principles of Faction and Turbulency, and avoid all such
provocations as may obstruct it, and take you off from the just prosecution of
it: That you that in the first place profess to honor God, by your appointed
Assembly here for Divine Worship, and in the next, to do good to others, will
do both by an happy Union amongst your selves.

And therefore since there is nothing, perhaps, that does more cherish and keep
up our differences than new invented names (which I shall not so far honor as
to mention in this Holy Place and Service) by which those that were really no
otherwise distinguished are too often distinguished, and that men may and do,
too much apply to the wrong as to the right; let it be your resolution and
practice to lay them aside, and leave them in the Streets, without giving them
admission into your Society. That there may be no others than what will in
conversation distinguish an Honest man from a Knave, in the State a Loyal
person from a Rebel: And I wish there were no need of any more in the Church
than what would distinguish a Protestant from a Papist, or rather that there
were no such distinction at all, but that we all might return to the primitive
state and temper, when all of the same Religion were known by the one name of
Christians; and the Church of God all the World over being purged from bad
principles, Superstition, and Idolatry, truly so called, (which at present
distinguish and divide the Church of Rome from the Church of England, and from
other Reformed Churches) and from all Schism, and Faction that divide us
amongst our selves, we may come to be one Fold and Flock, under the one
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, the Blessed Jesus, Joh. 10.16. 1 Pet. 2.25.
But though this is a State of things that we may rather desire than expect, and
is not to be brought about without the wonderful Providence of Almighty God;
yet let us next to our Prayers, that this Kingdom of God may come, use our
endeavor to make up the differences that are amongst us an effectual
obstruction thereunto.

This is a work may become the wisest of men, and will indeed try the Skill of
those that are most acquainted with the passions of humane Nature, and the
State of Affairs in the World* to prosecute, and Accomplish; when
notwithstanding all the attempts made toward it, it has yet remained for the
most part as it was. And therefore, when all the Arguments taken from Divine,
Moral, or Political reasons have not succeeded, why should we not try that
which is Artificial; which may serve as Mechanical ways do in some Operations,
where Rational and Methodical Applications fail.

When a Prince of the Family of Orange was stabbed by the Murtherous hand of a
flagitious Assasin, and all the Art and Medicines the Chyrurgions could use,
stopped not the Flux of Blood that Issued from the Orifice of the Wound, they
took another way, and stopped it with the pressure of men's Thumbs, till they had
turned the course of Blood. And when we see that all the means and
prescriptions used by good men amongst us, cannot stop the Flux of that
Virulent humor of strife and contention, let us try the artificial way before
proposed, and obstinately resolve to forbear such Names as may well be
conceived do add no little fuel and flame to our dissensions: Those names I
say, that divide between the Honest and the Honest, the Peaceable and the
Peaceable, the Loyal and the Loyal, and those that are of the same Communion
and Church, from those that are in all points of that Communion.

This is a course that all may observe, the Simple as well as the Gentle; and
he that understands little of the State of Humane affairs as well as he that
understands much. And therefore, if it be a means proper thereunto, no Christian
should, and no one that wishes well unto our Sion, and prays for the Peace of
Jerusalem, will omit.

Now whether this be a means proper or no, becomes not me to be magisterial and
positive in (since it is a means rather Prudential than Theological) but I
shall leave it to the Judgment of all Pious and Peaceable persons to consider,
and the Experience of Mankind to answer for.

And that I shall produce a most eminent example of from the History of Italy.
The story of the Guelfs and Gibellines is well known to the World, and the sad
state of things that issued upon it. Some say (though probably it was
otherwise) that the dispute began betwixt two Brothers of those names, the one
contending for the right of the Emperor, the other for that of the Pope. But
it soon set City against City, Province against Province, and one part of the
people so against another, that they had not only different Ensigns in War, but
diverse Garments, Colors, Nauclerus generat. 24*
and Gestures; nay they took a pleasure to be distinguished by certain motions
of their Fingers and Mouths. And being thus distinguished, the Animosities
remained, after the first cause was removed; and notwithstanding all attempts
made toward a pacification; they pursued one another with such inveterate Rage,
Vt ferme ad internecionem certatum sit, Platina vit. Bonif. 9.
(says an excellent Historian) that it wanted little of an universal
slaughter. Thus it continued for above two Hundred Years, and perhaps had
longer continued, if there had not been some other way taken for the extinction
of that Flame that for such a long current of years had been thus pernicious.
Which was put in prosecution by Pope Clement the 6 th. who ordained, Spondani
supplem. Baron. An. 1342.1.
that the names of the Guelfs and Gibellines should be held accursed, and those
be excommunicated that should use them by way of of distinction and reproach;
And so the names falling, the contention by degrees fell with the names. And
why may it not be so again? and that be done by a general consent amongst all
Pious and Peaceable persons, which was done by a decree of the Pope? And I pray
God it may be so amongst us; that no Corrupt Communication proceed out of our
Mouth, but (that we may conclude this advice with the following words of the
Apostle) Let all bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil
speaking be put away from you with all Malice. And be you kind one to another
forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians.
4.29.31, 32. If this be done, there is a good foundation laid for you to raise
your Superstructure upon.

2. Let me recommend to your consideration, the Duty of Charity usually so
called, in the care of those the World frowns upon, and God in his Providence
has bereft of those Comforts and Accomodations we do enjoy. You cannot reflect
upon the state of your Country, and what your Predecessors have done in order
to so good an end, by the Foundations raised for the Service of God and relief
of the Indigent, without observing the Honor that thereby redounds to that,
and the President you have to follow according to your Ability.

This is a debt you owe to God that has Blessed and prospered you in the
World, and which (I persuade my self) you are this day met with thankfulness to
acknowledge; and with a resolution to express it by not appearing before him
Empty, Ex. 23.15.

When Vespasian came to be Emperor, he used frequently to visit Cosa, where
from his Infancy he had been brought up under his Grandmother Tertulla, and
chose to have the Town continue as it then was, that it might bring his former
condition fresh to his remembrance, as the Roman Historian relates. And if we
would make a right estimate of our condition, and the obligations we are under
to the Divine Goodness, it would not be amiss to trace our lives back, and to
consider the several steps by which we have from our Childhood been brought to
the present State in which we are. How God has made our ways prosperous, and
our latter end to increase beyond our beginning, as Bildad said, Job. 8.7.

This is a duty you owe to your Religion, which as it makes it our Duty, so the
honor of it is concerned, that we should convince the World, that as much may
be done in Charity where the opinion of merit is not, as where it is made a
property to provoke men to it.

This is a Duty in which the Protestants of the Church of England have outdone
those of the Communion of the Church of Rome (as has been proved by others,
allowing time for time,) the Citizens of London have outdone others: And
perhaps there may be a way found out in which you may exceed the rest of the
City, though not in the greatness yet in the prudent distribution of your
Charity.

The Foreign Churches amongst us have no such public provisions made for the
Poor, nor are enabled to compel their Members to contribute to their relief:
And yet through the prevalency of a good Custom, and forward examples they are
of themselves so Charitable; and by the diligence, prudence and faithfulness of
those to whom the care of the public stock is committed, the Charity is so
well bestowed; that none are found to beg in the Streets, nor to supplicate
others for their benevolence; (except those whom the present storm of the
persecution in France has drove* hither for Refuge) though their Numbers are
great, and the Families dispersed from one end of the Town to the other. And it
is an answer we have always ready at hand, if any such apply themselves to us,
that they are already provided for, and that they either need it not, or are
not worthy of our Charity.

And this will be a worthy example for you to imitate, and it would be an
honor to you and your Country; if there could be such a way found out for
collecting, receiving and disposing of your Charity, that all that need, and
are able to work may be Employed, or by being put out to Apprentiships, may be
fitted for it; all that cannot work, may be relieved; and all that will not,
may be stigmatized and branded.

This will be a Charity indeed, and perhaps may be of more use than to found
and endow Hospitals, and Alms* Houses; and in which you will be exemplary to
others, and benificial as well to posterity as the Age you live in. This will
be better than the name of Sons, and of Daughters, and when time and other
reasons have worn out Families (as its easy to show it in the place of our
Nativity) this will embalm your memories, and (to make use of the Prophets
phrase) will give you an Everlasting name that shall not be cut off, Isai.
56.5. This will secure your Estates, entail a Blessing upon them and your
posterities, as we are assured, Ps. 25.26. I have not seen the Righteous (or
Charitable) forsaken nor his Seed begging Bread. He is ever merciful and
lends* and his Seed is Blessed. Nay, if the Apostle be to be regarded, such
as do good, are Rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
Communicate, do lay up for themselves a good foundation against the time to
come, and lay hold on Eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.

3. Let me recomend to you Sobriety in your entertainments* This I think my
self the rather obliged to take notice of, since if what has been of late the
practice in some Societies, should be transferred into all, and that
Intemperance should hold on the pace, which for some years past it has been
observed to take, all Societies would be dissolved* or, which is as bad rendered
useless and unserviceable and all the wise and good ends propounded in their
first Foundation and Establishment be utterly defeated.

Then all good and sober men must exclude themselves thence* and it would be as
unfit for such a one to appear there, as it was for a Virtuous Cato* to be
present at the Floral Games, and the Bestial practices, used in honor (as they
pretended) of their gods, and when either they will be Rude to him, or he must
be rude to them.

Ahasuerus was no less generous in the liberty he gave his Guests, by a Law
that none did Compel, than in the plenty and abundance he entertained them
with, Esther 1.7, 8. And I think he pays very dear for his Meat and Drink that
is despoiled of, or denied that Liberty; and can purchase his admission into
the Company at no less a price than the loss of his reason and innocence; and
to make himself ridiculous to men; and hateful to God.

Therefore since Charity amongst your selves, and Charity to others, is what
you propound to your selves, and declare to others to be your Design in your
Society, let it be your Care so to manage it, that this so excellent an end may
not be frustrated, and you lose the Company, and that be deprived of the best
members of it; I mean such as are truly Sober and Virtuous, and you in the
conclusion break up that Society you have begun to Establish.

If these be the measures you observe and keep, and the Society be thus
regulated and carried on, it will be truly glorious, good, and useful. And that
it may be prosperous, and live as long as there is a County to supply the City,
and a City to receive members from the County will be the hearty prayer of all
concerned in the welfare of both. Then you will honor both; and it will be the
conclusion of all, that God himself shall count when he writes up the People,
that the man was Born there Selah.

FINIS.

