A SERMON Preached before His GRACE the King's Commissioner, And the Three
ESTATES PARLIAMENT: June the 15th. 1690.

On Psalm. 2.10. Be Wise now Therefore, O ye Kings: be Instructed, ye Judges of
the Earth.

By David Williamson, Minister of the Gospel at Edinburgh,

The Second Impression Corrected and Amended.

^D^NBVRGH, Reprinted by the (...) Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and
Que^^ (...)lent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.

A SERMON ON PSALM 2. Verse 10.
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings: be Instructed, ye Judges of the Earth.
THESE things are clear. 1. That David was Penman of this Psalm, Acts 4.24,
25. verses. 2ly. That this Psalm relates to the Stability of David's Kingdom, I
make no Question: But it is most clear, that it mainly concerns, the Stability
of Christ's Kingdom; for many things in this Psalm cannot be applied to David.
3ly. It Is clear, this Text has a Connection, with the preceding, and subsequent
Words. Take this Paraphrase on the Psalm to make it out.

That the Opposers of Christ who Rebel against him, but show their Teeth and
Labor in vain: For the Lord will settle Christ's Kingdom in the visible
Church, Nill they, will they; and mock his Enemies, and vex them till he ruin
them, for the Stability of Christ's Kingdom is decreed in the Covenant of
Redemption, and here it is revealed; Christ shall have a full Victory, and dash
them by his Rod, who will not be instructed by his Word: And therefore it is
incumbent to all, especially to Magistrates; to learn their Lesson and be wise
in time, to Adore, Embrace, subject themselves, and do homage to Christ, least
if they kindle his Anger by provocation, they be consumed in the Flame of his
wrath.

This Text contains an Exhortation, wherein we have; 1. The Persons exhorted,
Kings, and Judges. 2. What they are exhorted to; to take Instruction, that they
may be wise. 3. The Connection, therefore be wise. 4. The seasonableness of it,
now therefore, if ever, least it be too late afterward; when there is no place
for Repentance.

I offer some Questions, 1. What is that to be wise, be Instructed? Answ. It
is, take your lesson from the Word, where true Wisdom is to be found, and
Repent: For he that hates Instruction, is Brutish. Prove. 12.1. And a Fool who
rues it out of time, when his Flesh and Bones are Consumed, by severe
Correction. Prove. 5.11, 12. And a Man is out of his Wits, till he repent; For
it is said of the repenting Prodigal. Luke. 15.17. When he came to himself, he
was not at himself before. He that is in a course of Sin in Scripture, is
called a Fool and Mad; the Drunkard, Unclean, Oppressor, and Persecuter: Paul
says of himself, he was exceedingly mad against the Church. Acts 26.11.

Quest. 2. What Wisdom is that which they should study? Answ. There is a
threefold Wisdom, 1. There is wordly Policy, that makes a Man his own Burrio.
2. There is Moral Prudence, that (...)an to serve his Generation. 3. There is
Christian Wisdom, that makes a Man wise for Heaven.

For the first, worldly Policy 1. The ends of it are, the lust of the Flesh,
the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of Life. 2. The means for attaining these
ends are correspondent: Namely, Self love, Distrust or suspicion, Disparagement
or Detraction, Compliance or Neutrality, Reservedness or Clossness, Surprizal,
or Advantage, Irreligigion or Atheism. 3. The Miscarriages in the use of these
Means, are 1 From the shortness and inconsistencie, of Man's both Life and
Temper, for bringing any great Design about. 2. The Emergency of indiscernable
Accidents, that will be sure to Interpose. 3. The Miscarriage of Instruments
that must be employed. 4. The competition of Adverse Partie^ that will be sure
to binder what they may. This is not the Wisdom meant in the Text, it being
Earthly, Sensual, Devilish, and from below. James 3.15. It is but Craft, and
such plat a S^are for themselves. 1 Cor. 3.19. He takes the wise in then own
(...):

2. For Moral Prudence, 1. the ends of it; are, Peace, Safety, Contentment and
Usefulness, 2. The means attaining their ends are four. 1. Moderation in our
Affections, Opinions, Discourses, and Expenses. 2. Recognition in (...)
Customs, Reports, Resolutions, and Undertakings. 3. Intogrity in our Dealings,
Words, Professions, and Endeavors, 3. Improvement of our inclinations,
Abilities, interests and injuries. 3. Mistakes of the world about it, are,
Difficulty, Stupidity, Severity and Singularity. This Moral Providence is
included in the Text.

3. Christian wisdom, the Ends of it are, 1. Reconciliation with God. We are
to Notice these things about it. 1. The means of it, The Covenant of Grace. 2.
The Parties to be reconciled to, an offended God, especially in his Justice and
Holiness, and offending Man, in whose offense there is a condemning Guilt, and
commanding, Power. 3. The Remedy is Christ's Death; the price and the Power of
it. 4. The Condition applying, is the Grace of Faith. 5. The Grant or Tenor, in
which this Covenant runs, God our God, and we his people.

The second end of this Christian Wisdom, is Communion with God; the means of
it, the New Birth; whereof God is the Author, the instrument is the word, the
sear and subject of it, Man, esperially his will: The manner Spiritual, who
attain this Wisdom have advantages in crosses, Co^st^cts, Desertions and Death.
This is the Wisdom that is mainly meaned in the Text. Q. 3. Who are under Rood
by Kings and Judges? Ans. Manistrats, Supreme and Subordinat, both these are
joined in the Old Testament here. and in the promise, Isa^ah 32.1. Behold, a
King shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment. And in
the New Testament, in Peter's exhortation to subjection, to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors as sent by him. And in Paul's exhortation to
prayer, for Kings, and all that are in Authority. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. 1 Timothy 2.2,
Whey are these joined? To show that Magistrates must not desire to be solitary
and independent: It would be a burden too heavy, even for Moses alone, to rule
a Nation or a great City; woe to him that is alone, and bath none to counsel
him: In the multitude of counselors there is safety, Prove. 11.14. There is a
Commonwealth in best case, when it has a good King, and adjoined to him, as
Eyes, Ears, and Hands to assist in Justice, good Ministers of State, and
Under-Rulers: And a good wise King will choose such; now both supreme and
subordinate Magistrates have need of Wisdom; For, if a King be a fool, although
his Courtiers, and subordinate Officers were never so wise, they will not
manage him; he will be a willful fool, and ruin himself who will, who, will
not: And if a King were never so wise, if his Counselors be Foolish, Selfish,
K^^vish, they will make his Throne totter, and hazard the falling of the Crown
off his head, and make the Commonwealth smart. Many observe, under Nerva a
good Emperor, by reason of wicked Under-Rulers, the Roman Commonwealth was in
worse case than under Nero.

Q. 4. Why is this Exhortation to Kings and Judges? Have not others need of
Wisdom as well as they? Answ. Others are not excluded, but these are mainly
exhorted, for six Reasons; 1. Because they are under preatest Obligations to
God. 2. They are liable to the greatest Temptations. 3. They are in hazard of
the greatest Snares. 4. Because their Authority and Example, good or bad, has a
great weight and influence; if they be sound and wise, they may do much service
to God, and as much disservice, if not so, 5. Because they need most Wisdom,
and ost conceit it, yet great. Men are not always wise, Job 32.9. 6. Because
Christ has but few Friends and Followers in that Categorie of Men; 1 Cor. 1.76.
Not many Noble, etc. They presume upon their own power and greatness, and think
(...) below them to submit to him; and they are in hazard to misken themselver,
and their Maker also. Exodus 5.2. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord that should obey
him? But he that would not know God, by Moses instruction, was made to know him
by his own, and his great Hosts Destruction.

Q. 5. What sort of Magistrates are there to be found? Answ. Some distinguish
them in respect of these seven; 1, In respect Jurisdiction, some are Superior,
who have none above them but God, as Emperor, King, Dictator, Senate; or
inserious, who are appointed by the Superior, as are all inferior Governors
and Officers 2. In respect of Religion, some are Believers, as Joshua; some
^fidels, and so are either such as persecute Religion, as Herod and Julian: or
tolerate it, as a Trajan, 3. In respect of Ob^ects, so ne are Togati, Gown-men
and Governors; ^one are A^^^ati, Swordmen, Martial Men. 4. In respect of
business, some Councillours, some Senators, some Judges. 5. In respect of
Office, some are Law givers, some are Law keepets, as Justices, and the like.
6. In respect of Diunity, some have Dignity and not Authority, as such who
enjoy the title of Dukes, Earl, Lords, Knights, or Gentlemen; some have Dignity
and Authority also, as such of any of the former kind, or the like; as are
likewise called to any Office of Rule and Government. 7 They may be well
distinguished in respect of Adj^^cts some are by God's permission, unlawful or
bad Magistrates, as having (in repect of the manner) attained their places by
unlawful means, or do exexercise their Authority with Cruelty or Partiality:
such an one was Saul, and these are a peoples Judgment: some are by God's
Approbation, Lawful Just, and good Magistrates, who come by their power by
lawful Election, or succession and do exercise it well; such an one was David,
these are a Peoples Mercy: God shafted by Readiness cursed Race, and choosed the
sou of Jesse who made no grea^shew, but a Man full of Spirit, and a Manly
Excellent Spirit; and to the boot, a Man according to Gods own heart; 1 Samuel
13.14. And we judge we have a King comes as near this Mark, as any King of
Scots we read of since ever there was one.

Moreover, we read of three sores of Kings, first Machiavels King, who may be
called a Tyrant. 2ly. The Papes King, who may be called a Slave. 2ly, God's
King who only deserves the Name. First for Mac^^^vel his King take these Five.
He duects him not to care how he come to a Kingdom, so he may have it; By much
or Falsh^od, Right or Wrong, Crast or Cruelty: miske^ning God and Providence,
he looks only to Fortune and fleshly Wisdom, and commends to him the cruelty of
the Lion, and cra^t of the Fox. 2ly. For his disposition, he forbids him to be
Religious indeed, but to seem so, the show of it is enough to do his Turn with
Man, whom he alone respects, and that only to deceive him: And although they
who are near him, know his Piety to be Feigned, yet dare not re^^st the common
Opinion of People, who count him Religious indeed: He reckons Conscience and
the fear of God, care to please him and be approven of him as Cut throats of
politic Designs, and that which makes Effeminate and breaks Courage; because
it teaches Men to seek Heaven, and contemn the Glory of the World, he Leaves
Religion to such as he counts base Spirits, and Sets up Atheism and deep
Hypocrisy in its place. 3ly. For Government, he advises his Prince to have
sufficient Wit of himself, at least to think, that he has it; To be jealous
of all, and keep close his Intentions from the best, least his purposes be
frustrat. 4ly. He directs them not to count his subjects Gods People, but his
own, and that not as free Men, but as Slaves. 5ly. For his end, he advises him
to keep his People in continual discord, to expone their Concord a Conspiracy;
There is nothing so terrible to him as good correspondence, in the mutual
intelligence of their Affairs. Like Nero, he cares not they hate him. so they
fear him. This is Machiavel's godless policy which he saw acted at the Court of
Rome, under Pope Alexander the sixth. And thus directed Borgea his son; this is
called wisdom in the World, but it is extreme madness; for beside the sin,
which they regard not, they procure their own ruin by such means as they chose
for establishment.

Secondly, For the Popes King or Slave, he sets up and casts him down at
pleasure, he injoyns him to serve him absolutely in a blind Obedience; and to
maintain Idolatry, and persecure the Truth, who are most in these are his
Greatest Darlings; He keeps his Kings under Tutorie, and suffers them not to
Rule by Gods Word, and the wholesome Laws of their Kingdoms, but Thrusts on
them his Breives, and Commands by his Legates.

3ly, For Gods King. He comes to the Throne in Gods Mercy, both to himself and
the People, he is Religious in his Disposition, acknowledges his advancement to
be of God, forgets not he is Gods Subject; In Government, learns Wisdom from
other Men's folly, and Labors to do Gods Work, by Gods Wisdom, making his
Commands the Men of his Counsel; He counts his People, not Slaves, but free
Men, even Gods people Who has first Right to them; that his Power over them is
not Absolute, but Delegate; for which he must be countable to God; by all means
seeks their wealth and peace, craves their Hearts more than their Goods, and
reckons their Love his best guard under God.

The point of Doctrine I would insist on, is this, That it is the Interest of
Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinate, to learn to be wise; And it answers the
Scope of these Words, they should so endeavor wisely to Manage their eminent
trust, as they may be most Subservient to the Advancement of the Kingdom of
Christ, and be approven of him. I shall observe this order, first whence must
they Learn this wisdom? 2ly. Wherein stands this wisdom Magistrates should
Learn? 3ly. Why ought they to be thus wise? 4ly. Some application of all.

First, Magistrates must Learn Wisdom from the Word of God, Deuteronomy: 17.18, 19.
It Is enjoined to a king, when he siteth on the ^rone of his Kingdom, that he
shall write a copy of this Law in a book out of that which is before the
Pr^ests, the Levites; And it shall be with him, and he shall read there in all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law, and these statutes to do them: That his heart be not
listed up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment,
to the right hand nor to the left ^ To the end that ^e may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he and his children in the midst of Israel. It Is enjoined Jeshuah
a Governor, Jeshuah. 1. 7, 8. Only be thou strong and very ^^urogro^^s, that
thou may observe to do, according to all the law which Moses my servant
command^d thee. Turn not from it, to the right hand, or to the lest, that thou
may prosper whi^^er soever thou go. This book of the law shall not depart
out of thy mouth, but tho^ shall meditat therein day and night, that thou
may observe to do according to all that is written therein; for thin thou
shall make thy way prosperous and then thou shall have good success. This word
is able to make the Man of God, Magistrate or Minister, wise to Salvation,
perfect, and thoroughly furnished for every good work, 2 Timothy 3.15, 17. By this
word, P^vid ^av^^g it ever with him, was made wiser than his enemies, bad more
understanding than the detients, and his Teachers, Psalm 119.98, 90, 100. Alas!
There are but too sew among our great Once, that have acquaintance with the
Word, that may be applied to many, Jer. 3.99. They have rejected the word of
the Lord, and what wisdom is there in them!

Quest. Wherein stands this Wisdom, Magistrates should Study? Answ. Solomen
says, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore with all thy getting
get understanding. It is supposed, Job. 38.2. Some darken Counsel by Words
without Knowledge^ True Wisdom stands not in Words: I consess good Diction
and Expression, acceptable Words with Eloquence are not Despicable Gists; But
the main pitch, Beauty and VVorth of Wisdom consift in Action, Joh. 13.17.
Christ says, If you know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them; Psalm.
111.10. Good understanding have all they that keep his Comm^ndments, James
3.13. Who is a wise Man, and endued with knowledge among you? Let him show out
of a good Conversation his Works with meekness of Wisdom: All would he called
Wise, and the most part pretend to it, even a Fool thinks himself wiser than
seven Men that can render a reason, Prove. 26.16. But would Men be what they
affect to be reputed, truly wise; then must they Study prudent Meekness, in
Co^versation; and Pronour Knowledge with Practice. Prove. 8.12. I Wisdom dwell
with Pruaence. Deuteronomy. 3.6. Keap these Statutes, for this is your Wisdom: There
be sour sorts of Persons scored by here. 1. The Worldly wise, who are cunning
to effectuate their Carnal purposes, 3. Such as content themselves with Humane
Knowledge, and can Reason in Natural Things; but know not God, nor themselves,
such do but go Wisely to Hell. Sapientes sapienter descendunt in Infernum,
Hieron. 3. Such as hunt after Notions and Sublime Speculations, knowing only
that they may know. 4. Such as are sinsully Crafty to devise wickedness. 1 Cor.
14.20. Be not Children in Understanding, but in Mali^e be ye Children: happy
Souls who never enters into sins secrets.

Honorable Worthies, in Charity I judge, I need not offer Instruction to many
for Information; yet there may be some, what ever smack they have of Homane
Policy, would be no worse to learn more Morality, and the Elements of Divine
Wisdom, and sure all needs upstirring to more Practice.

Now I will tell you wherein the Wisdom of Magistrates stands not, and then
wherein it does stand. 1. It stands no^ in unseasonable, undue contending;
^^ieing and deve^ing one another, least ye he consumed one of another; Gal.
5.15. The beginning of strise is like the opening of the waters to overflow.
Prove. 17.14. I confess there is a lawful contending, not only for Truth, and
the Faith of the Gospel, Jud. 3. Phil. 1.27. but even for inferior things,
Joh. 31.13, 14, 15, 23. he admits his hyrlings to plead their Right, and offer
their Grievances. If I did despise the cause of my man servant, or of my maid.
servant, when they contended with me; what then shall I do, when God rises up?
And when he visi^eth, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the
womb, make him? and did not one fashion us both in the womb? For destruction
from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.
As if he had said, if I had used my power to overthrow his just right, I heard
them patiently and indifferently, and did them right even against my self, if
by any misinformation or passion, I had done them Injury: What Apology shall I
make when I am called before God's Tribunal? Who will examine all my Actions,
and particularly what is betwixt me and my Servant; although he was my Servant,
yet my fellow Creature, made by the same God, after God's Image as I am, and
therefore one of God's Subjects, whom I could not abuse without the Injury of
his Supreme Lord: although by Power and Interest, I had little reason to fear Man,
I stood in a we of God, and of his Judgment, and made it my Business to please
him; so he admitted their Debate.

I confess there would be examination of the principal and rise of Debates, if
from pride and envy, then confusion and every evil work may be the consequent,
James 3.16. there is due season and right methods and measures that would he
followed, the miss and mistake in these, may mar a very cleanly Design, and
Essays for Peace ill managed; in stead of being water to quench the fire, may
prove oil to increase the flame: It is observable and commendable, although
Abraham superior and elder than Lot, avoided unseasonable contendings, when the
Canaanites were in the Land, Genesis 13. and yielded to Lot, whose choice proved
his punishment: It is no disparagement to the highest, to Princes Clemency and
Condescendency to these below them, even supposing some Transgression, Prove.
19.11. It is the glory of a man to pass over a transgression and his discretion
to defer anger: and far more is it the bound duty of inferiors to yield, and
not unnianntely to prig with these above them, where yielding may be without
manifest prejudice to Truth and Peace.

Secondly, it is not wisdom in Kings and Magistrate to exerce a despotick and
Arbitrary power, to Rule with Tyranny and Opp^^stion, what is spoken of Natural
Parents, Ephesians. 6.49. is applicable to the Fathers of the Republic; they would
not ^rovoke to wrath, but avoid inhumanity in their dealings, Relax and
Moderate their Menacings, and Boasts, least they imbitter their Spirits, and
extinguish or weaken their Affections, and become guilty of these sins, which
they being provoked, commit; by having that, which is due denied, or things
unjust in themselves, Commanded, or rigorous. Commands of things in their own
Nature indifferent, joined; Or ^ave ighing with bitterness against them, when
there is no cause, by inflicting punishment, either unjustly, where there is no
fault, or immoderatly, unseasonably, or basely, where there is a Fault.

As Inferiors have their bounds, which they may not pass, but move in the
Sphere of their Duty to Superiors; so Superiors would mind that there is to
Power on Earth, so ablolute, no not of Kings and Supreme Rulers, but implies,
Obligation through Virtue of Gods Ordinance, Rom 13. on these invested with it,
to make Conscience of several Duties, to Inferiors and Subjects, and they are
bound to advert not only; to the Matter, but to the manner of Performance, that
all Rigor and Oppression be avoided: He Rules with most Comfort and
Confidence, who keeps most room in the Affections: and they are likeliest to be
the Men of the Promise, to build the Old waste Places, to raise up the
Foundations of many Generations, to be called the Repairers of the Breaches,
the Restorers of Paths to dwell in, who loose the bands of Wickedness, and un
do the heavy burdens, and let the Oppressed go free, and break every Yoke, who
ease people of ^ust Grievances; and Impose not, nor Continue what is forbidden
and Condemned; Isaiah 58.6, 11.

Thirdly, it is not Wisdom for Magistrates, to be too credulous, but to try ere
they Trust, that they be not Influenced, and Imposed upon, and bad Impressions
made; Satan may borrow Peter's Tongue to give bad Advice to his Master Matthew.
16.22. A near Relation may whisper what is dangerous, and prove a snare. 2 Chronicles. 22.3. Ahaziah his mother counseled him to do wickedly. Saul hearkened to
false deceitful Slandering Dorg. Psalm. 52. a great Persecutor of David, who had
done great services to Saul and taken great Ventures for him. Kings would
beware of all, of such Complexion who may involve them in Guilt and Danger,
and all Courtiers and Favorites of Princes, would beware of any Tincture of
such a Disposition; Magistrates of all Degrees has need of two ears to hear both
Parties, and of discreet Ears to try the Truth of what is Related, and the
Design of the Relator. Job, 12.11. As the Mouth tastes Meat, so the Ear tryes
words. None should except against this warning, for the best of Men may be
warned against the worst of Sins. Luke 21.34. Christ warned his Disciples
against these Sins, that none could have jealoused their Disposition toward
Gluttony, and Drunkenness; they appeared to ly far from the Temptation to
these: Yet all Men are Men, and having Corruption are not without the reach of
Temptation, the best of Men, and best of Kings have made slips, Noah, Lot,
David. What I say to one, (says Christ) I say to all, watch; Mark. 13. close.

4. It is not the wisdom of great Men to seek themselves, or great things for
themselves, this is reproved in Baruch. Jer. 45. and an old Complaint of the
Apostle, which may be renewed. Phil. 2.21. All seek their own things, and not
the things of Jesus Christ. it is a Mark of Dishonor, and a Brand of infamy in
any, especially in great Men, to be Self-seekers, who live wholly to
themselves, like the Grave wherein all that is gotten is buried, and kept
closs, and nothing brought forth to public Benefit, on the Tombs of these it
may be written; such a man sought himself when he lived, and losed himself when
he died; Self seeking dispirits a Man, and makes him cold and cowardly in God's
Cause. This Self is the carnal corrupt part called Flesh, that sways the whole
Man. Christ and this Self are contrary; you cannot serve these two Masters;
this Self will make sinners say, concerning the Word of Life: The word that is
spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not do it, but what proceeds out
of our own Mouth. Jer. 44.16, 17. And concerning Christ, we will not have this
Man to Reign over us, Luke 19.14. For the Lord's sake, shake off its
Government, resist its Reasonings, disobey its Commands, refuse to follow its
inclinations or to satisfy its L^stings. 5. It Is not a Magistrates Wisdom to
prefer secular Affairs to the Lords, they were reproved. Haggai. 1. Who dwelled
in Ceiled Houses, when the Lords House lay waste: This is Machiavelians Wisdom,
to simulate and make all Interests of Religion subservient to Secular and Civil
Concerns; this is the principle of that damned Antichristian Hierarchy: This
Wisdom is but Craft, however it be plastered over; Jeroboam who withdrew the
people from the established worship of God pretended their ^ase, and not only
Tolerate, but Established another way of Worship, for which cause the Lord
draws a black line on his forehead, often stigmatizing him thus; Jeroboam the
son of Nebat who made Israel to sin, 2 Kings 10.31. etc.

6. A Magistrates wisdom stands not in pride and upliftedness of Spirit; proud
Pharaoh said who is the Lord? Exodus 4.2. But the Lord laid his pride as he did
Haman's, Esther 7. The king of Assyrias, Isaiah 10. Nebuchadneezar's, Dan. 4.
True wisdom humbles and advances to Honor, Prove. 15.33. Before honor is
bumility; It Is the ready way to honor both from God and Man to be humble, and
gains love and respect from both, whereas pride procures hatred and contempt, 1
Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seem to be wise in this World, let him become a
fool, that he may be wise: If any man would be wise to God, wise to eternal
Life and Salvation, let him be content to be accounted a fool by the men of the
world; The proud man and the fool gets one name; 1 Timothy 6.4. The original Word
signifies smoke, importing, that the proud man has a tumor, and is puffed up
with ill and noisome Air.

7. It is not the wisdom of Magistrates to overlook dangerous persons by a cruel
indulgence; one Achan spared may endanger the whole Camp of Israel; Traitors
to Kirk and State would be duly noticed: I am not for Rigours, Severity, and
Blood, and would be far from saying, what a Preacher in the South of Scotland
said, within these twelveyears, preaching before the Justiciary Court, of some
that he called Phanaticks, He desired the Lords to dye their scarlet robes in
these Men's scarlet blood; At which they themselves blushed. This I had from
Persons of Credit, Ear-witnesses, some whereof are yet alive. But sure Persons
of a Dangerous Complexion to undermine the State, would be incapacitate and put
out of reach to hazard the Commonwealth. If he were a Churchman; an Abiathar,
he might be sent to Anathoth.

Q. But wherein stands the wisdom of Princes and Magistrates? Ans. 1. In having
a good foresight, and not to be stiff headstrong and willful in what may
endanger (^f not well advised) As David in an humor would not be put off to
number the people, 2 Samuel 14. Notwithstanding Joab told him, it might provoke
God, and produce sad effects, for 70 thousand died for it: Princes in their
resolutions and purposes, would have a reserve to change measures on second
thoughts, especially in what concerns secular Affairs; so did David when
provoked by an unmannerly Cloun; 1 Samuel 25, But for things directly tending to
God's Glory, constancy is a commendation: David never changed his purpose of
building the house of God, and paying his Vows, Psalm. 66 14, 15. Psalm. 119.106,
1 12. Psalm. 13^.4, 5.

2. The wisdom of Magistrates stands in acquainting themselves with the word of
the Lord, which makes the simple wise; some are Branded Jer. 6.10. The word of
the Lord is to them a Reproach, for they have no delight in it; they mock
Piety, and Scripture, the rule of Piety, such are in the highest Class of
Sinners, who are in the seat of the Scorner, as some translate it, the Chair of
Pestilence, importing, as such are plagued in their own Spirits, so are they
the plague of their Generation; Ah! This plague is too rise among us: But be ye
not Mockers least your bands be made strong. I^ saiah 28.22. God will cast a
Chain of his wrath about such, which, if Mercy and Repentance prevent not, will
grip and smart them to all Eternity. But I say, Magistrates who would be truly
wise, not only for Eternal Life, but for Humane Affairs and Government, would
acquaint themselves with the word of God, where the Rules of Government are
insert, the sins of Governors related with the Snares they have fallen in by
committing such Sins, the examples of good Governors for imitation are set
before them, and the examples of the bad as Beacons to warn of Dangerous Rocks
on which others have Split.

3. The wisdom of Magistrates stands, in the right ordering of the Kingdom, the
State in Civil Affairs, the Church in Religious Matters, promoting Religion,
and the right ordering of their Persons and Familie^.

1. In right ordering the State in Civil Affairs, for it will never be well
with the Church, if not well with the State; for the wicked Will walk on every
side; when vilest Men are exalted, Psalm 12. last; When the wicked rise, Men
hide themselves. Prove. 28.28. When the righteous are in Authority, the people
rejoice; when the Wicked bear rule the people mourn, Prove. 29.2. David was of a
good mind: Mine eyes (said he) shall be upon the faithful of the Land, who walk
in a perfect heart, that they may dwell with me, and I will destroy Evil doers
from the City of the Lord. Psalm. 101.6, 8.

There be four sorts of Persons Dangerous in a State, and who endanger Crowned
Heads, and runs them on Precipices. 1. Sycophants and Flatterers, such were the
400 false Prophets to Achab, 1. Kings 22. 2. The Envyous, such were the
Courtiers about Darius. Dan. 6. 3. Selfish, Ambitious and Covetous Men, who
seek the glory of their own House, such a one was Haman. Esther 3. 4. Heady and
Young Counselors, like Rehoboams, who occasioned the Revolt of the ten
Tribes. 1 Kings. 12.

Now then it is the wisdom of Kings, to make a right Choice of Favorites for
Trust, and to have such in the Government as are described. Ex^d, 18.21. 1.
Able men, for Greatness, Resolution, Courage and Constancy of mind, the best
preservative against Partiality, and corruption in Judgment. 2. Men fearing
God, that will restrain them from all injustice, even when they have Ability
and Opportunity to injure. 3. Men of truth, Faithful, such as love the Truth,
and diligently labor to find it out in all Causes, and pass true and right
Sentence without respect of Persons. 4. Men hating Covetousness, Gifts, and
Bribes, the great Corrupters of Judges and Judgments, overthrowing them, Prove.
29.4. For when Gifts gets hold on the Heart, they blow a Dust in the Eyes of
the wise to blind them.

It is the great Wisdom of Magistrates to be careful that Justice be Dispensed
discreetly, speedily expeding Causes, (not fretting the Spirits of people by
undue delays) impartially and universally to all, resolutely, courageously,
righteously, exactly, soberly and diligently; And thus Judgment returning unto
Righteousness, and all the upright in heart shall follow it, Psalm. 94.15.

2ly, Good Laws, which are the Sinews of Societies would be Enacted; the
greatest perfection whereof stands, 1. In their conformity to that prime and
eternal Law of God, the Law of Laws, 2ly, In their vigor when they are put in
execution: written Laws are for direction, and the living Law (that is the
Magistrate) is for Action, to see that direction obeyed; Laws are not made for
Theory, but for Practice, and the best Practice on the part of the People it
obedience, and on the part of the Magistrate, Execution, when Rewards, and
Punishments are duly applied; wrong application of either, is hurtful: Laws
would be well resolved before Enacted, and ill grounded, ill resolved Laws
would be Reseinded; such as the Law of worshipping the King's Image, under the
pain of the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. The Law discharging praying to any but the
King for 30 days, under the pain of being cast into the Lions Den, Dan. 6. The
strait Commands against Preaching in the Name of Jesus, Act. 4. and 5. Many
such grievous Laws have been made, under which the Lord's people has smarted
fore; and many has built themselves upon their ruins, by the Laws of
Forfeitures and Fines, those would be reduced, which would ease the grieved
minds of these best affected to the Government in the Nation, the doing whereof
would make the Government lightsome: The gain of Oppression has a Curse in its
bosom, there is a Worm at the root of such Gourds, the belief whereof would
make the Possessors of other men's Estates and goods, part with them without a
grudge.

To prevent the making and Execution of bad Laws, and for the enacting and
execution of wholesome Laws; it is the wisdom of Kings to choose single-hearted,
self-denyed, and pious men for Trust, such as preser the Interest of the Prince
of the Kings of the earth before a Kings interest on earth; and the Kings
interest before their own, and the saving of their own Souls, before the
raising of their Fortune, and advancing of their Honor.

3ly, The wisdom of Magistrates stands mainly in this, in bending their chief
care about Religious concerns, promoting of Piety, advancing Zions welfare:
David says, Psalm 132. By Vow and by Oath, he would not come to the Tabernacle
of his House, nor go up into his Bed, nor give sleep to his eyes, nor slumber
to his eyelids, until he found a place for the Lord, an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 137.5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my
right hand forget her cunning; that is, Let me never do a right turn, if I do
not remember thee, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; that is, Let
me never speak a right word, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

First, You would promote Piety by your Commands, so did Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.2, 4.
He did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God: And
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and
the Commandment. And Josiah a Chron. 34. He Covenanted the people to walk after
the Lord.

Secondly, promote Piety by the Example of your Persons and Families, I will
behave my self, says David, Psalm. 101.1.2. etc. within my house with a perfect
heart, nor would he suffer with him these who were Slaves to Vice and
Immoralities: Magistrates would study sound Principles, and steer their Course
by the Compass of the Word, as Josh. 1.8. and 24.15. They would design Gods
glory above all. Constantius the Father of Constantine tried his Courtiers
wisely; who adhered to truth, he honored them, who forsook Christ, them he
Degraded, and said, who were false to God, would never be true to him: Much
depends upon Magistrates personal carriage, and their Courts; Leaders of people
easily causes them to err, Isa. 9.16. One wicked man in Authority destroys
much good, Eccles. 9.18. Their example is so powerful.

Thirdly, Magistrates would encourage, settle and maintain a learned, pions,
faithful and painful Ministry, men according to Gods own heart, who may seed
his people with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. And not men according
to their own humor, to starve, or poison people.

Fourthly, Magistrates would promote the true Worship of God, abolishing all
salse Worship, and Monuments of Idolatry: So did the Godly Magistrates, 1 Chronicles.
29. 2 Chronicles. 17, etc.

Fifthly, Magistrates would have a fervent care, to order Seminaries of
Learning, settling them with Able, Learned, Pious Men. It is an old trick of
Rome, to poison the Fountains that the Streams may be mudded: Children are the
Seminaries of the Church, and if the Seed be naught, the Crop is bad; they are
in a great mistake who think the ordering the Seminaries of Learning is a
business purely Civil; for Children should be taught Piety with humane
Learning; young ones may get a Wramp, and a wrong set by bad Masters, that many
Ministers will not cure; a new Vessel ill seasoned at first, it is (...) wear it
out; It Is dangerous to suck in poison with milk.

Sixthly, Magistrates would have a special care as to settle, so to preserve the
Hedge of true Government in Christ's Church, as may best keep out the Wild Boar,
that would corrupt both Doctrine and Manners: having enlarged on this purpose
the last Session of Parliament, in the presence of His Majesty's then High
Commissioner, I give but a few short hints now. First I told, that
Church Government was no light matter, it is an Ordinance of God, the Royal
Diadem of Christ; he was a Martyr on this head; it was his Di^^ay on the Cross,
Joh. 19.19. Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. Secondly That there was a
distinction between Ecclesiastic and Civil power, the Scripture condemns
Churchmen usurping Civil power, and Statesmen usurping Church power. Thirdly,
That Christ, the alone Head and King of his Church, had appointed a Form of
Government, for punishing Scandals, inflicting Church Censures, making Church-
Canons, and has not left it to men's Arbitriment to come and go upon them, no
man's will being a standart in this matter, Moses might not alter a pin from the
pattern showed in the Mount. Exodus 25.9. And if Moses was faithful in the House
as a Servant, much more Christ as a Son, whose house we are. Heb. 3.5, 6.
Fourthly, That in the Old Testament, there was a Church Government, distinct
from the State, the same Reasons abide for one in the N. T. Fifthly, I told you
the end of Church Government was Spiritual, the perfecting of the Saints, the
Edifying of the Body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.12. Sixthly, That for Circumstantials of
Government, general Rule^, managed with prudence, were sufficient: For
Substantials, the Scripture is clear, which none can alter. There be these five
expressly set down. 1. Church Officers as ye have them distinguished, Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 6. etc.
And not a Prelate mentioned among them all. 2ly. Church Courts and Judicatures,
Mat. 18.16, 18. Tell the Church, the Apostles were members of it, it was no
Civil Court. 3. Subordination of lesser Judicatures to greater. Act. 15. They
came from Antioch, to a more general Council at Jerusalem, for Decision of a
matter. 4ly. We have the order of procedure in relation to Censure, Mat. 16.26.
etc. First, private Admonition, then more public. 5ly. The natural kind of
these Censures, which is not Bodily, as taking away the Life or Goods, but
Spiritual, as Admonition, Reproof, etc. Now there is a Charge given, to observe
all these things inviolably, until Christ's second coming. 1 Timothy 5.21. 1 Timothy
6.14. This Government, we hope, will be manadged with all Discretion and
prudence, so as may best tend to the Edification of all, and irritation of none.

This Government we own (and which we bless God this Honorable Court has
owned and established by Law) was owned by Ambassadors from most of the
reformed Churches in Europe at the Synod of Dort, to which all Subscribed save
two. Moreover, it was sworn to in this Nation about 100 years ago, by persons
of all Ranks: Besides, it seems to prove it self to be of God; First, being
most answerable to the ends foresaid, of establishing a Ministry, Ephesians. 4.12. 2.
Guarding best against Vice and Error. 3. It keeps Ordinances best from
pollution, and the Church from infection. 4. If it be not most Witnessed to, by
the Spirits operation, in the conviction, conversion, and consolation of souls,
let God and the World judge: Had we not been persuaded of these things, what
fools would we have been, to have suffered one year, let be so many years
severity on that account. I judge they will not tell by hundreds in Scotland
among the sober, judicious, and ingenuous, who will spend their breath against
this Interest; and if any do, it is mostly these who indulge themselves, and
loves to be indulged in their lusts, and loves skowth and elbow-room to sin
without control.

Christ will not deny Caesar his due, nor will Christ want his own, he will not
endare the Pairing of the Priv^^edges of his Church, nor the ^r^^thing her in
the use of that intrinsic Power, which blessed be God is given in Scripture,
and was exercised 300. Years before there was a Christian Magistrate to own
her: And which Power Church Officers must use when Magistrates are Enemies,
although they should offend, and may use when Magistrates are Friends, who will
not offend; It is true there is Reason to acquaint them with such occasions, we
give unto the Magistrate, what GOD gave them, a Cumulative Power to help the
Church, and they may call a Church Judicature to conveen; but we deny them,
what GOD denies them, a Privative Power to hurt the Church, and deprive her of
her due; Magistrates should be Nursing Fathers to encourage, and no Step.
Fathers to dwang the Church.

That Magistrates of all Ranks ought to be Wise and Understanding Men, is clear,
they should be able to discern Good and Evil; that they may rightly Time and
Circumstantiat their Actions. D^ut. 1.13. Eccles. 8.5. It is threatened as a
Judgment, when Princes are Children and Bab^^ in Understanding. Isa. 3.4, 5.
David in his Prayer for Solomon, says, Lord, give him a persect heart. 1 Chrom
29.19. And in his blessing of him, Lord give thee wisdom and understanding; 2
Chr. 22.12. And when God gave Solomon a Choice, what was his desire? 1 Kings
3.9. Lord, give thy Servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, and
discern between Good and Bad.

There be three Reasons why Magistrates should learn Wisdom. 1. Because of the
Figure they hear by their Office, imported in their Styles, namely, first, they
are called Gods, and Sons of God. Psalm. 82. 2ly. Saviors of the People. Judge.
2.16. Who shelter against the Rage and Violence of the Wicked. 3ly. Fathers to
the People, and Nursing Fathers to the Church. G^n. 45.8. Isa. 49.23. Importing
not only Power and Authority, but Tenderness, Care and Pity: 4ly. Heads of the
Body Polltick. Number. 16. That influence the Body to direct and rule the Members.
5ly. The ^yes of a State, Job. 29.15. To oversee the manners of a People. 6ly.
The Servants of God by way of Eminency, Jerem. 27.6. To improve their Gifts for
the good of the Common Wealth. 7ly. The Shepherd of the People, Numh. 27.17. to
Feed, Lead, Defend and Watch over them. 8ly. Healers of the People, to bind up
their wounds. Isa. 3.7. 9ly. Pillars, Corner-stones, Foundations of the Earth.
Psalm. 11.3. Psalm. 75.3. Z^ch. 10.4. Because they unite and uphold the Building.
10ly. Shields of the Earth. Psalm. 47. last ver. That should protect God's
Ordinances and People in their Lives, Liberties and Estates. 11ly. Overseers.
Prove. 6.7. That are careful, that these under them live in Peace and Piety.
Lastly, They are called Coverts and hiding Places. Ezekiel. 28.10. That must
refresh and protect People under their shadow: All these says, Magistrates have
need to be Wise Men.

A second reason, because of Gods severity threatened in time on such in Office
as mis-behave, for Magistrates are neither above instruction, nor without
correction, if they fall, Job. 12.21. He pouts contempt upon Princes, and
weakens the strength of the Mighty, psalm. 110.5. He shall strike through Kings
in the day of his wrath, Psalm. 76.12. He is terrib^e to the Kings of the Earth,
he shall cut off the Spirit of Princes. This should instuence Magistrates to
se^k after Wisdom, conf^^ering they have to do with him, who is the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth. Rev. 1.5. Zions King, to whom they are all countable,
for We must all appear before the Tribunal of Christ. 2 Cor. 5.10. And all of
you here must appear that day, no Man's Honor or Office will procure a
Dispensation for absence from that Court, where he Judges without respect of
Persons. 1. Pet. 1.17. He accepts not the Person of Princes, he regards not the
Rich more than the Poor, for they are all the work of his Hands. Job. 34.19.
Take heed therefore and be wise, He will not so much a^k, were you King, Duke,
Marquess, Earl, Lord, Barron, Burges, as how behaved you in your Station and
Trust? And these who would Brawl and spit in his Messengers Face will be mute,
when the Master reckons: When the King came in, the man was speechless. Matt.
22.12. There may be some hearing me this day, who will hang their Heads, and
sing dumb that day.

A third Reason why Magistrates needs Wisdom, is, because they are liable to
Difficulties and Dangers; great is their Task to know the state of these under
them, to hear the plaints of the Foor, to repress the Insolencles of the Proud,
to Minister Ju^^ice to all. Although God exalt them above others, yet are they
Servants to Subjects, in that they watch for their Well and Safeti^, Romans 13.1;
4. They are the Ministers of God, to People for their good: many are quick
sighted to see their Defects, who see neither their Difficulties nor Dangers;
every curbed Humor, by sear of Punishment frets against them; it is impossible
for them to please all, they are in danger from open Enemies, secret Male
Contents, Fraud and Flattery Hazards them, as one said, both Solitariness and
Society are dangerous to Princes, yea sometimes they are not secure amidst
their Attendants; some have fainted, and laid down their Crowns and Honors,
because of thase things; but Plety and Prudence is the best Remedy, the more a
Magistrate be a seeker of God, the more Wisdom he shall find in that Fountain.
Isa. 11.2. The complete Furniture of a Magistrate begins at the Spirit of the
Lord, to rest on him, and is specified in the Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, and closes with the Spirit of
the fear of the Lord, or true Piety: Piety and Prudence will help to exped
Difficulties, and helps to Moderation in Government, which makes it more
durable; if Rehoboam had hearkened to the moderat Counsel of the Ancients,
belike he had kept the ten Tribes to the House of David: Plety and Prudence
helps to Magnanimity and Courage, to Graple and Conflict with Evils, Enemies.
Difficulties, and Dangers; David Graples with Goliath, Calth with the Anakims,
Paul with Bonds and Affl^ctions. The Righteous is made bold as a Lion. Prove:
28.1. His heart is established, trusting in the Lord, he will not be afraid
until he see his desire upon his Enemies. Psalm. 112.8, I will not be afraid of
ten thousands of the people that beset me round. Psalm. 3.6. I will not be
afraid tho an h^st encamp against me, Psalm. 27.3. Should such a man as I fl^t,
says Nehemiah chapter 6.11. It is a Mercy, not only to be kept safe from Danger,
but quiet from the sear of Evil, and this is the Privilege of the Holy and
Wise, who hearken to the Lord. Prove. 1.33. You see then that Holy Wisdom is
most needful to Magistrates on all these Accounts.

Appl. I have two words to say to Magistrates, and People jointly.

First. It is our wisdom to pray and watch against these things amongst us that
are evil tokens, and threatens both Church and State with Judgments, upon the
account whereof many Hearts trembles. 1. When men do not loath their own
Hearts, for their unprofitableness under Ordinances, but weary of them as their
burden. 2ly. When men prosessing the fear of the same God, are mutually
contentions, and continue to be so; when Brotherhood is broken, an idol
Shepherd is set up. Zeck. 11.14, 15. 3ly. Peoples breaking Vows to the Lord,
of cleaving to him in his Ordinances, and remaining Impenitent. 4ly When
Additions are made to the Ordinance of Christ, by the inventions of men. 5ly.
When people seek to abolish any Ordinance of Christ, either because of some
outward Evil they bring with them, or hope of some outward Advantage by casting
them off^ 6ly. Men's driving the Lord Jesus out of his Ordinances by secret and
spiritual pollutions thereof, either by secret contempt and weariness of them,
or by unbrokenness of heart in the enjoyment of them, when people live not in
the daily sense of an extreme need of Mercy. 7ly. When people go to Ordinances,
and go not to the Lord of Ordinances, for the blessing. 8ly. When the People
are unwilling and careless to receive the stroke, of the Eternal Power of the
Life of Jesus in their hearts. 9ly. When people do not only sin, but grow to
that height to cast off all reprooss, and christ-like admonitions for sin.
10ly. When Men cast off secret Dread, Fear and Reverence of the Majesty,
Dominion and Soveraignity that God stamps on Authority, Jude. 8. and have low
despising thoughts of Magistrates, and seek to pluck the Sword of Revenge for
sins, that hurt the Common wealth, out of their hands, without which the
greatest Power and Authority is but a Vanity and Nuility. 11ly, Whoredom and
uncleanness, tho rise among us, for which the Lord will Judge. Heb. 13.4. 12ly.
Swearing and Corsing, too rise also among all sorts, prosaning the Lords holy
Name, Men, and great Men thinks Oaths the flowrish of their Discourses, and
that then they speak with Power and Authority; But I tell them, be of what
Quality they will, they are Gods enemies who take His Nar^^ in vain; Psalm
139.20. 13ly. Frequent, Familiar; needless haunting with persons perverse in
principles and practices, by which many learn their way^; get a snare to their
Soul; and partaking of their sins, receive of their plagues; Prove. 22.25. Rev.
18.4. This has been the neck break o^ this Generation; Prove. 13.20. by which
companions of Fools have been destroyed. 14ly. Much unrepented of guilt in the
Persecuters of these bygone years; I am afraid till there be more resentn^^nt
of these things; Gods wrath will not be paci^ied. We have been deeved with the
noise of some, abusively called, the Cl^^^y their Suffering^ in Pamph^^^s with
Attestations justly jealoused, which will be overthrown ^re long by a true
Relation: I am not speaking by way of Approbation of Injuries. But how tender
the Consciences of Authors are, you may conjecture from their wide speaking;
likening their Flea bit Sufferings (in comparison of ours) to the Dragooning in
France. What shall I say; it would consume time, to reckon up so much as the
kinds of the Sufferings we have been trysted with. Some of all Degrees, and
some of the best Quality, sha^^d deeply in Suffering, even unto Blood,
Banishment, and Confinement, and Imprisonment; and Ministers among others to
pave the way to Prelacy, and make its introduction the more easy, and al^ the
Ministers of Edinburgh, save one (who had little cause to boast of any outward
advantage by Conformity) summarly warned by the States to remove from their
Charges, without Citation o^ Accusation, and by the dash of one Act a little
after, about 300 Ministers removed from their Congregations, without Citation
or Accusation. It were easy for me to prove the sufferings of sour o^ five
Presbyterian Ministers, to surpass what a hundred of them has met with: What
shall I say o^ the Sufferings before, and in the year 1666? a few pages in that
once forbidden Book Naphtali* will far surmount all the Accounts of their
Sufferings, what vast sums of money exacted, pillaging of houses, preferring
their Dogs to the Children of the Family, in sharing of the provisions of the
house, besides unheard of Barbarities, Mockings, Threatenings, when the people
went about the Worship of God? etc. And the shedding of the blood of many; and
since that time, what Intercommuning of many, denying them the use of things
useful and comfortable, some of whom were strangely circumstantiat, blind and
imprisoned, who could not move for their own rellef, cru^^ Imprisonment in
unwholesome Prisons, Minister: and others, some several months, some severa^
years, two, three, five, seven, some eleven years in Prison, which usage has
occasioned Diseases* and the death of many, and not a few Ministers and others,
dying in their Prisons, for whom no Entreaties could prevall, for getting them
out of prison, where they might have been better attended, many shut up in
closs Prisons, and no cause made known, and one among the rest above 20 weeks
shut up, for 13 weeks whereof his nearell relations not admitted to see his
Face, nor so much as speak to him through the lock of the Door, though he was
in great indisposition, none allowed to do him any service, and to this day the
cause never signified; what Finings, Confinings, Forseltures and Banishments,
what Tortures, and unheard of Tortures, and some of these multiplied upon one
person, and men without bowels beholding them Tormented. What killing in cold
blood* and women execute merely for their Opinion, who were no Idolaters, nor
abettors of Idolatry! some after Sentence, not getting leave to draw their
breath before execution; what barbarous beating of Drums at Scaffolds? what
hunting of Ministers and others like Partridges on the Mountain^ night and Day,
lying whole Nights, Summer and Winter in woods, and open fields? What violent
driving of Families from their Houses, driving, and selling of their Goods and
Cattle, laying many Families waste, violent intruding, possessing their Houses,
Lands, and Goods, without any sentence in Law; There be hundreds of
unquestionable witnesses of all these things What Cruel Urging the Consciences
of People, Men and Women (who had but a free Cottage) with a Bond to give such
and such Ministers, and others, not so much as a Nights Lodging, or (...) meal
of Meat, which appeared to be heavy on the Consciences of many (overtaken with
the Temptation) that when awakned they had no rest till they made a public
Consession, before Congregations of People. I knew a Minister speak to above 80
of them, who with Grief and Tears confessed their Guilt before the People; At
one Meeting 39. Men, and Women, not above two known to the Minister before,
resolving their appearance, rose up in all quarters crying, Guilitie, Guilty.
What Exorbitant Exactions, and Vast Sums before some Noble Men and Gentlemen's
Families could be Relieved by any access to their own Estates; not to speak of
the Barbarous Highland Host; nor of that Violent Pressing of the Oath of the
Test, (a perplexing Oath^ on many even beyond Lew, to the pressing of their
consciences, and that Pitisul consequences followed on it? amongst the rest,
the Cuting off of one of the greatest men of our Israel, the late Noble Earl of
Argyl. What Volumes, beyond Foxes, monuments might be Written, there is but one
^nstance, that were it meet to relate the circumstances thereof (which I know
from a Minister, and another person of Credit, both sharing in that deep
di^^ress, would make hearts that were not rocks to rent! A number in prison
taken from Dumfries, some week, Sick, and Aged, some Women with Child, some
Criple, and many others taken up by the way out of other prisons, and pricked
up like beasts, beside other hard usages in their journey, to the Castle of
Dunotter, where about 168. Men and Women were thrust in one Vault, and
considering the necessities of Nature, having scarcely room to stand; What case
they were in for some days, ^^dge ye: Yea, at their entry when scorched with
thrist, denied water by the Soldiers without Money! Many hardships they
endured, that it cost some of them their Lives: And after a long times distress
there, were driven back to Lothian, all save two or three, tied and flightered
like Thieves; and about eighty of them sent to America. If there be any here
who ever gave countenance, or active concurrence to any of these forementioned
sufferings, I charge you upon your perril to repent, and judge your selves,
that ye be not judged of the Lord. Some will possibly say, as Isaiah 30.10.
Minister, preach some other things to us: but as Micajah said, we say, what the
Lord says, that we must speak; God be thanked we have not an Ahab to deal
with; But though it were so, we behoved to speak our Masters Mind; many a time
we have preached, and distribute the Childrens Bread; with the perril of our
Lives, and theirs; and would do so yet, if called to it; But God forbid that
ever it come to that again among us, but Lord send no worse. Before that second
word to M^gistrats, and People jointly; Add to what goes before; That the
consideration of the hundredth part of our Sufferings makes many Judicious, who
will not approve what others have met with, wonder it was no worse, considering
what was the Spring and Fountain whence these deep and bitter waters did flow,
and upon whose account, and by whose Instigation: But far shall it be from U^
to entertain thoughts of such Barbarities, inhumanirles, and Antichristian
Usages, as We have been Treated with, to urge the making or Execution of such
severe Laws, but rather Compassionat the Miserable.

2ly. I would say another word to Magistrates and People jointly, prove your
wisdom by the F^^its of it, and I give you a Proof in the Aposties words, which
you may think upon, James 3.17. The Wisdom that is from above is first Pure,
then Peacable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated jull of Mercy, and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hyp^^risie.

I intended to have pressed on the People their dutiful respects to
Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinat, upon the Apostles prounds. 1 Pet: 2.13.14.
etc. First, for the Lords sake, and that Honor and Majesty Christ stamps on
them. 2ly. Because they are in the Lords room to do his work, in Punishing ill
doers, and rewarding these that do well; If this Power be abused, they must
answer to him. 3ly. Because this is the will of Christ, and the way so stop the
Mouths of foolish Men. 4ly This is our Liberty and would not be used as a
cloak of Licentiousness, we owe to them first reverence, and that in our Minds
not to Cur^e him in our thoughts, Eccles: 10, 20. In our Words not to rail
against him, Acts: 23, 5. The Authority of Magistrates is very tender in our
gestures, the Woman of Tekoah stoops to the ground, 2 Samuel: 14, 4. 2ly We owe
obedience in the Lord, from which Churchmen are not exeemed, 1 Pet: 2.13. Romans
13, 1. If they Command what is cross to the Lords mind, we must serve them with
Peter's answer, we ought to obey God rather than Man; Acts 5, 29. 3ly We owe
them Fidelity both to their persons and Authority. 4ly We owe them aid and
help, first, by saithfull counsel and advice, when called for, and discovery of
secret Enemies and plots. 2. By our Estates, paving custom, Rom: 13, 7. 3ly. By
our persons assisting them, both against Country Rebels, and Foreign enemies,
and when called for to venture our Lives for them in peace and war, 2 Samuel:
21.17. and 23.16. 4ly By our prayers, 2 Timothy 2, 2. (1) Because they neither
stand nor fall to themselves, Magistrates, especially Sovereigns, are the
pillara of a Kingdom, Let me smite King Saul but once, said Abishal, and the
kingdom shall be thine, and the victory thine, 1 Samuel 26, 8. So said
Abithophel, let me smite king David, and all Israel shall be gathered to thee,
2 S^m. 17.2. When Alexander died, the Ar^ie was but one Man less than before,
but yet it was compared by the Wise, to the C^clops which had its only eye
bored out. Should we not pray for Magistrates, especially the Supreme, who
carry not only about their own lives, but the lives of thousands depends on
their safety: As it was said to the King, Thou shall not go forth with us any
more to battle, least thou q^ench the light of Israel, for thou art worth ten
thousand, 2 Samuel 18.3. 2 Samuel 21.17. We should be earnest to pray Magistrates
may be Religious, because of the power of their Example to good or evil, their
vices pass current for virtues, and becomes a fashion, when the King of Shechem
yielded to Circumcision, a painful thing, the whole City followed: Be a Prince
never so great for Command, he Commands most by Example, let not our King and
Judges want our Prayers.

Let me press upon Magistrates, that ye Study Wisdom in God's Matt^^s and M^ns
also, both are required, ^f they be Pious only in God's Matters and not
otherwise prudent, then are they fitter for the Cloister than the Court; if
they be Prudent and Politic only, and not Plous, then are they fitter to be
Kings of Babel, where dwel^ Confusion, then of Jerusalem, where God's Glory is:
be careful that God be honored in the Nation, that abuses, and Errors in
Religion be reformed, Promorers thereof, and Seducers, discountenanced and
punished, and that the Purity and Truth of Doctrine he promoted and maintained,
according to the Example of Godly Kings, 2 Chronicles. 3.4, 15, 12, 17, 6. That the
word be purely Preached, that the good Things taught, and established, for the
precious O^dinances of Christ, be defended by Law, and done, as he has
appoin^^^. 2 Chronicles. 18, 8.11. That the Wicked and Profan^ be Discountenanced
and Punished, the wickedness of Subjects does great hurt to Gracious Kings, and
tends to the shortning of their days.

Then I would press Magistrates to study a great insight in affairs that
concerns Honesty and Equity: David had a good Insight in Matters as an Angel of
God, seeing Good and Evil. ^. Sam. 14. Solomon discerned which was the true
Mother. 1 Kings 3^ Magistrate^ should provide that People lead a Peaceable and
quit Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. 2 Timothy 2. Then I would press on
Magistrates to ^^udy a good Foresight of Dangers, to protect the People,
prevent, or wisely divert them. They must endeavor to desend against all
Enemies, Saul had little Foresight, when David sound him secure, David had
Husha^ in Absalom's Court.

That Kings may be in better Capacity for this, they must have Revenues,
called, Egra 4, 13. T^ll. Trib^te, and Custom, which three Caldea Words,
imports the Properties of these Revenu^s exacted of the People, that they
should be Moderat according to the Peoples Abllity, without Partiality,
Inveterate, or Ancient, so sar or so long, as the Common state requires, and no
more; for the safety of the King is the safety of the Commonweal, the safety
of the Common weal is a Law above all Laws, such Tributes, or Customs, call
them as you will, are as necessary to uphold a State; as blood in the veins for
conserving the Life. We must distinguish between the time of Peace and the time
of War, especially when Lives, Liberties, and Religion, are at the Stake, our
hearts must be enlarged without grudge, to make a liberal Offering, better
venture much than lose all. But if by Oppression extreme Exactions be
Collected, or public money be Dilapidat by Self seeking Men, they may resolve
to smart for it at the hands of the Lord: There have been old and frequent
Complaints of mis-managements, when public Money has either been bestowed on
men to uphold their debauches to consume it on their Lusts, to uphold unlimited
Lust^ and Designs of others; especially there has been complaints of Officers
of Armies, either withholding due pa^ment from these in Arms, or pu^ting Pay in
their Pockets, and making a shaw of a Vision at a Muster, that disappeared in
the day of Battle.

Honorable worthies, I incline not by Panegyricks to offend your modest ears,
whose praise will be in the Church: But we bles^ God, we have such a King and
Que^^ to rule over us, and such a Representative of their Majesty's in this
Honorable Court, and so many noble and worthy Patriots in this Assembly, who
befriend the interests o^our Lord, who are other ways minded, we pray the Lord
reveal it to them; but sure were they better acquaint with our Master, they
would soon change their mind. We bles^ the Lord, and we bless you from the
Lord, with our hearts, for what you have done for the house of the Lord, and
for the hone we have, that what remaim to be done, shall be done, though hope
deferred makes the hear sick, but when the desire comes it is a Tree of Life;
the desire accomplished is sweet to the soul, Prove. 13.12, 19. There are two
things, I would desire of this Honorable Court, The first (...) that what may
give a back-set to the thing that is done may be forborne, that Truth be not
abused by promiseuous Tolleration, this were to love our ease more than God,
and has produced sad Effects, and Confusions in some places of the World. There
being no persecution Threatued, Exercised, and for ou^ht I know neither
intended, by Church nor State, the muttering of such a Tolleration as we ^eard
of^ is some Surprise which some of the sober Conformists disclaims: It is under
pretense forsooth, of tenderness of Conscience: how tender they are God knows
and the World may know; I fear it is a ^ate ^ncome and distemper, which I
apprehend, from what is employed in their paper, of some ^ntention to introduce
some Novelties, and Forms in the Worship of God, which this Church could never
endure, nor durst they adventure on in their greatest height and freedom,
although snme now presume, contrare to our Confession of Faith, which if I
mistake nor, owns no other Book for the Rule of Worship, but the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament. This scruple they express, they cannot join in the
Sacrament of the Supper with these who wants Episcopal Ordination, whereas they
have for many years joined with Conformists, that were never Re-ordained: It Is
apprehended by many judicious, to be a mystery of iniquity, to endanger both
Church and State, and a shadow under which would shrud vice and error: And
beyond question, would propagat and perpetuat a Schism in this church; They had
wont to slander Non-consormists as Schismatics; but the reason is not alike,
for Presbyterians did stand their ground, and owned their Principies since the
Reformation from Poptry by Presbyters. So the Schism first and last is on their
side, this Tolleration would be buried under the Oak.

There is another thing that I would beg of this Honorable Court, beside the
care of ordering and purging the Seminaries of Learning, the removal of
Pa^^onages, not that we mean the injuring any in their just Civil Rights and
Properties, although the first Original was good, to defend the Church and her
Goods; Yet the usurpation over the Church did spring from a bad Fountain, and
the consequence has been destructive to the Church, and a grievous bondage,
many God provoking sins has followed on it, Simoniacal compacts; It has been
the sourse of a Godless insufficient Ministry, we would not have you to prig
with God in this matter; We hope, that (...) ^^^^tousness on the one hand, nor
envy on the other, shall hinder the removing of this Yoke; Two worthy Ministers
have written on this Subject, Mr. Rule, and Mr. Park, so as may satisfy and
give Light to these that will not shut their Eyes.

Honorable Worthies, what was said to the Princes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 22.19. I
say to you, Now set your heart and soul to seek the Lord your God; arise
therefore, and build the sanctuary of the Lord God. 1 Cor. 13. last verse, Be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as
ye know that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: Reformation ends not
in c^ntemplation, but in action: Be not slothful in business, forget not to do
as ye have been taught; ye want not your care and troubles: But what said
David* 1 Chronicles: 22.14. Now Behold, in my trouble, I have prepared for the house
of the Lord, an hundred thousand talents of Gold and a thousand thousand
talents of silver, and of brass and iron without weight: neither wa^, nor any
other busines^, could hinder him from this work.

Mind the example of the Jews, when stirred up to build the Temple, Ezra 5.1
2. They say not, we must first build the Walls of Jerusalem, to hold out the
enemy, but the Text says, They began to build the house of God, and with them
were Prophets of the Lord helping them, they were not full four ^ears in
building of the Temple, and i^ great Chronolo^^s be not far mistaken, the
Temple was fi^^shed 83 years before the Walls of Jerusalem we^e finished. I am
far from meaning your Affection should be cooled to the Laws, Liberties, peace
and safety of the Kingdom: I wo^ld only warm your Affections, with the zeal of
a through Reformation, go on, and improve, whereto ye have already attained,
and the Lord shall be with you, and the blessing of Obed-^d^m and his house,
shall rest upon you and yours. 1 Chronicles. 13 14. Consider the exient of that
Blessing, it was a bro^d B^e^ing; 1. His person was blessed, that is a blessed
Religion that brings health to the navel, and marrow to the bones, 2ly. His
posterity blessed. 1 Chronicles: 26.8. In sour. 1. He wa^ blessed with a numerous
progeny, threescore and two of Obed-ed^ms Family. 2ly. They were bl^ssed with
Employment, all made Officers in the House of God. 3ly. Blessed with inablement
to discharge that Employment, all able men of strength, mighty men of valor,
for the service of the Temple. 4. They are blessed with Honor, made Rulers and
Commanders through the House of their Father. 3. His possessions were blessed
with preservation, increase, a comfortable enjoying them, Obed-edom made his
House a Sanctuary for God, now God makes it a Sanctuary for him, a place of
safety. 4. His Actions and Undertakings are blessed, good success attends him.
5. His Friends are blessed, they fare the better for him, he becomes a
favorite of Heaven, he can speed Suits, and obtain blessings for others. I
hope there be some who hear me this day, who shall share of such blessings, and
that all of you might share of them, is my hearty prayer to God; ^ dare not
charge you, but I would advise, that none of you turn your back, till ye see
the Capestone out on the Work; and if thus your Heart and Care be toward the
House of God, he will have a care of yours. To his Name be praise.

FINIS.

