THE BISHOP OF CHICHESTER's SERMON Before the KING, JANVARY 30. 1696.

A SERMON Preached before the KING At WHITEHALL, ON JANVARY 30. 1696.

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill: At the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Corner of Warwick Lane in Paternoster Row.

M DC XC VII.

MATTHEW. XXIII. 34, 35, 36.
Behold I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them
ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: That upon you may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of Zacharias, Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and
the Altar. Verily I say unto you; All these things shall come upon this
generation.
IN this Chapter our Blessed Savior pronounces no less than Eight dreadful
Woes against the Scribes and Pharisees for their gross Hypocrisy; and amongst
the rest, for the pretended Reverence they bore to the Memory of the Ancient
Prophets, whom their forefathers wickedly Abused, Persecuted, and Killed; so
that they said, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets, v. 30.

But our Savior shows, that if they had lived in those Days, they would have
acted in the same way; since the same temper was existent in them, as had been
heretofore in their Fathers. So v. 31. Ye are witnesses unto your selves, that
ye are the children of them which killed the Prophets. Fill ye up then the
measure of your Fathers, for that ye are now in the way to: Wherefore, behold I
send unto you prophets, etc. and ye will do unto them as your Fathers
heretofore did unto those Prophets, whose Sepulchers ye now Garnish, and whose
Praises ye Celebrate. So that in the Event, upon you will come the sorest
Judgments; and it will be, as if all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias, etc. were required
of this Generation.

There is some doubt to be made concerning the Zachariah referred to in the
Text; for there were several of that Name in Scripture, as also in Josephus the
Jewish Historian. But this we may observe, that whoever he was, he was Slain
before the time that our Savior here so sharply inveighs against the Jews; for
it is by him charged upon them as a thing past, whom ye slew. Again, it was a
story well known to that People, and a case very notorious; and if so, as there
was no case more notorious than 2 Chronicles. 24. 20.
that of Zachariah the Son of Jehoiada; so there was none that this Character
could agree to, but to him, who was slain in the court of the house of the
Lord; or as it is here, between the Temple and the Altar.

But then there are Two or Three difficulties remaining, one of which is, That
Zachariah, who is here called the Son of Barachias, is in the Regal Story said
to be the Son of Jehoiada.

2 Samuel 12. 21. Prove. 31. 1. 2 Kings 23. 34. 2 Chronicles. 36. 4. Vid. Joseph. Ant.
l. 2. c. 12.
In answer to which, We may observe from Scripture, That it was common among
the Jews (as among many other Nations) to give several Names to the same
Person; as Solomon was called Lemuel and Jedidiah; and especially where those
Names were of the same signification, as Jehojakim and Eliakim. And thus it is
with Jehoiadah and Barachiah.

2. It was usual to give, or to have Names given, upon some Eminent Service
done by them, or some Eminent Blessing that befell them. So Gideon had the Name
of Jerubbaal given to him by his Father Joash, upon his breaking down Jud. 6.
32.
the Altar of Baal: And Jacob was called Israel, Genesis 32. 28.
because as a prince he had power with God and men. Thus Zacharias is here
called the Son of Barachias, or (as that Name signifies) the blessed of Genesis
24. 31. 26* 29*
the Lord, which was among them a term of Honor and Respect.

And a Name without doubt, as it was due, so was given to Jehoiada in a more
especial manner, because of his eminent Piety, and of his Zeal in advancing
Joash to the Throne; and for restoring the Liberties and Religion of that
People, after they had both been invaded by 2 Chronicles. 23.
the Infamous Practices of the Idolatrous Athaliah. He may for this reason well
deserve the Name of Barachias, or the blessed of the Lord.

And then the Aggravation of the Sin was, That this Zachariah martyred by them,
was the Son of that brave Jehoiada, that Patriot of their Country; and whom,
without any regard to his Ancestor, to his own Quality, his Message, or the
Place, they furiously rushed upon, and Levit. 24. 16.
stoned him (the Punishment of Blasphemers) in the Court of the Lord's House, or
Court of the Priests.

A Fact so heinous, that the Jews say, his Blood V. Lightfoot. Vol. 2. Talmud.
Exercitat.
continully bubbled up, and was not expiated till the Babylonish Captivity,
which was about Two hundred and fifty years after.

But if it was at this distance from the time of our Savior, how comes this
Instance of Zacharias to be the last, as that of Abel was the first?

I answer, Because that Blood was supposed to lie upon that Nation till the
Captivity; after which they were as averse to Idolatry, as ever they were
before addicted to it; and therefore that sort of Persecution ended with it.

But if it were so that Zacharias was the Son of that Jehoiadah, it seems very
hard and unjust that this Blood, and much more the Blood of Abel, and all the
Righteous Blood shed upon the Earth, should be required of that Generation, as
our Savior here affirms.

For what was the blood of Abel to them, who was Killed by his Brother Cain,
all of whose Posterity perished in the Deluge? Or how were they concerned in
the Blood of such Righteous Persons, as were slain in other parts of the Earth,
or even in that of Zacharias, who, though killed by their Ancestors, was slain
above Seven hundred years before?

I grant, this Blood could no more literally be charged upon that Generation,
than they could be said to have been Cotemporaries with those Ages of Abel or
Zacharias: But it is here thus represented, partly because they were of the
same Temper, and were acted by the like spirit of Envy and Hatred, as the
Murderers of Abel and Zacharias, etc. Partly it was as to Zacharias, because
the course of impiety in former Ages was carried along (though in a different
way) even to that Age; and lastly, because that what they were now agitating,
and would shortly accomplish, would be a Crime of such malignity, as would fill
up the measure of their fathers; and would determine in their Ruin, ver. 37,
38. O Jerusalem! etc. behold your house is left unto you desolate.

And it is as if he had said:

Ye think your selves clear of your Fathers Iniquity, forasmuch as ye Garnish
the Sepulchers of those Prophets whom they wickedly Killed, and that ye are not
Idolaters and Persecutors as they; and say, If we had been in the days of our
fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets; but you will so far outdo them, that ye will Kill and Crucify those
whom I shall send, and reject the last tender of Divine Mercy, and thereby
bring upon your selves ruin as inexpressible, as irreversible. For think of all
the Blood of Pious and Just Men, that has been shed through all Ages of the
World; think of that of Abel, and of Zacharias, and all that ye can think of,
and yet the case will hold no comparison with what ye will do, in Persecuting,
Killing, and Crucifying the Prophets, and Wise Men, that shall be sent to you,
and also Him that sends them.

Genesis 4. 10.
And if the Blood of Abel cried for vengeance, and that of Zacharias was
required of your Progenitors; Then what will not fall upon this Generation! It
will be such as was not from Matthew. 13. 19.
the beginning of the creation; It will be such as if all the Blood of the
Prophets, and of Righteous Men from Abel downward to that of Zacharias, Luke
11* 50.
were required of you; Behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, etc.
that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth; verily
these things shall come upon this generation.

In Discoursing upon which Argument,

I shall show;

I. That it often happens to the Best of Men, to be Opposed, and Persecuted,
and Despitefully used in this World.

II. That this is consistent with the Providence of God and his Government of
the World.

III. That in the sequel God does right to his Providence, and to their Piety
and Virtue by extraordinary Events.

I. It often happens to the best of Men to be Opposed and Evil-Treated.

I shall not go about to prove that which is matter of Fact, and has been the
constant Observation of all Ages more or less. We need not go farther for the
confirmation of it than the Instances of the Text, Abel and Zacharias, and the
rest of the Righteous Men upon Record: Or than the sad Instance which this Day
sets before us; when a Person as Eminent for his Piety, as his Character and
Dignity, was treated, as if he had been the Offscouring of all things, and
was, as many of the Righteous Men of Old, Persecuted and Slain.

And the Causes are as observable as the Fact, and of which there are as many,
as there are Prejudices and Misunderstandings, contrary Passions and Interests.
As long as there are Ambition and Pride, Envy and Malice, Covetousness on one
hand, or expensive Vices on another. As long as there are contrary Habits,
which are the Principles that rule in all Mankind, there will be Enmities and
Oppositions; and if Virtue, and Religion, and the Best of Men are against
Persons in these Circumstances, they will then retaliate the Injury, and be
against Virtue, and Religion, and the best of Men. For then it is not what the
thing is in it self, but what it is as to them; and it often is not because it
is Religion, or Virtue, or the Best of Men, that they thus Despitefully use
them; but because they are opposite to their Interest, or their Inclination, or
sometimes are to their Reproach. Then it is that the Pharisees are for
condemning our Savior, when they thought that the Romans would John 11. 48.
come and take away both their place and nation.

And especially is this of the more fatal and pernicious consequence, if this
Spirit be edged on by a false and mistaken Zeal; and Religion is pretended to
by some to face an evil design, and is believed by others to be concerned in
it, and is in danger to suffer.

For then this does, as they will have it, justify and establish the
Contention, and make it to be necessary. Then they think it laudable and
meritorious even to kill, when, in their Opinion, it is to do God John 16. 2.
service. It is then a Cause fit to venture their own life in, and a Cause that
will oblige them to take away that of another: Nay, it will even serve to break
through the Laws of Nature it self, and will have them to put those to Death,
whom Nature would otherwise teach to Preserve, and with the hazard of their own
Life to save from it. Thus it was foretold by our Savior, The brother shall
deliver up the brother to Matthew. 10. 21.
death, and the father the child, etc.

By these and the like means, the Best of Men too often fall under the heavy
hand of Violence and Oppression; and if we were then to judge of them by the
usage they meet with, they must have been the worst of Mankind. A case which
has tempted some to question, and others to deny a Providence.

But this without reason, if there be nothing in these Proceedings and Events,
but what is consistent with the Divine Oversight and Government of the World.

II. Which is the next thing to be Discoursed of:

The Providence of God is seen in Preserving all things in the same State and
Order as at the first establishment: And as he ordinarily leaves Natural
Causes, and necessary Agents to act according to their proper Nature, and to
keep to the Law and the Season, at the first appointed and prescribed; so he
generally leaves voluntary and intelligent Beings to follow their own
Inclinations, and to Choose, and Resolve, and Act as they shall see meet.

And if it happens that such Agents proceed upon wrong Principles, or mistaken
Measures, it is no more than if in mere Natural Causes there are some
Preternatural Accidents happen, through the concourse of different parts of
Matter together.

And if sometimes Good Men are left to their own Precipitance, as Josiah, when
he was not to be dissuaded from Attacking Pharaoh-Necho; 2 Chronicles. 25. 20.
and Wicked Men are left to their own Perverseness and Obstinacy, as Pharaoh; or
to their Pride, as Isa. 10.
the Haughty Assyrian; and they perish in it: This in the Voluntary World is no
more extraordinary, than when there is Seed-time and Harvest in the Natural
World; that is, that each acts according to the Nature they are of, and the
Condition they are in.

And it is no imputation upon Providence, if in this way Good Men, or the Best
of Men, fall sometimes into hard Circumstances, when Causes are left to their
own tendency, and are (as it were) in their own Power. For Nature is but
Nature; and to keep Nature in its course, is an Act of Providence; to keep
Stated and Permanent Beings in their Station and Order, and Transient in a
continued Succession, and Voluntary in their own Power and Liberty; is a
special Fruit of the Divine Providence.

But I confess, if there were no more, and that Providence were a mere
Supervisor, it would not be the Providence worthy of so Divine a Power, nor so
worthy of that Veneration we owe to it.

There is therefore a more noble part of it behind, and that is, That though
God generally keeps to the Laws he has given, and Preserves the World as he
made it; yet he upon occasion interposes, and does as well Govern the World as
Preserve it; and as he can when he pleases stop the current of the violent
Ocean for a Passage to his People, and make the stars Judge. 5. 20.
in their courses to fight against their Enemies; so he does Govern the Wills
and Passions of Men, Prove. 21. 1.
and turns them as the rivers of water, to or from their Purpose and Design, or
promotes or hinders their Design from Success, as he thinks fit.

And if it be asked, Why he does not interpose in cases that seem to us to be
of the greatest Consequence, and which the Welfare of a Nation, the Safety of
his People, the Good of his Church, turn upon; Why, for example, he does not
prevent the Sufferings and Oppressions of Good Men?

I Answer, Because it is for a greater Good, sometimes to themselves, sometimes
to the Public, by making them an Example of Patience, Charity, and Constancy;
sometimes for the Advantage of the Church, and for the Propagation of Religion,
and always for his own Honor and Service. Need we a greater Instance of this
than the Sufferings and Death of our Blessed Savior, with which seemingly, the
Cause seemed to be lost; We trusted that it was he which should have redeemed
Luke 24. 21.
Israel, said the despairing Disciples.

And his Enemies thought they had prevented all after-growth of that Doctrine
he Taught, when they had Slain him, and made sure the Matthew. 27. 65.
Sepulcher by Sealing the Stone, and setting a Watch. But his Resurrection
baffled all their endeavors, and showed how consistent this his Crucifixion
was with the Divine Providence, proceeding from the Hand and Counsel of God.
Acts 4. 28.


Thus it happened, in a lower degree, with the Enemies of our Government,
Church, and Religion, who thought all at an end, when they had cut down the
Defender of it. But we know what the Event was, Confusion to themselves, and,
in process of time, a Glorious Deliverance and Restoration to our Ancient
Government, Liberties, and Established Religion.

And if God has these noble Ends in Prospect, and thus brings Good out of
Evil; the Objection is foreclos'd, and the mouth of all Gainsayers must be
stopped.

Thus it ordinarily is; and if in some cases this be not so evident, and the
Judgments of God prove a great deep* and too deep for us to fathom, it is no
more an Objection against a Providence, than it is an Argument that a Child is
not a Rational Creature, because at the present we cannot find in it the
exercise of a Human Understanding.

In many cases there is Faith and Expectation, and the farther Success and
Events of things, which we are to defer our Judgment to.

It is sufficient God does put forth such acts of a Divine Power in some
special Cases and Instances, as shall enforce the Perversest, the most Exodus 9.
27. 8. 19. Judge. 1. 7. Dan. 4. 37. Psalm. 58. (...)*
Inconsiderate, and the most Insolent of Mankind, the Pharaoh's and Magicians,
the Adonibezek's and the Nebuchadnezzar's, to confess, Verily there is a God
that judges in the earth.

And this will bring us nearer yet to the Subject of this Day, in the next
Head: Which is,

III. That God does in very eminent Instances, Cases, and Events, do Right to
his Providence, and to the Righteous Men that frequently Suffer and meet with
the hardest Usage in this World.

I shall not enlarge upon this Argument, but confine my self to what is
intimated in the Text, when the Punishment of Antecedent Crimes is transferred
to, and falls upon Successors; and an after-Age, or Ages, suffer for the
foregoing, whether Personal, Domestical, or National; this is intimated here,
That upon you may come all the righteous blood, etc. but more expressly is it in
that Clause, whom ye slew; which the Greek Particle (...), being in the
Singular, refers immediately to Zacharias; for it is not said the Blood of
Abel, and of all other Righteous Men throughout the World, which they shed, as
it is of Zacharias whom ye slew. Which shows, that it is in another relation
that they stood in to Zacharias than they did to Abel; and that was, because
Zacharias was slain by their Fathers, and which they owned to have for some
Ages been imputed to their Nation before the Captivity (as has been beforesaid).

The imputation of one Man's, or one Age's Sin, in the Punishment of it to
another; and that Princes have suffered for the People Prove. 28. 2.
, and People for their Princes 2 Samuel 21. 1.
, and Children for their Fathers, and an after-Generation for a foregoing, has
been owned by all; the Heathens are full of it, and the Scriptures often appeal
to it; and Levit. 26. 4. Dan 9. 16.
therefore this was a part of their solemn Confessions; and their Fathers
Iniquity, as well as their own, was either Confessed, or Disclaimed.

But it concerns us to look somewhat further into this Argument, for the use it
may be of. And in Discoursing upon it,

In prosecution of which I shall consider,

1. What those Sins are, whose Punishment above others is thus transferred.

2. The case of Persons, or Nations, with respect to those Sins.

3. What is to be done by way of relief and remedy.

As to the former, there are Two sorts of Sins, Personal and Relative; Personal
are such as in their Effects pass no farther than the Person, and respect not
others, when all the hurt is as to himself, bating only what it may be in the
Example; Ezekiel. 18. 20.
and then where the Sin rests, there rests the Punishment; and the soul that
sins, it shall dye; the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, --
and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself alone; as it is said in
the Prophet.

But now where the Sins are Relative, and respect others, and which they are
damnified by, then the Punishment is farther dilated and extended, and so it
falls upon the Person and the Posterity, as God the Supreme Lawgiver does
direct.

I acknowledge that there is one Sin, viz. That of Idolatry, to which a
Threatening of this kind is annexed, as we find it in the Second Commandment;
though it does not immediately affect others; but being it so directly struck
at the foundation of all Religion, and more especially that of the Jews (whose
Constitution was a Theocracy, immediately under God) there was this terrible
Sanction added to it, to make Persons the more cautious of Offending. But
otherwise the Sins so Threatened, and for which Persons in Succession were
Punished, were the Sins that the Interests of others, or the Public, were
concerned in and damnified by (as has been said)* The reason of which seems to
be, Because as to Personal Vices, the Offenders shall answer for them in
another World; where every Man shall bear his own Burden, and give an Account
of himself to God. But those Sins which respect others, and which the Welfare
and Peace of Societies are Prejudiced by, they (besides the Punishments in
reserve in the next Life) shall here be Punished for: And that they may be
deterred from such Practices, the Threatening involves their Posterity with
them; than which nothing, generally, more awes Mankind. And especially is this
more to be observed in those cases, which the Laws of Men cannot, or do not,
reach, or the Executive Power in a Government is too Weak to Punish.

I shall give an Instance or two of this kind, omitting others, viz.

1. Notorious Injustice; the Oppressing of others that are not able to Help, or
Right themselves.

In this case the Providence of God does often (I dare not say, always) concern
it self: So that if Restitution be not made, either the Person himself shall
see it moulder away before his Luke 12. 20.
Eyes, or is snatched away from it, as the Fool in the Gospel, with a, This
Night, -- and then whose shall all these things be which thou have provided? Or
suppose the Estate thus acquired be turned over entire to his Heir, some secret
Worm goes along with it, that like Jonah's Gourd it withers away, and he is
exposed to all the Miseries of an indigent Life; and ends, perhaps, where the
Father began.

The Observation is not new, nor rare; it was Proverbial among the Heathens, as
is well known, De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres; and no Nation but
can answer it in their own Language.

2. Another Instance is that of Blooddsheding, or Murder. The Life of Man is
easily taken away, and what any desperate Person may Command; and therefore
when nothing is more Valuable, or that the World in Succession more depends
upon, Almighty God by a special and early Law took care for the security of it.
Genesis 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For
which no satisfaction was to be allowed, and nothing less than Blood was
estimated as an equivalent for it, where it was discovered; and where it was
not, it was to lie upon the Place, till it was some way or other Expiated, and
as far as could be, there was an Atonement made. This was the case of unknown
Homicide under the Law, when Numb 35. 31.
the Elders of the City, next to the Slain, were required to wash their Hands
over the Heifer, and to say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have
our eyes seen it; be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, and lay not
innocent blood unto thy people's charge, and that blood shall be forgiven them.
So shall thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, Deuteronomy. 21. 3.
For Blood was said to Defile the Land, Numb. 35. 35.

From hence it appears that innocent Blood was reputed to lie upon the Land
till an Expiation was made. The proper Expiation was the Blood of the Guilty
himself, wherever he was to be found; and in that case there was no
Commutation, no Substitution, no Sacrifice allowed, but Life was to go for
Life, according to the Law, Numb. 35. 30, 31. Whosoever kills any person, the
murderer shall be put to death, -- Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life
of a murderer who is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to Death. If
he was not discovered, then the course before spoken of, in killing the Heifer,
and using the Rites prescribed on that occasion, was to be taken: And in either
of those cases, the Guilt went no farther. It was not then imputed to the
Nation, it lay wholly on him that committed the Fact; and who in the secret
Providence of God was to Answer for it.

But if it were discovered, and the Murderer was suffered to escape without
that condign and personal Punishment required; then besides what he himself
should account for to God, the Supreme Judge, the Charge fell upon the Place or
the People, and they were to Answer to God for it.

And this translation of the Guilt is so much the more Observable, as the Fact
is Aggravated by the Quality of the Person Suffering, and thus Used; or by the
Relation the Person or Persons Offending are in. It was so here, when they were
Righteous Men, and Prophets that were Slain, as Abel and Zacharias: And when it
was a National Act, as was the Killing of Zacharias, in which Fact there was a
concurrence of all Qualities and Degrees, as you may see it, 2 Chronicles. 24. 17,
21.

And this was above all manifest in the Case here tacitly referred to, which is
the Crucifixion of our Savior; and which that infatuated People fixed the
Guilt of upon themselves by an indelible Imprecation, when they cried out, His
blood be on us and our children, Matthew. 27. 25.

And there is somewhat like this, in the Fact which gave the sad Occasion to
this Day's Assembly; it was Heinous in it self, Aggravated by the Quality of
the Person, and too great a Concurrence in the Guilt of it, though not so great
as to make it Universal, or a National Crime. God forbid it should ever be so
in the Effects of it.

2. But this leads me to consider the Case; and that is Twofold.

(1.) Of those that are in the same State with their Ancestors, and are either
Guilty of the same Facts, or are of the same Temper with them. As is the case
of the Jews represented by our Savior, who though not Idolaters as their
Forefathers before the Captivity, were yet of the same rancorous temper; and
would in Fact be Guilty of the same Persecution of Righteous Men as they; and
so they might well be called their Children, whose measure they were hastening
to fill up. This is a Case all must acknowledge, and is agreeable to the common
Sense of Mankind.

(2.) There is the case of those, that though Descendants from such as have
been Guilty of great Crimes, yet are not involved in them; and so in reason may
be thought not obnoxious to any Punishment for their sakes, or for the sake of
what has been done by Progenitors. And the case is resolved in favor to such,
Ezekiel. 18. 4, 20. The soul that sins shall die, the son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, etc. according to the ancient Law given to that People,
Deuteronomy. 24. 16. The fathers shall not be put to death for their children, neither
shall the children be put to death for their fathers: every man shall be put to
death for his own sin.

But here we are to Observe, That the stress lies upon that, That the son shall
not be put to death 2 Kings 14. 6.
for the father; this was a standing Law they were to keep to, and which none
but Almighty God, the Great Lawgiver, could reverse, as he did, only in some
special cases, such as that of Dathan and Achan, Numb. 16. 32. Josh. 7. 24.

But it is not to be denied, that notwithstanding this, there are Cases in
which the Innocent may suffer for the Nocent; Innocent Posterity, I mean, for
their Nocent Ancestors, as has been beforeshewed. I acknowledge it is a
difficult matter to state this Case, as to all the Circumstances and Measures
of it. There is no constant Rule that the Providence of God inviolably keeps to
in the Government of the World; and whatever Judgment we may be liable to make
as to some Events, and in which the Power and Justice of God is conspicuous to
all; and however in some cases he may generally so proceed, as that we may
raise Maxims from thence; yet being it is not universally so, we are not to
apply them without great Caution, nor can we particularly apply them without
danger of mistake: Our Savior has taught us not to Judge rashly; in answer to
that Question put to him by his Disciples, Who John 9. 2.
did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?

That God may Punish one Generation for the Faults of another, is not
inconsistent with his Justice; and that he does so, is no uncommon Observation:
But this is not always visible; it sometimes, for ought appears to us, does not
proceed to such severity in the Instances belonging to this Argument.

What becomes us to Observe from hence, is to lay restraints upon our selves
from such a consideration, That as we would not leave a Curse behind us upon
our Posterity, so we should be Just and Faithful in all our Concernments.

And again, That we should prevent any such Curse from falling upon our selves,
that we may be liable to from our Forefathers; especially where there is a
manifest reason for a just suspicion at least. Which brings to

3. To consider what is to be done by way of relief and remedy, where this is
the case known, or vehemently suspected to be. If the case be altogether secret
or unknown, no Person is therein concerned, more than he is in such as are
simply Sins of Ignorance; in which a general Confession and Repentance is
sufficient. But in a case known, or much suspected, other measures are to be
taken.

And the first thing here to be proposed, is, That Posterity be very careful to
avoid those Sins, which they know, or may conceive, their Progenitors to have
been guilty of; because else they may be accountable, not only for those Sins
which are properly theirs, but for those of others so far as that Guilt loses
not by a progression, Genesis 15. 16. Rev. 14. 15.
but every Age Contributes their share; till (as it was with the Amorites) their
iniquity be full, and they become ripe for excision and destruction (as has
been before said).

And the next thing is, that they show their aversion to them by some
particular and special marks and significations of it. I acknowledge that there
are some cases so extreme, that such a remedy may come too late; and there are
some reasons why Almighty God will not altogether pass by the tokens of a high
displeasure. So it was with David, though a true Penitent. And 2 Samuel 12* 10,
14.
so it was with the Israelites, whom neither the Religion and Conduct of an
Excellent Prince, 2 Kings 23. 25.
Josiah; nor even the Intercession of such Pious Persons Jerem. 15. 1. Ezekiel.
14. 14.
as Noah, Job, and Moses, etc. could have saved.

But let the case be what it will, as we know not how far the Mercy of God may
extend, and Jonah 3. 9.
who can tell if God will turn and repent, as the Ninevites rightly argued; so
if it be otherwise determined, that God will not spare nor forgive as to
Temporal Punishment; yet such Persons, and such a People, have done all that is
possible for them to do, and must submit the whole to the secret Judgment of
God.

From the whole we may be able to judge of the Case before us this day. The
Crime was indeed Public and Notorious, but I am not willing to call it
National; for a National Act implies a National Consent, and a National Consent
is by a Universal Voice of the Community of all degrees, or by their proper
Representatives. But the Contrivers and Executors of this Bloody Design, were
far from being in such a Capacity, being no more truly the Representatives of
the People, than Pirates and Robbers, that for a season obtain so strong a
Force as is not to be opposed.

All that can be said is, That too great a part of the Nation might have been
guilty of such things as gradually and insensibly led to it, and contrary to
whatever they forethought, ended in it; or at least our other crying sins (as
the Office for the Day signifies) might have provoked Almighty God to suffer it
so to be.

This may render it a suspected case, and what may be a reason sufficient for a
National Humiliation; as it was of Job's Sacrifice, it may Job 1. 5.
be, says he, that my sons have sinned, in their Festival Entertainments.

And accordingly we have the proper course taken by the Nation and their
Representatives (as soon as it was in its own power) to prevent any further
Punishment, and that was to disclaim it before God and Men, and to show their
Resentment of it by the most public Declaration, and their Establishing an
Anniversary Day of Fasting and Humiliation, that whatever Guilt might lie upon
the Nation, by that means, might be averted.

And we have good reason to hope this course has not failed of success, and
that God has had, and will have a Favor for us, and be Merciful to us, by the
many Testimonies he has given us of it in our frequent Deliverance, in a
wonderful manner, from those Dangers which threatened us, and we were
encompassed with, wherein he has done right to his Providence, and showed that
there is nothing too hard for him to do.

What remains, but that this should be a warning to all, that they be cautious
how far they engage in any Design against the Public Peace and Welfare of a
Nation; that they press not too near upon the fences of Government, lest by
some violent motion they be transported beyond the conduct of their own Reason
and Duty. For as no Man is safe in his own custody without the Divine Aid; so
neither is he in his own custody if he is not watchful over himself. And when
he is neither in his own keeping, nor in that of Divine Providence (as He is
not that ventures beyond the bounds of his Duty) who can tell how far he will
go, or what the event may be?

But however, let Men be as bad as they will, and want neither boldness to
undertake a bad Design, even that of Assassinating Princes, nor others to
instigate them; let Princes be fearless of Danger (as David was, 2 Samuel 21.
16.) and be never so liable to it; yet He that is higher Eccles. 5. 8.
than the highest regards, and there be higher than they, that will Protect
them. It is that Divine Providence, that not only sits at the Helm, and steers
all Public Counsels and Affairs, but also watches over the Persons and Lives
of the greatest Monarchs (who stand in as much need of such an Invisible Guard,
as we of their Protection).

And what therefore, as it becomes the greatest to Acknowledge, and to Implore
the Protection of for themselves, so what it becomes all that are Lovers of
their Prince, their Country, and their own Interest to join in, according to
the Apostle's direction, I exhort, that first of all (in a more especial
manner) supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving thanks, be made for
all men: for kings, and all that are in authority; that we may lead, etc. For
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God, 1 Timothy 2. 1.

FINIS.

