A SERMON PREACHED UPON THE Fifth of November, 1678.

By a Protestant Divine.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1678.

PSALM. LXXXIII. 3, 4. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy hidden ones: They have said, Come, and let us cut them
off from being a Nation, that the name of Israel be no more in remembrance.
THIS Psalm may either refer to some particular time, when the Land of Israel
had War with, and was invaded by the Edomites, Ismaelites, and the other
Nations spoken of here, ver. 6, 7, 8; as it was in the Reign of David, 2 Samuel
8. 1, etc. and Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 1, 10. Or else it may be applied to the
condition of the Jews with respect to the several enemies which they had from
time to time, to the Captivity. At which time especially we find the Amonites
and Moabites, the Edomites and Philistines, in Ezekiel. 25, with those of Tire,
chap. 26, to have been sworn enemies to the welfare of Israel, and to have
rejoiced in the destruction and captivity of that people. Upon which of these
occasions this Psalm was penned, it is not so fit to determine, as it is to
observe the lively representation that is here made of the enmity which the
wicked do bear to the Church and people of God; and of the need which the
Church has of, and of the protection it finds by the Divine Providence.

The Jews were a typical people, an emblem of what the Church was like to be,
and of what it was like to meet with in future ages. They were seldom or never
without enemies, and those enemies never without mischievous designs, which
they laid with great cunning, and prosecuted with all their might; but they
were also never without a defense, and with which they were always safe. The
enemies might advise and conspire, confederate, assemble and join together;
they might proceed, and promise themselves success in their design; but as long
as Israel was the Church of God, it was safe: and as till it needed
persecution, it should be preserved from it; so till it deserved it, should
never be forsaken. This is the account which the Psalmist gives of the state of
that Church with respect to its enemies that sought to destroy it, and with
respect to God, who took care to preserve it.

In the Words we have,

1. An evil design laid and contrived, which was to destroy the people of God;
They have taken counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden
ones.

2. Their Confederacy in this design; They have said, come, and let us cut them
off. So again, verse. 5, They have consulted together with one consent: they are
confederate against thee.

3. The success which they promised themselves in it; Come, and let us cut them
off; as if it was what they could as soon do as say; what they could not be
opposed or prevented in.

Accordingly I shall show,

1. That the wicked do bear an enmity to the Church of God, and seek the
destruction of it. Where I shall consider whence that does proceed.

2. In what ways they do show this enmity, and what course they take to afflict
and destroy the Church.

3. The confidence which they have of success.

4. By way of Supplement, I shall show by what ways their designs may be
prevented, and their enterprises overthrown.

First, I shall consider the enmity which the wicked bear to the Church of God,
and from whence that does proceed.

When we consider what the Church of God is, and of what excellent persons its
Family does consist, and by what excellent Rules it is ordered, we may think it
as safe from all outward violence, as from any inward distemper; and that it
should not find any enemies, since it does not by any just invitations make
them. From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not hence, even
of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust and have not: ye kill and
desire to have. James 4. 1. ^. When men do greedily desire what another does
possess, and use violence to thrust him out of his right that they themselves
may enjoy it: when they do envy the good of others, and do maliciously
endeavor to supplant them in it: when they do seek to revenge themselves upon
those that have done them a real injury, or that have prevented them from doing
it to another; they grow quarrelsom and contentious, and fill the World with
divisions and strifes, hatred and variance, blood and slaughter. But now when
men are meek and peaceable, when they are not forward to do any wrong to
others, and backward to resent what they receive from them; one would think
that they are as secure from receiving, as they are above the design of doing
any hurt; as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3. 13, Who will harm you if ye be
followers of that which is good? This is indeed often the reward of meekness,
and modesty, of integrity and faithfulness, of justice and honesty, of goodness
and piety, that it gains the good will and the good word of others, and
procures peace and safety to those that practice it. But yet it is no rare
thing for the best of men, and the best Religion in the World to meet with
fierce oppositions and sharp persecutions. An instance of which is the people
of Israel, who were continually practiced upon, invaded and assaulted by those
that were their neighbors. We find that no tie or obligation could secure them
against, or engage others to be for them, but that they watched and took all
advantages to surprise, to spoil and to ruin them. Some of these nations spoken
of in this Psalm, had more reason to be their Friends than their Enemies. The
Ishmaelites descended directly from Abraham, and the Hagarens are supposed to
be his posterity also by Keturah, whom some think to have been Hagar that he
took again after Sarah's death. The Moabites and Ammonites were the offspring
of Lot. The Edomites sprung from Esau the brother of Jacob: And which three
last, besides this relation by blood, had a particular reason to forbear all
Acts of Hostility, as they were not disturbed by the Israelites when they
passed by them into Canaan, Deuteronomy. 2. 5, 9. The rest of them were such whom
Israel did not disturb or invade, unless when invaded, contenting themselves
with what was given them by the decree, and order, and appointment of God. But
it is not always quietness and innocence that are a sufficient protection; even
that, when nothing else can be the foundation of a quarrel, shall serve to make
it. So that the Church may be persecuted without fault, and may fare ill, not
because it is worse, but better than those it receives injury from: and that
will appear if we consider from whence this does proceed.

1. This proceeds from the craft and policy, the malice and spite of the Devil,
who being a competitor with God for dominion in the World, and whose whole
design it is to defeat him in the good that he would do for mankind, does
perpetually labor to put a stop to whatever may be offered toward the
delivering of the Souls of men out of his snare. How does he triumph in being
the god of this World, and in the success that he has upon poor and miserable
mortals; most of whom he has in all ages made his tributaries and vassals; and
by whom he was so generally served and obeyed, that it was but in a spot of the
earth that God was truly worshipped, a Country not above 200 miles in length,
and 80 in breadth. So Psalm. 147. 19, 20, He shows his word unto Jacob: his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation,
and as for his judgments they have not known them. Whatever good men might be
scattered through the World, and however Religion might be preserved in some
particular Families and Tribes of other nations, (as it was in that of Job and
his friends) yet there was no entire nation that kept up the Religion of the
only true God, besides that of the Jews. When mankind had basely degenerated,
and the state of the World grew worse and worse, God chose out the people of
Israel for his peculiar service; and as for other ends, so to be an instrument
of winning others over to the same practice. This people he separated from the
rest of the World; and by his dealings with them, in dividing the Seas,
piercing the Rocks, destroying the nations for them, and preserving them when
threatened with the greatest dangers, so that no violence could hurt them, nor
power disposses them, nor any thing destroy them but their sins; by these and
the like ways he made them conspicuous to the Nations far and near, and pu^
such upon enquiring whence all this should proceed* and so at length they might
be won to own the same God, and put themselves under his protection. So Deuteronomy.
4. 6, Keep therefore and do them [my statutes] for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of all the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes, and say, surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
So Verse. 32. 33, 34. and Chap. 26. 18, 19.

And when God had so visibly separated a people to himself from all the World,
and that by such eminent tokens of his presence with them, he had made them and
himself known to the World, it was no wonder that the Devil set himself with
all his might to prevent this growing-danger that threatened his Kingdom, and to
provide that his dominions which he had kept hitherto entire to himself, might
not be invaded; and what he had usurped might not be wrested out of his hands;
Nothing should in such a case be wanting on his part that either his wit could
invent, or his power perform; and so without doubt he did stir up enemies to
assault, vex and destroy them. And he that did thus bestir himself in the first
settlement of a National Church, cannot be thought to have forgot himself or to
neglect his cause so far, as not to use an industry great and sufficient in
proportion to the danger that was approaching; when no less a design was set on
foot than of bringing the whole world into the same condition, and making al^
mankind to adore the King of kings, and Lord of lords in the same way. When
this design was laid, and such a power appeared in its behalf, as threw him out
of his Empire in a shameful way, and tore up the foundations of it; we may
suppose that he would bend all his forces that way, and that all his Crew would
take up Arms to oppose whatever was like to procure the total overthrow of that
Empire he had so long enjoyed. Then the gates of Hell, all the power and policy
of it, would combine against the Church which Christ established so much to the
prejudice of the Devils dominion. It Is said Revel. 12. 12, 13. Woe to the
inhabiters of the earth, and of the Sea: for the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. And when
the Dragon saw that he was castout unto the earth, he persecuted the woman
which brought forth the man-child. He that prided himself before in the extent
of his dominions and numbers of his Subjects, being deprived of that Supremacy,
breaks forth into the greatest rage against all the deserters of his
government, and seeks to destroy those whom he could not retain and keep firm
to him. And this is one cause why the Church of God meets with opposition and
persecution, as the Devil is concerned in the quarrel, and does instigate bad
men to manage and to carry it on.

Secondly, It proceeds from the restless tempe^ of wicked men, whose minds are
set upon mischief and that do catch at all opportunities for it. It is said of
such, Prove. 1. 16, that their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.
And Chap. 4. 16, 17. They sleep not except they have done mischief: and their
sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of
wickedness, and drink the wine of violence. Wherefore they are fitly compared
to the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
Isaiah 57. 20.

When sin has erected its Empire, and come to be predominant, it then becomes
an interest; and the heart of man which of it self is perpetually in motion,
will then, being made a party, move strongly in its desires and designs that
way which by such a depraved temper it is directed to. It Is always then
prepared for action; and as it is habitually disposed, so being awakened by the
least occasion, it presently is all on fire, and engages in the quarrel. It
will then appear in the Cause of Sin, and fight its battles; and whatever does
obstruct and oppose it, shall be looked upon and dealt with as an Enemy. This
does all sin more or less wherever it is. But there are some sinners that from
their own natural temper, or their manner of life, are more unquiet than
others, and whom it is necessary for the peace and safety of the world, to find
out some employment for (as they say it is for a Spirit when it is raised by
the power of charms and witchcraft) and to watch over them, or else they will
be perpetually hatching and doing of mischief. Such especially are they that
^ive in Cloisters and Frieries, that having no set and fixed employments to
take up their minds, are listening to all news, greedy of understanding the
state of affairs, prying into every ones concerns, busying themselves in
finding out what others think, design, or do: and therefore it is that there is
no part of their office which they are so diligent in, and expert at, as that
of hearing confessions; This they can abide by all the day, when they have
thereby* an opportunity of diving into the hearts, and drawing out the secrets
of others; of understanding the tempers of persons, the state of Families,
Towns, and Kingdoms. These are very dangerous persons wherever they do reside.
It Is such as these that will not suffer Princes or People to be quiet (where
they are admitted and indulged) but are perpetually instigating them, and
putting them forward upon dangerous enterprises. These, that pretend to be
under an Obligation not to divulge the secrets of Confession (although a
Prince, and Parliament, and thousands of People suffer by the concealment of
it, as it had likely to have proved in the Gunpowder-Treason) make their
advantage of these to breed ill blood, to foster and promote jealousies and
contentions betwixt Prince and people, betwixt Nation and Nation, that their
Cause may be promoted by it, and by this means others may be made unable to
hurt them, or defend themselves. It Is but fit therefore, since such have chosen
the life of a Cloister, that they should be confined to it, or else they are
enough to set all the World on fire, and to draw men into perpetual quarrels
and contentions. These are they that keep the Church from being quiet, and
Christians from the practice of those duties that tend to the peace, the order,
and the security of it.

3. It proceeds from the interest of wicked men, as it is Verse. 3. They have
consulted against thy hidden ones, or as (...) is rendered Psalm 17. 14. Thy
treasures. So Verse. 12. They say, let us take to our selves the houses [or
ornaments] of God in possession. The riches of the Temple, amongst other
things, did, it seems, invite their avarice. And this is frequently a reason of
the enmity of such. The Church may either have somewhat which they want; or
else if it should prevail, deprive them of somewhat which they have, and so
gives therefore sufficient ground of a quarrel. The Apostle tells us of some
men, whose God is their belly, and that mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. and
of others, whose gain is godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5, that are no further for
Religion than Religion is for them, and make use of that Sacred Name to obtain
or secure their secular interest; and if this be opposed, Hell it self shall be
moved, and all that power and policy can do, employed to protect it. Religion
it self shall be abandoned, and the Church of God harassed and persecuted, if
they make against it.

This is one great reason of the quarrel betwixt us and the Church of Rome, and
of all those attemps made upon us by a Foreign Power. England is a fruitful
Country, and the people, of their own temper, inclined to devotion; and it was
a plentiful harvest which some men reaped here in former times from
Peter Pence, and First Fruits, and Pensions, and Appeals, and Dispensations,
and Indulgences, and Jubilees, and Pilgrimages; they were goodly days when
there were frequent returns in these kinds from hence to Rome: but now that
there is a great Gulf fixed, by Laws and Statutes and Penalties, betwixt us
and them, so that they which would pass from hence to them cannot; neither can
they pass to us, that would come from thence about such affairs without danger,
whilst those Laws are in being, and are put in execution; their bank is sunk,
and they would fain be returning to their old quarter. There are Abbeys, and
Monastries, Frieries and Nunneries, with noble Manors and large Demesnes;
there are Benefices and Colleges which they thirst after. These are the Souls
that they so dearly prize and venture so hard to rescue out of the fire; these
are the Proselytes which they above all labor to gain: and because they are
still kept out, what broils and stirs do they make? what do they not threaten
and endeavor? And besides, there is danger, lest if they invade not us, that
we should grow upon them, and other people begin to be wise as well as ours.
Such also may come to see that Religion consists not in the visiting of a
Church, or looking devoutly upon a Relic, or kissing a piece of wood, or
bowing to an Image, or crossing the breast, or in singring of Beads, or saying
Prayers by tale, or being clad with the Robe of St. Francis, or walking
barefoot, or in being all night locked up in a Cloister, or in fasting by
eating of Fish, or in lighting up of Tapers, and making processions, and a
thousand of the like apish and fantastical Ceremonies; nay, they might come to
understand, that the Pope is not Christ's Vicar, nor his Holiness Infallible;
nor that he has power to deliver Souls out of Purgatory; and what is more,
that there is no such place as Purgatory, and so no need of praying for the
dead, nor of Money to purchase those prayers. This is a great reason why our
Religion in the Church of England, which is a Reformation of those corrupt
errors and practices that are crept into the Church of Rome, is so much
disliked and inveighed against by the Popish faction. For what would Rome
signify if it had no supremacy over other Churches? what appeals would be made
thither? what directions, commands and grants would be expected thence, if each
had as much authority within it self, as that now claims over all? If the rest
of the Apostles had authority equal with St. Peter; if all their successors in
the several parts of the World, were of the same degree, and none had
superiority over the rest; if the Church of Ephesus where St. John was, or that
of Jerusalem where St. James did preside, had as much privilege as that of
Rome, then she might sit as a widow in respect of what for these last ages she
has been, and be bereaved of all that Pomp and Greatness, that Wealth and
Magnificence that she has abounded in.

Again, if there be no infallibility amongst them, if their Popes have mistaken
in point of faith, and their decrees have been erroneous; if their Councils
have miscarried in their determinations; if Tradition has failed in what they
pretend to be conveyed down by it; if their Church, that is, be no better
than others; and whatever it pretends to, can really claim no better
infallibility; Then what need will there be of being solicitous and inquisitive
about what she shall require or determine? what need any one take a long
journey thither, when he may with greater ease and as much certainty have his
case resolved at home? Could that Church do no more than others, and had it no
such thing as a treasure of Merits and Superarogaions, no public and general
stock from whence such may be relieved as having made little conscience of
Religion whilst they lived, have no other claim to the privileges of it when
they come to dye; where would be the profit that does daily accrue to it by the
issuing out of Indulgences? Were there nothing in the Relics that are showed
by them, and no more in that Blood of Christ which they expose to the view and
veneration of the people, than that of a Duck (as my Lord Herbert in his
History of Henry the 8 th. says it was found to be) were there no more in the
Stairs of Pilate which the people with great devotion do climb up at Rome, and
expect great Indulgences for, than in those of an ordinary Church, who would
make such tedious Pilgrimages thither? If Purgatory be yet a place to be
discovered; and what there is not so much proof of, as for a World in the Moon;
if the proof of it depends upon Legends and Apparitions, etc. what will become
of the Dirges and Prayers offered for the dead, and of the Priests whose
incomes much depend upon it? If their Priests can do no more than ours, and to
the eye and experience of the world, make no more alteration upon the Bread and
the Wine consecrated by them, than what is consecrated by us; that after all
their ceremony and a do about it, it is no other than what it was before, is of
no other color or taste, is of no more weight, and takes up no more room than
before; what will become of the veneration that the Priest obtains, and the
profit that he makes by it? If they can forgive sins upon no other terms than
we, and repentance and amendment of life must be the condition of it, What
becomes of all their Dispensations, Pardons, Penances and Indulgences? If these
and the like things fail, and that they are in the same condition with other
Churches, a great part of their gain and dominion is lost. And it is no wonder
that they exclaim against us, that are so bold as to question and deny what
they would in these and the like particulars impose upon the Christian world.
They do then with as great reason set themselves against us, as Demetrius and
the Crafts-men did oppose St. Paul and his associates, Acts 19. 25, Sirs, Ye
know that by this craft we have our wealth. This, this is a case puts them hard
to it, and therefore they are concerned, nearly concerned to see that this
Heresy spreads no further, and to root it up wherever it has already
prevailed.

4. It may proceed from the excellency of a Church, when it does outshine them
in the best and truest Perfections, and that true goodness and substantial
piety is there taught and practiced. When it is not taken up with little
things, with imageries and fantastical appearances, but that the Religion it
owns is what tends to make men better, and that they are made by it not so much
Proselytes to a particular way, as to Virtue and Christianity. Give me a
Religion that works this way, that we may lay hold upon, that gives such rules
and directions as will abide the examination, and last throughout ages, and are
of good use to the world. There are some principles which run all into Air, and
carry you away till you know not where you are; that hoise a man above ground,
and make him full of selfconceit; and which he is so mighty fond of, that all
that are not as fanciful as himself, shall be accounted Heretics and what not.
This is too true of some amongst our selves, and it is also as true of the
Romish Church, that talk of infallibility, infallibility, and yet the Popes and
their own Councils have as grossly mistaken, as those that never pretend to it;
that talk of Absolution and Indulgence, and yet men's sins are no otherwise
forgiven than upon the terms of the Gospel, such as Faith, Repentance and new
Obedience (as the soberer of themselves acknowledge); that tell of Christ's
being bodily present at the Sacrament, flesh and blood as much as our selves,
and yet he is no otherwise to be seen than by our plain way of Faith, unless
they take fancy for another. These and the like notions are full of wind, and
make their Religion look big and bulky, but its either all art, and not nature;
or, what is worse, the distemper and not the constitution of it: It Is a
Religion so far of their own making, and which is made to serve an interest.
But now if a Church is plain in its Doctrine, grave in its Directions,
substantial in its Principles, and what drive at present practice (as these of
ours do), it shall be struck at by these kind of Hectors; and if they could,
banished out of the world.

5. It may proceed from the disposal of Divine Providence, that for the
punishing of the sins of a Church, does not only suffer others to afflict her,
but turn their displeasure that way. When the heart is of it self bent upon
mischief, and full fraught with evil and pernicious inclinations and designs,
God may make use of that temper for the serving of his own Providence, and may
direct it as he pleases without being guilty of the sin of it. So Psalm. 105.
25, He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtly with his
servants. Their heart before was corrupt and mischievous, and he made use of it
for the serving of his own design; He does not infuse this into such, or
necessitate them by any absolute decree or act of his own to be ambitious, or
proud, or covetous, or cruel, but it is what he finds; and the direction of it
to such objects, does no more make him the Author of it, than that person that
divides and directs the Stream, can be the maker of it. It is what he finds to
his hands, and what he does only order and dispose of.

And thus much is intimated in the phrase used in Scripture of stirring up an
adversary. God by his disposal ordering and directing the inclinations of men
that were before in the heart, according as time and occasion requires. This
is plain in what is said, 1 Kings 11. 14, The Lord stirred up an adversary unto
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite, he was of the Kings seed in Edom. Hadad being
beaten out of his Country by David, and forced to take shelter under the King
of Egypt, did doubtless wait an opportunity of returning, and yet
notwithstanding, we had nothing of any attempts made by him that way till the
latter end of Solomon (to whom God had promised a peaceable reign, as long as
he continued to serve him) when his wives had turned away his heart after other
gods, verse. 4. and then Hadad is said to have desired Pharoah's leave to
depart, verse. 21. God then making use of the settled inclinations of his mind,
in punishment to Solomon for his Apostasy. So God is said to send the Assyrian,
Isa. 1^. 5, 6. His pride and vain glory, were what did engage him to invade the
dominions of others, verse. 7. 8, It is in his heart to destroy, and cut off
nations not a few. For he says, are not my Princes altogether Kings? And God
served himself of this temper of his, and turned him upon the people of Gods
wrath, as the Children of Israel are there called. So he is said to bring
Nebuchadnezzar against them, Jer. 25. 9. So that a Church and people may come
thus to suffer through Gods wise and powerful ordination, as they by their sins
have provoked him to anger; and when it has done this work, and served this
end, and that by it they are brought to repentance, the same hand that brought
it on will carry it off.

2. I shall proceed to the second general, which is to observe the ways in
which they show this enmity, or the course which they take for the destruction
of the Church; and that is, deep consultation and joint endeavor, They take
crafty counsel, and are confederate.

And this is the most likely way to accomplish a design, when it is cunningly
contrived, and closely prosecuted. For all the action in the world, without
good consultation, may be baffled and disappointed; and the shrewdest
consultation without vigorous action will come to nothing; but when both these
do meet, it has the fairest hopes of success. And this the Adversaries of the
Church are not wanting in, who do too often surmount in both, those that have
the best cause, and whose greatest interest it is to defend it. But there are
particular ways which such do take. As,

1. Slandering their adversaries, and raising false reports of them. They are
then dealt with as the primitive Christians were by their persecutors, who were
dressed up in the skins of such Creatures as would the more exasperate and
invite the wild beasts to which they were exposed, to tear and devour them;
they shall be represented as Hypocrites and Deceivers, as Heretics and
Infidels, as pernicious and dangerous. So it was with the Christians of old,
who were said to be Atheists and contemners of all Religion, and guilty of the
foulest crimes, as Sacrilege, Sedition, Incest and Murder; and it is no wonder
when thus represented, that some of the best of the Heathenish Emperers made
Laws and Edicts against them, and followed them with severe persecutions, as
Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus, till they were made to understand better by
their Apologists. And so it happens often in the World, that Religion for want
of being understood, and the Religious for want of being truly known, are evil
entreated by them that mean well. But as such by mistake and misreport may
become Enemies to what is good, thinking it to be evil; so bad men are willing
to have it so, and do therefore take all occasions to asperse Religion, that
they may expose that and those that are better than themselves to obloquy and
reproach; for by how much the more they can cast dirt upon them, by so much the
more do they think themselves vindicated. And this is no small artifice of the
Church of Rome, in the foul dealing which they show to those that will not own
its authority, and submit to its unlimited Jurisdiction; they will take Hell it
self for calumnies, and say any thing that will serve to disgrace them. They
will dress them up as the poor people that are condemned for Heresy by the
Inquisition, in Sanbenito's and Coats painted over with Owls and Devils, to
make them ridiculous or worse, and to take the people off from condoling their
misfortune; they will describe their adversaries in Characters of blood and
soot, and what not, to set the people on with fury, and render them implacable.
Thus we find they did by Luther, whom they will needs have to dye, just when he
had entertained his Friends with merry conceits, and had been entertained at a
plentiful Supper, and that immediately his Soul was carried away by Devils;
when the truth is, that after he had been long troubled with a pain in his
breast, and was brought by it under great weakness, he was in continual
expectation of death; (though he ceased not to Preach as he had any
intermission) and the night that he died, though weak, yet set down with his
Friends, discoursing about the state in Heaven, and whether we shall then know
one another; and then retiring, according to his custom, to private Prayer, he
found that his pain increased; and perceiving, after some hours, that his end
drew near, he exhorted his Friends, and declared his perseverance in the Faith;
and praying with great fervency, concluded that and his life together, with,
Father into thy hands I commit my spirit; thou have redeemed me, O God of truth.

So they tell us that Calvin was given to gluttony and Epicurism, and was
branded for Sodomy at Noviodunum, where he was born; whereas he was a man of
great abstinence, never eating any thing for Ten years before his death till
evening; and is cleared of the latter by Jacob le Vasseur Dean of Noviodunum,
in his Book which he published of the Annals of that Church in 1633. Thus would
they make our Religion and all that profess it, look miscreantly in the eyes of
the world, that they might fall on us without mercy, and worry us with some
reputation.

2. By dividing the Church, and setting one part of it against the other. It Is
the policy of the Church of Rome, that though they have more and greater
divisions amongst them, as about the seat of infallibility it self (which is a
fundamental principle with them) than we, yet that there is a superior power
to crush them; and though they cannot be reconciled and put to an end, yet that
that puts them to silence, and so they are kept from doing mischief. But where
persons have a free liberty, and few or no restraints laid upon them, they are
tempted to break into parties, and those parties are apt to break one against
the other, by which means they are often made a prey to the common Adversary.
And I pray God this be not the event of this state with us. I am sure there
has not been wanting endeavor on their part to effect it; endeavor I say, to
make and aggravate and perpetuate differences, that so all might lie at their
mercy. How do they sort with all persons, strike into all Societies, take upon
themselves the guise of all parties, that they may bring each to war against
other, and fight the battles of Rome whilst they fight one with the other, and
all may fall a Sacrifice to its fury.

3. By downright force: that when other means do fail, or that they are weary
of expecting what will be the issue of them, they do without more ado, run to
their Arms, and bring the Cause to a decision in open Field. In open Field, say
I, I wish that were all; nay they will assassinate and massacre, blow up or
burn, or do any thing that either treachery or cruelty can teach them. This is
too true a Character of the Church of Rome, That ever since it first drew the
sword in the time of Hildebrand, never knew what it was to sheath it again, but
that has prosecuted it is Cause by force of Arms to this day. It Is that which
has claimed a Jurisdiction over Princes, and a power to depose and dethrone
them. It Is that which has disposed of their Kingdoms, and given Subjects
authority to rebel against them. It Is that which has raised Armies, and
animated Princes to head them against the Laws of Nations. It Is to that we are
beholding for 88, when with the Popes blessing, no less than a Fleet of 130
Ships, with 19290 Soldiers on board, besides Seamen, was sent to invade
England, and despoil Queen Elizabeth of her Crown and Kingdom. But what is all
this to their bloody Conspiracies! An Army cannot move without giving an Alarm,
it awakens others, and puts them upon their guard; but when the malice walks
like the pestilence in darkness, and is disguised either with the shows of
friendship and peace, or else lies out of all discovery, it is far more
dangerous. This makes the Church or people against whom it is designed, more
secure; and the Enemy more confident of success. Which brings to the fourth
general.

4. Here is the confidence that they have of success, and that may proceed from
the review which they take of their own policy and strength, and from the
observation which they make of the weakness of their adversaries; weak perhaps
of themselves, weaker perhaps with their divisions; weak because they are
secure, and not aware of an assault; and weak because they have made no
provision against it. Confident again they may be of success because the design
lies out of sight, and what is not easily discovered, though they are never so
inquisitive; when it lies under ground in Vaults or Cellars, as it was in the
Gunpowder-Treason; or what is so well banded together, that it cannot be well
prevented, though never so watchful, as that in 88. Confident again they may be
of success; because it is masked and disguised, that it is carried on whilst
they pretend peace, friendship, and alliance. So was the Parisian Massacre,
Anno 1572, when under the pretense of great friendship, upon the marriage
betwixt the King of Navar and Margaret sister to the King of France, the
Protestants in great numbers were drawn into the City, and then above 30000 of
them barbarously murdered. So it was in 88, when a peace was propounded, and
Commissioners on both sides sent to treat about it, with great and solemn
protestations on the Prince of Parma's side that no invasion was intended, and
yet within a few days after this, the Invincible (as it was called) Armado set
forth from Spain. So again in 1605, there were sent from the Pope orders to
forbid Conspiracies against the Government, whilst at the same time the
Gunpowder-Treason was not without his privity in agitation. Whilst these and
the like arts are used, it is no wonder that they promise themselves good
assurance of carrying the day, and that in good time they shall prevail over
them that they have thus far blinded and infatuated. But let not him that
girdeth on his harness, boast himself, as he that puts it off; nor talk too
confidently of success, till he is sure of it. For in this case there is a
promise of God that is surer than all the counsels and power of men, which is,
That the gates of Hell shall never prevail against the Church; and as God will
always have a Church in the world, do men or Devils what they can; so also a
particular Church shall reap the benefit of that promise, if they take the
course pointed to in this Psalm, which brings to the fourth General.

4. The course by which the Church and People of God may and shall be secured;
intimated here, verse. 1, Keep not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, and
be not still, O God; Which is fervent prayer to God, and entire dependence upon
him: in sum, the behaving themselves as those that are his servants; for then
God will be their Friend, and their Patron, and they will be as secure
notwithstanding the power of the enemy, as if they had no enemy to encounter,
or that enemy had no power to assault them. Then they shall find that verefied,
which is said, Isa. 8. 9, 10, Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye of far countries: Gird your selves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces: Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces: Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and
it shall not stand: for God is with us. Let us then betake our selves to this
course, and engage the Divine Protection by our importunate prayers to God, and
a due conformity to his commands, that we make good our profession by a
suitable practice, and as much exceed our adversaries in the life and spirit of
our Religion, as we do in the Purity and Principles of it; and then we shall
find, that though they may dig deep, their counsel shall be brought to light;
though they combine together, they shall be broken; though they summon up all
their force they shall be defeated, and we shall then be able to say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 6, The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do
unto me. Thus our Ancestors were delivered. Our Fathers trusted in thee: they
trusted, and thou did deliver them: They cried unto thee, and were delivered:
they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. And to encourage you hereunto, I
shall give you a brief account of Gods great mercy to them and this Church, in
the deliverance which we are this day met to commemorate, and that I shall do
in the order of the Text.

Their design was to root out the Protestant Religion; A Religion that has the
Scriptures, and the practice of the Primitive Church to defend it; a Religion
planted amongst us, with peace, and by Authority; that made not its way by
blood and slaughter, by rebellion and disobedience; that was settled without any
injury to the Prince, or prejudice to the people, and what did hugely tend to
the security of both: A Religion that dealt heartily and fairly with those that
were against it, and was never an enemy to them, till they became an enemy to
it; First, by receiving and owning the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus, that meant no
less than to depose the Queen, and turn her out of her Throne, and then
practicing accordingly. A Religion, that when in its own defense it had Laws
against such, yet rarely put them into execution; and that notwithstanding
which, many of them held Offices, and all their Estates, unless forfeired by
some particular Treason. This Religion which has so much to say for it self,
and God has so much honor, and we our comfort and salvation by; nay, this
Religion which they lived so safely under, did they seek to subvert.

And that in a way so barbarous, that it wants both parallel and defense, and
which the boldest of that Way cannot hear of without*blushing; and howsoever
they would have been in the success of it, cannot find any thing to excuse.

To Murder a King in their way, was no new case; so fell Frederick the second,
and Henry the seventh, Emperors; so fell our King John, so fell also Henry the
third and fourth of France. To Butcher a people; and without respect to Order,
Age, or Sex, to fall upon them, was what the Albigenses felt of old, and those
of France in the Massacre at Merindol, Anno 1545. and at Paris before spoken
of, had experience of. But when Prince, Parliament, and People were to be
assembled, without any regard to what they were, to blow them up all at once
with Gunpowder, and scatter the limbs of 30 or 40000 persons that must then
have necessarily perished by that practice, was what we are yet to find a name
for, and what Treason and Murder are too soft words to express.

And this was not the Act of some rash and inconsiderate person, but what many
confederated together in; not a design all on a sudden thought of, and as
suddenly embraced, but what had been considered and reviewed, and advised upon;
what Flanders and Rome had been consulted about, as the Transactions of
Baldwin, Owen, and Baynham do sufficiently witness. It was what they had spent
much time and many thoughts upon, and what they therefore did promise
themselves success in. And success they found, for they quickly met with an
house fit for their purpose, adjoining to that of the Parliament; there they
attempted to make a Mine fit for the receiving the stowage which they had
provided. But the time of the Parliament's sitting came on too fast, they
wanted hands, and their own hands wanted exercise in such hard labor to bring
this to perfection; and here again success waited upon them, and fortune (which
they called providence) seemed to be of their party; for the Parliament was
adjourned from February to November; and they in the mean while also met with a
Vault which they soon hired, and was more convenient for their purpose, as what
was already sitted for them, and nearer to the place of the Parliaments
convention.

The time now grew near, and they are big with expectation; the train was laid
for their design in the Country as well as here, and in all parts they were
ripe for action. But that which went on for so long a time as smoothly as their
hearts could wish, was all on a sudden interrupted. For ten days before (which
was the same time that the Conspirators appointed to assemble) one of them
doubtless by the overruling Providence of God, more tenderhearted than the
rest, wrote a Letter to the Lord Monteagle to dissuade him from being present
the first day of the Session.

A Letter in the reasoning of it very obscure; but what by the fortunate
interpretation of the King was found to signify much, and proved the happy
discoverer of the whole. Then as success waited before upon them, so it does as
much in the further discovery, whilst Faux is taken without the House (that if
otherwise within, would have blown up, though not the King and Parliament, yet
thousands with himself), and that the Conspirators are pursued, and taken in
the Country, before they were known to be guilty of this horrid Treason. These
and many other particulars might be observed in this Action; but that I shall
choose to refer you for satisfaction to what has formerly, and of late been
published upon that subject, and to the Act of Parliament, appointed to be read
upon this day, which follows.

Anno Tertio Jacobi Regis.
Yearly Prayers shall be made, for the delivery of the King, etc. From the
Gunpowder-Treason.
FOr as much as Almighty God, has in all Ages showed his power and mercy, in
the miraculous and gracious deliverance of his Church; and in the Protection of
Religious Kings and States, and that no Nation of the Earth has been blessed
with greater benefits, than this Kingdom now enjoys, having the true and free
profession of the Gospel under our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord King James; the
most Great, Learned, and Religious King that ever reigned therein, enriched
with a most hopeful and plentiful Progeny, proceeding out of his Royal Loins,
promising continuance of this happiness and profession to all prosterity; the
which many malignant and devilish Papists, Jesuits, and Seminary Priests much
envying and fearing, conspired most horribly, when the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons should have been Assembled in the Vpper-House of Parliament upon the
fifth day of November, in the Year of our Lord, 1605, Suddenly to have blown up
the said whole House with Gunpowder: an invention so Inhumane, Barbarous and
Cruel, as the like was never before heard of, and was, as some of the principal
Conspirators thereof confess, purposely devised and concluded to be done in the
said House. That where sundry necessary and Religious Laws for preservation of
the Church and State were made (which they falsely and slanderously term cruel
Laws) and enacted against them and their Religion; both place and persons
should be all destroyed and blown up at once, which would have turned to the
utter ruin of this whole Kingdom, had it not pleased Almighty God by inspiring
the Kings most Excellent Majesty with a Divine Spirit to interpret some dark
phrases of a Letter showed to His Majesty, above and beyond all ordinary
constructions, thereby miraculously discovering this hidden Treason, not many
hours before the appointed time for the execution thereof; therefore the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all His Majesty's
faithful and loving Subjects, do most justly acknowledge this great and
infinite blessing to have proceeded merely from God, his great mercy, and to
his most holy name do ascribe all honor, glory, and praise; and to the end
this unfeigned thankfulness may never be forgotten, but be had in a perpetual
remembrance; that all ages to come may yield praises to his Divine Majesty for
the same, and have in memory this joyful day of deliverance.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, that all and singular Ministers in every
Cathedral, and Parish Church, or other usual place for Common Prayer, within
this Realm of England and the Dominions of the same, shall always upon the
fifth day of November say morning prayer, and give unto Almighty God thanks for
this most happy deliverance, and that all and every person and persons
inhabiting within this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall
always upon that day diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church, or
Chapel accustomed, or to some usual Church or Chapel where the said morning
Prayer, Preaching or other service of God shall be used, and then and there to
abide orderly and soberly during the time of the said Prayers, or Preaching, or
other service of God there to be used and Ministered.

And because all and every person may be put in mind of his duty, and be then
better prepared to the said holy service, be it enacted by Authority aforesaid,
that every Minister shall give warning to his Parishioners publicly in the
Church at Morning-Prayer the Sunday before every such fifth day of November,
for the due observation of the said day, and that after morning Prayer, or
Preaching upon the said fifth day of November, they read publicly, distinctly
and plainly this present Act.

FINIS.

