EXPERIMENTS OF Spiritual Life and Health, And their PRESERVATIVES

In which the weakest Child of God may get Assurance of his Spiritual Life and
Blessedness

And the Strongest may find proportionable Discoveries of his Christian
Growth, and the means of it.

By Roger Williams of Providence in New England.

London, Printed, in the Second Month, 1652.

To the truly Honorable the Lady Vane, the Younger.
Madam,
YOur favorable, and Christian respects to me (both of former and latter date)
your Godly, and Christian Letters to me, so many thousand miles distant in
America: And your many gracious Demonstrations of an humble and Christian
Spirit breathing in you; are a three fold Cord which have drawn these lines
into your presence.

While I have sometimes mused how to express a Christian gratitude, I am at
last persuaded to crave your Ladyships acceptance of these poor Experiments of
each true Christians personal union, and communion with the Father of Spirits.

It is true, I have been sometimes pressed to engage in controversies, but I can
really and uprightly say, my Witness is on high, how harsh and dolesul the touch
of those strings are, especially, against such Worthies both in old and new
-England, in whom I joyfully before the world acknowledge (in many heavenly
respects) a lively character and Image of the Son of God. This broken piece, is
a breath of a still and gentle voice, none but the God of this world, and the
men of this world, can I lightly (at this turn) expect my opposites.

At other times I have been drawn to consider of the little flock of Jesus,
his Army, his body, his building, that for these many hundred years have been
scattered, routed and laid wast and desolate: At present, I only examine who
are the personal and particular Sheep of Jesus Christ, his Soldiers, his
living materials, though scattered, divided, and not composed and ordered at
their souls desire.

I confess (Madam) it was but a private and sudden discourse, sent in private
to my poor Companion and Yoak-fellow, occasioned by a sudden sickness
threatening death, into which, and from which it pleased the Lord most
graciously to cast and raise her.

The form and style I know will seem to this refined age, too rude and
barbarous: And the truth is, the most of it was penned and writ (so as seldom
or never such discourses were) in the thickest of the naked Indians of America,
in their very wild houses, and by their barbarous fires; when the Lord was
pleased this last year (more then ordinarily) to dispose of my abode and
travel amongst them. And yet, is the Language plain? it is the liker Christ's:
Is the composure rude? such was his outward Beauty: Are the trials (seemingly)
too close? such is the two edged Sword of his most holy Spirit, which pierces
between the very Soul and Spirit, and brings every thought into the obedience
of Christ Jesus.

Amongst the many Crowns of mercy (Madam) which it has pleased the Father of
mercies to crown your soul with, as David speaks of his Psalm. 103. there are
two which justly challenge (and your Ladyship I know does humbly acknowledge
them) to be the fairest.

The first, That he himself most high, most holy, (who makes his common
choice, the poor, Jam. 2. and chooses few Lords, few Knights, few Ladies, (few
wise, Cor. 3.
few noble, few mighty) has freely chosen you Madam, in so gracious and
blessed a measure, to desire to fear his Name.

A second, That for your dearest Companion and Guide in this vale of tears
(amongst the famous Worthies of this age) he has graciously guided you to such
a blessed choice, of such an Husband on earth, who bears so bright an Image of
your Husband in the Heavens, and in whose most holy and gracious hand, he has
been such a merciful and faithful Instrument, for both the freedoms both of
the outward and inner man.

I do humbly acknowledge (that upon an absolute account) all is mercy, and yet
I am also humbly confident, that in a respect (as he graciously remembered his
old friend Abraham, and tells us of a special love he yet bears the Jews for
Abraham's sake, even so, he has graciously vouchsafed at this present an
honorable remembrance to the NAMES of some of his more eminent former friends
and witnesses.

How has he ^rowned the memory of those his 2 zealous Servants in K. Henry the
8th. his days Cromwell and Lambert.
with a most eminent and blessed succession of such names and spirits at this
day? and in a gracious remembrance of his love to that blessed daughter and
witness of his the Lady Vane in Q. Mary's days; how has it pleased his
wisdom and goodness, to remember and to honor that Name, both in your
Ladyship and so many otherways, with so many loving kindnesses at this day?

My humble cry (Madam) to the Lord shall never cease, those all those your many
obligations of both temporal and eternal mercies, may (like chains of
Adamant) draw and bind your precious Soul more and more to resolve (by his
grace assisting) to make his name great, who has made your so and so to love
his Name, his Son, his Spirit, his Truth, his Children, that others at the
Torch of your exemplary meekness and fear of God, may light and kindle theirs;
That your Souls-eye more and more brightly may see him who is invisible, and
may so experimentally resent those invisible and internal Honors, pleasures and
profits that are in him that in comparison thereof the visible and worldly, may
be accounted by you but dreams of shadows, etc. That your great desire may be a
likeness of so high and holy, and so dear a Savior, and (as in other
excellencies so) in that especially of a desire of saving others, your
Children, Kindred, Servants, Friends, yea, Enemies: that neither the pleasing
calm of prosperity, nor the dreadful storms of changes, may quench or dampe
that holy fire of your Souls love (in Life and Death) to Him whom your Ladyship
has so much infinite cause to love, but never yet saw, in whom, and for ever

I desire to be Your HONORS unfeinedly faithful. R. W.

To every truly Christian Reader.
AS it is in the Earthly, so it is in the Heavenly Thy Maker is thy Husband.
Isa. 5.
Marriage of a poor Sinner to his Maker. There uses first to pass a private
kindling of Love, and a private consent and pomise (which sometimes are long)
before the open solemnity; and the publik^ profession of a Married life
together. This is my present design, (not to controvert the matters of public
Order and Worship, but) to present some poor Experiments of those Personal
excellencies of each true believing soul and spirit.

The Holy Spirit (in Isaiah) tells us of Balances Isa. 40.
wherein the most High weighs the Hills and Mountains: As also in Solomon, of
Balances wherein he Prove. 21.
weighs the very Spirits, even of men whose way is right in their own eyes.
And in John (14.) he commands us to try the Spirits, pretending to come from
Christ Jesus, whether they be of God, or no.

There is not the grossest Protestant or Papist, but Great pretenses to the
holy Spirit of God.
pretends to the Spirit of God; yea that horrid Monster Mahomet, blushed not to
avouch that in the Form of a Dove, the holy Spirit of God did whisper in his
ear from Heaven. Now blessed is that Spirit, public or private, who is truly
willing and joyful to lie down in the Balances of the Lords weighings.

Hitherto tend these Experiments of personal Communion with God in the Spirit
of Holiness, Romans 1. 3.

It Is true, all public and private Christian Spirits, pretend the Spirit of
Holiness: yea, how great a part of the World pretend to be Christendom, the
Christian world, that is, anointed with the Spirit of Christ Jesus? But was it
Death in Moses Rites to counterfeit that ceremonial and figurative Ointment,
Exodus 30. what To counterfeit the holy Spirit dreadful.
shall it be to counterfeit the Spirit of Life and Holiness it self? What I
believe therefore (as David and Paul once spoke) I freely speak: Yea, who can
but speak (says Peter and John) the Things they have seen and heard? I
confess I spoke these first but in a private Letter in America, and thought
not that the light in Europe should have seen them: But a twofold desire has
prevailed with me to expose these Trials to the Trying of all men.

1. The earnest desire of some Godly Friends.

2. Mine own desire of sowing a little handful of spiritual seed while the
short Minute of my seed-time (the opportunity of life) lasts.

My scope is to fill each truly Christian soul with triumphing and rejoicing:
I speak peace and joy to the The least of the little ones of Christ Jes^s o^ght
to rejoice.
Weakest Lamb and Child (in Christianity) that is so low, so weak, so little,
so poor in its own eyes, that it sometimes says, it has no Christ, no
Spirit, no Faith, no Love, no nor true Desire in it self. To this poor weak
one I speak peace and joy, and say, this spiritual poverty is blessed, and is
the first step or round of that spiritual Ladder, Mat. 5. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, I sound joyful Alarums of Encouragement to the strong to grow (as
Peter exhorts) in the Grace and Knowledge of the Lord Jesus.

It Is true, the communion of Saints is sweet and joyful, Communion of Saints
most sweet, and to be lamented after.
strong and powerful, eternally gainful and profitable; and holy and blessed
is that Spirit that makes the Saints (who are the Excellent of the Earth) its
Delight, and after that blessed hour of the Saints uniting in one Heart, one
Spirit, one Worship, let all that love Christ Jesus mourn and lament, and
breath and pant: And yet the weakest and the faintest Lamb that comes but
stealing in the Crowd to touch the hemb of the Lord Jesus his garment, that is
content to be esteemed a Dog, and to wait for crumbs of mercy under the Table of
the Son of God: let them I say rejoice also, for he that has begun that
blessed work by his own free and eternal Spirit, will by the same his own
holy Arm, gloriously finish it.

I end (Dear Christian) with the proposal of two Christian knots, or Riddles,
not unsuitable to these present Times and Spirits?

First, Why is the Heart of a David himself (Psa. 30.) Two Christian Riddles,
suiting these times and spirits.
more apt to decline from God, upon the Mountain of Joy, Deliverance, Victory,
Prosperity, then in the dark Vale of the shadow of Death, Persecution,
Sickness, Adversity, etc.

Secondly, Why is it, since God works freely in us to do and to will of his
own good pleasure, that yet he is pleased to command us to work out our own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling? Let us all humbly beg the Finger (the
Spirit) of the Lord to untie these Knots for us.

I. desire to be thine unseighned in Christ Jesus, R. W.

The Contents of this Discourse.
The Heads are three.

UNder the first are contained the Arguments of Spiritual Life, wherein the
Weakest and the Sickest Child of God may find its Spiritual Life apparent,
though over-cast and eclipsed with spiritual Weakness and Distempers.

Under the second Head, Arguments of the strength and vigor of the Spirit of
Life and Holiness: In which the strongest and the eldest in Christ, may find
Experiments of Spiritual Health, and Christian Activity and chearfullnesse.

These Experiments respect,

1. The Souls private corresponden^y with the Lord himself. 2. Converse and
correspondency with Men. 3. Private Retirednesses with it self.
Under the third Head are proposed some Means wherein the Spirit of God usually
breaths for the preserving and maintaining of a truly Spiritual and
Christian Health and Chearfullnesse.

The Letter which the Author sent with this Discourse to his Wife M. W. upon
her recovery from a dangerous sickness.
My Dearest Love and Companion in this Vale of Tears.
THy late sudden and dangerous Sickness, and the Lords most gracious and
speedy raising thee up from the gates and jaws of Death: as they were
wonderful in thine own, and others eyes, The true use of sickness.
so I hope, and earnestly desire, they may be ever in our thoughts, as a
warning from Heaven to make ready for a sudden call to be gone from hence: to
live the rest of our short uncertain span, more as strangers, longing and
breathing after another Home and Country; To cast off our great cares and fears
and desires and joys about this Candle of this vain life, that is so soon
blown out, and to trust in the living God, of whose wonderful power and mercy
thou have had so much and so late experience, which must make thee sing with
David (Psalm. 103.) Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless
his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who
forgiveth all thy sins, and heals thine infirmities: who redeemeth thy life
from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness.

My dear Love, since it pleases the Lord so to dispose of me, and of my
affairs at present, that I cannot often see thee, I desire often to send to
thee. I now send thee that which I know will be sweeter to thee then the Honey
and the Honey-combe, and stronger refreshment then the strongest wines or
waters, and of more value then if every line and letter w^e thousands of gold
and silver. Hezekiah upon his recovery from his sickness, made a writing
(Isai. 38.) as an everlasting monument of his praise unto God, and as a Goad or
spur to himself and others in the ways of godliness for the future.

Thy holy and humble desires are strong, but I know thy writing is slow, and
that thou will gladly accept of this my poor help, which with humble
thankfulness and praise to the Lord, I humbly tender to his holy service, and
thine in him.

I send thee (though in Winter) an handful of flowers made The outward and
inner m^n.
up in a little Posey, for thy dear self, and our dear children, to look and
smell on, when I as the grass of the field shall be gone, and withered.

We know how it pleases the spirit of God to distinguish between the outward
and the inner man, 2 Cor. 4. [Though our outward man perish; yet our inner is
renewed day by day:] It has pleased the most high to cast down thy outward
man, and again graciously to lift him up, and thereby to teach us both, to
examine and try the health, and strength, and welfare of the inner.

I will not now enter upon the Disputes about that question, what is the
Inner-man, whether Christ himself, as some say, or an Image or likeness of
Christ Jesus, as others say. That is a Candle or Torch to me, which is written
Ephesians. 3. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by faith: unto which agrees that
of the first of John: As many as received him, that is received Christ Jesus
into the house of their hearts to dwell there by beleiving and obeying of him,
they are borne of the Spirit, and are the Sons of God.

This Inner man, this new-man (which after God is created in What the inner man
is.
holiness and righteousuesse) I say, this Inner-man has his tempers and
distempers, his health and sickness, as well as this outward-man this body of
Clay. Subject to many distempers.


Hence we hear so often mentioned, the renewing of the inward-man, the growing
and increasing of Faith and Love, and other breathings of Gods Spirit; the
loss (that is in a measure,) of the Ephesians first love. Hence the many falls
of the Lords best Servants, recorded in Scripture, and the sleep of the Spouse
of Christ Jesus, although her heart wake in the truth of marriagelove, which
can never wholly dye in her and be extinguished.

The holy Scripture mentions a threefold person in all that are borne
again, First, the body of Flesh and clay, this outward natural being, which
must be dissolved and dye, then rise again A threesold person in Gods children.
to Glory.

The second is the body of corruption, or old man, which being deadly wounded
by the Son of God already in all that are his, shall shortly give up the
ghost, and rot, and never rise again.

The third is this holy, heavenly inner man, of whose health and daily renewing
I now discourse, who is born of an immortal seed, and therefore can no more
die then Christ himself: Romans 6.

Now as this outward man desires not only life, and being, but also health and
cheerfulness in all the living motions and actions thereof: So, (and much more
ten thousand fold) requires the inward and spiritual man, an healthful and
cheerful temper. A spiritual cheerful temper.
For as the Lord loves a che^rfull giver: So loves he also a cheerful
Preacher, a cheerful hearer, a cheerful prayer, and a cheerful sufferer for
his Name sake: He loves that the fhoes of preparation be on our feet ready to
run (all ways and weathers) the paths of his Command ^ents: That like a vessel
our leaks be stopped, and our whole soul be ready in an holy trim, and tightness,
for all his holy employments of us in the greatest tempests: that like heavenly
soldiers, our Arms be fixed, or like an Instrument, the strings of our
affections and parts be all in tune, to make heavenly music in the holy ears
of our heavenly Lord and King.

It Is true, as it is between a loving couple, (and as it was in the Church at
Ephesus) it is not easi^ to keep in the first flame of Love, fresh and equal,
although the fire of the truth and sincerity of marriage love never die, or be
extingnished.

It is true that Paul cries out (how much more may we) O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Spiritual distempers.


It Is true, that sometimes corruption and Satan surprise and carry away the
st^ongest champions of Christ Jesus, as slaves and captives for a time, until
Christ Jesus rescue, redeem and ransom, by giving repentance unto his Israel,
as he did to David, Peter, etc. as Abraham rescued Lot, and as David recovered
all his precious captives, led slaves away from Ziklag.

I am far therefore from passing the sentence of death upon the least of the
little ones of Jesus, (notwithstanding their spiritual weakness, and
sicknesses) in whom the lea^ sp^rk or breathing of the spirit of Life can be
discerned.

And I desire to see and lament the spiritual sicknesses, and diseases of mine
own and others Spirits, which yet are not unto death, (as Christ Jesus spoke of
Lazarus) but for the glory of God, in the fall and rising of his servants.

Yea as Paul distinguishes of Gods afl cting hand on his Saints Distinction
between spiritual death, spiritual sickness, and spiritual weakness.
at Corinth, so must I distinguish, between these three, death, sickness and
weakness: Every sickness of Gods Children is not a death, for the inner man
cannot die, no more then Christ himself. Rom: 6.

Again, every weakness is not a sickness, for some are weak, little ones in the
knowledge and love of Christ, while others are grown to be strong and aged in
Christ Jesus; Yea the strongest and oldest Soldiers of Christ Jesus, who have
not thought their dearest Heart blood to dear for such a Lord and Master, have
yet been troubled with some weakness, and fits of spiritual distempers: Weakness
in their Eyes is not discerning aright the mind of Christ Jesus, weakness in
their hands, and Feet, hindering their spiritual chearfulnes, and activity in
Christ's ways, which weaknesses yet have not brought them to a down right
halting in Christianity.

I propose therefore (with the assi^tance of Gods holy spirit) to examine these
three particulars.

First, what a ethe Arguments of that measure of spiritual life The Heads of
this Discourse
in Christ, which yet may stand with great spiritual weaknesses, and diseases.

2ly. What is that (...) of the grace of Christ Jesus, which may be called the
health, and cheerful temper, and disposition of the inner man.

3dly What are those spiritual preservatives, which may ke^p the Soul in an
healthful temper, free from spiritual sicknesses and d^stempers.

In these Examinations I profess two thin^: First not to oppress thy thoughts
and memory, with any long discourse, intending only to send thee after thy
sickness, a little posey fit and easy sor thy meditation, and ref^shing.

2ly. All my Flowers shall be some choice example, or speech of some son or
daughter of God, picked out from the Garden of the holy Scriptures for our
spiritual refreshing and consolation.

I begin therefore with such trialls and arguments as declare, the true life of
the inner man, notwithstanding spiritual weakness, sickness, and distempers.

First then when the Spirit of the Lord in 1 Job. 2. describes the several
Ages and grouths of this inward man (to wit a child, a strong man, and an old
man) it pleasath him to describe the young or little one by this difference,
that [He knows the The weakess of Gods children cry unto God as to a Father.
Father] to wit, that he knows the Lord so, as to look upon him (in his
measure) as to a Father, that he fears him, loves him, obeys him, and calls
upon him as on a Father: according to that of Gal: 4. Because you are sons, he
has sent forth the spirit of his Son crying in your Hearts Ab^a Father: Father
pardon me, Father help me, Father give me, etc.

Obj. But may not the Hypocrites call upon God, (and sometime more bold^y then
Gods little ones,) Lord Lord, Almighty and most merciful Father, etc.

An. I answer, an Hypocrite has many Lords, and many Fathers, besides, and
joined with their (pretended) heavenly Father. Wherea^ G^ds little ones cry
out, (Isa. 63.) Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abrah m be ignorant of us,
as if they had said: Thou art our only Father, above all Fathers, etc.

2ly. The Hypocrite says Lord, Lord, but cares for no more of the will of the
Lord hen may serve his own turn: But a child False calling upon God as upon a
Father
of God declares his child like submissi^n, to an heavenly Fathers will in all
things, according to the difference proposed by the Lord Jesus, (Mat: 7.) Not
every one that says unto me Lord, Lord but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven: The difference lies not in the words, but in the Heart, in
the upright submission of a child of God, to all that he believes to be the
will and pleasure of his heavenly Father.

For a second trial therefore: Where spiritual life is (notwithstanding 2
Argum: Gods children long for more and more knowledge of God.
weakness or distempers) there is always a professed willingness to get more
and more knowledge of this heavenly Father, of his name, of his works, of his
wotd, of his Christ, of his Spirit, his Saints, and Ordinances.

Hence Believers in Jesus, both Men and Women, are called Disciples, or
Scholars of Christ Jesus, professing continually to learn more and more of this
heavenly teacher. Hence his Disciples or Scholars petition to Christ Jesus,
Lord teach us to pray: Lord increase our Faith, etc.

Hence they ask him many Questions, and are by little and little instructed,
though for a while they were ignorant of the mystery of his Death, and
Res^ction.

Obj. But may not an Hypocrite defire to know more and more of God, of Christ,
etc.

Ans. I answer, although an Hypocrite out of an itching desire, of knowledge, of
novelty, and out of self love, to make use of so much of God, and of Christ, as
may serve his own ends, may desire, and attain, and profefse, and preach much
of God and Christ, yet will he pick and choose as Saul did, while David and all
Gods children uprightly desire to have respect to all the Commandments of God
in Christ Jesus.

Again, the obedience of Hypocrites is but the task of a slave, or Hireling,
when the obedience of a child of God, is that of a 2.
dutiful child to his Father, or an endeared Wife to her Husband, not caused
by terror or wages, but hearty Reverence and Affection.

Hence follows a third trial of spiritual life, (though accompanied Arg. 3.
Gods children hunger and thirst after Gods Word.
with much weakness,) to wit a vehement hunger and longing after the Ordinance
of the word preached: Hence that similitude by Peter. A^ New born Babes desire
the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby, 1. Pet: 2.

Obj. But may not Hyp^crits and counterfeits, both affectionately hear and
pre^ck, etc?

Ans. I answer, no question, but false worshippers, and false Christians may
easily satisfy themselves, and stop the mouths of their Gods word in Gods way.
conscie^es, with any formal performance of a Sermon by an houreglasse, or
other traditions, or customs o^ Fathers, or the times. But a child of God
desires to be as well careful (according to hisight, for the true
Mothers-Breas^, (a true Ministry) as for a Woman's Milk, the opening of the
word by any in any way, etc. And therefore cries the Spouse to Christ Jesus: Oh
thou whom my soul loves, show me where thou fe^dest, for why should I be as
one that turns afide to the flocks of thy companions. Cant, 1.


2ly. A true child of God (though weak) looks chiefly at God, and Christ,
himself in the Ministry, and dispensation of the word, and therefore says
(Cant: 1.) Let Him kifse me with the kisses of his mouth, for his love is
better then wine.

3. While the Hypocrites find their natural delight in the word, as in music,
while yet they obey not: The child of God comes True hunger after Gods word.
to the breasts of the Church, as a child hangs upon the Mothers Breast, not
only for the delight of sucking, but out of a vehement painful longing, to
have its soul satisfied, and its strength of spiritual life and grace
increased in the ways of God: according to that in 1. Pet: 2. [That you may
grow thereby.]

A 4th. Argument of the life of the inner man, (though in much weakness, o^
sickness, is a true and unsained desire, to do that which True desire in all
Gods people.
it finds it cannot do, but falls short in doing or suffering the will of God:
So Nehemiab pleads with God, from the uprightnes of their hearts, that they
desired to fear his Name, when a soul can say uprightly in Gods presence, I
desire, that is, unfainedly longing to know his will, although I am much
ignorant, I desire to believe, though I find an unbeleeving heart, I desire to
be willing and able to suffer, though I find much fearfulness, etc.

Ob. May not an Hypocrite desire to know and love God, etc.

I answer, an Hypocrite may desire to know so much of God, Difference between
the true and salse desire.
and to have so much of his grace, and so much of his power against some sins,
as may serve to save his soul, when he sees he cannot be saved without it: But
a child of God, only can desire God for himself, and desire to be like unto God
in his holy Nature, God must be chosen for himself.
and to have every thought brought under the obedience of Christ Jesus.

Hence though an Hypocrite may weep as Esau and Saul, and others have done, yet
a true child of God can only in truth cry out, with the Father, of the
possessed child in an humble sense of his own weakness, and spiritual poverty,
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, that is, help me against my unbelief,
against my passions, against my uncleanesse against my pride, against my
covetousnes, etc.

A 5th: trial of a true life (though in weakness, or sickness) is a Gods
children cannot live in known sin without struggling and mourning.
constant resisting and fighting against all known sin, as sin. He that is born
of God, (1. John 5.) keeps himsef that the evil one touches him not, unles
he be suddenly surprised, or violently forced, by mighty temptations, or
c^usoned and deceived by the deceitfulness of sin, he can no more willingly
touch it, then fire or poison, or the Devil himself.

Hence is there a continual war between the flesh and the spirit, Gal: 5. The
law of the mind, wars against the law of the members; The New-man against the
old, etc. For instance, although good Jacob was overcome by his Mothers
powerful persw^sion, yet suspecting a sin, he ^st strugled against it, my
Father says he, will feel me, and I shall bring a curse instead of a Blessing.

Obj. But may not an Hypocrite resist temptation, and fight against sin? I
answer, No, not against sin, as sin, but as it is dangerous No hypocrite can
fight against sin as sin.
and hurtful to soul, to body, to purse, to credit. So Balaam (I conceive in
earnest) refused Balacks money, and would not sin for an house full of gold and
silver, when as yet he loved that sin of cursing Gods people, and the wages of
it.

2ly. An Hypocrite cannot re^t the sin of Hypocrisy, and other da^ling sins:
but a child of God with David (Psalm: 139.) ^egs of God to search him, that is
to help him against Hypocrisy it self, and every false way, and to lead him in
the way everlasting.

Sixthly, a child of God though overwhelmed with many weaknesses or temptations,
yet he cannot possibly be brought to an ill opinion A true child of God tender
of Gods name.
or thought of God, but is always ready to take his part, to speak well of him,
and endures not, with a quiet mind, to hear his name dishonored: Hence Job in
his great passions and cursings could not be brought (no not by his wife) to
speak ill of God: but although he complained much of his own ofliction, and
stood to his uprightnes, against the charge of Hypocrisy, yet still he
magnifies the name of his God in all his discourses, and profess^th to trust in
him, al^hough his God should kill him.

Hence Samson, though carried away first by a Philistian wife, and then by a
Philistian w^ore, yen can he not be carried away so from the God of Israel, but
that still he acknowledges his high and holy hand in his victories and
deliverances, and accordingly Instances of Samson and Jehosaphat.
poures forth his s^ul to him for grace and assistance. And hence good
Jehosaphat though very strongly carried away with the flatte^ie of the
idolatrous King of Israel, yet he endures not to hear the name of his God
smitten through the sides of his servant the Prophet Micaiah, but plainly
(though weakly) takes part with his God and his Prophet, against the King of
Israel, and all his Priests and Courtiers, saying, Let not the King say so.

Obj May not Balaam and other hypocrites pretend the ^ame of God and Christ, be
preachers of him, c^ out devils, and in Christ's name do many wonderful things?

I answer: Hypocrites use the name of God only as Jehu did, for a stirrrp to
get up into the sadle of their own N^mes and (...), or as a commodity to get
something by i^, as an bireling (of whom the Lord Jesus speaks John 10.) that
serves God for wages, and while he cries, let the Lord be glorified, (Isa. 66.)
he persecutes his servants, but a child of God cannot be brought except by
surp^isall for a time to prefer his name before Gods, but upon cool thoughts,
is seriously willing to be trodden in the dust, and to be cast out, that the
name of God alone may be exalted, and glorified, as David after the causing of
the name of God to (...) blasphemed.

A 7th. Argument of the true life of grace, (though in much A true child of
God is patient under the rod of his heavenly Father.
weakness o^ sickness,) I observe to b^an humble acknowledgment of, and a
su^mitting unto the cor^cting and (...) hand of God in sicknesses, crosses,
losses, etc.

This admirably appears in old Ely, who though he were a bad Father to his own
sons, in suffering them unpunished (though not unreproved) in their outrageous
transgressions: Yet was he at the same time a good son to God, his heavenly
Father, in giving that heavenly and submissive answer to that fearful th.
eatning sent from the Lord by Samuel against him, saying, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good.

Ob: But did not Pharaoh acknowledge, and the Philistines acknowledge Gods hand
in smiring them, did not Ahab humble himself, Phara^h sues unto God by Moses,
the Philistines send a trespass ^ffering, and Ahab humbles himself by fasting,
etc.

I answer, a Saul, a Pharaoh, etc. if it were in their choice, would not submit
to the Lord at all, and when they do acknowledge 1. The enemies of God, and
slatterers cannot submit to God as to a Father.
and submit, they are forced to it, by Gods powerful hand, whom yet they look
at as a conqueror of Julian faid of Christ Jesus, and Jaolor or executioner,
not as a Father, with a child like submission, as appears by Phar^oh, the
Philistines. Ahab, and many more woeful instances, when the band of God is
removed etc.

Whereas a true child of God desires, as to acknowledge his Fathers hand
corr^cting his righteously, because he has deserved it, so also graciously and
faithfully, because he hopes God aims at his good, as a Father does at a
child's, in giving him fatherly eorrection, bitter Pills and Pbisick.

And therefore (2ly:) as when the Lord st^ikes an Hypocrite, he either runs
from him as a strange child stricken by another man, or flies against him in
murmuring, or howls out for anguish Gods children less grieve for the^r own
afsliction, then for Gods displeasure.
as a Dog, (Hos: 7.) They howl upon their Beds: So contrarily the true child of
God truly defires to run to his heavenly Father, and it as well, yea infinitely
more grieved, for the anger, and displeasure of the Lord, as for his own smart
and affliction.

3ly. The Hypocrite if he might have his own choice, had rather be rid of his
pain then his si^, and therefore when his pain is over, he returns with the Dog
to his Vomit: But a true child of God, truly (though weakly) desires to see,
and abhor, and slay his dearest sins, because he knows they are but flattering
traitors and gilded poisons: Hence Job cries out in the midst of all his
weaknesses and passions, Oh teach me wherein I have offended.

In a word, the Lord is fain to force afliction upon an Hypocrite, as men force
down a drench into the throat of an Horse, but a Gods children join with Gods
rod against themselves.
true child os God, (if under Gods r^d,) desires to join with the Lords hand,
and the Lords ends, as a child of some understanding is wil^ing to have its
worms killed, and therefore strives (willingly, unwillingly) to swallow down
the bitter aloes, or other bitter medicine.

An 8th: Trial of true life, (though in weakness) is a true (though faint)
willingness and inclination to enjoy more and more of Christ Jesus, in the
society of his Saints, after his o^n appointment, although with hardship and
difficulty attained unto

Hence the Spuose was both asleep, and awake, toward Christ Jesus: Cant: 5. She
was willing, and unwilling to rise to open to Christ Jesus: Hence she thinks
she hears her Husbands voice: It is Gods people long after Gods true worship in
Christ Jesus.
the voice of my Beloved: She thinks Christ is knocking at the do^r of her
heart, and will, in such and such arguments, in such and such Scriptures, in
such and such professions, and professors, in such and such their sufferings,
etc.

Obj. May it not possibly be that the true children of God, not only may
neglect, but even deny the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, appointed and practiced
in his first Churehes.

I answer, Gods Israel and people under the Gospel, may as possibly be
spiritual slaves and captives to Egypt and Babylon spiritual, as Israel of
old was to Babell, literal and material, in Gods people both awake and ^sleep
as to Christ Jesus.
respect of the wors^ipping of God, according to the appointment of Christ
Jesus.

In respect of false worship, Gods Israel may be a slave, and asleep, and yet
awake, and free, in true inclinations and desires, willing (though mixed with
sleepy unwi^ingnes) to be at any pains and cost, to enjoy her souls beloved
Christ Jesus, in his own appointments.

Hence such expressions with sighs and tears, if I were persuaded of Gods will,
if I were persuaded of the ^ecessity of such public ordinances and forms.

Hence others expressions, if I were persuaded of such and such Gods people
cannot bur be full of struglings of spirit as to the visible worship of God in
Christ Jesus.
ordinan^es, that such a people, or such a people were in the true way of
enjoying Christ Jesus, how joyfully should I join with them?

Hence holy David, though not so thoroughly awaked, to en joy the Ark and
presence of God, he and all Israel brings up the Ark of God with rejoicing,
though not after the Lords due order, which caused his holy jealousy to send
that perez Vzz^ that breach of Vzza^ amongst them.

It is in the heavenly as in the earthly marriage, there are degrees of
marriage affection, and yet all true: The affections of some are True marriage
affection in all Gods people to Christ Jesus, yet with much difference.
more lively and strong, of some more dull and weak: When yet the truth and
life appears in a true and longing desire to enjoy the Lord Jesus, in what way
soever, himself is pleased to ap point, and to turn from the bed and bozome,
(that is the worships) of all false Christ's, and strangers.

A ^th. discovery of true spiritual life, in weakness, I find to be a painful
and a restles mind, in temptations to sin, in yielding to sin, and lying in
sin, the breach not being made up with the Lord in humble conf^ssion and suit
for mercy, in the blood of a Savior. Gods children have no peace in sin
unrepented of.
This was David's painf^ll caf^ in his silence, Psalm. 32 When I kept silence my
bones waxed ol^, through my roaring all the Day.

So that as a Fish out of the ^ater (it^ element) (...) a bone broak or
disjoynted, is the troubled mind of a child of God, upon his discovered or but
(strongly) suspected, sinful way or practice.

Obj. May not Hypocrites be troubled in the sense of Gods disple^sure for sin,
as S^ul, Abab, and Iud^, etc.

I answer, an Hypocrite like some Traitor or murderer, may desire a pardon
from the King of Kings, whose person he hates, so did Saul and Ahab, and so may
any dissembler for his own ends Only Gods people can truly desire peace with God
of peace and safety, etc. But Gods children, and they only grieve at Gods
displeasure and grievance. Only a true Wife and Spouse of Christ Jesus can
grieve and morun for the displeased absence of Christ Jesus, and cries out in
humble bitterness of s^l, saw ye him whom my soul loves?

A 10th. trial of the true life of the inner man, (though weak and sickly,) is
a discerning, and liking, and secret wishing that beauty and shining of the
grace of Christ Jesus, which appears in others of Gods children, and which we
see wanting in our selves. Thus were there a sort of Gods children, which could
see beauty Two sorts of Gods people enquiring and longing after Christ Jesus.
and excellency in those which so affectionately inquired after Christ Jesus,
in his visible worship, and the several parts thereof, although themselves
were not so z^alously affected. Thus therefore say they: Oh thou the fairest of
Women, (an acknowledgment of heavenly grace and beauty, and they also enquire,
and desire to see that beauty of Christ Jesus, which the other Saints so
praised. And in Cant: 6. they say, whither is thy Beloved gone, oh thou fairest
among Women, that we may seek him with thee: Hence many of Gods dear Saints in
Qu: Mary's time, and other bloody days, in our own and other countries, The
liking of Gods gr^cious Spirit in others, a true Argument of the same Spirit in
our selves.
have praised God for, and have been ravished with the beauties of the heavenly
love and zeal, and patience in others of Gods servants, which they have seen
wanting in themselves: And thus, (whatever be our weaknesses) it must needs
argue a life of grace, when we can view the lives and deaths of the blefsed
martyrs, or witnesses of Christ Jesus, (either in the holy scriptures, or other
Records, I say can view them with a liking and true affecting of their graces,
with an humble acknowledgment of our own wants and poverties, and a mourning
desire of attaining to such a beauteous profession of Christ Jesus.

Such a beauty (doubtless) did many of Gods children apprehend in the Lords
Ordinances, and in such as suffered for them in England, who yet found not
strength themselves, to stand and suffer for, and with them, yet left much and
fled to New England, hoping to enjoy there (though with too much weak desire of
peace and liberty) the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, their souls Beloved.

Obj. But did not Balaam see the beauty and excellen^y of Gods Saints, when he
cried out, let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his, etc.

I answer, it is usually well said, Balaam desired the death, and blessedness of
the righteous, but not the life and righteousn^sse of the righteous.

Obj. Balaam seems to have seen the beauty of righteousness it self.

I answer, he might see and like righteousness in the end, and fruit of it, and
yet not in the true nature and beauty of it, for then Disse^blers, in a respect
may desire righteousness, but only Gods children can long for it in trut^, and
for it self.
he would have as well defired the life, as the death of the righteous, just as
these Indians (amongst whom I write these lines) they see the excellency of the
English industry, joined with plenty, and a better condition then their own,
but endure not that life of la^our and endeavor, wherein that plenty and
better state is found. But Gods children beholding the beauty and excellency of
the heavenly lives and deaths of others, (like soldiers in a Field) are
provoked by those examples, to desire to follow Christ Jesus in those holy
paths, and secretly to bemoan their own infirmities and deformities.

These and many more discoveries of the life of Christ Jesus in the soul,
(though in the midst of many weaknesses, and spiritual sicknesses) I hope (my
dear love, and faithful companion) thou in truth discernest in thy self, and
I, and others have discerned in thee: But oh search diligently in the Lords
holy presence, and humbly beg his help, that as the Spirit of God admonishes,
(Gal. 6.) thou may have rejoicing in thy self, and not in another good
opinion of thee.

But grant all these, and the assurance of a true and blessed Gods children
cannot but desire spiritual health, as well as life and Christian being.
life of grace within us?

Grant this life is as the life of Christ, never again to be extinguished. Yet
who rejeyceth not in health, who mourns not under the pains and weaknesses of a
sick bed?

Next therefore to the discovery of spiritual life, all that are born of God
must try their spiritual strength, and health, and cheerful temper: The
particular instances whereof, being propounded as examples, copies, and
samplars for us to follow in the holy Scripture, I shall pick, and gather, and
bind up, for both our encouragement, and comfort.

I confesfe the beholding of such heavenly patterns may astonish and an^ze u^
and make us despair to attain to the like heavenly temper: I pray thee
therefore (dear love) observe, (what before I said) that these particulars next
following are not discouragements from Christ, as if we had no life at all: but
encouragements to draw nearer to Christ Jesus, when we see suoh virtue proceed
out from him, to such poor sinners like our selves.

These particulars then following are as an holy looking glass, to discover to
us our souls spots, and blemishes, as also sweet cordial flowers, to refresh
and encourage our drooping spirits.

The several particular trialls of this spiritual health, and cheerfulness,
I shall bind up (as I may so speak) into three several parcells, as sometimes
we see sweet flowers bound up into sinaller bundles, to make up at last one
larger bundle or posie in one.

The three several sor^s shall be according to that division of the holy
Spirit by Paul to Titus.

First such as concern holiness, respecting our communion with God in Christ
Jesus.

2. Such as concern righteousness, respecting others. 3. Such as concern
^obriety, respecting our private selves and persons.
First, then it is an argument of the strength, and healthfub temper
Incomprehensible nature of God.
of the inner man, when our apprehensions of God are always such, as bring us
to holy wonderment and amazement, at the nature of incomprehensible God, at his
properties, and works, from the Sun in the Firmament, to the poorest Worm, at
his wonderful dispensing of his justice, and mercy, and disposing, and ruling
all things in Heaven, Earth, and Seas, from the highest Angels in he^ven, to th
e lowest Devils in Hell.

This was David's temper when he cried out, (Psalm: 104) Oh Lord how wonderful
are thy works, in wisdom have thou made Gods children ought to walk in
constant amazedness of spirit as to God his nature, works, etc.
them all! Also (Psalm. 8.) O Jehovah our Lord, how wonderful is thy Name in
all the earth! And Psalm: 139. he brings this wonder nearer to bimself, saying,
I will praise thee, for I am fearfully, and wonderfully made. As if he would
say, fearfully and wonderfully bred in the womb, fearfully and wonderfully
brought forth; and we may further say, ever since we came thus fearfully and
wonderfully into the world, fearfully and wonderfully brought up, fearfully and
wonderfully preserved, delivered, etc.

Obj. But may not natural men, and Hypocrites admire the Nature, and works of
God.

I answer, yes, but the wonder which does possess a child of God, causes him
to cry out with David, Psalm. 119. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me,
give me undestanding that I may learn thy statutes. It Is such a wonder as
draws up the heart unto God, with longings to be united unto him, to fear his
Name, to partake of his divine Nature, and to be like unto Him in holiness, and
true Righteousness.

Obj. The Devils believe, and tremble at God.

I answer, to tremble at the word of God, is alone the property of Gods
Servants, Isa. 66 The Devils may wonder and tremble at the just sentence, and
threatening part of Gods word: But Gods children tremble at the commanding part,
yea at the comforting and promising part of it also, least they should depart
or fall off from it, or loose, though but for a time as David, the joy and
sweetness of it.

Secondly, it is an Argument of health and spiritual strength The glorifying
of God the great work of Gods children
when the hallowing, the magnifying, and glorifying of the name of God is our
great work and business in this world, unto which all the businesses and works
we have in hand in the world beside give way, etc.

Thus Christ Jesus teaches all his to make it their first request to God, that
they may hallow, or glorify his name: Thus he professes (as it were upon his
death bed) John 17. that he had done his work, that he had glorified his Father
upon the earth: Hence he professes at his most solemn Arraignment, Joh. 18.
for this end was I born, and for this end came I into the world, that I might
bear witness to the truth; that is, to give his Father the glory of his truth,
and to destroy the lies of the devil the father of them, who belyeth God in
all his holy attributes, and works, and servants, and ordinances, and profaneth
and dishonors his holy name in them all.

Obj. Hypocrites profess to glorify God, and to say, Is^. 66. Let the Lord be
glorified.

I answer: No hypocrite can make it his work to glorify God, when it crosses
his own glory: No hypocrite can purely and simply, out of love to Gods name and
glory, be content to ^oose the offer of a kingdom as Moses did, when the Lord
himself offered it him, and as Christ Jesus did, when the people offered and
would have made him a King by force, and the devil proffered him all the
kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

Thirdly, it is an Argument of strength of Gods grace and Spirit in us, when we
perform actions of godliness, with a single Delightful privacie with God
argues strong affection.
and upright eye unto God himself in secret. Frequent and constant delight in
private converses argues strong affection to God or men: Hypocrites (says
Christ Jesus) will pray and fast, and give alms, but with a squint eye of
private and sinister self respect to be seen of men, etc. But Gods children
pray, and do good, and fast in secret, regarding no eye but the eye of an
heavenly Father, who seeing in secret will not fail to reward openly.

Ob. But may not hypocrites speak and preach against hypocrisy, against self
love, self respect, and fleshly and worldly ends in the performance of
spiritual duties? And is it not possible for Gods children to perform
spiritual duties with carnal ends and respects?

I answer: Hypocrites may do this, and pretend pure and upright ends for God,
as Jehn did: yet discover they hypocrisy, Hypocrites pretend far in glorifying
of God.
in the very pretense of sincerity, for not content with the Lords eye and
approbation, Come see my zeal (says he) Jonadab, which I have for the Lord.

2ly, Gods children (doubtless) may look aside, and mark who s^es and hears,
and rewards in their performances of service unto God: But this is either in
sins of ignorance; as for instance, many of Gods dear children perform service
to God in preaching as hirelings, and conceive themselves not bound although to
glorify Christ Jesus in saving souls) to preach without an hire, and so in
other cases.

Or 2ly, this may be knowingly and discerningly, as Paul says, Romans 7. When I
would do good, evil is present with me: such tempt^tions come in as water into
a ship, or as dust and diseases into a sound eye, and ^hen Gods children be
never quiet until such distempers be cleansed, and got out again.

Fourthly, it is an Argument of spiritual strength, when the Spirit A frequent
and constant spirit of prayer an argument of much of Gods Spirit.
of prayer breaths forth frequently, and constantly, and fervently to God in
us: Hence David prays and cries in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, he
rises at midnight to pray, and prevents the d^wning of the day to pray: Thus
Daniel is thrice each day on his knees to God, and would not be beaten off,
with the powers and terrors of cruel enemies and lions.

Thus the Lord Jesus frequently retired alone to private prayer, and sometimes
spent the whole night in prayer to God with strong cries, tears and
supplications: And therefore is it that all true Christians are the spiritual
Israelites, that is, wrastlers and strivers with God in prayer; like unto their
Father Jacob, who wrastled all night in prayer with God, wi^h weeping and
supplications, and would not let the Angel go until he blessed him; and
therefore his name was called Israel, a wrastler or prevailer with God, as well
as Jacob a supplanter and prevailer with men.

Ob. But may not Hypocrites be frequent and fervent in prayer to God? Did not
the Pharisees and Jews pray and fast often? Do not the very Turks solemnly pray
five times each 24-hours? And the Papists not only keep their solemn morning
and evening times of prayer, but many other solemn prayers unto which the
several orders of Friars, Monks and Nuns bind themselves? And how easy is it
by worldly engines to wheel about the Indians of America to become frequent
prayers unto God, etc.

I answer: Many are the differences between the true prayers of Gods children,
and the false of dissemblers and hypocrites: I will name a few for instance.

First then hypocrites pray but in a form and lip-labor, as a t^sk True prayer
is the souls breathing unto God:
and work to be done for carnal respects, to merit at Gods hand, or to stop
the mouth of conscience, which tells them they cannot be Gods children except
they pray: But true prayer is the pouring out of the heart to God, the true
breathing of the soul to God, arising as Incense and perfume unto God: Hence
(no doubt) although Paul before his conversion prayed much unto God, (for he
was a Pharisie) yet he never praid indeed, until his great change, and the
descending of the holy Spirit of prayer upon him: And therefore the Lord sends
Ananias with this encouragement unto Paul: Behold the prays, Act. 9.

Hence Gods children find a kind of holy pleasure, and delight in and has more
or less some soul-pleasure in it.
prayer, whatever be the event or issue, it pleases God to give, like as a man
finds delight in casting off an heavy burden from his shoulder, or in the
unbosoming of a grief, into the bosom of a friend. Thus Hanna oppressed with
grief, weeps no more, when she had powered forth her supplication before the
Lord: And the Lord Jesus p^wred forth his prayers, and tears, in the bosom of
his Father, and then rost^ quiet in his Fathers pleasure, as touching the
passing by, or drinking of the bitter cup.

O^j. B^t may not the children of God want holy pleasure and delight in prayer,
and depart from Gods presence as heavy as they came?

I answer, some spiritual distempers may hinder, and obstruct the operations
of the Spirit of prayer: nevertheles the soul and spirit prays and mourns for
the absence of holy pleasure, and delight in this holy exercise. Hence David's
mourning (as a Turtledove) in Gods children are most in private with God.
his prayers, and Jeremies lamentings for the ob^ructions, between the Lord and
their souls, in this holy Communion.

The second difference is, the Hypocrites prayers more respect the ears of men
then God, as the Lord Jesus tells us: They pray that men may know so much, and
esteem them Religious: Gods children, like true lovers, delight to be private,
and fervent with their heavenl^ Father, and Husband.

Thirdly, Hypocrites in their prayers most commonly respect earthly things,
(and therefore Hos. 7.) they cry and howl upon The prayers of Gods people most
respect spiritual and soul mercies.
their Beds, for corn, and wine: or at the best they respect but themselves,
etc. although it be in the pardon of their sins, and saving of their Souls: But
the prayers of Gods children, chiefly eye heavenly things.

Hence the wonderful spirituallity of Christ's prayer to his Father, (John 7.)
for the glorifying of his name, and spiritual Grace, and mercy in the souls of
Believers: Hence the admirabl^ spirituallity of David's prayers, for spiritual
and soul m^rcies, Psalm: 119. And the fervent prayers of Paul in all his
Epistles for heavenly and spiritual mercies to the Saints o^ God.

Hypocrites like Dogs howl and fawn for bones and crusts, etc. But Gods
children beg the proper tokens, and characters of a spiritual Father, to his
spiritual children, and Beloved.

4thly, Hypocrites will not always cry unto God, (J^b. 27.) but at last with
Saul, if God answer not, they run tothe Devil in evil means, murmur, and
despair: But Gods children can no more cease to cry unto God, then to live a
spiritual life, and therefore resolve to give God no Rest, until they receive
an answer, and therefore also wait for his holy pleasure, and leisure, and at
last are satisfied with the Lords holy pleasure, and sentence, God^ people wait
for, and rest in Gods answer.
al^hough it seem cross, add bitter to flesb, and blood: So Moses in respect
of his suit to God, for his going into the land of Can^: So David praying for
his child: So Christ Jesus in respect of his bitter cup. So Paul praying
against hi^ great temptation.

Obj. But may not Hypocrites pray long, and also wait upon God?

I answer, they may, yet at last, out of ^nbelief, and anger, like an angry
Dog, or sturdy Beggar, they cry out in murmur, and wrath, as the unbelieving
King of Israel, what should I wai^ upon God any longer? But Gods children never
give over: for when they grow weary, they (like Moses) beg help to their
fainting hands in prayer, and desire their eyes may never cease trickling tears
unto God, unti^ he look down from Heaven, Lament: 2.

A 5th: Argument of spiritual health, and strength, is a constant holy sense
of our own unwortbines, vileness, and ^asenes in Gods presence: Hence Jacob
professes himself l^sse then the least of Gods mercies, that is, then the
least crum, or drop, or rag, or look of mercy: Hence the Centurion professes
himself not worthy that Christ should come under his Roof: Hence Elizabeth her
holy wonder, whence is it (says ^he) that the Mother of my Lord should come
unto me? Hence Mephiboseth wonder^ that David should look upon such a dead Dog.

Ob: But may not Hypocrites profess they are not Papists, that they can
deserve nothing at Gods hands, that if they had their deserts it were woe wi^h
them?

I answer, Hypocrites may say so, but yet are angry when God seems not to deal
with them, as he deals with others. Hence they quarrel with God, as if that
God seemed not to respect their offerings of prayer, and fasting. Isa: 58. But
Gods children Gods people are only truly sensible of unworthines.
con^essing themselves Beggars at Gods door, and Dogs under his Table, they
wait for, and are humbly thankful for every crum of grace and mercy: So Christ
Jesus teaches us to give thanks for the mercy of a little bread, and then for
a little Fish, (Ma^k 6.) So after most heavy and wonderful afl^ctions, Jeremie
cries out Jehova is righteous, and professes it is mercy that it is not worse,
and that they were not burnt up, and consumed.

A 6th. Argument of the spiritual health and temper, is when the affections
work strong and lively after God, after God for 6thly.
himself, after God as a portion and inheritance, after God as an Husband: when
as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pant our Hearts after God, when
as the thirsty ground longs for the showers of Rain, so long our souls after
God: When his words are sweeter then the honey, and honey comb, and of more
esteem then thousands of gold, and silver.

Ob. But may not Hypocrites (as Balaam) profess so much and that in earnest?

I answer, the deceitful beart of a man will go wonderful far this way: Yet
certain it is an Hypocrite respects God, but as a Dog respects his Master, yea
sometimes a stranger, and an Enemy for a crust, or as an Hireling for his
wages: But Gods children, in Hypocrites affection to God.
the want of all things, are content with God alone, his Christ, his Spirit,
his Favor, his Word, his Ordinances: Hence David professes Psalm. 4. Thou
put more joy into my heart, then in the time when their corn and wine
increases: And Habac^ck, when Vine, and Fig tree, and Flock, and Heard fail,
he professes to rejoice in God, and to glory in the God of his salvation.

2ly. In the loss of all things, in the greatest straights and extremities,
Gods children yet find comfort in God, that God their portion is not lost. Thus
as David when his wives, and children, and friends, and servants, and cattle
were all devoured by an enslaving God himself the portion of his.
and (...) sword, and he finds no Remainder, but burnt walls and ashes, and his
own company ready to stone him, yet as David they take comfort, and encourage
themselves enjoying their God.

7tly. It is an Argument of spiritual health, and strength, when 7thly.
the holy Commandments of God are not grievous, but pleasant and delightful
to u^: when we can say as the Lord Jesus said, it is our meat and drink, to do
our heavenly Fathers will: when we are active and ready at the commands of God,
and can say (when the Lord asks whom shall we send) send me, as the Prophet
Ready obedience to God.
Esaias said: And as the Lord Jesus Psalm: 40. Here I am, I delight to do thy will
O my God: when we can without repining grudging, or delaying, obey commands
most grievous to flesh and blood, against not only flesh and blood, but against
carnal reason, yea against Hope and Faith it self, as Abraham did, in offering
up his most dear and only son Isaac.

Obj. But may not Hypocrites obey the commands of God, as Saul did, etc?

I answer, they may indeed obey Gods commands by halves as he did, and as a
servant, and hireling, serve God for wages, and with eye service, with opinion
of merit, and boast of their halt and lame service, as Saul did. But Gods
children embrace all the commands of God with delight, even the least, and most
despised, with the greatest and most difficult, and when all is done, they
confess they have need of merey, and are unprofitable Servants.

Obj. But may not Gods children live in the disobedience of some commands of
God, and yet be healthful, and strong in grace?

I answer, it is impossible that a child of God should (either in spiritual
health or sickness) live in the breach of any known command of God his Father.
It Is true, Abraham, and Jacob, and David, and others, lived long in the sin of
many wives, out of ignorance The sins of Gods people.
of Gods will, and Gods children to this day, even the holy Martyrs or
Witnesses of Jesus, (who accounted their heart bloods not too dear for Christ)
have and do live in the breach of many Commandments, that concern the worship
of God: But they are herein like a traveller deceived, by a false path, which
when he once really suspects, he cannot walk a step with ease, now do they cry
out with David, Psalm: 119. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts: And
when God says seek my Face, their Hearts answer, Lord thy face will I seek.
Psalm 27.

An 8th. discovery of spiritual health and strength, is an humble, 8thly.
a patient and thankful submission to the aflicting, and chastising hand of
God. Thus it is said of Aaron, in that dreadful stroke of Gods hand, depriving
him of his two sons in the fl^re of their Youth, in the midst of their sin, in
the performance of their Priests Office: it is said, Asron held his peace: I
was dumb and held my peace, (says David) Psalm. 39. for thou did it: Thus
Jeremi^h (Lam: 1.) Jehovah is righteous, for I have grievously transgrest
against him. Yea Job not only expressed an humble The patience of Gods children,
under Gods hand.
and patient mind, but also (which is wonderful, but proper to Gods children,
when in right temper) he blessed God in the midst of so many fearful and
astonishing losses, of so many Cattle, Servants, and Children. saying, Blessed
be the name of the Lord.

Obj. May not wicked men and Hypocrites acknowledge Gods aflicting hand, and
humble themselves?

I answer, Hypocrites may see Gods hand, and humble themselves as the
Egyptians, and the Philistines did, but cannot possibly be thankful for it:
They acknowledge Gods hand as a Dog h^s Masters when he is beaten, but not as a
child his Fathers. The counterfeit patience of Hypocrites.
As a loving and dutiful Wise, receiving Pills or Physic from the hand of her
loving Husband, a skillful Physician, who knows her sickness, and out of love
and care, prepares them for her, she cannot but be thankful for those bitter
medicines, and earnestly desire a kindly working: Thus David, Psalm: 119. I know
O Lord that thou in faithfulness have aflicted me, for all thy commands are
righteous.

A 9th. Argument of spiritua^ health, and strength, is an humble 9thly.
free confession, and giving glory unto God, in the rising up, or recovering
out of any scandalous transgression, against God Hence the Isralites confession
of their sin in desiring a King, (so impatiently, and imperiously as they did,
with large confessions, The mournful confession of Gods people.
1 Samuel 6.

Hence the many bitter and lamentable confessions of holy David and other holy
Servants of God, after their committing of known evils: Hence the Corinthians
repenting of their fellowship with the incestuous person in his sin, they give
such an exemplary evidence of their true Repentance, that their holy practice
is set as an holy Samplar, and Copy for all Saints afterward to follow, and
write after.

Obj. But did not Pharaoh, Saul, and Jud^s confess their sins, and^?

I answer, not with intent to glorify God, as Gods Saints do, taking shame
before the world unto themselves, lying down in 1.
the Dust that God may tread upon them, and be exalted.

Not with hatred of their sins, but in horror and trouble at the danger of
them, or in the evidence of them flying in their faces. 2.
Thus a Merchant casts those goods over board into the sea in a storm, which
afterward he wishes in again: Like a Dog, False confessions.
they vomit up the filth, which (after their stomach is eased) they return
unto, and lick up by new Commissions: But Gods children confess in hatred of
their sins, and loathing of themselves, and (like men in some sicknesses) are
willing to take those medicines which may provoke, and cause vomit, which
afterward they are so far from returning to, that they abhor to touch, or look
on it.

Obj. But may not Gods children return again to their vomit, and commit the
same sins, which they have cast up by humble confession?

I answer, the sins of Gods children are either, 1. gross or scandalous, which
when they recover out of, and give glory unto God, The sins of Gods people
distinguished.
by public confession, we seldom or never find them returning to such their
vomit again. Hence we hear no more of Noabs drunkenness, of David's adultry, of
Peter's denial of Christ Jesus, etc.

Or 2ly. Their sins are sins of a more private and ordinary distemp^r, wherein
their passions of anger, or neglect, or forgetfullnes prevail against them,
never without some bitterness, and grief, and humiliation, and endeavor, wi^h
resolution of a more watchful, and heavenly, and spiritual conversation?

10thly. It is an argument of spiritual health, and strength, to 10thly. Gods
people long after visible enjoyments of God.
maintain or recover an holy vehement longing, after the enj^yment of God, and
of Christ, in a visible, and open professi^n of his own holy worship, and
Ordinances, separate from all false worships, Gods, and Christ's, etc.

Hence that of David, Lord I have loved the Habitation of thy house, and the
place where thine honor dwells: Hence he prosesseth he had rather be a Door
keeper in the house of the Lord, (that is in a low condition, in Gods house,)
then to dwell in the tents of wickedness, though in never so safe and pleasant a
condition.

Hence he sums up all his desires in one, Psalm: 27. One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, etc.

Hence (though David mist of the Lords Order in carrying of the Lords Ark, and
afterward he mist in his thoughts about the building of God an house and
Temple; Yet in both he discovered his holy strong affection, to Gods public
honor, and worship. The very same which afterward the Prophet Jeremy, and
Daniel declared in their bitter Lamentations, for the Ruin of Gods house. And
both Daniel, and Zachary, and Haggie, mightily declare this affection for the
rebuilding, and setting up again this Temple and worship of God, and what they
prophefied, that both Ezra and Nehemiah, and afterward Jehoshua and Zeruba^el
zealously performed and executed.

Hence it is that in the heavenly Love Song, the love of Cbristians to Christ
Jesus in his ordinances is most elegantly set forth True Christians affection
to Christ Jesus in his visible worship.
by a similitude taken from the strong affection of married persons: I am,
says the Spouse sick of love, and Oye daughters of Jerusalem tell Christ Jesus
so: I^ I find him without I will kiss him openly in the streets, and will ^ot
be ashamed: True heavenly affection (like marriage love) at first kindles from
some private sparks, to an open flame of public profession, without shame
before all men.

Obj. May not Hypocrites (as Saul in fl^ying the Gibeonites, and Jebu in
slaying the Baalites) discover strong affection and zeal to the Lord and his
worship, and consequen^ly in these times to Christ Jesus and his h^ly kingd^m?

I answer: Hypocrites and counterfeits in their profession of love to Gods
public worship ever run upon one of these two Rocks. For,

First, either they set up, and maintain, and fight for a fancy, a
counterfeit, a false Christ, according to the prophecy of the Lord Jesus, that
many (that is, thousands and m^ltitutes of people) should so use his name, that
is, with a willing ignorance and delusion.

Or 2ly, if it be the true worship of the true God according to the appointment
of Christ Jesus, yet ever in two things the si^cere wife (the true love of
Christ Jesus) outgoes the whore and counterfeit.

First, the true wife contents not her self with the bare exercise, ordinance
or administration (as the hypocrites do) but in all is restless to enjoy the
Lord himself: For as the ordinance is spiritual, and heavenly; so longs the
true believer for a spiritual and heavenly communion with the Lord himself in
it, that he may become one spirit with him more and more in all these outward
and subordinate means and administrations.

Hence it pleases the Spirit of God to resemble his worship to the marri^ge
bed, which satisfies not the heavenly Spouse, when the Husband, Christ Jesus,
is not spiritually embraced therein, but absent.

2ly, The desire of the true believer in the enjoyment of Christ Jesus in any
of his appointments is to be made fruitful by him: but the defire of a whore
extends no further then Lust or a Reward. Hence Romans 7. We are married unto
Christ Jesus, that we should bring forth fruit unto God: A whoorish heart
willingly endures not fruitfulnes, but kills her own conceptions which the true
Wife cherishes, and tendreth as her life.

Obj. What should be the reason why so many of Gods children who in all ages
have discovered their strong affection to Gods visible worship, and communion
in Christ, have yet so varied, and wandered from the right, and first
institution of the Church, and ministry, and Ordinances of worship?

I answer, Gods council touching the spiritual captivity, and desolation,
must be fulfilled, when yet notwithstanding, the strength of the affection of
Gods people has appeared in their mourning, and weeping, and lamenting after,
and contending for the truth of the spiritual enjoyment of their souls
Beloved, in all the means of his own holy appointments.

11thly. Again it is an Argument of spiritual health, and strength, 11thly.
in respect of God, when the Heart is fixed, and readily prepared for all the
holy pleasure of God. Hence Hezekiah prays for such whose hearts were prepared
to seek Jehovah, God of their Fathers: Hence this readiness, and preparation of
mind, is compared to the shoes on our Feet, without which we are unfit for
traveling, walking, etc. and with which we are ready for any spiritual
employment. Hence David professes that his heart was fixed, and ready, and
when the Lord said seek my Face, David's heart answered, Lord thy Face will I
seek, etc.

Obj. What is the reason that Gods children are sometimes hardly brought on to
difficult services, and duties?

I answer, unreadines, and unfitnes is a spiritual sickness or distemper, which
when Gods children recover out of, then they say as the Lord Jesus in David
Psalm: 41. Lord my heart is willing, my heart is ready to do thy will O my God:
And they say to Christ Jesus, as his holy servant John Bradford said to Queen
Mary; If she keep me in prison, I will thank her; If ^he release me I will
thank her; If she burn me, I will still thank her.

Lastly, it is an Argument of spiritual health, and strength, when 12thly.
Gods children walk in a continual sense of their own insufficiencies, and
distempers, when they discern the evil inclination of their own spirits, and
the excellency, and insufficiency of Gods most holy Spirit: And therefore
continually say with David, Psalm 143. Thy Spirit is good, lead me etc. and
Psalm. 139. Search me O God, and try my heart, and see if thou find any way
of wiekednes in me, and lead me in the way ev^rlasting.

These and many more, are the trials (...) spiritu^ll strength, health, and
cheerfulnes, in matters concerning God: We now come to the second Head of
trialls of spiritual health, and strength, in matters concerning our selves.

First, then it is an Argument of spiritual health, and strength, when
(especially) after known sins committed, our hearts are in a broken frame and
temper, when our spirits are as it were Brokennes of spirit.
contrite, and pounded like spice in a Mortar, then yielding the most
delightful smell, and savor unto God.

Hence (Isa. 66) a contrite, and broken heart is an House wherein God dwells, an
House well ordered, swept, and garnished.

Hence a Spirit of trembling (Isa. 66.) is an Argument and character of the
most dutiful children of God: but of this forme^ly.

2ndly. It is an Argument of spiritual strength, when we make 2dly. Spiritual
battles.
it our work to observe, watch, and kill our corruptions, and rebellions, and
labor to keep under, and beat down our body to an holy fitnes, and readiness
for Gods service, in fasting, and prayer against temptations.

Obj. But may not Hypocrites humble themselves, and labor to mortify their
lusts, and corruptions?

I answer, no question, but in horror of conscience, and fear of Gods
judgments, an Hypocrite may humble himself in fasting, as Ahab, etc. but to
kill sin, as sin, and to desire to be ready for Gods will, in denying, and
subduing his own, is only the character and property of a child of God.

3ly. It is an Argument of spiritual health, and strength, when we 3dly. Godly
loathing for sin.
so look upon our sins, and our sinful dispositions, that we not only loath
our sins, but also loath our selves for them: So says the Lord, (Ezekiel. 6.) My
people shall loath themselves for their abominations, and for their whoorish
heart against me: Thus Job when he recovers himself from his murmurings against
God, he cries out. Behold I abhor myself, and repent in dust, and ashes. And
David, (Psalm: 73) looks upon himself for his murmu^ing against Gods providence,
as an ignorant person, as a fool and a beast in Gods presence.

Object. But may not an Hypocrite loath and abhor himself for sin?

I answer, It is possible for an Hypocrite to be sorry for some sins, and to be
angry with himself, and to loath himself, but not properly for his sins,
which he loves, but (as thieves, Hypocrites may in a respect loath themselves
for sin.
whores, drunkards, etc.) for the danger, damage and disgrace which his sin may
bring upon him. It is only the property of Gods children to look at sin as
sin, with a loathing eye, and to behold themselves vile and loathsome, even for
the most pleasing and profitable, and delightful, and most secret sins.

Fourthly, It is an Argument of the strength of Spiritual life, Fourthly.
when we lay down our selves at the feet of God, when as a Servants will, our
wills are subdued to the Lords will, when the True self denial.
Lord is become our self, when his ends are our ends, which give us content
and pleasure, although our selves, our ends are lost and destroyed, that we
may find new ends and delights in God.

Hence Epaphroditus to further the work of the Lord (Phil. 2) he regarded not
his health, and consequently not his life; as a true Soldier in the Service of
his heavenly King and Captain.

Object. But may not an Hypocrite deny himselfs; his own ends, his pleasures,
his profits, his credit, his liberty, his life.

I answer, It is impossible; for all that he does is still for himself: like
Israel, Hosea 7. He is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself: All
that he aims at in using the name of God, his glory, his Christ, is still to
exalt himself, to save himself: But Gods children eye ever a greater end then
self, to No Hypocrite can truly deny himself.
wit, the glorifying of their God, although it be in their own destructions.

Fifthly, Our hearts are then in an healthful frame and disposition, when we
are cordially willing to go from hence, that Fifthly.
we may be with Christ, Phil. 3. yet for the service of Christ and his Saints,
we are cordially willing to stay in hard and difficult Service.

Object. But may not an Hypocrite desire to dye, and to be with Christ?

I answer, An Hypocrite may defire to dye, and to be with Christ in a glorious
condition, but no Hypocrite can endure to dye, to be with Christ in an holy and
spiritual condition, free from sin: and therefore can he not endure uprightly,
etc. to work for Christ on Earth.

Sixthly, Then are we in an healthful frame of Grace, when God has brought
down our hearts to be content with the Sixthly.
changes of his right hand upon us: when we have learnt the lesson of Paul, to
be content with food and raiment, with a travelers and strangers portion, of
so much as may serve us in our Spiritual contentation in Gods will.
Journey: When we can tell how to abound without Pride, or security, or ^rust
in earthly things, and when we can tell how to want all outward mercies with
quietness and contentation.

Obj. But may not Hypocrites be contented with small matters, and suppress
their desires of great things, and say with Esau unto Jacob: Keep that thau
have my brother, I have enough?

I answer, The desires of all men are not alike greedy; but All changes and
losses are made up to Gods people only by himself.
yet the desires of men are truly satisfied with out God: Now when changes and
the loss of all things fall upon the Hypo^rite, he cannot find those changes
and those losses made up in God: No Habakkuk tells us, That it is the Character
of Gods children, when the corn is gone, and the flocks and the herds, and
the vine, and the figtree fail, to rejoice in God alone for a portion, and to
glory in the God of their Salvation.

Seventhly, Then are our hearts in an healthful frame, when Seventhly. Joy in
Sorrow.
we are not only willing to suffer for the name of Christ Jesus, but when we
also conceive a kind of pleasure in it; so says Paul, I take pleasure in
necessities, in distresses, and for Christ's sake; Hence the Saints (Heb. 13.
10.) not only suffered the spoiling of their goods, but they took the spoiling
of their goods with joy.

Object. May not Hipocrites suffer joyfully for Christ?

I answer, An Hypocrite may do and suffer with a seeming joy for Christ: But
he can never do this out of love to Christ, 1 Cor. 13. but always out of
self-love for his own glory and Hypocrites pretend to suffer for Christ.
honor, out of strong conviction of conscience, least he be damned in denying
his light, etc. Only Gods children can out of love to Christ Jesus rejoice (as
some true friend or wife) to be afflicted and to sorrow and loose for their
Souls beloved.

Object. Why then are many of Gods Children so heavy in their sufferings and
losses for Christ Jesus?

I answer, This happens sometimes out of distemper of body; sometimes out of
distemper and weakness of mind, which they labor against, and chide
themselves for as did David, Psalm. 42. and 43. why art thou disquieted O my
Soul, and why art thou so heavy within me? still trust in GOD, for I will
praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God.

Eighthly, It argues strength of Grace when we use this Eighthly.
world, and all the comforts of it with a weaned eye and mind, as if we used it
not: as English Travelers that lodge in an Indian Christian weanedness from
this worlds comforts.
house, use all the wild Indians comforts with a strange affection, willing and
ready to be gone: or as Passengers in a Ship, willing and ready (when God will)
to land, and go ashore in our own country, to our own House, and comforts in
the Heavens.

Thus Gideons Soldiers (in a figure of such as are fit for Christ's Battles)
are not only courageous and depart not with the cowards, but also lap at the
comforts of this life, with a speedy necessity, but lie not down to them in
excess of affection and delight.

Object. May not Hypocrites use this world with a strange affection, weaned
from the vanities of it, etc.

I answer, Doubtless not only a false Christian or Hypocrite, but other
natural men (out of the sense and experience of the vanity and uncertainly of
this life, and the comforts of it) may attain The heavenl^ use of earthly
comforts.
to a great seeming dispising of these earthly things, though never without
sorrow that they are not more full and certain, as being their portion: Only
Gods children who have made the Lord himself their portion, and his word and
Ordinances their inh^ritance, they only I say use them as from God, tokens of
his Love and goodness, and as golden chains to draw them unto him, and humbly
submit to Gods holy pleasure, in his gracious bestowing or withdrawing of them.

Ninthly, It is an argument of a strong fear of, and affection Ninthly.
to God, when in all our earthly businesses, we see God, and mind^ his name
and praise. Hence says James: Ye ought in all Journeys and purposes to say,
If God will: Hence Boaz that holy man, when he comes into his Field has God in
his mouth: The Lord bless you said he to his Reapers: Hence the poorest
Christian able to contribute (1 Cor. 16.) observes weekly, and therefore daily
the dispensations of God toward him; He observes the givings and takings of
Gods hand, and walks with him though in the poorest and meanest calling and
condition.

Object. But may not Hypocrites observe Gods blessing in worldly things, in
fair winds, good voyages, in the increase of children, corn, wine, cattle,
etc?

I answer, Natural conviction enforces even Pagans to confess (a Manittoo)
an Invisible Deity and Godhead in these visible things; But to make it a work
and Business in all these earthly things to see and glorify God, to walk
with him, and to The glorifying of God proper to Gods children only. Tenthly.
be full of his praise all the day-long; this is only the Character of Gods
children, who only truly see his hand, and love his name and glory.

Tenthly, It is an Argument of strength and vigor of grace, to keep a constant
watch and bridle on our lips and tongue, that no words pass but such as are
seasoned with Salt, to the glorifying of our Maker with our glory, and the
edifying or benefitting of others. This Tongue of ours the Lord compares to the
The true watch of Gods people over their Tongue.
bridle of a Horse, to the Helm of a Ship, which if well managed rules the
horse and ship, with safety and comfort: and the Spirit of God concludes; that
he is a perfect and strong man in Christ, that is thus able to command his
Speech and Tongue in this world.

Hence Christ Jesus preaches Judgment to the world, for the abuse of the
Tongue, and the idle words of it, when our words are not working words, and
tend not to heavenly profiting of others.

Hence the Spirit by Paul commands (Ephesians. 5.) that neither uncleanness, nor
covetousness, nor foolish talking, nor jeasting, be once heard from the mouths
of the Saints, but rather giving of thanks, and praising of God.

Object. But may not worldly persons set a watch before the door of their lips?

I answer, Moral wisdom may teach persons the vanity and gross wickedness
of the Tongue, but only Gods spirit (and strength of it) does teach Gods
children, in true fear and love of God, not only to restrain from vain and
foolish, but also to attain to a spiritual and heavenly Language.

Lastly, It argues strength and life and Grace in Christ, when our hearts by
Gods spirit are wrought to such a degree of hatred of sin, that we not only
abhor the acts thereof, but also fly and shun the looks and appearance of it:
so that we not only fly pride and passion, and covetousness and uncleanness,
but also the appearance of them.

Hence Boaz, when Ruth lay down at his feet in the night, as claiming marriage
by right, he not only refrained from uncleanness, or uncIeane touches, but
also he gravely advised her to be gone so early in the morning, that no man
should say there came a woman into the floar.

Object. But may not worldly persons not only avoid sin, but also the
appearance of it?

I answer, No worldly or unregenerate person can truly hate sin, or the
appearance of it, for it is his nature and Element, they can only hate the
damages and disgrace, and discredit of it, and Only Gods children can truly
hate sin.
so a Whore may hate whoredom. It Is only the property of Gods children, and
the newborn to hate sin as sin, with the sinful appearances of it as
opposite to their new and heavenly nature in Jesus Christ.

I Now come to the third head of the trials of spiritual health and strength,
and that respects our conversation with men, in which

First I argue, that it is a strong argument of a strong constitution Christ
and Ch^istians work to glorify God in doing good.
and spiritual health, when we can make it our work and trade, to aim at
glorifying our Maker in doing good to men.

Thus our great example Christ Jesus made it his work and trade to go about
to do good, which he did abundantly and constantly to the souls and bodies of
men.

Obj. Christ Jesus and his Apostles and messengers were end^ed with power from
on high, not only to preach the Word for conversion but also with power of
casting out Devils, and healing bodily diseases.

I answer, as an holy witness of Christ Jesus (a Woman) once answered a
Bishop, I am a member of Christ Jesus as well as Peter Holy women great helps in
the Gospel of Christ Jesus
himself. The least Believer and Follower of Jesus pertakes of the nature and
spirit of him their holy head and husband, as well as the strongest and holiest
that ever did or suffered for his holy name.

Therefore it is that we read not only of the service of those great
master builders and workmen of Christ Jesus, the Apostles, but also the
service and help of Christian women, for instance (Romans 16.) Phebe, Priscilla,
Mary, Persis, were eminently noted for helping forward the work of Christ
Jesus, to wit, the glorifying of God in the saving of the poor sons of men.

Object. But is it not possible for Gods children to be slack in this work and
trade of doing good to the souls and bodies of others, and yet be strong in
grace and healthful?

I answer, Doubtless Gods Children may be strong one way, and weak in another,
strong in one grace and weak in another, strong in one trial and weak in
another: But it is their weakness and sickness, when they are slow and
negligent of so glo^ious and heavenly a work.

Thus Paul complains of the Saints of Asia, that he found none that stuck close
to him but Timothy. Thus was it in Barucks weakness and sickness to seek
great and earthly things, and Jeremie (strong in spiritual health and life)
chides and reproves him for it, Jer. 45.

Secondly, It argues strength of spiritual life, when we bear Secondly.
a strong affection to the seed of the woman, Christ's seed, Gods children. To
do good to all men is a Christians trade, but especially to the household of
faith.

This was David's affection (Psalm 16.) when he looked upon Gods children
cannot bu^ naturally love one another.
Gods children as the excellent of the Earth, and placed all his delight in
them: Thus Jonathan though he lost his Fathers love for David's, though he was
to loose a Kingdom by David, yet he loves him as his own Soul.

Thus Ruth so loved that holy woman Naomi, that although she were grown poor,
a widow, and now in a tedious travel from Moab to Israel, and Naomi did also
entreat her and her sister to go back, and Orpah her sister was already
returned to her kindred and her Gods, yet such was the flame of her holy
affection, that she entreats Naomi not to entreat her: Entreat me not to leave
thee, for whether thou go I will go, where thou dy^st I will dye, and there
will I be buried: thy God shall be my God, etc.

Object. May not wicked persons favor, love, and respect Worldly men may in a
kind love Gods people.
Gods children? Did not Saul greatly respect Samuel; and for a while Herod,
John the Baptist? Did not Michol love King David, as well as did her brother
Jonathan? yea did not David find wonderful favor in the eyes of a Philistian
Achaz?

I answer, The nature and the grounds of the love of natural persons to Gods
children must be rightly distinguished: Gods children themselves may and ought
to love each other, and others also, acccording to any natural and civil
Relation; yet only Gods children can love Gods children for the grace and
spirit of God, which they see and find in each other.

Thus as two Candles or Torches they spiritually close and embrace each other
with heavenly affection, being of one common heavenly nature together. Thus
Contrymen meeting But Gods children can only love each other with a
spiritual love.
in strange and foreign nations presently know each other by their language,
etc.

Thus Brethren rejoice to find each other in strange places, and to know
themselves the sons of one Father and Mother.

Thus Fellow Soldiers which stick close each to other in life and death, yea,
although routed, disordered and flying, if possible they can discern and know
each other:

Object. But did not holy David (who was a man strong in grace) did not he lay
plots for the life of an holy man, noble Gods children may possibly be unkind
and cruel each to other.
and faithful Uriah? Did not Asah that holy King of Judah, practice false
Imprisoning, in committing the man of God to prison, and that only for his
faithfulness in reproving him from God?

I answer, This shows that both David and Asah at this time were very sick, and
David upon his recovery laments his weakness and wickedness and
Blood-guiltinesse, Psalm. 51.

Quest. But may not Gods children have just cause of exercising sharpness
each to others?

Yea doubtless, for Paul withstood even Peter himself to Gods people in case
may be sharp each to other, so was David sh^rply reproved by Nathan;
to his face, and the Church of Corinth must put away and deliver the
incestuous person to the Devil; though probably yet dear, and a brother,
according to that of Paul to the Thesselonians, yet count him not as an Enemy,
but admonish him as a Brother,

In a way of Justice, in a way of Physic, the dearest friend or Brother may
exercise much bitterness, though with much sweetness of temper, and with much
tender melting and bemoaning of affection.

Thus in cases have we seen mounfull violence used, to a wife or brother in
some kind of distempers and distractions.

But when Gods children shall so far degenerate, as to pursue One of the
blackest transgressions in the world for
the life each of other, though it be with desire to cover a sin, and to keep
Gods name from being dishonored (as in David's case) it is a weakness, it is a
sickness, which although it be not unto death, yet brings it near unto
Deaths door, and made David cry out with bitterness of his soul, Deliver me
from bloodguiltinesse O my God, and my tongue shall sing loud of thy
righteousness.

A third trial of spiritual health and strength is a compassionate Thirdly.
an^ pitiful, melting-heart over the afflicted or miserable, A compassionate
heart even toward enemies is a Christan heart.
yea, although our enemies, or enemies of their own Salvation.

Thus the Lord Jesus sighs for the hardness of the heart of his Enemies: thus
he weeps over Jerusalem that was to kill him, and prayed for his persecutors
and enemies.

Thus Jeremy powers forth his Book and Rivers of Lamentations for Jerusalem of
old, as Christ for the latter. Thus Gods people are commanded to weep with them
that weep: And when any oppose themselves, we ought in meekness and patience
to bear it, as knowing their woeful and miserable bondage and slavery to
Satan: And who knows whether it will please God in infinite mercy and
compassion to deliver them 2 Timothy 2. 26.
by vouchsafing repentance in Christ Jesus, as he has done to us?

Object. But may not Gods children exceed and over grieve for others?

Yea doubtless, and therefore God chideth Samuel for over-grieving for Saul,
because God has rejected him: Gods children may as well exceed the bounds of
gtiefs as of joy and auger, Gods people mourn for others.
and any kind of Passion or affection: but it is ever safer to fall on the
right hand of too much mercy and compassion, then on the left of Anger, Wrath
and Cruelty.

Hence David weeps over sinners with Rivers of Tears, because they keep not
Gods Law. Hence we are commanded to bear the burdens of others, and so fulfill
Christ's Law: All sin is a burden, but especially to Gods children, whether
they commit it out of a deceived judgment, and conscience, or out of passion,
and sudden slight of temptation: Their sins therefore (especially if
superiors,) we must cover, and with shame, and sorrow go backward like Shem,
and Japheth, as grieving, and unwilling to behold their nakedness.

Obj. But we are commanded not to suffer sin upon our Brethren, but reprove
them?

I answer, then is the tongue a fit instrument to reprove others, when it is
tuned by a grieved heart, that considers, and ponders it self, as subject to
temptation, and sin, as others, except mercy make the difference, and deliver
from temptation.

Fourthly, it is a good evidence of spiritual health, respecting 4thly,
Impartial reproving a character of Gods people.
others, when we endure not sin to lie upon them, or rather them to lie in the
pit of sin, but endeavor to help them out by wise, and loving, and seasonable
reproof, and exhortation.

Hence Job endures not sin in the wife of his Bozome, but charge her with
folly for her impatient, and impious counsel: Hence David smites deeply his
dearest Michol, when she mocks at his holy zeal for the Lord, and his worship.

Hence Christ Jesus sharply reproves his faithful servant and Apostle Peter,
and that only for (seeming) loving, and affectionate council: Get thee behind
me Satan.

Again, as true love, and zeal for God, (when strong) spares not the dearest:
so neither does it balk, or shun the highest. Thus deal Gods Prophets, even
with Kings, and Princes: Thus Samuel spares not Saul, nor Nathan David, Eliah
Ahab, nor John Baptist Bold reprovers for sin.
Herod and his Queen, even for those most near, and darling sins, which were
most dangerous to touch, and meddle with.

Qu: How stands such bold, and snarp language, (as some of the Prophets used)
with humble Duty, Fear, and Reverence, due unto superi^urs?

I answer, as true affection stands with plain, and sharp reproof of dearest,
so true humility in bold dealing on Gods behalf, with the most supreme, and
highest.

Hence are Gods people also commanded not only to reprove, but to separate in
case of final obstinacy in sin.

Obj. This course may seem to destroy humane society, yea nature, and civillity
out of the world.

I answer, it is true that Godliness, and Christian affection, and zeal for God
destroys corrupt nature, and humanity, but otherwise Godliness makes civilitie
more beautiful.
Godliness sa^ctifieth, and directs nature, and civillity, in the fear of God.

Fifthly, it argues strength of spiritual life, and grace, when a 5thly.
Soul is able to withstand, resist, and repel such sins, unto which the
opportunity of temptation sollicites, and invites us.

Hence holy Joseph, and David, are propounded to us for heavenly examples of
power, and strength of grace, in resisting those Joseph and David admirable for
resisting of temptations.
most, two plausible temptations (to which the wicked nature of man is so
prone, and subject:) the one of lust to Women, when strongly and often
solicited by his wanton Mistress: the other of revenge toward man, when his
blody persecutor Saul, seemed by God himself to be delivered, and brought into
his hand.

O^j. But David himself was conquered by uncleannes, and Asa wreaks his wrath,
upon the very servant, and Prophet of the most High, and yet both David, and
Asa were thought to be strong in grace, and power of Godliness?

I answer, Gods champions are sometimes strong, and sometimes weak, strong in
some things, weak in others, and (as the The falls of Gods children and to what
end.
strongest bodies) subject to spiritual colds, and falls, and hurts, which are
most graciously recorded for our comfort in our falls, as well as the holy
victories of the Saints, to make us watchful, and courageous.

Sixthly, in matters concerning others, it is a good argument of strength, of
grace, when we can patiently, and thankfully bear A Christian bearing of:
reproof a good argument of much of Christ Jesus.
a Reproof, and Admonition, when we can esteem a Reproof for our evil words,
or ways, not as a blow or streak on the Head, but as a sweet, and precious
Ointment powered on us.

Hence the admirable patience, and meeknes of Hanna, when Eii zeal^usly, but
uncharitably reproved her for Drunkenness. Hence when Christ Jesus most sharply
reproved Peter, and afterward Paul dealt severely with him about dissembling in
the matter of Communion; We hear not of the least impatient, or bitter word to
either, yea when he was unjustly charged, and that by Saints (Act. 11.) he
patiently bears it, and returns a soft, and gentle answer, which turned their
murmuring accusations into joyful satisfaction, and thansgiving.

But now the scorner, yea the godly being (weak) reproved Gods people may
possibly be angry at reproofs.
burst out in wrath. Thus not only Ahab imprisons Micaiah, and Herod, John the
Baptist, but Asa also claps up fast the reproving Prophet, and the best of Gods
children are subject to such sad distempers. when either a mistake of judgment,
or a pang of passion finfully hinders the receipt and working of the Reproofs of
the Almighty, which are wholesome heavenly potions intended by him the Father of
mercies, for our good, who ever be the cup, the vial, or instrument.

Obj. Many Phil sophers by natural wisdom, and many civil, and moral men,
out of the principles of civillity, and morality, and Natural wisdom goes
far, but not so far as spiritual.
sometimes for some private ends, will bear a Reproof with patience: And hence
that of Solomon, rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: whence it may seem
that men by strength of wisdom may receive in love, and profit, by a
Reprehension.

I answer, Gods children (as well as natural men) may also act from Rules of
Reason, and natural wisdom, but withal they act from an higher ground, and
principle, that is they hear they see Gods wise, and holy permitting hand in
the foulest mouth; So David acknowledges God in Shim^ railing, and Hezekiah in
Rabsheka his provocations, and blasphemies.

2dly. Gods children by reproofs, by sl^nders, and reproaches, are sent to God:
So David as a figure of Christ Jesus, and so Moses also, Repro^ches send Gods
people unto God.
when the people in their murmurings, reproached him, as the cause or occasion
of their miseries, he runs to God, and prays even for those unwarthy, and
unthankful men.

Lastly, with reference to our walking with others, it is an argument of great
strength of grace, when the glory of the Lord and the salvation of Gods people
is so great, and so dear in our eyes, that we can wish (upon supp^sition of
them two) that we not only loose our temporal, but our eternal slate and
welfare: Hence those two famous and wonderful speeches of those two glorious
stars Moses and Paul: Blot me out of thy book says Moses: And I could wish to
be accursed from Christ, says Paul, for Isreal's sake.

Ob. But can such a wish be lawful though for the gain and glory of Christ
since to be accursed from Christ cannot be without sin against Christ?

I answer: I will not dispute what accursedness or separation from Christ, that
is, some saying that Paul wished only a temporal, and some an eternal
separation from Christ: some a separation from joy and delight in the presence
of Christ, but not from the purity and holiness of Christ: But I say,
doubtless so near as any soul approaches to these heavenly copies of Moses and
Paul, so near comes he to the greatest strength, and health, and beauty of a
Christian life.

Ob. But can any man now attain to such a strength of grace as this, so to wish?

I answer: as it is in nature so in grace, there are children and young men (or
strong men,) and there are old and aged men in Different manifestations of
Christ Jesus in his people.
Christ: Again, as it is in nature, so in grace; there are differences of
child^en, and differences of young and aged men in Christ: every Israelite had
not the strength of Samson: nor every of David's Soldiers the strength and
valor of David's worthies: yet so near to these heavenly copies as we approach,
the stronger we are in the grace of God in Christ: And doubtless it cannot be
but it is in the desire of every true child of God, not only to enjoy a
pretty moderate health of spiritual life, but to be as strong in faith as
Abraham, in meekness as Moses, in patience a^ Job, in affection to God a^
David, and as zealous for the Lord and his glory, as were this blessed pair of
zealous servants of the most high, Paul and Moses.

I Am now come (dear Love) to the third and last Head proposed, Some means
which Gods Spirit uses as preservatives.
which is some few means of recovering and preserving of ^hristian health and
cheerfulness, and the preventing of spiritual sicknesses and diseases: In this
I shall desire to be brief, left by too long a discourse I discourage thy
reading, and hinder thy use and improvement of it.

First then, holy consideration of our estate, a deep and frequent examination
of our spiritual condition is an excellent Soul-examination a soul means of
spiritual preservation.
means of Christian health and temper: Thus teaches us the holy Spirit of God
by Jeremie, Lam: 2. Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord.

This searching and examining of our ways in Gods presence is (as it were) a
casting up of our accounts between God and our souls, wherein we truly verify
that true saying, That often reckoning makes God and our souls true friends.

This duty is hard, and therefore we must often cry t^ God with David, Psalm.
139. Search me O God, and try my heart, and see if there be any wicked way in
me, and lead me in the way ^verlasting.

This holy practice ought to be frequent, but then especially Affliction the
season of Examination.
when the hand, and Rods of the Lord are upon us: For then (as Job says) God
sof^neth our Hearts, and we are most like then to be as the ground moll^fied
upon a Thaw, fit to be broken up, or like the Ground moistened with storms, and
showers from H^aven, then in some hopeful turn for the Lords most gracious
seed, and heavenly planting.

Secondly, maintain an earnest longing and endeavor to 2dly. Christ Jesus his
appointments undoubted means of Christian health and cheerfulness.
enjoy Christ Jesus, who is our souls life in every holy Ordinance, which he
has appointed. If it be possible (with true satisfaction to our consciences,
and doubts in Gods presence) let us never rest from being planted into the holy
society of Gods children, gathered into the order of Christ Jesus, according to
hi^ most holy will, and Testament: Remembering that Christian health, grouth,
and fl^urishing, are promised to the Trees planted in Jehovahs house: And that
the holy Ordinances are the Lords provisions, and soul meals, and Breasts which
he has graciously appointed for his children, of all sorts, and ages.

Especially be much in holy prayer, and fasting before the Lord: this is an
Ordinance of which neither Pope nor Devil could Prayer with fasting a most
Christian and mighty ordinance.
ever deprive a child of God: If it be possible practice this duty with others,
however before the Lord in secret: rememb^ing how frequent the children of God
in holy scripture were in this duty. Daniel is an heavenly pattern: and so is
David, who wept and chastised his soul with fasting although he was reproached
for it, Psalm. 69.

Our holy Bridegroom the Lord Jesus, tells us that the Bridegroom shall be taken
away, and then his servants fast: as if he had ^xpresly named the times of the
Antichristian bondage, wherein the followers of Jesus, like the blessed Women.
(John the 20.) weeping, cry out, they have taken away my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him.

This holy Ordinance is of such admirable use among the Saints, that even in
the first, and purest times of Chris^ianity, we read of Christan yoke fellows,
consenting to a separation from each other, for a time that they may give
themselves to prayer, and fasting, 1. C. (...).

Obj. But some say fasting as it seems to be more proper to the Old Testa^ent,
so seems it not so useful in the New Covenant, when more spiritual worship,
and spiritual joys seem more suitable, and seasonable.

I answer, all the former Scriptures declare it to be an Ordinance of the New
T^stament, as well as a prayer it self: And for The excellent use of prayer and
fasting.
the use of it, it is most admirable for the seperating, and abstracting of the
mind, and spirit, from earthly occasi^ns, and comforts, for the devoting of the
soul to heavenly consideration, and examination of our ways, for the pouring
forth of prayers, and cries to God in the many great, and mighty straights
which Gods people pass through in this vale of tears, and Lamentation. And
indeed it is (as I may say) the taking of a soul sweat, or soul purge for the
avoiding and cleansing out our spiritual Hum^urs, and corruptions.

Thirdly, as ever we would preserve our spiritual health, let us 3dly.
Spiritual taking of cold.
carefully take heed of spiritual colds, and obstructio^s: For as it is in the
natural man, a cold it self is a great distemper, and the ground and ^eginning
of others, when the warm streams of blood, and spirits are stopped up, and
obstructed: So is it, (and much more in the spiritual) when our heavenly
spirits are stopped by damp colds, and ^bstructions of unnecessary frequenting of
cold societies, and places destitute of the life of the Sun of Righteousness
Christ Jesus.

The Lord Jesus is a Christians Garment: O let us keep that blessed garment
always close about us, and in all places, and in all companies, and upon all
occasions express the life, and power of Christ Jesus, longing to know, and to
follow his blessed words, and examples in life, and death.

Fourthly, take heed of spiritual surfets, that the feeding too much upon the
comforts of ^oak fellows, children, credit, profit, 4thly.
(though sweet, and wholesome as h^ny) ^urn not to bitterness, and loathing. Gods
people must watch against the sur^iting upon woe ldly comforts.


Gods children as travailers on the Land, as Passengers in a ship, must use
this world, and all co^forts of it, with dead, and weaned, and (...)
affections, a^ if they used them not: If Riches, i^ Child^en, i^ Cattle, if
Friends, if whatsoever increase, let us watch that the Heart fly not loose upon
them: But as we use salt with raw, and fr^sh meats, let us use no worldly
comfort without a savoury Remembrance, that these worldly Goods and comforts
are the common portion of the men of this perishing wo^ld, who must pe^ish
together with them. Let us muse upon their insufficiency to content, and fill
our Hearts, upon their uncertain coming, and going with Eagles wings: upon
their anxiety, and perplexednes full of Thorns, and vexation: upon their
certainty of departing, how soon we know not. O le^ us therefore beg gra^e from
Heaven, that we may use earthly comforts as a stool or ladder to help u^ upward
to heavenly comforts, profits, pleasures, which are only true, and lasting,
even eternal in God himself, when these Heavens, and earth are gone.

Fifthly, to maintain spiritual health and (...) is of no small use (as Paul
writes to Timothy) sometimes to help our 5. The power of meditating the joys
that are to come.
cold stomachs with a little wine or strong drink of the hope of the joys ^o
come: Lay hold (says Paul to Timotbie) of eternal life: and as the Soldier
meditates upon the glory of his victories: The sick passenger at Sea upon his
sweet refreshings on shore: the Traveller upon his journeys end and comforts at
his home: the L^bourer and the Hireling on his wages, the Husbandman on his
harvest: the Merchant on his gain: the woman in travail, on her fruit: so let
us sometimes w^rm and revive our cold hearts and fainting spirits, with the
assured hope of those victories, those crowns, those harvests, those
refreshings and fruits, which never eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor
never entered into man's heart the things which God has prepared for them that
love him: Of which however it pleases God to give his servants a taste in this
life, yet the harvest, and the vintage are to come, when they that suffer with
Christ Jesus shall reign with him, and they that have sown in tears shall reap
the never ending harvest of inconceiveable 5thly. Bitter and u^toothsome things
may yet be of a blessed and wholesome use to Gods people.
joys.

Sixthly, as it is in the restoring of the body to health, or in the preserving
of it in an healthful condition: it is often necessary to use the help of
sharp and bitter things, bitter pills, bitter potions, bitter medicines,
sweatings, purgings, vomitings, blood-lettings, etc. So is it with our souls,
and spirits, and preservation of the health and cheerfulness of the spiritual
and the inner man. Two sorts of bitter aff^ictions.


The sharp and bitter things which it pleases God to make use of in these
cases are of two sorts.

First, such as himself is pleased to use toward us in the way of his fatherly
afflictions of all sorts: on our spirits: our bodies, our yoke fellows,
children, servants, cattle, goods, etc. out of which, yea also out of the
injurious, and slanderous, and persecuting dealing of others, yea and out of
our own sins and failings his most holy and infinite wisd^m, fetches all sorts
of cleansing and purging, yea and sometimes, cordial and healing physic.

The second sort of sharp and bitter means are such, as we voluntarily use an^
apply our selves unto our selves, for the slaying and the purging out of the
filthy humeurs and corruptions of pride, security, uncleanness, self-love,
covetousness, and what ever else remains behind of the body of death in us.

It is true that the word of God, and all his holy Ordinances, they are not
only of a feeding, and nourishing, but also of a The Scripture the true store
house of soul physic.
purging, and cleansing Nature, of a preserving, and a restoring Quality: and
therefore out of these, we must take direction for all our spiritual Remedies,
against those soul distempers, unto which our spiritual, and inuer men are
subject.

First, then it is an wholesome though bitter pill, often to call to 1.
mind our many, our great, our known, our unknown transgressions against the
Lord as a Creator, against the Lord as a Father, against the Lord as a
Redeemer, against Christ Jesus, against his holy Spirit, against his
Ordinances, against his Saints, against our selves, etc. Yea the sins and
several corruptions of our Natures, The remembrance of our sins bitter, yet an
wholesome pill.
callings, and conditions, to which we yet are subject, and lie open, and
without supply of Grace, and strength from Heaven, we shall fall, and tumble
into, as well as the strongest of Gods servants, of whose woeful falls we read
of in holy Scripture.

Obj. It is a part of the Lords New Covenant, that he will forgive our sins,
and remember our iniquities no more.

I answer, unto all the promises of all sorts, (Ezekiel. 36.) it Gods children
bound to beg for pardon of sin.
pleases the Lord to add this Gospel Proviso; For all this I will be sought
unto says the Lord, according to that most holy direction, of the Lord Jesus,
to pray daily, not only for daily Bread, but also for daily forgivenes.

Obj. The Lord has forgiven them already in Christ, what need to pray for
forgiveness of them again.

I answer, We must mark the Lords Ordinance, for all this I will be sought
unto: Prayer and other spiritual Ordinances has the Lord appointed for our
souls good, as well as corporal means for our bodily comfort.

Hence the many examples of the servants of God thoughout the whole Scripture,
both before Jesus Christ and since, David, Godly sorrow not inconsistent but
subservient to spiritual joy.
Peter, Mary Magdalen, breaking forth into heavenly showers of godly tears.
Hence the Paschall Lamb (the figure of Christ Jesus) was appointed by the Lord
to be eaten with bitter herbs, implying and teaching that Jesus Christ
himself, his blood, pardon of sin, Life and Salvation, and all the spiritual
and eternal sweets that here below we find in Christ Jesus, they have not
their native and proper relish without the help of such sharp and bitter
herbs.

What though therefore in Gods council before the world was, all his works of
creation and redemption, vocation, justification, glorification are known to
him and acted by him? I say, in the most inconceiveable deep councels of his
will, according Gods councels absolve not us from means and endeavors.
to which he works all things, Ephesians. 1. 11? yet were it presumptuous
madness in us, and a tempting of the jealous eyes of the most High, to neglect
the ways, and means, and paths of mercy for Soul or Body, which his most holy
Wisdom out of infinite Grace and goodness has appointed to us?

A second sharp and bitter pill to pu^ge out spiritual corruption, is a due and
serious pondering of the nature, of the justice of the most High;
notwithstanding all the infinite sweetness The due consideration of Gods
justice is an heavenly though bitter pill.
of the Ocean of his mercy, and not withstanding all the colors and pretenses
which we poor sinners invent to our selves, to hide from our eyes, the
greatness and dreadfulnesse and terrors of it,

Well therefore might Job say: therefore am I troubled at his presence, and
when I consider I am afraid of him; and David, Psalm. 119. My Flesh trembles
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Object. But John says, perfect love casts out fear.

I answer, The true love of God, never casts out the true fear of God, but
only that which is false and counterfeit, that which is the fear of a Beast of
slaves and Devils.

Hence it is that the Spirit of the fear of the Lord was poured upon the Lord
Jesus himself.

This fear is an holy awe or reverence proper to a true and heavenly ingenuous
child of God, even (first and chiefly) to Christ Jesus, the elder Brother (in a
sense) of all the children of God. To cherish which holy fear of God, let us
cast our eyes upon the fiery flashes of his severe justice revealed unto us in
a threefold time, the time past, present and to come.

For the time past, how dreadful is that we find of the rejection and
ejection of so many glorious heavenly Spirits the Angels, tumbled down for
their sin of Pride, from the height The dreadful rejection of the Angels
of Heaven, and their glorious attendance upon God, to the depth of Hell in
horrible slavery to everlasting sins and torments.

How dreadful was that doleful Sentence upon the whole race of mankind, for
the Sin of the first root, our first Parents in The dreadful sentence upon all
mankind.
Paradise? How wonderful those Plagues and Destructions upon Pharaoh and the
land of Egypt, for their oppressing Gods people?

And (before that) how fearful and horrible was that destruction and burning
up of Sodom, and Gomorrah and other Cities with fire and brimstone from Heaven?
The destruction of Egypt and Sodom, and the whole world.


And (before both these) how wonderfully fearful and universal was, the
destruction of the whole world, in that choking, and All-o'rewhelming flood or
deluge.

How fearful were the strokes of Gods displeasure upon his own people of
Israel, in their many Destructions and Captivities? Fearful strokes of Gods
justice upon Israel.
How fearful the rejection of the t^n Tribes wholly swallow^d up and lost for
so many ag^s and generations?

How lamentable were the destructions (and especial that by Titus and
Vespasion) of the holy City, that glorious Jerusalem, in the slaughter and
captivity of 1100000 thousand Upon the Jews and Jerusalem.
Jews, men, women and children?

How fearful was the rejection of that whole Nation of the Jews, ever since
but a curse and a scorn to all the rest of the Nations of the world to this
day?

And (above all) who can but tremble at the impartial flames Upon the Son of
his love the Lord Jesus.
of Gods justice on that green and innocent tree, his own, and only begegotten
son Christ Jesus, when he stood surety in the room of sinners to make
satisfaction for their transeressions?

Object. Grant Gods justice and fierce wrath to be so hot, so fiery and
fearful toward his enemies, yet, what need his children fear his justice,
since that it is satisfied and his wrath appeased toward his people, by the
sufferings and bloodshed of Christ Jesus.

I answer, It is so evident, that although Christ Jesus his blood, has
quenched the fire of Gods eternal wrath toward The heavy and doleful strokes
of Gods righteteous hand upon his own people in this world.
his people, and sweetened the bitter Cup of all present Judgments and
afflictions: yet for his Name and Justice sake in this world, Gods children
have temporally felt the fearful stroks of his displeasure, and judgment must
begin at the house of God.

Hence that dreadful blow of Gods righteous hand upon our first Parents Adam
and Eve, cast out of Paradise with their posterity (even the whole race of
mankind) notwithstanding their belief in the promised seed Christ Jesus.

Hence the heavy strokes upon Lot, upon Lots wife, upon Moses, upon Aaron,
upon Sampson, upon Eli, upon David, upon Hezekiah upon Josiah, etc.

Object. But some may say, God sees no sin in Jacob, etc.

I answer, Their calamities are Judgments, that is righteous sentences of the
most high, Judgments, though not eternal Judgments: these vindicate Gods
name and Justice before an unrighteous world, and bear him witness of his
impartiality, even toward his own children; these humble and Gods holy end in
his sore afflictions upon his people.
bring his people to repentance and confession, and quicken their pace, and
their hearts, to watch against future sins and provocations.

Hence says the Spirit of God expressly, 1 Cor. 11. For this cause (that is for
his childrens abuse of the Lords Supper) many are weak and sick, and some are
fallen asleep; God chastises his own people, true christian Churches, for the
abuse of his holy Ordinances and appointments.

In the second place, let us cast our eyes abroad and behold the direful signs
and tokens, of Gods severe Justice executed at this present in the world. How
lamentably do we sce before Gods justice visibly seen in the present sorrows
of all sorts.
our eyes the daily and continued effects of that first wrath upon mankind, in
so many sorrows of all sorts for the first transgression.

Let us consider of the great constant reproach and misery over all the Nations
of the World, by reason of Gods righteous Sentence in the division of so many
Tongues and Languages.

O come and see (says David) what Desolations (Psalm. 46.) the Lord has
wrought in the Earth? How many hundred thousands of men, women and children
have of late years been swept away in the world, by wars, famines and
pestilencies? The horrible desolations of late years.


And since we are commanded to weep with them that weep; O that our heads were
fountains, and our eyes rivers of waters, that we might weep with Germany,
weep with Ireland, yea, weep day and night with England and Scotland (to speak
nothing of other remote Nations) in laying again and again to heart the
strokes of Gods most righteous judgments, in their mos^ fearful slaughters
and desolations.

The effects and marks of these most dreadful blows, every eye is forced to
see but yet there are some strokes, more fearful and yet not easily
p^rceived; such are the righteous The wonderful spiritual judgments upon the
Nations.
judgments of God, giving up the Nations of the world to so many horrible and
blasphemous worships, idolatries and superstitions. To speak nothing of whole
Nations and Kingdoms, that know not at all the true and living God, how cold
and hard is that stone that lies upon the mouth of that wonderful grave The
direful judgment upon the Jews.
of unbelief, wherein the Nation of (Gods choice and love) the Jews lie
buried and o'rewheImed to this day?

Who can but wonder and tremble at so many hundredth thousand and millions of
men given up for so. long a time (in so many and so mighty flourishing Nations
of the world) I say, The direful judgment of Mahumatanism, and
Antichristianisme.
given up to those two monstrously bewitching Worships of Mahumatisme and
Antichristianisme, the dire effects of Gods most righteous judgments upon the
Eastern and Western^ professors of the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus?

Add to these that most fearful and deplorable captivity of the very souls
and consciences of Gods own people (for so many hund^ed years) under false and
superstitious Worships. A The l^mentable captivity of Gods own people to
Antichristian worships.
righteous judgment, though not so easily discerned, yet in it self most
dreadful, and exceeding all the temporal calamities in the world.

But (thirdly) from these two times of past and present, let us cast our eyes
on the third which is yet to come, as sure and wonderful, will shortly be
th^se two most wonderful and dreadful downfals of those two so mighty
Monarchies (so great enemies to Christ Jesus) the Turkish and the Popish:
according to the Prediction of the holy Prophe^s. How fearful the effusion of
the Viols, in part fulfilled, and yet to be powered forth in their season? And
not a little wond^rfull is that mighty destruction of the Nations Gog and Magog
gathered as the sand of the Sea against the camp of the saints of the holy
City. The dreadful and eternal judgment yet to come.


And (to come to the full period and final sentence of the most righteous
Judge of the whole World) with what horrors and terrors shall these Heavens
and Earth pass away; this Earth with the works thereof being consumed and
burnt up? How inconceiveably direful will the last eternal judgment be, when
two worlds of men (the former destroyed by water, and this by fire) shall
appear, before the most glorious Tribunal of the Son of God? When all the
most secret sins shall be brought to trial, and an account shall be given for
every idle word?

O who can conceive the terrors of that thundering sentence [Goe ye cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, where the worm
never dies, and the fire never goes out.]

Object. But some may say, Can these sayings be any other then a Parable or
similitude? for is the Devil capable of any material fire? such as now is
grievous and painful to flesh and blood?

I answer, Grant these sayings Parabolicall or similitudes, as also that of
Dives and Lazarus: yet what are Parables and similitudes The Parables of holy
Scripture are full of heavenly kernels of Truth.
but Glasses to represent unto us in more plain and easy ways the holy truth
and mind of God?

The Kernel of truth is not the less sweet though wrapped up in the s^els and
husks; Beyond all question therefore Christ Jesus foretells most sure and
inconceiveable plagues to all that The worm that never dies, and ^the fire
that never goes out.
know not God, and obey not his glorious Gospel: And by this Worm that never
dies, and this fire that never goes out, declares a torment to be inflicted
upon both men and devils which shall be extreme like fire which shall be
universal upon the whole sinful creature, no part exempted, which shall be
also eternal, never dying, never ending, yet we may adore Gods righteous
judg^ments and (working out Salvation with fear and trembling) make sure of a
Jesus a Savior to deliver us from the wrath that is to come.

In the next place (my dear Love) let us down together by the steps of holy
meditation into the valley of the shadow of Death. It is of excellent use to
walk often into Golgotha, and The meditation of Death
to view the rotten skuls of so many innumerable thousands of millions of
millions of men and women, like our selves, gone, gone for ever from this life
and being (as if they never had life nor being) as the swift Ships, as the
Weavers shuttle, as an arrow, as the lightning through the air, etc.

It is not unprofitable to remember the faces of such whom we knew, with whom
we had sweet acquaintance, sweet society, with whom we have familiarly eaten
and lodged, but now grown loath some, ugly, terrible, even to their dearest,
since they fell into the jaws of death, the King of terrors.

And yet they are but gone before us, in the path all flesh must tread: How
then should we make sure, and infini^ely much of a Savior, who delivers us
from the power, and bitterness of Death, and Grave, and Hell, who is a
resurrection and life unto us, and will raise up and make our bodies glorious,
like his glorious Body, when he shall shortly appear in glory.

It is further of great and sweet use against the bitterness of Death, and
against the bitter-sweet delusions of this world daily to think each day our
last, the day of our last farewell, the day of the splitting of this vessel,
the breaking of this buble, the quenching of this Candle, and of our passage
into the land of Darkness, never more to behold a spoke of light until the
Heavens be no more.

Those three uncertainti^s of that most certain blow, to wit, of the Time when,
the Place where, the Manner how it shall 3 Terrible uncertainties.
come upon us, and dash our Earthen Pitcher all to pieces, I say the
consideration of these three, should be a threefold cord to bind us fast to an
holy watchfulness for our departures, and a spur to quicken us to abundant
faithfulness in doing and suffering Meditations of death powerful as to many
heavenly purposes.
for the Lord and his Christ, it should draw up our minds unto heavenly
objects, and loosen us from the vexing vanities of this vain puff of this
present sinful life.

Oh how weaned, how sober, how temperate, how mortified should our spirits, our
affections, our desires be, when we remember that we are but strangers,
converse with strange companies, dwell instrange houses, lodge in strange beds
and know not whether this day, this night shall be our final change of this
strange place for one far stranger, dark and doleful, except enlightened by
the Death and Life of the Son of God.

How contented should we be with any Pittance, any Allowance of Bread, of
Clothes, of Friendship, of Respect, etc?

How thankful unto God, unto man should we poor strangers be for the least
crum, or drop, or rag, vouchsafed unto us, when we remember we are but
strangers in an In, but passengers in a Ship, and though we dream of long
Summer days, yet our very life and being is but a swift short passage from the
bank of time to the other side or Banck of a doleful or joyful eternity?

How patient should our minds and bodies be under the crossing, disappointing
hand of our all-powerfull Maker, of our most gracious Father, when we remember
that this is the short span of our purging and fitting for an eternal Glory,
and that when we are judged we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world?

How quietly (without the swellings of revenge and wrath) should we bear the
daily injuries, reproaches, persecutings, etc. from the hands of men, who pass
away and wither (it may be before night) like grass, or as the smoke on the
chimnies top, and their love and hatred shall quickly perish?

Yea, how busy, how diligent, how solicitous should we be (like strangers upon
a strange Coast) waiting for a wind or passage) to get dispatched what we have
to do before we hear that final call, Away, Away, let us be gone from hence,
etc.

How should we ply to get aboard that which will pass, and turn to blessed
account in our own country?

How should we overlook and despise this worlds trash which (as the holy woman
going to be burnt for Christ said of money) will not pass in Heaven?

How zealous for the true God, the true Christ, his praise, his truth, his
worship, how faithful in an humble witness against the lies and cozening
delusions of the Father of lies, though gilded over with truth, and that by
the hands of the highest or holiest upon the Earth?

How frequent, how constant (like Christ Jesus our Founder and Example) in
doing good (especially to the Souls) of all men, especially to the Household of
Faith, yea even to our enenemies, when we remember that this is our seed-time,
of which every minute is precious, and that as our sowing is, must be our
eternal Harvest: for so says the Spirit by Paul to the Galathians: He that
sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption or rottenness, and he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

FINIS.

