- GOD's COURT: WHEREIN The DIGNITY and DUTY OF Judges and Magistrates, Is
showed in a SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held at KINGSTON upon THAMES, July
26. 1683. By THOMAS WILLIS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by B.W. for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the Bible in the
Piazza under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCLXXXIII.

To the Worshipful ANTHONY RAWLINS, Esquire; High Sheriff of the County OF SURREY.
Honored SIR,
THIS World, a most stately Structure, was made to be a Temple to the Eternal
Divinity. For Religion, which is the Holy Worship of GOD, is the great End of
the Life and Being of man, for whom this World was made. Man is both the
World's Orator and GOD's Priest: He, in the behalf of all the Creatures, is to
speak the Praises of GOD, and offering them up as a Spiritual Sacrifice at
GOD's Altar, to implore His Aid and Blessing upon all his Undertakings. And for
all the Good he receives and enjoys, he is devoutly to give the Glory to GOD.

All Civil Administrations and secular Affairs are sanctified by Religion. The
Law of Religion is written in the Nature of man; and its Obligations enforced
by Reason. The Heathens in all great Affairs, were wont to make humble
Addresses to the supposed Divinities they adored. The greatest Persons among
them, before they undertook any Matter of Weight or Importance, would have
Recourse to some Temple of the Gods, to ask Counsel, to offer up their Vows,
and to implore their Aid for a good Success. And when they were guided by
Oracles, they proceeded with as much Courage and Confidence, as if they
expected to be prosper'd by Miracles, in the Pursuit of their Designs. And when
they succeeded in their great Attempts, and attained their End, they honored
their Gods as the Authors of their happiness, by Religious Acknowledgments and
rich Oblations. How much more does it become Christians, to whom the only true
GOD has not only revealed Himself in the Greatness of His Power, and Glories
of his Grace, but also by a firm Covenant, obliged Himself to be their GOD, and
to do them Good, in all their Undertakings to make their Addresses to Him for
Direction, Assistance and good Success! How well does it become Judges and
Magistrates, who have so great a Power and Trust, both as to the Laws, and the
Lives of men, when they enter upon a Work of so great Importance, as the Peace
and Welfare of the King and People, to go to meet GOD in His House, who as
Supreme Lord and Judge presides in their Court! It Is by Authority derived from
GOD, they sit to judge men: and it is by the Light of His Wisdom, and Influence
of his Grace that they err not in Judgment. When a Judge comes out of the
Church into the Court, he appears with more Majesty, as a God coming out of
Heaven to administer Justice to men on Earth. When a Judge has first hearkened
to the Voice of GOD, declaring His Will to him in his Word, he comes with more
Authority-to execute his Office, and ought to be attended with more Regard, as
a Person who comes with Instructions from the King, and Injunctions from GOD.
And this is agreeable to what the Gospel requires, that what ever a man does,
he should do it in the Name of Christ, and for the Glory of GOD.

Now, Sir, the Solemnity of Religion, preparatory to the Administration of
Justice, was by your Appointment and Command, committed to my Care. The
following Discourse prepared for that Purpose, though somewhat contracted in the
Delivery, I have here, in Obedience to your Command, presented to you entire;
hoping that, at least, it may serve for a Memorial of that Honor, which His
Majesty, our most Gracious Sovereign, has been pleased to confer upon you, in
appointing you, in so perilous a Time, to be the Guardian of Public Justice,
and in accounting you a fit Person to be entrusted with the armed Power of the
whole County for the Defense and Safety both of the King and his People. It Is
a mighty Trust in a Day of so great Danger, wherein wicked men have made a
bloody Conspiracy against the Life of our Sovereign, which ought to be Ten
Thousand times dearer to every one of us than our own Lives. 2 Samuel 18.3.
But that Almighty GOD, in whose Hand are the Lives of Kings, will graciously
be pleased long to preserve the precious Life of our present Gracious
Sovereign, from all the Machinations of his wicked Enemies, and at last, after
a long and happy Reign on Earth, crown him with eternal Glory in Heaven, is (I
am well assured) the hearty Desire and Prayer of all his Loyal Subjects, and
amongst them of

(Worthy Sir) Your most humble Servant, Tho. Willis.

(...) GOD's COURE: AN ASSISE-SERMON; SHOWING The DIGNITY and DUTY OF Judges
and Magistrates.
PSALM. LXXXII. i. GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: He judges
among the Gods.


THE Actions of men eminent in Place and Power, are of much greater Importance
than what is done by inferior Persons. The Greater Stars give the clearer
Light, and have the stronger Influence. The Good or Hurt of many, the Welfare
or Infelicity of Thousands, often depends upon the Actions of some few Great men.
Their more notable Miscarriages often prove Epidemicall Mischiefs; whereas by
their wise Management of great Affairs, men enjoy much Tranquillity, with
Abundance of the Blessings of Peace. Now nothing does more conduce to engage
such Persons to a serious Care in the menage of important Matters than a lively
Sense of the Divine Presence. For as mean men are mightily over-awed by the
Presence of a King, and so easily restrained from an indecent Rudeness, and
induc't to a civil Behavior, and good Government of themselves: so must Great
men, in all Reason, be powerfully influenc't by the Presence of the most high
God, who is infinitely more above them in Wisdom, Greatness, Power, than the
Greatest King above the meanest men. Nothing therefore can be more proper and
powerful to induce Judges and Magistrates to a due Execution of their Office,
when they are assembled in a Court of Justice, than a clear Apprehension, a
firm Persuasion, and a full Assurance that Almighty GOD, the Great Judge of the
World, is present with them as Judge and King. And nothing is more certain.
For, says the Word of Truth, God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty:
He judges among the Gods.

Now who are the Mighty, the Gods here mentioned, but Judges and Magistrates?
What is this Congregation of the Mighty, but a Court of Justice? And who is
this Glorious Person, who stands in the Court, and superintends in Judgment:
It Is GOD Himself. GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: He judges
among the Gods.

Here then we have a fair Prospect into a large Field of Discourse. Let Us here
make a little Stand, and take a distinct View of the more remarkable Things,
which present themselves to our Eye. And lets in the first Place view those
Great and Splendid Titles, which are here given to Judges and Magistrates, and
consider the Import and Reason of them. Then let us cast our Eye upon the Court,
where the Persons adorned and dignified with these Titles are assembled, and
consider the Reason of their Convention and Association. And lastly let us take
special Notice of that bright Glory that rests upon them, which results from
the Divine Presence among them, and consider what Influence this should have
upon their Actions and Attendants, and especially those who have any particular
Concern in the Court.

The Titles here given to Judges and Magistrates are very illustrious: they are
called (...) E L and (...) ELOHIM, the Mighty, the Gods, or the Mighty Gods.
Both these Titles are the Names of GOD, even of the most High GOD, by which He
is most usually called in the Holy Scripture, They both signify Might and
Power, with a special Reference to Justice and Judgment. For (...) ELOHIM (as
the Hebrews observe) is a Name of Judgment; as (...) JEHOVAH is a Name of
Grace. So it is said (...) ELOHIM SHOPHET, Psalm. 75.7.
GOD is Judge: He puts down one, and sets up another. And by this Name
are Judges called in the Law of Moses. For it is said, For all manner of
Trespass, Exo. 22.9.
whether it be for Ox, for Ass, for Sheep, for Raiment, or for any manner of
lost Thing, which another challenges to be his, the Cause of both Parties
shall come (...) AD HAELOHIM, before the Judges; and whom (...) LOHIM the
Judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his Neighbor. And so likewise
is the Name (...) EL given to GOD when He is spoken of as a just and impartial
Judge. Deuteronomy. 10.17, 18.
For the LORD your GOD (says Moses to Israel) is GOD of Gods, and LORD of
Lords, (...) HAEL HAGGADOL, a Great GOD, a mighty and a terrible, which
regards not Persons, nor takes Reward. He does execute the Judgment of the
Fatherless and the Widow. And therefore says Bildad in Job, (...) Does EL,
Job, 8.3.
GOD pervert Judgment? or does the Almighty pervert Justice?

Strength and Power for Judgment then is the Import of these Names which are
here given to Judges. And therefore, when GOD is represented as coming forth in
his terrible Majesty, with Power and great Glory, to judge the whole World in
Righteousness, both these Names are given to Him. For it is said, (...) EL
ELOHIM, Psalm. 50.1-6.
The Mighty GOD, even the LORD has spoken, and called the Earth, even from the
rising of the Sun, unto the going down thereof. Out of Zion the Perfection of
Beauty (...) GOD, even ELOHIM the Mighty GOD, has shined. (...) Our GOD, even
ELOHIM the Mighty Judge shall come, and shall not keep Silence. A Fire shall
devour before Him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about Him. He shall
call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth that He may judge His People.
Gather my Saints together unto me, those who have made a Covenant with me by
Sacrifice. And the Heavens shall declare his Righteousness: (...) For GOD,
ELOHIM, the Mighty GOD, He is Judge; or (as we render it) GOD is Judge Himself.

Thus we have seen the Import of the Names or Titles here given to Judges and
Magistrates: let us now consider for what Reason they are given to them.

They are certainly given them Honoris and Officii gratia, to put an Honor
upon them, to discriminate them from others of an inferior Rank and Order in
the World; and to oblige them to such an Execution of their Office, as becomes
them who are dignified with so great an Honor.

It Is sure no small Honor to Judges and Magistrates, that GOD has entrusted
them with the Balances of Justice, armed them with his own glittering Sword,
and put into their Hands his Thunder and Lightening, even the Terrors of the
Law, which may make them formidable to guilty men: but this Honor receives a
mighty Augmentation by this, that he has graciously been pleased to
communicate to them His own Names, which primarily and most properly pertain
unto Himself; even (...) EL, and (...) ELOHIM, in that they are called the
Mighty, styled Gods. What greater Glory could GOD put upon men? When GOD, as a
Token of his Favor, changed the Names of Abram and Sarai, as a Mark of Honor,
He added only to each of them one Letter of his own glorious Name, (...)
JEHOVAH, calling him ABRAHAM, and her SARAH. Genesis 17.9.15.
But behold here, not a Letter of any Name of GOD, but his very Name, (...) EL,
GOD, the Mighty GOD, is here given to Judges and Magistrates. Yea, the very
same Name, which GOD, upon the Account of His Power and Judgment, assumes to
Himself, He here given unto them. For it is here said, (...) ELOHIM, GOD
stands in the Congregation of (...) EL, the Mighty: He judges among (...)
ELOHIM, the Gods. What more magnificent can be spoken of them? And the
Greatness of Him that speaks it, makes the Glory greater to them. If the King
give a Title of Honor to a man, it remains with him, and puts a Luster upon
his Person: If GOD Himself give a Title of Honor to a man, it makes him truly
honorable. And though the King gives many Titles of Honor to his Subjects, He
reserves that of King to himself: this is a Glory which he will not give to
another. But behold here GOD gives the Title of Gods to men. In conferring of
Honor, the King makes not men Kings: but GOD makes men Gods. Such are Judges
and Magistrates in the Sacred Style; Psalm. 82.6.
I have said, Ye are Gods. Such is the Honor of those Persons, whom the King
of Kings delights to Honor. The Senate of Rome seemed to Cineas (Ambassador
of King Pyrrhus) a Council House of Kings: Plat. in Pyrrbus.
but a Court of Justice, where the Mighty are assembled for Judgment, is a
Congregation of Gods.

Now GOD puts this Honor upon Judges and Magistrates, because they are to
represent his Person in the Execution of their Office; and to procure them the
greater Reverence and Veneration from men, that the Majesty of Justice, which
is designed to overawe men to Obedience, may not be obscured by the Contempt
of the Persons, who are authorized for the Administration of it. And when men
give Honor to a Magistrate, to a Judge, as GOD's Representative, they do in
effect give Glory to GOD, who has given such Power and Authority to men. And
thus there is, and ought to be, a constant Circulation of Honor; which as it
Originally comes from GOD, so should it ultimately return to Him, Rev. 22.13.
who is the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending; the first Cause,
and last End of all things. All the Streams of Excellency and Honor, which
flow from Him as their first Fountain and Original, should return to Him, and
empty themselves into the immense Ocean of His Glory.

Now as GOD by giving these Names to Judges and Magistrates, puts a Luster upon
their Persons, and incircles them with a Glory, to secure them from Contempt:
so He mightily obliges them hereby to such a Discharge of their Duty, as that
there may be a visible Correspondency in their Actions to the Excellency of
their Titles; and the Luster and Glory of these Great Names, may shine forth in
the Execution of their Office. Those who are styled Gods, should excel in
those Virtues, which are the lively Images of the Divine Perfections, even of
those Excellencies which are the Glories of God, as the Supreme Lord and Judge
of the World. Such are Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Fortitude and Truth. These are
as the bright Rays of the Sun wherein the eternal Divinity shines forth with
an amiable Luster, in the Government of the World. And the Gods on Earth should
array themselves with these Beams and Beauties: and that they may manifest
themselves to be what they are called, they should so demean themselves that
these Virtues and Excellencies may appear in their Administrations.

Wisdom is a Virtue which should never be wanting in Judges and Magistrates.
Eccles. 8.1.
'Twas the Wisdom of Solomon which made his Face to shine with so bright a
Luster, when he sat (...), glittering in his Glory and Majesty upon the
Tribunal. In his clear Decision of the doubtful Case betwixt the two Harlots, 1
King. 3.28.
both pleading for one living Child, all the World admired his Wisdom. This was
an early Glory of his Government, which rendered him truly Great in the Eyes of
his Subjects. Wisdom in a King or a Judge is an Angelical Excellency, a Ray of
Divinity. So it was said of David; As an Angel of GOD, so is my Lord the King,
2 Samuel 14.19.
to discern good and bad. This discerning Faculty is a necessary Virtue in a
Judge or Magistrate, without which he cannot rightly administer Justice and
Judgment (...). Isid. Pelus l. 3, Ep. 9.
. He must have a piercing Eye to look through the Disguises wherewith guilty
men are wont to hide the Truth, and palliate their Crimes. Truth is often hudled
up in Darkness, and hidden from the Eyes of men. A strict Scrutiny is then
necessary to a right Judgment. This was the Practice of Patient Job in his
Prosperous State; Job 29.16.
The Cause which I knew not, I searched out.

Political Wisdom, which stands in the Knowledge of Laws, and an Ability to
apply that Knowledge to Practice, in all emergent Cases, and to make a right
Judgment of Things in various Circumstances, is a Virtue without which it is
not imaginable the Office of a Judge or Magistrate should be rightly executed.
For as Justice is (...), Plato.
the prop of Cities, the strength of Societies, the Support of Kingdoms: so
Wisdom is (...), Orpheus.
the Eye of Justice. Without this, Justice is blind; and that Sword often wounds
the Innocent which should Defend them, and slay the Guilty.

But Justice thus guided by Wisdom, is an essential Excellency of a Good Ruler,
a God like Judge. For, He that rules over men must be just, 2 Samuel 23.3.
ruling in the Fear of GOD. And it is impartial Justice, which Moses the Great
Law giver requires in Judges, in the Charge which he gave them, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
saying, Hear the Causes between your Brethren, and judge righteously between
every man, and his Brother and the Stranger that is with him. Ye shall not
respect Persons in Judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the Great:
ye shall not be afraid of the Face of man; for the Judgment is GOD's. For when
Judges proceed according to the Divine Law, which is the most exact Rule of
Justice, the Sentence they pronounce, either when they absolve the Innocent, or
condemn the Guilty, is none other than that which GOD Himself, the Supreme
Judge, has already pronounced in his Law.

A Judge therefore making the Divine Law his Rule in Judgment, must not acquit
the Guilty, nor condemn the Righteous. Prove. 17.15.
For he that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are an Abomination to the LORD. And he that either for Fear or Favor
acquits a Great Offendour, shall not only be hated of God, but also abhorred of
men. For, Prove. 24.23, 24.
He that says to the Wicked, Thou art Righteous; him shall the people curse,
Nations shall abhor him. He that against the Light of his own Conscience,
either acquits the Guilty, or condemns the Innocent, draws a woeful Guilt upon
his own Soul; the Guilt of the Crime committed, or the Blood shed; and GOD will
require it at his Hand.

Justice is the Glory of the King, and therefore should be the Care of the
Judge. When Sisamnes, Herod. l. 5.
one of the chiefest of the Persian Judges, had given an unjust Judgment,
Cambyses the King caused him to be flayed alive, and his Skin (as a bloody
Trophee of the Triumph of Justice over an unjust Judge) to be hung up over the
Judgment Seat, for a Warning to all others.

Judges stand in the stead of GOD; and therefore they should depose all Humane
Respects, and as Divine Persons, do what may be rationally conceived GOD
Himself, who is essentially Just, in the like Case would do. A Judge should so
act in all Administrations, as if he was nothing else but Justice incarnate. So
exactly, impartially Just should Judges be, as if they were (what St. Acts
14.11.
Paul and Barnabas were thought to be) Gods come down from Heaven in the
Likeness of men. And therefore they must be such whose Eyes are not dazzled with
the Luster of Gold, nor Hands opened to receive Gifts. For how absurd is it
that (as it is in the ancient Proverb (...). Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20.
) The Hare should draw the Lion with a golden Snare! Judges and Officers (says
Moses) shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the LORD thy GOD gives
thee throughout all thy Tribes: and they shall judge the People with just
Judgment. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou shall not respect Persons,
neither take a Gift: for a Gift does blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert
the Words of the Righteous. (...)
Justice, Justice, or, that which is altogether just shall thou follow. It
should be as easy to turn the Sun from his Course, as to divert a Judge from
the Course of Justice.

And yet must a Judge or Magistrate so do Justice, as not to forget seasonably
to show Mercy, when fit occasion is offered. For Mercy is another Glory of the
Divinity, wherein those who are Gods on Earth, should shine in the Eyes of men.
For the most High GOD, though infinitely Just, is yet very Merciful and Gracious.
Thy Mercy (says the Psalmist) is Great unto the Heavens; Psalm. 57.10. and
119.64.
and the Earth is full of Thy Mercy. Mercy is the most amiable Excellency of
that GOD who is terrible in Majesty, and resistless in His Power. Mercy, it is
the Beauty of His Face, the Sweetness of His Name, the Glory of His Crown, the
Joy (if I may so speak) and Delight of His Heart. Mic. 7.18.
Who is a GOD like unto Thee (says the Prophet) who pardons Iniquity, and
passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of His Heritage? He retains not
His Anger for ever; because He delights in Mercy. There is not then a more
lovely Image of God to be found upon Earth, than a Merciful man. Justice
without Mercy, will in some Cases, be Cruelty; and Government without this
excellent Virtue, will degenerate into Tyranny. In a well governed Kingdom,
Judgment should run down as Water, Am. 5.24.
and Righteousness as a mighty Stream. But without Mercy, Judgment will be
turned to Wormwood, Am. 5.7.
and those mighty Waters, as the Rivers of Egypt, will be turned into Blood.
Justice and Mercy must walk hand in hand, in the Paths of Equity and Judgment.
The Good Judge must condemn the Guilty, and so do Justice: but defend the
Innocent, out of Love to Mercy. Such is the Charge which GOD by the Psalmist
gives unto Judges and Magistrates; Defend the Poor and Fatherless: Psalm. 82.3,
4.
do Justice to the afflicted and needy; rid them out of the hand of the Wicked.
Thus Justice on the Guilty, is Mercy to the Innocent.

Moreover a Love to Mercy should be manifested by alleviating the Rigours of
Justice, according to the Quality of the Offense, and condition of the
Offendour, so far as it may be done within the Latitude of the Law. Thus
Zaleucus, the Lawgiver of the Locrians, AElian. var. Hist. l. 14. c. 24.
when his Son being taken in Adultery, was by the Law to suffer the Loss of
both his Eyes, did by a rare Act of Mercy alleviate the Rigor of Justice, in
suffering one of his own Eyes to be put out, and sparing one of his Sons, that
he might not utterly deprive him of his Sight.

The Sword of Justice is to be bathed in the Oil of Mercy, that it may at once
wound and heal. For the very Design of Justice, even in the severest
Punishments, is not the Destruction, but the Good and Welfare of Mankind;
according to the known Maxim, (...), all Punishment is designed for Good. It Is
then the Property of a good Judge not to be transported by his Passion to Acts
of Severity in the Administration of Judgment, but (after the Example of GOD
Himself) in Wrath to remember Mercy. Hab. 3.2.
Mercy in the Administration of Justice, fixes the Empire of a Prince in the
Hearts of his Subjects, which is the firmest Establishment, and so the best
Security for the Kingdoms Peace. For by Justice the Oppressors are consumed
out of the Land: Isa. 16.5.
and in Mercy (says the Princely Prophet) shall the Throne be established.
Thus Mercy, the Beauty of the Divine Government, is the strength and Glory of a
Kingdom.

But though the Heart of a Ruler or Judge be tender, and apt to melt into Mercy,
Psalm. 93.1.
yet must he be strong and resolute in the Administration of Justice. The LORD
reigns (says the Psalmist) He is clothed with Majesty; the LORD is clothed
with strength, wherewith He has girded Himself. He Is a Strong GOD who governs
and judges the World; and that man must be Strong and of good Courage, who
stands in GOD's stead for the Administration of Government and Justice. When a
just Cause meets with a strong Opposition, there should the Judge interpose his
Power for the Defense of Right, and by his Authority become a Bulwark to the
Innocent. A Judge should never want Courage to rebuke the proudest Patron of
Wrong, the boldest Enemy to Justice.

Fortitude is a Virtue necessary in a Judge or Magistrate: and Justice then
shines with the brightest Luster, when it is in Conjunction with Fortitude.
There are two great Evils which often obstruct Justice, Force and Fraud. Fraud is
a secret, Force an open Enemy: Now as great Wisdom is necessary in a Judge to
detect Fraud; so great Fortitude is no less necessary to repel Force. 1 Kin.
10.18, 19, 20.
Solomon's Throne of Judgment was guarded with Lions. Justice must not only be
guided by Wisdom, but also guarded by Strength, maintained by Courage.

He that sustains the Person of GOD, must not fear the Faces of men. He must
not be baffled by a bold Offendour, so as to suffer a potent Transgressour of
the Law, to carry out his Crimes with Impunity; nor must he be over born by the
complicated Force of a multitude of Offenders. He must act as becomes one who
has Almighty GOD for his Patron, who accounts impartial Justice his
impenetrable Shield, who designs the Public Good as his main End, and esteems
the faithful Discharge of his Duty, to be his chiefest Glory. And therefore in
the Direction given to Moses for the Choice and Constitution of Magistrates and
Judges over the people, it is said, Exodus 18.21.
Thou shall provide out of all the people, Able men, (...) men of Virtue and
Valor, of Courage and Strength, as the prime Requisite for the adapting of
Persons for this great Office. And therefore said Jehoshaphat to the Judges,
whom he appointed to judge the people, 2 Chronicles. 19.11.
(...) Be Strong and Do your Work, or, as we render it, Deal courageously, and
the LORD shall be with the Good.

And why are Judges and Magistrates here, (in the Text) called the Mighty, yea,
(...) ELOHIM, the Mighty GOD, but to signify they ought to be men of Might and
Courage, for the Administration of Justice and Judgment: for the restraining of
daring Crimes, and the Punishment of proud and potent Offenders?

A good Judge or Magistrate who is faithful in the Discharge of his Duty, need
not doubt the Divine Presence and Protection. If a Matter of special
Difficulty, which is attended with Danger, do occur, he may do well to call to
mind the Words of David to his Son Solomon; Be strong, and of good Courage, and
do it; 1 Chronicles. 28.20.
Fear not, nor be dismayed: for the LORD GOD, even my GOD will be with thee; He
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Justice and Judgment is GOD's Work: and
therefore he that stands in GOD's stead, should not, for Fear of man, decline
the doing of it.

The Thebans were wont to make the Statues of their Judges without Hands; Plut.
de Isid. and Osir.
to note they should take no Bribes: but he cannot possibly be a good Judge,
who (as it is said of the Sword-Fish) is without Heart; who wants Courage and
Resolution to Execute Justice and Judgment. A Judge must have an Eagles Eye,
and a Lions Heart: He must have a Quickness of Sight to detect men's Crimes, and
a Courage sufficient to condemn the Guilty:

We read in our Chronicle, Sir Rich. Baker.
that Henry the Fifth being Prince, coming to rescue one of his Servants that
was indicted, was resisted by the Lord Chief Justice, whom he struck in the
Face; for which the Lord Chief Justice committed him to the Fleet. The Prince
suffered himself to be led to Prison. The King his Father hearing of it, was
exceedingly pleased, that he had a Judge of such Courage, and a Son of such
Submission.

Justice is indeed a Heroical Virtue in a Judge, which elevates him above all
Fears of Danger and Degradation, all Regard to Riches and Honors, all Respects
to Relations and Allies; it raises him to a true Greatness of Mind, and
Sublimity of Spirit, and sets him above all Terrors and Temptations; it
assimilates him in his Judicial Proceedings to the impassible Divinity. And
such a Judge shines in Honor as a God among men; and in the Renown of his
Justice, will be immortal.

Thus Fortitude and Magnanimity must enoble the Minds of those who sit upon the
Tribunal, and elevate their Spirits to such an Heroical Height as is
proportionable to the Greatness of the Power wherewith they are entrusted, for
the Administration of Justice and Judgment.

To complete their Character and Conformity to GOD, Exo. 18.21.
Judges and Magistrates must be (...) men of Truth. Truth is an essential
Excellency of GOD, the Rector and Judge of the World. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
For a GOD of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is He. The Truth of
Things is their Reality, or real Existence as they are represented to be: the
Truth of Persons is their Integrity, or faithful Management of their Affairs,
in Answer to and Discharge of their Obligations. A Judge or Magistrate must be
Faithful in the Discharge of his Trust, and make Truth, as far as it can be
discerned, the very Basis of all his Proceedings.

Among the Egyptians the chief Judge wore about his Neck a certain Jewel,
Aelian. var. Hist. l. 14. c. 34.
wherein the Image of Truth was engraven in a precious Stone. This was designed
certainly not so much for an Ornament, as a Memorial; that he might proceed in
Judgment according to Truth. And surely RIGHTEOUSNESS and TRVTH (as the VRIM
and THVMMIM in the Breast plate of Aaron) should be engraven on the Soul of the
Judge. Exo. 28.30.
For he that has not Truth and Justice seated in his very Soul (as the Father
speaks (...). Basil.
) cannot rightly execute Judgment.

Truth is the Soul of Justice, without which Courts of Judicature are but Shops
of Cruelty. If a Ruler hearken to Lies (says Solomon) all his Servants are
wicked. Then the Righteous will be defamed, the Guilty absolved, the Innocent
condemned; Justice and Judgment will be perverted to the high Dishonor of GOD,
and horrid Oppression of men: but when the Ruler and Judge (with David) hates
and abhors Lying, Prove. 29.12. Psalm. 119.163.
loves the Truth, preserves it inviolable in himself, and prizes it in other
men, he will earnestly endeavor to find out Truth in all Matters before him,
that all his Proceedings may be in Righteousness and Truth. Happy is the State
of that Land, Psalm. 85.8.
wherein Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other. When Truth shines with a clear Ray, Justice will appear in a
conspicuous Glory.

Thus we have seen what the Virtues are wherein Judges and Magistrates are
obliged to excel, upon Account of that Honor which the most High GOD has
conferred upon them, in giving such Glorious Titles to them. They are styled
the Mighty, the Gods; and therefore that they may express a Similitude to the
Eternal Divinity, they ought to excel in Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Fortitude and
Truth. Then as their Names are a Titular Honor, these Virtues will be their
Real Glory. These Virtues will not only gild their Names, but put such a
Luster upon their Persons, as will make them appear as Gods among men.
Wherever they live, they will be had in Honor; especially when these
judiciary Virtues are conjoined with a constant Practice of true Piety,
attended with the Actions of a good Life, and animated with a great Zeal for
the Glory of GOD. And truly he that is GOD's Substitute, authorized to act his
Part among men, should be zealous for His Glory: and he that by the Hand of GOD
is exalted to Eminency of Place and Power above others, should excel in Piety,
and be exemplary to others in the Virtues and Actions of a good Life. He should
live above this World, in Contempt of sordid Gain and secular Glory, and
uncontaminated with those sensual Pleasures, and vicious Impurities, which
woefully debase the Minds of men. A corrupt Judge, that oppresses the Poor, Psalm
10.18.
is styled a man of the Earth, (...) a sorry man, who is but a Son of the
Earth. But as for the Mighty, Psalm. 82.1, 6.
who are called Gods, and all of them Sons of the most High, Col. 3.2, 20.
how does it become them to mind the Things that are above, and to have their
Conversation in Heaven, from whence their Power and Glory descends! For where
should a God live but in Heaven? And if, for the Good of men, he abide on
Earth, he should by a Great Virtue, turn Earth into Heaven, and the Place
wherein he moves and acts, in to a Sphaere of Glory.

Such ought Magistrates and Judges, who are the living Images of GOD, to be in
this World. And then the more they excel in Virtue and Piety here, the
brighter shall they shine in Glory hereafter.

For they must at length leave this World, and be divested of their secular
Power and Greatness. Psalm. 82.6, 7.
Though Titular Gods, they are indeed but Mortal men. I have said ye are Gods,
and all of you Children of the most High: but ye shall dye like men, and fall
like one of the Princes. You, who sit as Gods upon the Tribunal in this World,
and judge others, shall at length (how soon ye know not) stand before the
Tribunal of the most High GOD, to be judged your selves, according to your
Works. Then shall all the Actions of Humane Courts be scanned again, and all
the Errors and Obliquities of Judicial Proceedings openly detected. Then the
Wrongs of all the oppressed, of all that have been injured by an unjust
Sentence, the Tears of Orphans, and the Blood of Innocents, shall with loud
Clamours, cry for Justice, and solicit the Divine Vengeance against the
Guilty. Then shall a severe Sentence, a dreadful Doom be passed upon all
corrupt Magistrates and unjust Judges. The Sentence shall be irrevocable, the
Judgment inevitable, the Punishment intolerable and everlasting. But good
Magistrates and just Judges shall, at that Day, appear with great Joy; and as
they have been exalted above others in the Honor of their Places here, so
shall they outshine them in the Luster of their Persons, and have those
Eminent Services they have done for GOD, for their King for their Country,
rewarded with a super-excellent Glory in Heaven. Psalm. 97.7.
Angels are sliled (...) ELOHIM, Gods (as it is said, Worship Him all ye Gods)
and Judges who are called Gods on Earth, having saithfully discharged their
Duty, shall share in the Glory of Angels, and shine as Gods in Heaven for ever
and ever.

Such is the Honor, such shall be the Glory of good Magistrates, of just
Judges. But now Magistrates and Judges are either Supreme or subordinate. The
Supreme Magistrate and Judge in a Kingdom is the KING Himself, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
as it is said; Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the LORD's
sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and the Praise of them
that do well; that is, subordinate Judges and Magistrates. Judges and
Magistrates then are but as Delegates of the King, who as his Representatives,
sustain his Person in Acts of Government and Administration of Justice to the
People. The Honor of these th^n in being styled the Mighty, the Gods, is but a
reflected Ray of that Glory, which with a far brighter Luster shines in Him.
The King does primarily and immediately represent the Person of GOD; and Judges
and Magistrates secondarily and mediately, as they represent the Person of the
King. The Glory then of these Great Names, the Mighty, the Gods, does primarily
pertain to Sovereign Princes; as may plainly appear by the Words of the
Scripture, where they are so styled; Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said, Ye are Gods, and all of you Children of the most High: but ye
shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes; like David, Solomon,
Hezekiah, that sometimes shone in this Glory, and now are fallen into the Dust.
Yea, and in our Public Service, we thus read the Words of the Text; GOD
stands in the Congregation of Princes: He is Judge among Gods. So that the
Gods here mentioned (according to this Reading of the Words) are Princes: and
what Princes can so properly be styled Gods as Kings, who have a Sovereign
Power over the People?

The Glory and Majesty of GOD then shines in its brightest Luster in the Face
of the King. His Glory is great (says the Psalmist) in thy Salvation: Psalm.
21.5.
Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him. It Is the King then who by reason
of his Supereminency in Power and Authority is indeed (...) EL, (...) ELOHIM, a
Mighty God, ruling and judging amongst men. It Is the King who (as Joseph to
Pharaoh, Daniel to Darius) is a Ruler and a Judge next and immediately under
the most High GOD, the Supreme LORD and Judge of the whole World. With what
Reverence and Veneration then ought men to look upon his Person! With what
Readiness and Alacrity ought they to submit to his Rule and Government! Hereby
also we may plainly perceive how great the Sin of Disobedience is, how heinous
the Crime of Rebellion. It Is in Effect to contemn GOD, to sight against GOD,
Acts 5.39.
who visibly governs the World by Sovereign Princes, as his Substitutes and
Vicegerents. And upon the same Account, how great is the Sin of speaking Evil
of the King! How monstrous the Crime of making a murderous Attempt against his
Sacred Person! It Is said in the Law, Exo. 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, (...) ELOHIM, the Judges (much less the King;)
nor curse (...) NASI, the Prince, or Ruler of the People. The speaking Evil of
an ordinary Person, is a Reproach; of a King, it is as the speaking Evil of GOD,
a Blasphemy. The Charge drawn up against Naboth was this; 1 Kin. 21.13.
Naboth did blaspheme GOD and the King. With this Crime the bold and daring
Sectaries of the Primitive Times, the proud and impure Gnostics, are charged
by the Apostles themselves, by whom they are thus uncharacterized; 2 Pet. 2.10.
Jude, v. 8.
They despise Government and Dominion, presumptuous are they and selfwill'd;
they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, (...), they tremble not when
they blaspheme the Glories; Sovereign Princes, in whom the Majesty and Glory of
GOD shines, and who therefore, as Gods among men, are the Glories of Mankind.
When GOD has put so much Majesty and Glory on them, given so much Authority and
Power to them, on purpose to cast an Awe upon those who are to be subject to
them, it must needs be strange that men should arrive to such an Height of
Insolence, as not to tremble when they blaspheme them. But desperate is the
Boldness of Wicked men; especially when a Multitude of them is combined in a
Traitorous Conspiracy against the Life and Honor of their lawful Sovereign.
Of such, David, Psalm. 31.15. Old Transtation.
one of the best of Kings, complains; I have heard the Blasphemy of the
Multitude: and Fear is on every side while they conspire together against me,
and take their Counsel to take away my Life. Audacious Villainy! Desperate
Impiety! How horrible a Wickedness is a bloody Attempt against the Life of the
King! Surely as the Speaking Evil of a King is Blasphemy, so the Killing of a
King is the Murder of GOD in Effigy, and the Slaughter of a whole Kingdom at a
Stroke. Lam. 4.20.
For the Anointed of the LORD is the Breath of our Nostrills. Our Lives are in
a sort bound up in the Life of our Sovereign Lord the King; seeing under his
Government and Protection we draw our vital Breath. How equal and reasonable
is it, that we should not only earnestly pray to Almighty GOD for the
Preservation of the Person of the King from Deceit and Violence; Psalm. 72.14.
but also, with the Hazard of our Lives and Estates, endeavor to do what lies
in us, for his Defense and Security: seeing we owe our own Peace and Safety,
our Lives and Liberties, with the quiet and comfortable Fruition of all our
Privileges and Possessions, to his Sword and Scepter. And be we well assured,
the hearty Loyalty and Obedience of the Subjects, is the best Security for the
Life of the King, and the greatest Glory of his Kingdom.

Having paid this small Tribute, which the Words of the Text demand, to the
King as Supreme, return we to the subordinate Rulers and Judges. And having
considered them in their Personal Capacity, both as to the Dignity which is
put upon them, and the Duty which is required of them; Come we now to consider
them in their Public Appearance, as assembled in a Court of Judcature, for the
Administration of Justice and Judgment. This is here called (...) ADATHEL,
GOD's Court or Council; as a Court of Judicature may be fitly called; because
constituted by his Authority, and held by his Appointment, as the Author and
Original of all Order, Power, and Government; 1 Cor. 14.33. Romans 13.1.
and because He is therein present, as Supreme Lord and Judge: For GOD stands
in the Congregation of the Mighty (as we read it) or, in the Court of GOD; that
is (according to the Idiom and Propriety of the Hebrew-Tongue) in His own
Court: He judges among the Gods. But (...) ADATH-EL, is here rendered by the
LXX. (...), the Synagogue, the Assembly of the Gods; which is of the same
Import with our Version, the Congregation of the Mighty. Now these Mighty ones,
are the Judge or Judges, with other Magistrates and Officers authorized for the
Administration and Execution of Justice and Judgment, for the Conservation of
the Public Peace.

Now this Convention and Association of the Mighty, of Judges and Magistrates,
for the Constitution of a Court of Justice, is grounded upon great Reason. For
hereby the Administration of Justice is not only rendered more unexceptionable,
but also more powerful and effectually conducible to its proper End, which is
the Public Peace, the Peoples Good. This will plainly appear, if we consider,
that the great End of the Administration of Justice, is the keeping of people
within the Limits of those Laws, which are the Rules of Government: And
Government is designed for the Public Good; and Laws are made for the securing
of the Persons and Proprieties of the People; and especially of the King or
Supreme Governor, who is the Life of the Law, and Soul of Government, from
whom that quickening Influence is derived, which animates the Law, otherwise a
dead Letter, into a living Power. And so consequently the Safety and Happiness
of all the People, must necessarily depend upon the Safety and Prosperity of
the King. Now Laws are designed to be as a Fence and Shield to men: a Shield to
secure their Persons from Wrong by Deceit or Violence; a Fence, to secure their
Proprieties from any injurious Encroachment or Invasion by others. For the
rendering them more effectual for this End, Penalties are annexed unto them, in
the Infliction whereof upon Transgressors stands the Execution of the Laws.
This Execution of Laws is properly an Act of Justice, without which Laws become
insignificant, as being ineffectuall for the Restraint of men from those
Insolences and Exorbitancies, whereby they become injurious to others, and
Disturbers of the Public Peace. Now Courts of Judicature are designed for the
Execution of Laws, in the due Administration of Justice and Judgment. And the
Convention of many Persons, authorized by the Sovereign Power for this End,
cannot but rationally appear to be the most powerful and effectual Means, to
restrain men from Vice and Sin, to keep them within the Limits of the Law, and
so to promote the great End of Government, the Public Good, the Kingdoms Peace.

For in such an Assembly of Judges and Magistrates, such a Congregation of the
Mighty, such a Convention of the Gods, all completely armed with Authority and
Power for the Execution of Justice and Judgment, there must needs appear so
much Majesty, as will cast an Awe upon the Spirits of men, strike the Guilty
with such a Terror, as may well make them tremble at the Bar, and create such
a Fear of offending in the Hearts of the innocent, as may in all Reason
restrain them from the Commission of those Crimes, for which they see others
condemned by the Sentence of the Judge, and then punished by the Hands of the
Executioner. For the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain: Romans 13.4.
for he is the Minister of GOD, a Revenger to execute Wrath upon him that does
evil.

Now when the Laws are backed by Arms: and many Persons are assembled together
bearing the Ensigns of Authority, and are attended by others bearing the
Instruments of Justice, we may reasonably conceive this will strike such a
Terror into the Minds of men, and cast such an Awe upon those that are
ill-inclin'd, as to restrain them from injurious Exorbitancies, and keep them
within the Bounds of Law and Government. This accumulated Strength of Justice
will as a mighty Torrent bear down all Opposition, and receive no Check by the
Insolence of a bold Offendour, nor be obstructed by a Multitude of
Transgressors. Thus Justice in a Collective Body of Judges, will shine with
brighter Majesty, and strike with greater strength, toward the beating down
all the Monsters of rebellious Pride, and enormous Power, which shall dare to
rise up against Law and Government.

Many Eyes see clearer than one, and many Hands do with greater Force, repel
that Wrong and Violence by which Righteous Persons are too often oppressed. And
thus Guilt is more easily detected, Innocence more certainly relieved, and the
Honor and Reverence due to Law and Government, more effectually secured for
the Public Good.

Thus in the wisest Nations, the best governed Kingdoms and Common Wealths,
such Courts of Judicature have been constituted, as have consisted of many
Persons, invested with Authority for the Administration of Justice. The Jews, a
People whose Government was founded in the Authority, and confirmed by the
Approbation of GOD Himself, had their Sanhedrim (...) Mat. 5.22. Vide Gratii
Annot. in hunt lotum.
, their (...), or Council vested with Judiciary Power, consisting of Seventy
Persons, who were the Elders of Israel. All the greater Cases of Law were
decided by them, and by their Sentence Capital Punishments (till their Power
was abridg'd by the Romans) were inflicted upon enormous Offenders. Amongst
these Seventy Judges, there were two sat as the Chief; Godw. Antiq. l. 5. c. 1.
one who was called (...) NASI, the Prince, or L. Chief Justice; and the other
who was called (...) AB BETH DIN, the Father of the Court, or of the House of
Judgment. Now to their Sanhedrim answer our Assizes (...)(...) or, Confessus,
Assessus, Assists.
. They are both Words of the same Import and Signification: and there is as
great a Correspondency in the Things signified. They both denote a Court of
Judicature consisting of many Judges, or Persons invested with Judiciary Power!
Such also was the Court of the Areopagites among the Athenians, and the Senate
of the Romans.

When there is but one Judge who sits alone in Judgment, the guilty Offendour
may hope either by his Gold, or Greatness, or by the Favor of Friends to sway
him from a right Sentence: but when many sit in Judgment, though he should be
favored by one, he may fall by the rest; and there will be no Hope for him to
prevail with all, and escape in Judgment. It is therefore very agreeable to
right Reason, that a Court of Justice, which is to determine of weighty
Matters, should consist of many Judges. For so will the Authority be more
August, and the Judgment more tremendous.

But that which should procure the greatest Reverence and Veneration to a Court
of Justice, is a firm Persuasion of the Divine Presence. This comes, in the
last Place, to be considered, as it is here, by the Psalmist, plainly expressed;
GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, He judges among the Gods.

GOD then, even the most High GOD, is in a special manner present in a Court
of Judicature, where Judges and Magistrates are assembled for the
Administration of Justice and Judgment; and He not only sees and observes all
Things that are there transacted, but by approving and ratifying every right
Sentence pronounced by the Judge, He judges among the Gods.

Now as this puts a great Honor upon the Court, casts a great Glory upon the
Judges there assembled; so it lays a mighty Obligation both upon them, and all
other Persons who have any Concern in the Court, or bear any Part in the
Administration of Justice, to have a very great Care of their Demeanor, to
take very great heed what they speak, what they do, as remembering and
considering that they are in the special Presence of Almighty GOD.

When the Judges, with attendant Magistrates, are set upon the Bench, to hear
Causes, and to do Justice, if the King should cause his Royal Throne to be set
in the Court, and should in his own Person come in his Royal Robes, with his
Crown glittering on his Head, and the Majesty of GOD shining in his Face, and
sit down amongst them, would not this be a great Honor to the Judges? Would
not his Presence and Appearing in Royal State, cast a great Luster upon the
Court? Now it is the Glory of the King, that he is the Image of GOD, and his
Vicegerent among men. If then the Great GOD Himself, Prove 8.15.
by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, shall be pleased to vouchsafe
His Presence in a Court of Judicature, in a Convention of Judges and
Magistrates; if He shall stand amongst the Mighty, judge amongst the Gods, how
great an Honor is this to the Judges! How great a Glory is this to the Court!
Well may a man that enters into the Court say, with Jacob, Genesis 28.16, 17.
after his Vision at Bethel, Surely the LORD is in this Place, and I knew it
not. How dreadful is this Place! This is none other but the Court of GOD, His
House of Judgment, wherein He stands and judges amongst men.

And then what a mighty Awe should the Presence of GOD east both upon the
Judges themselves, and the whole Assembly! With what a Reverentiall Regard to
the Divine Majesty should all Matters be transacted! All things should be done
as under the Eye of a GOD infinite in Wisdom, in Power, in Justice; a GOD and
Judge who infinitely hates Iniquity, Acts 17.31.
and who has appointed a Day wherein He will judge the World in Righteousness,
and call all men, both Great and Small, Eccl. 12.14. Mat. 12.37.
to a strict Account for all their Words and Actions.

Amongst the Arabians there was this ancient Custom: In the Court of Justice
adjoining to the Chambers of the King, there hung a Chain from the Cazement of
a Window into the Court. If any man thought himself to be wronged by the
Judges, he drew the Chain, and opened the Cazement. Hereupon the King took
Cognizance of the Cause: and if the Judges were found faulty, they were
presently slain; if the Party complaining was found guilty, he was put to
Death. In some Proportion and Correspondency hereunto, shall I say, there is a
Window open in Heaven over the Court of Justice, and there is nothing there
done by the Judges or others, but under the Eye of GOD, the Great King and
Supreme Judge, who from his High Throne looks down upon them? This
Consideration might be just Ground of great Care and Caution. But, behold! it is
more which is here asserted by the Psalmist. The Great GOD does not only look
down from Heaven, his Holy Habitation, upon the Judges of the Court, and
observe their Proceedings; but He is really present with them, and stands
amongst them. For GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: He judges
among the Gods.

In a lively Apprehension of the special Presence and Superintendency of the
Great GOD, how well does it become, how much does it concern the Judges
themselves to manage their great Trust and Power with all Fidelity and
Circumspection! What can be more fitly and properly spoken to them, than what
Jehoshaphat spoke to the Judges, whom he set in the Cities of Judah; or what
can more concern them in this Case, than to attend to the Charge, which the
King then gave them, 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7, 9.
saying, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who
is with you in the Judgment? Wherefore now let the Fear of the LORD be upon
you; Take heed, and do it, ((...) Observe and Do, Act with all Circumspection)
for there is no Iniquity with the LORD our GOD, nor Respect of Persons, nor
taking of Gifts. Thus whatever ye do, shall ye do in the Pear of the LORD,
faithfully, and with a perfect Heart. For (let me add from the Psalmist) though
as Gods ye judge men, there stands one amongst you (whom ye see not) who will
judge you, even the most High GOD (...). Phocyl.
. For GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty; and he that is in the
midst of them, (as we may render it) (...) will judge the Judges; (...) (as the
LXX render it) will judge the Gods. So act then in the Administration of
Justice, that when ye shall stand before the Judgment Seat of GOD, ye may stand
approved, and receive that Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which GOD, the Righteous Judge, shall then give to all just and good men, even
to all them who love His Appearing.

In a Word, so act as ye believe GOD Himself would do, were He in your Place in
the Nature of man. So shall ye reallize that Great Name which GOD has given
you, and be indeed, as you are styled, Gods, whom Justice, as an immortal Soul,
animates to a Divine Life, and intitles to an eternal Crown.

And how well does it become all others who attend the Court of Justice, to
bear upon their Souls a lively Apprehension of the Divine Presence; and so to
demean themselves in all Concerns as in the Sight of GOD! All those especially
who shall be bound by the Religion of an Oath, to declare and testify the Truth
in Matters of Fact which shall be laid before them, are mightily concerned to
take great Heed to themselves, that they do faithfully and sincerely acquit
themselves, in the Answer and Discharge of so sacred and solemn an Obligation.
Let them remember that the Eye of GOD, who discerns the Secrets of all Hearts,
is upon them. Let them remember that That GOD, by whose Name they swear, in
whose Presence they stand, and who hears the Words they speak before the Judge;
Deuteronomy. 32.
is a GOD of TRVTH, who infinitely hates and abhors Lying. Prove. 12.
Lying Lips (says the Wise man) are an Abomination to the LORD: but they that
deal truly are His Delight. Yea, Prove. 6.
a Lying Tongue is not less hateful to GOD, than Hands that shed innocent
Blood: both are an Abomination to the LORD. The Telling of a Lie is so great a
Sin in the Account of GOD, that He has punished it in some (as Ananias and
Sapphira) with present Death; and has plainly declared, Acts 5. 5 --
He will punish it hereafter with Hell fire: Rev. 21.8.
how much more horrid and abominable is a Perjury, even in the Divine Presence!
With what Indignation did King Nebuchadnezzar charge the Magicians with a Crime
of this kind; Dan. 2.9.
saying, Ye have prepared lying and corrupt Words to speak before Me! But how
much greater a Crime is it for men to prepare lying and corrupt Words, to speak
before Almighty GOD Himself, even then when they are bound by a solemn Oath to
declare the Truth! May not this justly kindle His wrathful Indignation, to the
utter Destruction of such impious men?

How great is the Mischief which by a lying Tongue may be done in a Court of
Justice! The Course of Justice may be obstructed, and the Stream of Judgment by
this means turned into a wrong Chanel. By a false Witness a man may be
overthrown in a just Cause, to his utter Ruin. By a Lie a man may be deprived
of his Life. Kin. 21.13.
The innocent Naboth, by the lying Tongues of two false Witnesses, was at once
deprived of his Life and Estate. A lying Tongue is a bloody Sword: and the most
unspotted Innocence is not a Shield strong enough to secure a man from its
fatal Stroke. By means of a lying Tongue the most Innocent may be found Guilty,
and the most Guilty may be pronounced Innocent.

But let those who shall be concerned to declare and testify the Truth, in
those Matters which shall fall under the Cognizance of the Court, remember and
consider, that though they may possibly by false Assertions, or sundry Artifices
and Disguises, conceal the Truth from men, and their Falsehood may not be
detected by the most discerning; yet it is utterly impossible they should
deceive that GOD before whom they stand: and though the Punishment of their
Perjury be not inflicted by men, they cannot possibly escape the Vengeance of
Almighty GOD. He has established an unchangeable Law against this Sin, which He
once, yea, twice, wrote with His own Finger (with the rest of the Ten
Commandments) upon Tables of Stone. The Law is this: Exo. 20.7.
Thou shall not take the Name of the LORD thy GOD in vain: for the LORD will
not hold him guiltless that takes His Name in vain. Now he that violates a
Sacred and solemn Oath, administered to him in the Name of GOD, does in a high
Degree take the Name of GOD in vain. How woeful is the State of this man! For
whether by his false Report or Testimony, an Innocent man be pronounced Guilty,
or a Guilty man Innocent, he becomes Guilty before GOD, the Great Judge of all,
who by a Righteous Sentence will condemn him to the burning Flames. For He has
said, Rev. 21.8.
He will not hold him guiltless, he will not acquit him, he will certainly
condemn him; and then most miserable must his State be for ever and ever. Now
what Folly is it for any man, for the Prevention of a just Sentence upon a
Guilty man, by a plain Perjury to draw such a dreadful Guilt upon his own Soul!
And the Folly is yet greater, and the Guilt more dreadful, if an Innocent man
by his false Report or Testimony be condemned to Death as Guilty. For he is
then at once Guilty of Perjury and Murder. He at once contemns GOD, and brings
the Blood of that man upon himself; and so justly deserves no less than double
Damnation.

Oh then remember all ye that may be concerned, that when ye come to take an
Oath in a Court of Justice, ye stand not only before the Judge, but before GOD
Himself, who stands as King and Judge in that Assembly, and will certainly
avenge upon you the grievous Sin of Perjury, if ye should any way be guilty of
it. Remember, O man, O woman, whosoever thou art, who shall be called as a
Witness of any Matter in the Court, Remember (I say) that Charge which Almighty
GOD has given thee in that Law, which He pronounced with a Voice of Thunder,
from the midst of Flames of Fire, in Mount Sinai, saying. Exo. 20.16.
Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor. The very words which
GOD then spoke are these, (...) Thou shall not answer a lying Testimony
concerning thy Neighbor; that is, Being interrogated by the Judge upon thy
Oath, thou shall not, in thy Answer, give a false or lying Testimony, for or
against thy Neighbor. This Oath, among the Jews, the Judge was wont to impose
after this manner; 1 Kin. 22.16. 2 Chr. 18.15. Mat. 26.63. Lev. 5.1.
I adjure thee by the living GOD that thou tell us the Truth in this Matter.
Hence it is said in the Law, If a Soul sin (that is, If a Crime be committed by
any Person) and one hear the Voice of Swearing (that is, of the Judge adjuring
him) and is a Witness whether he has seen or known of it; if he do not utter
it, then he shall bear his Iniquity (that is, He shall not only contract the
Guilt of the Crime committed, but also bear upon his Soul the Guilt of the Sin
of Perjury, and so incur the manifest Danger of eternal Damnation.) And
therefore all ye that are concerned, as ye tender the Honor of Almighty GOD,
and the Salvation of your own Souls (which you pledge in your Oath) deal in all
Things sincerely and truly, speaking, Psalm. 15.2.
as becomes an Heir of Heaven, the Truth in your Heart; that Justice and
Judgment may be rightly executed, and you, when you shall stand before the
Tribunal of GOD, may appear with Poldness, and give up your Accounts with Joy.

For thereis a Great Day a coming, when all the World shall be summoned to
appear before the Judgment Seat of GOD. Romans 14.10.
Never was there so Great an Assembly as that, and never shall there be any so
great after it. All the Kings, Rulers, and Judges of the Earth, shall meet
together at that Day: yea, then shall all men, both the Righteous and the
Wicked, both the Living and the Dead, stand before the Face of the Judge, by
his Sentence to be separated one from another, to receive their Reward or
Punishment in their proper Place, from whence they shall never return to meet
again or see one another Faces more. This was represented in Vision to St.
John, who thus reports what he saw; Rev. 20.11, 12.
I saw (says he) a Great white Throne, and Him that sat on it, from whose
Face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no Place for them.
And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before GOD. And the Books were
opened; and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life. And the Dead
were judged out of those Things which were written in the Books, according to
their Works. What was thus represented in Vision, shall at length be executed
in Reality; and we who are here present this Day, shall make a Part of that
great Appearance. It infinitely concerns us all to prepare for it, for our
everlasting State whether of Happiness or Misery will be determined by that
Sentence or Doom, that shall be passed on us at that Day. We shall then either
with unspeakable Joy, hear the Judge say to us, Come, ye Blessed, inherit the
Kingdom; Mat. 25.34, 41.
or with unutterable. Horror and Anguish hear those dismal mall Words,
Depart, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire. Happy are we this Day, that we have
yet Time allowed us, through GOD's indulgent Mercy, to prepare for that
Appearance. Happy are we, if we have any of us hitherto walked in sinful
Ways, that GOD is pleased this Day to call to us from Heaven in His Holy Word,
Ezck. 18.23, 32.
saying, Return and Live. Let Us remember, all our Words and Actions are
recorded in those Books, which shall be laid open at that Day. Let us then so
speak and do now, that we may not be asraid or ashamed that our Words and Deeds
should be openly declared before all the World then.

Let Us then look upon the Court of Justice, the Congregation of the Mighty this
Day, wherein GOD stands and judges amongst the Gods, as a lively Image of that
Great Assise, wherein we shall all stand before the Tribunal of GOD; whom though
we now see not, we shall then behold, manifesting Himself to us in the Humane
Nature, but with Great Majesty and Glory, in the Person of CHRIST. 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Then, as in the Court of Justice we see the Judge sitting on
the Bench, attended on either Hand with several Persons of Prime Quality,
vested with Judiciary Power, we shall see the Son of man (the Lord Jesus
Christ) sitting in the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 19.28. and Luke 22.30.
and with Him his Twelve Apostles, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
sitting upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Then shall
the Saints, by their Association to Christ, and Approbation of his Sentence,
have the Honor to judge Angels, to judge the World. How glorious a Day will
that be to the Just! For when Christ, Col. 3.4.
the Judge, appears, they shall also appear with Him in Glory. But how
terrible, how dreadful will it be to the Wicked! When we see a Guilty man
looking pale at the Bar, while the Judge is pronouncing the Sentence of Death
upon him, let us think with our selves, with what Horror and Trembling will
Guilty Sinners appear at the Great Day before the Tribunal of Christ, when the
irrevocable Sentence shall be passed upon them, whereby they shall be adjudg'd,
to the Suffering of the bitter Pains of eternal Death! Oh how will they wring
their Hands for Sorrow and Anguish of Heart, wishing they had never, never been
born, rather than by a Life of Sin, which was but for a Moment, have plunged
themselves into those unutterable Sorrows, those intolerable Torments which
shall last to Eternity! Now what considering man would for the Gain of the
whole World, nay for a Thousand Worlds be in the woeful State of a Guilty
Sinner at the Judgment-Day?

If a Picture of the Day of Judgment (as it is said) became the Means of the
Conversion of a barbarous Bogaris King of Bulgaria.
King to true Christianity; how much more powerful and efficacious should so
lively an Image and Representation thereof, as is a Court of Justice, wherein
the Judge sits upon Life and Death, be for the Conversion of men to GOD, for
the Persuasion of those who have hitherto lived in Sin and Wickedness, to break
off their evil Courses, and lead a New Life? Yea, let the Consideration of the
Coming of the Great and Dreadful Day of the LORD, Mal. 4.5.
awake us all to a speedy and serious Care for the Salvation of our immortal
Souls. Let Us make our Peace with GOD, by a hearty Repentance for our past
Offenses; and earnestly implore the Aids of His Grace, that we may honor Him
for the Time to come by a better Obedience. Let the Fear of a deserved
Punishment restrain us from Vice and Sin, and the Hope of a Glorious Reward
quicken us to an unwearied Diligence in well doing. Let Us so manage every
Action and Affair of Importance, as if we should be immediately summoned to
Judgment. Let Us demean our selves every Day of our Lives with such a Holy
Circumspection, as if we looked every Day, every Night when this Great Day
should begin. 2 Pet. 2.10, 11, 12.
For, the Day of the LORD will come as a Thief in the Night, in the which the
Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent Heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be burnt
up. Seeing then that all these Things shall be dissolved. What manner of
Persons ought we to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? Heb. 12.28, 29.
Let Us then have Grace that we may serve GOD acceptably, with Reverence and
Godly Fear. For our GOD is a consuming Fire. And then when that Great Day is
come we shall appear before GOD, our Judge, with exceeding Joy, 1 Pet. 4.13.
and being there openly honored before men and Angels, by His gracious
Acknowledgement of our Services and Sufferings for His Name and Glory, we shall
ascend in Triumph into His eternal Kingdom, where we shall for ever live and
reign with our Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; To whom be Majesty,
Dominion, and Glory, now and for evermore; AMEN.

FINIS.

