THE EXCELLENCY OF WISDOM, Disclosing it self in The Virtues of a good Life:
RECOMMENDED To the Natives of Warwickshire, IN A SERMON PREACHED To them on
their Anniversary Feast Day, in London, Nov. 30. 1675. By THOMAS WILLIS, D. D.
Vicar of Kingston upon Thames, and one of His MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

Who is a wise man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you? Let him show out of
a good Conversation his Works, with Meekness of Wisdom. Jam. 3.13. (...). Isid.
Pelus. l. 4. Ep. 174. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Abel Roper, at the Sun over
against St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1676.

Imprimatur

Concio haec (cui titulus, The Excellency of Wisdom.)

Reverendmo Dno Archiepiscopo Cant. a Sacris Domesticis Geo. Hooper.
Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, December. 7. 1675.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. for the, read, your Endeavors. p. 8. l. 10. for men, r. man
p. 11. l. 24. r. Usefulness. p. 19. Marg. for Famb. r. Jamb. and for (...) r.
(...) p. 24. l. 8. for of the, r. of Wisdom p. 31. l. ult. for deserve, r.
discern.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Lord BROOK, Baron of Beauchampscourt in
Warwickshire, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Stafford.
My Lord,
WISDOM and VIRTUE, which often wait at the Gate of HONOR, and hardly find
admittance, do here present themselves before Your Lordship, in Hopes of that
Noble Entertainment, which is wont to be given, by Persons of Honor, to their
Nearest Allies. They are never repulst by any without Wrong and Disgrace to
themselves; nor by any entertained, with a due Regard, without an Addition to
their Honor and Happiness. The Person, by whose Hand they are brought in this
humble Dress into Your Presence, beggs the Pardon of his Rudeness in this
Approach, and leaving these Excellencies to Your Lordships Entertainment,
instantly withdraws himself to his due distance, and waits (with Mordecai, at
the Gate) in Hope, that having presented these Virgin-Beauties before Your
judicious Eye, they will appear so agreeable to Your Noble Mind, that they will
presently obtain that entire Affection and Esteem, which will facilitate their
Admission into so indissoluble an Union, as shall for ever exclude the Fear or
Suspicion of a Divorce. And by this innocent and honorable Polygamy, may Your
Lordship be Blessed with a Beautiful-Offspring of such excellent and amiable
Virtues, as may support the Honor of Your Name, and be the growing Glory of
Your House.

These Excellencies, Wisdom and Virtue, which I have here presented before.
Your Lordship, are of more than Noble Descent, of Divine Original, the
Offspring of the uncreated Goodness. But I fear that (as sometimes the
incarnate Wisdom of God) they find but little Regard amongst the greater Part
of the Sons of Men. And therefore that their Reception (particularly in our own
Country, for its singular Honor and Advantage) may be answerable to their
Dignity, I have endeavored to unvail their excellent Beauty, and manifest
their singular Usefulness, in the following Discourse; which (though its
Meanness makes it even afraid of Appearance, yet imboldned by the Assurance of
the Goodness of the Design, and Seasonableness of the Endeavor) I do here
humbly offer to Your Lordships Hand.

To accept so small a Present from so mean a Person, will be an Act of
Humility; to become a Great Example of that Excellency which is here commended
to all men, will be a singular Glory. If the Doctrine delivered in this
Discourse, be commended to our Countrymen, by so Illustrious an Example,
'twill certainly be more powerfully operative and influential. So shall Your
Lordship shine as a Great Light among many lesser Stars: neither shall your
brighter Glory suffer an Eclipse in Death it self, but shine in a higher Orb
amongst those fair Lights, which adorn those glorious Mansions; wherein the
Sovereign Goodness reigns in eternal Glory.

May Wisdom so conduct Your Lordship in all Your Affairs, and Virtue so adorn
and beautify all Your Actions, that You may be the Honor of Your House, and
Ornament of Your Country; that having planted Virtues to a happy thriving on
Earth, and gathered their pleasant Fruits in Praises and Prosperities, you may
at length be carried up in Triumph, by glorious Angels, into Heaven, there to
be crowned with immortal Glories, in the Kingdom of God. May the Splendor of
Your Lordships Virtue and Goodness be so great, that the Spreading Rays
thereof may cover your whole Country, and extend their exhilarating Light even
to the remote Obscurities of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obsequious Servant, THO. WILLIS.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THough the following Discourse be directed to the Natives of one Country, the
subject of it is the Great Concern of all men. All men do certainly Desire to
be Happy: but no man can possibly be so, unless he become truly Wise. Now the
certain Way and Means to acquire Wisdom, and then to improve it in the Exercise
of Religion and Virtue, for the Attainment of true Happiness, is prescribed in
the following Discourse.

Man is a noble piece of active Earth, being animated with that immortal Fire,
which at first came down from Heaven, and inspirits him to those Motions, which
conduce to the Preservation and Perfection of his Being. The Soul of man is a
Spark of Heavenly Fire, which at first was kindled by the Genesis 2.7.
Breath of God, and is a Principle of those Actions, whereby he discovers the
Excellency of his Nature, and Nobleness of his Original. In this little Spark,
enclosed by the Psalm. 119.73.
Hand of God, in a Psalm. 139.14.
curious Frame, a Body fitly organized for Action, there is both Light and
Heat; Light for apprehension, and Heat for Action, God has given to man as
well an apprehensive Mind, as an active Spirit. Hereupon, if he act according
to his Nature and Being, upon his Apprehension of the Excellency of things, he
is earnest in the Pursuit of the most excellent Seize: Such are those
Virtues, which are apt to adorn his Mind and Life, and tend to exalt him to a
State of Honor and Happiness. This is the great Work of every man in the
World. And therefore, O man, whosoever thou art, open thine Eyes, and behold
the things which are excellent, and then earnestly endeavor the Acquisition of
them. Amongst these Excellent Seize, would thou be informed what is
most excellent, and so most worthy of thy greatest Diligence in the Pursuit? To
this thou art directed in the following Discourse by an infallible Oracle,
delivered in these words, Prove. 4.7.
Wisdom is the Principal thing: therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy getting
get Understanding.

Wisdom is indeed the principal Excellency, as being the most pleasant, the
most profitable, and the most satisfactory of all Seize: Wisdom (says
the Divine Philosopher) will make a man prosperous and happy in all things
(...). Plat. in Euthyd.
. And says the Kingly Preacher, Wisdom is a Defense, and Money is a Defense:
but the excellency of Knowledge is, that Wisdom gives Life to them that have
it Eccl. 7.12.
. It Is Wisdom that will give you an excellency above other men, and make you no
less Happy than the Angels of God.

But who knows the Path of Wisdom, or the Place of her Habitation? Though you
should digg to the Center of the Earth, or dive to the Bottom of the Sea Job
28.12, 13, 14.
, you could not find this inestimable Treasure: though you should ascend to the
Stars of Heaven, you could not reach to the Throne of Wisdom. Wisdom sets her
Throne above the Stars, and raigns in that Region of Light, wherein God himself
dwells Prove. 3.22.
. But at his Appointment she descends from her high Throne, and makes the Heart
of man her humble Seat. But then man must make his Approaches to God, in the
Exercises of Religion and Piety. In these Paths you shall arrive at the Throne
of Wisdom, and she will set upon your Head a Royal Diadem of Beauty, a
resplendent Crown of Glory.

Wisdom cannot possibly be separated from Piety, and the Virtues of a good
Life. For he that apprehends God to be the highest Being and chiefest Good, if
he do not honor and obey him, that he may at length attain that Happiness,
which lies in the full Fruition of him, is not wise; yea, he is guilty of the
greatest Folly, in that he neglects the only Means, by which he might attain
the highest Happiness. The Sun then may as soon be disrobed of his Beams, as
Wisdom can be divested of the Rays of Religion and Sanctity, which crown it,
in all Conditions, with a conspicuous Glory.

Certainly, Atheism and Irreligion, Sin and Wickedness (as I have endeavored,
though but in few words, to evince in the following Sermon) is the greatest
Folly in the World. It is God that made us, and not we our selves Psalm. 100.3.
, and in him we live and move, and have our being Acts 17.28.
, and yet The Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God Psalm. 14.1.
. How great, how strange is this Folly! The wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven Romans 1.18.
, against the sins of men, in various Plagues and Punishments; and yet Fools
make a Mock at Sin Prove. 14.9.
. As a mad man, who casts Firebrarnds, Arrows and Death: so is he who throws
out Oaths, Curses, and Blasphemies, and says, Am not I in Sport Prove. 27.18.
? These men play with Lightning, and mock the mighty Thunder, and in a proud
Scorn, open their naked Breasts to the flaming Arrows of the Almighty. They
deride Religion, scoff at Devotion, laugh and jeer the Virtues of Temperance,
Sobriety, Chastity out of Countenance. These men come forth upon the Stage, and
so demean themselves, as if they accounted it the highest Wisdom to act the
greatest Follies, in the Sight of God, and Angels, and Men. For they stand upon
their Heads and Shake their Heels against Heaven, They bear themselves upon the
Strength of their Reason and Parts, in the Contempt of Religion and Piety; as
if they accounted it a piece of Gallantry to dare Heaven by the Insolency of
their Crimes, and to awake 1 Pet. 2.3.
slumbring Vengeance to their own Destruction. Now are not these men guilty of
great Folly and Madness? What Folly is it in a mortal man to lift up a Flag of
Defiance against Almighty God! Shall a poor Worm that crawls in the Dust, or
Moth that frets a Garment, contend with a Man? Alas! he can instantly trample
the Worm under his Feet, and crumble the Moth to Dust with his Fingers. Greater
is the Disproportion which a mortal man bears to the Mighty God. More easily
can he turn the strongest man into Dust, and throw the stoutest Sinner into
Hell. A man therefore must wash his Heart from Wickedness Eze. 4.14.
, and his Hands in Innocence Psalm. 26.6.
; he must repent of his Sins, and reform his Life, or else (though he should be
admired by all men for the Greatness of his Wit) he can never atain to the
least Degree of true Wisdom.

Thus you see Impiety is utterly inconsistent with this Divine excellency. And
therefore if you do desire to become truly Wise, you must resolve to become
really Religious. But then when you have attained any Degree of Wisdom, let it
be your chief Care to retain it, as the most excellent Possession, the richest
Treasure in the World. There is a certain Ex God. Arab. Pin.
Tradition, that Solomon had a Ring, which while he preserved (as Samson his
Hair) he retained a singular Excellency of Wisdom above all other men. But
being over amorous toward certain Women, they robbed him at once of a double
Treasure, his Ring and Wisdom. Wisdom is an Excellency of the Mind: it is not so
much darkened by any thing, as by the Lust of the Flesh. The Suns Glories are
obscured by the Foggs that rise from the Earth: and the Lights of Wisdom are
obfuscated, and at length extinguished, by an Indulgence of sensual Appetites
and Inclinations. And therefore be careful (as becomes Citizens of Heaven, who
are Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth) to abstain from those fleshly Lusts, which
war against the Soul 1 Pet. 2.11.
. Do not for the base and sordid Pleasure of Sin, hazard the Loss of that
Excellency, which is your Crown and Glory. Live in the serious Exercise of
Solid Piety, and all Christian Virtues, here on Earth, and you shall at length
be admitted to the Participation of Everlasting Pleasures, in the Presence of
God, in Heaven. That no man, who shall peruse these Lines, may fall short of
this Felicity, this Discourse of Wisdom, as a Lamp lighted from the Sun, is
here held forth by the Hand of

London, Dec. 7. 1675. A Servant of Him who is the Savior of men, THO. WILLIS.

THE EXCELLENCY OF WISDOM, etc.
PROVE. IV. 7, 8, 9. VII. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom:
and with all thy getting get Understanding.

VIII. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to Honor,
when thou do embrace her.

IX. She shall give to thine Head an Ornament of Grace: a Crown of Glory shall
she deliver to thee.


GOD is the Beginning and End of all Things. With Him (as it becomes us) we
begin this Day: to Him, and to his Glory, as our ultimate End, it behooves us to
direct the Actions of this Day, and of our whole Life, that in him, when Time
shall be no more, we may be most Blessed for ever.

To God we owe our Being, who gave us our Birth in a good Land, and in a
pleasant Place, in the same Country, the Eden-of England; and thence
transferred us, for our better Being, into the Great City of the Land, which by
its sudden Rise, in so much Splendor, from its woeful Ruins, is become the
Wonder of the World. To Him give we the Glory of our Being and Brotherhood, the
Praise of all the Blessings which contribute to our present Well-being, and
encourage our Hopes of future Blessedness.

This is our Work, this our Duty at this Time, and your appearance (my much
Honored and Beloved Countrymen) in this Place, is a visible Pledge of your
Readiness and Resolution to perform it. For that ye may give unto God the Glory
due unto his Name, ye are this Day come unto his House, and are here ready to
hearken to his Holy Oracles, that ye may be informed, what is most excellent,
most acceptable to Him, and most honorable for your selves, in the Discharge
of your Duty.

Many excellent things have been recommended to you by the Ministers of his
Holy Mysteries upon the like Occasion, who have all designed your Advance in
Virtue, that ye might become excellent Persons, and truly Honorable in the Eye
of the World, and in the sight of God himself. All that have spoken unto you in
the Name of God (as those three young men, who contended for the Glory of
uttering the wisest Sentence before K. Darius Esdr. 3.
) have endeavored to recommend to you that Virtue, which would render you the
Worthies of your Country, the most accomplished Persons for Excellency and
Goodness. After them all I come forth this Day, and tell your every one from
the Mouth of the Lord, Wisdom is the principal thing: therefore, etc. Here Is,

I. An Encomium of Wisdom; She is commended to us as the most excellent of all
things; Wisdom is the principal thing. Dull Mortals! Degenerate Mankind! Do men
discern the Glitter of Gold, the sparkling Luster of Gems, the Beauty and
Sweetness of Gain, as one of the fairest Flowers in the Worlds Garden, and can
they not discern the Excellency of Wisdom, without a Verbal Encomium? Are
things brought to that pass, that she must bring her Letters of Commendation
with her from Heaven, or she can hardly find Entertainment amongst men upon
Earth? Must she have her Herald go before her to prepare her Way, by
proclaiming her Excellency? However now we are utterly inexcusable if we do not
give her an agreeable Entertainment, when we are informed of her Quality, and
told she is the principal thing, she holds the Principality amongst those
Virtues, that ennoble, enrich, and adorn the Mind of man.

II. An earnest Persuasion, backed with Arguments, to endeavor the Acquisition
and Improvement of this Excellent Virtue; Therefore get Wisdom; -- Exalt her,
and she shall promote thee. -- This is the Counsel and Advice of the Holiest of
Kings, David, recommended to us by the Wisest of Men, Solomon. It Is to a
threefold Act; 1. to Acquire, 2. Exalt, and 3. Embrace Wisdom.

1. To be diligent in the endeavors for the Acquisition of Wisdom; Therefore
get Wisdom, and with all thy getting get Understanding, i.e. make it thy chief
Design and constant Endeavor, who pursuest any Excellency, any Advantage on
Earth, to get Wisdom, as that which is most excellent and advantageous.

2. To give her the Pre-eminence in the Government of all the Actions of our
Life. Which Advice is backed with an Argument, a Proposal and Assurance of
Honor and Estimation, which shall accrue to a man thereby; Exalt her, and she
shall promote thee. Wisdom seems to say to men, what the God of Wisdom said to
Eli; Them that honor me I will honor: and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed 1 Samuel 2.30.
.

3. To entertain her with the greatest Kindness, Familiarity and Endearment
that may be; to take her into the Arms and Bosom-embraces of the Soul. To this,
Honor and Ornament is assured, Glory and Renown. She shall bring thee to
Honor when thou do embrace her. She shall give to thine Head an Ornament of
Grace: a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee. She shall procure to thee
that Praise and Estimation, which will be to thee as a graceful Ornament, as a
glorious Crown. Man is the King of all Creatures; the wise man is a King
amongst men, and the Glory of Wisdom is his Crown. It Is Wisdom will incircle
thee with bright Glories on Earth, and entitle thee to Honor and Happiness in
Heaven.

And now behold I have set a noble Prize before you, and would fain persuade
you to a generous Contest for the Attainment of it. The Contest wherein I would
engage you, is to excel in Wisdom: the Prize is an Ornament of Grace, a Crown
of Glory.

To make plain the way before you, I shall 1. Enquire what Wisdom is. 2. Show
you wherein the excellency of this Acquisition lies. 3. Make it plainly appear
that this excellent Endowment is attainable, and show you by what Means.


And then I shall endeavor to persuade you every one to Diligence in the Use
of the Means for the Attainment of so excellent a Virtue. All with a Design to
advance you to such a Degree of Excellency and Goodness, that ye may be the
Glory of your Native Country, and the Ornament of this great City, adding to
the Splendor of its Riches and Honor, the Luster of Wisdom and Virtue.

This is the Work which now lies before us, in the Management whereof I am
obliged,

I. To enquire, and to give you an Account what Wisdom is. By the ancient
Philosophers (who are followed by the Greek Fathers) it is thus defined; (...).
Alcin. de Dogm. Plat. Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 2. c. 2. Bafil. Sapientia est retum
divinarum and humanarum, causarumque quibus hae res continentur scientia. Cic.
l. 2. Offic.
Wisdom is the Knowledge of the Nature and Causes, both of things Divine and
Humane. Or, (...). Aristot.
It Is the Understanding and Knowledge of the most excellent things. But this is
but an excellent kind of Speculative Knowledge, which may be in the Mind of a
man utterly destitute of true Wisdom. Wisdom is certainly a practick
Excellency, a Virtue that directs and influences our Actions, to the Attainment
of the most excellent Ends. It Is as the Light of the Sun, which is accompanied
with that Influence which fructifieth the Earth.

Wisdom then is an excellent, Energetical Virtue of the Mind of man, whereby,
upon a clear Apprehension and a right Judgment of things, the whole Soul is
carried out, in a well governed Order, in an earnest and constant Pursuit of
the most excellent Seize.

In this Description I have given you the liveliest Pourtraicture that I can of
this excellent Virtue. Be pleased to peruse her several Lineaments, and while I
unvail her amiable Excellencies, keep your Eyes sixth upon her Beauty, till you
find her Image impressed upon your Soul.

an excellent Virtue of the Mind of man.Man is the noblest Creature in the
Universe; the Soul is the noblest Part of man; the Understanding is the noblest
Power of the Soul; and Wisdom is the noblest Virtue of that Power, the most
beautiful Embellishment of the Mind of man.

Other Virtues are for the most part seated in the Will, and their Office is
the Moderation and Government of all the inferior Appetites and Affections:
But Wisdom has her Throne in the highest Place, is seated in the noblest Power
of the Soul, the Mind or Understanding of man, and thence sends forth her
Influence upon all the Powers and Motions of the Soul, the Actions and
Interests of the whole Life. There she sits as a Queen, and is attended with an
honorable Train of excellent Virtues. Temperance stands on her right Hand, and
Patience on her left. Fortitude, Justice, Clemency and Goodness stand before
her Face, and Humility sits at her feet, and when ever she stirs abroad,
Contentment attends all her Motions. Thus she is truly honorable in her
Attendants, and in all her Appearances, and makes him that entertains her
honorable and happy.

an Energetical Virtue,powerfully operative. She gives not only a directive
Light, but sheds forth also such a mighty Influence, as makes the Motions of
the Soul and Actions of the Life agreeable.

Judgment of things.For the wise man's Eyes are in his Head: but the Fool
walks in Darkness Eccl. 2.14.
.

the whole Soul is carried out,in a well governed Order, in an earnest and
constant Pursuit of the most excellent Seize. There is a threefold Act of
Wisdom, viz.

1. To propose the most excellent End; as the Glory of God, and man's Good and
Happiness.

2. To elect the best Means, which are most proper and powerfully conducible
thereunto.

3. To engage the most earnest Endeavors, in the diligent Use of these Means,
for the Attainment of this End.

And thus ye have seen what Wisdom is: Come we now to consider,

II. Wherein the Excellency of Wisdom lies. The Excellency of things
adventitious to the Essence or Being of men, lies in their Usefulness, or
Subserviencie to his Well-being and Blessedness. Those things which give him
Support, Defense, and Luster in the Eyes of the World, are commonly accounted
excellent. Such are Riches, Power and Honor. Riches are a Support, Power a
Defense, Honor an Ornament to men, giving a Luster to their Persons and
Actions. These, men are wont to pursue with much Earnestness, as most excellent
Seize, seeing they render them as Princes amongst the Poor, as Gods among
men.

But now the Excellency of Wisdom, which gives it a Pre-eminence above all
these extrinsick Accessions, lies in this, that it conduces to the Perfection
of the Nature of man, advances him to a Similitude to the most high God, and
leads him to the Fruition of the chiefest Good, and so gives him Possession of
the highest Happiness. The most splendid things on Earth are often times given to
those Sinners, who shall never see Gods Face in Heaven: but true Wisdom is the
Beatifick Virtue of the Saints, which leads them, by the Actions of a good
Life, to the Beatifick Vision of God in Glory. Though secular Advantages then
are sought for with great Earnestness, and esteemed Excellent, Wisdom is the
principal thing, it is much more excellent.

1. Wisdom is better than Riches (...). Menand.
. Riches are a comfortable Accessory to the Animal Life; Wisdom makes a man
almost equal with Angelical Beings. Hence 'twas said of David, My Lord the King
is as an Angel of God 2 Samuel 18.27. and 14.17, 20.
. Now what is the Life of a Beast to the active Excellency of an Angel?
Certainly a Wise man, though without Wealth, does as much excel a Rich man,
without Wisdom, as an Angel does an Ass laden with Gold. Thou have Wisdom and
want Riches; another has Riches and wants Wisdom. Now tell me, Can thou be
content to barter Conditions with him; to part with thy Wisdom to be possessed of
his Wealth? No, it is impossible. For he is already a Fool, who can consent to
such an Exchange. This must needs extort a Confession from every one of you,
that Wisdom is better than Riches, which yet is the golden Oil, which sets all
the Wheels of Action throughout the whole World in Motion.

There is not certainly a more noble Possession than that of Wisdom (...). Men.
. Riches are but an Addition to the outward Estate: Wisdom is the Eunoblement
of the Mind of man. The one is but as a Prop set to a ruinous House: the other
as a royal Diadem set on the Head of a Sovereign Prince. The Excellency of a
thing may be estimated by the Loss or Deprivation. Now tell me, to which would
ye rather consent; To have an Eye plucked out of your Head, or to have a Skirt
cut off from your Garment? Wisdom is as the Eye of man's Soul, whereas Riches,
as a Skirt of a Garment, are but an Addition to his Estate, which oft-times are
more a Burden than an Ornament.

Certainly the greatest Excellency and Praise of Riches is this, that they are
good Instruments of Virtue. Their Excellency then lies in their Use, to which
they neither are, nor can be applied without the Direction of Wisdom. Wisdom
then is the Principal thing, to which Riches are subservient, when they become
the Means of Glory to God, or Good to men. How much better then is it to get
Wisdom than Gold? and to get Understanding rather to be chosen than Silver Pro.
16.16.
? Yea Wisdom (says Solomon) is better than Rubies; and all the things that may
be desired are not to be compared to it Prove. 8.11.
. And therefore,

2. Wisdom is to be preferred before Power. Power, unless directed by Wisdom,
like the dreadful Thunder, breaks all in pieces. As a Sword in a mad man's Hand,
such is great Power, which not being guided by Wisdom, becomes the Instrument
of Rage and Folly. Power without Wisdom, is but as the strength of a Beast,
dangerous and destructive. Wisdom in War is more Excellent than Power and
strength. A wise man (says Solomon) scaleth the City of the Mighty Prove. 21.22.
. Victory is ofter owing to a wise Conduct, than the brutish strength of an
ungoverned Body of People.

Moreover, the Power of a Prince is his Authority for the Government of his
People. This is a Splendid and Noble Thing, an Excellency worthy to be Crowned
with Honor: But yet even this must give place to Wisdom, as the greater
Excellency. Government is properly the direction of the actions of men to
excellent ends for the Public Good. Now hereunto two things are requisite,
Right and Skill, or an ability to do it: The former without the latter is
altogether insignificant and useless; the latter (when they are conjoined) is
the Luster and Glory of the former. Now the former, Right to Govern, is
Authority; the latter, Skill to do it well, is Wisdom. This then being the
Praise and Glory of the other, as rendering it useful for the Public Good,
which is its only Excellency, is much more Excellent. For that which makes
another thing excellent, must needs be more excellent it self. If Power and
Authority then do owe their Excellency and Use, fullness to Wisdom, Wisdom that
applies them to their proper ends, must needs be much more excellent. A wise
man is better than a King, (...)
say the Hebrew Doctors; For (say they) if a wise man die, there is not
presently found a wise man to succeed him; but if a King die, there is not a man
of Israel, but may be made a King: Yea, they have a bolder. Proverb in the
praise of Wisdom; Kings are the Judges of the Earth, but wise men are the
Judges of Kings. (...)


3. Wisdom excells Honor: Honor without Virtue is but an empty Title, but
Wisdom is a real Excellency, a rare endowment of the Mind of Man: Where there
is Virtue to support Honor, there Honor is the luster of Virtue: But now
Wisdom is it self a most excellent Virtue of the mind of Man; and therefore as
much as the substance of Gold excells the shine, so much does Wisdom excel
Honor.

Honor is but the estimation of Excellency, or rather some extrinsick
Testimony of that Estimation: But Wisdom is a real Excellency, which gives an
intrinsic Worth and Value to the Mind of Man, and therefore is much to be
preferred before that Honor which stands in some outward acknowledgement.
What Is a Gilded Title to a Noble Mind, or a little popular Air, to that
Excellency of spirit, which renders a man useful for the Public?

But if any are delighted with the shine of Gold, let them possess themselves
of that bright-fac'd Metal, and then they may please themselves as much as
they will with its shining luster. Do ye delight in Honor? seek for Wisdom,
and Honor will not fail to attend you: Exalt Her, and she shall promote thee;
She shall bring thee to Honor, when thou do embrace her, etc.

Thus ye see the Excellency of Wisdom to be such, as that it may justly
challenge the precedence of Riches, and Power, and Honor, which are the most
courted advantages, that I may not say, Vanities of the world. And so you have
seen wherein that Excellency of Wisdom lies, which justly denominates her the
Principal thing: I come now to prove,

III. That this Excellency is attainable, and to show you by what means you may
attain it.

The Throne of Wisdom is on High, and this World may seem to be left as the
Stage on which Folly is come to act her part: Wisdom is so great an Excellency,
that it may well be questioned whether it can be found on Earth: Yet certainly
this Excellency is attainable. If we be but serious and constant in our
Endeavors, we may come to have our Souls adorned with the Lights and crowned
with the Glories of Wisdom. For,

1. It Is not sure in vain, that the Wise Man does here commend Wisdom to us,
and exhort us to the most earnest Endeavors to acquire it: Wisdom is the
principal thing: therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy getting get
Understanding. God is not wont to delude men, in commanding them to seek that,
which he is resolved he will deny, or knows they cannot attain. This Excellency
Wisdom is then certainly attainable.

2. God has assigned unto Men that Work in the World, which cannot possibly be
done without Wisdom; and yet if it be not done, he has subjected them to an
inevitable Necessity of bearing his Wrath, and being eternally miserable.
Wisdom is the Psalm 111.10. Pro. 1.7. and 9.10.
first Principle of Religion and Piety, whereby Man gives unto God the Glory
due unto his Name. Psalm 29.2.
This is his great Work in this world. And he that does not thus honor God on
Earth, must expect no Glory nor Happiness in Heaven: What then remains, but
that he must bear his own Guilt, and God's Wrath in Hell? Now if Wisdom was not
attainable that this work might be done, this would be nothing else but a cruel
design of the Eternal destruction of all Mankind, which is utterly inconsistent
with the Divine Philanthropy, the essential Goodness of God, and his
unspeakable Love to Man: And therefore true Wisdom is certainly attainable.

3. God has given to Man a Rational Soul, furnished with excellent Powers
(...) Faculties, whereby it is capable of the most Noble Endowments, and
agreeable Actions, as a Power of discerning betwixt Good and Evil; the
Understanding: and a Power of choosing the Good, and refusing the Evil; the
Will. How far these Faculties are impeded by the depravation of Nature, and
again relieved by the aids of Grace, I shall not now discourse. Certain it is,
To know and discern is essential to the Understanding: to choose or refuse is
essential to the Will. Hereby God has given to Man an immediate capacity of
Wisdom, which stands in the knowledge of excellent things, the proposal of
excellent ends, and the Choice and Use of the most proper means for the
attainment of those ends. He that lives in the Use of his Reason, in the
exercise of these Noble Powers of his Soul, is, in some degree, Wise. He that
applies his Understanding to the Knowledge of that which God reveals to be good
for Man, and imployes all his Powers in the diligent and constant prosecution
of it, has attained to true Wisdom. This Method is so Natural, this Motion is
so agreeable, that it cannot but plainly appear, that this Excellency, this
rare Endowment of the Mind of Man, Wisdom and Understanding is attainable.

Neither need I insist on the Means, by which it may be attained, seeing that
has already been declared in some measure in the forementioned Proofs and
Instances of its attainableness: I shall only add, True Wisdom may be attained
by these Means:

1. A due Government of a Man's self. He that would attain Wisdom, must not
permit an Ataxy in his own Soul: He must not suffer the Inferior Powers
thereof to Usurp an Empire and Regency over the Superior. He must carefully
maintain the Right and Power of Reason in the Government of the Appetite and
Passions. The sensitive Powers must be strictly held in subjection to the
Rational: Keep Reason in her Throne, and She will soon be inured to the
Government of all the motions of the Soul, the actions of the Life, according
to the Rules of Wisdom.

2. A serious Deuteronomy. 32.29.
consideration of a Man's State. There Is an Eternal State of Happiness or Misery
remains for every Man after death, according to his demeanor in this Life. The
Wicked shall be tormented in Mat. 25. ult.
Eternal Fire: the Righteous shall Mat. 13.43.
shine as the Sun, in the splendours of a superexcellent Glory, which shall
never suffer the least Eclipse. Now a Holy and Virtuous Life is the Way and
Means to this State of Excellent Glory. The lively consideration hereof must
needs be of mighty Power and Influence to incline a man to the choice and use
of these Means, in order to so excellent an end: And herein lies Man's true
Wisdom.

3. A diligent study of the Holy Scriptures; Herein are contained the Oracles
of God, wherein his hidden Wisdom is revealed to Men. The Holy Bible is the
Book of Wisdom. Of this blessed Book may be truly said, that which (not without
great vanity) was inscribed upon the Tomb of Pherecydes the Syrian; (...),
Laert.
Here lies Wisdom in its highest Perfection. That Wisdom which shines in its
highest Glory, amongst Angels in Heaven, here discloseth it self in its amiable
and most attractive Beauties to men on Earth. By Meditation on God's
Testimonies Holy David became Ps. 119.98, 99, 100.
wiser than his Enemies, wiser than the Ancients, wiser than his Teachers,
whose Office it was to teach him Wisdom: The Holy Scriptures are able to make a
man wise to Salvation: 2 Timothy 3.15.
Herein God has set before us, and proposed unto us those things, in the
Knowledge and Practice whereof stands that True Wisdom, which is Man's greatest
Excellency and Glory. The Holy Gospel is the manifestation of the Wisdom of God
in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God Ordained before the World unto
our Glory. 1 Cor. 2.7.
The wisest men that ever were in the world, who were not immediately inspired
by God, owed their Excellent Wisdom to the study of his Holy Word. That great
Oracle of Wisdom, and State-Politie, the Lord Verulam, confessed he owed his
Wisdom to the Works of Solomon, particularly the Book of the Proverbs. The Holy
Scriptures are that Great Light, which God has set up and appointed to give
the Light of Wisdom to the Rational World.

And thus you see by what Means this Excellency, that so ennobles the mind of
Man, may be attained.

Now me thinks every one of you should be inflamed with a Generous Desire of so
great an Excellency, and should resolve to be diligent and serious in your
endeavors for the attainment of it. It Is an Argument of a base and mean Spirit
to rest in an inglorious sloth, when a man is called to an Honorable
Employment. Behold, here is a Noble Design, a Work worthy to engage all your
Powers, though ye were the greatest Princes on Earth, the Acquisition of
Wisdom. Wisdom is the greatest Excellency and Adornment of the Soul of Man, and
renders him amiable and illustrious in the sight of God. Wisdom more adorns a
King than His Royal Diadem, and redeems the meanest man from an unregarded
Obscurity, and renders him truly Excellent and Honorable. A wise Man, though
in never so poor and mean Estate, is a bright Star, incircled with his own
Rays of Glory, and need not envy the proudest Princes their Secular Greatness
and Honor. There are many things Excellent, Great, Glorious in the worlds eye,
which men are wont to pursue with great earnestness, and would account
themselves very happy in the acquisition and attainment of them: But, Wisdom is
the prineipal thing; therefore get Wisdom, etc. Exalt her, and she shall
promote thee, etc.

Such is the Excellency and desirableness of Wisdom; and therefore, 1. Get
Wisdom: 2. Use Wisdom: and 3. Let your Wisdom be accompanied with those
Virtues and Graces, which may demonstrate its Excellency and Glory.

1. Get Wisdom; why should you take up with any other acquisition, when you are
capable of so great an Excellency? What is it in the world on which men put the
greatest value? Silver, Gold, Gems? Know, Wisdom is more excellent and
desirable: It cannot be gotten for Gold, neither shall Silver be weighed for
the price thereof: It cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the
precious Onyx or the Sapphire: The Gold and Crystal cannot equal it; and the
exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine Gold. No mention shall be made
of Coral or of Pearls; for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies: The Topaz of
Aethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure Gold. Job
28.15-19.
The Gold of Ophir, the Topaz of Aethiopia, the precious Onyx and the Sapphire,
the Crystal and the Coral are not worthy to be compared to Wisdom. Did men but
know the worth of Wisdom, the finest Gold, the fairest Pearls, the richest
Rubies, would find but small regard. Could the Excellency and Beauty of Wisdom
be presented to the eye of man, the finest Gold would cease to shine, the
fairest Pearls would soon grow pale, and the richest Rubies would blush for
shame, as wholly vanquished by so rare a Virtue, and rendered of little or no
value.

Wisdom is the Excellency of the most Noble Beings; it is the Praise of Men, the
Perfection of Angels, the Glory of God: The Sun is the Glory of the world,
Light of the Sun: God is the Glory of all Beings, Wisdom is the Glory of God.
Now how great an Honor is it for a Mortal Man to be (...). Alcin. c. 2. (...).
Famb.
like to the most High God, in that Excellency, which is his Glory! To glitter
in Gold is accounted a great Glory; but it is a far greater, to be an Earthly
God, in the Excellency of Wisdom: Get Wisdom therefore, and with all your
getting get Understanding. For,

1. Wisdom will give the greatest Excellency to your Persons: It Is Wisdom that
makes a Man's face to shine: Eccl. 8.1.
For it impresses upon him a Ray of the Glory of God: (...)
Wise men on Earth are like the stars in Heaven, say the Hebrew Doctors.
Certainly, Wisdom excells Folly, as far as Light excells Darkness. Eccl. 2.13.
There Is not more difference betwixt a Man and a Beast, than betwixt a Wise Man
and a Fool. Wisdom will crown you with a singular Glory; 'twill make you as
Princes amongst the People, as Angels amongst men.

2. 'Twill make you beneficial to others: It Is the Glory of Man to be the Means
of Good to many: 'Twas the Wisdom of Joseph, which preferred him to that great
Honor in Egypt, which gave him a mighty Capacity of doing Good; and so he
became the Means of sustaining his Fathers Family, yea, the whole Land of
Egypt, and all the Neighboring Countries in the years of Famine. By Wisdom ye
may not only promote the Welfare of your own Country, but also contribute to
the Safety, Peace and Honor of the whole Kingdom. It Is Wisdom will make you
living Images of the great God, and mighty Instruments of Good to men.

3. 'Twill make you truly Happy and Honorable; Happy in the Favor of God,
Honorable in the Esteem of Men. True Wisdom is always attended with a train
of Excellent Virtues, and it intitles men to the highest Honors, to Immortal
Glories in the Kingdom of God. The Glory of Wisdom out-lasts men's Life, and
shall have a Resurrection with their Bodies from the Grave: For when the Day is
come, that the Dead shall rise from the Dust, then shall they that be Wise
shine as the brightness of the Firmament; Dan. 12.3.
in the luster of a superexcellent Glory, in the Kingdom of God: Happy then is
the Man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding: For length
of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honor. Prove.
3.13, 16.
Glory is the inheritance of Wisdom: For the wise shall inberit Glory; when
shame shall be the promotion of Fools. Prove. 3. ult.
Get Wisdom then, and with all your getting get Understanding. Exalt Her, and
She shall promote thee; She shall bring thee to Honor, when thou do embrace
Her: She shall give to thine Head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of Glory shall
She deliver to thee.

Be sensible of your want of Wisdom. It Is not to be imagined, that he should
earnestly endeavor to get Wisdom, who has an Opinion that he is already Wise:
Be not wise therefore in your own conceits: Romans 12.16.
Let no man deceive himself: If any man among you seem to be wise in this
world, ('it is the Apostles Counsel) let him become a Fool that he may be wise: 1
Cor. 3.18.
For he that thinks himself sufficiently Wise, is certainly a Fool: whereas he,
who being sensible of his Folly, seeks after Wisdom, begins to be Wise.

Seek then after Wisdom as the Principal Excellency and ennoblement of your
Nature: and that ye may attain it,

1. Converse with the Wise: For he that walks with wise men shall be wise;
but a companion of Fools shall be destroyed: Pro. 13.20.
This world is the Temple of God: Wise Men are Lamps, which God has lighted up
therein. One Lamp may be lighted from another. From them ye may derive that
Light of Wisdom, which will make you to shine in the eyes of God and Men: But
know the truly virtuous are the only Wise. The Light of Wisdom shines in a Holy
Life, as a bright star in a serene sky. Choose then Holy and Good Men for your
intimate Companions, that through the Light and influence of their
Communications and Example, you may learn Wisdom by a living Law. Thus Holy
David, I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts. Psalm 119.63.
These are as God's Mystic Seals, by which he impresses Wisdom on the minds of
men.

2. Ask Wisdom of God: For the LORD gives Wisdom, out of his mouth comes
Knowledge and Understanding. Prove. 2.6.
God is the Fountain of Wisdom, being infinitely, essentially wise. Angels
excel in Wisdom: these bright Lamps which burn before the Throne of God, were
lighted up by his Glorious Beams. To whom then should Man go, who wants and
desires Wisdom, but to the All-wise God? It Is He that has said, Ask, and it
shall be given you. Matt. 7.7. Luke 11.9.
Did the poorest man present know where he might have Gold for asking, he would
soon outshine the Rich, and disdain to fill his Treasury with any baser Metal:
But he that asks Gold of the Rich, shall but be derided for the insolency of
his request. But, If any of you lack Wisdom (which is better than Gold) let him
ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
be given him. Jam. 1.5.
Thus did King Solomon become the wisest man in the World.

3. Engage your selves with all seriousness in the exercise of a solid Piety,
and the Virtues of a Holy Life: For, The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom: A good Understanding have all they that do his Commandments. Psalm
111.10.
Live not then at random; but make an Election upon a due deliberation of that
course of Life, which you apprehend to be most excellent and agreeable to the
Divine Will, and most conducible to your future good, your eternal happiness:
Bind your self with the firmest Resolutions, notwithstanding all difficulties
and discouragements, to persist in this way, till you attain your end. When you
are assaulted with Temptations, remember then not to act according to your
present inclinations, but according to that Election you have made, those
resolutions which you have fixed in your soul, upon a mature deliberation: This
is your highest Wisdom, to act according to the Rules of Virtue, with an
unshaken constancy, till you shall receive a Crown of Glory.

Thus I have showed you the way and means whereby ye must get Wisdom. Now,

II. Learn to use Wisdom: Let Wisdom be your Guide in all your Affairs, and
Understanding your directress in all your undertakings: Be diligent, serious
and constant in doing those things wherein true Wisdom does consist. Assemble
all the Powers of your Soul for this purpose. The Sun incessantly moves in the
Heavens, and as incessantly shines on the Earth; so do ye in the Lights of
Wisdom, till ye shall be incircled with Rays of Glory in the presence of God.
Enter then into the paths of Virtue, that ye may shine in the Lights of Wisdom.
Desist from Sin, as the greatest Folly; believe in Christ, obey his Gospel, and
submit to his Government, that ye may secure the salvation of your Souls, which
is your highest Wisdom.

Let your Wisdom disclose it self in your 1. Piety toward God; 2. Loyalty to
the King; and 3. Love and Charity to one another: I shall propose these Duties
to you, only as proofs of the Wisdom, the proper acts and indications of this
excellent Virtue.

1. Let your Wisdom shine in your Piety toward God: True Wisdom comes from
God, and discloses its Excellency and Divine Original by those Acts of Religion
and Piety, by which Man makes the nearest approaches to God. Religion, in its
Rise, is Man's Return to God; in its Progress, his Honoring of God by acts of
Devotion, and the Virtues of a Holy Life; in its End, his Union with God, and
fruition of him as the chiefest Good, and his highest happiness for ever.

Now if Religion and Piety, which comprehends all the Virtues and Duties of a
good Life, be the proper argument and evidence of True Wisdom, certainly
Atheism and Irreligion, debauchory and sin are undeniable evidences of the want
of this excellency. Swearing, Lying, Cursing, Drinking to excess, Whoredom and
Uncleanness, Cheating and Overreaching for gain, are visible badges of folly,
and marks of madness upon men. For is it not desperate folly and madness in a
Mortal Man, to make Almighty God his Enemy, by slighting his Authority,
breaking his Laws, and despising his Government? Is it not Folly and Madness in
men, to provoke Him to wrath by their sins, in whose Favor lies all their
Felicity? Is it not Folly and Madness in Men, made after the Image of God, for
a little sordid gain, or filthy pleasure of Sin, to cast away all possible
hopes of future happiness in Heaven?

Take heed then, ye that would be accounted Sons of Wisdom, that ye be not
justly charged with Folly. Let not an Oath, a Curse, or any corrupt
Communication be heard to come out of your mouths; drink not to excess, nor
provoke any other to drink to your measure. Let not your Meeting this Day be a
Feast of Fools. If any man swear an Oath, let him pay for his folly, and bear
his own shame, while ye manifest your Wisdom, in drawing from the mire and
filth of your Country (the swaggering, swearing debauchee is no better) some
profit for the relief of the Poor.

2. Show your selves wise men by your Loyalty to your King. Law and Government
is the greatest security we have under Heaven for our Lives and Liberties, our
Religion and Property, and whatsoever is or ought to be dear unto us. Take away
the fence of Law, break down the Wall of Government, and all is instantly laid
open and common. The strong will oppress the weak, the Poor will prey upon the
Rich, and the Lives of the Innocent will be in the hands of the Cruel. A
fruitful Land will soon become a barren Wildorness; Cities and Dwelling-houses
would be turned into Dens of Bruit-beasts, and wild salvages in the shapes of
men. Loose but the Bonds of Government, and all things would instantly run into
Confusion, and men would still prey upon one another, till they became all a
prey to a Foreign Foe, all inslaved to a Foreign Yoke. To prevent so great
mischiefs, it is the Wisdom of every man to contribute what he can to the
Conservation of the Law and Government under which he lives, in its full
Strength and Beauty. Now the Loyalty and Obedience of the Subjects to their
Sovereign, gives the greatest strength to the Law, and Beauty to the Government.

He that breaks a Law opens a Gap in the Fence, and he that despises
Authority, exposes the Government to Contempt. When a Multitude, in pursuit of
some particular Advantage, or for the redress of some particular Grievance,
combines together to over-bear the Law, and subvert the Government of a
Kingdom, they act the greatest folly imaginable, by destroying the best
security they have for all they enjoy. They do but try their Forces to sink the
Ship wherein they sail; to pull down the House in which they dwell; to
overthrow the Stage on which they stand, to their inevitable Ruin.

The Sovereign Power is the Soul of the Law and Government: He that weakens
this Power, goes about to destroy the Law, to subvert the Government: But
Loyalty and Obedience to the Sovereign, who governs his Subjects by Good Laws,
preserves the Law in its full Force, and the Government in its Luster and
Glory. Now this is your greatest security for your dearest interests, and will
be a proof of your Wisdom, and render you the Worthies of your Country.

3. Demonstrate your Wisdom by your Love and Charity to one another. Union is a
work of Wisdom, as mightily conducing to the greater good of the parts united.
Now Brotherly Love is the beautiful band of Union: Behold how good, and how
pleasant it is for Brethren (of the same Country, of the same City, of the
same Church) to dwell together in Unity. Ps. 133.1.
Unity is the Beauty and Strength of a Society, its Safety and Glory. The
Branch by its Union with the Tree, the Stone with the Building, a Member with
the Body, secures it self and the Body, the Building, the Tree: but when this
Union is dissolved, the part, if not the whole, is soon destroyed. It Is then
your Wisdom to maintain that Union by Brotherly Love, which is so conducible to
your mutual Good. This will be your Strength and Beauty, your Excellency and
Honor. The Conservation and Improvement hereof for its proper ends, will be
your Wisdom, as Men, and as Christians, your Crown and Glory.

But then to your Brotherly Kindness add Charity; 2 Pet. 1.7.
in the Relief of those that are in Distress, in the Redemption of your poor
Brethren from the Ignominy, Obscurity and Misery of an indigent Condition. This
will be a singular Proof of your Wisdom, as well as a visible mark of your
Christianity. 'Twill be your Wisdom in days of Danger, to secure your Estates;
and nothing can be so safe as that which (by Acts of Charity) is laid up in
Heaven. (...) 6.^^.
It Is certainly an Act of great Wisdom in a man, to improve his Temporal Estate
to the best advantage. And this improvement is the best made, this advantage is
best secured by the Offices of Charity. For by doing Good to others, a man
treasures up Glory to himself. For though the Poor may seem a barren soil, he
that sows this precious Seed, shall reap Honor on Earth, and rewards in
Heaven. Divine Charity is the only Excellent Chemistry; it turns even Dross
into Gold. Hereby you may commute your Temporal Riches for Eternal Treasures.
It Is the Grain not stored up in the Garner, but sown in the Fields, that yields
the plentiful increase.

If God then by his Blessing has given you a Temporal Estate, it is your Wisdom
to employ some part thereof in Works of Charity, as the best improvement for an
Eternal Advantage. They who most abound with worldly Goods, are but Stewards of
Gods Blessings, and it is their Wisdom to employ them according to his Will.
This is the Proof of their Fidelity, whereupon they may expect God's Acceptance
and a great reward.

That Advantage is most to be valued, which is of greatest extent and longest
duration. Such is the advantage which may be acquired by the Offices of
Charity. For hereby many persons may be raised from an unprofitable sloth and
deep poverty, to a happy Capacity of doing good to others; and then will the
Glory of all their good deeds redound to you. So may ye do good after this
Life, and bring Glory to God, when ye shall sleep in your Beds of Honor; such
are the Graves of good men, who having finished their course of Virtue, lie
down in Glory, and rest in the hope of a happy Resurrection to the Glorious
Joys of an endless Life.

It Is certainly a commendable Act of Charity, to take Children out of poor
Families, and train them up in honest Trades and Callings, whereby they may
become serviceable to the Public Good. [You may here behold this day some
Instances of the Fruits of this Charity Above 60 Youths put out Apprentices in
London by the Charities of this Aniversary Feast.
.] From these neglected Quarries, are those stones sometimes taken, which are
the Strength and Beauty of the Building; the stately Pinnacles and Top-stones
thereof.

Wisdom shines in her brightest splendor in the Works of Charity, which are
the paths to Honor. Count it your Glory then to do Good; to be Beneficial to
your poor Brethren. Hide not your selves from your own flesh Isa. 58.7.
. Nothing is more Divine, than to do Good (...). Synes. Ep. 31.
. It Is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive Acts 20.35.
. Honor God then with your substance Pro 3.9.
, and relieve the Poor with some part of your Estate: So shall the Poor at once
lift up their eyes upon you, and their hands to Heaven and bless you, while
they behold you with Love and Veneration, as so many Living Images of the
Eternal Divinity, the Sovereign Beauty and Goodness.

Thus I have showed you the right Use, and best improvement of Wisdom, for the
Glory of God, and Good of Men. Now in the last place,

III. Let your Wisdom be accompanied with those Virtues and Graces, which may
with the most convincing Light and Evidence attest its Original, and justify
it to the World, to be the Offspring of Heaven, the Daughter and the delight
of God; as with Innocence, Meekness and Humility.

1. Innocence. Defraud no Man, wrong no Man; Be wise as Serpents, but be
harmless as Doves Mar. 10.16.
. Wisdom builds her House, but not with the Ruins of her Neighbor. He that
does wrong to another, does the greatest injury to himself: For he subjects
himself to Gods 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Wrath, and his Estate to his Mal. 2.2.
Curse, which may not only secretly consume his ill-gotten Goods, but also
bring his whole Estate to nothing. No Man can shine in the Lights of Wisdom,
but in the State of Innocence.

2. Meekness. Disturb no man: Disquiet not your selves by letting loose your
unruly Passions. Folly is clamorous and troublesome, but Tranquillity and Peace
are the inseparable Companions of Celestial Wisdom. The Wisdom that is from
above, is, first pure, and then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated
Jam. 3.17.
. Wisdom is a glorious Princess, and She Governs her Subjects in Peace. Unruly
Passions are not permitted to keep their Revels under her Regency. These Rebels
against Reason are bound in Chains, or banished from her Dominion. He is a Wise
man that knows well how to Govern a City; but he more excells in Wisdom, who
knows how to govern his own Spirit Prove. 16.32.
; who upon all Provocations, can keep his Passions under the Rule and Regency
of Reason. He is both a Fool, and dangerous, who upon every petty discontent is
ready to set his own House on fire, and does what he can to put the
Neighborhood into a flame. Where the Spirit of a Man takes fire, with a little
spark, a slight Provocation, there is wanting the Meekness of Wisdom. Jam. 3.13.


3. Humility. Despise no man: He that despises his Neighbor is void of Wisdom
Prove. 11.12.
. Pride not your selves in the Opinion of your own Excellency: For when pride
comes, then comes shame; but with the lowly is Wisdom Prove. 11.2.
. Wisdom cohabits with Humility, and therefore let not the Wise Man Glory in
his Wisdom Jer. 9.23.
, or despise his Neighbor because of his Folly. Alas, O Man, who made thee to
differ 1 Cor. 4.7.
! The Great God who made you both, might have given him Wisdom, and said of
thee, Let him be a Fool. Art thou wiser than another? Be not lifted up: there
are others wiser than thou. If thou wast in deed wiser than all men, yet what
was thy Wisdom, but Folly to the most Wise God? Certainly thou can not
deserve so much Folly in the weakest man, as the All-wise God discerns in thee.
Angels excel in Wisdom, yet the most Wise God charges them with Folly Job 4.18.
. Now do thou not desire, that God who sees Folly in thee, may not despise
thee? Then remember, that it is the Will of God, and there is the greatest
Reason in the world, that thou should not despise thy Brother, though thou
perceivest in him a want of Wisdom. Has God given you Wisdom, conserve it in
Humility, and it will be your great Glory. Angels excel in Wisdom, and they
are exemplary in Humility: They veil Isa. 6.2, 3.
their faces in the presence of God, and give Glory to His Name: And it is an
Act of Humility in Man, to give the Glory of all his Excellency to God: And
therefore, To God alone be ascribed, Rev. 7.12.
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, and Praise, both
now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Coronis.
THe SERMON ended, the FEAST begins. Herein the Example is added to the Rule:
The DOCTRINE delivered, presently (in its Warmth and Vigor) issues into
PRACTICE. Brotherly Love is expressed by Feasting together, and then in the
Close, a Liberal Contribution is made for the Offices of Charity. And thus
RELIGION, attended with BROTHERLY LOVE and ChARITY, (the principal Graces of
Christians, and visible Glories of Christianity) appears in its Beauty and
Luster, in these LOVE FEASTS of the Natives of our Country. This was all
prudently managed, with Good Order, Civility and Sobriety, by the STEWARDS of
the Feast, for this present Year, MDCLXXV, whose Names (that the Reader may
know to whom the foregoing SERMON, preached upon their Choice and Call, is
owing) are here expressed; Mr THOMAS HOLLIER, Mr JOSEPH COLINGE, Mr WILLIAM
SAVAGE, Mr JOHN SAPCOT, Mr THO. DAFFORNE, Mr JOHN LAND; Mr THOMAS GIBBS, Mr
SAMVEL BARON.


The Feast ended, Stewards for the following Year are chosen, by setting of
Garlands of Laurel upon their Heads, with the Sound of Music, and the Plaudits
of the People. Herein there is a little, but lively Representation of that
Honor and Happiness, which is reserved in Heaven, for those Persons, who live
in the Exercise of Religion, Brotherly Love, and Charity, here upon Earth. For
at the end of their Life (which upon the Account of the Peace and Joy of a good
Conscience, will be but as the Close of a Festival) they shall be Crowned with
Glory, and with joyful Harmonies and Hallelujah's received, with the Applauses
of ANGELS, into the Society of the BLESSED, and so shall live in the VISION and
FRVITION of the Most High GOD, the chiefest GOOD, with Fullness of Satisfaction,
and Everlasting Delight. AMEN.

HALLELVJAH.

