A SPECIMEN, Of the Rhetoric, Candor, Gravity, and Ingenuity of Wi. Williams,
Speaker to the late House of Commons at Westminster, in his Speech to Sir
Robert Peyton, When he expelled him that House.
You are absolutely the worst of Men, The Speaker not excepted. Guilty of the
sin against the Holy Ghost. Nonsensical Bumbast.
and have committed the Greatest of Offenses, for which you deserve to be
Obliterated from the Knowledge of all; being of a base and timorous Spirit: You
have endeavored to cast the damnable Plot upon the most Innocent of his
Majesty's Subjects; Witness their Feats from 41 to 48, etc.
even those Friends who Chose you to Sit in this Honorable House. Never the
more honorable, for being supplied by such people.
You have disgraced the Honor of your Family, brought such perpetual Ignominy
upon your self, as can never be Retrieved. You have forsaken God and your
Country; The poor Dunce knows not the meaning of the word Retrieve. The noble
and elegant style of an Indictment.
and Satan being your director, you have imagined, contrived, and endeavored
to bring Popery into this Kingdom, by the vilest ways the Devil and the Pope
could assist you withal. But the Bill of Union would have been a more effectual
one.


You have been out of measure, ungrateful, and fled from the Principles of all
honest men, I cannot call you fallen Angel, for you have been a Devil from the
beginning; Charity and Civility.
and to bring your Diabolical purpose to pass, you have consulted the Devil,
Gadbury, and hugged the Witch Celliers, and have been a True Hypocrite, If
true, how a Hypocrite? if a Hypocrite, how true?
and played a Prize with Religion for advantage. But why should I say Religion,
when you never had any, but were ever a profuse rolling Hero, having nothing
now left you but the shape of a Man, whereby you are become nauceous to this
House, Could any thing have, been more cleanly and gentilely, more decently and
gravely expressed? You should have put your Finger in your Throat, and have
gone on with this great work.
and therefore they now spew you out.


