THE BLOODY TENENT, of PERSECUTION, for cause of CONSCIENCE, discussed, in A
Conference between TRVTH and PEACE.

WHO, In all tender Affection, present to the High Court of Parliament, (as
the Result of their Discourse) these, (amongst other Passages) of highest
consideration.

Printed in the Year 1644.

FIrst, That the blood of so many hundred thousand souls of Protestants and
Papists, spilt in the War^ of present and former Ages, for their respective
Consciences, is not required nor accepted by Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace.

Secondly, Pregnant Scriptures and Arguments are throughout the Work proposed
against the Doctrine of Persecution for for cause of Conscience.

Thirdly, Satisfactorie Answers are given to Scriptures, and objections
produced by Mr. Calvin, Beza, Mr. Cotton, and the Ministers of the New English
Churches, and others former and later, tending to prove the Doctrine of
Persecution for cause of Conscience.

Fourthly, The Doctrine of Persecution for cause of Conscience, is proved
guilty of all the blood of the Souls crying for vengeance under the Altar.

Fifthly, All Civil States, with their Officers of justice in their respective
constitutions and administrations are proved essentially Civil, and therefore
not Judges, Governors or Defendours of the Spiritual or Christian state and
Worship.

Sixthly, It is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his Son
the Lord Jesus) a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish or
Antichristian consciences and worships, be granted to all men in all Nations
and Countries: and they are only to be fought against with that Sword which
is only (in Soul matters) able to conquer, to wit, the Sword of Gods Spirit,
the Word of God.

Seventhly, The state of the Land of Israel, the Kings and people thereof in
Peace and War, is proved figurative and ceremonial, and no pattern nor
president for any Kingdom or civil state in the world to follow.

Eighthly, God requires not an uniformity of Religion to be inacted and
enforced in any civil state; which enforced uniformity (sooner or later) is
the greatest occasion of civil War, ravishing of conscience, persecution of
Christ Jesus in his servants, and of the hypocrisy and destruction of millions
of souls.

Ninthly, In holding an enforced uniformity of Religion in a civil state, we
must necessarily disclaim our desires and hopes of the Jews conversion to
Christ.

Tenthly, An enforced uniformity of Religion throughout a Nation or civil
state, confounds the Civil and Religious, denies the principles of
Chr^stianity and civility, and that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh.

Eleventhly, The permission of other consciences and worships then a state
professes, only can (according to God) procure a firm and lasting peace,
(good assurance being taken according to the wisdom of the civil state for
uniformity of civil obedience from all sorts.)

Twelfthly, lastly, true civility and Christianity may both flourish in a State
or Kingdom, notwithstanding the permission of diverse and contrary consciences,
either of Jew or Gentile.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, both Houses of the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable and Renowned Patriots:
NExt to the saving of your own souls (in the lamentable shipwreck of Mankind)
your task (as Christians) is to save the Souls, but as Magistrates, the
Bodies and Goods of others.

Many excellent Discourses have been presented to your Fathers hands and Yours
in former and present Parliaments: I shall be humbly bold to say, that (in what
concerns your duties as Magistrates, toward others) a more necessary and
seasonable debate was never yet presented.

Two things your Honors here may please to view (in this Controversy of
Persecution for cause of Conscience) beyond what is extant.

First the whole Body of this Controversy formed and pitched in true Battalia.

Secondly (although in respect of my self it be impar congressus, yet in the
power of that God who is Maximus in Mini^is, Your Honors shall see the
Controversy is discussed with men as able as most, eminent for ability and
piety, Mr. Co^ton, and the New English Ministers.

When the Prophets in Scripture have given their Coats of Arms and Escutch^ons
to Great Men, Your Honors know the Babylonian Monarch has the Lion, the
Persian the Bear, the Grecian the Leopard, the Roman a compound of the former
3. most strange and dreadful, Dan. 7.

Their oppressing, plundring ravishing, murdering, not only of the bodies, but
the souls of Men are large explaining commentaries of such similitudes.

Your Honors have been famous to the end of the World, for your unparalled
wisdom, courage, justice, mercy, in the vindicating your Civil Laws,
Liberties, etc. Yet let it not be grievous to your Honors thoughts to ponder a
little, why all the Prayers and Tears and Fastings in this Nation have not
pierced the Heavens, and quenched these Flames, which yet who knows how far
they will spread, and when they will out!

Your Honors have broke the jaws of the Oppressor, and taken the prey out of
their Teeth ( Job. 29.) For which Act I believe it has pleased the most High
God to set a Guard (not only of Trained men, but) of mighty Angels, to secure
your sitting, and the City.

I fear we are not pardoned, though reprieved: O that there may be a
lengthning of Londons tranquillity, of the Parliaments safety, by mercy to the
poor! Dan. 4.

Right Honorable, Soul yokes, Soul oppressions plundrings, ravishings, etc.
are of a crimson and deepest dye, and I believe the chief of Englands sins,
unstopping the Viols of Englands present sorrows.

This glass presents your Honors with Arguments from Religion, Reason,
Experience, all proving that the greatest yoakes yet lying upon English necks,
(the peoples and Your own) are of a spiritual and soul nature.

All former Parliaments have changed these yoakes according to their
consciences (Popish or Protestant) It Is now your Honors turn at helm, and
(as your task, so I hope your res^lution, not to change (for that is but to
turn the wheel, which another Parliament, and the very next may turn
again:) but to ^ase the Subjects and Your selves from a yoke (as was once
spoke in a case not unlike Act 15.) which neither You nor your Fathers were
ever able to bear.

Most Noble Senators, Your Fathers (whose seats You fill) are mouldred, and
mouldring their brains, their tongu^s, etc. to ashes in the pit of rottenesse:
They and You must shortly (together with two worlds of men) appear at the
great Bar: It shall then be no grief of heart that you have now attended to
the cries of Souls, thousands oppressed, millions ravished by the Acts and
Statutes concerning Souls, not yet repealed.

Of Bodies impoverished, imprisoned, etc. for their souls belief, yea
slaughtered on heaps for Religions controversies in the Wars of present and
former Ages.

Notwithstanding the success of later times, The famous saying of a late King
of Bohemia.
(wherein sundry opinions have been hatched about the subject of Religion) a
man may clearly discern with his eye, and as it were touch with his finger
that according to the verity of holy Scriptures, etc. men's consciences ought in
no sort to be violated, urged or constrained. And whensover men have attempted
any thing by this violent course, whether openly or by secret means, the issue
has been pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderful innovations in the
principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and Countries, etc.

It cannot be denied to be a pious and prudentiall act for Your Honors
(according to your conscience) to call for the advice of faithful Councillors
in the high debates concerning Your own, and the souls of others.

Yet let it not be imputed as a crime for any suppliant to the God of Heaven
for You, if in the humble sense of what their souls believe, they power forth
(amongst others) these three requests at the Throne of Grace.

First, That neither Your Honors, nor those excellent and worthy persons,
whose advice you seek, limit the holy One of Israel to their apprehensions,
debates, conclusions, rejecting or neglecting the humble and faithful
suggestions of any, though as base as spittle and clay, with which sometimes
Christ Jesus opens the eyes of them that are borne blind.

Secondly, That the present and future generations of the Sons of Men may never
have cause to say that such a Parliament (as England never enjoyed the like)
should model the worship of the living, Essay of Religion.
eternal and invisible God after the Bi^^ of any earthly interest, though of
the highest concernment under the Sun: And yet, says that learned Sir
Francis Bacon (how ever otherwise persuaded, yet thus he confesses:) Such as
hold pressure of Conscience, are guided therein by some private interests of
their own.

Thirdly, What ever way of worshipping God Your own Consciences are persuaded
to walk in, yet (from any bloody act of violence to the consciences of others)
it may be never told at Rome nor Oxford, that the Parliament of England has
committed a greater rape, It is rarely seen that ever persons were pers^^^ed
for their (...)
then if they had forced or ravished the bodies of all the women in the World.

And that Englands Parliament (so famous throughout all Europe and the World)
should at last turn Papists, Prelatists, Presbyterians, Independents,
Socinians, Familists, Antinomians, etc. by confirming all these sorts of
Consciences, by Civil force and violence to their Consciences.

To every Courteous Reader.
While I plead the Cause of Truth and Innocence against the bloody Doctrine
of Persecution for cause of conscience, I judge it not unfit to give alarm to
my self, and all men to prepare to be persecuted or ^^nted for cause of
conscience.

Whether thou stand charged with 10 or but 2 Talents, if thou huntest any
for cause of conscience, how can thou say thou followest the Lamb of God who
so abhorred that practice?

If Paul, if Jesus Christ were present here at London, and the question were
proposed what Religion would they approve of: The Papists, Prelatists,
Presbyterians, Independents, etc. would each say, Of mine, of mine.

But put the second question, if one of the several sorts should by major vote
attain the Sword of steel: what weapons does Christ Jesus authorize them to
sight with in His cause? Do not all men hate the persecutor, and every
conscience true or false complain of cruelty, tyranny? etc.

Two mountains of crying guilt lie heavy upon the backs of All that name the
name of Christ in the eyes of Jews, Turks and Pagans.

First, The blasphemies of their Idolatrous inventions, superstitions, and most
unchristian conversations.

Secondly, The bloody irreligious and inhumane oppressions and destructions
under the mask or veil of the Name of Christ, etc.

O how like is the jealous Jehovah, the consuming fire to end these present
slaughters in a greater slaughter of the holy Witnesses? Rev. 11.

Six years preaching of so much Truth of Christ (as that time afforded in K.
Edwards days) kindles the flames of Q. Mary's bloody persecutions.

Who can now but expect that after so many scores of years preaching and
professing of more Truth, and amongst so many great contentions amongst the
very best of Protestants, a fiery furnace should be heat, and who sees not now
the ^ires kindling?

I confess I have little hopes till those flames are over, that this Discourse
against the doctrine of persecution for cause of conscience should pass
current (I say not amongst the Wolves and Lions, but even amongst the Sheep of
Christ themselves) yet liberavl animam meam, I have not hid within my breast my
souls belief: And although sleeping on the bed either of the pleasures or
profits of sin^e thou think thy conscience bound to smite at him that dares
to waken thee? Yet in the midst of all these civil and spiritual Wars (I
hope we shall agree in these particulars.)

First, how ever the proud (upon the advantage of an higher earth or ground)
or' clooke the poor and cry out Schismatickes. Heretics, etc. shall
blasphemers and seducers escape unpunished? etc. Yet there is a sorer punishment
in the Gospel for despising of Christ then Moses, even when the despiser of
M^ses was put to death without mercy, Heb. 10. 28, 29. He that believes not
shall be damned, Mark 16. 16.

Secondly, what ever Worship, Ministry, Ministration, the best and purest are
practiced without faith and true persuasion that they are the true institutions
of God, they are sin, sinful worships, Ministries, etc. And however in Civil
things we may be servants unto men, yet in Divine and Spiritual things the
poorest pesant must disdain the service of the highest Prince: Be ye not the
servants of men, 1 Cor. 14.

Thirdly, without search and trial no man attaines this faith and right
persuasion, 1 These. 5. Try all things.

In vain have English Parliaments permitted English Bibles in the poorest
English houses, and the simplest man or woman to search the Scriptures, if yet
against their souls persuasion from the Scripture, they should be forced (as
if they lived in Spain or Rome it self without the sight of a Bible) to
believe as the Church believes.

Fourthly, having tried, we must hold fast, 1 Thessal. 5. upon the loss of a
Crown, Revel. 13. we must not let go for all the ^lea bitings of the present
afflictions, etc. having bought Truth dear, we must not ^ell it cheap, not
the least grain of it for the whole World, no not for the saving of Souls,
though our own most precious; least of all for the bitter sweetning of a
little vanishing pleasure.

For a little puff of credit and reputation from the changeable breath of
uncertain sons of men.

For the broken bags of Riches on Eagles wings: For a dream of these, any or
all of these which on our deathbed vanish and leave tormenting stings behind
them: Oh how much better is it from the love of Truth, from the love of the
Father of lights, from whence it comes, from the love of the Son of God, who
is the way and the Truth, to say as he, John 18. 37. For this end was I borne,
and for this end came I into the World that I might be are witness to the
Truth.

A Table of the principal Contents of the Book.
TRuth and Peace their rare and seldom meeting. Page 15 2 Great complaints of
Peace. 16 Persecutors seldom plead Christ but Moses for their Author. 17
Strife Christian and unchristian. ibid A threefold doleful cry. ibid. The
wonderful providence of God in the writing of the argument^s against
persecution. 18 A definition of persecution discussed. 19 Conscience will not
be restrained from its own worship, nor constrained to another. 20 A chaste
soul in Gods worship, compared to a chaste wife. ibid. Gods people have erred
stom the very fundamentalls of visible worship. ibid 4 Sorts of spiritual
foundations in the New Testament. 21 The 6 fundamentalls of the Christian
Religion. ibid. The coming out of Babel not Iocall, but mystical. ibid. The
great ignorance of Gods people concerning the nature of a true Church. ibid.
Common Prayer written against by the New English Ministers. 23 Gods people have
worshipped God with false worships. ibid. God is pleased sometimes to convey
good unto his people beyond a promise. ibid. A notable speech of King James to
a great Nonconformist turned persecutor. 24 Civil peace discussed. ibid. The
difference between Spiritual and civil state. 25 Six cases wherein Gods
people have been usually accounted arrogant, and peace breakers, but most
unjustly 26 The true causes of breach and disturbance of civil peace. 29 A
preposterous way of suppressing errors. 30 Persecutors must needs oppress
both erroneous and true consciences. ibid. All persecutors of Christ profess
not to persecute him. ibid. What is meant by the Heretic. Tit. 3. Page 33 The
word Heretic generally mistaken. 34 Corporal killing in the Law, typing out
Spiritual killing in the Gospel. 36 The carriage of a Soul sensible of mercy,
toward others in their blindness, etc. 38 The difference between the Church,
and the World wherein it is, in all places. 38 The Church and civil State
confusedly made all one. 39 The most peaceable accused for peace-breaking. 40 A
large Examination of what is meant by the Tares, and letting of them alone.
ibid. Satan's subtletic about the opening of Scripture. 41 Two sorts of
Hypocrites, 44 The Lord Jesus the great Teacher by Parables, and the only
Expounder of them. 44 Preaching for conversion is properly out of the Church.
45 The tares proved properly to signify Antichristians. ibid. Gods Kingdom on
Earth the visible Church. 46 The difference between the Wheat and the Tares, as
also between these Tares and all others. 46 A civil Magistracy from the
beginning of the world. 47 The Tares are to be tolerated the longest of all
sinners. 48 The danger of infection by permitting of the Tares, assoyled. ibid.
The civil Magistrate not so particularly spoken to in the New Testament as
Fathers, Masters, etc. and why. 50 A twofold state of Christianity;
Persecuted under the Roman Emperors, and Apostated under the Roman Popes.
ibid. 3 Particulars contained in that prohibition of Christ Jesus concerning
the Tares, Let them alone, Mat. 13. 51 Accompanying with Idolaters, 1 Cor. 5.
discussed. 52 Civil Magistrates never invested by Christ Jesus with the power
and title of Defenders of the Faith. 54 Gods people ever earnest with God for
an Arm of Flesh. 55 The (...) punishment of the blind Pharisees in 4 respects.
ibid. The point of seducing, infecting, or Soul killing, examined. 57 Strange
consusions in punishments. 59 The blood of Souls, Acts 20. lies upon such as
profess the Ministry: the blood of Bodies only upon the State. ibid. ^surpers
and true Heirs of Christ Jesus. Page 60 The Civil Magistrate bound to
preserve the bo^^s of their subjects, and not to destroy them for conscience
sake. 61 The fire from heaven, Rev. 13. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. examined. 62 The
original of the Christian name, Acts 11. 63 A Civil sword in Religion makes a
Nation of hypocrites, Isa. 10 64 A difference of the true and false Christ and
Christians. 65 The nature of the worship of unbeleeving and natural persons.
ibid. Antoninus Pius his famous act concerning Religion. 66 Isa. 24. Mic. 4. 3.
concerning Christ's visible Kingdom discussed. ibid. Acts 20 29. The
suppressing of Spiritual wolves discussed. 67 It is in vain to decline the
name of the head of the Church, and yet to practice the headship. 68 Titus 1.
9. 10 discussed. 69 Unmerciful and bloody doctrine. 70 The Spiritual weapons,
2 Cor. 10. 4. discussed. ibid. Civil weapons most improper in Spiritual
causes. 71 The Spiritual artillery, Ephesians. 6. applied. 72 Romans 13. concerning
Civil Rulers power in Spiritual causes, largely examined. 73 Paul's appeal to
Caesar examined. 77 And cleared by 5 arguments. ibid. 4 Sorts of swords. 79
What is to be understood by evil, Romans 13. 4. 81 Though evil be always
evil, yet the permission of it may sometimes be good. 83 2 Sorts of commands
both from Moses and Christ. 84 The permission of diverce in Israel, Mat. 19.
17, 18. ibid. Usury in the Civil state lawfully permitted. 85 Seducing
teachers, either Pagan, Jewish, Turkish or Antichristian, way yet be obedient
subjects to the Civil Laws. 86 Scandalous livers against the Civil state. 87
Toleration of Jesabel and Balaam, Rev. 2 14. 20. examined. 88 The Christian
world has swallowed up Christianity. 89 Christ Jesus the deepest politician
that ever was, yet commands be a toleration of Antichristians. 91 The Princes
of the world seldom take part with Christ Jesus. 93 Buchanans items to King
James. ibid. King James his sayings against persecution. ibid. King Steven of
Poland his sayings against persecution. Page 93 Forcing of conscience a soul
rape. 94 Persecution for conscience has been the launcet which has let blood
the Nations. All Spiritual whores are bloody ibid. Poligamie or the many wives
of the Fathers. ibid. David advancing of Gods worship against order. 95
Constantine and the good Emperors confessed to have done more hurt to the Name
and Crown of Christ then the bloody Noroes did. ibid. The language of
persecuters. 96 Christ's Li^^ies may flourish in the Church, notwithstanding the
weeds in the world permitted. 97 Queen Elizabeth and King James their
persecuting for cause of Religion examined. ibid. Queen Elizabeth confessed by
Mr. Cotton to have almost fired the world in civil combustions. 98 The Wars
between the Papists and the Protestants. ibid. The Wars and success of the
Waldensians against three Popes. 99 Gods people victorious ^ver comers, and
with what weapons. ibid. The Christian Church does not persecute, but is
persecuted. ibid. The nature of excommunication. 100 The opinion of ancient
Writers examined concerning the doctrine of persecution. 101 Constraint upon
conscience in Old and New England. ibid. The Indians of New England permitted
in their worshipping of devils, 102 In 2 cases a false Religion will not hurt.
103 The absolute sufficiency of the Sword of the Spirit. 104 A National
Church not instituted by Christ. ibid. Man has no power to make Laws, to
bind conscience. 105 Hearing of the word in a Church estate a part of Gods
worship. 107 Papists plea for toleration of conscience. ibid. Protestant
partiality in the cause of persecution. 108 Pills to purge out the bitter
humor of persecution. ibid. Superstition and persecution have had many votes
and suffrages from Gods own people. 109 Soul-killing discussed. ibid. Phineas
his act discussed. 111 Eliah his slaughters examined. ibid Dangerous
consequences flowing from the civil Magistrates power in Spiritual cases. 114
The world turned upside down. Page 114 The wonderful answer of the Ministers
of New England to the Ministers of Old. ibid. Lamentable differences even
amongst them that fear God. 115 The doctrine of persecution ever drives the
most godly out of the world 116 A Model of Church and Civil power composed by
Mr. Cotton, and the Ministers of New England, and sent to Salem, (as a further
confirmation of the bloody doctrine of persecution for cause of conscience)
examined and answered. 118 Christ's power in the Church confessed to be above all
Magistrates in Spiritual things. 119 Isa. 49. 23. lamentably wrested. ibid.
The civil Commonweal, and the Spiritual Commonweal the Church not
inconsistent, though independent the one on the other. 120 Christ ordinances
put upon a whole city or Nation may civilize them, and moralize, but not
Christianize before repentance first wrought. 121 Mr. Cottons and the New
English Ministers confession that the Magistrate has neither Civil nor
Spiritual power in Soul matters. 122 The Magistrates and the Church (by Mr.
Cottons grounds) in one and the same cause made the Judges onthe Bench, and
delinquents at the Bar. 123 A demonstrative illustration that the Magistrate
cannot have power over the Church in Spiritual or Church causes. 124 The true
way of the God of Peace in differences between the Church and the Magistrate.
125. The terms Godliness and Honesty explained, 1 Timothy 2. x. and honesty
proved not to signify in that place the righteousness of the second Table. 127
The forcing of men to Gods worship, the greatest breach of civil peace. 129
The Roman Caesar's of Christ's time described. ibid. It pleased not the Lord
Jesus in the institution of the Christian Church to appoint and raise up any
Civil Governors to take care of his worship. 130 The true custodes utriusque
Tabulae, and keepers of the Ordinances and worship of Jesus Christ. ibid. The
Kings of Egypt, Moah, Philistia, Assyria, Ni^^vch, were not charged with the
worship of God, as the Kings of Judah were. 131 Masters of families not charged
under the Gospel to force all the consci^uces of their families to worship. 132
Gods people have then shined brightest in Godliness, when they have enjoyed
least quietness. page 134. Few Magistrates, few Men, spiritually good; yet
diverse sorts of commendable Goodness beside spiritual. ibid. Civil power
originally and fundamentally in the People. Mr. Cotton and the New English give
the power of Christ into the hands of the Commonweal. 137 Laws concerning
Religion, of two sorts. 138 The very Indians abhor to disturb any Conscience
at Worship. 139 Canons and constitutions pretended Civil, but indeed
Ecclesiastical. ibid. A threesold guilt lying upon Civil powers, commanding
the Subjects Soul in Worship. 143 Persons may with less sin be forced to
marry whom they cannot love, then to worship where they cannot believe. ibid.
As the cause, so the weapons of the Beast and the La^^ be are infinitely
different. 146 A^taxerxes his Dicree examined. 147 The sum of the Examples of
the Gentile Kings decrees concerning Gods worship in Scripture. 149 The
Doctrine of putting to death Blasphemers of Christ, cuts off the hopes of the
Jews partaking in his blood. 18^ The direful effects of fighting for
Conscience. 151 Error is confident as well as Truth. 152 Spiritual prisons.
153 Some Consciences not so easily healed and cured as men imagine. 154
Persecuters dispute with Heretics, as a tyrann call Cat with the poor Mouse:
And with a true Witness, as a roaring Lion with an innocent Lamb in his paw.
155 Persecuters endure not tho name of Persecuters. 156 Psalm 101 concerning
cutting off the wicked, examined. 158 No difference of Lands and Countries,
since Christ Jesus his coming. ib. The New English separate in America, but
not in Europe. 159 Christ Jesus forbidding his followers to permit Leaven in
the Church, does not forbid to permit Leaven in the World. 160 The Wall ( Cant.
8. 9.) discussed. 161 Every Religion commands its professors to hear only its
own Priests or Ministers. 162 Jonah his preaching to the Ninevites discussed.
162 ^^aring of the Word discussed. ibid. Eglon his rising up to Ehuds message,
discussed. ibid. A twofold Ministry of Christ: First, Apostolical, properly
converting, Secondly, Feeding or Pastoral. page 162 The New English forcing
the people to Church, and yet not to Religion (as they say) forcing them to be
of no Religion all their days 163 The Civil State can no more lawfully
compel the Consciences of men to Church to hear the Word, then to receive the
Sacraments. 164 No president in the word, of any people converting and
baptizing themselves. 166 True conversion to visible Christianity, is not only
from sins against the second Table, but from false Worships also. ibid. The
Commission, Mat. 28 discussed. 167 The Civil Magistrate not be trusted with
that Commission. ibid. Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 1^. a figure of Christ Jesus in his
Church, not of the Civil Magistrate in the State. 168 The maintenance of the
Ministry, Gal. 6. 6. examined. ibid. Christ Jesus never appointed a
maintenance of the Ministry from the i^penitent and unbelieving. 169 They that
compel men to hear, compel them also to pay for their hearing and
conversion. ibid. Luc. 14. Compel them to come in, examined. ibid. Natural
men can neither truly worship nor maintain it. 170 The National Church of the
Jews might well be forced to a settled maintenance: but not so the Christian
Church. 171 The maintenance which Christ has appointed his Ministry in the
Church. 172 The Universities of Europe causes of universal sins and plagues:
yet Schools are honorable for tongues and Arts. 173 The true Church is
Christ's School, and Believers his Scholars. ibid. Mr. Ainsworth excellent in
the Tongues yet no University man. 174 K. Henry the 8. set down in the Popes
chair in England. 175 Apocrypha, Homilies, and Common Prayer precious to our
forefathers. ib. Reformation proved fallible. 176 The president of the Kings of
Israel and Judah largely examined. 178 The Persian Kings example make strongly
against the doctrine of Persecution. 179 1. The difference of the hand of
Canaan from all lands and countries, in 7 particulars. ibid. 2. The difference
of the people of Israel from all other peoples, in 7 particulars. 183
Wonderful turnings of Religion in England in twelve years revolution. Page
185 The Pope not unlike to recover his Monarchy over Europe, before his
dow^fall. ibid. Israel Gods only Church might well renew that National
Covenant and ceremonial worship, which other Nations cannot do. 187 ^ The
difference of the Kings and Governors of Israel from all Kings and Governors
of the world, in 4 particulars. 188 5 Demonstrative arguments proving the
unsoundnesse of the maxim, viz. The Church and Commonweal are li^e Hypocrates
twins. 189 Asacrilegious prostitution of the name Christian. 192 David
immediately inspired by God in his ordering of Church affairs. 193 Solomon's
deposing of Ab^a^har, 1 Kings 2. 26, 27. discussed. 194 The liberties of
Christ's Churches in the choice of her officers. 195 A civil influence
dangerous to the State liberties. ibid. Jehosaphats fast examined. ibid. God
will not wrong Caesar, and Caesar should not wrong God. 196 The famous acts of
Josiah examined. ibid. Magistracy in general from God, the particular forms
from the people. ibid. ^ Israel confirmed in a National Covenant by
revelations, signs and miracles, but not so any other Land. ibid. Kings and
Nations often plant and often pluck up Religions. 197 A National Church ever
subject to turn and return. ibid. A woman, Papissa, or head of the Church.
ibid. The Rapists nearer to the truth, concerning the governor of the Church,
then most Protestants. 198 The Kingly power of the Lord Jesus troubles all the
Kings and Rulers of the world. ibid. A twofold exaltation of Christ. ibid. A
monarchical and Ministerial power of Christ. 199 3 Great competitours for the
Ministerial power of Christ. ibid. The Pope pretends to the Ministerial
power of Christ, yet upon the point chalengeth the Monarchical also. ibid. 3
Great factions in England striving for the Arm of Flesh. 200 The Churches of
the separation ought in humanity, and subjects liberty, not to be oppressed,
but at least permitted. 201 7 Reasons proving that the Kings of Israel and
Judah can have no other but a Spiritual Antitype. 202 Christianity ^^des not
to the nature of a Civil Commonweal; nor does want of Christianity diminish
it. page 203 Most strange, yet most true consequences from the Civil
Magistrates being the Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Judah. ibid. If no
Religion but what the Commonweal approve; then no Christ, no God, but at the
pleasure of the World. 204 The true Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
ibid. 4. The difference of Isreal's Statutes and Laws from all others in 3
particulars. ibid. 5. The difference of Isreal's Punishments and Rewards from
all others. 205 Temporal prosperity most proper to the National state of the
Jew. ibid. The Excommunication in Israel. 206 The corporal stoning in the Law
typed out spiritual stoning in the Gospel. ibid. The wars of Israel typical
and unparalleld, but by the Spiritual wars of Spiritual Israel. ibid. The
famous typical captivity of the Jews. 207 Their wonderful victories. 208
The mystical Army of white troopers. 209 Whether the Civil state of Israel
was presidentiall. ibid. Great unfaithfulness in Magistrates to cast the
burden of judging and establishing Christianity upon the Commonweal. 210
Thousands of lawful Civil Magistrates, who never hear of Jesus Christ. 211
Nero and the persecuting Emperors not so injurious to Christianity, as
Constantine and others, who assumed a power in Spiritual things ibid. They who
force the conscience of others, cry out of persecution, when their own are
forced. 212 Constantine and others wanted not so much affection, as information
of judgment. ibid. Civil Authority giving and lending their Horns to
Bishops dangerous to Christ's truth. ibid. The Spiritual power of Christ Jesus,
compared in Scripture to the incomparable horn of the Rhinocerot. 213 The
nursing Fathers and Mothers, Isa. 49. ibid. The civil Magistrate owes 3 things
to the true Church of Christ. 214 The civil Magistrate owes ^ things to false
Worshippers. 214 The rise of High Commissions. 215 Pious Magistrates and
Ministers consciences are persuaded for that, which other ^as plous Magistrates
and Ministers consciences condemn. Page 215 An apt similitude discussed
concerning the Civil Magistrate. 216 A grievous charge against the Christian
Church and the King of it. 222 A strange Law in New England formerly against
excommunicate persons. ibid. A dangerous doctrine against all Civil
Magistrates. 223 Original sin charged to hurt the Civil state. ibid. They who
give the Magistrate more then his duo, are apt to disreabe him of what is his.
224 A strange double picture. 226 The great privileges of the true Church of
Christ. 227 2 Similitudes illustrating the true power of the Magistrate. ibid.
A marvelous challenge of more power under the Christian, then under the Heathen
Magistrate. 229 Civil Magistrates, derivatives from the fountains or bodies of
people. 230 A believing Magistrate no more a Magistrate then an unbeleeving.
ibid. The excellency of Christianity in all callings. ibid. The Magistrate
like a Pilot in the Ship of the Commonweal. 231 The terms Heathen and
Christian Magistrates. ibid. The unjust and partial liberty to some
consciences and bondage unto all others. 232 The commission Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
not proper to Pastors and teachers least of all to the Civil Magistrate. 233
Unto whom now belongs the care of all the Churches, etc. ibid. Acts 15.
commonly misapplied 234 The promise of Christ's presence Mat. 18. distinct from
that Mat. 28. 235 Church administrations firstly charged upon the Ministers
thereof. 236 Queen Elizabeth's Bishops truer to their principles then many of a
better spirit and profession. 237. Mr. Barrowes profession concerning Queen
Elizabeth. ibid The inventions of men swarving from the true essentialls of
civil and Spiritual Commonweales. 239 A great question viz. whether only
Church members, that is godly persons in a particular Church estate, be only
eligible into the Magistracy. ib. The world being divided into 30 parts, 25
never heard of Christ. 240 Lawful civil states where Churches of Christ are
not. ibid. Few Christians Wise and noble and qualified for affairs of State.
ibid.
SCRIPTURES AND REASONS written long since by a Witness of lesus Christ, close
Prisoner in Newgate, against Persecution in cause of Conscience; and sent some
while since to Mr. Cotton, by a Friend who thus wrote:
In the multitude of Councillors there is safety: It is therefore humbly
desired to be instructed in this point: viz.
Whether Persecution for cause of Conscience, be not against the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ the King of Kings. The Scriptures and Reasons are these.
BEcause Christ commands that the Tares and Wheat (which Truth, and those
that walk in Lies) should be let alone in the World, and not plucked up until
the Harvest, which is the end of the World, Matthew. 13. 30. 38. etc.

The same commands Matthew. 15. 14. that they that are Blind (as Religion, and
are offended with him for teaching true Religion) should be let alone,
referring their punishment unto their falling into the Ditch.

Again, Luke 9. 54, 55. he reproved his Disciples who would have Fire come
down from Heaven and devour those Samaritanes who would not receive Him, in
these words: Ye know not of what Spirit ye are, the son of Man is not come to
destroy Men's lives, but to save them.

Paul the Apostle of our Lord teaches, 2 Timothy 24. 2. That the servant strive,
but must be gentle toward all Men, suffering the Evil Men, instructing them
with meekness that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give
them repentanco, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and come to amendment out
of that snare of the devil, etc.

According to these blessed Commandments, the holy Prophets foretold, that
when the Law of Moses (concerning Worship) should cease, and Christ's Kingdom
be established, Esa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3, 4 They shall break their Swords into
Mathookes, and their Spears into Sithes. And Esa. 11. 9. Then shall none hurt
or destroy in all the Mountain of my Holiness, etc. And when he came, the
same he taught and practiced, as before: so did his Disciples after him, for
the Weapons of his Warfare are not carnal (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 10 4.

But he charge straightly that his Disciples should be so far from persecuting
those that would not be of their Religion, that when they were persecuted they
should pray (Matthew. 5.) when they were cursed they should bless, etc.

And the Reason seems to be, because they who now are Tares, may hereafter
become Wheat; they who are now blind, may hereafter see; they that now resist
him, may hereafter receive him; they that are now in the devils snare, in
adversenesse to the Truth, may hereafter come to repentance; they that are now
blasphemers and persecutors (as Paul was) may in time become faithful as he;
they that are now idolators as the Corinths once were (1 Cor. 6. 9.) may
hereafter become true worshippers as they; they that are now no people of God,
nor under mercy (as the Saints sometimes were, 1 Pet. 2. 20.) may hereafter
become the people of God, and obtain mercy, as they.

Some come not till the 11. hour, Matthew. 20. 6. if those that come not till
the last hour should be destroyed, because they come not at the first, then
should they never come but be prevented.

All which premises are in all humility referred to your godly wise
consideration.

persecution for cause of conscience is against the profession and practice of
famous Princes.

First, you may please to consider the speech of King James, in his Majesty's
Speech at Parliament, 1609. He says, it is a sure Rule in divinity, that God
never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed.

And in his Highness Apology, page 4. speaking of such Papists that took the
Oath, thus:

I gave good proof that I intended no persecution against them for conscience
cause, but only desired to be secured for civil obedience, which for
conscience cause they are bound to perform.

And page 60. speaking of Blackwell (the Archpriest) his Majesty says, It was
never my intention to lay any thing to the said Arch-Priests charge (as I have
never done to any) for cause of conscience. And in his Highness Exposition on
Revel. 20. printed 1568. and after 1603. his Majesty writes thus: Sixthly, the
compassing of the Saints and the besieging of the beloved City, declares unto
us a certain note of a false Church, to be Persecution, for they come to seek
the faithful, the faithful are them that are sought: the wicked are the
besiegers, the faithful are the besieged.

Secondly, the saying of Stephen King of Poland: I am King of Men, not of
Consciences, a Commander of Bodies, not of Souls.

Thirdly, the King of Bohemia has thus written:

And notwithstanding the success of the later times (wherein sundry opinions
have been hatched about the subject of Religion) may make one clearly discern
with his eye, and as it were to touch with his Finger, that according to the
verity of Holy Scriptures, and a Maxim heretofore told and maintained, by the
ancient Doctors of the Church; That men's consciences ought in no sort to be
violated, urged, or constrained; and whenever men have attempted any thing by
this violent course, whether openly or by secret means, the issue has been
pernicious, and the cause of great and wonderful Innovations in the
principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and Countries of all Christendom.

And further his Majesty says: So that once more we do profess before God
and the whole World, that from this time forward we are firmly resolved not to
persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or molested, any person
whosoever for matter of Religion, no not they that profess themselves to be of
the Romish Church, neither to trouble or disturb them in the exercise of their
Religion, so they live conformable to the Laws of the States, etc.

And for the practice of this, where is persecution for cause of conscience
except in England and where Popery reigns, and there neither in all places, as
appears by France, Poland, and other places.

Nay, it is not practiced amongst the Heathen that acknowledge not the true
God, as the Turk, Persian, and others.

Thirdly, 3. Reas.
because persecution for cause of conscience is condemned by the ancient and
later Writers, yea and Papists themselves.

Hilarie against Auxentius says thus: The Christian Church does not persecute,
but is persecuted. And lamentable it is to see the great folly of these times,
and to sigh at the foolish opinion of this world, in that men think by humane
aid to help God, and with worldly pomp and power to undertake to defend the
Christian Church. I ask you Bishops, what help used the Apostles in the
publishing of the Gospel? with the aid of what power did they preach Christ,
and converted the Heathen from their idolatry to God? When they were in
prisons, and lay in chains, did they praise and give thanks to God for any
dignities, graces, and favors received from the Court? Or do you think that
Paul went about with Regal Mandates, or Kingly authority, to gather and
establish the Church of Christ? sought he protection from Nero, Vespasian?

The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own maintenance, travailing
by land and water from Town to City, to preach Christ: yea the more they were
forbidden, the more they taught and preached Christ. But now alas, humane help
must assist and protect the Faith, and give the same countenance to and by
vain and worldly honors. Do men seek to defend the Church of Christ? as if
he by his power were unable to perform it.

The same against the Arrians.

The Church now, which formerly by enduring misery and imprisonment was known
to be a true Church, does now terrify others by imprisonment, banishment, and
misery, and boasts that she is highly esteemed of the world, when as the true
Church cannot but be hated of the same.

Tertull. ad Scapulam: It agrees both with humane reason, and natural equity,
that every man worship God uncompelled, and believe what he will; for it
neither hurts nor profits any one another man's Religion and Belief:
Neither beseems it any Religion to compel another to be of their Religion,
which willingly and freely should be embraced, and not by constraint: for as
much as the offerings were required of those that freely and with good will
offered, and not from the contrary.

Ierom. in proaem. lib. 4. in Ieremiam. Heresy must be cut off with the Sword
of the Spirit: let us strike through with the Arrows of the Spirit all Sons
and Disciples of misled Heretics, that is, with Testimonies of holy
Scriptures. The slaughter of Heretics is by the word of God.

Brentius upon 1 Cor. 3. No man has power to make or give Laws to Christians,
whereby to bind their consciences; for willingly, freely, and uncompelled,
with a ready desire and cheerful mind, must those that come, run unto Christ.

Luther in his Book of the Civil Magistrate says; The Laws of the Civil
Magistrates government extends no further then over the body or goods, and to
that which is external: for over the soul God will not suffer any man to
rule: only he himself will rule there. Wherefore whosoever does undertake to
give Laws unto the Souls and Consciences of Men, he usurpeth that government
himself which appertains unto God, etc.

Therefore upon 1 Kings 5. In the building of the Temple there was no sound of
Iron heard, to signify that Christ will have in his Church a free and a
willing People, not compelled and constrained by Laws and Statutes.

Again he says upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church, which is
defended by the Secular Arm or humane Power, but the false and feigned Church,
which although it carries the Name of a Church yet it den^es the power thereof.

And upon Psalm. 17. he says: For the true Church of Christ knows not
Brachium saeculare, which the Bishops now adays, chiefly use.

Again, in Postil. Dom. 1. post Epiphan. he says: Let not Christians be
commanded, but exhorted: for, He that willingly will not do that, whereunto he
is friendly exhorted, he is no Christian: wherefore they that do compel those
that are not willing, show thereby that they are not Christian Preachers, but
Worldly Beadles.

Again, upon 1 Pet. 3. he says: If the Civil Magistrate shall command me to
believe thus and thus: I should answer him after this manner: Lord, or Sir,
Look you to your Civil or Worldly Government. Your Power extends not so far
as to command any thing in Gods Kingdom: Therefore herein I may not hear you.
For if you cannot bear it, that any should usurp Authority where you have to
Command, how do you think that God should suffer you to thrust him from his
Seat, and to seat your self therein?

Lastly, the Papists, the Inventors of Persecution, in a wicked Book of theirs
set forth in K. James his Reign, thus:

Moreover, the Means which Almighty God appointed his Officers to use in the
Conversion of Kingdoms and Nations, and People, was Humility, Patience,
Charity; saying, Behold I send you as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10.
16. He did not say, Behold I send you as Wolves among Sheep, to kill,
imprison, spoil and devour those unto whom they were sent.

Again verse. 7. he says: They to whom I send you, will deliver you up into
Counsels, and in their Synagogues they will scourge you; and to Presidents and
to Kings shall you be led for my sake. He does not say: You whom I send, shall
deliver the people (whom you ought to convert) unto Counsels, and put them in
Prisons, and lead them to Presidents, and Tribunal Seats, and make their
Religion Felony and Treason.

Again he says, verse 32 When ye enter into an House, salute it, saying, Peace
be unto this House: he does not say, You shall send Pursevants to ransack or
spoil his House.

Again he said, John 10. The good Pastor gives his life for his Sheep, the
Thief comes not but to steal, kill and destroy. He does not say, The Thief
gives his life for his Sheep, and the Good Pastor comes not but to steal,
kill and destroy.

So that we holding our peace, our Adversaries themselves speak for us, or
rather for the Truth.

To answer some maine Objections. And first, that it is no praejudice to the
Common wealth, if Liberty of Conscience were suffered to such as do fear God
indeed, as is or will be manifest in such men's lives and conversations.

Abraham abode among the Canaanites a long time, yet contrary to them in
Religion, Genesis 13. 7. and 16. 13. Again he so journed in Gerar, and K.
Abimelech gave him leave to abide in his Land, Genesis 20. 21. 23. 24.

Isaac also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 26.

Jacob lived 20 years in one House with his Uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Gen, 31.

The people of Israel were about 430 years in that infamous land of Egypt, and
afterward 70 years in Babylon, all which time they differed in Religion from
the States, Exodus 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.

Come to the time of Christ, where Israel was under the Romans, where lived
diverse Sects of Religion, as Her^dians, Scribes and Pharisees, Saduces and
Libertines, Thud^ans and Samaritanes, beside the Common Religion of the Jews,
Christ and his Apostles. All which differed from the Common Religion of the
State, which was like the Worship of Diana, which almost the whole world then
worshipped, Acts 19. 20.

All these lived under the Government of Caesar, being nothing hurtful unto
the Commonwealth, giving unto Caesar that which was his. And for their
Religion and Consciences toward God, he left them to themselves, as having no
Dominion over their Souls and Consciences. And when the Enemies of the Truth
raised up any Tumults^ the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased
them, Acts 18. 14. and 19. 35.

THE ANSWER OF Mr. JOHN COTTON of Boston in New England, To the aforesaid
ARGUMENTS against Persecution for Cause of Consciene.
Professedly mainteining Persecution for Cause of Conscience.
THe Question which you put, is, Whether Persecution for cause of Conscience,
be not against the Doctrine of Jesus Christ the King of Kings.

Now by Persecution for Cause of Conscience, I conceive you mean, either for
professing some point of Doctrine which you believe in Conscience to be the
Truth, or for practicing some Work which in Conscience you believe to be a
Religious 'Duty.

Now in Points of Doctrine some are fundamental, without right belief whereof
a Man cannot be saved: Others are circumstantiall or less principal, wherein
Men may differ in judgment, without prejudice of salvation on either part.

In like sort, in Points of Practice, some concern the waightier Duties of the
Law, as, What God we worship, and with what kind of Worship; whether such, as
if it be Right, fellowship with God is held; if Corrupt, fellowship with Him is
lost.

Again, in Points of Doctrine and Worship less Principal: either they are
held forth in a meek and peaceable way, though the Things be Erroneous or
unlawful ^ Or they are held forth with such Arrogance and Impetuousnesse, as
tends and reaches (even of it self) to the disturbance of Civil Peace.

Finally, let me add this one distinction more: When we are persecuted for
Conscience sake, It is either for Conscience rightly informed, or for erroneous
and blind Conscience.

These things premised, I would lay down mine Answer to the Question in
certain Conclusions.

First, it is not lawful to persecute any for Conscience sake Rightly
informed; persecuting such, Christ himself is persecuted in them, Acts 9. 4.

Secondly, for an Erroneous and blind Conscience, (even in fundamental and
weighty Points) It is not lawful to persecute any, till after Admonition once
or twice ^ and so the Apostle directs, 7 it. 3. 10. and gives the Reason,
that in fundamental and principal points of Doctrine or Worship, the Word of
God in such things is so clear, that he cannot but be convinced in
Conscience of the dangerous Error of his way, after once or twice Admonition,
wisely and faithfully dispensed. And then if any one persist, it is not out of
Conscience, but against his Conscience, at the Apostle says verse. 11. He is
subverted and sins, being condemned of Himself, that is, of his own
Conscience. So that if such a Man after such Admonition shall still persist in
the Error of his way, and be therefore punished; He is not persecuted for
Cause of Conscience, but for sinning against his Own Conscience.

moment, whether Points of Doctrine or Worship, If a man hold them forth in a
Spirit of Christian Meekness and Love (though with Zeal and Constancy) he is
not to be persecuted, but tolerated, till God may be pleased to manifest his
Truth to him, Phil. 3. 17. Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Error or false way, with a boisterous and arrogant spirit, to the disturbance
of Civil peace, he may justly be punished according to the quality and
measure of the disturbance caused by him.

Now let us consider of your Reasons or Objections to the contrary.

Your first head of Objections is taken from the Scripture. Object. 1. Because
Christ commands to let alone the Tares and Wheat to grow together unto the
Harvest, Mat. 13. 30. 38.

Answ. Tares are not Briars and Thorns, but partly Hypocrites, like unto the
Godly, but indeed Carnal, as the Tares are like to Wheat, but are not Wheat.
Or partly such Corrupt Doctrines or Practices as are indeed unsound, but yet
such as come very near the Truth, (as Tares do to the Wheat) and so near,
that Good men may be taken with them, and so the Persons in whom they grow,
cannot be rooted out, but good will be rooted up with them. And in such a case
Christ calls for Toleration, not for penal prosecution, according to the 3.
Conclusion.

Object. 2. In Math. 15. 14. Christ commands his Disciples to let the Blind
alone till they fall into the ditch; therefore he would have their punishment
deferred till their ^^all destruction.

Answ. He there speaks not to publi^^e officers, whether in Church or
Commonweal, but to his private Disciples, concerning the Pharisees, over whom
they had no power. And the Command he gives to let them alone, is spoken in
regard of troubling themselves or regarding the offense, which they took at
the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel: As who should say, Though they be
offended at this Saying of mine, yet do not you fear their Fear, nor be
troubled at their offense, which they take at my Doctrine, not out of sound
Judgment, but out of their Blindness. But this makes nothing to the Cause in
hand.

Ob. In Luke 9. 54. 55. Christ reproves his Disciples, who would have had fire
come down from Heaven to consume the Samaritanes, who refused to receive Him.

Obj. And Paul teaches Timothy, not to strive, but to be gentle toward All
men, suffering evil patiently.

Answ. Both these are Directions to Ministers of the Gospel how to deal (not
with obstinate offenders in the Church, that sin against Conscience, but)
either with Men without, as the Samaritanes were, and many unconverted
Christians in Crete, whom Titus (as an Evangelish) was to seek to convert: Or
at best with some Jews or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnal, yet were
not convinced of the error of their Way: And it is true, it became not the
Spirit of the Gospel to convert Aliens to the Faith of Christ (such as the
Samaritanes were) by Fire and Brimstone; nor to deal harshly in public
Ministry or private Conference with all such contrary minded men, as either
had not yet entered into Church Fellowship, or if they had, yet did hitherto
sin of Ignorance, not against Conscience.

But neither of both these Texts do hinder the Ministers of the Gospel to
proceed in a Church Way against Chruch-members, when they become Scandalous
offenders, either in Life or Doctrine: much less do they speak at all to
Civil Magistrates.

Ob. 5. From the prediction of the Prophets, who foretold that Carnal Weapons
should cease in the days of the Gospel, Isa. 2. 4. and 11. 9. Mic. 4. 3. 4.
And the Apostie professes, The weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, 2 Cor,
10. 4. And Christ is so far from persecuting those that would not be of his
Religion, that he charge them, when they are persecuted themselves, they
should pray, and when they are cursed they should bless The reason whereof
seems to be, that they who are now Persecuters and wicked persons, may become
true Disciples and Converts.

Answ. Those predictions in the Prophets do only show, First, with what kind
of Weapons he will subdue the Nations to the Obedience of the Faith of the
Gospel, not by Fire and Sword, and Weapons of War, but by the Power of his
Word and Spirit, which no man doubts of.

Secondly, those predictions of the Prophets show what the meek and peaceable
temper will be of all the true Converts to Christianity, not Lions or Leopards,
etc. not cruel oppressors, nor malignant opposers, or biters of one another.
But does not forbid them to drive ravenous Wolves from the sheepfold, and to
restrain them from devouring the Sheep of Christ.

And when Paul says, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal but
spiritual, he denies not civil weapons of Justice to the Civil Magistrate,
Romans 13. but only to Church officers. And yet the weapons of such officers he
acknowledges to be such, as though they be spiritual, yet are ready to take
vengeance of all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6. which has reference (amongst
other Ordinances) to the censure of the Church against scandalous offenders.

Christ commands his Disciples to bless them that curse them and persecute
them, he gives not therein a rule to public officers, whether in Church or
Commonweal, to suffer notorious sinners, either in life or doctrine, to pass
away with a blessing: But to private Christians to suffer persecution
patiently, yea and to pray for their persecutors.

Again, it is true, Christ would have his Disciples to be far from
persecuting (for that is a sinful oppression of Men for righteousness sake)
but that hinders not but that he would have them execute upon all disobedience
the judgment and vengeance required in the Word, 2 Cor. 10. 6. Romans 13. 4.

God become true Disciples and Converts, yet we may not do evil that good may
come thereof: And evil it would be to tolerate notorious evil doers, whether
seducing teachers, or scandalous livers. Christ had something against the Angel
of the Church of Pergamus for tolerating them that held the doctrine of Balaam,
and against the Church of Thiatira for tolerating Iesabel to teach and seduce,
Rev. 2. 14. 20.

Your second Head of Reasons is taken from the profession and practice of
famous Princes, King James, Stephen of Poland, King of Bohemia.

Whereunto a treble answer may briefly be returned.

First, we willingly acknowledge, that none is to be persecuted at all, no more
then they may be oppressed for righteousness sake.

Again, we acknowledge that none is to be punished for his conscience, though
misinformed, as has been said, unless his error be fundamental, or
seditiously and turbulently promoted, and that after due conviction of his
conscience, that it may appear he is not punished for his conscience, but for
sinning against his conscience.

Furthermore, we acknowledge none is to be constrained to believe or profess
the true Religion till he be convinced in judgment of the truth of it: but yet
restrained he may from blaspheming the truth, and from seducing any unto
pernicious errors.

2. We answer, what Princes profess or practice, is not a rule of conscience:
they many times tolerate that in point of State policy, which cannot justly be
tolerated in point of true Christianity.

Again, Princes many times tolerate offenders out of very necessity, when the
offenders are either too many, or too mighty for them to punish, in which
respect David tolerated Ioab and his murders, but against his will.

3. We answer further, that for those three Princes named by you, who tolerated
Religion, we can name you more and greater who have not tolerated Heretics
and Schismatickes, notwithstanding their pretense of conscience, and arrogating
the Crown of Martyrdom to their sufferings.

Constantine the Great at the request of the General Council of Nice,
banished Arrius with some of his fellows. Sozom. lib. 1. Eccles. Hist. cap.
19. 20. The same Constantine made a severe Law against the Donatists. And the
like proceedings against them were used by Valentinian, Gratian, and
Theodosius, as Augustine reports in Epist. 166. Only Julian the Apostata
granted liberty to Heretics as well as to Pagans, that he might by tolerating
all weeds to grow, choke the vitals of Christianity, which was also the
practice and sin of Valens the Arrian.

Queen Elizabeth, as famous for her government as any of the former, it is
well known what Laws she made and executed against Papists. Yea and King
James (one of your own witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against
Papists (as you say) for conscience sake, yet you are not ignorant how sharply
and severely he punished those whom the malignant world calls Puritanes, men
of more conscience and better faith then he tolerated.

I come now to your third and last argument, taken from the judgment of
ancient and later Writers, yea even of Papists themselves, who have condemned
persecution for conscience sake.

You begin with Hilary, whose testimony we might admit without any prejudice to
the truth: for it is true, the Christian Church does not persecute, but is
persecuted. But to excommunicate an Heretic, is not to persecute; that is, it
is not to punish an innocent, but a culpable and damnable person, and that not
for conscience, but for persisting in error against light of conscience,
whereof it has been convinced.

It is true also what he says, that neither the Apostles did, not may we
propagate Christian Religion by the Sword: but if Pagans cannot be won by the
Word, they are not to be compelled by the Sword. Nevertheless this hinders
not, but if they or any others should blaspheme the true God, and his true
Religion, they ought to be severely punished; and no less do they deserve, if
they seduce from the truth to damnable Heresy or Idolatry.

Your next Writer (which is Tertullian) speaks to the same purpose in the
place alleged by you. His intent is only to restrain Scapula the Roman
Governor of Africa from the persecution of Christians, for not offering
sacrifice to their gods: And for that end fetches an argument from the Law of
Natural Equity, not to compel any to any Religion, but to permit them either
to believe willingly, or not to believe at all. Which we acknowledge, and
accordingly permit the Indians to continue in their unbeleefe. Nevertheless it
will not therefore be lawful openly to tolerate the worship of devils or
Idols, or the seduction of any from the truth.

When Tertullian says, Another man's Religion neither hurts nor profits
any; it must be understood of private worship and Religion professed in
private: otherwise a false Religion professed by the Members of a Church, or by
such as have given their Names to Christ, will be the ruin and desolation of
the Church, as appears by the threats of Christ to the Churches of Asia,
Revel. 2.

Your next Author Hierom crosses not the truth, nor advantageth not your
cause: for we grant what he says, that Heresy must be cut off with the Sword
of the Spirit. But this hinders not, but that being so cut down, if the
Heretic still persist in his Heresy, to the seduction of others, he may be
cut off by the civil sword, to prevent the perdition of others. And that to
be Hieromes meaning appears by his note upon that of the Apostle, [A little
Leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe] therefore (says he) a spark as soon as it
appears, is to be extinguished, and the Leaven to be removed from the rest of
the dough, rotten pieces of flesh are to be cut off, and a scabbed beast is to
be driven from the (...) le^t the whole house, mass of dough, body and flock,
be set on fire with the spark, be sowred with the Leaven, be putrified with
the rotten flesh, perish by the scabbed beast.

Brentius (whom you next quote) speaks not to your Cause. We willingly grant
him and you, that Man has no power to make Laws, to bind Conscience. But this
hinders not, but that Men may see the Laws of God observed, which do bind
Conscience.

The like Answer may be returned to Luther, whom you next allege. First, that
the Government of the Civil Magistrate extends no further then over the
Bodies and Goods of their Subjects, not over their Souls: And therefore they
may not undertake to give Laws to the Souls and Consciences of Men.

Secondly, that the Church of Christ does not use the Arm of Secular Power to
compel men to the Faith, or profession of the Truth; for this is to be done by
Spiritual weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled.

But this hundredth not that Christians sinning against light of Faith and
Conscience, may justly be censured by the Church with Excommunication, and by
the Civil Sword also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdition of
their Souls.

As for the Testimony of the Popish Book, we weigh it not, as knowing
(whatsoever they speak for Toleration of Religion, where themselves are under
Hatches) when they come to sit at Stern, they judge and practice quite
contrary, as both their Writings and Judicial proceedings have testified to
the World these many years.

To shut up this Argument from Testimony of Writers. It is well known,
Augustine retracted this Opinion of yours, which in his younger times he had
held, but in after riper age reversed and refuted, as appears in the second
Book of his Retractations, chap. 5. and in his Epistles 48. 50. And in his 1.
Book against Parmenianus, cap. 7. he shows, that if the Donatists were
punished with death, they were justly punished. And in his 11 Tractate upon
John, They murder, says he, Souls, and themselves are afflicted in Body:
They put men to everlasting death, and yet they complain when themselves are
put to suffer temporal death.

Optatus in his 3. book, justifies Macharius, who had put some Heretics to
death; that he had done no more herein then what Moses, Phincas, and Elias had
done before him.

Bernard in his 66 Sermon in Cantica: Out of doubt (says he) it is better that
they should be restrained by the Sword of Him, who bears not the Sword in
vain, then that they should be suffered to draw many others into their Error.
For he is the Minister of God for Wrath to every evil doer.

Calvin's judgment is well known, who procured the death of Michael Servetus
for pertinacie in Heresy, and defended his fact by a Book written of that
Argument.

Beza also wrote a Book de Haereticis Morte plectendis, that Heretics are to
be punished with Death. Aretius likewise took the like course about the Death
of Valentinus Gentilis, and justified the Magistrates proceeding against him,
in an History written of that Argument.

Finally, you come to answer some maine Objections, as you call them, which yet
are but one, and that one objecteth nothing against what we hold. It is (say
you) no prejudice to the Commonwealth, if Liberty of Conscience were suffered
to such as fear God indeed, which you prove by the examples of the Patriarchs
and others.

But we readily grant you, Liberty of Conscience is to be granted to men that
fear God indeed, as knowing they will not persist in Heresy, or turbulent
Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience of the sinfulness thereof.

But the Question is, Whether an Heretic after once or twice Admonition (and
so after conviction) or any other scandalous and heinous offender, may be
tolerated, either in the Church without Excommunication, or in the
Commonwealth without such punishment as may preserve others from dangerous and
damnable infection.

Thus much I thought needful to be spoken, for avoiding the Grounds of your
Error.

I forbear adding Reasons to justify the Truth, because you may find that
done to your hand, in a Treatise sent to some of the Brethren late of Salem,
who doubted as you do.

The Lord Jesus lead you by a Spirit of Truth into all Truth, through Jesus
Christ.
A REPLY to the aforesaid ANSWER of Mr. Cotton.
In a CONFERENCE between TRVTH and PEACE.
CHAP. I.
Truth. IN what dark corner of the World ( sweet Peace) are we two met? How
has this present evil World banished Me from all the Coasts and Quarters of
it? and how has the Righteous God in judgment taken Thee from the Earth, Rev.
6. 4.


Peace. It Is lamentably true ( blessed Truth) the foundations of the World have
long been out of course: Truth and Peace rarely and seldom meet.
the Gates of Earth and Hell have conspired together to intercept our joyful
meeting and our holy kisses: With what a wearied, tired Wing have I flowne over
Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, Towns, to find out precious Truth?


Truth. The like enquiries in my flights and travells have I made for Peace,
and still am told, she has left the Earth, and fled to Heaven.


Peace. Dear Truth, What is the Earth but a dungeon of darkness, where Truth
is not?


Truth. And what is the Peace thereof but a fleeting dream, thine Ape and
Counterfeit?


Peace. O where is the Promise of the God of Heaven, that Righteousness and Peace
shall kiss each other?


Truth. Patience (sweet Peace) these Heavens and Earth are growing Old, and
shall be changed like a Garment, Psalm. 102. They shall melt away, and be burnt
up with all the Works that are therein; and the most high Eternal Creator,
shall gloriously create New Heavens and New Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. Our kisses then shall have their endless date of
pure and sweetest joys? till then both Thou and I must hope, and wait, and
bear the fury of the Dragons wrath, whose monstrous Lies and Furies shall
with himself be cast into the lake of Fire, the second death, Revel. 20.


Peace. Most precious Truth, thou know we are both pursued and laid for:
Mine heart is full of sighs, mine eyes with tears: Where can I better vent my
full oppressed bosom, then into thine, whose faithful lips may for these few
hours revive my drooping wandering spirits, and here begin to wipe Tears from
mine eyes, and the eyes of my dearest Children?


Truth. Sweet daughter of the God of Peace, begin; power out thy sorrows, vent
thy complaints: how joyful am I to improve these precious Minutes to revive
our Hearts, both thine and mine, and the hearts of all that love the Truth and
Peace, Zach. 8.


Peace. Dear Truth, I know thy birth, thy nature, thy delight. They that know
thee, will prize thee far above themselves and lives, and sell themselves to
buy thee. Well spoke that famous Elizabeth to her famous Attorney Sir Edward
Coke: Mr. Attorney, go on as thou have begun, and still plead, not pro Domina
Regina, but pro Domina Veritate.


Truth. It Is true, my Crown is high, my Scepter's strong to break down
strongest holds, to throw down highest Crowns of all that plead (though but in
thought) against me. Some few there are, but oh how few are valiant for the
Truth, and dare to plead my Cause, as my Witnesses in sackcloth, Revel. 11.
While all men's Tongues are bent like Bows to shoot out lying words against Me!


Peace. O how could I spend eternal days and endless dates at thy holy feet,
in listening to the precious Oracles of thy mouth! All the Words of thy mouth
are Truth, and there is no iniquity in them; Thy lips drop as the hony-combe.
But oh! since we must part anon, let us (as thou said) improve our Minutes,
and (according as thou promisedst) revive me with thy words, which are sweeter
then the honey, and the honey-combe.


CHAP. II.
Dear Truth, I have two sad Complaints:

First, a great complaints of Peace.
The most sober of thy Witnesses, that dare to plead thy Cause, how are they
charged to be mine Enemies, contentious, tarbulent, seditious?

Secondly, Thine Enemies, though they speak and rail against thee, though
they outragiously pursue, imprison, banish, kill thy faithful Witnesses, yet
how is all ve^illion'd over for Justice against the Heretics? Yea, if they
(...) and blow the (...) of devouring Wars, that leave neither Spiritual nor
Civil State, but burns up Branch and Root, yet how do all pretend an holy
War? He that kills, and he that is killed, they both cry out, It is for God,
and for their conscience.

It Is true, nor one nor other seldom dare to plead the mighty Prince Christ
Jesus for their Author, Persecutors seldom plead Christ, but Moses for their
Author.
yet both (both Protestant and Papist) pretend they have spoke with Moses and
the Prophets, who all, say they (before Christ came) allowed such holy
persecutions, holy Wars against the enemies of holy Church.

Truth. Dear Peace (to ease thy first complaint) it is true, thy dearest Sons,
most like their mother, Peace-keeping, Peacemaking Sons of God, have borne and
still must bear the blurs of troublers of Israel, and turners of the World
upside down. And it is true again, what Solomon once spoke: The beginning of
strife is as when one lets out Water, therefore (says he) leave off
contention before it be meddled with. This Caveat should keep the banks and
sluices firm and strong, that strife, like a breach of waters, break not in
upon the sons of men.

Yet strife must be distinguished: Strife distinguished.
It is necessary or unnecessary, godly or ungodly, Christian or unchristian,
etc.

It is unnecessary, 1. Ungodly strife.
unlawful, dishonorable, ungodly, unchristian, in most cases in the world,
for there is a possibility of keeping sweet Peace in most cases, and if it be
possible, it is the express command of God that Peace be kept, Romans 13.

Again, 2. Godly strife.
it is necessary, honorable, godly, etc. with civil and earthly weapons to
defend the innocent, and to rescue the oppressed from the violent paws and
jaws of oppressing persecuting Nimrods, Psalm. 73. Job 29.

It is as necessary, yea more honorable, godly, and Christian, to ^ight the
^ight of faith, with religious and spiritual Artillery, and to contend
earnestly for the faith of Jesus, once delivered to the Saints against all
opposers, and the gates of earth and hell, men or devils, yea against Paul
himself, or an Angel from heaven, if he bring any other faith or doctrine,
Jude verse. 4. Gal. 1. 8.


Peace. With the clashing of such Arms am I never wakened. A threefold
doleful cry. Christ's worship is his bed, Cant. 1. 16. False worship therefore
is a false bed.
Speak once again (dear Truth) to my second complaint of bloody persecution,
and devouring wars, marching under the colors of upright Justice, and holy
Zeal, etc.


Truth. Mine ears have long been filled with a threefold doleful Outcry.


First, of one hundred forty four thousand Virgins (Rev. 14) forced and
ravished by Emperors, Kings, and Governors to their beds of worship and
Religion, set up (like Absalems) on high in their several States and Countries.

Secondly, The cry of the souls under the Altar.
the cry of those precious souls under the Altar (Rev. 6.) the souls of such
as have been persecuted and slain for the testimony and witness of Jesus,
whose blood has been spilt like water upon the earth, and that because they
have held fast the truth and witness of Jesus, against the worship of the
States and Times, compelling to an uniformity of State Religion.

These cries of murdered Virgins who can sit still and hear? Who can but run
with zeal inflamed to prevent the destowring of chaste souls, and spilling of
the blood of the innocent? Humanity stirs up and prompts the Sons of men to
draw material swords for a Virgins chastity and life, against a ravishing
murderer? And Piety and Christianity must needs awaken the Sons of God to draw
the spiritual sword (the Word of God) to preserve the chastity and life of
spiritual Virgins, who abhor the spiritual defilements of false worship,
Rev. 14.

Thirdly, A cry of the whole earth.
the cry of the whole earth, made drunk with the blood of its inhabitants,
slaughtering each other in their blinded zeal, for Conscience, for Religion,
against the Catholics, against the Lutherans, etc.

What fearful cries within these twenty years of hundred thousands men, women,
children, fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, brethren, sisters, old and young,
high and low, plundered, ravished, slaughtered, murdered, famished? And hence
these cries, that men ^ling away the spiritual sword and spiritual artillery
(in spiritual and religious causes) and rather trust for the suppressing of
each others God, Conscience, and Religion (as they suppose) to an arm of
flesh, and sword of steel?

Truth. Sweet Peace, what have thou there?


Peace. Arguments against persecution for cause of Conscience.


Truth. And what there?


Peace. An Answer to such Arguments, contrarily maintaining such persecution
for cause of Conscience.


Truth. These Arguments against such persecution, The wonderful providence of
God in the writing of the Arguments against persecution in Milk.
and the Answer pleading for it, written (as Love hopes) from godly intentions,
hearts, and hands, yet in a mavelous different style and manner. The
Arguments against persecution in milk, the Answer for it (as I may say) in
blood.


The Author of these Arguments (against persecution) (as I have been
informed) being committed by some then in power, close prisoner to Newgate, for
the witness of some truths of Jesus, and having not the use of Pen and Ink,
wrote these Arguments in Milk, in sheets of Paper, brought to him by the Woman
his Keeper, from a friend in London, as the stopples of his Milk bottle.

In such Paper written with Milk nothing will appear, but the way of reading
it by fire being known to this friend who received the Papers, he transcribed
and kept together the Papers, although the Author himself could not correct,
nor view what himself had written.

It was in milk, tending to soul nourishment, even for Babes and Sucklings in
Christ.

It was in milk, spiritually white, pure and innocent, like those white horses
of the Word of truth and meekness, and the white Linen or Armor of
righteousness, in the Army of Jesus. Rev. 6. and 19.

It was in milk, soft, meek, peaceable and gentle, tending both to the peace
of souls, and the peace of States and Kingdoms.

Peace. The Answer (though I hope out of milkie pure intentions) is returned in
blood: bloody and slaughterous conclusions; bloody to the souls of all men, The
Answer writ in Blood.
forced to the Religion and Worship which every civil State or Commonweal
agrees on, and compells all subjects to in a dissembled uniformitie.


Bloody to the bodies, first of the holy witnesses of Christ Jesus, who
testify against such invented worships.

Secondly, of the Nations and Peoples slaughtering each other for their
several respective Religions and Consciences.

CHAP. III.
Truth. IN the Answer Mr. Cotton first lays down several distinctions and
conclusions of his own, tending to prove persecution.

Secondly, Answers to the Scriptures, and Arguments proposed against
persecution.


Peace. The first distinction is this: The first distinction discussed.
By persecution for cause of Conscience, I conceive you mean either for
professing some point of doctrine which you believe in conscience to be the
truth, or for practicing some work which you believe in conscience to be a
religious duty.


Truth. I acknowledge that to molest any person, Desinition of persecution
discussed.
Jew or Gentile, for either professing doctrine, or practicing worship merely
religious or spiritual, it is to persecute him, and such a person (what ever
his doctrine or practice be true or false) suffers persecution for conscience.


But withal I desire it may be well observed, that this distinction is not
full and complete: For beside this that a man may be persecuted because he
holds or practices what he believes in conscience to be a Truth, (as Daniel
did, for which he was cast into the Lions den. Dan. 6.) and many thousands of
Christians, because they durst not cease to preach and practice what they
believed was by Go^ commanded, Conscience will not be restrained from its own
worship, nor constrained to another.
as the Apostles answered ( Acts 4 and 5.) I say besides this a man may also be
persecuted, because he dares not be constrained to yield obedience to such
doctrines and worships as are by men invented and appointed. So the three
famous Jews were cast into the fiery furnace for refusing to fall down (in a
nonconformity to the whole conforming world) before the golden Image, Dan. 3.
21. So thousands of Christ's witnesses (and of late in those bloody Marian
days) have rather chose to yield their bodies to all sorts of torments, then
to subscribe to doctrines, or practice worships, unto which the States and
Times (as Nabuchadnezzar to his golden Image) have compelled and urged them.

A chaste wife will not only abhor to be restrained from her husbands bed, A
chaste soul in Gods worship like a chaste wife.
as adulterous and polluted, but also abhor (if not much more) to be
constrained to the bed of a stranger. And what is abominable in corporal, is
much more loathsome in spiritual whoredom and defilement.

The Spouse of Christ Jesus who could not find her souls beloved in the ways
of his worship and Ministry, ( Cant. 1. 3. and 5. Chapters) abhorred to turn
aside to other Flocks, Worships, etc. and to embrace the bosom of a false
Christ, Cant. 1. 8.

CHAP. IV.
Peace. THe second distinction is this.


In points of Doctrine some are fundamental, The second distinction discussed^
without right belief whereof a man cannot be saved: others are
circumstantiall and less principal, wherein a man may differ in judgment
without prejudice of salvation on either part.

Truth. To this distinction I dare not subscribe, Gods people may err from the
very fundamentals of visible worship.
for then I should everlastingly condemn thousands, and ten thousands, yea the
whole generation of the righteous, who since the falling away (from the first
primitive Christian state or worship) have and do err fundamentally
concerning the true matter, constitution, gathering and governing of the
Church: and yet far be it from any pious breast to imagine that they are not
saved, and that their souls are not bound up in the bundle of eternal life.


We read of four sorts of spiritual or Christian foundations in the New
Testaments.

First, the Foundation of all foundations, 4 sorts of spiritual Foundations
the Cornerstone it self, the Lord Jesus, on whom all depend, Persons,
Doctrines, Practices, 1. Cor. 3.

2. Ministriall foundations. The Church is built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Ephel. 2. 20.

3. The foundation of future rejoicing in the fruits of Obedience, 1 Timothy 6.

4. The foundation of Doctrines, (...) The six Foundations of the Christian
Religion or Worship.
without the knowledge of which, there can be no true profession of Christ,
according to the first institution, Heb. 6. The foundation or principles of
Repentance from dead works, Faith toward God, the Doctrine of Baptism, Laying
on of Hands, the Resurrection, and Eternal Judgment. In some of these, to
wit, those concerning Baptismes, and Laying on of Hands, Gods people will be
found to be ignorant for many hundred years: and I yet cannot see it proved
that light is risen, I mean the light of the first institution, in practice.

Gods people in their persons, Heart-waking ( Cant. 5. 2.) in the life of
personal grace, will yet be found fast asleep in respect of public Christian
Worship.

Gods people (in their persons) are His, most dear and precious: Coming out
of Babell, not local but mystical.
yet in respect of the Christian Worship they are mingled amongst the
Babylonians, from whence they are called to come out, not locally (as some have
said) for that belonged to a material and local Babell, (and, literal Babell
and Jerusalem have now no difference, John 4. 21.) but spiritually and
mystically to come out from her sins and Abominations.

If Mr. Cotton maintain the true Church of Christ to consist of the true
matter of holy persons called out from the World; and the true form of Union
in a Church Covenant; And that also, neither National, Provincial, nor
Diocesan Churches are of Christ's institution: how many Thousands of Gods people
of all sorts, ( Clergy and Laity, as they call them) will they find both in
former and later times, captivated in such National, Provincial, and Diocesan
Churches? yea and so far from living in, yea or knowing of any such Churches
(for matter and form) as they conceive now only to be true, The great
Ignorance of Gods people concerning the Nature of the true Church.
that until of late years, how few of Gods people knew any other Church then
the Parish Church of dead stones or timber? It being a late marvailous light
revealed by Christ Jesus the Sun of Righteousness, that his people are a
Company or Church of living stones, 1 Pet. 2 9.

And however his own Soul, and the souls of many others (precious to God) are
persuaded to separate from National, Provincial, and Diocesan Churches, and
to assemble into particular Churches: yet since there are no Parish Churches in
England, Mr. Cotton and all the Half Seperates, halting between true and falls
Churches, and consequently, not yet clear in the fundamental matter of a
Christian Church.
but what are made up of the Parish bounds within such and such a compass of
houses; and that such Churches have been and are in constant dependence on,
and subordination to the National Church: how can the New-English particular
Churches join with the Old English Parish Churches in so many Ordinances of
Word, Prayer, Singing, Contribution, etc. but they must needs confess, that as
yet their Souls are far from the knowledge of the foundation of a true
Christian Church, whose matter must not only be living stones, but also
separated from the rubbish of Antichristian confusions and desolations.

CHAP. V.
Peace. WIth lamentation I may add: How can their Souls be clear in this
foundation of the true Christian matter, who persecute and oppress their own
(acknowledged) Brethren presenting Light unto them about this Point? But I
shall now present you with Mr. Cottons third distinction. In point of Practice
(says he) some concern the weightier duties of the Law, as, What God we
worship, and with what kind of Worship: whether such, as if it be Right,
fellowship with God is held; if false, fellowship with God is lost.


Truth. It is worth the inquiry, what kind of Worship he intends; for
Worship is of various signification: whether in general acceptance he mean
the rightnesse or corruptnesse of the Church, The true Ministry a Fundamental.
or the Ministry of the Church, or the Ministrations of the Word, Prayer,
Seals, etc.

And because it pleases the Spirit of God to make the Ministry one of the
foundations of the Christian Religion, (Heb. 6. 12.) and also to make the
Ministry of the Word and Prayer in the Church, to be two special works (even
of the Apostles themselves) Acts 6. 2. I shall desire it may be well considered
in the fear of God.

First, concerning the Ministry of the Word; The New-English Ministers, when
they were new elected and ordained Ministers in New England, must undeniably
grant, The New English Ministers examined.
that at that time they were no Ministers, notwithstanding their profession of
standing so long in a true Ministry in Old England, whether received from the
Bishops (which some have maintained true) or from the People, which Mr. Cotton
and others better liked, and which Ministry was always accounted perpetual
and indelible: I apply, and ask, Will it not follow, that if their new
Ministry and Ordination be true, the former was false? and if false, that in
the exercise of it (notwithstanding abilities, graces, intentions, labors, and
(by Gods gracious, unpromised, and extraordinary blessing) some success) I
say, will it not according to this distinction follow, that according to
visible rule, Fellowship with God was lost?

Secondly, concerning Prayer; Common Prayer cast off, and written against by
the New-English.
The New English Ministers have disclaimed and written against that worshipping
of God by the Common or set forms of Prayer, which yet themselves practiced in
England, notwithstanding they knew that many servants of God in great
sufferings witnessed against such a Ministry of the Word, and such a Ministry
of Prayer.


Peace. I could name the persons, time and place, when some of them were
faithfully admonished for using of the Common prayer, and the Arguments
presented to them, then seeming weak, but now acknowledged sound: yet at that
time they satisfied their hearts with the practice of the Author of the
Council of Trent, who used to read only some of the choicest selected Prayers
in the Masse-booke, (which I confess was also their own practice in their
using of the Common Prayer.) But now according to this distinction, I ask
whether or no fellowship with God in such prayers was lost.


Truth. I could particularize other exercises of Worship, which cannot be
denied (according to this distinction) to be of the waightier points of the
Law, to wit, [What God we Worship, and with what kind of worship:] wherein
fellowship with God (in many of our unclean and abominable Worships) has been
lost. Only upon these premises I shall observe. First, that Gods people, even
the standard-bearers and leaders of them (according to this distinction) have
worshipped God (in their sleepy ignorance) by such a kind of Worship, Gods
people have worshipped God with false worships.
as wherein fellowship with God is lost; yea also this it is possible for them
to do, after much light is risen against such Worship, and in particular,
brought to the eyes of such holy and worthy persons.


Secondly, there may be inward and secret fellowship with God in false
Ministeries of Word and Prayer, It pleases God sometimes, beyond his promise,
to convey blessings and comfort to His, in false worships.
(for that to the eternal praise of Infinite Mercy beyond a word or promise of
God I acknowledge) when yet (as the distinction says) in such worship (not
being right) fellowship with God is lost, and such a service or ministration
must be lamented and forsaken.

Thirdly, I observe that Gods people may live and die in such kinds of
worship, notwithstanding that light from God publicly and privately, has
been presented to them, able to convince: yet not reaching to their conviction
and forsaking of such ways, contrary to a conclusion afterward expressed,
Fundamentals of Christian worship not so easy and clear.
to wit, [That fundamentals are so clear, that a man cannot but be convinced
in Conscience, and therefore that such a person not being convinced, he is
condemned of himself, and may be persecuted for sinning against his
conscience.]

Fourthly, I observe that in such a maintaining a clearness of fundamentals or
waightier points, and upon that ground a persecuting of men, because they sin
against their consciences, Mr. Cotton measures that to others, which himself
when he lived in such practices, would not have had measured to himself. As
first, that it might have been affirmed of him, that in such practices he did
sin against his conscience, having sufficient light shining about him.

Secondly, that he should or might lawfully have been cut off by death or
banishment, as an Heretic, sinning against his own conscience.

And in this respect the Speech of King James was notable to a great
Non-conformitant converted (as is said by King James) to conformity, A notable
speech of K. James to a great nonconformist, turned persecuter.
and counselling the King afterward to persecute the Non-conformists ev^n unto
death: Thou Beast (quoth the King) if I had dealt so with thee in thy
nonconformity, where had thou been?

CHAP. VI.
Peace. THe next distinction concerning the manner of persons holding forth the
aforesaid practices (not only the waightier duties of the Law, The 4.
distinction discussed.
but points of doctrine and worship less principal.)

Some (says he) hold them forth in a meek and peaceable way: some with such
arrogance and impetuousnesse, as of it self tends to the disturbance of
civil peace.


Truth. In the examination of this distinction we shall discuss,

First, what is civil Peace, (wherein we shall vindicate thy name the better.)

Secondly, what it is to hold forth a Doctrine or Practice in this
impetuousnesse or arrogance.

First, What civil peace is.
for civil peace, what is it but pax civitatis, the peace of the City,
whether an English City, Scotch, or Irish City, or further abroad, French,
Spanish, Turkish City, etc.

Thus it pleased the Father of Lights to define it, Iorem. 29. 7. Pray for the
peace of the City; which peace of the City, or Citizens, so compacted in a
civil way of union, may be entire, unbroken, safe, etc. notwithstanding so
many thousands of Gods people the Jews, were there in bondage, and would
neither be constrained to the worship of the City Babell, nor restrained from
so much of the worship of the true God, as they then could practice, as in
plain in the practice of the 3 Worthies, Shadrach, Misach, and Abednego, as
also of Daniel, Dan. 3. and Dan. 6. (the peace of the City or Kingdom, being a
far different Peace from the Peace of the Religion or Spiritual Worship,
maintained and professed of the Citizens. This Peace of their Worship (which
worship also in some Cities being various) being a false Peace, Gods people
must be Nonconformitants to Evil.
Gods people were and ought to be Nonconformitants, not daring either to be
restrained from the true, or constrained to false Worship, and yet without
breach of the Civil or Citie-peace, properly so called.


Peace. Hence it is that so many glorious and flourishing Cities of the World
maintain their Civil peace, yea the very Americans and wildest Pagans keep
the peace of their Towns or Cities; The difference between Spiritual and
Civil Peace.
though neither in one nor the other can any man prove a true Church of God in
those places, and consequently no spiritual and heavenly peace: The Peace
spiritual (whether true or false) being of a higher and far different nature
from the Peace of the place or people, being merely and essentially civil and
humane.


Truth. O how lost are the sons of men in this point? To illustrate this: The
Church or company of worshippers (whether true or false) is like unto a Body or
College of Physicians in a City; like unto a Corporation, Society, or Company
of East-Indie or Turkie-Merchants, or any other Society or Company in London:
which Companies may hold their Courts, keep their Records, hold, disputations;
and in matters concerning their Society, may dissent, divide, break into
Schisms and Factions, sue and implead each other at the Law, yea wholly break
up and dissolve into pieces and nothing, and yet the peace of the City not be
in the least measure impaired or disturbed; because the essence or being of the
City, and so the well-being and peace thereof is essentially distinct from
those particular Societies; The difference between the Spiritual and Civil
State.
the Citie-Courts, Citie-Lawes, Citie-punishments distinct from theirs. The
City was before them, and stands absolute and entire, when such a Corporation
or Society is taken down. For instance further, The City or Civil state of
Ephesus was essentially distinct from the worship of Diana in the City, or of
the whole city. Again, the Church of Christ in Ephesus (which were Gods
people, converted and called out from the worship of that City unto
Christianity or worship of God in Christ) was distinct from both.

Now suppose that God remove the Candlestick from Ephesus, yea though the whole
Worship of the City of Ephesus should be altered: The Civil State, the
Spiritual estate, and the Church of Christ distinct in Ephesus.
yet (if men be true and honestly ingenuous to Citie-covenants, Combinations
and Principles) all this might be without the least impeachment or infringement
of the Peace of the City of Ephesus.

Thus in the City of Smirna was the City it self or Civil estate one thing,
The Spiritual or Religious state of Smirna, another; The Church of Christ in
Smirna, distinct from them both; and the Synagogue of the Jews, whether
literally Jews (as some think) or mystically, false Christians, (as others)
called the Synagogue of Satan, Revel. 2. distinct from all these. And
notwithstanding these spiritual oppositions in point of Worship and Religion,
yet hear we not the least noise (nor need we, if Men keep but the Bond of
Civility) of any Civil breach, or breach of Civil peace amongst them: and to
persecute Gods people there for Religion, that only was a breach of Civilitie
it self.


CHAP. VII.
Peace. NOw to the second Quaerie, What it is to hold forth Doctrine or
Practice in an arrogant or impetuous way?


Truth. Although it has not pleased Mr. Cotton to declare what is this
arrogant or impetuous holding forth of Doctrine or Practice tending to
disturbance of Civil peace, The Answerer too obscure in generals.
I cannot but express my sad and sorrowful observation, how it pleases God
to leave him, as to take up the common reproachful accusation of the Accuser
of Gods children; Gods meekest servants use to be counted arrogant and
impetuous. 6 cases wherein Gods people have been bold and zealous, yet not
arrogant.
to wit, that they are arrogant and impetuous: which charge (together with that
of obstinacy, pertinacie, pride, Troublers of the City, etc.) Satan commonly
loads the meekest of the Saints and Witnesses of Jesus with.


To wipe off therefore these foul blurs and aspersions from the fair and
beautiful face of the Spouse of Jesus, I shall select and propose 5 or 6
cases, for which Gods witnesses in all Ages and Generations of Men, have been
charged with arrogance, impetuousnes, etc. and yet the God of Heaven, and Judge
of all men, has graciously discharged them from such crimes, and maintained
and avowed them for his faithful and peaceable servants.

First, Gods people have proclaimed, taught, disputed for diverse months
together, a new Religion and Worship, contrary to the Worship projected in the
Town, Christ Jesus and his Disciples teach publicly a new Doctrine,
fundamentally different from the Religion professed.
City, or State, where they have lived, or where they have traveled, as did
the Lord Jesus Himself over all Galile, and the Apostles after Him in all
places, both in the Synagogues and Marketplaces, as appears Acts 17. 2. 17.
Acts 18. 48. Yet this no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse.

Secondly, Gods servants have been zealous for their Lord and Master, even to
the very faces of the Highest, and concerning the persons of the Highest, so
far as they have opposed the Truth of God: So Eliah to the face of Ahab, It is
not I, but thou, and thy Fathers house that troublest Israel: So the Lord Jesus
concerning Herod, Go tell that Fox: So Paul, God delivered me from the mouth
of the Lion; and to Ananias, Gods servants zealous and bold to the faces of the
Highest.
Thou whited wall, and yet in all this no Arrogance, nor Impetuousnesse.

Thirdly, Gods people have been immovable, constant and resolved to the death,
in refusing to submit to false Worships, and in preaching and professing the
true worship, contrary to express command of public Authority: So the three
famous Worthies against the command of Nobilchadnezzar, Gods people constantly
immovable to death.
and the uniforme conformity of all Nations agreeing upon a false worship, Dan.
3. So the Apostles ( Acts 4 and 5 chap.) and so the witnesses of Jesus in all
ages, who loved not their lives to the death (Rev. 12.) not regarding sweet
life nor bitter death, and yet not Arrogant, nor Impetuous.

Fourthly, Gods people since the coming of the King of Israel, Gods people
ever maintained Christ Jesus the only Lord and King to the conscience.
the Lord Jesus, have openly and constantly professed, that no Civil Magistrate,
no King nor Caesar have any power over the Souls or Consciences of their
Subjects, in the matters of God and the Crown of Jesus, but the Civil
Magistrates themselves; yea Kings and Keisars are bound to subject their own
souls to the Ministry and Church, the Power and Government of this Lord
Jesus, the King of Kings. Hence was the charge against the Apostles (false in
Civil, but true in spiritualls) that they affirmed that there was another
King, one Jesus, Acts 17. 7. And indeed, this was the great charge against the
Lord Jesus Himself, which the Jews laid against Him, and for which he suffered
Death, as appears by the Accusation written over His Head upon the Gallows,
John 9. 19. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.

This was and is the sum of all true preaching of the Gospel or glad news,
That Christ is King alone over conscience is the sum of all true preaching.
viz. That God anointed Jesus to be the sole King and Governor of all the
Israel of God in spiritual and soul causes, Psalm. 2. 6. Acts 2. 36. Yet this
Kingly power of His he resolved not to manage in His own Person, but
Ministerially in the hands of such Messengers which he sent forth to preach and
baptize, and to such as believed that word they preached, John 17. And yet here
no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse.

5. Gods people in delivering the Mind and Will of God concerning the
Kingdoms and Civil States where they have lived, have seemed in all show of
common sense and rational policy (if men look not higher with the eye of
says) to endanger and overthrow the very Civil State, Gods people have see
men the disturbers of Civil State.
as appears by all Ieremses preaching and counsel to King Zedechia, his
Princes and people, insomuch that the charge of the Princes against Jeremiah
was, that he discouraged the Army from fighting against the Babylonians, and
weakened the Land from its own defense, and this charge in the eye of reason,
seemed not to be unreasonable or unrighteous, Ier. 37. 38. chapters, and yet in
Jeremy no Arrogance nor Impetuousnesse.

6. Lastly, Gods people by their preaching, disputing, etc. have been (though
not the cause) yet accidentally the occasion of great contentions and
divisions, Gods word and people the occasion of tumults.
yea tumults and uproares in Towns and Cities where they have lived and come,
and yet neither their Doctrine nor themselves Arrogant nor Impetuous, however
so charged: For thus the Lord Jesus discovers men's false and secure
suppositions, Luke ^ 1. 51. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on the
earth? I tell you nay, but rather division, for from hence forth shall there be
five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three, the father
shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father, etc. And
thus upon the occasion of the Apostles preaching, the Kingdom and Worship of
God in Christ, were most commonly uproares and tumults, where ever they came:
For instance, those strange and nonstrous uproares at Iconium, at Ephesus, at
Jerusalem, Acts 14. 4. Acts 19. 29. 40. Acts 21. verse. 30, 31.

CHAP. VIII.
Peace. IT will be said (dear Truth) what the Lord Jesus and his Messengers
taught was Truth, but the question is about Error.


Truth. I answer, this distinction now in discussion, concerns not Truth, or
Error, but the manner of holding forth or divulging.


I acknowledge that such may be the way and manner of holding forth, The
instances proposed carry a great show of impe^^ousnesse, yet all are pure and
peaceable.
(either with railing or reviling, daring or chalenging speeches, or with force
of Arms, Swords, Guns, Prisons, etc.) that it may not only tend to break, but
may actually break the civil peace, or peace of the City.

Yet these instances propounded are cases of great opposition and spiritual
hostility, and occasions of breach of civil peace: and yet as the borders (or
matter) were of gold: so the speckes (or manner, Cautic. 1.) were of silver:
both matter and manner, pure, holy, peaceable, and inoffensive.

Moreover, I answer, that it is possible and common for persons of soft and
gentle nature and spirits to hold out falsehood with more seeming meekness and
peaceablenesse, then the Lord Jesus or his servants did or do hold forth the
true and everlasting Gospel. So that the answerer would be requested to
explain what he means by this arrogant and impetuous holding forth of any
doctrine, which very manner of holding forth tends to break civil peace, and
comes under the cognizance and correction of the Civil Magistrate: Lest he
build the Sepulcher of the Prophets, and say, If we had been in the Pharisees
days, the Roman Emperors days, or the bloody Marian days, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Mat. 23. 30. who
were charged with arrogance and impetuousnesse.

CHAP. IX.
2. Ob. Peace. IT will here be said, Whence then arises civil dissentions and
uproares about matters of Religion?


Truth. I answer: The true cause of tumults at the preaching of the Word.
When a Kingdom or State, Town or Family, lies and lives in the guilt of a
false God, false Christ, false worship: no wonder if sore eyes be troubled at
the appearance of the light, be it never so sweet: No wonder if a body full of
corrupt humors be troubled at strong (though wholesome) Physic? If persons
sleepy and loving to sleep be troubled at the noise of shrill (though silver)
alarums: No wonder if Adonijah and all his company be amazed and troubled at
the sound of the right Heir King Solomon, ^ King. 1. If the Husbandmen were
troubled when the Lord of the Vineyard sent servant after servant, and at last
his only Son, and they beat, and wounded, and killed even the Son
himself, because they meant themselves to seize upon the inheritance, unto
which they had no right, Matthew. 21. 38. Hence all those tumults about the
Apostles in the Acts, etc. whereas good eyes are not so troubled at light;
vigilant and watchful persons loyal and faithful, are not so troubled at the
true, no nor at a false Religion of Jew or Gentile.


Secondly, A preposterous way of suppressing errors.
breach of civil peace may arise, when false and idolatrous practices are held
forth, and yet no breach of civil peace from the doctrine or practice, or the
manner of holding forth, but from that wrong and preposterous way of
suppressing, preventing, and extinguishing such doctrines or practices by
weapons of wrath and blood, whips, stocks, imprisonment, banishment, death,
etc. by which men commonly are persuaded to convert Heretics, and to cast out
unclean spirits, which only the finger of God can do, that is the mighty
power of the Spirit in the Word.

Hence the Town is in an uproare, Light only can expel fogs and darkness.
and the Country takes the Alarm to expel that fog or mist of Error,
Heresy, Blasphemy, (as is supposed) with Swords and Guns; whereas it is Light
alone, even Light from the bright shining Sun of Righteousness, which is
able, in the souls and consciences of men to dispell and scatter such fogges
and darkness.

Hence the Sons of men, (as David speaks in another case, Psalm. 39.) disquiet
themselves in vain, and unmercifully disquiet others, as (by the help of the
Lord) in the sequel of this discourse shall more appear.

CHAP. X.
Peace. NOw the last distinction is this: Persecution for Conscience, is either
for a rightly informed conscience, or a blind and erroneous conscience.


Answ. Truth. Indeed both these consciences are persecuted: but lamentably
blind and erroneous will these consciences shortly appear to be, Persecutors
oppress both true and erroneous consciences.
which out of zeal for God (as is pretended) have persecuted either. And
heavy is the doom of those blind Guides and Idol Shepherds (whose right eye
Gods finger of jealousy has put out) who flattering the ten Homes or worldly
Powers, persuade them what excellent and faithful service they perform to
God, in persecuting both these consciences: either hanging up a rightly
informed conscience, and therein the Lord Jesus himself, between two
malefactors, or else killing the erroneous and the blind, like Saul (out of
zeal to the Israel of God) the poor Gibeonites, whom it pleased God to permit
to live: and yet that hostility and cruelty used against them (as the repeated
judgment year after year upon the whole Land after told them) could not be
pardoned, until the death of the persecutor Saul his sons had appeased the
Lords displeasure, 2 Samuel 21.


CHAP. XI.
Peace. AFter explication in these Distinctions, it pleases the Answerer to
give his resolution to the question in four particulars.

First, that he holds it not lawful to persecute any for conscience sake
rightly informed, for in persecuting such (says he) Christ himself is
persecuted: for which reason, truly rendered, he quotes Act. 9. 4. Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me?


Truth. He that shall read this Conclusion over a thousand times, shall as
soon find darkness in the bright beams of the Sun, as in this so clear
and shining a beam of Truth, viz. That Christ Jesus in his Truth must not be
persecuted.

Yet this I must ask (for it will be admired by all sober men) what should be
the cause or inducement to the Answerers mind to lay down such a Position or
Thesis as this is, It is not lawful to persecute the Lord Jesus.

Search all Scriptures, Histories, Records, Monuments, consult with all
experiences, did ever Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Iezabel, Scribes and Pharisees, the
Jews, Herod, the bloody Neroes, Gardiners, Boners, Pope or Devil himself,
profess to persecute the Son of God, Jesus as Jesus, Christ as Christ, without
a mask or covering?

No, says Pharaoh, the Isrealites are idle, and therefore speak they of
sacrificing: David is risen up in a conspiracy against Saul, therefore
persecute him: Naboth has blasphemed God and the King, therefore stone him:
Christ is a seducer of the people, a blasphemer against God, and traitor
against Caesar, therefore hang him: Christians are schismatic, factious,
heretical, therefore persecute them: The Devil has deluded John Hus,
therefore crown him with a paper of Devils, and burn him, etc.


Peace. One thing I see apparently in the Lords overruling the pen of this
worthy Answerer, All persecutors of Christ profess not to persecute him.
viz. a secret whispering from heaven to him, that (although his souls aim at
Christ, and has wrought much for Christ in many sincere intentions, All
persecutors of Christ, profess not to persecute him
and Gods merciful and patient acceptance) yet he has never left the Tents of
such who think they do God good service in killing the Lord Jesus in his
servants, and yet they say, if we had been in the days of our Fathers in
Queen Mary's days, etc. we would never have consented to such persecution:
And therefore when they persecute Christ Jesus in his truths or servants, they
say, Do not say you are persecuted for the Word for Christ his sake, for we
hold it not lawful to persecute Jesus Christ.


Let me also add a second; So far as he has been a Guide (by preaching for
persecution) I say, wherein he has been a Guide and Leader, by
mis-interpreting and applying the Writings of Truth, so far I say his own
mouths and hands shall judge (I hope not his persons, but) his actions, for
the Lord Jesus has suffered by him, Act. 9. 3. and if the Lord Jesus himself
were present, himself should suffer that in his own person, which his
servants witnessing his Truth do suffer for his sake.

CHAP. XII.
Peace. THeir second Conclusion is this: It is not lawful to persecute
erroneous and blind conscience, even in fundamental and weighty points, till
after admonition once or twice, Tit. 3. 11. and then such consciences may be
persecuted, because the Word of God is so clear in fundamental and weighty
points, that such a person cannot but sin against his conscience, and so being
condemned of himself, that is, of his conscience, he may be persecuted for
sinning against his own conscience.


Truth. I answer, in that great battle between the Lord Jesus and the Devil,
it is observable that Satan takes up the weapons of Scripture, and such
Scripture which in show and color was excellent for his purpose: but in this
3. of Titus, as Solomon speaks of the Birds of heaven, Prove. 1. a man may
evidently see the snare; and I know the time is coming wherein it shall be
said, Surely in vain the Net is laid in the sight of the Saints (heavenly
Birds.)


So palpably gross and thick is the mist and fog which Satan has raised
about this Scripture, that he that can but see men as trees in matters of Gods
worship, may easily discern what a wonderful deep sleep Gods people are
fallen into concerning the visible Kingdom of Christ, in so much that this
third of Titus which through fearful prophanations, has so many hundred years
been the pretended Bulwark and defense of all the bloody Wolves, dens of Lions,
and mountains of Leopards, hunting and devouring the Witnesses of Jesus, should
now be the refuge and defense of (as I hope) the Lambs and little ones of
Jesus, yet (in this point) so preaching and practicing so unlike to themselves,
to the Lord Jesus, and lamentably too like to His and their Persecutors.

CHAP. XIII.
Peace. BRight Truth, since this place of Titus is such a pretended Bulwark for
persecuting of Heretics, and under that pretense of persecuting all thy
followers, I beseech you by the bright beams of the Sun of Righteousness,
scatter these mists, and unfold these particulars out of the Text:

First, What this Man is that is an Heretic.

Secondly, How this Heretic is condemned of himself.

Thirdly, What is this first and second Admonition, and by whom it is supposed
to be given.

Fourthly, What is this rejecting of Him, and by whom it is supposed this
Rejection was to be made.


Truth. First, What is meant by Heretic in Titus.
What is this Heretic? I find him commonly defined to be such an one as is
obstinate in Fundamentalls, and so also I conceive the Answerer seems to recent
him, saying, That the Apostle renders this reason, why after once and twice
Admonition, he ought to be persecuted, because in fundamental and principal
points of Doctrine and Worship, the Word of God is so clear, that the
Heretic cannot but be convinced in his own Conscience.


But of this reason, I find not one tittle mentioned in this Scripture: for
although he says such an one is condemned of himself, yet he says not, nor
will it follow that fundamentalls are so clear, that after first and second
Admonition, a person that submits not to them is condemned of himself, any more
then in lesser points. This 11 verse has reference to the former verses. Titus
an Evangelist, a Preacher of glad News, abiding here with the Church of Christ
at Creet, is required by Paul to avoid, to reject, and to teach the Church to
reject Genealogies, disputes, and unprofitable questions about the Law: Such a
like charge it is as he gave to Timothy, left also an Evangelist at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 4.

If it should be objected what is to be done to such contentious vain strivers
about Genealogies and questions unprofitable? The Apostle seems plainly to
answer, Let him be once and twice admonished.

Ob. Yea, but what if once and twice admonition prevail not?

The Apostle seems to answer, (...), and that is, the man that is wilfully
obstinate after such once and twice admonition, Reject him.

With this Scripture agrees that of 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. where Timothy is commanded
to withdraw himself from such who dote about questions and strife of words.

All which are points of a lower and inferior nature, not properly falling
within the terms or notions of those ((...)) first principles and ((...))
foundations of the Christian Profession, to wit, Repentance from dead works,
Faith toward God, the doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, the
Resurrection, and eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 2. etc.

Concerning these Fundamentalls (although nothing is so little in the Christian
Worship, but may be referred to one of these six, yet) does not Paul to Timothy
or Titus speak in those places by me alleged, o^ of any of these, as may
evidently appear by the context and scope?

The beloved Spouse of Christ is no receptacle for any filthy person, obstinate
in any filthynesse against the purity of the Lord Jesus, who has commanded his
people to purge out the old leaven, not only greater portions, but a little
leaven which will leaven the whole lump; and therefore this Heretic or
obstinate person in these vain and unprofitable questions, was to be rejected,
as well as if his obstinacy had been in greater matters.

Again, if there were a door or window left open to vain and unprofitable
questions, and sins of smaller nature, how apt are persons to cover with a
silken covering, and to say, Why, I am no Heretic in Fundamentalls, spare me
in this or that little one; this or that opinion or practice, these are of an
inferior circumstantiall nature? etc.

So that the coherence with the former verses, and the scope of the Spirit of
God in this and other like Scriptures being carefully observed, this Greek word
Heretic is no more in true English and in Truth, The word Heretic generally
mistaken.
then an obstinate and wilful person in the Church of Creet, striving and
contending about those unprofitable Questions and Genealogies, etc. and is not
such a monster intended in this place, as mo^^ Interpreters run upon, to wit,
One obstinate in Fundamentalls, and as the Answerer makes the Apostle to write
in such Fundamentalls and principal points, wherein the Word of God is so
clear that a man cannot but be convinced in conscience, and therefore is not
persecuted for matter of conscience, but for sinning against his conscience.

CHAP. XIV.
Peace. NOw in the second place, What is this Self-condemnation?


Truth. The Apostle seems to make this a ground of the rejecting of such a
person, because he is subverted and sins, being condemned of himself: It
will appear upon due search that this selfecondemning is not here intended to
be in Heretics (as men say) in fundamentalls only, but as it is meant here, in
men obstinate in the lesser Questions, etc.


First, he is subverted or turned crooked, (...), a word opposite to
straightness or rightnesse: So that the scope is, as I conceive, upon true and
faithful admonition once or twice, the pride of heart, or heat of wrath,
draws a veil over the eyes and heart, so that the soul is turned loosed and
from the checks of truth.

Secondly, he sins, (...), that is, being subverted or turned aside; he
sins or wanders from the path of Truth, and is condemned by himself (...),
that is, by the secret checkes and whisperings of his own conscience, Checks
of conscience
which will take Gods part against a man's self, in smiting, accusing, etc.

Which checks of conscience we find even in Gods own dear people, as is most
admirably opened in the 5 of Cant. in those sad, drowsy and unkind passages
of the Spouse in her answer to the knocks and calls of the Lord Jesus; which
Gods people in all their awakening acknowledge how slightly they have listened
to the checks of their own consciences. This the Answerer pleases to call
sinning against his conscience, for which he may lawfully be persecuted, to
wit, for sinning against his conscience.

Which conclusion (though painted over with the vermillion of mistaken
Scripture, and that old dream of Jew and Gentile, that the Crown of Jesus
will consist of outward material gold, and his sword be made of iron or
steel, executing judgment in his Church and Kingdom by corporal punishment)
I hope (by the assistance of the Lord Jesus) to manifest it to be the
overturning and rooting up the very foundation and roots of all true
Christianity, and absolutely denying the Lord Jesus the Great Anointed to be
yet come in the Flesh.

CHAP. XV.
THis will appear, if we examine the two last Quaries of this place of Titus:
to wit,

First, What this Admonition is?

Secondly, What is the Rejection here intended? Reject him.

First then, Titus, unto whom this Epistle and these directions were written,
(and in him to all that succeed him in the like work of the Gospel to the
Worlds end) he was no Minister of the Civil State, armed with the majesty and
terror of a material sword, What is the first and second admonition.
who might for offenses against the civil state, inflict punishments upon the
bodies of men, by imprisonments, whippings, sines, banishment, death. Titus was
a Minister of the Gospel or Glad tidings, armed only with the Spiritual sword
of the Word of God, and such Spiritual weapons as (yet) through God were
mighty to the casting down of strong holds, yea every high thought of the
highest head and heart in the world, 2 Cor. 10. 4.

Therefore these first and second Admonitions were not civil or corporal
punishments on men's persons or purses, which the Courts of Men may lawfully
inflict upon Malefactors: but they were the reprehensions, What the rejecting
of the Heretic was.
convictions, exhortations, and persuasions of the Word of the Eternal God,
charged home to the Conscience, in the name and presence of the Lord Jesus, in
the midst of the Church. Which being despised and not hearkened to, in the
last place follows rejection; which is not a cutting off by heading, hanging,
burning, etc. or an expelling of the Country and Coasts: neither which (no nor
any lesser civil punishment) Titus nor the Church at Crete had any power to
exercise. But it was that dreadful cutting off from that visible Head and
Body, Corporal killing in the Law, typing out Spiritual killing by
Excommunication in the Gospel.
Christ Jesus and his Church; that purging out of the old leaven from the lump
of the Saints; the putting away of the evil and wicked person from the holy
Land and Commonwealth of Gods Israel, 1 Cor. 5. where it is observable, that
the same word used by Moses for putting a malefactor to death in typical
Israel, by sword, stoning, etc. Deuteronomy 13. 5. is here used by Paul for the
spiritual killing or cutting off by Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away
that evil person, etc.

Now I desire the Answerer, and any, in the holy awe and fear of God to
consider, That

From whom the first and second Admonition was to proceed, from them also was
the rejecting or casting out to proceed, as before.

But not from the Civil Magistrate (to whom Paul writes not this Epistle, and
who also is not bound once and twice to admonish, but may speedily punish, as
he sees cause, the persons or purses of Delinquents against his Civil State:)
but from Titus the Minister or Angel of the Church, and from the Church with
him, were these first and second Admonitions to proceed; And

Therefore at last also this Rejecting, which can be no other but a casting
out, or excommunicating of him from their Churchsocietie.

Indeed, this rejecting is no other then that avoiding which Paul writes of to
the Church of Christ at Rome, Romans 16. 17. which avoiding (however woefully
perverted by some to prove persecution) belonged to the Governors of Christ's
Church and Kingdom in Rome, and not to the Roman Emperor for him to rid and
avoid the World of them, by bloody and cruel Persecution.

CHAP. XVI.
Peace. THe third Conclusion is; The third Conclusion discussed.
In points of lesser moment, there ought to be a Toleration.

Which though I acknowledge to be the Truth of God, yet 3 things are very
observable in the manner of laying it down; Satan's policy.
for Satan uses excellent arrows to bad marks, and sometimes beyond the
intent, and hidden from the eye of the Archer.

First (says he) such a person is to be tolerated, The Answerer grants a
Toleration.
till God may be pleased to reveal his Truth to him.


Truth. This is well observed by you; for indeed this is the very ground why
the Apostle calls for meekness and gentleness toward all men, and toward
such as oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2. because there is a peradventure or it may
be; Patience to be used toward the opposite.
It may be God may give them Repentance. That God that has shown mercy to
one, may show mercy to another: It may be that eye salve that anointed one man's
eye who was blind and opposite, may anoint another as blind and opposite: He
that has given Repentance to the husband, may give it to his wise, etc.

Hence that Soul that is lively and sensible of mercy received to it self in
former blindness, opposition and enmity against God, cannot but be patient
and gentle toward the Jews, who yet deny the Lord Jesus to be come, The
carriage of a Soul sensible of mercy, toward other sinners in their blindness
and opposition.
and justify their Forefathers in murdering of him: Toward the Turks, who
acknowledge Christ a great Prophet, yet affirm less than Mahomet. Yea to all
the several sorts of Antichristians, who set up many a false Christ in stead
of him. And lastly to the Pagans and wildest sorts of the sons of men, who have
not yet heard of the Father, nor the Son. And to all these sorts, Jews,
Turks, Antichristians, Pagans, when they oppose the light presented to them;
In sense of its ow^ former opposition, and that God peradventure may at last
give repentance: I add, such a Soul will not only be patient, but earnestly
and constantly pray for all sorts of men, that out of them Gods elect may be
called to the fellowship of Christ Jesus, And lastly, not only pray, but
endeavor (to its utmost ability) their participation of the same grace and
mercy.

That great Rock upon which so many gallant Ships miscarrie, viz. That such
persons, false Prophets, Heretics, etc. were to be put to death in Israel, I
shall (with Gods assistance) remove: as also that fine silken covering of the
Image, viz. that such persons ought to be put to death or banished, to prevent
the infecting and seducing of others, I shall (with Gods assistance) in the
following discourse pluck off.

Secondly, I observe from the Scriptures he quoteth for this Toleration, (Phil.
3. and Romans 14) how closely, yet I hope unadvisedly, he makes the Churches of
Christ at Philippi and Rome, The Answerer co^founds the Churches in Philippi
and Rome with the Cities Philippi and Rome.
all one with the Cities Philippi and Rome, in which the Churches were, and to
whom only Paul wrote. As if what these Churches in Philippi and Rome must
tolerate amongst themselves, that the Ci^ies Philippi and Rome must tole rate
in their citizens: and what these Churches must not tolerate, that these Cities
Philippi and Rome must not tolerate within the compass of the City, State and
Jurisdiction.


Truth. Upon that ground, by undeniable consequence, these Cities Philippi and
Rome were bound not to tolerate themselves, that is, the Cities and Citizens of
Philippi and Rome, in their own Civil life and being, but must kill or expel
themselves from their own Cities, as being Idolatrous worshippers of other gods
then the true God in Jesus Christ.

But as the Lilie is amongst the Thorns, so is Christ's Love among the
Daughters: Difference between (...) the Church and the World.
and as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Forest, so is her Beloved among
the Sons: so great a difference is there between the Church in a City or
Country, and the Civil state, City or Country in which it is.

No less then (as David in another case, Psalm. 103. as far as the Heavens are
from the Earth) are they that are truly Christ's (that is, anointed truly with
the Spirit of Christ) from many thousands who love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
and yet are and must be permitted in the World or Civil State, although they
have no right to enter into the gates of Jerusalem the Church of God.

And this is the more carefully to be minded, The Church and Civil Scare
confusedly made all one.
because when ever a toleration of others Religion and Conscience is pleaded
for, such as are (I hope in truth) zealous for God, readily produce plenty of
Scriptures written to the Church, both before and since Christ's coming, all
commanding and pressing the putting forth of the unclean, the cutting off the
obstinate, the purging out the Leaven, rejecting of Heretics. As if because
brians, thorns, and phistles may not be in the Garden of the Church, therefore
they must all be plucked up out of the Wilderness: whereas he that is a Briar,
that is, a Jew, a Turk, a Pagan, an Antichristian to day, may be (when the
Word of the Lord runs freely) a member of Jesus Christ to morrow cut out of the
wild Olive, and planted into the true.


Peace. Thirdly, from this toleration of persons but holding lesser errors,
Persecutors have forgotten the blessedness promised to the merciful, Math. 5.
I observe the unmercifulness of such doctrines and hearts, as if they had
forgotten the Blessedness, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain
mercy, Math. 5. He that is slightly and but a little hurt, shall be suffered,
and means vouchsafed for his cure. But the deep wounded sinners, and leprous,
ulcerous, and those of bloody issues twelve years together, and those which
have been bowed down 38. years of their life, they must not be suffered until
peradventure God may give them repentance; but either it is not lawful for a
godly Magistrate to rule and govern such a people (as some have said) or else
if they be under government, and reform not to the State Religion after the
first and second admonition, the Civil Magistrate is bound to persecute, etc.


Truth. Such persons have need, as Paul to the Romans, Chap. 12. 1. to be
besought by the mercy of God to put on bowels of mercy toward such as have
neither wronged them in body or goods, and therefore justly should not be
punished in their goods or persons.


CHAP. XVII.
Peace. I Shall now trouble you (dear Truth) but with one conclusion more,
which is this: viz. That if a man hold forth error with a boisterous and
arrogant spirit, to the disturbance of the civil Peace, he ought to be
punished, etc.


Truth. To this I have spoken too, confessing that if any man commit ought of
those things which Paul was accused of (Act. 25. 11.) he ought not to be
spared, yea he ought not, as Paul says, in such cases to refuse to dye.

But if the matter be of another nature, a spiritual and divine nature, I have
written before in many cases, What persons are guilty of breach of civil peace
and might in many more, that the Worship which a State professes may be
contradicted and preached against, and yet no breach of Civil Peace. And if a
breach follow, it is not made by such doctrines, but by the boisterous and
violent opposers of them.

Such persons only break the Cities or Kingdoms peace, The most peaceable
wrongfully accused of peacebreaking.
who cry out for prison and swords against such who cross their judgment or
practice in Religion. For as Joseph's mistress accused Joseph of uncleanness,
and calls out for civil violence against him, when Joseph was chaste, and her
self guilty: So commonly the meek and peaceable of the earth are traduced as
rebels, factious, peace-breakers, although they deal not with the State or
State-matters, but matters of divine and spiritual nature, when their
traducers are the only unpeaceable, and guilty of breach of Civil Peace.


Peace. We are now come to the second part of the Answer, which is a particular
examination of such grounds as are brought against such persecution.

The first sort of grounds are from the Scriptures.


CHAP. XVIII.
FIrst, The examination of what is meant by the Tares, and the command of the
L. Jesus to let them alone.
Matthew. 13. 30, 38. because Christ commands to let alone the Tares to grow up
together with the Wheat, until the Harvest.

Unto which he answers: That Tares are not Briars and Thorns, but partly
Hypocrites, like unto the godly, but indeed carnal (as the Tares are like to
Wheat, but are not Wheat,) or partly such corrupt doctrines or practices as are
indeed unsound, but yet such as come very near the truth (as Tares do to the
Wheat) and so near that good men may be taken with them, and so the persons in
whom they grow cannot be rooted out, but good Wheat will be rooted out with
them. In such a case (says he) Christ calls for peaceable toleration, and
not for penal prosecution, according to the third Conclusion.

Truth. The substance of this Answer I conceive to be first negative, The
Answerers fallacious exposition that Tares signify either Persons, Doctrines
or Practices.
that by Tares are not meant persons of another Religion and Worship, that is
(says he) they are not Briars and Thorns.

Secondly, affirmative, by Tares are meant either persons, or doctrines, or
practices; persons, as hypocrites, like the godly: doctrines or practices
corrupt, yet like the truth.

For answer hereunto I confess that not only those worthy witnesses (whose
memories are sweet with all that fear God) Calvin, Beza, etc. but of later
times many conjoyne with this worthy Answerer, to satisfy themselves and
others with such an Interpretation.

But alas, The Answerer ba^ely affirming a most strange interpretation.
how dark is the soul left that desires to walk with God in holy fear and
trembling, when in such a weighty and mighty point as this is, that in matters
of conscience concerns the spilling of the blood of thousands, and the Civil
Peace of the World in the taking up Arms to suppress all false Religions!
when I say no evidence or demonstration of the Spirit is brought to prove such
an interpretation, nor Arguments from the place it self or the Scriptures of
truth to confirm it; but a bare Affirmation that these Tares must signify
persons, or doctrines and practices.

I will not imagine any deceitful purpose in the Answerers thoughts in the
proposal of these three, Satan's subtlet^e about the opening of Scripture.
persons, doctrines, or practices, yet dare I confidently avouch that the Old
Serpent has deceived their precious souls, and by Tongue and Pen would
deceive the souls of others by such a method of dividing the word of truth. A
threefold Cord, and so a threefold Snare is strong, and too like it is that one
of the three, either Persons, Doctrines, or Practices may catch some feet.


CHAP. XIX.
Peace. THe place then being of such great importance as concerning the truth
of God, the blood of thousands, yea the blood of Saints, and of the Lord Jesus
in them, I shall request your more diligent search (by the Lords holy
assistance) into this Scripture. I shall make it evident, that by these Tares
in this Parable are meant persons in respect of their Religion and way of
Worship, open and visible professors, as bad as briars and thorns; not only
suspected Foxes, but as bad as those greedy Wolves which Paul speaks of, Acts
20. who with perverse and evil doctrines labor spiritually to devour the
flock, and to draw away Disciples after them, whose mouths must be stopped,
and yet no carnal force or weapon to be used against them, but their mischief
to be resisted with those mighty weapons of the holy Armoury of the Lord
Jesus, wherein there hangs a thousand shields, Cant. 4.


That the Lord Jesus intends not doctrines or practices by the tares in this
Parable is clear: for

First, the Lord Jesus expressly interprets the good seed to be persons, and
those the children of the Kingdom; and the tares also to signify Men, and
those the children of the Wicked one, ver. 38.

Secondly, Toleration in Romans 14. considered. Toleratio^ of Jew^sh ceremonies
for a time upon some grounds in the Jew^sh Church, proves not toleration of
Popish and Anti christian Ceremonies in the Christian Church, although in the
State.
such corrupt doctrines or practices are not to be tolerated now as those
Jewish observations (the Lords own Ordinances) were for a while to be
permitted, Romans 14. Nor so long as till the Angels the Reapers come to reap
the Harvest in the end of the world. For can we think that because the tender
Consciences of the Jews were to be tendered in their differences of meats, that
therefore persons must now be tolerated in the Church (for I speak not of the
Civil State) and that to the worlds end, in superstitious forbearing and
forbidding of flesh in Popish Lents, and superstitious Fridayes, etc. and that
because they were to be tendered in their observation of Jewish Holidayes, that
therefore until the Harvest or Worlds end, persons must now be tolerated (I
mean in the Church) in the observation of Popish Christmas, Easter,
Whitsontide, and other superstitious Popish Festivals?

I willingly acknowledge, that if the members of a Church of Christ shall upon
some delusion of Satan kneel at the Lords Supper, keep Christmas, or any
other Popish observation, great tenderness ought to be used in winning his
soul from the error of his way: and yet I see not that persons so practicing
were sit to be received into the Churches of Christ now, as the Jews weak in
the Faith, (that is, in the Liberties of Christ) were to be received, Romans 14.
1. And least of all (as before) that the toleration or permission of such ought
to continue till Doomes day, or the end of the world, as this Parable urges
the Toleration: Let them alone until the Harvest.

CHAP. XX.
Again, Tares proved not to signify hypocrites
Hypocrites were not intended by the Lord Jesus in this famous Parable.

First, the Original word (...), signifying all those Weeds which spring up
with the Corn, as Cockle, Darnell, Tares, etc. seems to imply such a kind of
people as commonly and generally are known to be manifestly different from,
Hence were the witnesses of Christ (...) and others in H. 4. his reign called
Lo^lards (as some say) from (...), weeds known well enough, hen^e taken for
sign of barrenesse: Ius^lix (...) and sterll^^ do^^^an^u^ a v^^a: others
conceive they were so called from one Lolla^d, etc. but all Papis^s accounted
them as Tares because of their profession.
and opposite to the true worshippers of God, here called the children of the
Kingdom; as these weeds, tares, cockle, darnell, etc. are commonly and
presently known by every husbandman to differ from the wheat, and to be
opposite, and contrary, and hurtful unto it.

Now whereas it is pleaded that these tares are like the wheat, and so like
that this consimilitude or likeness is made the ground of this interpretation,
viz. That tares must needs signify hypocrites, or doctrines, or practices, who
are like Gods children, Truth, etc.

I answer, first, The Parable holds forth no such thing, that the likeness of
the tares should deceive the servants to cause them to suppose for a time that
they were good wheat, but that as soon as ever the tares appeared, ver. 26.
the servants came to the householder about them, ver. 27. the Scripture holds
forth no such time wherein they doubted or suspected what they were.

Peace. It may be said they did not appear to be tares until the co^ne was in
the blade, and put forth its fruit.


Truth. I answer, The false and counterfeit Christians appear as soon as the
true and faithful.
The one appeared as soon as the other, for so the word clearly carries it,
that the seed of both having been sown, when the wheat appeared and put forth
its blade and fruit, the tares also were as early, and put forth themselves as
appeared also.

Secondly, there is such a dissimilitude or unlikenesse, I say such a
dissimilitude, that as soon as tares and wheat are sprung up to blade and
fruit, every husbandman can tell which is wheat, and which are tares and
cockle, etc.


Peace. It may be said true: So when the hypocrite is manifested, then all may
know him, etc. but before hypocrites be manifested by fruits they are unknown.

I answer, search into the Parable, and ask when was it that the servants
first complained of the tares to the householder, but when they appeared or came
in sight, there being no interim, wherein the servants could not tell what to
make of them, but doubted whether they were wheat or tares, as the Answerer
implies.

Secondly, when was it that the householder gave charge to let them alone, but
after that they appeared, and were known to be tares, which should imply by
this interpretation of the Answerer, that when men are discovered and known to
be Hypocrites, Hypocritical Christians.
yet stil^ ^uch a generation of Hypocrites in the Church must be let alone and
tolerated until the harvest or end of the world, which is contrary to all
order, piety and safety in the Church of the Lord Jesus, as doubtless the
Answerers will grant; so that those Tares being notoriously known to be
different from the Corn, The Tares cannot signify Hypocrites.
I conclude that they cannot here be intended by the Lord Jesus to signify
secret Hypocrites, but more open and apparent Sinners.


CHAP. XXI.
THe second reason why these tares cannot signify hypocrites in the Church,
Two sorts of Hypoc^ites: 1. In the Church as Judas, St. ^o^ M^g^^, and these
must be to le^ated until discovered, and no longer. 2. Hypocrites in the world
which a^e false Christians, ^a^^e Churches, and these the Lord Jesus wi^ have
let alone unto Harvest.
I take from the Lord Jesus His own Interpretation of the field (in which both
wheat and tares are sown, which says he is the World, out of which God
chooses and calls His Church.

The World lies in wickedness, is like a Wilderness or a Sea of wild Beasts
innumerable, fornicators, covetous, Idolaters, etc. with whom Gods people may
lawfully converse and cohabit in Cities, Towns, etc. else must they not live
in the World, but go out of it, In which world as soon as ever the Lord Jesus
had sown the good seed, the children of the Kingdom, true Christianity, or
the true Church; the Enemy Satan presently in the night of security, Ignorance
and Error (whilst men slept) sowed also these tares which are Antichristians
or false Christians. These strange Professors of the Name of Jesus, the
Ministers and Prophets of God, beholding they are ready to run to Heaven to
fetch fiery judgments from thence to consume these strange Christians, and to
pluck them by the roots out of the world: But the Son of Man, the meek Lamb of
God (for the Elect sake which must be gathered out of Jew and Gentile, Pagan,
Antichristian, commands a permission of them in the World, The Field by most,
generally, but falsely interpreted the Church.
until the time of the end of the World, when the Goats and Sheep, the Tares
and Wheat shall be eternally separated each from other.

Peace. You know some excellent Worthies (dead and living) have labored to
turn this Field of the World into the Garden of the Church.


Truth. But who can imagine that the Wisdom of the Father, the Lord Jesus
Christ, The Lord Jesus the great teacher by Parables, and the only expounder of
them.
would so open this Parable (as He professedly does) as that it should be close
shut up, and that one difficulty or lock should be opened by a greater and
harder, in calling the World the Church? contrary also to the way of the Light
and Love that is in Jesus, when he would purposely teach and instruct His
scholars contrary to the nature of Parables and similitudes.

And lastly, to the nature of the Church or Garden of Christ.


CHAP. XXII.
IN the former Parable the Lord Jesus compared the Kingdom of Heaven to the
sowing of Seed. The scope of the Parable.
The true Messengers of Christ are the Sowers, who cast the Seed of the Word of
the Kingdom upon four sorts of ground, Fou^e sorts of ground or hearers of
the word in the world and but one properly in the Church, the rest seldom come
or acciden^ally to hear the word in the Church, which word ought to be ^itted
for the feed^ng of the Church or flock: preaching for conversion is properly
out of the Church.
which four sorts of ground or hearts of men, cannot be supposed to be of the
Church, nor will it ever be proved that the Church consists of any more sorts
or natures of ground properly, but one, to wit, the honest and good ground, and
the proper work of the Church concerns the flourishing and prosperity of this
sort of ground, and not the other unconverted ^^ree sorts, who it may be
seldom or never come (...) the Church unless they be forced by the Civil
sword, which the patern^ or first sowers never used, and being forced they are
put into a way of Religion by such a course, if not so, they are forced to live
without^ Religion, for one of the two must necessarily follow, as I shall prove
afterward.

In the field of the World then are all those sorts of ground, high way
hearers, stony and thorny ground hearers, as well as the honest and good
ground, and I suppose it will not now be said by the Answerer, that those three
sorts of bad grounds were hypocrites or tares in the Church.

Now after the Lord Jesus had propounded that great leading Parable of the
Sower and the Seed, He is pleased to propound this Parable of the Tares, The
scope of the Parable of the Tares.
with admirable coherence and sweet consolation to the honest and good ground,
who with glad and honest hearts having received the word of the Kingdom, may
yet seem to be discouraged and troubled with so many Antichristians and false
Professors of the Name of Christ. The Lord Jesus therefore gives direction
concerning these tares, that unto the end of the World successively in all the
sorts and generations of them they must be (not approved or countenanced, but)
let alone or permitted in the World.

Secondly, he gives to His own good seed this consolation, The Lord Jesus in
this ^arable of the Ta^es gives direction and consolation to His servants.
that those heavenly Reapers the Angels in the harvest or end of the World,
will take an order and course with them, to wit, they shall bind them into
bundles, and cast them into the everlasting burnings, and to make the cup of
their consolation run over: He adds verse. 4. Then, then at that time shall the
Righteous shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

These tares then neither being erroneous doctrines, The Tares proved properly
to signify Antichristians.
nor corrupt practices, nor hypocrites in the true Church intended by the Lord
Jesus in this Parable; I shall in the third place by the help of the same Lord
Jesus) evidently prove that these tares can be no other sort of sinners, but
false worshippers, Idolaters, and in particular properly, Antichristians.

CHAP. XXIII.
FIrst then, these Tares are such sinners as are opposite and contrary to the
children of the Kingdom visibly so declared and manifest, ver. 38. Math. 8. 12
Mat. 21. 43 Gods kingdom on Earth the visible Church.
Now the Kingdom of God below, is the visible Church of Christ Jesus,
according to Matthew. 8. 12. The children of the Kingdom which are threatened to
be cast out, seem to be the Jews, which were then the only visible Church in
Covenant with the Lord, when all other Nations followed other gods and
worships. And more plain is that fearful threatening, Matthew. 21. 43. The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation that will bring
forth the fruits thereof.

Such then are the good seed, good wheat, children of the Kingdom, as are the
disciples, members and subjects of the Lord Jesus Christ his Church and
Kingdom: and therefore consequently such are the tares, as are opposite to
these, Idolaters, Will-worshippers, not truly but falsely submitting to Jesus:
and in especial, the children of the wicked one, visibly so appearing. Which
wicked one I take not to be the Devil; for the Lord Jesus seems to make them
distinct: The difference between the Wheat and the Tares, as also between these
Tares and all other.
He that sowes the good seed (says he) is the Son of man, the field is the
World, the good seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares are the
children of the wicked, or wickedness, the enemy that sowed them, is the
Devil.

The Original here, (...), agrees with that, Luke 11. 4. Deliver us (...),
from evil or wickedness; opposite to the children of the Kingdom and the
righteousness thereof.

CHAP. XXIV.
Peace. IT is true, that all drunkards, thieves, unclean persons, etc. are
opposite to Gods children.


Truth. Answ. Their opposition here against the children of the Kingdom, is
such an opposition as properly sights against the Religious state or Worship of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, it is manifest, that the Lord Jesus in this parable intends no other
sort of sinners, unto whom he says, Let them alone, in Church or State; for
then he should contradict other holy and blessed ordinances for the punishment
of offenders both in Christian and Civil State.

First, in Civil state, from the beginning of the World, God has armed
Fathers, Masters, Magistrates, to punish evil doers, Civil Magistracy from
the beginning of the World.
that is, such of whose actions Fathers, Masters, Magistrates are to judge, and
accordingly to punish such sinners as transgress against the good and peace of
their Civil state, Families, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms: their States,
Governments, Governors, Laws, Punishments and Weapons being all of a Civil
nature: Offenders against the Civil laws not to be perpetually tolerated. Nor
offenders in the Church of Christ Jesus to be su^^red.
and therefore neither disobedience to parents or magistrates, nor murder nor
quarrelling, uncleanness nor lasciviousness, stealing nor extortion, neither
ought of that kind ought to be let alone, either in lesser or greater
families, towns, cities, kingdoms, Romans 13. but seasonably to be suppressed, as
may best conduce to the public safety.

Again secondly, in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, whose kingdoms, officers,
laws, punishments, weapons, are spiritual and of a Soule-nature, he will not
have Antichristian idolaters, extortioners, covetous, etc. to be let alone, but
the unclean and lepers to be thrust forth, the old leaven purged out, the
obstinate in sin spiritually stoned to death, and put away from Israel; and
this by many degrees of gentle admonition in private and public, as the case
requires.

Therefore if neither offenders against the civil Laws, State and peace ought
to be let alone; nor the Spiritual estate, the Church of Jesus Christ ought to
bear with them that are evil, Revel. 2. I conclude, that these are sinners of
another nature, Idolaters, False-worshippers, Antichristians, who without
discouragement to true Christians must be let alone and permitted in the world
to grow and fill up the measure of their sins, after the image of him that
has sown them, until the great Harvest shall make the difference.


CHAP. XXV.
THirdly, in that the officers unto whom these Tares are referred, are the
Angels the heavenly Reapers at the last day, it is clear as the light, The
great Reapers are the Angels.
that (as before) these Tares cannot signify Hypocrites in the Church, who
when they are discovered and seen to be Tares opposite to the good fruit of the
good seed, are not to be let alone to the Angels at Harvest or end of the
world, but purged out by the Governors of the Church, and the whole Church of
Christ. Again, they cannot be offenders against the civil state and Common
welfare, whose dealing with is not suspended unto the coming of the Angels,
but unto Men, who (although they know not the Lord Jesus Christ, yet) are
lawful Governors and Rulers in Civil things.

Accordingly in the 4. and last place, in that the plucking up of these tares
out of this field must be let alone unto the very harvest or end of the world,
it is apparent from thence, that (as before) they could not signify hypocrites
in the Church, who when they are discovered to be so, (as these tares were
discovered to be tares) are not to be suffered (after the first and second
Admonition) but to be rejected, and every Brother that walks disorderly to be
withdrawn or separated from: So likewise no offendour against the Civil
state, by robbery, murder, adultery, oppression, sedition, mutiny, is for
ever to be connived at, and to enjoy a perpetual toleration unto the Worlds
end, as these tares must.

Moses for a while held his peace against the sedition of Korah, Dathan, The
Tares to be tolerated the longest of any sinners.
and Abiram. David for a season tolerated Shimei, Ioab, Adonijah; but till the
Harvest or end of the World, the Lord never intended that any but these
spiritual and mystical Tares should be so permitted.

CHAP. XXVI.
NOw if any imagine that the time or date is long, The danger of infection by
these tares assoyled. Lamentable experience has proved this true of late in
Europe, and lamentably true in the sl^ughter of some hundred thousands of the
English.
that in the mean season they may do a world of mischief before the Worlds
end, as by infection, etc.

Truth. First, I answer, that as the civil State keeps it self with a civil
Guard, in case these Tares shall attempt ought against the peace and welfare of
it, let such civil offenses be punished, and yet as Tares opposite to Christ's
Kingdom, let their Worship and Consciences be tolerated.

Secondly, the Church or spiritual State, City, or Kingdom has laws, and
orders, and armories, (whereon there hang a thousand Bucklers, Cant. 4.)
Weapons and Ammunition, able to break down the strongest Holds, 1 Cor. 10. and
so to defend it self against the very Gates of Earth or Hell.

Thirdly, the Lord himself knows who are his, and his foundation remains
sure, his Elect or chosen cannot perish nor be finally deceived.

Lastly, the Lord Jesus here in this Parable lays down two Reasons, able to
content and satisfy our hearts^ to bea^e patiently this their contradiction
and Antichristianity, and to permit or let them alone.

First, lest the good Wheat be plucked up and rooted up also out of this Field
of the World, if such combustions and fightings were, as to pluck up all the
false professors of the name of Christ, the good wheat also would enjoy little
peace, but be in danger to be plucked up and torn out of this world by such
bloody storms and tempests.

And therefore as Gods people are commanded, Ier. 29. to pray for the peace of
material Babell, wherein they were captivated, and 1 Time. 2. to pray for all
men, and specially Kings and Governors, that in the peace of the civil State
they may have peace. So contrary to the opinion and practice of most (drunk
with the Cup of the Whores fornication) yea, and of Gods own people fast
asleep in Antichristian Dalilahs laps, obedience to the command of Christ to
let the tares alone, will prove the only means to preserve then Civil Peace,
and that without obedience to this command of Christ, it is impossible (without
great transgression against the Lord in carnal policy, which will not long
hold out to preserve the civil peace.

Beside, Gods people the good Wheat are generally plucked up and persecuted, as
well as the vilest idolaters, whether Jews or Antichristians, which the Lord
Jesus seems in this Parable to foretell.

The second Reason noted in the Parable which may satisfy any man from
wondering at the patience of God, The great and dreadful Harvest.
is this: when the world is ripe in sin, in the sins of Antichristianisme
(as the Lord spoke of the sins of the Amorites, Genesis 12.) then those holy and
mighty Officers and Executioners, the Angels, with their sharp and cu^ting
sickles of eternal vengeance, shall down with them, and bundle them up for
the everlasting burnings.

Then shall that Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. be consumed by the breath of the mouth
of the Lord Jesus, and all that worship the Beast and his picture, and receive
his mark into their forehead or their hands, shall drink of the Wine of the
wrath of God which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented wit^ ^i^e and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their
torment shall ascend up for ever and ever, Rev. 14. 10. 11.


CHAP. XXVII.
Peace. YOu have been larger in vindicating this Scripture from the violence
offered unto it, because as I said (...) such great consequence, as also
because so many excellent (...) have not rightly ^^vided it, to the great
misguiding of many precious (...), which otherwise might have been turned into
the paths of more peaceablenesse in themselves and toward others.


Truth. I shall be briefer in the Scriptures following. The charge of Christ
Jesus, Let alone the Tares, was not spoken to Magistrates, Ministers of the
civil state, but to Ministers of the Gospel.



Peace. Yet before you depart from this, I must crave your patience to satisfy
one Objection, and that is; These servants to whom the Householder answers,
seem to be the Ministers or Messengers of the Gospel, not the Magistrates of
the civil State, and therefore this charge of the Lord Jesus is not given to
Magistrates to let alone false worshippers and idolaters.

Again, being spoken by the Lora Jesus to his Messengers, it seems to concern
Hypocrites in the Church, as before was spoken, and not false worshippers in
the State or World.


Truth. I answer, first, The civil Magistrate not so particularly spoken to as
Fathers and Masters in the New Testament, and why. Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3. 4. etc.
I believe I have sufficiently and abundantly proved, that these tares are not
offenders in the civil State. Nor secondly, Hypocrites in the Church, when
once discovered so to be, and that therefore the Lord Jesus intends a grosser
kind of Hypocrites, professing the name of Churches and Christians in the
field of the World or Commonwealth.

Secondly, I acknowledge this command [Let them alone] was expressly spoken to
the Messengers or Ministers of the Gospel, who have no civil power or
authority in their hand, and therefore not to the civil Magistrate, King, or
Governor, to whom it pleased not the Lord Jesus by himself or by his Apostles
to give particular Rules or directions concerning their behavior and carriage
in Civil Magistracy, as they have done expressly concerning the duty of
fathers, mothers, children, masters, servants, yea and of Subjects toward
Magistrates, Ephesians. 5. and 6. Colos. 3. and 4. etc.

I conceive not the reason of this to be (as some weakly have done) because the
Lord Jeus would not have any followers of his to hold the place of civil
Magistracy, but rather that he foresaw, and the Holy Spirit in the Apostles
foresaw how few Magistrates, A twofold state of Christianity, the persecuted
under the Roman Emperors, and the Apostate ever since.
either in the first persecuted, or apostated state of Christianity would
embrace his yoke: in the persecuted state, Magistrates hated the very name of
Christ or Christianity: In the state apostate some few Magistrates (in their
persons holy and precious, yet) as concerning their places, as they have
professed to have been Governors or Heads of the Church, have been so many
false Heads, and have constituted so many false visible Christ's.

Thirdly, I conceive this charge of the Lord Jesus to his Messengers the
Preachers and Proclaimers of his mind, is a sufficient declaration of the
mind of the Lord Jesus, if any civil Magistrate should make question what
were his duty concerning spiritual things.

The Apostles, and in them all that succeed them, being commanded not to pluck
up the Tares, but let them alone, received from the Lord Jesus a threefold
charge.

First, Christ's Messengers receive a threefold charge in that prohibition of
Christ, Let them alone. Gods people not to pray for ^h^ present ruin and
destruction of idolaters, although their persecutors, but for their peace and
salvations. The word of God ^^ghtly de^ounced plucks up k^ng^^ms.
to let them alone, and not to pluck them up by prayer to God for their
present temporal destruction.

Jeremy had a Commission to plant and build, to pluck up and destroy
Kingdoms, Ier. 1. 10. therefore he is commanded not to pray for that people
whom God had a purpose to pluck up, Jer. 14 11. and he plucks up the whole
Nation by prayer, Lament. 3. 66. Thus Elijah brought fire from heaven to
consume the Captains and the ^ifties, 2 King. 1. and the Apostles desired also
so to practice against the Samaritanes, Luc. 9. 54. but were reproved by the
Lord Jesus. For contrarily, the Saints and Servants and Churches of Christ are
to pray for all men, especially for all Magistrates (of what sort or Religions
soever) and to seek the peace of the City (what ever City it be) because in
the peace of the place Gods people have peace also, Ier. 297. 2 Timothy 2. etc.

Secondly, Gods Messengers are herein commanded not to prophecy or denounce a
present destruction or extirpation of all false professors of the name of
Christ, which are whole Towns, Cities, and Kingdoms full.

Jeremy did thus pluck up Kingdoms in those fearful Prophecies he poured
forth against all the Nations of the World, throughout his Chap. 24. 25. 26.
etc. as did also the other Prophets in a measure, though none comparably to
Jeremy and Ezekiel.

Such denunciations of present temporal judgments are not the Messengers of
the Lord Jesus to pour forth. It Is true, many fore and fearful plagues are
poured forth upon the Roman E^^perours and Roman Popes in the Revelation, yet
not to their utter extirpation or plucking up until the Harvest.

Thirdly, I conceive Gods Messengers are charged to let them alone and not
pluck them up, by exciting and stirring up Civil Magistrates, Kings,
Emperors, Governors, Parliaments, or General Cou^ts or Assemblies, to pu^ish
and persecute all such persons out of their Dominions and Territories, as
worship not the true God according to the revealed will of God in Christ Jesus.
Gods Ministers are (...) to provoke (...)
It Is (...) Eliiah thus stirred up Ahab to kill all the Priests and Prophets of
Baal, ^ut that was in (...) sig^ra^ive state of the Land of Canaan (as I have
already and shall further manifest) not to be matched or paralleld by any other
State, but the spiritual State or Church of Christ in all the world, 1 ^et. 2.
9.
putting the false Prophets and Idolaters spiritually to death by the two-edged
sword and power 1 Cor. 5.
of the Lord Jesus, as that Church of Israel did corporally.

And therefore ^aith Paul expressly, 1 Cor. 5. 10. Companying with (...). 1 Cor.
5 discussed.
we must go out of the world, in case we may not company in civil converse
with Idolaters etc.


Peace. It may be said some sorts of sinners are there mentioned, as Drunkards,
Raylers, Extortioners, who are to be punished by the Civil Sword, why not
Idolaters also? for although the Subject may lawfully converse, buy and fell,
and live with such, yet the Civil Magistrate shall nevertheless be justly
blamed in suffering of them.


Truth. I answer, Lawful converse with idolaters in civil, but not in
spiritual things.
the Apostle in this Scripture speaks not of permission of either, but
expressly shows the difference between the Church and the World, and the
lawfulness of conversation with such persons in civil things, with whom it is
not lawful to have converse in spirituals: secretly withal foretelling, that
Magistrates and People, whole States and Kingdoms should be Idolatrous and
Antichristian, yet with whom notwithstanding the Saints and Churches of God
might lawfully cohabit, and hold civil converse and conversation.

Concerning their permission of what they judge Idolatrous, I have and shall
speak at large.


Peace. Oh how contrary unto this command of the Lord Jesus have Dangerous and
ung^ounded zeal.
such as have conceived themselves the true Messengers of the Lord Jesus, in
all ages, not let such Professors and Prophets alone, whom they have judged
Tares, but have provoked Kings and Kingdoms (and some one of good intentions
and zeal to God) to prosecute and persecute such even unto death? Amongst whom
Gods people (the good wheat) has also been plucked up, as all Ages and
Histories testify, and too too often the World laid upon bloody heaps in civil
and intestine desolations on this occasion. All which would be prevented, and
the greatest breaches made up in the peace of our own or other Countries, were
this command of the Lord Jesus obeyed, to wit, to let them alone until the
Harvest.


CHAP. XXVIII.
I Shall conclude this controversy about this Parable in this brief (...) and
recapitulation of what has been said, I hope by the evident demonstration of
Gods Spirit to the conscience I have (...)

First, that the Tares in this Parable cannot signify Doctrines or Practices
(as was affirmed) but Persons.

Secondly, the Tares cannot signify Hypocrites in the Church either
undiscovered or discovered.

Thirdly, the Tares here cannot signify Scandalous Offenders in the Church.

Fourthly, nor scandalous offenders in life and conversation against the Civil
state.

Fifthly, The field in which these Tares are sown, is not the Church

Again affirmatively: First, the Field is properly the World, the Civil State
or Commonwealth.

Secondly, The Tares here intended by the Lord Jesus, are Antichristian
idolaters, opposite to the good seed of the Kingdom, true Christians.

Thirdly, the ministers or messengers of the Lord Jesus ought to let them alone
to live in the world, (...) neither seek by prayer or prophecy to pluck them
up before the Harvest.

Fourthly, this permission or suffering of them in the field of the World, is
not for hu^t, but for common good, even for the good of the good Wheat, the
people of God

Lastly, the patience of God is, and the patience of Men ought to be exercised
toward (...), and yet notwithstanding their doom is fearful at the harvest,
even gathering, bund^ng, and everlasting burnings by the mighty hand of the
Angels in the end of the World.

CHAP. XXIX.
Peace. THe second Scripture brought against such persecution for cause of
Conscience, M^^th. 15. 14. the se^^^^ Scripture controv^rted in this cause.
is Matthew. 15. 14. where the Disciples being troubled at the Pharisees carriage
toward the Lord Jesus and his doctrines, and relating how they were offended at
him, the Lord Jesus commands his Disciples to let them alone, and gives this
(...), that the blind lead the blind, and both should fall into the ditc^.

Unto which, Answer is made, That it makes nothing to the Cause, because it was
spoken to his private Disciples, and not to public Officers in Church or
State: and also, because it was spoken in regard of not troubling themselves,
or regarding the offense which the Pharisees took.


Truth. I answer, (to pass by his assertion of the privacie of the Apostles)
in that the Lord Jesus commanding to let them alone, that is, not only not be
offended themselves, but not to meddle with them; it appears it was no
ordinance of God nor Christ for the Disciples to have gone further, and have
complained to, Christ Jesus never directed his Disciples to the civil
Magistrate for help in his cause.
and excited the Civil Magistrate to his duty: which if it had been an
Ordinance of God and Christ, either for the vindicating of Christ's doctrine, or
the recovering of the Pharisees, or the preserving of others from infection, the
Lord Jesus would never have commanded them to omit that which should have
tended to these holy ends.


CHAP. XXX.
Peace. IT may be said, that neither the Roman Caesar, nor Herod, no^ Pilate
knew ought of the true God, or of Christ; and it had been in vain to have made
complaint to them who were not sit and competent, but ignorant and opposite
Judges.


Truth. I answer first, Paul's appealing to Caesar. Civil Magistrates never
appointed by God, Dfenders of the Faith of Jesus. Every o^^ is bound to put
forth him self to his utmost power in Gods business; and wh^re it stops, the
guilt will lie.
this removes (by the way) that stumbling block which many fall at, to wit,
Paul's appealing to Caesar; which since he could not in common sense do unto
Caesar as a competent Judge in such cases, and wherein he should have also
denied his own Apostleship or office, in which regard (to wit in matters of
Christ) he was higher then Caesar himself: it must needs follow, that his
appeal was merely in respect of his Civil wrongs, and false accusations of
sedition, etc.

Secondly, if it had been an Ordinance of God, that all Civil Magistrates were
bound to judge in causes spiritual or Christian, as to suppress heresies,
defend the faith of Jesus; although that Caesar, Herod, Pilate were wicked,
ignorant and opposite, yet the Disciples and the Lord Christ himself had been
bound to have performed the duty of faithful Subjects, for the preventing of
further evil, and the clearing of themselves, and so to have left the matter
upon the Magistrates care and conscience, by complaining unto the Magistrate
against such evils; for every person is bound to go so far as lies in his
power for the preventing and the redressing of evil; and where it stops in
any, and runs nor clear, there the guilt, like filth or mud, will lie.

Thirdly, had it been the holy purpose of God to have established the doctrine
and kingdom of his Son this way, Christ could have easily been furnished with
godly Magistrates, if he had so appointed,
since his coming, he would have furnished Commonweals, Kingdoms, Cities,
etc. then and since, with such temporal Powers and Magistrates as should have
been excellently sit and competent: for he that could have had legions of
Angels, if he so pleased, could as easily have been, and still be furnished
with legions of good and gracious Magistrates to this end and purpose.


CHAP. XXXI.
IT is generally said, that God has in former rimes, and does still, and will
hereafter stir up Kings and Queens, etc.

I answer, that place of Isa. 49. 23. will appear to be far from proving such
Kings and Queens Judges of Ecclesiastical causes: and if not Judges, they may
not punish.

In Spiritual things, themselves are subject to the Church, and censures of
it, although in Civil respects superior. How shall those Kings and Queens be
supreme Governors of the Church, and yet lick the dust of the Churches feet?
Gods Israel earnest with God for in Arm of Flesh, which God gives in his
anger, and takes away in his wrath. The punishment of blind Pharisees, though
let alone, yet is greater then any corporal punishment in the world, in 4
respects.
as it is there expressed.

Thirdly, Gods Israel of old were earnest with God for a King, for an Arm of
Flesh, for a King to protect them, as other Nations had. Gods Israel still have
ever been restless with God for an Arm of flesh.

God gave them Saul in his anger, and took him away in his wrath: And God has
given many a Saul in his Anger, that is, an Arm of Flesh in the way of his
Providence, (though I judge not all persons whom Saul in his Calling typed out,
to be of Saul's spirit) for I speak of a State and outward visible Power only.

I add, God will take away such stays on whom Gods people rest, in his wrath,
that King David, that is, Christ Jesus the Antitype, in his own Spiritual
power in the hands of the Saints, may spiritually and for ever be advanced.

And therefore I conclude, it was in one respect that the Lord Jesus said, Let
them alone, because it was no Ordinance for any Disciple of Jesus to prosecute
the Pharisees at Caesar's Bar.

Beside, let it be seriously considered by such as plead for present corporal
punishment, as conceiving that such sinners (though they break nor Civil
peace) should not escape unpunished, I say, let it be considered, though for
the present their punishment is deferred, yet the punishment inflicted on them
will be found to amount to an higher pitch then any corporal punishment in the
World beside, and that in these four respects.

CHAP. XXXII.
FIrst by just judgment from God false teachers are stark blind, Gods sword
has struck out the right eye of their mind and spiritual underderstanding,
The eye of the (...) struck out is worse then for both right and left eye of
the body to be (...) out ten thousand times.
ten thousand times a greater punishment then if the Magistrate should command
both the right and left eye of their bodies to be bored or plucked out, and
that in so many fearful respects if the blindness of the soul and of the
body were a little compared together, whether we look at that want of
guidance, or the want of joy and pleasure, which the light of the eye
affords; or whether we look at the damage, shame, deformity and danger,
which blindness brings to the outward man, and much more true in the want of
the former, and miseris of the latter in spiritual and soul blindness to
all eternity.

Secondly, how fearful is that wound that no Balm in Gilead can cure? How
d^eadfull is that blindness which for ever to all eye salve is incurable? For
if persons be wilfully and desperately obstinate (after light shining forth)
let them alone faith the Lord. Some souls incurable, whom not only corporal
b^^ spiritual phys^^ke can nothing avail.
So spoke the Lord once of Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone,
Hos. 7. what more lamentable condition then when the Lord has given a poor
sinner over as a hopeless patient, incurable, which we are wont to account a
^orer affliction, then if a man were torn and racked, etc.

And this I speak not that I conceive that all whom the Lord Jesus commands
His servants to pass from, and let alone, to permit and tolerate (when it is
in their power corporally to molest them) I say that all are thus ^^cura^le,
yet that sometimes that word is spoken by Christ Jesus to ^is servants to be
patient, for neither can corporal or spiritual (...) or Physic ever heal
or cure ^^em.

Thirdly, their end is the Ditch, that bottomless pit of everlasting
separation (...) the holy and sweet Presence of the Father of Lights, Goodness
and Mercy it self, The bottom (...) blind ^all.
enalesse, (...), in extremity, universality, and eternity of torments, which
most direful and lamen^able downfall, should strike a ^oly fear and trembling
into all (...) see the Pit, whith^^ (...) are ^umbling, and cause us to strive
so far as (...) by the spiritual eye salve of the Word of God to heal and
(...) ^hei^ soule-destroying blindness.

(...), of those that fall into this ^^e^^full Ditch, both leader and
followers, how deplorable in more especial manner is the leaders case, upon
whose neck the followers tumble, the ruin not only of his own soul, being
horrible, but also the ruin of the followers souls eternally galling and
tormenting.

Peace. Some will say these things are indeed full of horror, yet such is the
state of all sinners and of many Malefactors, whom yet the State is bound to
punish, and sometimes by death it self.


Truth. I answer, The Civil Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but to
cut off Civil offenses, yea and the offenders too in case: But what is this
to a blind Pharisce, resisting the Doctrine of Christ, who happily may be as
good a subject, and as peaceable and profitable to the Civil State as any, and
for his spiritual offense against the Lord Jesus, in denying Him to be the
true Christ, he suffers the vengeance of a dreadful judgment both present
and eternal, as before.


CHAP. XXXIII.
Peace. YEa but it is said that the blind Pharisees misguiding the subjects of
a Civil State, Soul killing the ch^efest murder. No Magistrate can execute
true justice in killing soul for soul, but christ Jesus who by typical death
in the Law, typed out spiritual in the Gospel. A great mistake in most to
conceive that dead men, that is, souls dead in sin may be infected by false
doctrine.
greatly sin against a Civil State, and therefore justly suffer civil
punishment; for shall the Civil Magistrate take care of outsides only, to wit,
of the bodies of men, and not of souls, in laboring to procure their
everlasting welfare?


Truth. I answer, It is a truth, the mischief of a blind Pharisees blind
guidance is greater then if he acted Treasons, Murders, etc. and the loss of
one soul by his seduction is a greater mischief then if he blew up
Parliaments, and cuts the throats of Kings or Emperors, so precious is that
invaluable Jewel of a Soul, above all the present lives and bodies of all the
men in the world I and therefore a firm Justice calling for eye for eye, tooth
for tooth, life for life; calls also soul for soul, which the blinde-guiding
seducing Pharisee shall surely pay in that dreadful Ditch, which the Lord
Jesus speaks of, but this sentence against him the Lord Jesus only pronounces
in His Church, His spiritual judicature, and executes this sentence in part at
present and hereafter to all eternity: Such a sentence no Civil Judge can
pass, such a Death no Civil sword can in^lict.


I answer secondly, Dead men cannot be infected, the civil state the world,
being in a natural state dead in sin (what ever be the State-Religion unto
which persons are forced) it is impossible it should be infected: Indeed the
living, the believing, the Church and spiritual state, that and that only is
capable of infection; for whose help we shall presently see what
preservatives, and remedies the Lord Jesus has appointed.

Moreover as we see in a common plague or infection the names are taken how
many are to dye, All natural men being dead in sin, yet none die everlastingly
but such as are thereunto ordained.
and not one more shall be struck, then the destroying Angel has the names
of. So here, what ever be the soul infection breathed out from they lying lips
of a plague-sicke Pharisee, yet the names are taken, not one elect or chosen of
God shall perish, Gods sheep are safe in His eternal hand and counsel, and he
that knows his material, knows also his mystical stars, their numbers, and
calls them every one by name, none fall into the Ditch on the blind Pharisees
back, but such as were ordained to that condemnation, both guide and followers,
1 Pet. 2. 8. Jude 4. The vessels of wrath shall break and split, and only
they to the praise of Gods eternal justice, Romans 9.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Peace. BUt it is said, be it granted that in a common plague or infection none
are smitten and dye but such as are appointed, yet it is not only every man's
duty, but the common duty of the Magistrate to prevent infection, and to
preserve the common health of the place; likewise though the number of the
Elect be sure, and God knows who are His, yet has He appointed means for
their preservation from perdition, and from infection, and therefore the Angel
is blamed for suffering Balaams doctrine, and Iesabel to seduce Christ Jesus
His servants, Rev. 2. Tit. 3. 10. Romans 16. 17.


Truth. I answer, The Lord Jesus has not lest his Church without spiritual
antidotes and remedies against infection.
Let that Scripture and that of Titus reject an Heretic, and Romans 16. 17.
avoid them that are contentious, etc. let them, and all of like nature be
examined, and it will appear that the great and good Physician Christ Jesus,
the Head of the Body, and King of the Church has not been unfaithful in
providing spiritual antidotes and preservatives against the spiritual
sicknesses, sores, weaknosses, dangers of his Church and people; but he never
appointed the civil sword for either antidote or remedy, as an addition to
those spiritualls, which he has left with his wife, his Church or People.


Hence how great is the bondage, the captivity of Gods own People to
Babylonish or confused mixtures in Worship, The miserable bondage Gods people
live in.
and unto worldly and earthly policies to uphold State Religions or Worships,
since that which is written to the Angel and Church at Pergamus, shall be
interpreted as sent to the Governor and City of Pergamus, and that which is
sent to Titus, and the Church of Christ at Creet must be delivered to the
civil officers and City thereof.

But as the Civil Magistrate has his charge of the bodies and goods of the
subject: So have the spiritual Officers, Governors and overseers of Christ's
City or Kingdom, the charge of their souls, and soul safety: Hence that
charge of Paul to Tim. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin rebuke before all, that
others may learn to fear. This is in the Church of Christ a spiritual means
for the healing of a soul that has sinned, or taken infection, and for the
preventing of the infecting of others, that others may learn to fear, etc.

CHAP. XXXV.
Peace. IT is said true that Titus and Timothy, and so the Officers of the
Church of Christ are bound to prevent soul infection: But what hinders that
the Magistrate should not be charged also with this duty?


Truth. I answer, many things I have answered, and more shall; at present I
shall only say this: The Kings and Queens of England Governors of the Church.
If it be the Magistrate duty or office, then is he both a Temporal and
Ecclesiastical officer; contrary to which most men will affirm: and yet we
know the policy of our own Land and Country has established to the Kings and
Queens thereof, the supreme heads or governors of the Church of England.


That doctrine and distinction that a Magistrate may punish an Heretic civilly
will not here avail; Strange confusion in punishments.
for what is Babel if this be not confusedly to punish corporal or civil
offenses with spiritual or Church censures (the offendour not being a member
of it) or to punish Woe were it with the civil Magistrate if he blood of
souls (beside the ordinary care of the bo^ies ^^d goods ^f (...)) should ^^ry
(...) him.
soul or spiritual offenses with corporal or temporal weapons proper to
Delinquents against the temporal or civil state.

Lastly, woe were it with the civil Magistrate (and most intolerable burdens
do they lay upon their backs that teach this doctrine) if together with the
common care and charge of the Commonwealth (the peace and safety of the Town,
City, State or Kingdom) the blood of every soul that perishes should cry
against him, unless he could say with Paul, Acts 20. (in spiritual regards) I
am clear from the blould of all men, that is the blood of souls, which was his
charge to look after, The Magistrates duties toward the Church the Sp^^se of
Christ.
so far as his preaching went, not the blood of bodies which belongs to the
civil Magistrate.

I acknowledge he ought to cherish (as a foster-father) the Lord Jesus in his
truth, in his Saints, to cleave unto them himself, and to countenance them
even to the death, yea also to break the teeth of the Lions, who offer Civil
violence and injury unto them.

But, to see all his Subjects Christians, to keep such Church or Christians in
the purity of worship, and see them do their duty, this belongs to the Head of
the Body Christ Jesus, and such spiritual Officers as he has to this purpose
deputed, whose right it is according to the true pattern: Usurpers and true
heirs of the spiritual Crown of Jesus.
Abimelech, Saul, Adonijah, Athalia were but usurpers: David, Solomon, Ioash,
etc. they were the true heirs and types of Christ Jesus in His true Power and
Authority in His Kingdom.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Peace. THe next Scripture brought against such persecution is Luke 9. 54, 55.
Luke 9. 54. 55 discussed.
where the Lord Jesus reproved His Disciples, who would have had fire come
down from Heaven, and devour those Samaritanes^ that would not receive Him in
these words: You know not of what spirit you are, the Son of Man is not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them.

With this Scripture Mr. Cotton joins the fourth, and answers both in one,
which is this, 2 Timothy 2. 24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must
be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil men, instructing them with
meekness that are contrary minded and oppose themselves, proving if God
peradventure will give them repentance that they may acknowledge the truth, and
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil who are taken
captive by him at his will.

Unto both these Scriptures it pleases him thus to answer: Both these are
directions to Ministers of the Gospel how to deal (not with obstinate
offenders in the Church who sin against conscience, but) either with men
without as the Samaritanes were, and many unconverted Christians in Creet, whom
Titus (as an Evangelist) was to seek to convert:

Ot at best with some Jews or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnal, yet
were not convinced of the error of their way: And it is true it became not the
Spirit of the Gospel to convert Aliens to the Faith (such as the Samaritanes
were) by fire and brimstone, An excellent saying of persecutors themselves^
nor to deal harshly in public Ministry or private conference with all such
several minded men as either had not yet entered into Church fellowship, or if
they had did hitherto sin of ignorance, not against Conscience: But neither of
both these Texts do hinder the Minister of the Gospel to proceed in a Church
way against Church members, when they become scandalous offenders either in
life o^ doctrine, much less do they speak at all to the Civil Magistrate.


CHAP. XXXVII.
Truth. THis perplexed and ravelled Answer, wherein so many things and so
doubtful are wrapped up and entangled together, I shall take in pieces.


First, The Answerer when he should speak to toleration in the State, ^unnes
to punishments in the Church, which none can deny.
concerning that of the Lord Jesus rebuking his Disciples for their rash and
ignorant bloody zeal (Luc. 9.) desiring corporal destruction upon the
Samaritanes for refusing the Lord Jesus, etc. the Answerer affirms, that
hinders not the Ministers of the Gospel to proceed in a Church way against
scandalous offenders, which is not here questioned, but maintained to be the
holy will of the Lord, and a sufficient censure and punishment, if no civil
offense against the Civil State be committed.

Secondly (says he) Much less does this speak at all to the Civil
Magistrate.

Where I observe that he implies that beside the censure of the Lord Jesus, in
the hands of his spiritual governors, for any spiritual evil in life or
doctrine, If the Civil Magistrate be a Christian, he is bound to be like
Christ in saving, not destroying men's bodies. The civil Magistrate bound not
to inflict nor to suffer any other to inflict violence, stripes, or any
corporal punishment for evil against Christ.
the Civil Magistrate is also to inflict corporal punishment upon the
contrary minded: whereas

First, if the Civil Magistrate be a Christian, a Disciple or follower of the
meek Lamb of God, he is bound to be far from destroying the bodies of men,
for refusing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, for otherwise he should not
know (according to this speech of the Lord Jesus) what spirit he was of yea and
to be ignorant of the sweet end of the coming of the Son of Man, which was not
to destroy the bodies of Men, but to save both bodies and souls, verse. 55. 56.

Secondly, if the Civil Magistrate, being a Christian, gifted, prophecy in
the Church, 1 Corinthians. 1. 14. although the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they in
their own persons hold forth, shall be refused, yet they are here forbidden to
call for fire from heaven, that is, to procure or inflict any corporal
judgment upon such offenders, remembering the end of the Lord Jesus his
coming, not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Lastly, this also concerns the conscience of the Civil Magistrate, as he is
bound to preserve the civil peace and quiet of the place and people under him,
he is bound to suffer no man to break the Civil Peace, by laying hands of
violence upon any, though as vile as the Samaritanes for not receiving of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

It is indeed the ignorance and blind zeal of the second Beast, the false
Prophet, Rev. 13. 13. Revel. 13. 13. Fire from heaven. What the fire from
heaven is which the false Prophet brings down.
to persuade the civil Powers of the earth to persecute the Saints, that is,
to bring fiery judgments upon men in a judicial way, and to pronounce that
such judgments of imprisonment, banishment, death, proceed from Gods righteous
vengeance upon such Heretics. So dealt diverse Bishops in France, and England
too in Queen Mary's days with the Saints of God at their putting to death,
declaiming against them in their Sermons to the people, and proclaiming that
these persecutions even unto death were Gods just judgments from heaven upon
these Heretics.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Peace. Doubtless such fiery spirits (as the Lord Jesus said) are not of God:
I pray speak to the second place out of Timothy, 2. Epist. 25. 26. 2 Timothy 3.
25. 26. examined.



Truth. I acknowledge this instruction to be meek and patient, etc. is
properly an instruction to the Ministers of the Gospel. Yet diverse Arguments
from hence will truly and fairly be collected, to manifest and evince how far
the civil Magistrate ought to be from dealing with the civil sword in
spiritual cases.

And first by the way^ I desire to ask, What were these unconverted Christians
in Crete, which the Answerer compares with the Samaritanes, whom Titus (says
he) as an Evangelist was to seek to convert; and whether the Lord Jesus have
any such Disciples and Followers, who yet are visibly in an unconverted estate.
O that it may please the Father of mercies, the Father of lights, to awaken and
open the eyes of all that fear before him, that they may see whether this be
the Language of Canaan, or the Language of Ashdod.

What is an unconverted Christian but in truth an unconverted Convert? A quaere
what the Answerer means by his unconverted Christian in Crete.
that is in English, one unturned turned: unholy holy: Disciples or Followers
of Jesus not following of him: In a word, that is Christians or anointed by
Christ, Antichristians not anointed with the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Certain it is, The original of Christians.
such they were not unto whom the Spirit of God gives that name, Act. 11. And
indeed whither can this tend but to uphold the blasphemy of so many as say they
are Jews, that is, Christians, but are not? Rev. 2. But as they are not
Christians from Christ, but from the Beast and his Picture, so their proper
name from Antichrist, is Antichristians.

How sad yet and how true an evidence is this, The Answerer yet in the
unconverted Churches and worships.
that the soul of the Answerer (I speak not of his inward soul and person,
but of his worship) has never yet heard the call of the Lord Jesus, to come
out from those unconverted Churches, from that unconverted Antichristian
Christian world, and so from Antichrist Belial, to seek fellowship with Christ
Jesus, and his converted Christians, Disciples after the first pattern.

Again, I observe the haste and light attention of the Answerer to these
Scriptures (as commonly the spirits of Gods children in matters of Christ's
Kingdom are very sleepy) for these persons here spoken of were not (as he
speaks) unconverted Christians in Crete, Gods people sleepy in the matters of
Christ's Kingdom, Cant. 5. 2.
whom Titus as an Evangelist was to convert, but they were such opposites as
Timothy (to whom Paul writes this Letter at Ephesus) should meet withal.


CHAP. XXXIX.
Peace. BUt what is there in this Scripture of Timothy alleged concerning the
civil Magistracy?


Truth. I argue from this place of Timothy in particular, thus. 1 Cor. 14.
Patience and ^eeknesse required in all that open Christ's mysteries.


First, if the civil Magistrates he Christians, or members of the Church,
able to prophecy in the Church of Christ, then I say as before, they are bound
by this command of Christ to suffer opposition to their doctrine, with
meekness and gentleness, and to be so far from striving to subdue their
opposites with the civil sword, that they are bound with patience and
meekness to wait if God peradventure will please to grant repentance unto
their opposites.

So also it pleases the Answerer to acknowledge in these words: It becomes not
the Spirit of the Gospel to convert Aliens to the Faith (such as the
Samaritanes, and the unconverted Christians in Crete) with Fire and Brimstone.

Secondly, be they oppositions within, and Church members (as the Answerer
speaks) become scandalous in doctrine, (I speak not of scandals against the
civil State, which the civil Magistrate ought to punish) it is the Lord only
(as this Scripture to Timothy implies) who is able to give them repentance, The
civil Sword may make a Nation of Hypocrites and Antichristians, but not one
Christian.
and recover them out of Satan's snare: to which end also he has appointed
those holy and dreadful censures in his Church or Kingdom. True it is, the
Sword may make (as once the Lord complained, Isa. 10.) a whole Nation of
Hypocrites: But to recover a Soul from Satan by repentance, and to bring them
from Antichristian doctrine or worship, to the doctrine or worship Christian,
in the least true internal or external submission, that only works the
All-powerfull God, by the sword of his Spirit in the hand of his Spiritual
officers.

What a most woeful proof hereof have the Nations of the Earth given in all
Ages? Wonderful changes of Religion in England.
And to seek no further then our native Soil, within a few scores of years,
how many wonderful changes in Religion has the whole Kingdom made, according
to the change of the Governors thereof, in the several Religious which they
themselves embraced! Henry the 7. finds and leaves the kingdom absolutely
Popish. Henry the 8. casts it into a mould half Popish half Protestant.
Englands changes in point of Religion.
Edward the 6. brings forth an Edition all Protestant. Queen Mary within few
years defaceth Edwards work, and renders the Kingdom (after her Grandfather
Hen. 7. his pattern) all Popish. Mary's short life and Religion ends together:
and Elizabeth reviveth her Brother Edwards Model, all Protestant: And some
eminent Witnesses of Gods Truth against Antichrist, have inclined to believe,
that before the downfall of that Beast, England must once again how down her
fair Neck to his proud usurping yoke and foot.


Peace. It has been Englands sinful shame, to fashion and change their
Garments and Religions with wondrous ease and lightness, as a higher Power, a
stronger Sword has prevailed; after the ancient pattern of Nebuchaanezzars
bowing the whole world in one most solemn uniformitie of worship to his Golden
Image, Dan. 3.


CHAP. XL.
BUt it has been thought, or said, Shall oppositions against the Truth escape
unpunished? will they not prove mischievous, etc.

Truth. I answer (as before) concerning the blind Guides (in case there be no
Civil offense committed) the Magistrates, The misery of opposites against the
Truth.
and all men that by the mercy of God to themselves discern the misery of
such Opposites, have cause to lament and bewail that fearful condition
wherein such are entangled, to wit, in the snares and chains of Satan, with
which they are so invincibly caught and held, that no power in Heaven or Earth,
but the Right hand of the Lord in the meek and gentle dispensing of the Word
of Truth, can release and quit them.

Those many false Christ's (of whom the Lord Jesus forewarnes, Mat. 24.) have
sutably their false bodies, faith, spirit, Baptism, as the Lord Jesus, has
his true body, A difference between the true and false Christ and Christians.
faith, spirit, etc. Ephesians. 4. correspondent also are their weapons, and the
success, issue, or operation of them. A carnal weapon or sword of steel may
produce a carnal repentance, a show, an outside, an uniformitie through a
State or Kingdom: But it has pleased the Father to exalt the Lord Jesus only,
to be a Prince (armed with power and means sufficient) to give repentance to
Israel, Acts 5. 31.

Accordingly an unbelieving Soul being dead in sin (although he be changed
from one worship to another, like a dead man shifted into several changes of
apparel) cannot please God, Heb. 11. and consequently, whatever such an
unbelieving and unregenerate person acts in Worship or Religion, The worship of
unbelieving unregenerate persons.
it is but sin, Romans 14. Preaching sin, praying (though without beads or
book) sin; breaking of bread, or Lords supper sin, yea as odious as the
oblation of Swines blood, a Dogs neck, or killing of a Man, Isa. 66.

But Faith it is that gift which proceeds alone from the Father of Lights,
Phil. 1. 29. and till he please to make his light arise and open the eyes of
blind sinners, their souls shall lie fast asleep (and the faster, in that a
sword of steel compells them to a worship in hypocrisy) in the dungeons of
spiritual darkness and Satan's slavery.


Peace. I add, that a civil sword The danger and mischief of a civil sword
in Soul matters, which makes the civil Magistrate deeply guilty of all those
evils which he aims to suppress.
(as woeful experience in all ages has proved) is so far from bringing or
helping forward an opposite in Religion to repentance, that Magistrates sin
grievously against the work of God and blood of Souls, by such proceedings.
Because as (commonly) the sufferings of false and Antichristian Teachers harden
their followers, who being blind, by this means are occasioned to tumble into
the ditch of Hell after their blind leaders, with more inflamed zeal of lying
confidence. So secondly, violence and a sword of steel begets such an
impression in the sufferers, that certainly they conclude (as indeed that
Religion cannot be true which needs such instruments of violence to uphold it
so) that Persecutors are far from soft and gentle commiseration of the
blindness of others. That cannot be a true Religion, which needs carnal
weapons to uphold it. Persecutors beget a persuasion of their cruelty in the
hearts of the persecuted.
To this purpose it pleased the Father of Spirits, of old, to constrain the
Emperor of Rome, Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Pius his golden act.
to write to all the Governors of his Provinces to forbear to persecute the
Christians, because such dealing must needs be so far from converting the
Christians from their way, that it rather begat in their minds an opinion of
their cruelty, etc.


CHAP. XLI.
Peace. THe next Scripture against such persecution, is that of the Prophet,
Isa. 24. together with Mic. 4. 3. they shall break their swords into
plough-shares, Isa. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3. Isa. 11. 9. concerning Christ's peace able
Kingdom discussed.
and their spears into pruning-hookes, Isa. 11. 9. There shall none hurt or
destroy in all the mountain of my Holiness.

Unto which it pleased Mr. Cotton to say, That these predictions do only
show, first, with what kind of weapons he should subdue the Nations to the
obedience of the faith of the Gospel, not by fire and sword, and weapons of
War, but by the power of the Word and Spirit of God, which faith he, no man
doubts of.

Secondly, Mr. Cottons excellent interpretation of those Prophecies.
those predictions of the Prophets show, what the meek and peaceable temper
will be of all true converts to Christianity; not Lions or Leopards, not cruel
oppressors nor malignant opposers or biters one of another: but does not forbid
them to drive ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, and to restrain them from
devouring the sheep of Christ.


Truth. In this first excellent and truly Christian Answer, me thinks the
Answerer may hear a voice from Heaven, His doctrine and practice condemned by
that interpretation.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee: For what can be said more heavenly
by the tongues of Men and Angels, to show the heavenly meek temper of all the
Soldiers of the Lamb of God, as also to set forth what are the Spiritual
weapons and ammunition of the holy war and battle of the Gospel and Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, for the subduing of the Nations of the World unto him.


Peace. And yet out of the same mouth (which should not be, faith James)
proceeds good and evil, sweet and sour; for he adds: But this does not
forbid them to drive ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, and to restrain them
from devouring the sheep of Christ.


Truth. In these words (according to the judgment here maintained by him) he
fights against the former truth (to wit, that by spiritual weapons Christ
Jesus will subdue the Nations of the Earth to the obedience of the Gospel) for
by driving away these Wolves he intends not only the resistance and violence
which the Shepherds of Christ ought spiritually to make, but the civil
resistance of the material Swords, Spiritual and mystical Wolves.
Staves Guns, etc. Whence^ I argue, that same power that forces the evil (or
Wolves) out, forces the good (the Sheep) in; for of the same or like things
is the same or like reason; as the same arm of flesh that with a staff beats
off a Wolf, with a Rod and Hook brings in the Sheep: the same dog that
assaulteth and teareth the Wolf, frighteth and forces in the straggling Sheep.


CHAP. XLII.
Peace. But for the clearer opening of this mystery, I pray explicate that
Scripture where the Spirit of God is pleased to use this similitude of Wolves,
Act. 20. 29. opened.
Acts 20. 29. out of which (keeping to the Allegory) I shall propose these
Quaeries.

First, what Wolves were these Paul warnes of?


Truth. Answ. Wolves literally he will not say: Nor secondly, persecutors of
the Flock, such as the Roman Emperors were, Magistrates under him.

Therefore (thirdly) such as brought other Religions and Worships, What those
Wolves were Act. 20. 29.
as the Spirit of God opens it, verse. 30. Such as amongst themselves should
speak perverse things, as many Antichrists did, and especially The Antichrist.
And I ask whether or no such as may hold forth other Worships or Religions,
(Jews, Turks, or Antichristians) may not be peaceable and quiet Subjects,
loving and helpful neighbors, fair and just dealers, true and loyal to the
civil government? It is clear they may from all Reason and Experience in many
flourishing Cities and Kingdoms of the World, and so offend not against the
civil State and Peace; nor incur the punishment of the civil sword,
notwithstanding that in spiritual and mystical account they are ravenous and
greedy Wolves.


Peace. 2. I quaere to whom Paul gave this charge to watch against them, verse.
31.


Truth. They were not the Magistrates of the City of Ephesus, but the Elders or
Ministers of the Church of Christ (his mystical flock of sheep) at Ephesus:
Unto them was this charge of watching given, and so consequently of driving
away these Wolves.

And however that many of these charges and exhortations given by that One
Shepherd Christ Jesus to the Shepherds or Ministers of Churches, Charges
directed to Ministers of the spiritual kingdom, fasly applied to the
Magistrates of the civil.
be commonly attributed and directed (by the Answerer in this discourse) to the
civil Magistrate; yet I desire in the fear and holy presence of God it may
be inquired into, whether in all the Will or Testament of Christ there be any
such word of Christ No word of Christ to the civil Magistrate to feed his
flock, but to his Ministers, who (if true) have spiritual power sufficient
against spiritual Wolves.
by way of command, promise, or example, countenancing the Governors of the
civil State to meddle with these Wolves, if in civil things peaceable and
obedient.


Peace. Truly if this charge were given to the Magistrates at Ephesus, or any
Magistrate in the World, doubtless they must be able to discern and
determine (out of their own official abilities in these spiritual Law
questions) who are spiritual Sheep, what is their food, what their poison,
what their properties, who their Keepers, etc. So on the contrary who are
Wolves, what their properties, their haunts, their assaults, the manner of
taking, etc. spiritually: (and this beside the care and study of the Civil
Laws, and the discerning of his own proper Civil Sheep, obedient Sheep,
etc. as also wolvish oppressors, etc. whom he is bound to punish and suppress)


Truth. I know that Civil Magistrates (in some places) have declined the name
of Head of the Church, Magistrates decline the name of Head of the Church, and
yet practice the headship or government.
and Ecclesiastical Judge, yet can they not with good conscience decline the
name, if they do the work, and perform the office of determining and
punishing a merely spiritual Wolf.

They must be sufficiently also able to judge in all spiritual causes, and
that with their own, and not with other men's eyes, (no more then they do in
civil causes) contrary to the common practice of the Governors and Rulers of
Civil States, who often set up that for a Religion or Worship to God, which
the Clergy or Churchmen (as men speak) shall in their Consciences agree upon.

And if this be not so, to wit, that Magistrates must not be Spiritual Judges
(as some decline it in the title, Supreme Head and Governor) why is Gallio
wont to be exclaimed against for refusing to be a Judge in such matters as
concerned the Jewish Worship and Religion? How is he censured for a Profane
person, without conscience, etc. in that he would be no Judge or Head? (for
that is all one in point of Government.)


Peace. In the third place I quaerie whether the Father who gave, The Elect
shall not be devoured.
and the Son who keeps the Sheep, be not greater then all? Who can pluck
these Sheep the Elect out of his hand, which answers that common objection of
that danger of devouring, although there were no other weapons in the world
appointed by the Lord Jesus. But


CHAP. XLIII.
FOurthly, Christ Jesus furnishes his Shepherds with power sufficient to drive
away Wolves.
I ask, Were not these Elders or Ministers of the Church of Ephesus
sufficiently furnished from the Lord Jesus to drive away these mystical and
spiritual Wolves?

Truth. True it is, against the inhumane and uncivil violence of Persecutors,
they were not, nor are Gods children able and provided: but to resist, drive
away, expel, and kill spiritual and mystical Wolves by the word of the Lord,
none are fit to be Christ's Shepherds who are not able^ Tit. 1. 9. 10. 11. Tit.
1. 9. 10. opened.
The Bishop or Overseer must be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to
convince the Gainsayers: which Gainsayers to be by him convinced, that is,
overcome or subdued (though it may be in themselves ever obstinate) they were I
say as greedy Wolves in Crete, as any could be at Ephesus: for so says Paul
verse. 10. they were unruly and vain talkers, deceivers, whose mouths must be
stopped, who subverted whole houses; and yet Titus (and every ordinary Shepherd
of a flock of Christ) had ability sufficient to defend the flock from
spiritual and mystical wolves without the help of the Civil Magistrate.


Peace. In this respect therefore me thinks we may ^itly allude to that
excellent answer of Job to Bildad the Shuhite, Job 26. Job 26. 1, 2.
How have thou helped him that is without power? How savest thou the arm that
has no strength? How have thou counseled him that has no wisdom? how have
thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?

5. Lastly, I ask, whether (as men deal with Wolves) these wolves as Ephesus
were intended by Paul to be killed, their brains dashed out with stones,
staves, halberts, guns, etc. in the hands of the Elders of Ephesus, etc?


Truth. Doubtless (comparing spiritual things with spiritual) all such
mystical wolves must spiritually and mystically so be slain. And the Witnesses
of Truth, Revel. 11. speak fire, and kill all that hurt them, by that sierie
Word of God, and that two-edged sword in their hand, Psalm. 149.


But oh what streams of the blood of Saints have been and must be shed (until
the Lamb have obtained the Victory, Unmercifull and: bloody doctrine.
Revel. 17.) by this unmercifull (and in the state of the New Testament, when
the Church is spread all the World over) most bloody doctrine, viz. The wolves
(Heretics) are to be driven away, their brains knock^ out and killed, the
poor sheep to be preserved for whom Christ died, etc.

Is not this to take Christ Jesus, and make him a temporal King by force? John
6. 15. Is not this to make his Kingdom of this world, to set up a civil and
temporal Israel, to bound out new Earthly holy Lands of Canaan, yea and to set
up a Spanish Inquisition in all parts of the World, to the speedy destruction
of thousands, yea of millions of Souls, and the frustrating of the sweet end
of the coming of the Lord Jesus, to wit, to save men's souls (and to that end
not to destroy their bodies) by his own blood?

CHAP. XLIV.
Peace. THe next Scripture produced against such Persecution, is 2 Cor. 10. 4.
John 6. 15. 2. Cor. 10. 4. discussed.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having in a readiness
to avenge all disobedience, etc.

Unto which it is answered, When Paul says, The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but spiritual: he denies not civil weapons of Justice to the civil
Magistrate, Romans 13. but only to Church Officers: and yet the weapons of Church
officers he acknowledges to be such, as though they be spiritual, yet are
ready to take vengeance on all disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6. which has
reference, amongst other Ordinances, to the censures of the Church against
scandalous offenders.


Truth. I acknowledge that herein the Spirit of God denies not civil weapons
of justice to the Civil Magistrate, which the Scripture he quotes, Romans 13.
abundantly testify.

Yet withal I must ask, why he here affirms the Apostle denies not civil
weapons of Justice to the civil Magistrate? of which there is no question,
unless that (according to his scope of proving persecution for conscience) he
intends withal, that the Apostle denies not civil weapons of justice to the
Civil Magistrate in Spiritual and Religious causes: The contrary whereunto
(the Lord assisting) I shall evince, both from this very Scripture, and his
own observation, and lastly by that 13 of the Romans, by himsefe quoted.

First then from this Scripture and his own Observation: The weapons of Church
officers (says he) are such, which though they be spiritual, are ready to
take vengeance on all disobedience; which has reference (says he) amongst
other Ordinances, to the Censures of the Church against scandalous offenders.

I hence observe, The difference of the civil and spiritual estate.
that there being in this Scripture held forth a twofold state, a Civil state
and a Spiritual, Civil officers and spiritual, civil weapons and spiritual
weapons, civil vengeance and punishment, and a spiritual vengeance and
punishment: although the Spirit speaks not here expressly of Civil Magistrates
and their civil weapons, Civil weapons most improper in spiritual causes:
fitly exemplified by that similitude, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
yet these States being of different Natures and Considerations, as far
differing as Spirit from Flesh, I first observe, that Civil weapons are most
improper and unfitting in matters of the Spiritual state and kingdom, though
in the Civil state most proper and suitable.


CHAP. XLV.
FOr (to keep to the similitude which the Spirit uses, for instance) To
batter down a strong hold, high wall, fort, tower or castle, men bring not a
first and second Admonition, and after obstinacy, Excommunication, which are
spiritual weapons concerning them that be in the Church: nor exhortations to
Repent and be baptized, to believe in the Lord Jesus, etc. which are proper
weapons to them that be without, etc. But to take a strong hold, men bring
Canons, Culverins, Saker, Bullets, Powder, Muskets, Swords, Pikes, etc. and
these to this end are weapons effectual and proportionable.

On the other side, to batter down Idolatry, false worship, heresy, schism,
blindness, hardness, out of the soul and spirit, it is vain, improper,
Spiritual weapons, only effectual in spiritual and soul causes.
and unsuitable to bring those weapons which are used by persecutors, stocks,
whips, prisons, swords, gibbets, stakes, etc. (where these seem to prevail
with some Cities or Kingdoms, a stronger force sets up again, what a weaker
pulled down) but against these spiritual strong holds in the souls of men,
Spiritual Artillery and weapons are proper, which are mighty through God to
subdue and bring under the very thought to obedience, or else to bind fast the
soul with chains of darkness, and lock it up in the prison of unbeleefe and
hardness to eternity.

2. I observe that as civil weapons are improper in this business, Civil
weapons not only improper, but unnecessary in spiritual causes.
and never able to effect ought in the soul: So (although they were proper,
yet) they are unnecessary, for if as the Spirit here says (and the Answerer
grants) spiritual weapons in the hand of Church officers are able and ready to
take vengeance on all disobedience, that is able and mighty, sufficient and
ready for the Lords work either to save the soul, or to kill the soul of
whomsoever, be the party or parties opposite, in which respect I may again
remember that speech of Job, How have thou helped him that has no power? Job
26.

Peace. Offer this (as Malachie once spoke) to the Governors the Kings of the
Earth, No earthly Kings or Governors will be so served, as we pretend to serve
the King of Kings.
when they besiege, beleagure, and assault great Cities, Castles, Forts, etc.
should any subject pretending his service bring store of pins, sticks, strawes,
bulrushes, to beat and batter down stone walls, mighty Bulwarks, what might
his expectation and reward be, but at least the censure of a man distract,
beside himself? etc.


Truth. What shall we then conceive of His displeasure, (who is the chief or
Prince of the Kings of the earth, and rides upon the Word of Truth and
meekness, which is that white Horse, Rev. 6. and Rev. 19. Psalm. 45. The white
Troopers.
with His holy witnesses the white Troopers upon white horses) when to His
help and aid men bring and add such unnecessary, improper and weak munition?


Will the Lord Jesus (did He ever in His own Person practice, or did he
appoint to) join to His Breastplate of Righteousness, Spiritual Ammunition.
Ephesians. 6. applied Material and Spiritual ^^htly joined together.
the breastplate of iron and steel? to the Helmet of righteousness and
salvation in Christ, an helmet and crest of iron, brass, or steel, a target of
wood to His shield of Faith? His two edged sword coming forth of the mouth of
Jesus, the material sword, the work of Smiths and Cutlers? or a girdle of
shoes leather to the girdle of truth, etc. Excellently fit and proper is that
alarm and item, An alarm to civil or earthly Rulers.
Psalm. 2. Be wise therefore O ye Kings (especially those ten Horns, Rev. 17.)
who under pretense of fighting for Christ Jesus give their power to the Beast
against Him, and be warned ye Judges of the Earth: Kiss the Son, that is with
subjection and affection, acknowledge Him only the King and Judge of souls (in
that power bequeathed to His Ministers and Churches) lest if His wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, then blessed are they that trust in Him.

CHAP. XLVI.
Peace. NOw in the second place concerning that Scripture, Romans 13. Concerning
the civil Rulers power in spiritual causes discust.
which it pleases the Answerer to quote, and himself, and so many excellent
servants of God have insisted upon to prove such persecution for Conscience;
how have both he and they wrested this Scripture (not as Peter writes of the
wicked, to their eternal, yet) to their own and others temporal destruction
by Civil wars and combustions in the world?

My humble request therefore is to the Father of Lights, to send out the bright
beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and to scatter the mist which that old
serpent, the great jugler Satan, has raised about this holy Scripture, and my
request to you (divine Truth) is for your care and pains to inlighten and
clear this Scripture.


Truth. First then upon the serious examination of this whole Scripture it will
appear that from the ninth verse of 12 Chap. Romans 13. speaks not at all of
spiritual but civil affairs.
to the end of this whole 13 Chap. the Spirit handles the duties of the Saints
in the careful observation of the second Table in their civil conversation, or
walking toward men, and speaks not at all of any point or matter of the first
Table concerning the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

For, having in the whole Epistle handled that great point of free
Justification by the free Grace of God in Christ^ in the beginning of the 12
Chap. he exhorts the Believers to give and dedicate themselves unto the Lord
both in soul and body, and unto the 9 verse of the 12 Chap. he expressly
mentions their conversation in the Kingdom or Body of Christ Jesus, together
with the several Officers thereof.

And from the 9 ver. to the end of the 13 he plainly discourses of their
civil conversation, and walking, one toward another^ and with all men, from
whence he has fair occasion to speak largely concerning their subjection to
Magistrates in the 13 Chap. The scope of Rom 13.


Hence it is that verse 7 of this 13 Chap. Paul exhorts to performance of love
to all men ( Magistrates and subjects) verse 7. 8. Render therefore to all
their due, Love to man, the duty of the whole second Table.
tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another, for he
that loves another has fulfilled the Law.

If any man doubt (as the Papists speak) whether a man may perfectly fulfill
the Law; How love fulfilleth the Law
every man of found judgment is ready to answer him that these words [He that
loves has fulfilled the Law] concerns not the whole Law in the first Table,
that is the worship and Kingdom of God in Christ.

Secondly, That the Apostle speaks not here of perfect observation of the
second Table without failing in word or act toward men, but lays open the
sum and sustance of the Law, which is love, and that he that walks by the
rule of love toward all men (Magistrates and subjects) he has rightly attained
unto what the Law aims at, and so in Evangelicall obedience fulfills and keeps
the Law.

Hence therefore again in the 9 verse having discoursed of the 5 Command in
this point of Superiors, he makes all the rest of the Commandments of the
second Table, which concern our walking with man (viz. Thou shall not kill,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear
false witness, Thou shall not covet: and if there be any other Commandment,
to be briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self.

And verse 10 Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the
fulfilling of the Law, that is (as before) the Law concerning our civil
conversation toward All men, Magistrates or Governors, and fellow subjects of
all conditions.


CHAP. XLVII.
Peace. ALthough the Scripture is sufficient to make the man of God perfect,
Romans 13 so interpreted even by them that held persecution for conscience.
and the fool Wise to salvation, and our faith in God must be only founded
upon the Rock Christ, and not upon the sand of men's judgments and opinions:
Yet as Paul alleges the judgment and sayings of unbeleevers for their
conviction out of their own tenets and grants: So I pray you to set down the
words of one or two (not unbeleevers in their persons, but excellent and
prestious servants and witnesses of God in their times, whose names are sweet
and precious to all that fear God) who although their judgment ran in the
common stream, viz. That Magistrates were keepers of the 2 Tables, defendors
of the Faith against Heretics, and notwithstanding what ever they have written
for defense of their judgments, yet the light of truth so evidently shined
upon their souls in this Scripture, that they absolutely denied the 13 of the
Romans to concern any matter of the first Table.


Truth. First, I shall produce that excellent servant of God, Calvin's judgment
of Romans 13.
Calvin, who upon this 13 to the Romans writes; Tot a autem haec disputatio
est de civilibus praefecturis: It aque, frustr a inde sacrilegam suam
tyrannidem stabilire mosiuntur qui Dominatum in conscientias exerceant. But
(says he) this whole discourse concerns civil Magistrates, and therefore in
vain do they who exercise power over consciences, go about from this place
to establish their sacrilegious tyranny.


Peace. I know how far most men (and especially the sheep of Jesus will ^lie
from the thought of exercising tyranny over conscience) that happily they will
disclaim the dealing of all with men's consciences: Yet if the Acts and
Statutes which are made by them concerning the worship of God be attended to;
their profession (and that out of zeal according to the pattern of that
ceremonial and figurative state of Israel) to suffer no other Religion nor
worship in their Territories, Gods people loath to be found, yet proved
persecutors.
but one; their profession and practice to defend their Faith from reproach and
blasphemy of Heretics by Civil weapons, and all that from this very 13 of the
Romans; I say if these particulars and others be with fear and trembling in
the presence of the most High examined; the wonderful deceit of their own
hearts shall appear unto them, and how guilty they ^ill appear to be of
wrestling this Scripture before the Tribunal of the most High.


Truth. Again Calvin speaking concerning fulfilling of the Law by love, writes
thus on the same place: Sed Pauls^ in totam (...) respic^ tantum de officiis
lequitur, quae nobis erg^^ (...) demand^n^ur a lig^: That is, Paul has not
respect unto the whole Law, he speaks only of those duties which the Law
commands toward our neighbors, and it is manifest, that in this place by our
neighbors he means high and low, Magistrates and subjects, unto whom we
ought to walk by the rule of love, paying unto every one their due.

Again, Caeterum Paulus hic tantum meminit secundae Tabulae quia de ea tantum
erat quaestio. But Paul here only mentions the second Table, because the
question was only concerning that.

And again, Caelvin confesses that the first Table concerning Gods worship,
is not here in Romans 13. touched.
Quod autem repetit complementum legis esse dilectionem, intellige (ut prius)
de ea legis part quod hominum societatem spectat: Prior enim legis tabula quae
est de cultu Dei minime hic attingitur: But in that he repeateth that love is
the fulfilling of the Law, understand as before, that he speaks of that part
of the Law which respects humane society; for the first Table of the Law which
concerns the Worship of God is not in the least manner here touched.

After Calvin, his successor in Geneva that holy and learned Beza Beza upon
Romans 13.
upon the word (...), if there be any other Commandment it is summed up in
this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, writes thus: Tota lex nihil
aliud quam amorem Dei and proximi praecipit, sed tamen cum Apostolus hoc Ioco
de mutuis hominum officiis disserat, legis vocabulum ad secundam Tabulam
restringendam puto.

The whole Law (says he) commands nothing else but the love of God, and yet
nevertheless since the Apostle in this place discourses of the duties of men
one toward another, I think this term law ought to be restrained to the
second Table.


CHAP. XLVIII.
Peace. I Pray now proceed to the second Argument from this Scripture against
the use of civil weapons in matters of Religion and spiritual worship.


Truth. The Spirit of God here commands subjection and obedience to higher
Powers, even to the Roman Emperors and all subordinate Magistrates; and yet
the Emperors and Governors under them were strangers from the life of God in
Christ, yea most averse and opposite, yea cruel and bloody Persecutors of the
name and Followers of Jesus: and yet unto these is this subjection and
obedience commanded. Now true it is, that as the civil Magistrate is apt not
to content himself with the majesty of an earthly Throne, Crown, Sword,
Scepter, but to seat himself in the Throne of David in the Church: So Gods
people (and it may be in Paul's time) considering their high and glorious
preferment and privileges by Jesus Christ, were apt to be much tempted to
despise Civil Governors, especially such as were ignorant of the Son of God,
and persecuted him in his servants.


Now then I argue, Paul writes not to the Roman Governors to defend the truth,
and to punish heretics.
if the Apostle should have commanded this subjection unto the Roman Emperors
and Roman Magistrates in spiritual causes, as to defend the truth which they
were no way able to discern, but persecuted, (and upon trust from others no
Magistrate (not persuaded in his own conscience) is to take it.)

Or else to punish Heretics, whom then also they must discern and judge, or
else condemn them as the Jews would have Pilate condemn the Lord Jesus upon
the sentence of others, I say if Paul should have (in this Scripture) put this
work upon these Roman Governors, and commanded the Churches of Christ to
have yielded subjection in any such matters, he must (in the judgment of all
men) have put out the eye of Faith and Reason and Sense at once.

CHAP. XLIX.
Peace. IT is said by some, Why then did Paul himself, Act. 25. appeal to
Caesar, unless that Caesar (though he was not, yet) he ought to have been a
fit Judge in such matters?


Truth. I answer, if Paul in this Appeal to Caesar, Paul's appeal to Caesar
discussed.
had referred and submitted simply and properly the cause of Christ, his
Ministry and Ministration to the Roman Emperors Tribunal, knowing him to be
an Idolatrous stranger from (...) true God, If Paul had appealed to Caesar in
spiritual things, he had committed 5. evils.
and a Lion-like bloody persecutor of the Lord Jesus, the Lamb of God, I say
let it be considered whether or no he had committed these 5. Evils.


The first against the dimmest light of Reason in appealing to darkness to
judge light, to unrighteousness to judge righteousness, the spiritually
blind, to judge and end the controversy concerning heavenly colors.

Secondly, against the cause of Religion, which if condemned by every inferior
Idolater, must needs be condemned by the Caesar's themselves, who (
Nabuchadnezzar-like) set up their State-images or Religions, commanding the
Worlds uniformity of worship to them.

Thirdly, against the holy State and Calling of the Christians themselves, who
(by virtue of their subjection to Christ) even the least of them are in
spiritual things above the highest Potentates or Emperors in the world, who
continue in enmity against, or in an ignorant natural state without Christ
Jesus. This honor or high exaltation above all his Holy ones, to bind (not
literally but spiritually) their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles in Linkes
of Iron, Psalm. 49.

Fourthly, against his own Calling, Apostleship, or office of Ministry, unto
which Caesar himself and all Potentates (in spiritual and soul matters)
ought to have submitted: and unto which in controversies of Christ's Church and
Kingdom, Caesar himself ought to have appealed, the Church of God being built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20.

And therefore in case that any of the Roman Governors, Imperours than them
selves if, Christians, subject to the Apostles and Churches in spiritual
things.
or the Emperor himself had been humbled and converted to Christianity, by
the preaching of Christ, were not they themselves bound to subject themselves
unto the power of the Lord Jesus in the hands of the Apostles and Churches, and
might not the Apostles and Churches have refused to have baptized or washed
them into the profession of Christ Jesus, upon the apprehension of their
unworthiness?

Or if received into Christian Fellowship, were they not to stand at the Bar of
the Lord Jesus in the Church, concerning either their opinions or practices,
were they not to be cast out and delivered unto Satan by the power of the Lord
Jesus, if after once and twice admonition they persist obstinate, as faithfully
and impartially, as if they were the meanest in the Empire: Yea, although the
Apostles, the Churches, the Elders or Governors thereof were poor and mean
despised persons in civil respects, and were themselves bound to yield all
faithful and loyal obedience to such Emperors and Governors in Civil
things.

Were they not (if Christians) bound themselves to have submitted to these
spiritual decrees of the Apostles and Elders, as well as the lowest and
meanest members of Christ, Act. 16? And if so, how should Paul appeal in
spiritual things to Caesar, or write to the Churches of Jesus to submite in
Christian or Spiritual matters?

Fifthly, if Paul had appealed to Caesar in spiritual respects, he had
greatly profaned the holy name of God in holy things, in so improper and vain
a prostitution of spiritual things to carnal and natural judgments, which
are not able to comprehend spiritual matters, which are alone spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.

And yet Caesar (as a civil supreme Magistrate) ought to defend Paul from
Civil violence, Lawful appeals in civil things to Civil Magistrates.
and sta^derous accusations about sedition, mutiny, civil disobedience, etc.
And in that sense who doubts but God's people may appeal to the Roman Caesar,
an Egyptian Pharach, a Philistian Abimelecke, an Assyrian Nabuchadnezzar, the
great M^gol, Prester John, the great Turk, or an Indian Sachim?

CHAP. L.
Peace. WHich is the third Argument against the civil Magistrates power in
spiritual and soul matters out of this Scripture, Romans 13?


Truth. I dispute from the nature of the Magistrates weapons, verse. 4. He has
a sword (which he bears not in vain) delivered to him, as I acknowledge from
Gods appointment in the free consent and choice of the subjects for common good.


We must distinguish of swords.

We find four sorts of swords mentioned in the New Testament. Four sorts of
swords mentioned in the New Testament.


First, the sword of persecution, which Herod stretched forth against James,
Act. 12.

Secondly, the sword of Gods Spirit, expressly said to be the Word of God,
Ephesians. 6. A sword of two edges carried in the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1. which is
of strong and mighty operation, piercing between the bones and the marrow,
between the soul and the spirit, Heb. 4.

Thirdly, the great sword of War and Destruction, given to him that rides that
terrible Red Horse of War, so that he takes Peace from the Earth, and men kill
one another, as is most lamentably true in the slaughter of so many hundred
thousand souls within these few years in several parts of Europe, our own
and others.

None of these 3 swords are intended in this Scripture:

Therefore, fourthly, there is a Civil sword, The Civil Sword.
called the Sword of Civil justice; which being of a material civil nature,
for the defense of Persons, Estates, Families, Liberties of a City or Civil
State, and the suppressing of uncivil or injurious persons or actions by such
civil punishment, It cannot according to its utmost reach and capacity (now
under Christ, when all Nations are merely civil, without any such typical
holy respect upon them, as was upon Israel a National Church) I say, cannot
extend to spiritual and Soul-causes, Spiritual and Soul punishment, which
belongs to that spiritual sword with two edges, the soule-piercing (in
soule-saving or soule-killing) the Word of God.

CHAP. LII.
Truth. A Fourth Argument from this Scripture I take in the 6. verse, Tribute,
Custom, etc. merely civil recompenses for civil work.
from Tribute, custom, etc. which is a merely civil Reward or Recompense for
the Magistrates work. Now as the wages are, such is the work: But the wages
are merely civil, Custom, Tribute, etc. not the contributions of the Saints
or churches of Christ (proper to the Spiritual and Christian state) and such
work only must the Magistrate attend upon, as may properly deserve such civil
wages, reward or recompense.


Lastly, Magistrates called by God Gods Ministers.
that the Spirit of God never intended to direct or warrant the Magistrate to
use his Power in spiritual affairs and Religious worship: I argue, from the
term or title it pleases the wisdom of God to give such Civil officers, to
wit, (verse. 6.) Gods Ministers.

Now at the very first blush, no man denies a double Ministry.

The one appointed by Christ Jesus in his Church, to gather, to govern,
receive in, cast out, The spiritual Ministry.
and order all the affairs of the Church, the House, City or Kingdom of God,
Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12.

Secondly, a Civil Ministry or office, The civil Ministry or service.
merely humane and civil, which Men agree to constitute (called therefore an
humane creation, (1 Pet. 2.) and is as true and lawful in those Nations,
Cities, Kingdoms, etc. which never heard of the true God, nor his holy Son
Jesus, as in any part of the World beside, where the Name of Jesus is most
taken up.

From all which premises, viz. that the scope of the Spirit of God in this
Chapter is to handle the matters of the second Table (having handled the
matters of the first in the 12.) since the Magistrates of whom Paul wrote, were
natural, ungodly, persecuting, and yet lawful Magistrates, and to be obeyed
in all lawful Civil things.

Since all Magistrates are Gods Ministers, essentially civil, bounded to a
civil work, with civil weapons or instruments, and paid or rewarded with
civil rewards. From all which, I say, I undeniably collect, that this
Scripture is generally mistaken, and wrested from the scope of Gods Spirit, and
the nature of the place, and cannot truly be alleged by any for the Power of
the Civil Magistrate to be exercised in spiritual and Soule-matters.

CHAP. LII.
Peace. AGainst this I know many object out of the 4. verse of this Chapter,
What is to b^ understood b^ Evil, Romans 13 4.
that the Magistrate is to avenge or punish Evil: from whence is gathered,
that Heresy, false Christ's, false Churches, false Ministeries, false Seals,
being evil, ought to be punished Civilly, etc.


Truth. I answer, that the word (...) is generally opposed to Civil Goodness
or Virtue in a Commonwealth, and not to Spiritual Good or Religion in the
Church.

Secondly, I have proved from the scope of the place, that here is not intended
Evil against the Spiritual or Christian Estate, handled in the 12 Chap. but
Evil against the Civil State, in this 13. properly falling under the
cognizance of the Civil Minister of God, the Magistrate, and punishable by
that civil sword of his, as an incivilitie, disorder, or breach of that civil
order, peace and civility, unto which all the Inhabitants of a City, Town, or
Kingdom oblige themselves.


Peace. I have heard that the Elders of the New-English Churches, (who yet out
of this 13 Romans maintain Persecution) grant that the Magistrate is to preserve
the peace and welfare of the State, and therefore that he ought not to punish
such sins as hurt not his peace. In particular, they say, the Magistra^e may
not punish secret sins in the Soul: Nor such sins as are yet handling in
the Church in a private way: Nor such sins which are private in Families; and
therefore they say, the Magistrate transgresteth to prosecute complaints of
children against their parents, servants against masters, wives against
husbands, (and yet this proper to the Civil State) Nor such sins as are
between the Members and Churches themselves.

And they confess, that if the Magistrate punish, and the Church punish, there
will be a greater Rent in their Peace.


Truth. From thence (sweet Peace) may we well observe, Some give to the
Magistrate what is not his, and take from him that which is proper to him.


First, the Magistrate is not to punish all Evil, according to this their
confession.

The distinction of private and public Evil will not here avail, because
such as urge that term Evil, viz, that the Magistrate is to punish Evil,
urge it strictly, eo nomine, because Heresy, Blasphemy, false Church, false
Ministry is evil, as well as Disorder in a Civil State.

Secondly, I observe, how they take away from the Magistrate that which is
proper to his cognizance, as the complaints of servants, children, wives,
against their parents, masters, husbands, etc. ( Families as families, being as
stones which make up the common building, and are properly the object of the
Magistrates care, in respect of Civil Government, Civil order and obedience.)


CHAP. LIVE.
Peace. I Pray now (lastly) proceed to the Authors Reason why Christ's
Disciples should be so far from persecuting, that they ought to bless them
that curse them, and pray for them that persecute them, because of the
freeness of Gods grace, and the deepenesse of his Councels, calling them that
are Enemies, Persecutors, No people, to become meek Lambs, the sheep and
people of God, according to 1 Pet. 2. 20. You which were not a people, are now
a people, etc. and Matthew. 20. 6. Some come at the Last hour, which if they
were cut off because they came not sooner, would be prevented, and so should
never come.

Unto this Reason the Answerer is pleased thus to reply:

First in general; We must not do Evil, that Good may come thereof.

Secondly, in particular, he affirms, that it is evil to tolerate seditious
evil doers, seducing Teachers, scandalous livers: Toleration discussed. Upon
this point has Mr. John Goodwin excellently of late discoursed.
and for proof of this he quotes Christ's reproof to the Angel of the Church at
Pergam^s, for tolerating them that hold the doctrine of Balaam; and against the
Church of Thiatyra, for tolerating Iesabel to teach and seduce, Revel. 2. 14.
20.


Truth. I answer, first, by assenting to the general Proposition, that it is
most true, like unto Christ Jesus himself, a sure foundation, 1 Cor. 3. Yet
what is built upon it, I hope (by Gods assistance) to make it appear is but
hay and stubble, dead and withered, not suiting that golden foundation, nor
pleasing to the Father of mercies, nor comfortable to the Souls of men.

It is evil (says he) to tolerate notorious evil doers, seducing Teachers,
scandalous livers.

In which speech I observe 2 evils:

First that this Proposition is too large and general, because the Rule admits
of exception, and that according to the will of God.

1. It is true, that Evil cannot alter its nature, but it is always Evil, as
darkness is always darkness, yet

2. It must be remembered, that it is one thing to command, Evil is always
Evil, yet permission of it may in case be good.
to conceal, to council, to approve Evil, and another thing to permit and
suffer Evil with protestation against it, or dislike of it, at least without
approbation of it.

Lastly, this sufferance or permission of Evil is not for its ownsake, but for
the sake of Good, which puts a respect of Goodness upon such permission.

Hence it is, that for Gods own Glory sake (which is the highest Good) he
endures, that is, permits or suffers the Vessels of Wrath, Romans 9. And
therefore although he be of pure eyes, and can behold no iniquity, yet his
pure eyes patiently and quietly beholds and permits all the idolatries and
prophanations, all the thefts and rapines, all the whoredoms and abominations,
all the murders and poysonings; and yet I say, for his glory sake he is
patient, and long permits.

Hence for his peoples sake (which is the next Good in his Son) he is
oftentimes pleased to permit and suffer the wicked to enjoy a longer reprive.
Therefore he gave Paul all the lives that were in the ship, Acts 27.

Therefore he would not so soon have destroyed Sodom, but granted a longer
permission, had there been but 10 righteous, Genesis 19. Therefore, Ierem. 5. had
he found some to have stood in the gap, he would have spared others. Therefore
gave he Iesabel a time or space, Revel. 2.

Therefore for his Glory sake has he permitted longer great sinners, who
afterward have perished in their season, as we see in the case of Ahab, the
Ninevites and Amorites. etc.

Hence it pleased the Lord not only to permit the many evils against his own
honorable ordinance of Marriage in the world, Deuteronomy. 24.
but was pleased after a wonderful manner to suffer that sin of many wives in
Abraham, Jacob, David, Solomon, yea with some expression which seem to give
approbation, as 2 Samuel 12.


Peace. It may be said, this is no pattern for us, because God is above Law,
and an absolute Sovereign.


Truth. I answer, although we find him sometime dispensing with his Law, yet
we never find him deny himself, or utter a falsehood: And therefore when it
crosses not an absolute Rule to permit and tolerate (as in the case of the
permission of the souls and consciences of all men in the world, I have shown
and shall show further it does not) it will not hinder our being holy as he is
holy in all manner of conversation.


CHAP. LIVE.
Peace. IT will yet be said, it pleases God to permit Adulteries, Murders,
Poisons: God suffers men like fishes to devour each other, Habac. 1. the
wicked to flourish, Ier. 12. yea sends the Tyrants of the world to destroy the
Nations, and plunder them of their riches, Isa. 10. Should men do so, the
world would be a Wilderness, and beside we have command for zealous execution
of Justice impartially, speedily.


Truth. I answer, Two sorts of commands both by Moses and Christ.
we find two sorts of commands both from Moses and from Christ, the two great
Prophets and Messengers from the living God, the one the type or figure of the
later: Moses gave positive Rules both spiritual and civil, yet also he gave
some not positive but permissive for the common good: So the Lord Jesus
expounds it.

For, whereas the Pharisees urged it, that Moses commanded to give a Bill of
Divorcement and to put away: the Lord Jesus expounds it, Moses for the
hardness of your heart suffered or permitted, Math. 19. 17, 18. Math 16. 17.
18.


This was a permissive The permission of divorce in Israel.
command universal to all Israel, for a general good, in preventing the
continual fires of Dissentions and Combustions in families (yea it may be
Murders, Poisons, Adulteries which that people (as the wisdom of God
foresaw) was apt out of the hardness of their heart to break out into, were
it not for this preventing permission.

Hence it was that for a further public good sake, and the public safety,
David permitted Ioab, a notorious malefactor, and Shimei and Adonijah, etc. And
civil States and Governors in like cases have and do permit and suffer what
neither David nor any civil Governor ought to do or have done, were it not
to prevent the hazard of the whole, in the shedding of much innocent blood
(together with the n^cent) in civil combustions.


Peace. It may be said, Ioab, Shimei, Adonijah, etc. were only (as it were)
reprived for a time, and proves only that a season ought to be attended for
their punishment.


Truth. Answ. I answer, I produce not these instances to prove a permission of
Tares (Antichristians, Heretics) which other Scriptures abundantly prove, but
to make it clear (against the Answerers allegation, that even in the civil
State permission of notorious evil doers, even against the civil State, is
not disapproved by God himself, and the wisest of his servants in its season.


CHAP. LV.
Truth. I Proceed. Usurie in a Commonweal or Civil State lawfully permitted.
Hence it is that some Generals of Armies, and Governors of Cities, Towns,
etc. do, and (as those former instances prove) lawfully permit some evil
persons and practices. As for instance, in the civil State, Usury, for the
preventing of a greater evil in the civil Body, as stealing, robbing,
murdering, perishing of the poor, and the hindrance or stop of commerce and
dealing in the Commonwealth. Just like Physicians, wisely permitting noisome
humors, and sometimes diseases, when the cure or purging would prove more
dangerous to the destruction of the whole, a weak or crazy body, and specially
at such a time.

Thus in many other instances it pleased the Father of lights the God of
Israel, to permit that people, especially in the matter of their demand of a
King, Permission of the Tares in the field of the world for a twofold good.
(wherein he pleaded that himself as well as Samuel was rejected.)

This ground, to wit, for a common good of the whole, is the same with that of
the Lord Jesus commanding the Tares to be permitted in the World, because
otherwise the good wheat should be endangered to be rooted up out of the Field
or World also, as well as the Of the good Where.
ares: and therefore for the good sake the Tares, which are indeed evil, were
to be permitted: Yea and for the general good of the whole world, the field it
self, Of the whole world, ^he field it self.
which for want of this obedience to that command of Christ, has been and is
laid waste and desolate, with the fury and rage of civil War, professedly
raised and maintained (as all States profess for the maintenance of one true
Religion (after the pattern of that typical land of Canaan) and to suppress
and pluck up these Tares of false Prophets and false Professors,
Antichristians, Heretics, etc. out of the world.

Hence illae lachrymae: hence Germanies, Irelands, and now Englands tears and
dreadful desolations, which ought to have been, and may be for the future
(by obedience to the command of the Lord Jesus, concerning the permission of
Tares to live in the world, though not in the Church) I say ought to have
been, and may be mercifully prevented.


CHAP. LVI.
Peace. I Pray descend now to the second evil which you observe in the
Answerers position, viz. that it would be evil to tolerate notorious evil
doers, seducing teachers, etc.


Truth. I say, the evil is, that he most improperly and confusedly joins and
couples seducing teachers with scandalous livers.


Peace. But is it not true that the world is full of seducing teachers, and is
it not true that seducing teachers are notorious evil doers?


Truth. I answer: far be it from me to deny either: and yet in two things I
shall discover the great evil of this joining and coupling seducing teachers,
and scandalous livers as one adaequate or proper object of the Magistrates care
and work to suppress and punish.

First, it is not an Homogeneall (as we speak) but an Heterogeneall commixture
or joining together of things most different in kinds and natures, as if they
were both of one consideration.


For who knows not but that many seducing teachers, Seducing teachers, either
Pagan, Jewish or Antichristian, may yet be obedient subjects to the Civil
laws.
either of the Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian Religion, may be
clear and free from scandalous offenses in their life, as also from
disobedience to the Civil Laws of a State? Yea the Answerer himself has
elsewhere granted, that if the Laws of a Civil State be not broken, the Peace
is not broken.

Again, who knows not that a seducing teacher properly sins against a
Church or Spiritual estate and Laws of it, and therefore ought most properly
and only to be dealt withal in such a way, and by such weapons as the Lord
Jesus himself has appointed gainsayers, opposites and disobedients (either
within his Church or without) to be convinced, repelled, resisted, and slain
withal.

Whereas scandalous offenders against Parents, Scandalous livers against the
Civil state who they are.
against Magistrates in the 5 Command. and so against the life, chastity, goods
or good name in the rest, is properly transgression against the Civil State
and Commonweal, or the worldly state of Men: And therefore consequently if the
World or Civil State ought to be preserved by Civil Government or Governors;
such scandalous effendours ought not to be tolerated, but suppressed according to
the wisdom and prudence of the said Government.

Secondly, as there is a fallacious conjoying and confounding together persons
of several kinds and natures, differing as much as Spirit and Flesh, Heaven
and Earth each from other. So is there a silent and implicit justification to
all the unrighteous and cruel proceedings of Jews and Gentiles against all the
Prophets of God, the Lord Jesus Himself, and all His Messengers and Witnesses,
whom their Accusers have ever so coupled and mixed with notorious evil doers
and scandalous livers.

Elijah was a troubler of the State; Jeremy weakened the hand of the people: yea
Moses made the people neglect their work: the Jews built the Rebellious and
bad City: the three Worthies regarded not the command of the King: Christ Jesus
deceived the people, was a conjurer and a traitor against Caesar in being King
of the ^ewes (indeed He was so spiritually over the true Jew the Christian)
therefore He was numbered with notorious evil doers, and nailed to the Gallows
between two Malefactors.

Hence Paul and all true Messengers of Jesus Christ are esteemed seducing and
seditious teachers and turners of the World upside down: Yea and to my
knowledge (I speak with honorable respect to the Answerer, so far as he has
labored for many Truths of Christ) the Answerer himself has drunk of this
cup to be esteemed a seducing Teacher.

CHAP. LVII.
Peace. YEa but he produces Scriptures against such toleration, and for
persecuting men for the cause of conscience: Christ (says he) had something
against the Angel of the Church of Pergamus for tolerating them that held the
doctrine of Balaam, and against the Church of Thiatira for tolerating Iesabel
to teach and seduce, Rev. 2. 14. 20.


Truth. I may answer with some admiration and astonishment how it pleased the
Father of lights, and most jealous God to darken and veil the eye of so
precious a man, as not to seek out and propose some Scriptures (in the proof
of so weighty an assertion) as at least might have some color for an influence
of the Civil Magistrate in such cases: for


First, Toleration. Rev. 2. 14. 20. examined.
he says not that Christ had ought against the City Pergamus, (where Satan
had his throne Rev. 2.) but against the Church at Pergamus, in which was set up
the Throne of Christ.

Secondly, Christ's Charge is not against the Civil Magistrate of Pergamus, but
the Messenger or Ministry of the Church in Pergamus.

Thirdly, I confess so far as Balaams or Iesabels doctrine maintained a
liberty of corporal fornication, it concerned the City of Pergamus and
Thiatira, and the Angel or Officers of those Cities to suppress not only such
practices, but such Doctrines also, as the Roman Emperor justly punished Ovid
the Poet, for teaching the wanton Art of Love, leading to and ushering on
laciviousnesse and uncleanness.

4. Yet so far as Balaams teachers or Iesabel did seduce the members of the
Church in Pergamus or Thiatira, to the worship of the Idolaters in Pergamus or
Thiatira (which will appear to be the case) I say so far I may well and
properly answer, as himself answered before those Scriptures, brought from
Luc. 9. and 2 Timothy 2. to prove patience and permission to men opposite, viz.
These Scriptures (says he) are directions to Ministers of the Gospel, and in
the end of that passage he adds, Much less do they speak at all to Civil
Magistrates.

Fifthly, Either these Churches and the Angels thereof had power to suppress
these doctrines of Balaam, Christ Ministers and Churches have power sufficient
from Christ to suppress Balaam and Iesabel seducing to false worship.
and to suppress Iesabel from teaching, or they had not:

That they had not cannot be affirmed, for Christ's Authority is in the hands of
his Ministers and Churches, Matthew. 16. and 18. and 1 Cor. 5.

If they had power, as must be granted, then I conclude sufficient power to
suppress such persons, who ever they were that maintained Balaams doctrine in
the Church at Pergamus, although the very Magistrates themselves of the City of
Pergamus, (if Christians) and to have suppressed Iesabel from teaching and
seducing in the Church had she been Lady, Queen, or Empress, if there were no
more but teaching without hostility: And if so, all power and authority of
Magistrates and Governors of Pergamus and Thiatira, and all submitting or
appealing to them, in such cases, must needs fall as none of Christ's
appointment.

Lastly, From this perverse wresting of what is writ to the Church and the
Officers thereof, as if it were written to the Civil State and Officers
thereof; all may see how since the Apostacy of Antichrist, The Christian world
has swallowed up Christianity.
the Christian World (so called) has swallowed up Christianity, how the Church
and civil State, that is the Church and the World are now become one flock of
Jesus Christ; Christ's sheep, and the Pastors or Shepherds of them, all one
with the several unconverted, wild or tame Beasts and Cattle of the World
and the civil and earthly governors of them: The Christian Church or Kingdom
of the Saints, that stone cut out of the mountain without hands, Daniel 2. now
made all one with the mountain or Civil State, the Roman Empire, from whence
it is cut or taken: Christ's lilies, garden and love, all one with the thorns,
the daughers and wilderness of the World, out of which the Spouse or Church of
Christ is called, and amongst whom in civil things for a while here below, she
must necessarily be mingled and have converse, unless she will go out of the
World (before Christ Jesus her Lord and Husband send for her home into the
Heavens, 1 Cor. 5. 10.)

CHAP. LVIII.
Peace. HAving thus (by the help of Christ) examined those Scriptures or
writings of truth, The second head of Reasons against such persecution, viz.
the profession of famous Princes, K. James, Steven of Poland, and K. of Bohemia.
brought by the Author against Persecution, and cleared them from such vailes
and mists wherewith Mr. Cotton has endeavored to obscure and darken their
light: I pray you now (by the the same gracious assistance) proceed to his
answer to the second head of Reasons from the profession of famous Princes
against persecution for conscience, K. James, Steven of Poland, K. of Bohemia,
unto whom the Answerer returns a treble answer.

First, says he, We willingly acknowledge that none is to be persecuted at all
no more then they may be oppressed for righteousness sake.

Again, we acknowledge that none is to be punished for his conscience though
misinformed (as has been said) unless his Error be fundamental or
seditiously and turbulently promoted, and that after due conviction of his
conscience, that it may appear he is not punished for his conscience, but for
sinning against his conscience.

Furthermore, we acknowledge none is to be constrained to believe or profess
the true Religion, till he be convinced in judgment of the truth of it, but
yet restrained he may be from blaspheming the truth, and from seducing any unto
pernicious error.


Truth. This first answer consists of a repetition and enumeration of such
grounds or conclusions, as Mr. Cotton in the entrance of this Discourse laid
down, and I believe that (through the help of God) in such replies as I have
made unto them, I have made it evident what weak foundations they have in the
Scriptures of truth; Isa. 40 6. 2 Pet. 2.
as also that, when such conclusions (excepting the first) as grass, and the
flower of the grass shall sade, that holy Word of the Lord, which the Author
against such persecution produced, and I have cleared, shall stand for ever,
even when these Heavens and Earth are burnt.


Peace. His second answer is this: What Princes profess and practice is not a
rule of conscience. They many times tolerate that in point of State-policie,
which cannot justly be tolerated in point of true Christianity.

Again, Princes many times tolerate offenders out of very necessity, when the
offenders are either too many or too mighty for them to punish, in which
respect David tolerated Ioab and his murders, but against his will.


CHAP. LIX.
VNnto those excellent and famous speeches of those Princes worthy to be
written in golden letters or rows of Diamonds upon all the gates of all the
Cities and Palaces in the World, the Answerer (without any particular reply)
returns two things.

Truth. First, that Princes profession and practice is no rule of conscience:
Mr. Cottons unequal dealing with Princes.
unto this as all men will subscribe, so may they also observe how the Answerer
deals with Princes.

One while they are the nursing Fathers of the Church, not only to feed, but
also to correct, and therefore consequently bound to judge what is true feeding
and correcting: and consequently all men are bound to submit to their feeding
and correcting.

Another while, when Princes cross Mr. Cottons judgment and practice, then it
matters not what the profession and practice of Princes is; for (says he)
their profession and practice is no Rule to Conscience.

I ask then, unto what Magistrates or Princes will themselves or any so
persuaded submit, as unto keepers of both Tables, as unto the Antitypes of the
Kings of Israel and Judah, and nursing Fathers and Mothers of the Church?

First, will it not evidently follow, that by these Tenants they ought not to
submit to any Magistrates in the world in these cases, but to Magistrates just
of their own conscience: and

Secondly, that all other Consciences in the world (except their own) must be
persecuted by such their Magistrates?

And lastly, is not this to make Magistrates but steps and stirrops to ascend
and mount up into their rich and honorable Seats and Sad^les; I mean great
and settled maintenances, which neither the Lord Jesus, nor any of his first
Messengers, the true patterns, did ever know?


CHAP. LX.
Truth. IN the second place he says that Princes out of State policy tolerate
what suits not with Christianity, and out of State necessity tolerate (^s David
did Ioab) against their wills.

To which I answer,

First, that although with him in the first I confess that Princes may
tolerate that out of State policy which will not stand with Christianity, The
Answerer a knowledgeth a necessity of some tol^ration.
yet in the second he must acknowledge with me, that there is a necessity
sometime of State Toleration, as in the case of Ioab, and so his former
affirmation generally laid down [ viz. that it is evil to tolerate seducing
Teachers, or scandalous livers] was not duly waighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, Christ Jesus the deepest politician that ever was, and yet he
commands a toleration of Antichristians.
and is too light.

Secondly, I affirm that that State policy and State necessity, which (for the
peace of the State and preventing of Rivers of civil Blood) permits the
Consciences of men, will be found to agree most punctually with the Rules of
the best Politician that ever the World saw, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, in comparison of whom Solomon himself had but a drop of wisdom,
compared to Christ's Ocean, and was but a Farthing Candle compared with the All
and Ever glorious Son of Righteousness.

That absolute Rule of this great Politician for the peace of the Field, which
is the World, and for the good and peace of the Saints, who must have a civil
being in the World, I have discoursed of in his command of permitting the
Tares, that is, Antichristians or false Christians to be in the Field of the
World, growing up together with the true Wheat, true Christians.


CHAP. LXI.
Peace. HIs third Answer is this:

For those three Princes named by you who tolerated Religion, we can name you
more and greater who have not tolerated Heretics and Schismatickes,
notwithstanding their pretense of Conscience, and their arrogating the Crown
of Martyrdom to their sufferings.

Constantine the Great at the request of the General Council at Nice,
banished Arrius, with some of his Fellows, Sozom. lib. 1. Eccles hist. cap 19
20.

The same Constantine made a severe Law against the Donatists: and the like
proceedings against them were used by Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, as
Augustine reports in Ep. 166. Only Julian the Apostate granted liberty to
Heretics, as well as to Pagans, that he might by tolerating all weeds to
grow, choke the vitals of Christianity: which was also the practice and sin
of Valens the Arrian.

Queen Elizabeth, as famous for her Government as most of the former, it is
well known what Laws she made and executed against Papists: yea and K. James
(one of your own Witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against Papists
(as you say) for Conscience sake, yet you are not ignorant how sharply and
severely he punished those whom the malignant World calls Puritans, men of more
Conscience and better Faith then the Papists whom he tolerated.


Truth. Unto this I answer: First, that for mine own part I would not use an
argument from the number of Princes, witnessing in profession of practice
against Persecution for cause of Conscience; for the truth and faith of the
Lord Jesus must not be received with respect of faces, The Princes of the
world seldom take put with Christ.
be they never so high, princely and glorious.

Precious Pearls and Jewels, and far more precious Truth are found in muddy
shells and places. The rich Mines of golden Truth lie hid under barren hills,
and in obscure holes and corners.

The most High and Glorious God has chosen the poor of the World: Princes not
persecuting are very rare.
and the Witnesses of Truth (Rev. 11.) are clothed in sackcloth, not in Silk
or Satin, Cloth of Gold, or Tissue: and therefore I acknowledge, if the number
of Princes professing persecution be considered, it is rare to find a King,
Prince or Governor like Christ Jesus the King of Kings, and Prince of the
Princes of the Earth, and who tread not in the steps of Herod the Fox, or Nero
the Lion, openly or secretly persecuting the name of the Lord Jesus; such were
Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, though under a mask or pretense of the name of the God
of Israel.

To that purpose was it a noble speech of Buchanan, Buchanans Item to King
James.
who lying on his deathbed sent this Item to King James: Remember my humble
service to his Majesty, and tell him that Buchanan is going to a place where
few Kings come.


CHAP. LXII.
Truth. SEcondly, I observe how inconsiderately (I hope not willingly) he
passes by the Reasons and Grounds urged by those three Princes for their
practices; for as for the bare examples of Kings or Princes, they are but like
shining Sands, or gilded Rocks, giving no solace to such as make woeful
shipwreck on them.

In K. James his Speech he passes by that Golden Maxim in Divinity, King
James his sayings against persecution.
that God never loves to plant his Church by Blood.

Secondly, that Civil Obedience may be performed from the Papists.

Thirdly, in his observation on Revel 20. that true and certain note of a
false Church, to wit, persecution: The wicked are besiegers, the faithful are
besieged.

In K. Steven of Poland his Speech, King Steven of Poland his speech against
Persecution.
he passes by the true difference between a Civil and a Spiritual
Government: I am (said Steven) a Civil Magistrate over the bodies of men, not
a spiritual over their souls.

Now to confound these, is Babel; and Jewish it is to seek for Moses, and bring
him from his grave (which no man shall find, for God buried him) in setting up
a National state or Church in a land of Canaan, which the great Messiah
abolished at his coming.

Thirdly, he passes by in the speech of the King of Bohemia, that foundation
in Grace and Nature, to wit, that Conscience ought not to be violated or
forced: and indeed it it is most true, that a Soul or spiritual Rape Forcing
of Conscience is a Soul rape.
is more abominable in Gods eye, then to force and ravish the Bodies of all the
Women in the World.

Secondly, that most lamentably true experience of all Ages, which that King
observes, viz. that persecution for cause of Conscience Persecution for
conscience, the Launcet that lets blood Kings and Kingdoms.
has ever proved pernicious, being the causes of all those wonderful
innovations of, or changes in the Principalities^ and mightiest Kingdoms of
Christendom. He that reads the Records of Truth and Time with an impartial
eye, shall find this to be the Launcet that has pierced the veins of Kings
and Kingdoms, of Saints and Sinners, and filled the streams and Rivers with
their blood.

Lastly, All spiritual Whores are bloody.
that Kings observation of his own time,, viz. that Persecution for cause of
Conscience, was practiced most in England, and such places where Popery
reigned, implying (as I conceive) that such practices commonly proceed from
that great whore the Church of Rome, whose Daughters are like their Mother, and
all of a bloody nature, as most commonly all Whores be.


CHAP. LXIII.
NOw thirdly, in that the Answerer observes, that amongst the Roman
Emperors, they that did not persecute, were Julian the Apostate, and Valens
the Arrian; whereas the good Emperors, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosius, they did persecute the Arrians, Donatists, etc.

Answ. It is no new thing for godly and eminently godly men, The Godly
somotimes evil actors, and the Ungodly good actors. Poligamie, or the many
wives of the Fathers.
to perform ungodly actions: nor for ungodly persons, for wicked ends to act
what in it self is good and righteous.

Abraham, Jacob, David Solomon, etc. (as well as Lamech, Saul, etc.) lived in
constant transgression against the institution of so holy and so ratified a Law
of Marriage, etc. and this not against the light and checks of conscience, (as
other sins are wont to be recorded of them) but according to the dictate and
persuasion of a Resolved Soul and Conscience.

David out of zeal to God, David's advancing of Gods Worship against Gods Order.
with 30 thousand of Israel, and Majesticall solemnity, carries up the Arc,
contrary to the Order God was pleased to appoint: the issue was both Gods and
David's great offence^ 2 Samuel 6.

David in his zeal would build an house to entertain his God? what more
pious? and what more (in show) serio^sly consulted, when the Prophet Nathan is
admitted Counselor? 2 Samuel 7.

And probable it is, that his slaughter of Vriiah was not without a good end,
to wit, to prevent the dishonor of Gods name, in the discoverrie of his
Adultery with Bathsheba: yet David was holy and precious to God still, (though
like a jewel fallen into the dirt) whereas K. Ahab, though acting his fasting
and humiliation, was but Ahab still, though his Act (in it self) was a duty,
and found success with God.

CHAP. LXIV.
Peace. I Have often heard that History reports, and I have heard that Mr.
Cotton himself hat affirmed it, that Christianitic fell asleep in Constantines
bosom, and the laps and bosoms of those Emperors professing the name of
Christ.


Truth. The unknowing zeal of Constantine and other Emperors, Constantine and
the good Emperors are confessed to have done more hurt to the name and crown of
the Lord Jesus, then the persecuting Neroes etc.
did more hurt to Christ Jesus his Crown and Kingdom, then the raging fury of
the most bloody Neroes. In the persecutions of the later, Christians were sweet
and fragrant, like spice pounded and beaten in morters: But those good
Emperors, persecuting some erroneous persons, Arrius, etc. and advancing the
professors of some Truths of Christ (for there was no small number of Truths
lost in those times) and maintaining their Religion by the material Sword, I
say by this means Christianity was ecclipsed, and the Professors of it fell
asleep, Cant. 5. Babel or confusion was ushered in, and by degrees the Gardens
of the Churches of Saints were turned into the wilderness of whole Nations,
until the whole World became Christian or Christendom, The Garden of the
Church and Field of the World made all one by Antichrististianisme.
Revel. 12. and 13.

Doubtless those holy men, Emperors and Bishops, intended and aimed right, to
exalt Christ: but not attending to the Command of Christ Jesus, to permit the
Tares to grow in the field of the World, they made the Garden of the Church,
and Field of the World to be all one; and might not only sometimes in their
zealous mistakes persecute good wheat in stead of Tares, but also pluck up
thousands of those precious stalks by commotions and combustions about
Religion, as has been since practiced in the great and wonderful changes
wrought by such Wars in many great and mighty States and Kingdoms, as we heard
even now in the Observation of the King of Bohemia.


CHAP. LXV.
Peace. Dear Truth, before you leave this passage concerning the Emperors, I
shall desire you to glance your eye on this not unworthy observation, to wit,
how fully this worthy Answerer has learned to speak the roaring language of
Lyon-like Persecution, far from the purity and peaceablenesse of the Lamb,
which he was wont to express in England. For thus he writes:

More and greater Princes then these you mention (says he) have not tolerated
Heretics and Schismatics, notwithstanding their pretense of Conscience, and
their arrogating the Crown of Martyrdom to their suff^ings.


Truth. Thy tender ear and heart (sweet Peace) endures not such language: It Is
true, that these terms, Heretics (or wilfully obstinate) and Schismatics (or
Renders) are used in Holy Writ: it is true also, that such pretend conscience,
and challenge the crown of Martyrdom to their sufferings: The language of
Persecuters, the wolves and hunters of the World.
Yet since (as King James spoke in his [Marke of a false Church] on Revel. 20.)
the Wicked persecute and besiege, and the Godly are persecuted and besieged;
this is the common clamor of Persecuters against the Messengers and Witnesses
of Jesus in all Ages, viz. You are Heretics, Schismatics, factious,
seditious, rebellious. Have not all Truths witnesses heard such reproaches? You
pretend conscience; You say you are persecuted for Religion; You will say you
are Martyrs?

Oh it is hard for Gods children to fall to opinion and practice of
Persecution, without the ready learning the language thereof: And doubtless,
that Soul that can so readily speak Babels language, has cause to fear that
he has not yet in point of Worship left the Gates or Suburbs of it.


Peace. Again, in blaming Julian and Valens the Arrian, for tolerating all
weeds to grow, he notes their sinful end, that thereby they might choke the
vitals of Christianity; and seems to consent (in this and other passages
foregoing and following on a speech of Jerome) that the weeds of false
Religions tolerated in the world, have a power to choke and kill true
Christianity in the Church.


Truth. I shall more fully answer to this on Ieromes speech, and show that if
the weeds be kept out of the Garden of the Church, the Roses and Lilies therein
will flourish, notwithstanding that weeds abound in the Field of the Civil
State. Christ's Lilies may flourish in his Church, notwithstanding the abundance
of weeds (in the world) permitted.
When Christianity began to be choked, it was not when Christians lodged in
cold Prisons, but Down beds of ease, and persecuted others, etc.


CHAP. LXVI.
Peace. HE ends this passage with approbation of Q. Elizabeth for persecuting
the Papists, and a reproof to King James for his persecuting the Puritans, etc.


Truth. I answer, if Queen Elizabeth The persecution of Queen Elizabeth and
King James compared together.
according to the Answerers Tenent and Conscience, did well to persecute
according to her conscience, King James did not ill in persecuting according to
his: For Mr. Cotton must grant, that either King James was not fit to be a
King, had not the essential qualifications of a King, in not being able
rightly to judge who ought to be persecuted, and who not, or else he must
confess that King James and all Magistrates must persecute such whom in their
Conscience they judge worthy to be persecuted.


I say it again (though I neither approve Queen Elizabeth or K. James in such
their persecutions, yet) such as hold this Tenent of persecuting for
Conscience, must also hold that Civil Magistrates are not essentially fitted
and qualified for their function and office, except they can discern clearly
the difference between such as are to be punished and persecuted, and such as
are not.

Or else if they be essentially qualified, without such a religious spirit of
discerning, and yet must persecute the Heretic, the Schismaticke, etc. must
they not persecute according to their conscience and persuasion. And then
doubtless (though he be excellent for Civil Government) may he easily, as
Paul did ignorantly, persecute the Son of God, in stead of the Son of perdition.

Therefore (lastly) according to Christ Jesus his command, Magistrates are
bound not to persecute, and to see that none of their subjects be persecuted
and oppressed for their conscience and worship, being otherwise subject and
peaceable in Civil Obedience.

CHAP. LXVII.
IN the second place I answer and ask, what glory to God what good to the
souls or bodies of their subjects shall Princes, did these Princes bring in
persecuting? etc.

Peace. Mr. Cotton tells us in his discourse upon the third Violl, In his
opening of the 7. Viols, in print. Mr. Cotton confesses that Queen Elizabeth
her persecuting the Papists, had almost ruined the English Nation.
that Queen Elizabeth had almost fired the world in civil combustions by such
her pe^secuting: For, though he bring it in to another end, yet he confesses
that it raised all Christendom in combustion, raised the Wars of 88. and the
Spanish Invasion: and he adds (both concerning the English Nation and the
Dutch) that if God had not born witness to his people, and their Laws, in
defeating the intendments of their enemies against both the Nations, it might
have been the ruin of them both.


Truth. That those Laws and Practices of Queen Elizabeth raised those
combustions in Christendom I deny not: That they might likely have cost the
ruin of English and Dutch I grant.


That it was Gods gracious work in defeating the Intendments of their enemies
I thankfully acknowledge. The Wars between the Papists and the Protestants.
But that God bore witness to such persecutions and laws for such
persecutions I deny, for

First, event and success come alike to all, and are no Arguments of love or
hatred, etc.

Secondly, the Papists in their wars have ever yet had both in Peace and War
victory and dominion; and therefore (if success be the measure) God has borne
witness unto them.

It is most true what Daniel in his 8. and 11. and 12. Chapters, and John in
his Revel. 11. 12. and 13. Chapters write of the great success of Antichrist
against Christ Jesus for a time appointed.

Success was various between Charles the fifth and some German Princes:
Eventus omnis (...).
Philip of Spain and the Low Countries: The French King and his Protestant
Subjects, sometimes losing, sometimes winning, interchangeably.

But most memorable is the famous history of the Wald^nses and Albingenses,
those famous Witnesses of Jesus Christ, who rising from Wald^ at Lions in
France (1160.) spread over France, The wars and success of the Walden^^an
witnesses against three Popes and their popish Armies.
Italy, Germany, and almost all Countries, into thousands and ten thousands,
making separation from the Pope and Church of Rome. These fought many Battles
with various success, and had the assistance and protection of diverse great
Princes against three succeeding Popes and their Armies, but after mutual
slaughters and miseries to both sides, the final success of victory fell to
the Popedom and Romish Church in the utter extirpation of those famous
Waldensian witnesses.

Gods servants are all overcommers when they war with Gods weapons in Gods
cause and Worship: and Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters, seven times is it recorded,
Gods people victorious overcommers, and with what weapons.
To him that overcommeth in Ephesus, To him that overcommeth in Sardis, etc.
and Revel. 12. Gods servants overcame the Dragon or Devil in the Roman
Emperors by three weapons, The blood of the Lamb, The word of their
Testimony, and The not loving of their lives unto the death.

CHAP. LXVIII.
Peace. THe Answerer in the next place descends to the third and last Head of
Arguments produced by the Author, The third head of Arguments from ancient and
later writers.
taken from the judgment of ancient and later Writers, yea even of the Papists
themselves, who have condemned persecution for conscience sake: some of which
the Answerer pleases to answer, and thus writes.

You begin with Hilarie, The Christian Church does not persecute, but is
persecuted.
whose testimony without prejudice to the Truth we may admit: For it is true,
the Christian Church does not persecute, but is persecuted.

But to excommunicate an Heretic is not to persecute, that is, it is not to
punish an innocent, but a culpable and damnable person, and that not for
conscience, but for persisting in error against light of conscience, whereof
he has been convinced.


Truth. In this Answer here are two things.

First, his confession of the same Truth affirmed by Hilarious, to wit, that the
Christian Church does not persecute, but is persecuted: su^ing wi^h that
fo^eg^ing observation of King James from Rev. 20.


Peace. Yet to this he adds a color thus: which, says he, we may admit
without prejudice to the truth.


Truth. I answer, Persecuting (...) cannot be Christ's Churches.
if it be a mark of the Christian Church to be persecuted, and of the
Antichristian o^ false Church to persecute, then those Churches cannot be truly
Christian (according to the first institution) which either actually
themselves, or by the Civil power of Kings and Princes given to them (or
procured by them to fight for them) do persecute such as dissent from them or
be opposite against them.


Peace. Yea, but in the second place he adds, that to excommunicate an
Heretic, is not to persecute, but to punish him for sinning against the light
of his own conscience, etc.


Truth. I answer, if this worthy Answerer were thoroughly awaked from the
Spouses spiritual slumber, (Cant. 5.) and had recovered from the drunkenness
of the great Whore, who intoxicateth the Nations, Revel. 17. It is impossible
that he should so answer: for.

First, The nature of excommunication.
who questioneth, whether to excommunicate an Heretic, (this is, an obstinate
Gainsayer) as we have opened the word upon Tit. 3.) I say, who questioneth
whether that be to persecute? Excommunication being of a spiritual nature, a
Sentence denounced by the Word of Christ Jesus the Spiritual King of his
Church; and a Spiritual killing by the most sharp two-edged Sword of the
Spirit, in delivering up the person excommunicate to Satan. Therefore who sees
not that his Answer comes not near our Question?


Peace. In the Answerers second conclusion (in the entrance of this Discourse)
he proves persecution against an Heretic for sinning against his conscience,
and quotes Tit. 3. 10. which only proves (as I have there made it evident) a
Spiritual rejecting or excommunicating from the Church of God, and so comes
not near the question.

Here again he would prove Churches charged to be false, because they
persecute: I say he would prove them not to be false, because they persecute
not: for, says he, Excommunication is not Persecution. Whereas the Question is
(as the whole discourse, What persecution or hunting is.
and Hilaries own amplification of the matter in this speech, and the practice
of all Ages testifies) whether it be not a false Church that does persecute
other Churches or Members (opposing her in Spiritual and Church matter) not by
Excommunications, but by imprisonments, stocking, whipping, sining, banishing,
hanging, burning, etc. notwithstanding that such persons in Civil obedience
and subjection are unreproveable.


Truth. I conclude this passage with Hilarious and the Answerer, That the
Christian Church does not persecute; no more then a Lilie does scratch the
Thorns, Christ's Spouse no^ser ^tcher or fighter.
or a Lamb pursue and tear the ^olves, or a Turtle dove hunt the Hawks and
Eagles, or a chaste and modest Virgin fight and scratch like whores and harlots.

And for punishing the Heretic for sinning against his conscience after
conviction, which in the second conclusion he affirms to be by a civil sword
I have at large there answered.


CHAP. LXIX.
Peace. IN the next place he selecteth one passage out of Hilarie, (although
there are many golden passages there expressed against the use of Civil Earthly
Powers in the Affairs of Christ.) The passage is this:

It is true also what he says that neither the Apostles nor We may propogate
Christian Religion by the Sword: Who cannot be won by the Word, must not be
compelled by the Sword.
but if Pagans cannot he won by the Word, they are not to be compelled by the
Sword: Nevertheless this hinders not (says he) but if they or any other
should blaspheme the true God and his true Religion, they ought to be severely
punished: and no less do they deserve, if they seduce from the Truth to
damnable Heresy or Idolatry.


Truth. In which Answer I observe, first his Agreement with Hilarie, that the
Christian Religion may not be propagated by the Civil Sword.

Unto which I reply, and ask then what means this passage in his first answer
to the former speeches of the Kings, viz. We acknowledge that none is to be
constrained to believe or profess the true Religion, till he be convinced in
judgment of the Truth of it: implying 2 things.

First, that the Civil Magistrate, who is to constrain with the Civil Sword,
must judge all the Consciences of their Subjects, whether they be convinced or
no.

Secondly, when the Civil Magistrate discerns that his Subjects consciences
are convinced, then he may constrain them vi and armi^, hostily.

And accordingly, Constrain upon Consciences in Old and New England.
the Civil State and Magistracy judging in spiritual things, who knows not
what constraint lies upon all consciences in Old and New England, to come to
Church, and pay Church duties, which is upon the point (though with a sword of
a finer gilt and trim in New England) nothing else but that which he confesses
Hilarie says true, should not be done, to wit, a propagation of Religion by
the Sword.

Again, although he confesses that propagation of Religion ought not to be by
the sword: yet he maintains the use of the sword, when persons (in the
judgment of the Civil State, for that is implied) blaspheme the true God, and
the true Religion, and also seduce others to damnable Heresy and Idolatry.
Which because he barely affirms in this place, I shall defer my Answer unto
the after Reasons of Mr Cotton and the Elders of New English Churches; where
Scriptures are alleged, and in that place (by Gods assistance) they shall be
examined and answered.


CHAP. LXX.
Peace. THe Answerer thus proceeds: Your next Writer is Tertullian, Tertullian
his speech discussed.
who speaks to the same purpose in the place alleged by you. His intent is
only to restrain Scapula the Roman Governor of Africa, from persecuting the
Christians, for not offering sacrifice to their Gods: and for that end,
fetches an Argument from the Law of Natural equity, not to compel any to any
Religion, but permit them to believe or not to believe at all.

Which we acknowledge; and accordingly we judge, the English may permit the
Indians to continue in their unbelief: nevertheless it will not therefore be
lawful to tolerate the worship of Devils or Idols, to the seduction of any
from the Truth.


Truth. Answ. In this passage he agrees with Tertullian, and gives instance in
America of the English permitting the Indians to continue in their unbeleefe:
yet withal he affirms it not lawful to tolerate worshipping of Devils, The
Indians of New England permitted by the English not only to continue ^n their
unbele^f (which they can^^^ ^ure) but also in their f^lse worship which they
might by the civil sworrestraine.
or seduction from the Truth.

I answer, that in New England it is well known that they not only permit the
Indians to continue in their unbelief, (which neither they, nor all the
Ministers of Christ on Earth, nor Angels in Heaven can help, not being able to
work belief) but they also permit or tolerate them in their Paganish worship,
which cannot be denied to be a worshipping of Devils, as all false Worship is.

And therefore cons^quently according to the same practice, did they walk by
Rule and impartially, not only the Indians, but their Countrymen, French,
Dutch, Spanish, Persians, Turks, Jews, etc. should also be permitted in their
Worships, if correspondent in civil obedience.


Peace. He adds further, when Tertullian says, That another man's Religion
neither hurts nor profits any; It must be understood of private worship and
Religion professed in private: otherwise a false Religion professed by the
members of the Church, or by such as have given their names to Christ, will be
the ruin and desolation of the Church, as appears by the threats of Christ
to the Churches^ Revel. 2.


Truth. I answer (passing by that unsound distinction of members of the Church,
or those that have given their Names to Christ, which in point of visible
profession and Worship will appear to be all one) it is plain,

First, that Tertullian does not there speak of private, but of public
Worship and Religion.

Secondly, Although it be true in a Church of Christ, that a false Religion or
Worship permitted, will hurt, according to those threats of Christ, Revel. 2.
Yet in 2 cases I believe a false Religion will not hurt (which is most like to
have been Tertullians meaning)

First, In a cases a false Religion will not hurt the true Church, or the State.
a false Religion out of the Church will not hurt the Church, no more then
weeds in the Wilderness hurt the enclosed Garden, or poison hurt the body
when it is not touched or taken, yea and antidotes are received against it.

Secondly, a false Religion and Worship will not hurt the Civil State, in case
the worshippers break no civil Law: and the Answerer (elsewhere)
acknowledges, that the civil Laws not being broken, civil Peace is not
broken: and this only is the Point in Question.


CHAP. LXXI.
Peace. YOur next Author (says he) Jerome, crosses not the Truth, nor
advantageth your Cause; for we grant what he says, that Heresy must be cut
off with the sword of the Spirit: but this hinders not, but being so cut down^
if the Heretic will persist in his Heresy, to the seduction of others, he may
be cut off also by the Civil Sword, The seducing or infecting of others
discussed.
to prevent the perdition of others. And that to be Ieromes meaning, appears
by his note upon that of the Apostle, (A little Leaven leaveneth the whole
lump) Therefore (says he) a spark as soon as it appears, is to be
extinguished, and the leaven to be removed from the rest of the dough; Rotten
pieces of flesh are to be cut off, and a scabbed beast is to be driven from the
sheepfold; lest the whole House, Body, mass of Dough, and Flock, be set on
fire with the spark, be putrified with the rotten slesh, sowred with the
leaven, perish by the scabbed beast.


Truth. I answer, The Answerer trus^eth not to the sword of the Spirit only in
Spiritual causes.
first, he grants to Tertullian, that Heresy must be cut off with the sword
of the Spirit: yet withal he maintains a cutting off by a second sword, the
sword of the Magistrate; and conceives that Tertullian so means, because he
quoteth that of the Apostle, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

Answ. It is no Argument to prove that Tertullian meant a civil sword, by
alleging 1 Cor. 5. or Gal. 5. which properly and only app^ove a cutting off
by the sword of the Spirit in the Church, and the purging out of the leaven in
the Church in the Cities of Corinth and Galatia.

And if Tertullian should so mean as himself does, yet

First, The absolute sufficiency of the sword of the Spirit.
that grant of his, that Heresy must be cut off with the sword of the Spirit,
implies an absolute sufficiency in the sword of the Spirit to cut it down,
according to that mighty operation of Spiritual weapons, (2 Cor. 10. 4.)
powerfully sufficient either to convert the Heretic to God, and subdue his
very thoughts into subjection to Christ, or else spiritually to slay and
execute him.

Secondly, it is clear to be the meaning of the Apostle, and of the Spirit of
God, not there to speak to the Church in Corinth or Galatia, The Church of
Christ to be kept pure.
or any other Church, concerning any other dough, or house, or body, or ^lock,
but the dough, the body, the house, the ^lock of Christ his Church: Out of
which such spa^ks, such leaven, such rotten slesh and scabbed sheep are to be
avoided.

Nor could the eye of this worthy Answerer ever be so obscured, as to run to a
Smiths shop for a Sword of iron and steal to help the Sword of the Spirit, A
National Church not inst^^^t^d by Christ Jesus.
if the Sun of Righteousness had once been pleased to show him, that a
National Church (which elsewhere he professes against) a state Church
(whether explicit, as in Ola England, or implicit, as in New) is not the
Institution of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The National typical State-Church of the Jews necessarily called for such
weapons: The national Church of the Jews.
but the particular Churches of Christ in all parts of the World, consisting of
Jews or Gentiles, is powerfully able by the sword of the Spirit to defend it
self, and ^ffend Men or Devils, although the Stat^ or Kingdom (wherein such a
Church or Churches of Christ are gathered) have neither carnal spear nor
sword, etc. 1 Samuel 13.
as once it was in the National Church of the Land of Canaan.


CHAP. LXXII.
Peace. BReutius (whom you next quote, Man has no power to m^ke laws to bind
conscience.
says he) speaks not to your cause. We willingly grant you, that man has
no power to make Laws to bind conscience, but this hinders not, but men may
see the Laws of God observed which do bind conscience.


Truth. I answer, In granting with Breutius that man has not power to make
Laws to bind conscience, he overthrowes such his tenent and practice as
restrain men from their Worship, according to their Conscience and belief,
and constrain them to such worships (though it be out of a pretense that they
are convinced) which their own souls tell them they have no satisfaction nor
faith in.

Secondly, whereas he affirms that men may make Laws to see the Laws of God
observed.

I answer, as God needs not the help of a material sword of steel to
assist the sword of the Spirit in the affairs of conscience, so those men,
those Magistrates, yea that Commonwealth which makes such Magistrates, must
needs have power and authority from Christ Jesus to sit Judge and to determine
in all the great controversies concerning doctrine, discipline, government, etc.

And then I ask, Desperate consequences unavoidable.
whether upon this ground it must not evidently follow, that

Either there is no lawful Commonwealth nor civil State of men in the world,
which is not qualified with this spiritual discerning: (and then also that the
very Commonweal has more light concerning the Church of Christ, then the
Church it self.)

Or, that the Commonweal and Magistrates thereof must judge and punish as they
are persuaded in their own belief and conscience, (be their conscience
Paganish, Turkish, or Antichristian) what is this but to confound Heaven and
Earth together, and not only to take away the being of Christianity out of the
World, but to take away all civility, and the world out of the world, and to
lay all upon heaps of confusion?


CHAP. LXXIII.
Peace. THe like answer (says he) may be returned to Luther, Luthers
testimony in this case discussed.
whom you next allege.

First, that the government of the civil Magistrate extends no further then
over the bodies and goods of their subjects, not over their souls, and
therefore they may not undertake to give Laws unto the souls and consciences
of men.

Secondly, that the Church of Christ does not use the Arm of secular power to
compel men to the true profession of the truth, for this is to be done with
spiritual weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled. But
this (says he) hinders not that Christians sinning against light of faith
and conscience, may justly be censured by the Church with excommunication, and
by the civil sword also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdition of
their souls.


Truth. I answer, in this joint confession of the Answerer with Luther, to wit,
that the government of the civil Magistrate extends no further then over the
bodies and goods of their subjects, not over their souls: who sees not what a
clear testimony from his own mouth and pen is given, to wit, that either the
Spiritual and Church estate, the preaching of the Word, and the gathering of
the Church, the Baptism of it, the Ministry, Government and Administrations
thereof belong to the civil body of the Commonweal? that is, to the bodies
and goods of men, which seems monstrous to imagine: Or else that the civil
Magistrate cannot (without exceeding the bounds of his office) meddle with
those spiritual affairs.

Again, Mr. Cottons positions evidently proved contradictory to themselves.
necessarily must it follow, that these two are contradictory to themselves: to
wit,

The Magistrate power extends no further then the bodies and goods of the
subject, and yet

The Magistrates must punish Christians for sinning against the light of faith
and conscience, and for corrupting the souls of men.

The Father of Lights make this worthy Answerer and all that fear him to see
their wandering in this case, not only from his fear, but also from the light
of Reason it self, their own convictions and confessions.

Secondly, in his joint confession with Luther, that the Church does not use
the secular power to compel men to the Faith and Profession of the truth, he
condemns (as before I have observed)

First, his former Implication, viz^ that they may be compelled when they are
convinced of the truth of it.

Secondly, their own practice, who suffer no man of any different conscience
and worship to live in their jurisdiction, except that he depart from his own
exercise of Religion and Worship differing from the worship allowed of in the
civil State, yea and also actually submit to come to their Church.

Which howsoever it is colored over with this varnish, Hearing of the Word of
God in a Church estate a part of Gods worship.
viz. that men are compelled no further then unto the hearing of the word, unto
which all men are bound: yet it will appear that teaching and being taught in
a Church estate is a Church worship, as true and proper a Church worship as the
Supper of the Lord, Act. 2. 46.

Secondly, all persons (Papist and Protestant) that are conscientious, have
always suffered upon this ground especially, that they have refused to come to
each others Church or Meeting.


CHAP. LXXIV.
Peace. THe next passage in the Author which the Answerer descends unto,
Papists plea for toleration of conscience.
is the testimony of the Papists themselves, a lively and shining testimony
from Scriptures alleged both against themselves and all that associate with
them (as power is in their hand) in such unchristian and bloody both tenants
and practices.

As for the testimony of the Popish book (says he) we weight it not, as
knowing what ever they speak for toleration of Religion, where themselves are
under Hatches, when they come to sit at Stern they judge and practice quite
contrary, as both their writings and judicial proceedings have testified to
the world these many years.


Truth. I answer, although both writings and practices have been such, yet the
Scriptures and expressions of truth alleged and uttered by them, speak loud
and fully for them when they are under the Hatches, that for their conscience
and religion they should not there be choked and smothered, but suffered to
breathe and walk upon the Deckes in the air of civil liberty and
conversation in the Ship of the commonwealth, upon good assurance given of
civil obedience to the civil State.

Again, if this practice be so abominable in his eyes from the Papists, viz.
The Protestants partial in the case of persecution.
that they are so partial as to persecute when they sit at Helm, and yet cry
out against persecution when they are under the Hatches, I shall beseech the
Righteous Judge of the whole world to present as in a Water or Glass (where
face answers to face) the faces of the Papist to the Protestant, answering to
each other in the samenesse of partiality, both of this doctrine and practice.

When Mr. Cotton and others have formerly been under hatches, what sad and true
complaints have they abundantly powered forth against persecution? How have they
opened that heavenly Scripture, Cant 4. 8. Where Christ Jesus calls his tender
Wife and Spouse from the fellowship with persecutors in their dens of Lions,
and mountains of Leopards?

But coming to the Helm (as he speaks of the Papists) how, both by preaching,
writing, Printing, practice, do they themselves (I hope in their persons
Lambs) unnaturally and partially express toward others, the cruel nature of
such Lions and Leopards?

O that the God of Heaven might please to tell them how abominable in his eyes
are a weight and a weight, A false balance in Gods matters abominable to God.
a stone and a stone in the bag of waights! one weight for themselves when they
are under Hatches, and another for others when they come to Helm.

Nor shall their confidence of their being in the truth (which they judge the
Papists and others are not in) no nor the Truth it self privilege them to
persecute others, and to exempt themselves from persecution, because (as
formerly.)

First, Sheep cannot h^nt, no not the wolves.
it is against the nature of true Sheep to persecute or hunt the Beasts of the
Forest, no not the same Wolves who formerly have persecuted themselves.

Secondly, if it be a duty and charge upon all Magistrates in all parts of the
World to judge and persecute in and for spiritual causes, then either they are
no Magistrates who are not able to judge in such cases, or else they must judge
according to their Consciences, whether Pagan, Turkish or Antichristian.

Lastly, Pills to purge out the spirit of persecution.
notwithstanding their confidence of the truth of their own way, yet the
experience of our Fathers errors, our own mistakes and ignorance, the sense
of our own weaknesses and blindness in the depths of the prophesies and
mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ, and the great professed expectation of
light to come which we are not now able to comprehend, may abate the edge, yea
sheath up the sword of persecution toward any, especially such as differ not
from them in doctrines of repentance, or faith, or holiness of heart and life,
and hope of glorious and eternal union to come, but only in the way and manner
of the administrations of Jesus Christ.


CHAP. LXXV.
Peace. TO close this head of the testimony of Writers, it pleases the
Answerer to produce a contrary testimony of Austin, Optatus, etc.


Truth. I readily acknowledge (as formerly I did concerning the testimony of
Princes) that Antichrist is too hard for Christ at votes and numbers:
Superstition and persecution have had many votes from Gods own people.
yea and believe that in many points (wherein the servants of God these many
hundred years have been fast asleep) superstition and persecution have had
more suffrages and votes from Gods own people then has either been honorable
to the Lord, or peaceable to their own or the souls of others: Therefore (not
to derogate from the precious memory of any of them) let us briefly consider
what they have in this point affirmed.

To begin with Austin: They murder (says he) souls, and themselves are
afflicted in body, and they put men to everlasting death, and yet they
complain when themselves are put to temporal death.

I answer, Austins saying for persecution examined.
This Rhetorical persuasion of humane wisdom seems very reasonable in the eye
of flesh and blood, but one Scripture more prevails with faithful and
obedient souls then thousands of plausi^le and eloquent speeches: in
particular,

First, the Scripture uses soule-killing Soul-killing.
in a large sense, not only for the teaching of false prophets and seducers,
but even for the offensive walking of Christians, in which respect 1 Cor. 8.) a
true Christian may be guilty of destroying a soul for whom Christ died, and
therefore by this rule ought to be hanged, burned, etc.

Secondly, That plausible similitude will not prove that every false teaching
or false practice actually kills the soul, as the body is slain, and slain
but once, for souls infected or bewitched may again recover, 1 Cor. 5. Gal.
5. 2 Timothy 2. etc.

Thirdly, for soule-killings, yea also for soule-woundings and grievings,
Christ Jesus has appointed remedies sufficient in his Church. There comes
forth a two edged sword out of his mouth (Rev. 1. and Rev. 2) able to cut down
Heresy (as is confessed) yea and to kill the Heretic, Punishments provided by
Christ Jesus against Soule-killers and Soule-wounders.
yea and to punish his soul everlastingly, which no sword of steel can reach
unto in any punishment comparable or imaginable; and therefore in this case we
may say of this spiritual soule-killing by the sword of Christ's mouth, as Paul
concerning the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2. Sufficient is this punishment, etc.

Fourthly, Although no Soule-killers, nor Soule-grievers may be suffered in the
Spiritual State or Kingdom of Christ, the Church; yet he has commanded that
such should be suffered and permitted to be and live in the World, as I have
proved on Matthew. 13. otherwise thousands and millions of souls and bodies
both, must be murdered and cut off by civil combustions and bloody wars
about Religion.

Fifthly, I argue thus: The Souls of all men in the World are either naturally
dead in Sin, or alive in Christ. If dead in sin, no man can kill them, Men
dead in Sin, cannot be Soul killed. A National enforced Religion or a Civil
War for Religion the two great preventers of soul conversion and life.
no more then he can kill a dead man: Nor is it a false Teacher or false
Religion that can so much prevent the means of Spiritual life, as one of these
two; Either the force of a material sword, imprisoning the Souls of men in a
State or National Religion, Ministry or Worship; Or secondly, Civil wars
and combustions for Religion sake, whereby men are immediately cut off without
any longer means of Repentance.

Now again, for the Souls that are alive in Christ, he has graciously
appointed Ordinances powerfully sufficient to maintain and cherish that life,
Armor of proof able to defend them against men and devils.

Secondly, the Soul once alive in Christ, is like Christ himself, ( Revel.
1.) alive for ever, ( Romans 6.) and cannot die a spiritual death.

Lastly, Grant a man to be a false Teacher, an Heretic, a Balaam, a Spiritual
Witch, a Wolf, a Persecuter, breathing out blasphemies against Christ, Soul
killers prove (by the grace of Christ) Soul savers.
and slaughters against his followers, as Paul did, Act. 9. I say, these who
appear Soule-killers to day, by the grace of Christ may prove (as Paul)
Soule-savers to morrow: and says Paul to Timothy (1 Timothy 4.) thou shall save
thy self and them that hear thee: which all must necessarily be prevented, if
all that comes within the sense of these Soule-killers, must (as guilty of
blood) be corporally killed and put to death.


CHAP. LXVI.
Peace. Dear Truth, your Answers are so satisfactorie to Austins speech, that
if Austin himself were now living, me thinks he should be of your mind. I
pray descend to Optatus, Optatus examined.
who (says the Answerer) justifies Macharius for putting some Heretics to
death, affirming that he had done no more herein then what Moses, Phineas and
Elias had done before him.


Truth. Th^se are shafts usually drawn from the Quiver of the Ceremonial and
typical state of the National Church of the Jews, Persecuters leave Christ,
and fly to Moses for their practice.
whose shadowish and figurative state vanished at the appearing of the Body and
substance, the Sun of Righteousness, who set up another Kingdom or Church
(Heb. 12.) Ministry and Worship: in which we find no such Ordinance, precept
or president of killing men by Material Swords for Religion sake.

More particularly concerning Moses, I quaerie what commandment or practice of
Moses either Optatus or the Answerer here intend? Probably that passage of
Deuteronomy. 13. wherein Moses appointed a slaughter either of a person or a city that
should depart from the God of Israel, with whom that National Church was in
Covenant. And if so, I shall particularly reply to that place in my Answer to
the Reasons hereunder mentioned.

Concerning Phineas his zealous Act:

First, his slaying of the Israelitish man, and woman of Midian, Phineas his
act discussed.
was not for spiritual, but corporal filthiness.

Secondly, no man will produce his fact as presidentiall to any Minister of the
Gospel so to act in any Civil state or Commonweal; although I believe in the
Church of God it is presidentiall for either Minister or people to kill and
slay with the two-edged sword of the Spirit of God any such bold and open
presumptuous sinners as these were.

Lastly, concerning Eliah: There were two famous acts of Eliah of a killing
nature:

First, that of slaying 850 of Baals Prophets. 1 Kings 18.

Secondly of the two Captains and their Fifties, by fire, etc.

For the first of these, Elia^s slaughters examined.
it cannot figure or type out any material slaughter of the many thousands of
false Prophets in the World by any material sword of Iron or Steel: for as
that passage was miraculous, so find we not any such commission given by the
Lord Jesus to the Ministers of the Gospel. And lastly, such a slaughter must
not only extend to all the false prophets in the World, but (according to the
Answerers grounds) to the many thousands of thousands of Idolaters and false
worshippers in the Kingdoms and Nations of the World.

For the second Act of Eliah, Eliahs consuming the 2 Capta^nes and their
companies by ^i^e, discussed.
as it was also of a miraculous nature: So secondly, when the followers of the
Lord Jesus (Luc. 9.) proposed such a practice to the Lord Jesus, for injury
offered to his own person, he disclaimed it with a mild check to their angry
spirits, telling them plainly they knew not what spirits they were of; and
adds that gentle and merciful conclusion, That he came not to destroy the
bodies of men, as contrarily Antichrist does, alleging these instances from
the Old Testament, as also Peter's killing Anania^, Acts 5. and Peter's vision
and voice, Arise Peter, kill and eat, Acts. 10.


CHAP. LXXVII.
Peace. YOu have so satisfied these instances brought by Optatus, that me
thinks Optatus and the Answerer himself might rest satisfied.

I will not trouble you with Bernards argument from Romans 13. which you have
already on that Scripture so largely answered.

But what think you (lastly) of Calvin, Beza, and Aretius?


Truth Ans. Since matters of fact and opinion are barely related by the
Answerer without their grounds, whose grounds notwithstanding in this Discourse
are answered. I answer, if Paul himself were joined with them, yea or an Angel
from Heaven bringing any other rule then what the Lord Jesus has once
delivered, we have Paul's conclusion and resolution, peremptory and dreadful,
Gal. 1. 8.


Peace. This passage finished, let me finish the whole by proposing one
conclusion of the Author of the arguments, viz. It is no prejudice to the
Commonwealth if Liberty of Conscience were suffered to such as fear God
indeed: Abraham abode a long time amongst the Cananites, yet contrary to them
in Religion, Genesis 13. 7. and 16. 13. Again, he s^journed in Gerar, and King
Abimel^ch gave him leave to abide in his Land, Genesis 20. 21. 23. 24.

Isaac also dwelt in the same Land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 26.

Jacob lived 20 years in one house with his Uncle Laban, yet differed in
Religion, Genesis 31.

The people of Israel were about 430 years in that infamous land of Egypt, and
afterward 70 years in Babylon: all which times they differed in Religion from
the States, Exodus 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.

Come to the time of Christ, where Israel was under the Romans, where lived
diverse Sects of Religion, as Herodians, Scribes and Pharisees, Saduces and
Libertines, Theudaeans and Samaritanes, beside the Common Religion of the Jews,
and Christ and his Apostles. All which differed from the Common Religion of the
State, which was like the Worship of Diana, which almost the whole World then
worshipped, Acts 19. 20.

All these lived under the Government of Caesar, being nothing hurtful unto
the Commonwealth, giving unto Caesar that which was his. And for their Religion
and Consciences toward God, he left them to themselves, as having no dominion
over their Souls and Consciences: And when the Enemies of the Truth raised up
any tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them, Acts 18
14. and 19. 35.

Unto this the Answerer returns thus much:

It is true, that without prejudice to the Commonwealth, Liberty of
Conscience may be suffered to such as fear God indeed, as knowing they will
not persist in Heresy or turbulent Schism, when they are convinced in
Conscience of the sinfulnes thereof. But the question is, whether an Heretic
after once or twice Admonition, (and so after Conviction) and any other
scandalous and heinous offender, may be tolerated either in the Church without
Excommunication, or in the Commonweal without such punishment as may preserve
others from dangerous and damnable infection.


CHAP. LXXIX.
Truth. I Here observe the Answerers partiality, that none but such as truly
fear God should enjoy Liberty of Conscience, whence the Inhabitants of the
World must either come into the estate of men fearing God, or else dissemble a
Religion in hypocrisy, or else be driven out of the World: One must follow.
The first is only the gift of God, the second and third are too commonly
practiced upon this ground.

Again, since there is so much controversy in the World, where the name of
Christ is taken up, concerning the true Church, the Ministry and Worship, and
who are those that truly fear God; I ask who shall judge in this case, who be
they that fear God?

It must needs be granted, that such as have the power of suffering or not
suffering, Dangerous consequences flowing from the Civil Magistrates judging in
Spiritual causes.
such Consciences, must judge: and then must it follow (as before I intimated)
that the Civil State must judge of the truth of the Spiritual; and then
Magistrates fearing or not fearing God, must judge of the fear of God: also
that their judgment or sentence must be according to their conscience, of what
Religion soever: Or that there is no lawful Magistrate, who is not able to
judge in such cases. And lastly, that since the Sovereign power of all Civil
Authority is founded in the consent of the People, that every Commonweal has
radically and fundamentally in it a power of true discerning the true fear of
God, The World turned upside down.
which they transfer to their Magistrates and Officers: Or else that there are
no lawful Kingdoms, Cities, or Towns in the World, in which a man may live,
and unto whose Civil Government he may submit: and then (as I said before)
there must be no World, nor is it lawful to live in it, because it has not a
true discerning Spirit to judge them that fear or not fear God.

Lastly, although this worthy Answerer so readily grants, that Liberty of
Conscience should be suffered to them that fear God indeed: The wonderful
answer of the Ministers of the Church of New England to the Ministers of the
Church of Old England.
yet we know what the Ministers of the Churches of New England wrote in answer
to the 3 Question sent to them by some Ministers of Old England, viz. that
although they confessed them to be such persons whom they approved of far above
themselves, yea who were in their hearts to live and die together; yet if they
and other godly people with them, coming over to them, should differ in Church
constitution, they then could not approve their Civil cohabitation with them,
and consequently could not advise the Magistrates to suffer them to enjoy a
Civil being within their Jurisdiction.

Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, yea let the Heavens be astonished, and
the Earth tremble at such an Answer as this from such excellent men to such
whom they esteem for godliness above themselves.


CHAP. LXXIX.
Peace. YEa, but they say, they doubt not if they were there but they should
agree; for, say they, either you will come to us, or you may show us light to
come to you, for we are but weak men, and dream not of perfection in this life.


Truth. Alas, L^mentable differences even amongst them that ^ear God.
who knows not what lamentable differences have been between the same
Ministers of the Church of England, some conforming, others leaving their
livings, friends, country, life, rather then conform; when others again (of
whose personal godliness it is not questioned) have succeeded by conformity
into such forsaken (so called) Livings? Between the Presbyterians and
Independants, Covenanters and Noncovenanters, of both which many are truly
godly in their persons.
How great the present differences even amongst them that fear God, concerning
Faith, Justification, and the evidence of it? concerning Repentance and godly
sorrow, as also and mainly concerning the Church, the Matter, Form,
Administration and Government of it?

Let none now think that the passage to New England by Sea, or the nature of
the Country can do what only the Key of David can do, to wit, open and shut
the Consciences of men.

Beside, how can this be a faithful and upright acknowledgement of their
weakness and imperfection, when they preach, print, and practice such violence
to the souls and bodies of others, and by their Rules and Grounds ought to
proceed even to the killing of those whom they judge so dear unto them, and in
respect of godliness far above themselves?


CHAP. LXXX.
Peace. YEa but (say they) the godly will not persist in Heresy or turbulent
Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience, The doctrine of persecution
nec^ss^r^ly and most commonly falls (...) vi^st upon he ^^ost godly persons.
etc.


Truth. Sweet Truth, if the Civil Court and Magistracy must judge (as before I
have writ^en) and those Civil Courts are as lawful, consisting of natural
men as of godly persons, then what consequences necessarily will ^ollow, I have
before mentioned. And I add, according to this conclusion it must follow,
that, if the most godly persons yield not to once or twice Admonition (as is
maintained by the Answerer) they must necessarily be esteemed obseinate
persons, for if they were godly (says he) they would yield. Must it not then
be said (as it was by one, passing sentence of Banishment upon some, whose
godliness was acknowledged) that he that commanded the Judge not to respect
the poor in the cause of judgment, commands him not to respect the holy or
the godly person?

Hence I could name the place and time when a godly man, The doctrine of
persecution drives the most godly persons out of the world.
a most desirable person for his trade, etc. (yet something different in
conscience) propounded his willingness and desire to come to dwell in a
certain Town in New England; it was answered by the Chief of the place, This
man differs from us, and we desire not to be troubled. So that in conclusion
(for no other reason in the world) the poor man, though godly, useful and
peaceable, could not be admitted to a Civil Being and Habitation on the Common
Earth in that Wilderness amongst them.

The latter part of the Answer concerning the Heretic or obstinate person to
be excommunicated, and the scandalous offender to be punished in the
Commonweal, which neither of both come near our Question: I have spoken I
fear too largely already.


Peace. Mr. Cotton concludes with a confident persuasion of having removed the
grounds of that great error, viz. that persons are not to be persecuted for
cause of conscience.


Truth. And I believe (dear Peace) it shall appear to them that (with fear
and trembling at the word of the Lord) examine these passages, that the charge
of error reboundeth back even such an error, as may well be called the
bloody tenent, The bloody Tenent.
so directly contradicting the spirit and mind and practice of the Prince of
Peace; so deeply guilty of the blood of souls compelled and forced to
^^ypocrisie in a spiritual and soul rape; so deeply guilty of the blood of
the Souls under the Altar, persecuted in all ages for the cause of Conscience,
and so destructive to the civil peace and welfare of all Kingdoms, Countries,
and Commonwealths.


CHAP. LXXXI.
Peace. TO this Conclusion (dear Truth) I heartily subscribe, and know the
God, the Spirit, the Prince, the Angels, and all the true awaked Sons of Peace
will call thee blessed.


Truth. How sweet and precious are these contemplations, but oh how sweet the
actions and fruitions?


Peace. Thy lips drop as the Honey-combe, Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue;
oh that these drops, these streams might flow without a stop or interruption!


Truth. The glorious white Troopers (Rev. 19.) shall in time be mounted, and he
that is the most High Prince of Princes, and Lord General of Generals mounted
upon the Word of Truth and Meekness (Psalm 45.) shall triumph gloriously, and
renew our meetings. But hark, what noise is this?


Peace. These are the doleful drums, and shrill sounding trumpets, Wars for
Conscience.
the roaring murdering Canons, the shouts of Conquerours, the groans of
wounded, dying, slaughtered, righteous with the wicked. Dear Truth how long?
how long these dreadful sounds and direful sights? how long before my glad
return and restitution?


Truth. Sweet Peace, who will believe my true report? yet true it is, if I were
once believed, blessed Truth and Peace should not so soon be parted.


Peace. Dear Truth, what welcome have thou found of late beyond thy former
times or present expectations?


Truth. Alas, my welcome changes as the times, and strongest swords and arms
prevail: were I believed in this, that Christ is not delighted with the blood
of men (but shed his own for his bloodiest enemies) that by the word of Christ
no man for gainsaying Christ, or joining with his enemy Antichrist, should be
molested with the civil sword: The blessed Magna Charta
Were this foundation laid as the Magna Charta of highest liberties, and good
security given on all hands for the preservation of it, how soon should every
brow and house be stuck with Olive Branches?


Peace. This heavenly invitation makes me bold once more to crave thy patient
ear and holy tongue. Errour^s impatient and soon tired, but thou art Light,
and like the Father of Lights, unwearied in thy shinings. Lo here what once
again I present to thy impartial censure.


A MODEL of CHURCH and CIVIL Power. Composed by Mr. COTTON and the MINISTERS of
NEW ENGLAND, And sent to the CHURCH at SALEM, as a further Confirmation of the
bloody Doctrine of PERSECUTION for cause of CONSCIENCE.
Examined and Answered.
CHAP. LXXXII.
Truth. What have thou there?


Peace. Here is a combination of thine own Children against thy very life and
mine: A strange Model of a Church and Commonweal, after the M^s^call and
Jewish pattern
H^re is a Model (framed by many able learned and godly hands) of such a
Church and Commonweal as wakens Moses from his unknown Grave, and denies
Jesus yet to have seen the Earth.


Truth. Begin (sweet Peace) read and propound. My hand shall not be tired with
holding the balances of the Sanctuary: do thou put in, and I shall weigh as
in the presence of Him whose pure eyes cannot behold iniquity.


Peace. Thus then speaks the Preface or Entrance. Mat. 16. 19. with ^oh: 20.
23. Romans 13. 1. Mat. 10. 18. Tit 3. 1. Acts 15. 20.
Seeing God has given a distinct power to Church and Commonweal, the one
Spiritual (called the Power of the Keys) the other Civil called the Power of
the Sword) and has made the members of both Societies subject to both
Authorities, so that every soul in the Church is subject to the higher powers
in the Commonweal, Isa. 49. 2^. Gal. 3. ^8.
and every member of the Commonweal (being a member of the Church) is subject
to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, and in him to the censures of the Church; the
Question is, how the Civil State and the Church may dispense their several
Governments without infringement and impeachment of the power and honor of the
One or of the Other, and what bounds and limits the Lord has set between both
the Administrations.


Truth. From that conclusion (dear Peace) that every mem^ of the Commonweal,
Christ's power in his Church confessed to be above all Magistrates in (...) all
things.
being a member of the Church, is subject to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, and
in Him to the censure of the Church; I observe that they grant the Church of
Christ in Spiritual causes to be superior and over the highest Magistrates in
the World, if members of the Church.

Hence therefore I infer, may she refuse to receive, and may also cast forth
any, yea even the highest (if obstinate in Sin) cut of her Spiritual society.

Hence in this Spiritual society, that soul who has most of Christ, most of
His Spirit, is most (spiritually) honorable, according to the Scriptures,
quoted Acts 15. 20. Isa. 49. 23. Gal. 3. 28.

And if so, how can this stand with their common tenent, that the Civil
Magistrate must keep the first Table set up, reform the Church, and be Judge
and Governor in all Ecclesiastical as well as Civil causes?

Secondly, I observe the lamentable wresting of this one Scripture, Isa. 49.
23. lamentably wrested.
Sometimes this Scripture must prove the Power of the Civil Magistrates, Kings
and Governors, over the Church in Spiritual causes etc. Yet here this
Scripture is produced to prove Kings and Magistrates (in Spiritual causes) to
be censured and corrected by the same Church. ^Tis true in several respects,
he that is a Governor may be a subject but in one and the same spiritual
respect to judge and to be judged: to sit on the Bench, and stand at the Bar of
Christ Jesus, is as impossible as to reconcile the East and West together.


CHAP. LXXXII.
The first head, That both Jurisdictions may stand together.
Peace. Whereas diverse affecting transcending power to themselves over the
Church have persuaded the Princes of the World, The first head examined.
that the Kingdom of Christ in His Church cannot rise or stand, without the
falls of those Commonweales wherein it is set up, John 18. 36.
we do believe and profess the contrary to this suggestion; the government of
the one being of this World, J^r. 29. 7.
the other not; the Church helping forward the prosperity of the Commonweal by
means only Ecclesiastical and Spiritual; the Commonweal helping forward her
own and the Churches felicity by means political or temporal; Ezta 7. 23.
Romans 1. 2. 3. and Tim. 2. 2.
the falls of Commonweales being known to arise from their scattering and
diminishing the power of the Church, and the flourishing of Commonweales with
the well ordering of the people (even in moral and civil virtues) being
observed to arise from the vigilant administration of the holy Discipline of
the Church, as Bodin, (a man not partial to Church Discipline) plainly
testifies. The vices in the free estate of Geneva, quae legibus nusquam
vindicantur, by means of Church Discipline, sine vi and tumultu coercentur;
the Christian liberty not freeing us from subjection to Authority, but from
inthrallment and bondage unto sin.


Truth. Ans. From this confession, The Civil Commonweal and the Spiritual
Commonweal the Church, not inconsistent, though independent the one on the
other.
that the Church or Kingdom of Christ may be set up without prejudice of the
Commonweal, according to John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World, etc. I
observe that although the Kingdom of Christ, the Church and the Civil
Kingdom or Government be not inconsistent, but that both may stand together;
yet that they are independent according to that Scripture, and that therefore
there may be (as formerly I have proved) flourishing Commonweales and Societies
of men^ where no Church of Christ abides; and secondly, the Commonweal may be
in perfect peace and quiet, notwithstanding the Church, the Commonweal of
Christ be in distractions^ and spiritual oppositions both against their
Religions, and sometimes amongst themselves, as the Church of Christ in Corinth
troubled with divisions, contentions, etc.

Secondly, I observe it is true the Church helps forward the prosperity of
the Commonweal by spiritual means Ier. 29. 7. The prayers of Gods people
procure the peace of the City, where they abide, yet that Christ's Ordinances
and administrations of Worship are appointed and given by Christ to any Civil
State, Town or City as is implied by the instance of Geneva, that I
confidently deny.

The Ordinances and Discipline of Christ Jesus, Christ's Ordinances put upon a
whole City or Nation, may more civilize and moralize, but ^ever Christianize
them.
though wrongfully and profanely applied to natural and unregenerate men may
cast a blush of civillity and morality upon them as in Geneva and other places
(for the shining brightness of the very shadow of Christ's Ordinances casts a
shame upon barbarism and incivillity yet withal I affirm that the
misapplication of Ordinances to unregenerate and unrepentant persons hardens up
their souls in a dreadful sleep and dream of their own blessed estate, and
sends millions of souls to hell in a secure expectation of a false salvation.


CHAP. LXXXIV.
The second head, concerning Superiority of each Power.
Peace. BEcause contention may arise in future times which The second head
concerning superiority of each power.
of these Powers under Christ is the greatest as it has been under Antichrist,
we conceive first, That the power of the Civil Magistrates is superior to the
Church policy in place, honors, dignity, earthly power in the World; Romans 13.
1. 5. 6 Isa. 49. 23. Isa. 49. 23.
and the Church superior to him (being a member of the Church)
Ecclesiastically, that is, in a Church way ruling and ordering him by
Spiritual Ordinances according to God for his souls health, as any other
member, so that all the power the Magistrate has over the Church is temporal
not spiritual, Luc. 12. 14. Joh. 8. 11. And that judicium of the church in law
suits, 1 Cor. 62 is only arbitrarium not coasti^^m.
and all the power the Church has over the Magistrate is spiritual not
temporal: And as the Church has no temporal power over the Magistrate, in
ordine ad bonum spirituale: So the Magistrate has no Spiritual power over the
Church in ordine ad bonum temporale.

Secondly, the delinquencie of either party calls for the exercise of the
power of terror from the other part; for no Rulers ordained of God are a
terror to good works, but to evil, Romans 13. 3. So that if the Church offend,
the offense of the Church c^lleth upon the Civil Magistrate, either to seek
the healing thereof as a nursing father by his own grave advice, and the
advice of other Churches; or else if he cannot so prevail to put forth and
exercise the superiority of his power in redressing what is amiss according to
the quality of the offense by the course of civil Justice.

On the other side, if the Magistrate being a member of the Church shall
offend, the offense calls upon the Church either to seek the healing thereof
in a brotherly way by conviction of his sin; or else if they cannot prevail,
then to exercise the superiority of their power in removing of the offense and
recovering of the offendour by Church censures.

If the end of Spiritual or Church power is bonum spirituale, a spiritual
good; Ans. Truth.
and the end of Civil or State power is bonum temporale, a temporal good: And
secondly, if the Magistrate have no spiritual power to attain to his
temporal end, no more then a Church has any temporal power to attain to her
Spiritual end, A contradiction to make the Magistrate supreme judge in
spiritual causes, and yet to have no spiritual power.
as is confessed: I demand if this be not a contradiction against their own
disputes, tenants, and practices touching that question of persecution for
cause of conscience: For if the Magistrate be supreme Judge (and so
consequently give supreme judgment, sentence and determination) in matters of
the first Table, and of the Church, and be custos utriusque, Tabule, keepers of
both Tables (as they speak) and yet have no Spiritual power as is affirmed,
how can he determine what the true Church and Ordinances are, and then set them
up with the power of the Sword? How can he give judgment of a false Church, a
false Ministry, a false Doctrine, false Ordinances, and with a Civil Sword
pull them down, if he have no Spiritual power, authority or commission from
Christ Jesus for these ends and purposes?

Further I argue thus: If the civil officers of State must determine, judge
and punish in Spiritual causes, his power, authority and commission must be
either Spiritual or Civil, or else he has none at all, and so acts without a
commission and warrant from the Lord Jesus, The Civil Magistrate confessed to
have no Civil power over the souls of men.
and so consequently stands guilty at the Bar of Christ Jesus to answer for
such his practice as a transcendent Delinquent.

Now for civil power, these worthy Authors confess that the Government of the
civil Magistrate extends no further then over the bodies and goods of the
Subject, and therefore has no civil power over the Soul, and therefore (say
I) not in Soule-causes.

Secondly, It is here confessed in this passage, that to attain his Civil end
or Bonum temporale, he has no Spiritual power, Nor spiritual.
and therefore of necessity out of their own mouths must they be judged for
provoking the Magistrate, without either Civil or Spiritual power, to judge,
punish and persecute in Spiritual causes; and to fear and tremble, lest they
come near those frogs which proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon and Beast
and false Prophet, who by the same Arguments which the Authors here use stir
up the Kings of the Earth to make war against the Lamb Christ Jesus, and his
Followers, Revel. 17.


CHAP. LXXXV.
IN the next place I observe upon the point of Delinquencie, such a confusion,
as Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at: If the Church offend (say they) after
advice refused, in conclusion the Magistrate must redress, that is, punish the
Church (that is, in Church offenses and cases) by a course of Civil justice.

On the other side, if the Civil Magistrate offend after Admonition used, and
not prevailing, in conclusion the Church proceeds to censure, that is, to
Excommunication, as is afterward more largely proved by them.

Now I demand, if the Church be a Delinquent, who shall judge? It is answered,
the Magistrate. Again, if the Magistrate be a Delinquent, The Magistrate and
the Church, by the Authors grounds, at one and the same time, in one and the
same cause, made the Judges on the B^^^h, and D^^^quents ^^^th. B^^re.
I ask who shall judge? It is answered, the Church. Whence I observe, (which
is monstrous in all cases in the World) that one person, to wit, the Church or
Magistrate, shall be at one time the Delinquent at the Bar, and the Judge upon
the Bench. This is clear thus: The Church must judge when the Magistrate
offends; and yet the Magistrate must judge when the Church offends; and so
consequently in this case must judge whether she contemn Civil Authority in
the Second Table, for thus dealing with him: Or whether she have broken the
rules of the first Table, of which (say they) God has made him Keeper and
Conserver. And therefore, though the Church make him a Delinquent at the Bar,
yet by their confession God has made him a Judge on the Bench. What blood,
what tumults has been, and must be spilt upon these grounds?

Peace. Dear Truth, No question but the Church may punish the Magistrate
spiritually in spiritual cases; and the Magistrate may punish the Church,
civilly, in civil cases: But that for one and the same cause the Church must
punish the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the Church, this seems monstrous,
and needs explication.


Truth. Sweet Peace, I illustrate with this Instance: A true Church of Christ
(of which, according to the Authors supposition, the Magistrate is a member)
chooses and calls one of her members to office: An illustration demonstrat^ng
th^^ the C^vill Mag^st^at^ c^nnot h^ve power over the Church (...) spiritu^ll
or Church causes.
The Magistrate opposes: The Church persuaded that the Magistrates exceptions
are insufficient (according to her privilege, which these Authors maintain
against the Magistrates prohibition) proceeds to Ordain her officer: The
Magistrate charge the Church to have made an unfit and unworthy choice, and
therefore according to his place and power, and according to his conscience and
judgment he suppresseth such an officer, and makes void the Churches choice:
Upon this the Church complains against the Magistrates violation of her
priviledges^ given her by Christ Jesus, and cries out that the Magistrate is
turned Persecuter^ and not prevailing with admonition, she proceeds to
Excommunication against him: The Magistrate according to his conscience,
endures not such profanation of Ordinances as he conceives; and therefore, if
no advice and admonition prevail, he proceeds against such obstinate abusers
of Christ's holy Ordinances, (as the Authors grant he may) in Civil Court of
justice, yea and (I add according to the pattern of Israel) cuts them off by
the sword, as obstinate usurpers and prophaners of the holy things of Christ.

I demand what help has any poor Church of Christ in this case, The
punishments Civil which the Magistrate insticts upon the Church for Civil
crimes, lawful and necessary.
by maintaining this power of the Magistrate to punish the Church of Christ, I
mean in spiritual and Soule-cases, for otherwise I question not but he may
put all the members of the Church to death justly, if they commit crimes worthy
thereof, as Paul spoke, Acts 23.

Shall the Church here sly to the Popes Sanctuary against Emperors and
Princes excommunicate, to wit, give away their crowns, kingdoms or dominions,
and invite foreign Princes to make War upon them and their Territories? The
Authors surely will disclaim this; and yet I shall prove their Tenants tend
directly unto such a practice.

Or secondly, shall she say the Magistrate is not a true Magistrate' because
not able to judge and determine in such cases? This, their confession will not
give them leave to say, because they cannot deny unbelievers to be lawful
Magistrates: and yet it shall appear (not withstanding their con^ession to the
contrary) their Tenants imply, that none but a Magistrate after their own
conscience, is a lawful Magistrate.

Therefore, thirdly, they must ingenuously and honestly confess, that if it be
the duty of the Magistrate to punish the Church in spiritual cases, he must
then judge according to his conscience and persuasion, whatever his conscience
be: and then let all men judge into what a woeful state they bring both the
civil Magistrate and Church of Christ, by such a Church-destroying and
State-destroying Doctrine.


Peace. Some will here say, in such a case either the Magistrate on the Church
must judge; either the Spiritual or Civil State must be supreme.

I answer, if the Magistrate be of another Religion,

First, The true way of the God of Peace in differen^es between the Church and
the Magistrate.
What has the Church to judge him being without? 1 Cor. 5.

Secondly, If he be a member of the Church^ doubtless the Church has power to
judge (in spiritual and Soule-cases) with spiritual and Church censures all
that are within, 1^ Cor. 5.

Thirdly, If the Church offend against the civil peace of the State, by
wronging the bodies or goods of any, the Magistrate bears not the sword in
vain, Romans 13. to correct any or all the members of the Church. And this I
conceive to be the only way of the God of Peace.


CHAP. LXXXVI.
The third head concerns the End of both these Powers.
FIrst the common and last end of both is Gods glory, and Man's eternal
felicity.

Secondly, the proper ends:

First of Commonwealth, is the procuring, preserving, increasing of external
and temporal peace and felicity of the State in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.

Secondly, of the Church, a begetting, preserving, increasing of internal and
spiritual peace and felicity of the Church, in all godliness and honesty,
Esaias 2. 3, 4. and 9. 7. So that Magistrates have power given them from Christ
in matters of Religion, because they are bound to see that ou^ward peace be
preserved, not in all ungodliness and dishonesty (For such peace is
Satanicall) but in all godliness and honesty, for such peace God aims at. And
hence the Magistrate is custos of both the Tables of godliness, in the first
of Honesty, in the second for Peace sake. He must see that honesty be
preserved within his jurisdiction, or else the subject will not be bonus Cives.
Ch^mer. de Ec. l^s. p. 376. Park. part. polit. lib. 1. cap. 1
He must see that godliness as well as honesty be preserved, else the subject
will not be bonus vir, who is the best bonus cives. He must see that
godliness and honesty be preserved, or else himself will not be bonus
Magistratus.

Truth. In this passage here are diverse particulars affirmed mavelous
destructive both to godliness and honesty, though under a fair ma^ke and
color of both.

First, it will appear that in spiritual things they make the Garden and the
Wilderness (as often I have intimated) I say the Garden and the Wilderness,
the Church and the World are all one: The G^rden of the Church and the
Wilderness of the World ma^e all one.
for thus,

If the Powers of the World or Civil State, are bound to propose external
Peace in all godliness for their end, and the end of the Church be to preserve
internal Peace in all godliness, I demand if their end (godlinesse^ be the
same, is not their power and state the same also, unless they make the Church
subordinate to the Commonwealths and, or the Commonweal subordinate to the
Churches end, which (being the governor and setter up of it, and so
consequently the Judges of it) it cannot be?

Now i^ godliness be the worshipping and walking with God in Christ, The
Commonweal more charged by these Authors with the W^^sh^p and Ordinances, then
the Church.
is not the Magistrate and Commonweal charged more by this tenent with the
worship and Ordinances of God, then the Church, for the Magistrate they charge
with the external peace in godliness, and the Church but with the internal.

I ask further, what is this internal peace in all godliness? whether intend
they internal within the Soul, which only the eye of God can see, opposed to
external or visible, which man also can discern? or else whether they mean
internal, that is spiritual soul matters, ma^ters of Gods Worship, and then
I say that peace (to wit, of godliness or Gods worship) they had before
granted to the civil State?


Peace. The Truth is, (as I now perceive) the best and most godly of that
judgment declare themselves never to have seen a true difference between the
Church and the World, The authors of these Position^ never yet s^w a true
d^fference between ^he Church of Ch^^^t and the world, in po^^t of worship.
and the Spiritual and Civil State; and how^oever these worthy Authors seem
to make a kind of separation from the World, and profess that the Church must
consist of spiritual and living Stones, Saints, Regenerate persons, and so
make some peculiar enclosed Ordinances, as the Supper of the Lord, (which none,
say they, but godly persons must taste of) yet by compelling all within their
Jurisdiction to an outward conformity of the Church worship, of the Word and
Prayer, and maintenance of the Ministry thereof, they evidently declare that
they still lodge and dwell in the confused mixtures of the unclean and clean,
of the flock of Christ, and Herds of the World together, I mean in spiritual
and religious worship.


Truth. For a more full and clear discussion of this Scripture, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
(on which is weakly built such a mighty building) I shall propose and resolve
these four Quaeries.


CHAP. LXXXVII.
First, 1 Timothy 2. 1. discuss^d.
what is meant by godliness and honesty in this place.

Secondly, what may the scope of the holy Spirit of God be in this place.

Thirdly, whether the civil Magistrate was then custos utri^^sque Tabulae,
keeper of both Tables, etc.

Fourthly, whether a Church or Congregation of Christians may not live in
godliness and honesty, although the civil Magistrate be of another conscience
and worship, and the whole State and Country with him.

To the first, What is here meant by godliness and honesty?

Answ. The word honesty in this place of Timothy cannot signify here the
honesty or righteousness of the second Table.
I find not that the Spirit of God here intends the first and second Table.

For, how ever the word (...) signify godliness, or the worship of God, yet
the second word (...) I find not that it signifies such an honesty as
compriseth the duties of the second Table, but such an honesty as signifies
solemnity, gravity, and so it is turned by the Translatours, Tit. 2. 7. (...),
that is, in doctrine, incorruptnesse, gravity: which doctrine cannot there be
taken for the doctrine of the civil state, or second Table, but the gravity,
majesty, and solemnity of the spiritual doctrine of Christianity. So that
according to the Translatours own rendering of that word in Titus, this place
of Timothy should be thus rendered (In all godliness (or worshipping of God)
and gravity) that is, a solemn or grave profession of the worship of God; and
yet this mistaken and misinterpreted Scripture is that great Castle and strong
Hold which so many ^lye unto concerning the Magistrates charge over the two
Tables.

Secondly, what is the scope of the Spirit of God in this place?

I answer first negatively, The scope of Gods Spirit in this place of Timothy.
the scope is not to speak of the duties of the first and second Table:

Nor secondly is the scope to charge the Magistrate with forcing the people
(who have chose him) to godliness or Gods worship, according to his
conscience, (the Magistrate keeping the peace of external godliness, and the
Church of internal, as is affirmed:) but

Secondly, positively, I say the Spirit of God by Paul in this place provokes
Timothy and the Church at Ephesus, and so consequently all the Ministers of
Christ's Churches and Christians, to pray for two things.

First, Gods people must pray for and endeavor the peace of the State they
live in.
for the peaceable and quiet state of the Countries and places of their abode,
that is employed in their praying (as Paul directs them) for a quiet and
peaceable condition, and suits sweetly with the command of the Lord to his
people, even in Babel, Ier. 29. 7. Pray for the peace of the City, and seek
the good of it, for in the Peace thereof it shall go well with you. Which Ruie
will hold in any Pagan or Popish city, Although Pagan or Pop^sh
and therefore consequently are Gods people to pray against Wars, Famines,
Pestilences, and especially to be far from kindling coals of War, and
endeavor the bringing in and advancing their conscience by the sword.

Secondly, they are here commanded to pray for the salvation of all men, that
all men, and especially Kings and Magistrates might be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, implying that the grave or solemn and shining
profession of godliness or Gods worship according to Christ Jesus, is a
blessed means to cause all sorts of men to be affected with the Christian
profession, and to come to the same knowledge of that one God and one Mediator
Christ Jesus. All which tends directly against what it is brought for, to wit,
the Magistrates forcing all men to godliness or the worshipping of God,
Forcing of men to godliness or Gods worship, the greatest cause of breach of
Civil peace
which in truth causes the greatest breach of peace, and the greatest
distractions in the World, and the setting up that for godliness or, worship
which is no more then Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, a State worship, and in
some places the worship of the Beast, and his Image, Dan 3. Rev. 13.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
THirdly, I quaerie whether the Civil Magistrate (which was then the Roman
Emperor) was keeper or guardian of both Tables (as is affirmed.)

Scripture and all History tell us, The Roman Caesar's described.
that those Caesar's were not only ignorant, without God, without Christ, etc.
but professed worshippers or maintainers of the Roman gods or devils; as also
notorious for all sorts of wickedness, and lastly, cruel and bloody Lions,
and Tigers toward the Christians for many hundred years.

Hence I argue from the wisdom, love and faithfulness of the Lord Jesus in
his house, Not appointed by Christ Jesus keepers and guardians of his Church.
it was impossible that he should appoint such ignorant, such Idolatrous, such
wicked and such cruel persons to be his chief Officers and Deputy Lieutenants
under himself to keep the worship of God, to guard his Church, his Wife: No
wise and loving father was ever known to put his child, no not his beasts,
dogs or swine, but unto fitting keepers.

Men judge it matter of high complaint, that the Records of Parliament, the
Kings children, the Tower of London, the Great Seal should be committed to
unworthy keepers! And can it be without high blasphemy conceived that the Lord
Jesus should commit his Sheep, his Children, yea his Spouse, his thousand
shields and bucklers in the Tower of his Church^ and lastly, his Great and
Glorious Broad Seals of Baptism and his Supper, to be preserved pure in their
adminstrations, I say that the Lord Jesus who is wisdom, and faithfulness it
self, should deliver these to such keepers.

Peace. Some will say, it is one thing what persons are in ^act and practice:
another what they ought to be by right and office.


Truth. In such cases as I have mentioned, no man does in the common eye of
reason deliver such matters of charge and trust to such as declare themselves
and sins (like Sodom) at the very time of this great charge and trust to be
committed to them.


Peace. It will further be said, that many of the Kings of Judah who had the
charge of establishing, reforming (and so consequently of keeping the first
Table) the Church, Gods worship, etc. were notoriously wicked, Idolatrous, etc.


Truth. I must then say, the case is not alike, for when the Lord appointed the
Government of Israel after the rejection of Saul to establish a Covenant of
succession in the type unto Christ, let it be minded what pattern and
president it pleased the Lord to set for the after Kings of Israel and Judah,
in David the man after His own Heart.


But now the Lord Jesus being come Himself, and having fulfilled the former
types, and dissolved the National State of the Church, and established a more
Spiritual way of worship all the World over, It pleased not the Lord Jesus in
the first institution of his Church to furnish himself with any such Civil
Governors, as unto whom he might commit the care of his worship.
and appointed a Spiritual government and governors, it is well known what
the Roman Caesar's were, under whom both Christ Jesus Himself and his Servants
after him lived and suffered; so that if the Lord Jesus had appointed any such
Deputies (as we find not a tittle to that purpose, nor have a shadow of true
reason so to think) he must I say in the very first institution, have pitched
upon such persons for these Custodes utri^^que Tabulae, ke^pers of both Tables,
as no man wi^e, or faithful or loving, would have cho^en in any of the former
Instances or cases of a more inferior nature.

Beside to that great pretense of Israel, I have largely spoken to^

Secondly, I ask how could the Roman Caesar's or any Civil Magistrates be
cust^des, keepers of the Church and worship of God, when as the Authors of
these positions acknowledge, that their Civil power extends but to bodies and
goods.

And for Spiritual power they say they have none, ad bonum temporale (to a
temporal good) which is their proper end, and then having neither Civil nor
Spiritual power from the Lord Jesus to this purpose, how come they to be such
Keepers as is pretended?

Thirdly, If the Roman Emperors were Keepers, The true Keepers which Christ
Jesus appointed, of his O^dinances and Worship.
what Keepers were the Apostles, unto whom the Lord Jesus gave the care and
charge of the Churches, and by whom the Lord Jesus charged Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.
to keep those commands of the Lord Jesus without spot until his coming.

These Keepers were called the foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2. 20. and made
up the Crown of 12 Stars about the head of the Woman, Rev. 12. whose names
were also written in the 12 foundations of New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.

Yea what Keepers then are the ordinary Officers of the Church appointed to be
the Shepherds or Keepers of the Flock of Christ, appointed to be the Porters
or Dore-keepers and to watch in the absence of Christ, Mark 13. 34. Acts 20.,

Yea what charge has the whole Church it self, which is the pillar and ground
of Truth, 2 Timothy 2. in the midst of which Christ is present with his Power, 1
Cor. 5. to keep out or cast out the impenitent and obstinate, even Kings and
Emperors themselves from their Spiritual society, 1 Cor. 5. Iam. 3. 1. Gal.
3. 28.

4. I ask whether in the time of the Kings of Israel and Judah (whom I
confess in the typical and National state to be charged with both Tables) I
ask whether the Kings of the Assyrians, The Kings of the Assyrians etc. not
charged with Gods worship as the Kings of Judah in that National and typical
church
the Kings of the Ammonites, Moabites, Philistims, were also constituted and
ordained Keepers of the worship of God as the Kings of Judah were (for they
were also lawful Magistrates in their Dominions?) or whether the Roman
Emperors were custodes, or keepers more then they? or more then the King of
Babylon Nebuchadnezzar, under whose Civil government Gods people lived, and in
his own Land and City, ^er. 29.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
Peace. YOu remember (dear Truth) that Constantin^, Theodos^us, Constantine,
Theodosius. etc. mis^^formed.
and others were made to believe that they were the Antitypes of the Kings of
Judah, the Church of God; and Henry the 8. was told that that Title Defensor
Fidei, Defendour of the Faith (though sent him by the Pope for writing against
Luther) was his own Diadem due unto him from Heaven. So likewise since, the
Kings and Q^eens of England have been instructed.


Truth. But it was not so from the beginning, as that very difference between
that National state of the Church of God then, and other Kings and Magistrates
of the World (not so charged) does clearly evince and leads us to the
Spiritual King of the Church, Christ Jesus the King of Israel, and his
Spiritual Government and Governors therein.

Fifthly, I ask whether had the Roman Caesar's more charge to see all their
Subjects observe and submit to the worship of God in their dominion of the
World, then a master, Masters of families under the Gospel not charged to force
all under him from their own consciences to his.
father or husband now under the Gospel in his Family?

Families are the foundations of government, for what is a Commonweal, but a
Commonweal of Families agreeing to live together for common good?

Now in families, suppose a believing Christian Husband has an unbeleeving
Antichristian wife, what other charge in this respect is given to an husband, 1
Cor. 7. but to dwell with her as an husband if she be pleased to dwell with
him: but, to be so far from forcing her from her conscience unto his, as
that if for his conscience sake she would depart, he was not to force her to
tarry with him, 1 Cor. 7. Consequently the Father or Husband of the State
differing from the Commonweal in Religion, ought not to force the Commonweal,
nor to be forced by it: yet is he to continue a civil husbands care, if the
Commonweal will live with him, and abide in civil covenant.

Now as a husband by his love to the truth and holy conversation in it, and
seasonable exhortations, ought to endeavor to save his wife, yet abhorring to
use corporal compulsion (yea, in this case to child or servant) so ought the
Father, Husband, Governor of the Commonweal endeavor to win and save whom
possibly he may, yet far from the appearance of civil violence.

Sixthly, If the charge of Gods worship was left with the Roman Emperor, then
was he bound to turn the whole world into the Garden, Flock, and Spouse of
Christ. Millions put to death.
if the Roman Emperors were charged by Christ with his Worship in their
dominion, and their dominion was over the world (as was the dominion of the
Grecian, Persian, and Babylonian Monarchy before them) who sees not if the
whole world be forced to turn Christian (as afterward and since it has
pretended to do) who sees not then that the world (for whom Christ Jesus would
not pray) and the God of it, are reconciled to Jesus Christ, and the whole
field of the world become his enclosed garden?

Seventhly, if the Roman Emperors ought to have been by Christ's appointment
Keepers of both Tables, Antitypes of Israel and Iudahs Kings, how many millions
of Idolaters and Blasphemers against Christ Jesus and his worship ought they to
have put to death according to Isreal's pattern?

Lastly, I ask (if the Lord Jesus had delivered his Sheep and Children to
these Wolves, his Wife and Spouse to such Adulterers, his precious Jewels to
such great Thieves and Robbers of the world as the Roman Emperors were, what
is the reason that he was never pleased to send any of his servants to their
gates to crave their help and assistance in this his work, Christ never sent
any of his Ministers or Servants to the Civil Magistrate for help in spiritual
matters.
to put them in mind of their office, to challenge and claim such a service
from them according to their office, as it pleased God always to send to the
Kings of Israel and Judah in the like case?


Peace. Some will here object Paul's appealing to Caesar.


Truth. And I must refer them to what I formerly answered to that Objection.
Paul never appealed to Caesar as a Judge appointed by Christ Jesus to give
definitive sentence in any spiritual or Church controversy, but against that
civil violence and murder which the Jews intended against him, Paul justly
appealed: For otherwise if in a spiritual cause he should have appealed, he
should have overthrown his own Apostleship and Power given him by Christ
Jesus in spiritual things, above the highest Kings or Emperors of the world
beside.


CHAP. XC.
Peace. BLessed Truth, I shall now remember you of the fourth Quaerie upon this
place of Timothy, to wit, whether a Church of Christ Jesus may not live in Gods
worship and comeliness, notwithstanding that the civil Magistrate profess
not the same but a contrary Religion and Worship in his own person and the
Country with him.


Truth. I answer the Churches of Christ under the Roman Emperors did live in
all godliness and christian gravity, Christ Jesus has left power in his
Church to preserve her self pure, though in an idolatrous Country.
as appears by all their holy and glorious practices, which the Scripture
abundantly testifies.

Secondly, this ^lowes from an institution or appointment of such a power and
authority, left by the Lord Jesus to his Apostles and Churches, that no
ungodliness or dishonesty in the first appearance of it was to be suffered,
but suppressed and cast out from the Churches of Christ, even the little Leaven
of doctrine or practice, 1 Corinthians. 5. Gal. 5.

Lastly, I add, that although sometimes it pleases the Lord to vouchsafe his
servants peace and quietness, and to command them here in Timothy to pray for
it, for those good ends and purposes for which God has appointed civil
Magistracy in the world, to keep the world in peace and quietness. Yet Gods
people have used most to abound with godliness and honesty, Gods people have
used to shine in brightest godliness when they have enjoyed least quietness.
when they have enjoyed least peace and quietness. Then like those spices,
Cant. 4. Myrrh, Frankincense, Saffron, Calamus, etc. they have yielded the
sweetest favor to God and man, when they were pounded and burnt in cruel
persecution of the Roman Censors: then are they (as Gods Venison) most sweet
when most hunted: Gods Stars shining brightest in the darkest night: more
heavenly in conversation, more mortified: more abounding in love each to other,
more longing to be with God: when the inhospitable and salvage World has used
them like strangers, and forced them to hasten home to another Country which
they profess to seek.


CHAP. XCI.
Peace. Dear Truth, it seems not to be unseasonable to close up this passage
with a short descant upon that Assertion, viz. A subject without godliness
will not be bonus vir, a good man, nor a Magistrate except he see godliness
preserved, will not be bonus Magistratus.


Truth. I confess that without godliness or a true w^rshipping of God with an
upright heart according to Gods Ordinances, neither Subjects nor Magistrates
can please God in Christ Jesus, and so be spiritually or christianly good, Few
M^gistrates, few men spiritually and christianly good.
which few Magistrates and few men either come to, or are ordained unto: God
having chosen a little ^lock out of the world, and those generally poor and
mean, 1 Cor. 1. Iam. 2. Yet this I must remember you of, that when the most
High God created all things of nothing, he saw and acknowledged diverse sorts of
goodness, Yet diverse sorts of goodness n^turall, artificial, ci^vill, etc.
which must still be acknowledged in their distinct kinds: a good Air, a good
Ground, a good Tree, a good Sheep, etc.

I say the same in Artificialls, a good Garment, a good House, a good Sword, a
good Ship.

I also add a good City, a good Company or Corporation, a good Husband,
Father, Master.

Hence also we say, a good Physician, a good Lawyer, a good Seaman, a good
Merchant, a good Pilot, for such or such ^ shore or Harbor, that is, Morally,
Civilly good in their several Civil respects and employments.

Hence ( Psalm. 133.) the Church or City of God is compared to a City compact
within it self; which compactnes may be found in many Towns and Cities of the
World, where yet has not shined any spiritual or supernatural goodness.
Hence the Lord Jesus (Matthew. 12.) describes an ill state of an house or
kingdom, viz. to be divided against it self, which cannot stand.

These I observe to prove, that a Subject, a Magistrate, The Civil Goodness of
Cine^, Kingdoms, Subjects, M^gistrates, must be owned, although Spiritual
goodness (proper to the Christian State or Church) be wanting.
may be a good Subject, a good Magistrate, in respect of civil or moral
goodness, which thousands want, and where it is, it is commendable and
beautiful, though Godliness which is infinitely more beautiful, be wanting,
and which is only proper to the Christian state, the Commonweal of Israel,
the true Church, the holy Nation, Ephesians. 2. 1 Pet. 2.

Lastly, however the Authors deny that there can be Bonus Magistratus, a good
Magistrate, except the sea all Godliness preserved; yet themselves confess that
civil honesty is sufficient to make a good Subject, in these words, viz. He
must see that Honesty be preserved within his jurisdiction, else the Subject
will not be Bonus civ^s, a good citizen: and doubtless (if the Law of
Relations hold true) that civil honesty which makes a good citizen, must also
(together with qualifications sit for a Commander) make also a good Magistrate.


CHAP. XCII.
Peace. THe 4. head is, The proper means of both these Powers to attain their
ends.

First, the proper means whereby the Civil Power may and should attain its
end, are only Political, and principally these Five.

First the erecting and establishing what form of Civil Government may seem
in wisdom most meet, according to general rules of the Word, and state of
the people.

Secondly, the making, publishing, and establishing of wholesome Civil Laws,
not only such as concern Civil Justice, but also the free passage of true
Religion: for, outward Civil Peace arises and is maintained from them both,
from the latter as well as from the former:

Civil peace cannot stand entire, where Religion is corrupted, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3.
5. 6. Judge. 8. And yet such Laws, though conversant about Religion, may still
be counted Civil Laws, as on the contrary, an Oath does still remain
Religious, though conversant about Civil matters.

Thirdly, Election and appointment of Civil officers, to see execution of
those Laws.

Fourthly, Civil Punishments and Rewards, of Transgressors and Observers of
these Laws.

Fifthly, taking up Arms against the Enemies of Civil Peace.

Secondly, the means whereby the Church may and should attain her ends, are
only ecclesiastical, which are chiefly five.

First, setting up that form of Church Government only, of which Christ has
given them a pattern in his Word.

Secondly, acknowledging and admitting of no Lawgiver in the Church, but
Christ, and the publishing of his Laws.

Thirdly, Electing and ordaining of such officers only, as Christ has
appointed in his Word.

Fourthly, to receive into their fellowship them that are approved, and
in^licting Spiritual censures against them that offend.

Fifthly, Prayer and patience in suffering any evil from them that be without,
who disturb their peace.

So that Magistrates, as Magistrates, have no power of setting up the Form of
Church Government, electing Church officers, punishing with Church censures,
but to see that the Church does her duty herein. And on the other side, the
Churches as Churches, have no power (though as members of the Commonweal they
may have power) of erecting or altering forms of Civil Government, electing
of Civil officers, inflicting Civil punishments (no not on persons
excommunicate) as by deposing Magistrates from their Civil Authority, or
withdrawing the hearts of the people against them, to their Laws, no more then
to discharge wives, or children, or servants, from due obedience to their
husbands, parents, or masters: or by taking up arms against their Magistrates,
though he persecute them for Conscience: for though members of Churches who are
public officers also of the Civil State, may suppress by force the violence
of Usurpers, as Iehoiada did Athaliah, yet this they do not as members of the
Church, but as officers of the Civil State.


Truth. Here are diverse considerable passages which I shall briefly examine, so
far as concerns o^r controversy.

First, whereas they say, that the Civil Power Civil power originally and
fundamentally in the people.
may erect and establish what form of civil Government may seem in wisdom
most meet, I acknowledge the proposition to be most true, both in it self, and
also considered with the end of it, that a civil Government is an Ordinance of
God, to conserve the civil peace of people, so far as concerns their Bodies
and Goods, as formerly has been said.

But from this Grant I infer, (as before has been touched) that the
Sovereign, original, and foundation of civil power lies in the people, (whom
they must needs mean by the civil power distinct from the Government set up.)
And if so, that a People may erect and establish what form of Government
seems to them most meet for their civil condition: It is evident that such
Governments as are by them erected and established, have no more power, nor for
no longer time, then the civil power or people consenting and agreeing shall
betrust them with. This is clear not only in Reason, but in the experience of
all commonweals, where the people are not deprived of their natural freedom
by the power of Tyrants.

And if so, that the Magistrates receive their power of governing the Church,
Mr. Cotton and the New-English Ministers give the Government of Christ's Church
or Spouse into the hands of the people or Commonweal.
from the People; undeniably it follows, that a people, as a people, naturally
considered (of what Nature or Nation soever in Europe, Asia, Africa or America)
have fundamentally and originally, as men, a power to govern the Church, to
see her do her duty, to correct her, to redress, reform, establish, etc. And
if this be not to pull God and Christ, and Spirit out of Heaven, and subject
them unto natural, sinful, inconstant men, and so consequently to Satan
himself, by whom all peoples naturally are guided, let Heaven and Earth judge.


Peace. It cannot by their own Grant be denied, but that the wildest Indians
in America ought (and in their kind and several degrees do) to agree upon
some forms of Government, The very Indian Americans made Governors of the
Church by the Authors of these Positions.
some more civil, compact in Towns, etc. some less. As also that their
civil and earthly Governments be as lawful and true as any Governments in the
World, and therefore consequently their Governors are Keepers of the Church or
both Tables, (if any Church of Christ should arise or be amongst them:) and
therefore lastly, (if Christ have betrusted and charged the civil Power with
his Church) they must judge according to their Indian or American consciences,
for other consciences it cannot be supposed they should have.


CHAP. XCIII.
Truth. Again, whereas they say that outward Civil peace cannot stand where
Religion is corrupted; and quote for it, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. 5. 6 and Judges 8.

I answer with aam^ration how such excellent spirits (as these Authors are
furnished with, not only in heavenly but earthly affairs) should so forget,
and be so fast asleep in things so palpably evident, as to say that outward
civil peace cannot stand, where Religion is corrupt. When so many stately
Kingdoms and Governments in the world have long and long enjoyed civil peace
and quiet, Many Civil States in flourishing peace and quiet, where ^he Lord
Jesus is not ^ounded.
notwithstanding their Religion is so corrupt, as that there is not the very
Name of Jesus Christ amongst them: And this every Historian, Merchant,
Traveller, in Europe^ Asia, Africa, America, can testify: for so spoke the
Lord Jesus himself, Ioh. 16. The world shall sing and rejoice.

Secondly, for that Scripture 2 Chronicles. 15. 3 etc relating the miseries of
Israel and Judah, and Gods pla^es upon the people for corruption of their
Religion, it must still have refere^ce (...) peculiar state unto which God
called the seed of one man, Abraham, in a figure, dealing so with them as he
dealt not with any Nation in the World, Psalm. 1. ^6 Romans 9.

The Antitype to this State I have proved to be the Christian Church, which
consequently has been and is ^fflict^d (...) spiritual plagues, desolations
and captiviti^s, for cor^upting of that Religion which has been revealed unto
them. This appears by the 7 Churches, and the people of God, now so many
^u^dre^ years in woeful bondage and slaverte to the mystical Babel, until
the time of their joyful deliverance.


Peace. Yea but they say that such Laws as are conversant about Religion, may
still be account^d Civil Laws, as on the contrary an Oath does still remain
Religious, though conversant about Civil matters.


Truth. Laws respecting Religion are twofold: Laws concerning Religion,
either Religious,


First, such as concern the acts of Worship and the Worship it self, the
Ministers of it, their fitnes or unfitnes, to be suppressed or established: and
for such Laws we find no footing in the New Testament of Jesus Christ.


Secondly, Laws respecting Religion may be such as merely concern the Civil
State, o^ Civil.
Bodies and Goods of such and such persons, professing these and these
Religions, viz^ that such and such persons, notorious for Mutinies, Treasons^
Rebellions, Massacres, be disarmed: The very Indians abhor to disturb any
Conscience at Worship.
Again, that no persons Papists, Jews, Turks, or Indians be disturbed at
their worship, (a thing which the very Indians abhor to practice toward any.)
Also that imanitie and freedom from Tax and Toll may be granted unto the
people of such or such a Religion, as the Magistrate pleases, Ezra 7.

These and such as are of this nature, concerning only the bodies and goods of
such and such Religious persons, I confess are merely Ci^ill.

But now on the other hand, that Laws restraining persons from such and such a
Worship, because the Civil state judges it to be false:

That Laws constraining to such and such a worship, because the Civil State
judges this to be the only ^rue way of worshipping God:

That such and such a Reformation of Worship be submitted unto by all Subjects
in such a Jurisdiction: Canons and Constitutions p^etended Civil, but indeed
Ecclesiastical.


That such and such Churches, Ministers, Ministries be pull^ down, and such
and such Churches, Ministries, and Ministrations set up:

That such Laws properly concerning Religion^ God, the Souls of men, should
be Civil Laws and Constitutions; is as far from Reason, as that the
Commandments of Paul, which he gave the Churches concerning Christ's worship (1
Cor. 11. and 1 Cor. 14.) were Civil and Earthly constitutions: Or that the
Canon and Constitutions of either oecum^nicall or National synods concerning
Religion, should be Civil and State-conclusions and agreements.

To that instance of an Oath remaining rel^gious though conversant about civil
things; I answer and acknowledge, an Oath may be spiritual, Laws merely
concerning spiritual things, must needs be spiritual.
though taken about earthly business, and accordingly it will prove, and only
prove what before I have said, that a Law may be civil though it concern
persons of this and of that religion, that is as the persons professing it are
concerned in civil respects of b^dies or goods, as I have opened; whereas if
it concern the souls and religions of men simply so considered in reference
to God, it must of necessity put on the nature of a religious or spiritual
ordinance or constitution.

Besides, it is a most improper and fallacious instance for an oath, being an
invocation of a true or false God to judge in a case, is an action of a
spiritual and religious nature, what ever the subject matter be about which it
is taken, whether civil or religious: but a law or constitution may be civil
or religious, as the subject about which it is conversant is, either civil
(merely concerning bodies or goods) or religious concerning soul and worship.

CHAP. XCIV.
Peace. THeir fifth Head is concerning the Magistrates power in making of Laws.

First, they have power to publish and apply such Civil Laws in a State as
either are expressed in the Word of God in Moses Judicialls (to wit, so far as
they are of general and moral equity, and so binding all Nations in all Ages)
to be deducted by way of general consequence and proportion from the word of
God.

For in a free State no Magistrate has power over the bodies, goods, lands,
liberties of a free people, but by their free consents. And because free men
are not free Lords of their own estates, but are only stewards under God,
therefore they may not give their free consents to any Magistrate to dispose of
their bodies, goods, lands, liberties at large as themselves please, but as God
(the sovereign Lord of all) alone. And because the Word is a perfect rule as
well of righteousness as of holiness, it will be therefore necessary that neither
the people give consent, nor that the Magistrate take power to dispose of the
bodies, goods, lands, liberties of the people, but according to the Laws and
Rules of the Word of God.

Secondly, in making Laws about civil and indifferent things about the
Commonweal.

First, he has no power given him of God to make what laws he please, either
in restraining from, or constraining to the use of indifferent things, because
that which is indifferent in its nature, man sometimes be inexpedient in its
use, and consequently unlawful, 1 Cor. 2. 5. it having been long since
defended upon good ground, Quicquid non expeait, quatenus non expedit, non
licet.

Secondly, he has no power to make any such Laws about indifferent things,
wherein nothing good or evil is shown to the people, but only or principally
the mere authority or will of the imposer for the observance of them, Colos. 2.
21, 22. 1 Cor. 7. 23, compared with Ephesians. 6. 6.

It is a prerogative proper to God to require obedience of the sons of men,
because of his authority and will.

The will of no man is Regula recti, unless first it be Regula recta.

It is an evil speech of some, that in some things the will of the Law, not
the ratio of it, must be the Rule of Conscience to walk by; and that Princes
may forbid men to seek any other reason but their authority, yea when they
command frivola and dura. And therefore it is the duty of the Magistrate in all
laws about indifferent things, to show the Reasons, not only the Will, to
show the expediency, as well as the indifferency of things of that nature.

For we conceive in Laws of this nature, it is not the will of the Lawgiver
only, but the Reason of the Law which binds. Ratio est Rex Legis, and Lex est
Rex Regis.

Thirdly, because the judgment of expedient and inexpedient things is often
difficult and diverse, it is meet that such Laws should not proceed without
due consideration of the Rules of Expediency set down in the Word, which are
these three:

First, the rule of Piety, that they may make for the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.
31.

Secondly, the rule of Charity, that no scandal come hereby to any weak
brother, 1 Cor. 8. 13.

Thirdly, the Rule of Charity, that no man be forced to submit against his
conscience, Romans 14. 14. 23. nor be judged of contempt of lawful Authority,
because he is not suddenly persuaded of the expediency of indifferent things;
for if the people be bound by God to receive such Laws about such things,
without any trial or satisfaction to the conscience, but must judge them
expedient because the Magistrate thinks them so, then the one cannot be
punished in following the other, in case he shall sin in c^lling Inexpedient
Expedient; but Christ says the contrary, If the blind lead the blind, they
shall both fall.


Truth. In this passage these worthy Men lay down such a ground, as the gates
of Hell are not able to shake concerning the Magistrates walking in indifferent
things: The Authors large confession of the liberty of conscience from the Laws
of Civil authority in spiritual cases.
And upon which ground that Tower of Lebanon may be raised whereon there hang a
thousand shields and bucklars, Cant 4. to wit, that invincible Truth, That no
man is to be persecuted for cause of conscience: The ground is this: The
Magist^ate has not power to make what Laws he please, either in restraining
or constraining to the use of indifferent things: And further he confesses
that the reason of the Law, not the will of it must be the rule of conscience.
And they add this impregnable reason: viz. If the people be bound to receive
such Laws without satisfaction to conscience, then one cannot be punished for
following the other, in case he shall sin contrary to Christ Jesus, who
says, If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall.

Hence I argue, If the Civil Magistrate have no power to restrain or
constrain their subjects in things in their own nature indifferent, Civil
Magistrates confessed not to have power to urg the conscience in indifferent
things.
as in eating of meats, wearing this or that garment, using this or that
gesture, but that they are bound to try and examine his commands, and satisfy
their own reason, conscience and judgment before the Lord, and that they
shall sin, if they follow the Magistrates command, not being persuaded in
their own soul and conscience that his commands are according to God! It will
be much more unlawful and heinous in the Magistrate to compel the subjects
unto that which (according to their consciences persuasion) is simply unlawful
as unto a falsely constituted Church, Ministry, Worship, Administration, and
they shall not escape the D^ch, by being led blindefold by the Magistrate, but
though he fall in first, yet they shall in after him, and upon him, to his
greater and more dreadful judgment.

In particular thus, If the Magistrate may restrain me from that gesture in
the Supper of the Lord, which I am persuaded I ought to practice, he may also
restrain me by his commands from that Supper of the Lord it self in such or
such a Church according to my conscience.

If he cannot (as they grant) constrain me to such or such a garment in the
worship of God, can he constrain me to worship God by such a Ministry, and
with such worship, which my soul and conscience cannot be persuaded is of God?

If he cannot command me in that circumstance of time to worship God this or
that day, can he command me to the worship it self?


Peace. Me thinks I discern a threefold guilt to lie upon such Civil powers
as impose upon and enforce the conscience, A threefold guilt^ly^ng upon Civil
powers commanding the subjects (...) worship.
though not unto the ministration and participation of the Seals, yet either
to depart from that worship which it is persuaded of, or to any exercise or
worship which it has not faith in.

First, of an appearance of that Arminian Popish doctrine of freewill, as if it
lay in their own power and ability to believe upon the Magistrates command
since it is confessed that what is submitted to by any without faith it is
sin, be it never so true and holy Romans 14.

Secondly, since God only opens the heart and works the will, Phil. 2. it
seems to be an high presumption to suppose that together with a command
restraining from, or constraining to worship, that God is also to be forced or
commanded to give faith to open the heart to incline the will, etc.

Thirdly, A guilt of the hypocrisy of their subjects and people in forcing
them to act and practice in matters of Religion and Worship against the doubts
and checks of their consciences, Persons may (...) sin (...) to many whom t^^y
(...) not (...), (...) to worship where they cannot believe.
causing their bodies to worship, when their souls are far off, to draw near
with their lips, their hearts being far off, etc.

With less sin ten thousand fold may a natural ^ather force his (...), or
the Father of the Commonweal force all the maidens in a Country to the
marriage beds of such and such men whom they cannot love, then the souls of
these and other subjects to such worship or Ministry, which is either a true or
false, because Cant. 1. 16.


Truth. Sweet Peace, your conclusions are undeniable, and O that they might
sink deep into those Noble and Honorable Bosoms it so deeply concerns! but
proceed.


CHAP. XCV.
Peace. IN that fifth head they further say thus:

Thirdly, in matters Ecclesiastical we believe, first, That Civil Magistrates
have no power to make or constitute Laws about Church affairs which the Lord
Jesus has not ordained in his Word for the well ordering of the Church; for
the Apostle solemnly charge Timothy, and in him all Goverours of the Church,
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ (who is the only Potentate, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords) that the Commandment given by him for the ordering
of the Church be kept without spot unrebukeable to the appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 14. 15. And this Commandment given in the Word, the
Apostle faith is able to make the man of God perfect in all Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 17. And indeed the adminstration of all Christ's affairs does
immediately aim at spiritual and divine ends (as the worship of God and the
salvation of men's souls:) and therefore no Law nor means can be devised by
the wisdom or wit of man that can be fit or able to reach such ends, but use
must be made of such only as the divine Wisdom and holy Will of God has
ordained.

Secondly, We believe the Magistrates power in making Laws about Church
affairs, is not only thus limited and restrained by Christ to matters which
concern the substance of Gods worship and of Church government, but also such
as concern outward order, as in Rites and Ceremonies for uniformities sake:
For we find not in the Gospel that Christ has any where provided for the
uniformity of Churches, but only for their unity.

Paul in matters of Christian liberty commends the unity of their Faith in
the holy Spirit, giving order that we should not judge nor condemn one
another in difference of judgment and practice of such things where men live
to God on both sides, even though there were some error on one side, Romans 14.
to the 6. How much less in things indifferent, where there may be no etrour on
either side.

When the Apostle directs the Church of Corinth that all things be done
decently and in order, he meant not to give power to Church Officers, or to
Civil Magistrates to order what ever they should think meet for decency and
order; but only to provide that all the Ordinances of God be administered in the
Church decently without unnatural or uncivil uncomelinesse (as that of long
hair, or women's prophe^ying, of the like) and orderly without confusion or
disturbance of edification, as the speaking of many at once in the Church.

Thirdly, we do nevertheless willingly grant that Magistrates upon due and
diligent search what is the counsel and will of God in his Word concerning the
right ordering of the Church, may and ought to publish and declare, establish
and ratify such Laws and Ordinances as Christ has appointed in his Word for
the well ordering of Church affairs, both for the gathering of the Church, and
the right administration of all the Ordinances of God amongst them in such a
manner as the Lord has appointed to edification. The Law of Artaxerxes, Ezra
7. 23. was not usurpation over the Churches liberty, but a Royal and just
confirmation of them: Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven: For why
should there be wrath against the King and his Sons?


Truth. Dear Peace. me thinks I see before mine eyes a wall daubed up (of
which Ezekiel speaks) with untempered mortar: Here they restrain the
Magistrate from making Laws either concerning the substance or ceremony of
Religion, but such only as Christ has commanded, and those, say they, must
publish and declare after the example of Artaxerxes.

I shall herein perform two things: First, examine this Magistrates duty to
publish, declare, etc. such Laws and Ordinances as Christ has appointed.

Secondly, I shall examine that proof from Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 23.

In the first, Gods Israel des^o^s of Saul^arme of flesh.
me thinks I hear the voice of the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 8. 5. Make us a
King that may rule over us after the manner of the Nations, rejecting the Lord
ruling over them by his holy Word in the mouth of his Prophets, and sheltring
themselves under an Arm of Flesh; which Arm of Flesh God gave them in His
Anger, and cut off again in His Wrath, after he had persecuted David the
figure of Christ Jesus who has given his people the Scepter and Sword of his
Word and Spirit, and refused a temporal Crown or Weapons in the dispensation
of his Kingdom.

Where did the Lord Jesus or his Messengers charge the Civil Magistrate, or
direct Christians to petition him, to publish, declare or establish by his Arm
of Flesh and Earthly weapons the Religion and worship of Christ Jesus?

I find the Beast and false Prophet (whose rise and doctrine is not from
Heaven, but from the Sea and Earth) dreadful and terrible by a Civil Sword
and dignity, Rev, 13. 2.

I find the Beast has gotten the power and might of the Kings of the Earth,
The 7 headed Beast, and the Lamb differ in their weapons.
Revel. 17. 13.

But the Lambs weapons are Spiritually mighty, 2 Cor. 10. etc. his Sword is
two-edged coming out of his mouth, Revel. 1. His preparations for War are
white Horses and white Harness, which are contest by all to be of a spiritual
nature, Revel. 19.

When that whore Iesabel stabbed Naboth with her Pen, Naboths case typical.
in stirring up the people to stone him as a Blasphemer of God and the King,
what a glorious mask or veil of Holiness put she on? Proclaim a Fast, set a
day apart for humiliation; and for confirmation, let all be ratified with the
Kings Authority, Name, and Seal, 1 1 Kings, 21. 8.

Was not this recorded for all Gods Naboths, standing for their Spiritual
interests in heavenly things (typed out by the typical earth and ground of
Canaans land) that they through patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope, Romans 15^ 4.?

Again, I demand who shall here sit Judge, whether the Magistrate command any
other Substance or Ceremony but what is Christ's?

By their former Conclusions, every Soul must judge what the Magistrate
commands, and is not bound, even in indifferent things, to the Magistrates
Law, further then his own Soul, Conscience and judgment ascends to the Reason
of it: Here the Magistrate must make Laws for that Substance and Ceremony
which Christ appointed: But yet he must not do this with his eyes open, but
blindfold and hoodwinkt; for if he judge that to be the Religion of Christ, and
such to be the order there in which their Consciences judge otherwise, and
assent not to, they profess they must submit only to Christ's laws, and
therefore they are not bound to obey him.

O^ what is this but to make use of the Civil Powers and Governors of the
World, Civil Powers abused as a Guard about the Bed of Spiritual whoredoms.
as a Guard about the Spiritual Bed of Soulewhoredomes, in which the Kings of
the Earth commit Spiritual fornication with the great Whore, Rev. 17. 2? as a
Guard while the Inhabitants of the Earth are drinking themselves drunk with
the wine of her fornication.

But oh what terrifying, what allurings are in Iereinies Curse and Blessing 1
Ier. 17. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, that makes Flesh his Arm
(too too common in spiritual matters) and whose heart departs from Jehovah:
He shall be as an Heath in the Wilderness (even in the spiritual and mystical
wilderness) and shall not see when comfort comes, but shall abide in drouth in
the wilderness in a barrenland, etc.


CHAP. XCVI.
Peace. O What mysteries are these to Flesh and Blood! how hard for flesh to
forsake the Arm thereof! But pass on (dear Trutly) to their proof
propounded, Ezra 7. 23. Wherein Artaxerxes confirmed by Law what ever was
commanded by the God of Heaven.


Truth. ^zra 7. 23. discussed.
In this Scripture I mind first the people of God captivated under the dominion
and government of the Kings of Babel and Persia.

Secondly, Artaxerxes his favor to these Captives, 1. Of freedom to their
Consciences. 2. Or bounty toward them. 3. Of exempting of some of them from
common charges.


Thirdly, Punishments on offenders.

Fourthly, the ground that ^aries him on to all this.

Fifthly, Ezra praising of God for putting this into the heart of the King.

Concerning the people of God the Jews, they were as Lambs and Sheep in the
jaws of the Lion, Gods people not subject to ^he Kings of Babell or Per^^ in
Spirituals.
the dearly beloved of his Soul under the devouring Tyrants of the World,
both the Babylonian and the Persian, far from their own Nation, and the
Government of their own anointed Kings, the figures of the true King of the
Jews the Lord Jesus Christ.

In this respect it is clear, that the Jews were no more subject to the Kings
of Babylon and Persia in Spiritual things, then the Vessels of the Sanctuary
were subject to the King of Babels use, Dan. 5.

Concerning this King I consider, first his person, a Gentile Idolater, an
oppressing Tyrant, one of those devouring Beasts, Da^. 7. and 8. An hand of
bloody Conquest set the Crown upon the lead of these Monarchs; and although in
Civil things they might challenge subjection, yet why should they now sit down
in the throne of Israel, and govern the people and Church of God in Spiritual
things?

Secondly, Tyrants hearts sometimes wonderfully mo^^ified toward Gods people.
consider his acts of Favor, and they will not amount to a positive Command,
that any of the Jews should go up to build the Temple, nor that any of them
should practice his own worship, which he kept and judged the best for his own
Soul and People.

It Is true, he freely permits them, and exercises a bounteous assistance to
them: All which argues no more, but that sometimes it pleases God to open the
hearts of Tyrants greatly to favor and further his people. Such favor found
Nehemiah, and Daniel, and others of Gods people have and shall find, so often
as it pleases Him to honor them that honor Him, before the Sons of Men.


Peace. Who sees not how little this Scripture contributes to their Tenent? but
why (say some) should this King confirm all with such severe punishments? and
why for all this^ should Ezra give thanks to God, if it were not imitable for
aftertimes?


Truth. The Law of God which he confirmed, he knew not, and therefore neither
was, nor could he be a Judge in the Case.

And for his Ground, what was it but the common terrors and convictions of an
aff^ighted Conscience?

In such sits and pangs, what have not Pharaohs, Saul's, Ahabs, Herod's,
Nabuchadnezzar, D^ri^us, and A^ta ^erxes their decrees examined.
Agrippa's spoken? and what wonderful decrees have Nabuchadnizzar, Cyrus,
Darius, Artaxerxes put forth concerning the God of Israel, Dan. 3. and 6. and
Ezra 1 and 7 etc. and yet as far from being charged with (as they were from
being affected to) the Spiritual Crown of Governing the Worship of God, and
the Conscience of his people.

^Tis true, Ezra most piously and justly gave thanks to God for putting such a
thing into the heart of the King: But what makes this pattern for the Laws of
Civil Governors now under the Gospel? Ezra's thanksgiving for the Kings
decree examined.
It suited well with that National state of Gods Church, that the Gentile King
should release them, permit them to return to their own Land, assist them with
other favors, and enable them to execute punishments upon offenders according
to their National State.

But did God put such a thing as this into the heart of the King, viz. to
restrain upon pain of Death all the millions of men under his Dominion from
the Idolatties of their several and respective Countries? to constrain them
all upon the like penalty to conform to the Worship of the God of Israel, to
build him a Temple, erect an Altar, ordain Priests, offer sacrifice, observe
the Fasts and Feasts of Israel? yea did God put it into the Kings heart to send
Levites into all the parts of his Dominion, compelling them to hear; which is
but a natural thing (as some unsoundly speak) unto which all are bound to
submit?

Well however, Ezra gives thanks to God for the Kings, and so should all that
feate God in all Countries, The duty of all Civil States toward the
Consciences of their Subjects.
if he would please to put it into the hearts of the Kings, States and
Parliaments, to take off the yoakes of Violence, and permit (at least) the
Consciences of their Subjects, and especially such as in truth make Conscience
of their Worships to the God of Israel: and yet no cause for Ezra then, or Gods
Ezra's and Israelites now, to acknowledge the care and charge of Gods worship,
Church and Ordinances, to lie upon the shoulders of Artaxerxes, or any other
Civil Prince or Ruler.

Lastly for the Confirmation or Ratification which they suppose Magistrates are
bound to give to the Laws of Christ, Christ needs no humane confirmations.
I answer, Gods cause, Christ's Truth, and the two-edged sword of his Word,
never stood in need of a temporal Sword, or an humane Witness to confirm and
ratify them. If we receive the witness of an honest man, the witness of the
most holy God is greater, 1. John 5.

The result and sum of the whole matter is this: 1. It may please God
sometimes to stir up the Rulers of the Earth to permit and tolerate, to favor
and countenance Gods people in their worships, The sum of the Examples of
Gentile Kings decreeing for Gods Worship in Scripture
though only out of some strong conviction of conscience or fear of wrath,
etc. and yet themselves neither understand Gods worship, nor leave their own
state, Idolatry or Country worship.

For this Gods people ought to give thanks unto God; yea and all men from this
example may learn not to charge upon the Magistrates conscience (besides the
care of the Civil peace, the bodies and goods of men) the Spiritual peace in
the worship of God and souls of men: but hence are Magistrates instructed
favorably to permit their subjects in their worships, although themselves be
not persuaded to submit to them, as Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius and
Artaxerxes did.


CHAP. XCVII.
Peace. THe sixth question is this: How far the Church is subject to their Laws?

All those (say they) who are members of the Commonweal are bound to be
subject to all the just and righteous Laws thereof, and therefore (membership
in Churches not cutting men off from the membership in commonweales) they are
bound to be subject, even every soul, Romans 13. 1. as Christ himself and the
Apostles were in their places wherein they lived, and therefore to exempt the
Clergy (as the Papists do) from Civil subjection, and to say that generatio
Clerici, is corruption subditi, is both sinful and scandalous to the Gospel of
God; and though all are equally subject, yet Church members are more especially
bound to yield subjection, and the most eminent most especially bound, not only
because conscience does more strongly bind, but also because their ill
examples are more infectious to others, pernicious to the State, and provoke
Gods wrath to bring vengeance on the State.

Hence if the whole Church or officers of the Church shall sin against the
State or any person by sedition, contempt of Authority, heresy, blasphemy,
oppression, slander, or shall withdraw any of their members from the service of
the State without the consent thereof, their persons and estates are liable to
Civil punishments of Magistrates according to their righteous and wholesome
Laws, Exodus 22. 20. Levit. 24. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. and 18. 10.


Truth. What concerns this head in civil things, I gladly subscribe unto:
what concerns heresy, blasphemy, etc. I have plentifully before spoken to,
and shall here only say 2 things:

First, those Scriptures produced concern only the people of God in a Church
estate, and must have reference only to the Church of Christ Jesus, which (as
Mr. Cotton confesses) is not National but Congregationall of so many as may
meet in one place, 1 Cor. 14 and therefore no Civ^ll State can be the antitype
and parallel; to which purpose upon the 11 Question I shall at large show the
difference between that National Church and State of Israel, The Law of
putting to death blasphe^^ of Christ cuts off. I hopes from the Jews of part
king in his blou^.
and all other States and Nations in the World.

Secondly, If the Rulers of the Earth are bound to put to death all that
worship other gods then the true God, or that blaspheme (that is speak evil
of in a lesser or higher degree) that one true God; it must unavoidably follow
that (the beloved for the Fathers sake) the Jews whose very Religion
blasphemeth Christ in the highest degree, I say they are actually sons of
death, and all to be immediately executed according to those quoted Scriptures:
And

Secondly, the Towns, Cities, Nations and Kingdoms of the World must
generally be put to the sword, if they speedily renounce not their Gods and
Worships, and so cease to blaspheme the true God by their Idolatries: This
bloody consequence cannot be avoided by any Scripture rule, for if that rule be
of force Deuteronomy. 13. and 18. not to spare, The dir^full effects of sighting for
conscience.
or show mercy upon person or City falling to Idolatry, that bars out all
favor or partiality; and then what heaps upon heaps in the slaughter houses
and shambles of Civil Wars must the world come to, as I have formerly noted,
and that unnecessarily, it being not required by the Lord Jesus for his sake,
and the Magistrates power and weapons being essentially Civil, and so not
reaching to the impiety or ungodliness, but the incivility and
unrighteousness of tongue or hand?


CHAP. XCVIII.
Peace. Dear Truth, these are the poisoned daggers stabbing at my tender
heart! Oh when shall the Prince of peace appear and reconcile the bloody sons
of men? but let me now propose their 7 head: viz.

In what order may the Magistrate execute punishment on a Church or
Churchmember that offends his Laws.

First, gross and public notorious sins which are against the light of
conscience as Heresy, etc. there the Magistrate keeping him under safe ward
should send the offendour first to the Church to heal his conscience, still
provided that the Church be both able and willing thereunto: By which means
the Magistrate shall convince such an ones conscience that he seeks his
healing, rather then his hurt.

The censure also against him shall proceed with more power and blessing, and
none shall have cause to say that the Magistrate persecutes men for their
consciences, but that he justly punishes such an one for sinning rather
against his conscience, Tit. 3. 0.

Secondly, in private offenses how the Magistrate may proceed, see Chap. 12. It
is not material whether the Church or Magistrates take it first in hand. Only
with this caution, that if the State take it first in hand, they are not to
proceed to death or banishment, until the Church has taken their course with
him, to bring him to Repentance, provided that the Church be willing and ready
thereunto.

Secondly, in such sins wherein men plead Conscience, as Heresy, etc.


Truth. Here I have many just exceptions and considerations to present.

First, they propose a distinction of some sins: some are against the light
of conscience, etc. and they instance in Heresy.

Ans. I have before discust this point of an Heretic sinning against light of
conscience: And I shall add that howsoever they lay this down as an infallible
conclusion that all Heresy is against light of Conscience; yet (to pass by
the discussion of the nature of Heresy, in which respect it may so be that
even themselves may be found heretical, E^lour is confident as well as Truth.
yea and that in fundamentalls) how do all Idolaters after light presented,
and exhortations powerfully pressed, either Turks or Pagans, Jews or
Antichristians, strongly even to the death hold fast (or rather are held fast
by) their delusions.

Yea Gods people themselves, being deluded and captivated are strongly
confident even against some fundamentalls, Gods people as well as others will
be found obstinate in fundamental errors in which sufferings and persecution
does harden.
especially of worship, and yet not against the light, but according to the
light or eye of a deceived conscience.

Now all these consciences walk on confidently and constantly even to the
suffering of death and torments, and are more strongly confirmed in their
belief and conscience, because ^uch bloody and cruel courses of persecution
are used toward them.

Secondly, speaks not the Scripture expressly of the Jew, Isa. 6. Mat. 13. Acts
28. that God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not
see, etc^ all which must be spoken of the very conscience, which he that has
the golden key of David can only shut and open, and all the Picklocks or^
Swords in all the Smiths shops in the World can neither by force or fraud
prevent his time.

Is it not said of Antichristians, Strong delusions.
2^ Thessal. 2. that God has sent them strong delusions, so strong and
efficacious, that they believe a Lie and that so Confidently, and some so
Conscientiously, that Death it self cannot part between the Delusion and
their Conscience.

Again, the Magistrate (say they) keeping him in safe ward: that is, the
Heretic, the Blasphemer, Idolater, etc.


Peace. I here ask all men that love even the Civil Peace, where the Lord
Jesus has spoken a tittle of a Prison or safe ward to this purpose.


Truth. We find indeed a prison threatened by God to his irreconciled enemies,
neglecting to account with him, Matthew. 5.

We find a prison into which persecuters cast the Saints: So John, Spiritual
prisons.
so Paul, and the Apostles, Matthew. 14. 10. etc. were cast, and the great
Commander of, and caster into prison, is the Devil, Revel. 2.

We find a Spiritual prison indeed, a prison for Spirits, 1 P. ^. 3. 19. the
Spirits formerly rebellious against Christ Jesus speaking by Noah unto them,
now kept in safe ward against the judgment of the great day.

In Excommunication, a Soul obstinate in sin is delivered to Satan his
Jaylour, and he keeps him in safe ward, until it pleases God to release him.

There is a prison for the Devil himself a thousand years, Rev. 20. Christ
Jesus appointed no material prisons for Blasphemers of him, etc.
And a Lake of eternal fire and brimstone, into which the Beast and False
Prophet, and all not written in the Lambs book, and the Devil that deceived
them, shall eternally be there secured and tormented.

But neither amongst these, nor in any other passage of the New Testament, do
we find a prison appointed by Christ Jesus for the Heretic, Blasphemer,
Idolater, etc. being not otherwise guilty against the Civil State.

It Is true, Antichrist (by the help of Civil Powers) has his prisons, to
keep Christ Jesus and his members fast: such prisons may well be called the
Bishops prisons, The Bishops prisons.
the Popes, the Devils prisons: These inquisition houses have ever been more
terrible then the Magistrates.

At first, persecuting Bishops borrowed prisons of the Civil Magistrate (as
now their successors do still in the world) but afterward they wr^ng the keys
out of the Magistrates hands, and hung them at their own Girdles, and would
have prisons of their own, as doubtless will that Generation still do, if
God prevent them not.


CHAP. XCIX.
Peace. Again (say they) the Magistrate should send him first to the Church to
heal his Conscience.


Truth. Is not this as the Prophet speaks, Like mother, like daughter? Like
mother like daughter.
So the mother of whoredoms the Church of Rome teaches and practices with
all her Heretics: First let the holy Church convince them, and then deliver
them to the Secular power to receive the punishment of Heretics.


Peace. Me thinks also they approach near that Popish Tenent, Ex opere
operato: for their Exhortations and Admonitions must necessarily be so
operative and prevalent, that if the Heretic repent not, Conscience not so
easily healed and cared.
he now sins against his Conscience: not remembering that Peradventure, 2 Timothy
2. If peradventure, God will give them repentance: and how strong delusions
are, and believing of lies, and how hard it is to be undeceived, especially in
Spirituals?


Truth. And as it may so prove, when an Heretic indeed is brought to this
College of Physicians to have his conscience healed, and one Heretic is to
cure another: So also when any of Christ's Witnesses (supposed Heretics) are
brought before them, how does the Lord Jesus suffer whippings and stabs, when
his Name, and Truths, and Witnesses, and Ordinances are all profaned and
blasphemed?

Besides, suppose a Man to be an Heretic, and yet suppose him brought as the
Magistrates Prisoner, though to a true Church, to heal his Conscience:
Wounding instead of healing of Consciences.
What promise of Presence and Blessing has the Lord Jesus made to his Church
and Spouse in such a way? and how common is it for Heretics either to be
desperately hardened by such cruel courses (yet pretending Soule-healing) or
else through fear and terror to practice gross hypocrisy even against their
consciences? So that these Chir^rgions and Physicians pretending to heal
Consciences, by such a course wound them deeper, and declare themselves
Chir^rgions and Physicians of no value.


Peace. But what think you of the Proviso added to their Proposition, viz.
Provided, the Church be able and willing?


Truth. Doubtless this proviso derogates not a little from the nature of the
Spouse of Christ. For she, like that gracious woman, Prove. 31. 26. Christ's
Spouse able and willing to be ^e wounded cons^^^nces.
opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the Law of Grace: she is
the pillar and ground of Truth, 2. Tim. 2. The golden candlestick from whence
true light shines: the Angels or Ministers thereof able to try false Apostles
( Rev. 2.) and convince the Gainsayers, Tit. 1.

Again (according to their principles of suppressing persons and Churches
falsely worshipping) how can they permit such a blind and dead Church not able
and willing to heal a wounded Conscience?


Peace. What should be the reason of this their expression?


Truth. Doubtless their Consciences tell them how few of those Churches (which
they yet acknowledge Churches) are able and willing to hold forth Christ Jesus
the Sun of Righteousness, healing with his wings the doubting and afflicted
conscience.

Lastly, their conscience tells them, that a Servant of Christ Jesus may
possibly be sent as an Heretic to be healed by a false Church, which Church
will never be willing to deal with him, or never be able to convince him.


Peace. Yea, but they say, by such a course the Magistrate shall convince such
an ones conscience; that he seeks his good, etc.


Truth. If a man thus bound be sent to a Church to be healed in his conscience,
either he is an Heretic, or he is not.

Admit he be: yet he disputes in fear, as the poor thief: the Mouse disputes
with a terrible persecuting Cat: A persecuting Church disputes with an Heretic
as a Cat with the Mouse; and with a true Witness as a Lion with a Limb in his
paw.
who while she seems to play and gently toss, yet the conclusion is a proud
insulting and devouring cruelty.

If no Heretic but an innocent and faithful witness of any Truth of Jesus;
disputes he not as a Lamb in the Lions paw, being sure in the end to be torn
in pieces?


Peace. They add: The censure this way proceeds with more power and blessing.


Truth. All power and blessing is from that blessed Son of God, unto whom all
power is given from the Father, in Heaven and Earth. He has promised his
presence with his Messengers, preaching and baptizing to the worlds end,
ratifying in Heaven what they blind or loose on Earth.

But let any man show me such a commission, instruction and promise given by
the Son of God to Civil powers in these spiritual affairs of his Christian
Kingdom and Worship?


Peace. Lastly they conclude, This course of first sending the Heretic to be
healed by the Church, takes away all excuse; for none can say that he is
persecuted for his Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.


Truth. Iesabel placing poor Naboth before the Elders as a blasphemer of God
and the King, and sanctifying the plotted and intended murder with a day of
humiliation, Persecutours endure not so to be called.
may seem to take away all excuse, and to conclude the Blasphemer worthy to be
stoned: But Jehovah the God of Recompenses ( ^er. 51.) when he makes
Inquisition for blood, will find both Iesabel and Ahab guilty, and make the
Dogs a feast with the flesh of Iesabel, and leave not to Ahab a man to piss
against the wall; for (as Paul in his own plea) there was nothing committed
worthy of death: and against thee, O King, says Daniel, I have not sinned (
Dan. 6.) in any Civil fact against the State.


CHAP. C.
Peace. THeir eighth question is this: viz. What power Magistrates have about
the gathering of Churches?

First, the Magistrate has power, and it is his duty to encourage and
countenance such persons, as voluntarily join themselves in holy Covenant, both
by his presence (if it may be) and promise of protection, they accepting the
right hand of fellowship from other neighbor Churches.

Secondly, he has power ^o forbid all Idolatrous and corrupt Assemblies, who
offer to put themselves under their patronage, and shall attempt to join
themselves into a Church Estate, and if they shall not hearken, to force them
therefrom by the power of the Sword, Psalm. 101. 8. For our tolerating many
Religions in a State in several Churches, beside the provoking of God, may in
time not only corrupt, leaven, divide, and so destroy the peace of the
Churches, but also dissolve the continuity of the State, especially ours whose
walls are made of the stones of the Churches: it being also contrary to the end
of our planting in this part of the World, which was not only to enjoy the pure
Ordinances, but to enjoy them all in purity.

Thirdly, He has power to compel all men within his grant, to hear the Word,
for hearing the Word of God is a duty which the light of Nature leads even
Heathens to: The Ninivites heard Jonah, though a stranger, and unknown unto
them, to be an extraordinary Prophet, Jonah 3. And Eglon the King of Moab
hearing that Ehud had a message from God, he rose out of his seat for more
reverent attention, Judge. 3. 20.

Yet he has no power to compel all men to become members of Churches, because
he has not power to make them fit members for the Church, which is not wrought
by the power of the Sword, but by the power of the Word: Nor may he force the
Churches to accept of any for members, but those whom the Churches themselves
can freely approve of.


Truth. To the first branch of this head, I answer, That the Magistrate should
encourage and countenance the Church, yea and protect the persons of the Church
from violence, disturbance, etc. It being truly noble and glorious, by how much
the Spouse and Queen of the Lord Jesus transcends the Ladies, Queens, and
Empresses of the World, in glory, beauty, chastity and innocence.

It Is true, all Magistrates in the world do this: viz. Encourage and protect
that Church or Assembly of worshippers, which they judge to be true and approve
of; but not permitting other consciences then their own: It has come to pass
in all ages, and yet doubtless will, that the Lord Jesus and His Queen are
driven and persecuted out of the World.

To the second, That the Magistrate ought to suppress all Churches which he
judges false, he quoteth Psalm. 101. 8. Betimes I will cut off the wicked of
the Land, that I may cut off all evil doers from the City of Jehovah: unto
which, he adds four Reasons.


Peace. Dear Truth, first, a word to that Scripture, so often quoted, and so
much boasted of.


Truth. Concerning that holy Land of Canaan, concerning the City of Jehovah,
Jerusalem, out of which King David here resolves to cut off all the wicked and
evil doers. Psalm. 101. 8. concerning the cutting off the wicked, examined.
I shall speak more largely on the 11 Head or Question in the differences
between that and all other Lands.

At present I answer, There is no holy Land or City of the Lord, no King of
Sion, etc. but the Church of Jesus Christ, and the King thereof, according to 1
Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a holy Nation, and Jerusalem is the holy people of God in the
true profession of Christianity, Heb. 12. Gal. 4. and Rev. 21. Out of which the
Lord Jesus by his holy Ordinances, No Land of Canaan, nor holy City now
in such a government, and by such governors as he has appointed, he cuts off
every wicked person and evil doer.

If Christ Jesus had intended any difference of plate, Cities or Countries,
doubtless Jerusalem and Samaria had been thought of, or the Cities of Asia,
wherein the Christian Religion was so gloriously planted.

But the Lord Jesus disclaimes Jerusalem and Samaria forth having any respect
of holiness more then other Cities, John 4.

And the Spirit of God evidently testineth that the Churches were in the Cities
and Countries, No difference of Lands and Cities since the coming as was
before the coming of the Lord Jesus.
not that the whole Cities or Countries were Gods holy Land, and Cities out of
which all false worshippers and wicked persons were to be cut, Rev. 2. and 3.

The Devils throne was in the City of Pergamus, in respect of the state and
persecution of it, and yet there was also the Throne of the Lord Jesus set up
in His Church of worshippers in Pergamus, out of which the Balaamites, and
Nicholaitans and every false worshipper was to be cast, though not out of the
City of Pergamus, for then Pergamus must have been thrown out of Pergamus,
and the World out of the World.


CHAP. CI.
Peace. OH that my head were a fountain, and mine eyes River^ of tears to
lament my children, the children of peace and light, thus darkning that, and
other lightsome Scriptures with such dark and direful clouds of blood.


Truth. Sweet Peace, thy tears are seasonable and precious, and botled up in
the Heavens: but let me add a second consideration from that Scripture: If
that Scripture may now literally be applied to Nations and Cities in a parallel
to Canaan and Jerusalem since the Gospel, and this Psalm. 101. be literally to
be applied to Cities, Towns, The bloody interpretation of Psalm. 101.
and Countries in Europe and America, not only such as assay to join
themselves (as they here speak) in a corrupt Church estate, but such as know
no Church estate, nor God, nor Christ, yea every wicked person and evil doer,
must be hanged or stoned, etc. as it was in Israel, and if so, how many
thousands and millions of men and women in the several Kingdoms and
governments of the World must be cut off from their Lands, and destroyed from
their Cities, as this Scripture speaks?

Thirdly, since those persons in the New English plantations accounted unfit
for Church estate, yet remain all members of the Church of England, from which
New England dares not separate, no not in their Sacraments, (as some of the
Independents have published) what riddle or mystery, or rather fallacy of
Satan is this?


Peace. The New English separate in America, but not in Europe.
It will not be offense to charity to make conjecture: First, herein New
England Churches secretly call their Mother whore, not daring in America to
join with their own Mothers children, though unexcommunicate, no nor permit
them to worship God after their consciences, and as their Mother has taught
them this secretly and silently, they have a mind to do, which publicly they
would seem to disclaim, and profess against.

Secondly, The New Eng^ish permit not their brethren of Old England to enjoy
their consciences left their own numbers might exceed their own, or at least
the greatness of their own Assemblies and maintenances decrease.
If such members of Old England should be suffered to enjoy their consciences
in New, (however it is pretended they would profane Ordinances for which they
are unfit (as true it is in that natural persons are not fit for Spiritual
worship) yet this appears not to be the bottom, for in Old England the New
English join with Old in the ministrations of the Word, Prayer, singing,
contribution, maintenance of the Ministry, etc.) if I say, they should set up
Churches after their conscience, the greatness and multitudes of their own
Assemblies would decay, and with all the contributions and maintenance of their
Ministers, unto which all or most have been forced.


Truth. Dear Peace, These are more then conjectures, thousands now epsy, and
all that love the purity of the worship of the living God should lament such
halting: I shall add this, not only do they partially neglect to cut off the
wicked of the Land, but such as themselves esteemed beloved and goldy have they
driven forth, and keep out others which would come unto them, eminently godly
by their own confession, because differing in conscience and worship from
them, and consequently not to be suffered in their holy Land of Canaan.

But having examined that Scripture alleged, let us now weigh their Reasons.

First (say they) the not cutting off by the sword, but tolerating many
Religions in a State would provoke God: unto which

I answer, Christ Jesus never appointed all Religions but his own to be cut
off by the Civil Sword.
first (and here being no Scripture produced to these Reasons, shall the sooner
answer) that no proof can be made from the Institutions of the Lord Jesus that
all Religions but one are to be cut off by the Civil Sword; that National
Church in that typical Land of Canaan being abolished, and the Christian
Commonweal or Church instituted.

Secondly, I affirm that the cutting off by the Sword other Consciences and
Religions is (contrarily) most provoking unto God, A bloody mother.
expressly against his will concerning the Tares Matthew. 13. as I have before
proved; as also the bloody mother of all those monstrous mischiefs (where such
cutting off is used) both to the souls and bodies of men.

Thirdly, let conscience and experience speak how in the not cutting off their
many Religions, it has pleased God not only not to be provoked, but to prosper
the state of the united Provinces our next neighbors, and that to admiration.


Peace. The second reason is, such tolerating would leaven, divide and destroy
the peace of the Churches.


Truth. Christ Spiritual power, most powerful.
This must also be denied upon so many former Scriptures and Reasons produced,
proving the power of the Lord Jesus, and the sufficiency of his Spiritual
power in his Church, for the purging forth and conquering of the least evil,
yea and for the bringing every thought in subjection unto Christ Jesus, 2 Cor.
10.

I add, Christ forbidding his followers to permit leaven in the Church, does
not for^bid to permit leaven in the World.
they have not produced one Scripture, nor can, to prove that the permitting to
leaven of false doctrine in the World or Civil State, will leaven the
Churches: only we find that the permission of leaven in persons, doctrines or
practices in the Church, that indeed will corrupt and spread, 1. Cor. 5. and
Gal. 5. but this Reason should never have been alleged, were not the
particular Churches in New England, but as so many implicit Parish Churches in
one implicit National Church.


Peace. Their third Reason is, it will dissolve the continuity of the State,
especially theirs, where the walls are made of the stones of the Churches.


Truth. I answer briefly to this bare affirmation thus, that the true Church is
a wall spiritual and mystical, Cant. 8. 9.

Then consequently a false Church or Company is a false or pretended wall, and
none of Christ's.

The civil State, Power and Government is a civil wall, etc. and

Lastly, the walls of Earth or stone about a City are the natural or
artificial wall or defense of it.

Now in consideration of these four walls I desire it may be proved from the
Scripture of Truth, The Wall, Cant. 8. 9. discussed.
how the false spiritual wall or company of false worshippers suffered in a
City can be able to destroy the true Christian wall or company of believers.

Again, A spiritual wall cannot properly impair the civil.
how this false spiritual wall or false Church permitted, can destroy the
civil wall, the State and Government of the City and Citizens, any more then
it can destroy the natural or artificial wall of earth or stone.

Spiritual may destroy spiritual, if a stronger and victorious, but
spiritual cannot reach to artificial or civil.


Peace. Yea but they fear the false spiritual wall may destroy their civil,
because it is made of the stones of Churches.


Truth. If this have reference to that practice amongst them, viz. that none
but members of Churches enjoy civil freedom amongst them (ordinarily) in
imitation of that National Church and State of the Jews, then I answer, they
that follow Moses Church constitution) which the New English by such a practice
implicitly do) must cease to pretend to the Lord Jesus Christ and his
institutions.

Secondly, Many flourishing Civil States where true Churches are not found.
we shall find lawful civil State both before and since Christ Jesus, in
which we find not any tidings of the true God our Christ.

Lastly, their civil New English State framed out of their Churches may yet
stand, subsist and flourish, although they did (as by the word of the Lord they
ought) permit either Jews or Turks or Antichristians to live amongst them
subject unto their Civil Government.


CHAP. CII.
Peace. ONe branch more, viz. the third remains of this Head, and it concerns
the hearing of the Word, unto which (say they) all men are to be compelled,
because hearing of the word is a duty which even Nature leads Heathens to:
for this they quote the practice of the Ninevites hea^ing Jonah, and Eglo^
(King of Moab) his rising up to Ehuds pretended message from God, Judge 3.


Truth. Hearing discussed.
I must deny that position: for light of Nature leads men to hear that only
which Nature conceives to be good for it, Every Religion prefers its own
Priests and Ministers before all other.
and therefore not to hear a Messenger, Minister or Preacher, whom conscience
persuades is a false messenger or deceiver, and comes to deceive my soul, as
Millions of men and women in their several respective religions and
consciences are so persuaded, conceiving their own to be true.

Secondly, Jonahs preaching to the Ninevites, and their hearing of his message
examined.
as concerning the instances, Jonah did not compel the Ninevites to hear that
message which he brought unto them.

Besides the matter of compulsion to a constant worship of the world in Church
estate (which is the Question) comes not near Ionahs case.

Nor did Christ Jesus or any of his Ambassadors so practice: but if persons
refused to hear the command of the Lord Jesus to his Messengers was only to
depart from them, shaking off the dust of their feet with a denunciation of
Gods wrath against them, Math. 10. Act. 14.

Concerning Eglon his rising up: First, Eh^d compelled not that King either to
hear or reverence, Eglon his rising up to Ehuds message, examined.
and all that can be imitable in Eglon, is a voluntary and willing reverence
which persons ought to express to what they are persuaded comes from God.

But how do both these instances mightily convince and condemn themselves,
who not only profess to turn away from, but also persecute or hunt all such
as shall dare to profess a Ministry or Church estate differing from their
own, though for personal godliness and excellency of gifts reverenced by
themselves.

Thirdly, to the point of compulsion: It has pleased the Lord Jesus to appoint
a two fold Ministry of his Word.

First, A two fold Ministry of Christ, converting and feeding.
for unbeleevers and their conversion, according to Math. 28. 19. Marc. 16 15,
16. and the constant practice of the Apostles in the first preaching of the
Gospel.

Secondly, a Ministry of feeding and nourishing up such as are converted and
brought into Church estate, according to Ephesians. 4. etc. Now to neither of these
do we find any compulsion appointed by the Lord Jesus, or practiced by any of
his.

The compulsion preached and practiced in New England, is not to the hearing of
that Ministry sent forth to convert unbeleevers, and to constitute Churches:
for such a Ministry they practice not: but to the hearing of the word of
edification, exhortation, consolation, dispensed only in the Churches of
worshippers: I apply,

When Paul came first to Corinth to preach Christ Jesus, by their Rule the
Magistrates of Corinth ought by the Sword to have compelled all the people of
Corinth to hear Paul.

Secondly, Paul never used any civil compulsion.
after a Church of Christ was gathered (by their rule) the Magistrates of
Corinth ought to have compelled the people still (even those who had refused
his Doctrine, for the few only of the Church embraced it) to have heard the
Word still, and to have kept one day in seven to the Christians God, and to
have come to the Christians Church all their days. And what is this but a
settled formality of Religion and Worship, unto which a people are brought by
the power of the sword?

And however they affirm that persons are not to be compelled to be members of
Churches, The New English forcing their subjects to church all their days, and
yet forcing them not to any Religion (as they say) they force the people then
to be of no religion all their days,
nor the Church compelled to receive any: Yet if persons be compelled to
forsake their Religion which their hearts cleave to, and to come to Church, to
the worship of the Word, Prayers, Psalms, and Contributions, and this all
their days: I ask whether this be not this peoples Religion, unto which
submitting, they shall be quiet all their days, without the enforcing them to
the practice of any other Religion? And if this be not so, then I ask, Will
it not inevitably follow, that they (not only permit, but) enforce people to
be of no Religion at all, all their days?

This toleration of Religion, or rather irreligious compulsion, is above all
tolerations monstrous, to wit, to compel men to be of no Religion all their
days. I desire all men and these worthy Authors of this Model, to lay their
hands upon their heart, and to consider whether this compulsion of men to hear
the Word, (as they say) whether it carries men, to wit, to be of no Religion
all their days, worse then the very Indians, who dare not live without
Religion according as they are persuaded.

Lastly, I add, from the Ordinance of the Lord Jesus, and practice of the
Apostles (Acts 2. 42.) where the Word and Prayer is joined with the exercise of
their fellowship, and breaking of Bread; in which Exercises the Church
continued constantly: that it is apparent that a Civil State may as lawfully
compel men by the civil sword to the breaking of bread, The Civil State can
no more lawfully compel the Consciences of men to Church to hear the Word,
then to receive the Sacraments.
or Lords Supper, as to the Word or Prayer, or Fellowship.

For first, they are all of the same nature, Ordinances in the Church (I speak
of the feeding Ministry in the Church, unto which persons are compelled) and
Church Worship. Secondly, every conscience in the World is fearful, at least
shie of the Priests and Ministers of other Gods and Worships, and of holding
Spiritual fellowship in any of their Services. Which is the case of many a
Soul, viz. to question the Ministers themselves, as well as the Supper it
self.


CHAP. CIII.
Peace. Dear Truth, This pressing of men to the Spiritual Battles of Christ
Jesus, is the cause why (as it is commonly with pressed Soldiers) that so many
thousands fly in the day of Battle. But I present you with the 9. Question,
viz.

What power the Magistrate has in providing of Church Officers?

First (say they) the Election of Church officers being the proper Act of the
Church, therefore the Magistrate has no power (either as Prince or Patron) to
assume such power unto himself. When Christ sends to preach by his supreme
power, the Magistrate may send forth by his power subordinate, to gather
Churches, and may force people to hear them, but not invest them with office
amongst them.

Secondly, the Maintenance of Church Officers being to arise from all those who
are ordinarily taught thereby ( Gal. 6. 6.) hence it is the duty of the Civil
Magistrate to contend with the people, as Nehemiah did, chap. 13. ver. 10. 11.
who do neglect and forsake the due maintenance of the Church of God, and to
command them to give such portions for the maintenance of Church officers, as
the Gospel commands to be offered to them freely and bountifully, 2. Cor. 9.
5, 6, 7. According as Hezekiah commanded the people to give to the Priests and
Levites the portions appointed by the Law, that they might be encouraged in the
Law of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31. 4.

Thirdly, the furnishing the Church with set officers, depending much upon
erecting and maintenance of Schools, and good education of youth; and it lying
chiefly in the hand of the Magistrate to provide for the furthering thereof,
they may therefore and should so far provide for the Churches, as to erect
Schools, take care for fit Governors and Tutours, and commend it to all the
Churches, if they see it meet, that in all the Churches within the Jurisdiction
once in a year, and if it may be, the Sabbath before the General Court of
Election, there be a Free Will offering of all people for the maintenance of
such Schools: And the moneys of every Town so given, to be brought on the day
of Election to the Treasury of the College, and the moneys to be disposed by
such who are so chosen for the disposing thereof.


Truth. In the choice of officers, it is very obscure what they mean by this
supreme power of Christ Jesus sending to preach.

We know the Commission of the Lord Jesus to his first Messengers to go into
all Nations to preach and gather Churches, and they were immediately sent forth
by him: but Mr. Cotton elsewhere boldeth, that there is now extant no immediate
Ministry from Christ, but mediate, that is, from the Church.

Let us first see how they agree with themselves, and secondly how they agree
with the Magistrate in this business.

First, In the first pattern there is a converting Ministry, to gather the
Church or Flo^k of Christ.
if they hold a sending forth to preach by Christ's supreme power, according to
Math. 28. Mark 16. Romans 10. they must necessarily grant a time, when the Church
is not, but is to be constituted out of the Nations and Peoples now converted
by this preaching: whence according to the course of Scripture, the nature of
the Work, and their own Grant in this place, it is apparent that there is a
Ministry before the Church, gathering and espousing the Church to Christ: and
therefore their other Tenent must needs be too light, viz. that there is no
Ministry but that which is mediate from the Church.


Peace. Blessed Truth, this doctrine of a Ministry before the Church, is harsh
and deep, yet most true, most sweet. Yet you know their Ground, that two or
three Godly persons may join themselves together, become a Church, make
officers, send them forth to preach, to convert, baptize, and gather New
Churches.


Truth. I answer, first we find not in the first institution and pasterne, that
ever any such two, or three, or more, did gather and constitute themselves a
Church of Christ, without a Ministry sent from God to invite and call them by
the Word, and to receive them unto fellowship with God upon the receiving of
that Word and Message: No president of any people in the Gospel converting and
gathering themselves, without some Messenger sent from the Lord to effect those
ends.
And therefore it may very well be quaeried how without such a Ministry two or
three become a Church? and how the power of Christ is conveyed unto them; Who
espoused this people unto Jesus Christ, as the Church at Corinth was espoused
by Paul, 2 Cor. 11.? If it be said themselves, or if it be said the Scriptures,
let one instance be produced in the first patterns and practices of such a
Practice.

It has been generally confessed, that there is no coming to the Marriage feast
without a Messenger inviting, sent from God to the Souls of men, Matthew. 22.
Luc. 14. Romans 10.

We find when the Thessalonians turned to God from their Idols to serve the
living and true God, 1 Thessal. 1. 9. it pleased God to bring a Word of Power
unto them by the mouth of Paul in the same place.


Peace. You know (dear Truth) it is a common plea, that Gods people now are
converted already, and therefore may congregate themselves, etc.


Truth. Two things must here be cleared:

First, Professed public conversion is not only from sins against the
second Table in personal Repentance, but from false worship also.
does their conversion amount to external turning from Idols, I These. 1. 9.
beside their internal Repentance, Faith, Love, etc. Secondly, who wrought this
conversion, who begot these Children? (for though the Corinthians might have
ten thousand Teachers, yet Paul had begotten them by the Word.

It Is true (as Mr. Cotton himself elsewhere acknowledges) God sends many
Preachers in the way of his providence (even in Babel mystical) though not
according to his Ordinance and Institution: So even in the wilderness (Rev.
12.) God provideth for the sustentation of the woman, Rev. 12. by which
provision even in the most Popish times and places, yea and by most false and
Popish callings (now in this lightsome Age confessed so to be) God has done
great things to the personal conversion, A true Ministry necessary before
conversion, and therefore before the Church in the first pattern.
consolation, and salvation of his people.

But as there seems yet to be desired such constitution of the Christian
Church, as the first institution and pattern calls for: So also such a calling
and converting of Gods people from Antichristian Idols to the Christian
Worship: And therefore such a Ministry (according to the first pattern) sent
from Christ Jesus to renew and restore the Worship and Ordinances of God in
Christ.

Lastly, if it should be granted that without a Ministry sent from Christ to
gather Churches, that Gods, people in this Country may be called, converted
from Antichristian Idols, to the true worship of God in the true Church estate
and Ordinances, will it not follow that in all other Countries of the World
Gods Elect must or may be so converted from their several respective false
worships and Idolatries, The true way of the M^^^st^y sent with that commission
Ma^^h. 28. discussed.
and brought into the true Christian Church estate without such a Ministry sent
unto them? Or are there two ways appointed by the Lord Jesus, one for this
Country, and another for the rest of the World? Or lastly, if two or three more
(without a Ministry) shall arise up, become a Church, make Ministers, etc. I
ask whether those two or three, or more must not be accounted immediately and
extraordinarily stirred up by God, and whether this be that supreme power of
Christ Jesus (which they speak of) sending forth two or three private persons
to make a Church and Ministers, without a true Ministry of Christ Jesus first
sent unto themselves? Is this that commission (which all Ministers pretend
unto) Mat. 28. 19. etc. first, in the hands of two or three private persons
becoming a Church, without a mediat call from which Church (say they) there
can be no true Ministry, and yet also confess that Christ sends forth to
preach by his supreme power; and the Magistrate by his power subordinate to
gather Churches?


CHAP. CIV.
Peace. YOu have taken great pains to show the irreconciliablenesse of those
their two assertions, viz. First, there is now no Ministry (as they say) but
what is mediat from the Church, and yet secondly, Christ Jesus sends Preachers
forth by his supreme power to gather the Church: I now wait to hear, how, as
they say, the Magistrate may send forth by his power subordinate to gather
Churches, enforcing the people to hear, etc.


Truth. If there be a Ministry sent forth by Christ's supreme power; The Civil
Magistrate not betrusted with gathering of Churches.
and a Ministry sent forth by the Magistrates subordinate power to gather
Churches; I ask what is the difference between these two? Is there any
gathering of Churches but by that commission, Mat. 28. Teach and baptize? And
is the civil Magistrate entrusted with a power from Christ as his Deputy to
give this commission, and so to send out Ministers to preach and baptize?

As there is nothing in the Testament of Christ concerning such a delegation or
assignment of such power of Christ to the civil Magistrate: If the Magistrate,
then much more the people of the world, from whom the Magistrates receive their
power.
So I also ask, since in every free State civil Magistrates have no more power
but what the peoples of those States, Lands and Countries betrust them with,
whether or no (by this means) it must not follow that Christ Jesus has left
with the Peoples and Nations of the World, his Spiritual Kingly power to grant
commissions and send out Ministers to themselves, to preach, convert and
baptize themselves? How inevitably this follows upon their conclusion of power
in Magistrates to send, etc. and what unchristian and unreasonable consequences
must flow from hence, let all consider in the fear of God.

Iehosaphats sending forth the Levites to teach in Judah, Iehosaphat (2 Chronicles.
17.) a figure of Christ Jesus in his Church not of the Civil Magistrate in the
State.
etc. as they allege it not; so elsewhere it shall more fully appear to be a
type and figure of Christ Jesus the only King of his Church providing for the
feeding of his Church and People by his true Christian Priests and Levites,
viz. The Ministry which in the Gospel he has appointed.


CHAP. CV.
Peace. WE have examined the Ministry, be pleased (dear Truth) to speak to
the second branch of this head, viz. the maintenance of it: They affirm that
the Magistrate may force out the Ministers maintenance from all that are taught
by them, and that after the pattern of Israel, and the argument from 1 Cor. 9.
Gal. 6. 6.


Truth. This theme, viz. concerning the maintenance of the Priests and
Ministers of worship, is indeed the Apple of the Eye, the Dianah of the Dianah,
etc. yet all that love Christ Jesus in sincerity, and souls in and from him
will readily profess to abhor filthy lucre ( Tit. 1.) and the wages of
Balaam (both more common and frequent then easily is discernable.)

To that Scripture Gal. 6. 6. Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is taught in the Word make him that teaches partaker of all his
goods: I answer, Concerning the maintenance of the Ministry examined.
That teaching was of persons converted, believers entered into the School and
Family of Christ the Church, which Church being rightly gathered, is also
rightly invested with the power of the Lord Jesus, to force every soul therein
by spiritual weapons and penalties to do its duty.

But this forcing of the Magistrate is intended and practiced to all sorts of
persons without as well as within the Church, unconverted, natural and dead in
sin, as well as those that live, and feeding enjoy the benefit of spiritual
food.

Now for those sorts of persons to whom Christ Jesus sends his Word out of
Church estate, Christ Jesus never appointed a maintenance of his Ministers from
the unconverted and unbeleeving.
Jews or Gentiles, (according to the Parable of Math. 13. highway hearers,
stony ground and thorny ground hearers) we never find title of any
maintenance to be expected, least of all to be forced and exacted from them.
By civil power they cannot be forced, for it is no civil payment or
business, no matter of Caesar, but concerning God: nor by spiritual power,
which has nothing to do with those which are without, 1. Cor. 5.

It is reasonable to expect and demand of such as live within the state a
civil maintenance of their civil officers, and to force it where it is
denied. It is reasonable for a Schoolmasters to demand his recompense for his
labor in his School: but it is not reasonable to expect or force it from
stranges, enemies, rebels to that City, from such as come not within, or else
would not be received into the School. What is the Church of Christ Jesus,
but the City, the School^, and Family of Christ? the Officers of this City,
School, Family, may reasonably expect maintenance from such they minister
unto, but not from strangers, enemies, etc.


Peace. They that compel men to hear, compel men also to pay for their
hearing and conversion.
It is most true that sin goes in a link, for that tenent that all the men
of the world may be compelled to hear Christ preach (and enjoy the labors of
the Teacher as well as the Church it self) forces on another also as evil,
viz. that they should also be compelled to pay, as being most equal and
reasonable to pay for their conversion.


Truth. Some use to urge that Text of Luc. 14. Compel them to come in. Compel
them to Mass (say the Papists:) compel them to Church and Common prayer, say
the Protestants: Compel them to the Meeting, say the New English. In all these
compulsions they disagree amongst themselves: but in this, viz. Compel them to
pay, in this they all agree.

There is a double violence which both Error and Falsehood use to the souls of
men. Two sorts of compulsion.


First, moral and Moral and
persuasive, such was the persuasion first used to Joseph by his Mistress: such
was the persuasions of Tamar from Ammon: such was the compelling of the young
man by the Harlot; Prove. 7. she caught him by her much fair speech and
kisses. And thus is the whole world compelled to the worship of the Golden
Image, Dan. 3.

The second Compulsion is civil, Civil Compulsion.
such as Joseph's Mistress began to practice upon Joseph to attain her whorish
desires.

Such as Ammon practiced on Tamar to satisfy his brutish lust.

And such was Nabuchadnezzars second compulsion, his fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. and
mystical Nabuchadnezzars killing all that receive not his mark, Rev. 13.

The first sort of these violences, The Ministers of Christ Jesus compel with
no other sword then that of Christ's mouth, the sword of the Spirit with two
edges.
to wit, by powerful argument and persuasion, the Ministers of the Gospel also
use. Hence all those powerful persuasions of Wisdoms Maidens, Pro. 9. Hence
(says Paul) knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. and
pull some out of the fire, says Iud^: such must that compulsion be, Luc. 14.
viz. the powerful persuasions of the word, being that two-edged sword coming
out of the mouth of Christ Jesus in his true Ministers sent forth to invite
poor sinners to partake of the Feast of the Lamb of God. The civil Ministers
of the Commonweal cannot be sent upon this business with their civil weapons
and compulsions, but the spiritual Minister of the Gospel with his spiritual
sword of Christ's mouth, a sword with two edges.

But more particularly the contributions of Christ's Kingdom are all holy and
spiritual, The maintenance of the Ministry spiritual.
though consisting of material earthly substance, (as is Water in Baptism,
Bread and Wine in the Supper) and joined with prayer and the Lords Supper, Act.
2. 42.

Hence as Prayer is called Gods sacrifice, Natural men can neither truly
worship nor maintain it.
so are the contributions and mutual supplies of the Saints, sacrifices, Phil.
4.

Hence also as it is impossible for natural men to be capable of Gods
worship, and to feed, be nourished and edified by any spiritual ordinance, no
more then a dead child can suck the breast, or a dead man feast:

So also is it as impossible for a dead man yet lodged in the grave of Nature
to contribute spiritually (I mean according to Scriptures rule) as for a dead
man to pay a reckoning.

I question not but natural men may for the outward act preach, pray,
contribute, etc. but neither are they worshippers suitable to him who is a
Spirit ( John 4.) nor can they (least of all) be forced to worship or the
maintenance of it, without a guilt of their hypocrisy.


Peace. They will say, what is to be done for their souls?


Truth. The Apostles (whom we profess to imitate) preached the Word of the
Lord to unbeleevers, without mingling in worship with them, and such Preachers
and preaching such as pretend to be the true Ministry of Christ, ought to be
and practice: Not forcing them all their days to come to Church and pay their
duties, either so confessing that this is their Religion unto which they are
forced: or else that (as before) they are forced to be of no Religion all their
days.

The way to subdue Rebels is not by correspondence and communion with them,
Rebels not subdued by compliance, but resistance.
by forcing them to keep the City Watches, and pay sessements, etc. which all
may be practiced (upon compulsion) treacherously, the first work with such is
powerfully to subdue their judgments and wills, to lay down their weapons, and
yield willing subjection: then come they orderly into the City, and so to City
privileges.


CHAP. CVI.
Peace. PLease you now (dear Truth) to discuss the Scriptures from the Old
Testament, Nehem 13. and 2 Chronicles. 31.


Truth. The national Church of the Jews might well be forced to a settled
maintenance of their priests but not so the Christian Church.
God gave unto that National Church of the Jews that excellent Land of
Canaan, and therein Houses furnished, Orchards, Gardens Vineyards, Olive yards,
Fields, Wells, etc. they might well in this settled abundance, and the promised
continuation and increase of it afford a large temporal supply to their
Priests and Levites, even to the Tenth of all they did possess.

Gods people are now in the Gospel brought into a spiritual land of Canaan,
flowing with spiritual milk and honey, and they abound with spiritual and
heavenly comforts, though in a poor and persecuted condition, therefore an
enforced settled maintenance is not suitable to the Gospel, as it was to the
Ministry of Priests and Levites in the Law.

Secondly, in the change of the Church estate, there was also a change of the
Priesthood and of the Law, Heb. 7. Nor did the Lord Jesus appoint that in his
Church, and for the maintenance of his Ministry, the Civil sword of the
Magistrate, but that the Spiritual Sword of the Ministry should alone compel.

3. Therefore the compulsion used under Hezekiah and Nehemiah, was by the
civil and corporal Sword, The Civil Sword of the National Church of the
Jews could not type out a Civil, but a Spiritual Sword of the Christian
Church.
a type (in that typical State) not of another material and corporal, but of
an heavenly and spiritual, even the sword of the Spirit, with which Christ
fights, Revel. 3. which is exceeding sharp, entering in between the soul and
spirit, Heb. 4. and bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ Jesus: He that submits not at the shaking of this sword, is cut off by
it; and he that despises this sword, all the power in the World cannot make
him a true worshipper, or by his purse a mainteiner of Gods worship.

Lastly, If any man professing to be a Minister of Christ Jesus, No man should
be bound to worship, nor maintain a Worship against his own consent.
shall bring men before the Magistrate (as the practice has been, both in Old
and New England) for not paying him his wages or his due: I ask (if the
voluntary consent of the party has not obliged him) how can either the
officers of the Parish, Church, or of the Civil State compel this or that man
to pay so much (more or less) to maintain such a Worship or Ministry? I ask
further, if the determining what is each man's due to pay, why may they not
determine the tenth and more, as some desired (others opposing) in New England,
and force men not only to maintenance, but to a Jewish maintenance.


Peace. Yea but (say they) is not the Labourer worthy of his hire?


Truth. Yes, from them that hire him, from the Church, to whom he labors or
ministers, Christ's laborers worthy of their hire, but from them that hire them
not from the Civil State: no more then the Minister of the Civil State is
worthy of his hire from the Church, but from the Civil State, (in which I
grant the persons in the Church ought to be assistant in their Civil respects.)


Peace. What maintenance (say they) shall the Ministry of the Gospel have?


Truth. We find two ways of maintenance for the Ministry of the Gospel,
What maintenance Christ has appointed his Ministers in the Gospel.
proposed for our direction in the New Testament.

First, the free and willing contribution of the Saints, according to 1 Cor.
16. Luc. 8. 3. etc. upon which both the Lord Jesus, and his Ministers lived.

Secondly, the diligent work and labor of their own hands, as Paul tells the
Thessalonians, and that in two cases:

1. Either in the inabilities and necessities of the Church.

2. Or for the greater advantage of Christ's truth; as when Paul saw it would
more advantage the name of Christ, he denies himself, and falls to work
amongst the Corinthians and Thessalonians.

Let none call these cases extraordinary: for if persecution be the portion of
Christ's sheep, and the business or work of Christ must be dearer to us then our
right eyes or lives, such as will follow Paul, and follow the Lord Jesus, must
not think much at, but rejoice in poverties, necessities, hunger, cold,
nakedness, etc. The Stewards of Christ Jesus must be like their Lord, and
abhor to steal as the evil Steward, pretending that the shamed to beg, but
peremptorily, dig he could not.


CHAP. CVII.
Peace. ONe and the last branch (dear Truth) remains concerning Schools.

The Churches (say they) much depend upon the Schools, and the Schools upon
the Magistrates.


Truth. I honor Schools for Tongues and Arts: but the institution of Europes
Universities, Universities of Europe a cause of universal sins and plagues,
yet Schools honorable for Tongues and Arts.
devoting persons (as is said) for Scholars, in a Monastical way, forbidding
Marriage and Labor to, I hold as far from the mind of Jesus Christ, as it is
from propagating his Name and Worship.

We count the Universities the Fountains, the Seminaries or Seed-plots of all
Piety: but have not those Fountains ever sent what streams the Times have
liked? and ever changed their taste and color to the Princes eye and Palate?

For any depending of the Church of Christ upon such Schools, I find not a
little in the Testament of Christ Jesus.

I find the Church of Christ frequently compared to a School: Christ's church
his School, and all Believers Scholars.
All Believers are his Disciples or Scholars, yea women also, Acts 9. 36. There
was a certain Disciple or Scholar called Dorcas.

Have not the Universities sacrilegiously stole this blessed name of Christ's
Scholars from his people? Is not the very Scripture language it self become
absurd, to wit, to call Gods people, especially Women (as Dorcas) Scholars?


Peace. Some will object, how shall the Scriptures be brought to ^ight from out
of Popish darkness, except these Schools of Prophets convey them to us?


Truth. I know no Schools of Prophets in the New Testament, but the particular
Congregation of Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 14. And I question whether any thing but
Sin stopped and dried up the current of the Spirit in those rare gifts of
tongues to Gods sons and daughters, serving so admirably both for the
understanding of the Original Scriptures, and also for the propagating of the
name of Christ.

Who knows but that it may please the Lord again to cloth his people with a
spirit of zeal and courage for the name of Christ, Who knows but God may
again power forth the gifts of Tongues?
yea and power forth those fiery streams again of Tongues and Prophecy in
the restoration of Zion?

If it be not his holy pleasure so to do, but that his people with daily study
and labor must dig to come at the Original Fountains, Tongues attainable out
of Oxford or Cambridge.
Gods people have many ways (besides the Universitie, lazy and Monkish) to
attain to an excellent measure of the knowledge of those tongues.

That most despised (while living) and now much honored Mr. Ainsworth, Mr.
Ainsworth
had scarce his Peer amongst a thousand Academians for the Scripture
Originalls, and yet he scarce set foot within a College walls.


CHAP. CVIII.
Peace. I Shall now present you with their 10. Head, viz. concerning the
Magistrates power in matters of Doctrine.

That which is unjustly ascribed to the Pope, is as unjustly ascribed to the
Magistrates, viz. to have power of making new Articles of Faith, or Rules of
Life, or of pressing upon the Churches to give such public honor to the
Apocrypha writings, or Homilies of men, as to read them to the people in the
room of the Oracles of God.


Truth. This Position simply considered I acknowledge a most holy truth of God,
both against the Pope, and the Civil Magistrates challenge, both pretending to
be the Vicars of Christ Jesus upon the Earth. Yet two things here I shall
propose to consideration.

First, since the Parliament of England thrust the Pope out of his chair in
England, and set down King Henry the 8. and his Successors in the Popes
room, King Henry the 8. set down^^ the Popes chair in England.
establishing them supreme Governors of the Church of England, since such an
absolute government is given by all men to them to be Guardians of the first
Table and worship of God; to set up the true worship, to suppress all false,
and that by the power of the Sword, and therefore consequently they must judge
and determine what the true is, and what the false.

And since the Magistrate is bound (by these Authors principles) to see the
Church, If the Mgistrate must punish in Spiritual (...), he must (...) be
judge (...) Spiritual causes also.
the Church officers and members do their duty, he must therefore judge what
is the Churches duty, and when she performs or not performs it, or when she
exceeds, so like wise when the Ministers perform their duty, or when they
exceed it.

And if the Magistrate must judge, then certainly by his own eye, and not by
the eyes of others, though assembled in a National or General Council.

Then also upon his judgment must the people rest, as upon the mind and
judgment of Christ, or else it must be confessed that he has no such power left
him by Christ to compel the souls of men in matters of Gods worship.

Secondly, Apocripha, Common Prayer and Homilies, precious to our forefa^hers.
concerning the Apocrypha writings and Homilies to be urged by the Magistrate
to be read unto the people as the Oracles of God: I ask if the Homilies of
England contain not in them much precious and heavenly matter ^ Secondly, if
they were not (...) (at least many of them) by excellent men for learning,
holiness, and witness of Christ's Truth incomparable. Thirdly, were they not
authorized by that most rare and pious Prince Ed. 6. then head of the Church of
England? With what great solemnity and rejoicing were they received of
thousands?

Yet now behold their children after them sharply censure them for Apocrypha
writings and Homilies trust into the room of the Word of God, and so falling
into the consideration of a false and counterfeit Scripture.

I demand of these worthy men whether a servant of God might then lawfully have
refused to read or hear such a false Scripture? A case.


Secondly, if so, whether King Edward might have lawfully compelled such a man
to yield and submit, or else have persecuted him, yea (according to the Authors
principles) whether he ought to have spared him, because after the admonitions
of such pious and learned men, this man shall now prove an Heretic, and as an
obstinate person sinning against the light of his own conscience?

In this case what shall the conscience of the subject do, awed by the dread
of the most High? What shall the conscience of the Magistrate do, zealous for
his glorious Reformation, being constantly persuaded by his Clergy of his
Lieutenantship received from Christ?

Again, Reformations are fallible.
what privilege have those worthy servants of God either in Old or New
England, to be exempted from the mistakes, into which those glo^ious Worthies
in K. Edwards time did fall? Bloody conclusions.
and if so, what bloody conclusions are presented to the World, persuading men
to pluck up by the Roots from the Land of the living, all such as seem in
their eyes heretical or obstinate?


CHAP. CIX.
Peace. Dear Truth, What dark and dismal bloody paths do we walk in? How
is thy name and mine in all ages cried up, yet as an English Flag in a Spanish
bottom, not in truth but dangerous treachery and abuse both of Truth and Peace?

We are now come to the 11 Head 11 Head.
which concerns the Magistrates power in worship.

First, they have power (say they) to reform things in the worship of God in a
Church corrupted, and to establish the pure worship of God, defending the same
by the power of the sword against all those who shall attempt to corrupt it.

For first, the reigning of Idolatry and corruption in Religion is imputed to
the want of a King, Judges 17. 5, 6.

Secondly, Remissenes in Reforming Religion, is a fault imputed to them who
suffered the High Places in Israel and in Gallio, who cared not for such
things, Acts 18.

Thirdly, Forwardness this way is a duty not only for Kings in the Old
Testament, but for Princes under the New, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Romans 13. 4. Esaias 49. 23.
Neither did the Kings of Israel reform things amiss as types of Christ, but
as Civil Magistrates, and so exemplary to all Christians. And here Reformation
in Religion is commendable in a Persian King, Ezra 7. 23. And it is well known
that remissenes in Princes of Christendom in matters of Religion and Worship
(divolving the care thereof only to the Clergy, and so setting the Horns
thereof upon the Churches head) has been the cause of Antichristian
inventions, usurpations and corruptions in the Worship and Temple of God.

Secondly, they have not power to press upon the Churches, stinted Prayers, o^
set Liturgies, whether New or Old, Popish, or others under color of uniformity
of Worship, or moral goodness of them both for matter and form, conceiving
our arguments sent to our Brethren in England concerning this Question to
evince this Truth.

Thirdly, they have no power to press upon the Churches, neither by Law (as
has been said before) nor by Proclamation and command, any sacred significant
ceremonies, whether more or less, Popish or Jewish rite, or any other device
of man, be it never so little in the worship of God, under what color soever
of indifferency, civility, using them without opinion of s^nctity, public
peace or obedience to righteous Authority, as Surplice, Cross, kneeling at
Sacrament; Salt and Spitle in Baptism, Holy days: They having been so
accursed of God, so abused by man, the imposing of some ever making way for the
urging of more, the receiving of some making the conscience bow to the burden
of all.

Fourthly, they have not power to govern and rule the acts of worship in the
Church of God.

It is with a Magistrate in a State, in respect of the acts of those who
worship in a Church, as it is with a Prince in a Ship, wherein, though he be
governor of their persons (else he should not be their Prince) yet is not
governor of the actions of the Ma^iners (then he should be Pilot:) Indeed if
the Pilot shall manifestly err in his action, he may reprove him, and so any
other passenger may: Or if he offend against the life and goods of any, he may
in due time and place civilly punish him, which no other passenger can do:
For, it is proper to Christ, the Head of the Church, as to prescribe, so to
rule the actions of his own worship in the ways of his servants, Esaias 96, 7.
The government of the Church is upon his shoulder, which no Civil officer
ought to attempt: And therefore Magistrates have no power to limit a Minister
either to what he shall preach or pray, or in what manner they shall worship
God, lest hereby they shall advance themselves above Christ, and limit his
Spirit.


Truth. In this general Head are proposed two things.

First, what the Magistrate ought to do positively concerning the worship of
God.

Secondly, what he may do in the worship of God.

What he ought to do is comprised in these particulars.

First, he ought to reform the worship of God when it is corrupted.

Secondly, he ought to establish a pure worship of God.

Thirdly, he ought to defend it by the sword: he ought to restrain Idolatry by
the sword, and to cut off offenders, as former passages have opened.

For the proof of this positive part of his duty are propounded three sorts of
Scriptures.

First, from the practice of the Kings of Israel and Judah.

Secondly, some from the New Testament.

Thirdly, from the practice of Kings of other Nations.

Unto which I answer.

First, The argument from the Babylonian and Persian kings re-minded.
concerning this latter, the Babylonian and Persian Kings, Nebuchadnezzar,
Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes: I conceive I have sufficiently before proved, that
these Idolatrous Princes making such Acts concerning the God of Israel, whom
they did not worship nor know, nor meant so to do, did only permit and
tolerate, and countenance the Jewish worship, and out of strong convictions
that this God of Israel was able to do them good (as well as their own gods)
to bring wrath upon them and their Kingdoms, as they believed their own also
did, in which respect all the Kings of the world may be easily brought to the
like: but are no president or patterns for all Princes and Civil Magistrates
in the World, to challenge or (...) the power of ruling or governing the Church
of Christ, and of wearing the spiritual Crown of the Lord, which he alone
wears in a spiritual way by his Officers and Governors after his own holy
appointment.

Secondly, for those of the New Testament I have (as I believe) fully and
sufficiently answered.

So also that prophecy of Isa. 49.

Lastly, The president of the Kings and Governo^^s of Israel and Judah examined.
however I have often touched those Scriptures produced from the practice of
the Kings of Israel and Judah. yet because so great a waeight of this
controversy lies upon this president of the Old Testament, from the duties of
this nature enjoined to those Kings and Governors, and their practices,
obeying or disobeying, accordingly commended or reproved. I shall (with the
help of Christ Jesus, the true King of Israel) declare and demonstrate how
weak and brittle this supposed Pillar of Marble is, to bear up and sustain
such a mighty burden and weight of so many high concernments as are laid upon
it. The state of Israel relating to spiritual matters proved typical.
In which I shall evidently prove that the state of Israel as a National State
made up of Spiritual and Civil power, so far as it attended upon the
spiritual, was merely figurative and typing out the Christian Churches
consisting of both Jews and Gentiles, enjoying the true power of the Lord
Jesus, establishing, reforming, correcting, defending in all cases concerning
his Kingdom and Government.


CHAP. CX.
Peace. BLessed be the God of Truth, the God of Peace, who has so long
preserved us in this our retired conference without interruptions: His mercy
still shields us while you express and I listen to that so much imitated, yet
most unimitable State of Israel.

Yet before you descend to particulars (dear Truth) let me cast The Persian
Kings make evidently against such as produce them for maintenance of the
doctrine of persecution.
one Mite into your great Treasury concerning that Instance (just now
mentioned) of the Persian Kings.

Me thinks those presidents of Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes are strong against
New Englands Tenent and practice. Those Princes professedly gave free
permission and bountiful encouragement to the Consciences of the Jews, to use
and practice their Religion, which Religion was most eminently contrary to
their own Religion and their Countries worship.


Truth. I shall (sweet Peace) with more delight pass on these rough ways,
from your kind acceptance and unwearied patience in attention.

In this discovery of that vast and mighty difference between that State of
Israel and all other States (only to be matched and paralleled by the
Christian Church or Israel) I shall select some maine and principal
considerations concerning that State wherein the irreconciliable differences
and disproportion may appear.

First, The Land of Canaan chosen by God to be the seat of the Church, but
under the New Testament all Nations alike.
I shall consider the very Land and Country of Canaan it self, and present
some considerations proving it to be a None^ such.

First, this Land was espied out and chosen by the Lord out of all the
Countries of the World to be the seat of his Church and people, Ezekiel. 20^6.

But now there is no respect of Earth, of Places or Countries with the Lord: So
testified the Lord Jesus Christ himself to the woman of Samaria (John 4.)
professing that neither at that Mountain nor at Jerusalem should men worship
the Father.

While that National State of the Church of the Jews remained, the Tribes
were bound to go up to Jerusalem to worship, Psalm. 122. But now, in every
Nation (not the whole Land or Country as it was with Canaan) he that fears
God and works righteousness is accepted with him, Act. 10. 35. This then
appeared in that large Commission of the Lord Jesus to his first Ministers: Go
into all Nations, and not only into Canaan, to carry tidings of Mercy, etc.

Secondly, the former Inhabitants thereof, seven great and mighty Nations
(Deuter. 7.) were all devoted to destruction by the Lords own mouth, which was
to be performed by the impartial hand of the Children of Israel, without any
sparing or showing Mercy.

But so now it has not pleased the Lord to devote any people to present
Destruction, The inhabitants of Canaans Land every soul to be put to death
that the Israelites might enjoy their possessions: not so now.
commanding his people to kill and slay without Covenant or Compassion,
Deuteronomy 7. 2.

Where have Emperors, Kings, or Generals an immediate call from God to destroy
whole Cities, City after City, Men, women, Children, Old and Young, as Joshua
practiced? Joshua 6. and 10. Chapters, etc.

This did Israel to these seven Nations, that they themselves might succeed
them in their Cities, Habitations, and Possessions.

This only is true in a spiritual Antitype, when Gods people by the Sword
(the two-edged Sword of Gods Spirit slay the ungodly and become Heirs, yea
fellow Heirs with Christ Jesus, Romans 8. Gods meek people inherit the
earth, (Matthew 5.) They mystically like Noah (Hebrews 11) condemn the whole
unbeleeving World, both by present and future sentence, 2 Corinthians. 6. 2.


CHAP. CXI.
THirdly the very materials, the Gold and Silver of the Idols of this Land were
odio^s and abominable, and dangerous to the people of Israel, that they might
not desire it, nor take it to themselves, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. lest themselves also
become a curse, The very (...) and silver of Cara^aes^ Images (...) to be
abhorred.
and like unto those cursed abominable things. Whereas we find not any such
accursed nature in the materials of Idols or Images now, but that (the
Idolatrous forms being changed) the silver and gold may be cast and coined,
and other materials lawfully employed and used.

Yet this we find in the Antitype, that gold, silver, yea house, land, yea
wives, children, yea life it self, as they allure and draw us from God in
Christ, are to be abominated and hated by us, without which hatred and
indignation against the most plausible and pleasing enticings from CHRIST
JESUS, it is impossible for any man to be a true Christian, Luke 14. 26.

Fourthly, The Land of Canaan ceremonially holy.
this Land, this Earth was an Holy land, Z^ch. 2. 12. Ceremonially and
typically holy, Fields, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, etc. which Holiness the World
knows not now in one Land, or Country, House, Field, Garden, etc. one above
another.

Yet in the Spiritual Land of Canaan the Christian Church, Greater holiness
in the Antitype under the Gospel, then in the types under the Law.
all things are made holy and pure (in all Lands) to the pure, Tit. 1. meats
and drinks are sanctified, that is, dedicated to the holy use of the thankful
Believers, 1 Timothy 4. vea and the unbelieving Husband, Wife, and their Children
are sanctified and made holy to Believers, insomuch that that golden
inscription (peculiar to the forehead of the High Priest) Holiness to Jehovah,
shall be written upon the very Bridles of the Horses, as all are dedicated to
the service of Christ Jesus in the Gospels peace and holiness.

Fifthly, The Land of Canaan Jehorahs Land.
the Lord expressly calls it his own Land, Levit. 25 23. Hos. 9. 3 Jehovah his
Land, a term proper unto Spiritual Canaan, the Church of God, which must
needs be in respect of his choice of that Land to be the Seat and Residence of
his Church and Ordinances.

Bu^ now the partition wall is broken down, and in respect of the Lords
special proprie^ie to one Country more then another, what d^fference between
Asia and Africa, between Europe and America. between England and Turkey, London
and Constantinople?

This Land (among many other glorious Titles given to it) was called Emanuels
land, Emanuels Land so no Land or country more then another.
that is, God with us, Christ his land, or Christian land, Isa 8. 8.

But now: Jerusalem from above is not material and Earthly, but Spiritual,
Gal. 4. Heb. 12. Material Jerusalem is no more the Lords city then Jericho,
Ninivie, or Babell (in respect of place or Country) for even at Babell
literal was a Church of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5.

It is true that Antichrist has christened all those Countries whereon the
Whore sits, The Blasphe m^us titles of the Christened and Christian World.
Revel 17. with the Title of Christ's land, or Christian land.

And Hundius, in his Map of the Christian World, makes this land to extend to
all Asia, a great part of Africa, all Europe, and a vast part of America, even
so far as his unchristian Christenings has gone. But as every false Christ
has false Teachers, false Christians, false Faith, Hope, Love, etc. and in the
end false Salvation, so does he also counterfeit the false Name of Christ,
Christians, Christian land or Country.

Sixthly, this Land was to keep her Sabbaths unto God: Six years they were
to sow their Fields, and prune their Vines, but in the 7. The material Land of
Ca^a^n was to keep her Sabboths, so no material land or Country now. God
feeds his sometimes immediately.
year they were not to sow their Fields, nor prune their Vineyards, but to eat
that which grew of it self or own accord.

But such Observations does not God now lay upon any Fields, Vineyards, etc.
under the Gospel.

Yet in the Spiritual land of Canaan, the true Church, there is a Spiritual
Soule-rest or Sabbath, a quiet depending upon God, a living by Faith in him, a
making him our portion, and casting all care upon him who cares for us: yea
sometimes he feeds his by immediate gracious works of Providence, when
comforts arise out of the Earth, without secondary means or causes, as here,
or as elsewhere Manna descended from Heaven.

Seventhly, such portions and possessions of Lands, Fields, Houses, Vineyards,
were sold with caution or proviso of returning again in the year of Iubilee
to the right owners, Levit. 25. 23.

Such cautions, such provisos are not now enjoined by God in the sale of lands,
fields, inheritances, nor no such Iubilee or Redemption to be expected.

Yet this also finds a fulfilling in the spiritual Canaan, The J^bilee of
Canaan a type of restitution and redemption in the Gospel.
or Church of God, unto which the silver Trumpet of Iubilee, the Gospel, has
^ounded a spiritual restitution of all their spiritual rights and
inheritances, which either they have lost in the fall of the first man Adam, or
in their particular falls, when they are captive and sold unto sin, Romans 7. Or
lastly in the spiritual captivity of Babele bondage: how sweet then is the
name of a Savior, in whom is the joyful sound of Deliverance and Redemption!

Eighthly, this Land or Country was a figure or type of the kingdom of Heaven
above, Canaans land a type of (...) Kingdom of God on Earth and in Heaven
begun here below in the Church and Kingdom of God, Heb. 4. 8. Heb. 11. 9. 10.
Hence was a Birthright so precious in Canaans Land: Hence Naboth so inexorable
and resolute in refusing to part with his Inheritance to King Ahab, counting
all Ahabs seeming reasonable offers most unreasonable, Why Naboth refused to
part with a Garden plot to his King upon hazard of his life.
as soliciting him to part with a Garden plot of Canaans land, though his
refusal cost him his very life.

What Land, what Country now is Isreal's Parallel and Antitype, but that holy
mystical Nation the Church of God, peculiar and called out to him out of every
Nation and Country, 1 Pet. 2. 9. In which every true spiritual Naboth has his
spiritual inheritance, which he dares not part with, though it be to his King
or Sovereign, and though such his refusal cost him this present life.

CHAP. CXII.
Peace. Doubtless that Canaan Land was not a pattern for all Lands: It was a
nonesuch, unparalleld and unmatchable.


Truth. Many other considerations of the same nature I might annex, but I pick
here and there a flower, The difference of the people of Israel and all other
Peoples. The people of Israel the seed of one man.
and pass on to a second Head concerning the people themselves, wherein the
state of the people shall appear unmatchable, but only by the true Church and
Israel of God.

First, the people of Israel were all the Seed or Offspring of one man
Abraham, Psalm. 105. 6. and so downward the Seed of Isaac and Jacob, hence
called the Israel of God, that is, wrastlers and prevailers with God,
distinguished into twelve Tribes all sprung out of Isreal's loins.

But now, few Nations of the World but are a mixed Seed, the people of England
especially the Britains, Picts, Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, by a
wonderful providence of God being become one English people.

Only the Spiritual Israel and Seed of God the Newborn are but one: Only
made good in the Spiritual seed, the regene^ate or newborn.
Christ is the Seed, Gal. 3. and they only that are Christ's are only Abraham's
Seed and Heirs according to the promise.

This Spiritual Seed is the only Antitype of the former figurative and
typical: A Seed which all Christians ought to propagate, yea even the
unmarried men and women (who are not capable of natural off spring) for thus
is this called the Seed of Christ (who lived and died unmarried Isa. 59. 21.

Secondly, this people was selected and separated to the Lord, his Covenant and
Worship from all the people and Nations of the World beside to be his peculiar
and only people, Levit. 20. 26. etc.

Therefore such as returned from Babyl^n (...) Jerusalem, they separated
themselves to eat the Passover, (...) 6 And in that solemn humiliation and
confession before the Lord, Nehem 9. The people of Israel separate from all
Nations in Sp^^^ all and in some Civil things.
the children of Israel separated themselves from all strangers.

This separation of theirs was so famous, that it extended not only to
Circumcision, the Passover, and matters of Gods worship, but even to temporal
and civil things: Thus (Ezra 9) they separated or put away their very wives,
which they had taken of the strange Nations contrary to the Commandment of the
Lord.

But where has the God of Heaven in the Gospel separated whole Nations or
Kingdoms (English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, No Nation so s^parated to God
in the Gospel, but only the newborn Israel that fear God in every Nation.
etc.) as a peculiar people and Antitype of the people of Israel? Yea where the
least footing in all the Scripture for a National Church after Christ's coming?

Can any people in the world pattern this samplar but the Newborn Israel,
such as fear God in every Nation ( Acts 10. 35.) commanded to come forth and
separate from all unclean things or persons, (2 Cor. 6.) and though not bound
to put away strange wives as Israel did, because of that peculiar respect upon
them in Civil things, yet to be holy or set apart to the Lord in all manner of
civil conversation, 1 Pet. 1. Only to marry in the Lord, yea and to marry as
if they married not 1 Cor 7. yea to hate wife and children, father, mother,
house and land, yea and life it self for the Lord Jesus, Luc. 14.

Thirdly, this Seed of Abraham thus separate from all people unto the Lord was
wonderfully redeemed and brought from Aegypts bon^age through the Red Sea, and
the Wilderness unto the Land of Canaan, by many strange signs and wonderful
miracles, wrought by the ou^stretched hand of the Lord, famous and dreadful,
The whole people of Israel (...) of Egypt.
and to be admired by all succeeding peoples and generations, Deuteronomy. 4. 32, 33,
34. Ask now from one side of the Heaven unto the other, whether there has
been such a thing as this, etc?

And we may ask again from one side of the Heaven unto the other whether the
Lord has now so miraculously redeemed and brought unto Himself any Nation or
people as he did this people of Israel. Not so any whole Nation now.



Peace. The English, Scot^h, Dutch etc. are apt to make themselves the
parallels, as wonderfully come forth of Pope^y, etc.


Truth. 1. But first, whole Nations are no Churches under the Gospel.

Secondly, bring the Nations of Europe professing Protestanisme to the balance
of the Sanctuary, Pope^y not so easily turned from as i^ conceived.
and ponder well whether the body, bulk, the general or one hundredth part of
such peoples be truly turned to God from Popery.

Who knows not how easy it is to turn, and turn, and turn again whole
Nations from one Religion to another?

Who knows not that within the compass of one poor span of 12 years
revolution, Wonderful turnings in Religion in 12 years conpasse in England.
all England has become from half Papist, half Protestant, to be absolute
Protestants; from absolute Protestants, to absolute Papists; from absolute
Papists (changing as fashions) to absolute Protestants?

I will not say (as some worthy witnesses of Christ have uttered) that all
England and Europe must again submit their fair necks to the Popes yoke: But
this, I say, many Scriptures concerning the destruction of the Beast and the
Whore look that way: And I add, The Pope not unlike to recover his Monarchy
over Europe before his downfall.
they that feel the pulse of the people seriously must confess that a
victorious Sword, and a Spanish Inquisition will soon make millions face about
as they were in the Forefathers times.


CHAP. CXIII.
Peace. O That the Steersmen of the Nations might remember this, Be wise and
kiss the Son, lest he go on in this His dreadful anger, and dash them in
pieces here and eternally.


Truth. I therefore thirdly add, That only such as are Abraham's Seed,
circumcised in Heart, Newborn, Israel (or wrastlers with God) are the
Antitype of the former Israel, Who are now the true Seed of Abraham.
these are only the holy Nation (1 Pet. 2.) wonderfully redeemed from the
Egypt of this World (Titus 2. 14.) brought through the Red Sea of Baptism (1
Cor. 10.) through the wilderness of afflictions, and of the peoples (Dent. 8.
Ez^k. 20.) into the Kingdom of Heaven begun below, even that Christian Land of
Promise, where flow the everflowing streams and Rivers of Spiritual milk and
honey.

Fourthly, All this people universally (in typical and ceremonial respect)
were holy and clean in this their separation and sequestration unto God, Exodus
19. 5. Hence, even in respect of their natural birth in that Land they were an
holy Seed, The people of Israel all holy in a typical (...)
and Ezr^ makes it the matter of his great complaint, Ezra 9. 12. The holy Seed
have mingled themselves.

But where is now that Nation or Country upon the face of the Earth, thus
clean and holy unto God, and bound to so many ceremonial cleansings and
purgings?

Are not all the Nations of the Earth alike clean unto God, or rather alike
unclean, until it pleases the Father of mercies to call some out to the
Knowledge and Grace of his Son, making them to see their filthiness and
strangeness from the Commonweal of Israel, All Nations now alike since the
coming of the Lord Jesus.
and to wash in the blood of the Lamb of God.

This taking away the difference between Nation and Nation, Country and
Country, is most fully and admirably declared in that great vision of all sorts
of living creatures presented unto Peter, Acts 10. whereby it pleased the Lord
to inform Peter of the abolishing of the difference between Jew and Gentile in
any holy or unholy, clean or unclean respect.

Fifthly, (not only to speak of all, but to select one or two more) This
people of Israel in that National State were a type of all the Children of God
in all ages under the profession of the Gospel, who are therefore called the
Children of Abraham, The children of Israel a figure of the Israel or people of
God only under the Gospel.
and the Israel of God, Gal. 3.and Gal. 6. A Kingly Priesthood and holy Nation
(1 Pet. 2. 9) in a clear and manifest Antitype to the former Israel, Exodus 19.
6.

Hence Christians now are figuratively in this respect called Jews, Rev. 3.
where lies a clear distinction of the true and false Christian under the
consideration of the true and false Jew: Behold I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan that say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, Rev. 3.
But such a typical respect we find not now upon any People, Nation or Country
of the whole World: But out of all Nations, Tongues and Languages is God
pleased to call some and redeem them to Himself ( Rev. 5. 9.) And has made no
difference between the Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and Scithians, Gal. 3. who
by Regeneration or second birth, become the Israel of God, Gal. 6. the Temple
of God, 1 Cor. 3. and the true Jerusalem, Heb. 12.

Lastly, The people of Israel (...) rent from all the world in their figurative
and ceremonial worships.
all this whole Nation or people, as they were of one typical seed of Abraham,
and sealed with a shameful and painful Ordinance of cutting off the
foreskin, Which differenced them from all the World beside: So also were they
bound to such and such solemnities of figurative worships. Amongst many others
I shall end this passage concerning the people with a famous observation out of
Numb. 9. 1 3. viz. All that whole Nation was bound to celebrate and keep the
Feast of the Passover in his season, or else they were to be Put to death. But
does God require a whole Nation, Country or Kingdom now thus to celebrate the
spiritual Passover, the Supper and Feast of the Lamb Christ Jesus, at such a
time once a year, and that whosoever shall not so do shall be put to death?
What horrible prophanations, Israel Gods only Church might well renew that
National Covenant and ceremonial worship which other Nations cannot imitate.
what gross hypocrisies, yea what wonderful desolations (sooner or later)
must needs follow upon such a course?

It Is true, the people of Israel, brought into covenant with God in Abraham, and
so successively borne in Covenant with God, might (in that state of a National
Church) solemnly covenant and swear that whosoever would not seek Jehovah the
God of Israel, should be put to death, 2 Chronicles. 15. whether small or great,
whether man or woman.

But may whole Nations or Kingdoms now (according to any one title expressed by
Christ Jesus to that purpose) follow that pattern of Israel and put to death
all, both men and women, great and small, that according to the rules of the
Gospel are not borne again, penitent, humble, heavenly, patient? etc. What a
world of hypocrisy from hence is practiced by thousands, that for fear will
stoop to give that God their bodies in a form, whom yet in truth their hearts
affect not?

Yea also what a world of profanation of the holy Name and The hypocrisies,
prophanations, and slaughters which such imitation now in the Gospel produce.
holy Ordinances of the Lord in prostituting the holy things of God (like the
Vessels of the Sanctuary, Dan. 5.) to profane, impenitent and unregenerate
persons?

Lastly, what slaughters both of men and women must this necessarily bring into
the world, by the Insurrections and Civil Wars about Religion and
Conscience? Yea what slaughters of the innocent and faithful witnesses of
Christ Jesus, who choose to be slain all the day long for Christ his sake,
and to fight for their Lord and Master Christ, only with spiritual and
Christian weapons?


CHAP. CXIV.
Peace. IT seems (dear Truth) a mighty Gulf between that people and Nation,
and the Nations of the world then extant and ever since.


Truth. As sure as the blessed substance to all those shadows, Christ Jesus is
come, so unmatchable and never to be paralleld by any National State was that
Israel in the Figure or Shadow

And yet the Israel of God now, the Regenerate or Newborn, the circumcised in
Heart by Repentance and Mortification, who willingly submit unto the Lord Jesus
as their only King and Head, may fitly parallel and answer that Israel in the
type, without such danger of hypocrisy, of such horrible prophanations, and of
firing the Civil State in such bloody combustions, as all Ages have brought
forth upon this compelling a whole Nation or Kingdom to be the antitype of
Israel.


Peace. Were this Light entertained, some hopes would shine forth for my
return and restoration. The difference of the Kings and Governors of Israel
from al Kings and Governors of the world. First, they were all members of the
Church.



Truth. I have yet to add a third consideration concerning the Kings and
Governors of that Land and people.

They were to be (unless in their captivities) of their Brethren, members of
the true Church of God, as appears in the History of Moses, the Elders of
Israel, and the Judges and Kings of Israel afterward.

But first, who can deny but that there may be now many lawful Governors,
Magistrates and Kings in the Nations of the World, where is no true Church of
Jesus Christ? Excellent Talents vouchsafed by God to unregenerate persons.


Secondly, we know the many excellent gifts wherewith it has pleased God to
furnish many, inabling them for public service to their Countries both in
Peace and War (as all Ages and Experience testifies) on whose souls he has
not yet pleased to shine in the face of Jesus Christ: which Gifts and Talents
must all lie buried in the Earth, unless such persons may lawfully be called
and chosen to, A doctrine contrary to all true Piety and Humanity it self.
and improved in public service, notwithstanding their different or contrary
Conscience and Worship.

Thirdly, if none but true Christians, members of Christ Jesus, might be Civil
Magistrates, and publicly entrusted with civil affairs, then none but
members of Churches, Christians should be Husbands of Wives, Fathers of
Children, Masters of Servants: But against this doctrine the whole creation,
the whole World may justly rise up in arms, as not only contrary to true
Piety, but common Humanity it self. For if a Commonweal be lawful amongst
men that have not heard of God nor Christ, certainly their Officers, Ministers,
and Governors must be lawful also.

Fourthly, it is notoriously known to be the dangerous doctrine professed by
some Papists, The Papists doctrine of deposing Magistrates confessed in effect
to be true by the P^^cestants.
that Princes degenerating from their Religion, and turning Heretics, are to
be deposed, and their Subjects actually discharged from their obedience. Which
doctrine all such must necessarily hold (however most loath to own it) that
hold the Magistrate Guardian of both Tables, and consequently such an one as is
enabled to judge, yea and to demonstrate to all men the worship of God: yea and
being thus Governor and Head of the Church he must necessarily be a part of it
himself: which when by Heresy he falls from (though it may be by Truth,
miscalled Heresy) he falls from his calling of Magistracy, and is utterly
disabled from his (pretended) guardianship and government of the Church.

Lastly, No civil Magistrate Christian in Christ's time.
we may remember the practice of the Lord Jesus and his followers, commanding
and practicing obedience to the Higher Powers, though we find not one Civil
Magistate a Christian in all the first Churches. But contrarily the civil
Magistrate at that time was the bloody Beast, made up (as Daniel seems to
imply concerning the Roman State, Dan. 7. 7.) of the Lion, the Bear, and the
Leopard, Rev. 13. 2.


CHAP. CXV.
Peace. BY these waights we may try the weight of that commonly received and
not questioned opinion, viz. Five demonstrative arguments proving the
unsoundnesse of that Maxim: The Church and Commonwealth are like Hypocrates
twins.
That the civil state and the spiritual, the Church and Commonweal, they are
like Hippocrates twins, they are borne together, grow up together, laugh
together, weep together, sicken and die together.


Truth. A witty, yet a most dangerous Fiction of the Father of ^ies, who
hardened in Rebellion against God, persuades Gods people to drink down such
deadly poison, though he knows the truth of these five particulars, which I
shall reminde you of.

First, many flourishing States Many flourishing States without a true Church.
in the World have been and are at this day, which hear not of Jesus Christ,
and therefore have not the presence and concurrence of a Church of Christ with
them.

Secondly, Many of Gods people (...) from a true Church state.
there have been many thousands of Gods people, who in their personal estate
and life of grace were awake to God, but in respect of Church estate they knew
no other then a Church of dead stones, the Parish Church; or though some light
be of late come in through some cranny, yet they seek not after, or least of
all are joined to any true Church of God, consisting of living and believing
stones.

So that by these New English Ministers principles, not only is the door of
calling to Magistracy shut against natural and unregenerate men (though
excellently ^itted for civil offices) but also against the best and ablest
servants of God, Yet ^it for civil services.
except they be entered into Church estate; so that thousands of Gods own
people (excellently qualified) not knowing, or not entering into such a Church
estate, shall not be accounted fit for civil services.

Thirdly, admit that a civil Magistrate be neither a member of a true Church
of Christ (if any be in his dominions) nor in his person fear God, yet may he
(possibly) give free permission without molestation, yea and sometimes
encouragement and assistance to the service and Church of God. Gods people
permitted and favored by Idolaters.
Thus we find Abraham permitted to build and set up an Altar to his God
wheresoever he came amongst the idolatrous Nations in the Land of Canaan. Thus
Cyrus proclaims liberty to all the people of God in his Dominions, freely to
go up and build the Temple of God at Jerusalem, and Artaxerxes after him
confirmed it.

Thus the Roman Emperors and Governors under him permitted the Church of God
the Jews in the Lord Christ's time, their Temple and Worship, although in
Civil things they were subject to the Romans.

Fourthly, Christ's church gathered and governed with out the help of an arm
of flesh.
the Scriptures of Truth and the Records of Time concur in this, that the
first Churches of Christ Jesus, the lights, patterns and presidents to all
succeeding Ages, were gathered and governed without the aid, assistance or
countenance of any Civil Authority, from which they suffered great
persecutions for the name of the Lord Jesus professed amongst them.

The Nations, Rulers, and Kings of the Earth tumultuously rage against the Lord
and his Anointed, Psalm. 2. 1. 2. Yet verse. 6. it has pleased the Father to set
the Lord Jesus King upon his holy Hill of Zion.

Christ Jesus would not be pleased to make use of the Civil Magistrate to
assist him in his Spiritual Kingdom: nor would he yet be daunted or
discouraged in his Servants by all their threats and terreurs: Christ's true
^pouse (...) and faithful to Christ Jesus in the (...) or (...) from the World.
for Love is strong as death, and the coals thereof give a most vehement
flame, and are not quenched by all the waters and floods of mightiest
opposition, Cant. 8.

Christ Church is like a chaste and loving wife, in whose heart is fixed her
Husbands love, who has found the tenderness of his love toward her, and has
been made fruitful by him, and therefore seeks she not the smiles, nor fears
the frowns of all the Emperors in the World to bring her Christ unto her, or
keep him from her.

Lastly, The 10 horns, Revel. 13. and 17.
we find in the tyrannical usurpations of the Romish Antichrist, the 10
horns (which some of good note conceive to be the 10 Kingdoms, into which the
Roman Empire was quartred and divided) are expressly said Revel. 17. 13. to
have one mind to give their power and strength unto the Beast, yea ( ver. 17.)
their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the Words of God shall be fulfilled:
whence it follows, that all those Nations that are gilded over with the name
of Christ, have under that mask or viz^rd (as some Executioners and Tormentors
in the Inquisition use to torment) persecuted the Lord Jesus Christ, either
with a more open, gross and bloody, or with a more subtle, secret and gentle
violence.

Let us cast our eyes about, The great mystery of Persecution unfolded.
turn over the Records, and examine the experience of past and present
Generations, and see if all particular observations amount not to this sum,
viz. that the great whore has committed fornication with the Kings of the
Earth, and made drunk thereof Nations with the cup of the wine of her
fornications: In which drunkenness and whoredom (as whores use to practice) she
has robbed the Kings and Nations of their power and strength, Christian
Naboths slaughtered.
and ( Iesabel like) having procured the Kings names and seals, she drinks
drunk, Revel. 17. with the blood of Naboth, who (because he dares not part with
his rightful inheritance in the land of Canaan, the blessed land of promise
and salvation in Christ) as a Traitor to the civil State, and Blasphemer
against God, she (under the color of a day of humiliation in Prayer and
Fasting) stones to death.


CHAP. CXVI.
Peace. Dear Truth, how art thou hidden from the eyes of men, in these
mysteries? how should men weep abundantly with John, that the Lamb may please
to open these blessed seale^ unto them?


Truth. O that Men more prized their makers fear ^ then should they be more
acquainted with their Makers counsels, for his Secret is with them that fear
him, Psalm. 25.

I pass on to a second Difference. 2. Difference.


The Kings of Israel and Judah were all solemnly anointed with oil, The
mystery of the anointing the Kings of Israel and Judah.
Psalm. 39. 20. I have found David my servant, with my holy (...) have I
anointed him. Whence the Kings of Israel and Judah were honored with that
mystical and glorious Title of the Anointed, (...) Christ of the Lord, Lam. 4.
20. the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointe^ of Jehovah was taken in their
pits, etc.

Which anointing and title, however the Man of Sin, together with the Crown
and Diadem of Spiritual Israel, the Church of God, he has given to some of
the Kings of the Earth, that so he may in lieu thereof dispose of their Civil
Crowns the easier: yet shall we find it an incommunicable privilege and
prerogative o^ of the Saints and people of God.

For as the Lord Jesus himself in the Antitype was not anointed with
material but spiritual oil, Psalm. 45. with the oil of Gladness, and Luke 4.
14. from Isa. 61. 1. with the spirit of God. The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings, The Name Christian or
Anointed.
etc. So also all his members are anointed with the holy spirit of God, 2 Cor.
1. 21. and 1 John 2.

Hence is it that Christians rejoice in that name, as carrying the very
express title of the Anointed of the Lord; which most superstitiously and
sacrilegiously has been applied only unto Kings.


Peace. O dear Truth, how does the great Searcher of all Hearts find out the
thefts of the Antichristian World? A Sacrilegious Monopoly of the Name
Christian.
how are men carried in the dark they know not whither? How is that heavenly
charge, Touch not mine Anointed, etc. ( Psalm. 105.) common to all Christians
(or anointed with) Christ their Head, by way of Monopoly or privilege
appropriated to Kings and Princes?


Truth. It will not be here unseasonable to call to mind that admirable
Prophecy, Ezekiel. 21. 26, 27. Thus says Jehovah God, Remove the Diadem, take
away the Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase
him that is high: The Crown of Christ's Kingly power.
I will overturne, overturne, overturne, until he come whose right it is, and
I will give it him. The matter is a Crown and Diadem to be taken from an
Usurpers head, and set upon the head of the right Owner.


Peace. Doubtless this mystically intends the spiritual Crown of the Lord
Jesus, for these many hundredth years set upon the heads of the C^mpetitours
and Corrivals of the Lord Jesus, upon whose glorious head in his Messengers and
Churches, the Crown shall be established; The anointing, the title, and the
crown and power must return to the Lord Jesus in his Saints, unto whom alone
belongs his power and authority in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual cases.


CHAP. CXVII.
Truth. I Therefore proceed to a third difference between those Kings and
Governors of Israel and Judah, 3. The Kings of Israel and Judah invested with
a^ Spiritual power.
and all other Kings and Rulers of the Earth. Look upon the Administrations of
the Kings of Israel and Judah, and well weigh the Power and Authority which
those Kings of Israel and Judah exercised in Ecclesiastical and spiritual
causes, and upon a due search we shall not find the same Scepter of Spiritual
power in the hand of Civil Authority, which was settled in the hands of the
Kings of Israel and Judah.

David appointed the Orders of the Priests and Singers, he brought the Arc to
Jerusalem, he prepared for the building of the Temple, the pattern whereof he
delivered to Solomon: yet David herein could not be a type of the Kings and
Rulers of the Earth, but of the King of Heaven, Christ Jesus: for,

First, David, as he was a King, so was he also a Prophet, Acts 2. 30. and
therefore a type (as Moses also was, of that great Prophet the Son of God. And
they that plead for David's Kingly power, must also by the same rule plead for
his Prophetical, by which he swayed the Scep^er of Israel in Church affairs.

Secondly, David immeately inspired by the Spirit of God, in his ordering of
Church ma^ters.
it is expressly said, 1 Cron. 28. 11. 12. 13. verses, that the pattern which
David gave to Solomon (concerning the matter of the Temple and Worship of God)
he had it by the Spirit, which was no other but a figure of the immediate
inspiration of the spirit of God, unto the Lord Jesus the true Spiritual King
of Israel, John. 1. 49. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; Rabbi, thou art the
King of Israel.

Again, What Civil Magistrate may now act as Solomon (a type of Christ) does
act, 1 King. 2. 26. 27.? Salomons deposing Abiathar (^ Kings 2. 26. 27^)
discussed.
Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto Jehovah.


Peace. Some object that Abiathar was a man of death, ver. 26. worthy to die,
as having followed Adonijah; and therefore Solomon executed no more then Civil
justice upon him.


Truth. Solomon remits the Civil punishment, Solomon his putting Abiathar from
the Priesthood, examined.
and inflicts upon him a spiritual. but by what right, but as he was King of
the Church, a figure of Christ?

Abiathar his Life is spared with respect to his former good service in
following after David; but yet he is turned out from the Priesthood.

But now put the case: suppose that any of the Officers of the New England
Churches should prove false to the State, A case put upon occasion of Abiathars
case.
and be discovered joining with a French Monsieur, or Spanish Don, (thirsting
after conquest and dominion) to further their invasions of that Country; yet
for some former faithful service to the State, he should not be adjudged to
Civil punishment: I ask now, might their Governors or their General Court
(their Parliament) depose such a man, a Pastor, Teacher, or Elder, from his
holy Calling or office in Gods House?

Or suppose in a partial and corrupt State, Another ^ase.
a Member or Officer of a Church should escape with his life upon the
commission of marther, ought not a Church of Christ upon repentance to receive
him? I suppose it will not be said that he ought to execute himself; or that
the Church may use a Civil sword against him. In these cases may such persons
(spared in civil punishments for some reason of, or by partiality of State)
be punished spiritually by the Civil Magistrate, as Abiathar was? Let the very
Enemies of Zion be Judges.

Secondly, If Solomon in thrusting out of Abiathar was a pattern and president
unto all Civil Magistrates, why not also in putting Za^^k in his room, ver.
35. But against this the Pope, the Bishops, the Presbyterians, and the
Independents will all cry out against such a practice in their several
respective claims and challenges for their Ministries.

We find the Liberty of the subjects of Christ in the choice of an Apostle,
The liberties of Christ's Churches in the choice of their officers. A civil
influence dangerous to the Saints liberties.
Act. 1. of a Deacon, Act. 6. of Elders, Act. 14. and guided by the assistance
either of the Apostles or Evangelists, 1 Timothy 1. Tit. 1. without the least
influence of any civil Magistrate, which shows the beauty of their liberty.

The Parliaments of England have by right free choice of their Speaker, yet
some Princes have thus far been gratified as to nominate, yea and
implicitly to commend a Speaker to them. Wise men have seen the evil
consequences of those influences (though but in civil things) how much far
greater and stronger are those snares, when the golden Keys of the Son of
God are delivered into the hands of civil Authority?


Peace. You know the noise raised concerning those famous acts of Asa,
Hezekiah, Iehosaphat, Josiah. What think you of the Fast proclaimed by
Iehosaphat? 2 Chronicles. 20. 3.


Truth. I find it to be the duty of Kings and all in authority, to encourage
Christ's Messengers of Truth proclaiming Repentance, etc.

But under the Gospel to enforce all natural and unregenerate people to acts
of worship, what president has Christ Jesus given us?

First, Jehosaphats ^ast examined.
it is true Iehosaphat proclaimed a Fast, etc. but was he not in matters
spiritual a type of Christ, the true King of Israel?

Secondly, Iehosaphat calls the members of the true Church to Church service
and worship of God.

But consider, If civil powers may inj^y^e the time o^ the Churches w^rship,
the may also forbid her times.
if civil Powers now may judge of and determine the actions of worship proper
to the Saints: I^ they may appoint the time of the Churches worship, Fasting
and Prayer, etc. why may they not as well forbid those times which a Church of
Christ shall make choice of, seeing it is a branch of the same Root to forbid
what lik^th not, as well as to injoyne what pleases?

And if in those most solemn duties and exercises, why not also in other
ordinary meetings and worships? And if so, where is the power of the Lord Jesus
bequeathed to his Ministers and Churches, of which the power of those Kings was
but a shadow?


CHAP. CXVIII.
Peace. THe liberty of the Subject sounds most sweet, London and Oxford both
profess to fight for it: How much infinitely more sweet is that true soul
liberty according to Christ Jesus?

I know you would not take from Caesar ought, although it were to give to God:
God will not wrong Caesar, and Caesar should not wrong God.
And what is Gods and his peoples I wish that Caesar may not take. Yet for the
satisfaction of some, be pleased to glance upon Josiah his famous Acts in the
Church of God concerning the worship of God, the Priests, Levites, and their
Services, compelling the people to keep the Passover, making himself a
covenant before the Lord, and compelling all that were found in Jerusalem and
Benjamin to stand to it.


Truth. To these famous practices of Josiah I shall parallel the practices of
Englands Kings: and first de jure, a word or two of their right: then de facto,
discuss what has been done.

First, The famous acts of (...) examined.
de jure: Josiah was a precious branch of that Royal Root King David, who was
immediately designed by God: and when the golden linkes of the Royal chain
broke in the usurpations of the Roman Conqueror, it pleased the most wise God
to send a Son of David, a Son of God, to begin again that Royal Line,
to sit upon the Throne of his Father David, Luc. 1. 32. Acts 2. 30.

It is not so with the Gentile Princes, M^gistracy in general from God, the
particular forms from the people.
Rulers and Magistrates, (whether Monarchical, Aristrocraticall, or
Democraticall) who (though government in general be from God, yet) receive
their callings, power and authority, (both Kings and Parliaments) mediately
from the people.

Secondly, Josiah and those Kings were Kings and Governors over the then true
and only Church of God National, brought into the Covenant of God in Abraham,
and so downward: and they might well be forced to stand to that Covenant into
which with such immediate signs and miracles they had been brought.

But what Commission from Christ Jesus had Henry the eight. Israel confirmed in
a National Covenant by revelations, signs, and miracles, but so not England.
Edward the 6. or any ( Josiah like) to force the many hundred thousands of
English men and women, without such immediate signs and miracles that Israel
had to enter into an holy and spiritual Covenant with the invisible God, the
Father of Spirits, or upon pain of death (as in Iosia^s time) to stand to that
which they never made, nor before Evangelicall Repentance are possibly capable
of.

Now secondly de facto, let it be well remembered concerning the Kings of
England professing Reformation. Henry 8. the first head and governor of the
Church of England.
The foundation of all was laid in Henry the 8. The Pope chalengeth to be the
Vicar of Christ Jesus here upon earth, to have power of reforming the Church,
redressing abuses, etc. Henry 8. falls out with the Pope, and chalengeth that
very power to himself of which he had despoiled the Pope, as appears by that
Act of Parliament establishing Henry 8 the supreme Head and Governor in all
cases Ecclesiastical, etc. It pleased the most High God to plague the Pope by
Henry the 8. his means: but neither Pope nor King can ever prove such power
from Christ derived to either of them.

Secondly, The wonderful formings and reformings of Religion by Englands Kings.
(as before intimated) let us view the Works and Acts of Englands imitation of
Iosiahs practice. Henry the 7. leaves England under the slavish bondage of the
Popes yoke. Henry the 8. reformes all England to a new fashion, half Papist,
half Protestant. King Edward the 6. turns about the Wheel of the State, and
works the whole Land to absolute Protestanisme. Queen Mary succeeding to the
Helm, steeres a direct contrary course, breaks in pieces all that Edward
wrought, and brings forth an old edition of Englands Reformation all Popish.
Kings and States often plant, and often pluck up Religions.
Mary not living out half her days (as the Prophet speaks of bloody persons)
Elizabeth (like Joseph) advanced from the Prison to the Palace, and from the
irons to the Crown, she pluckes up all her sister Mary's plants, and sounds a
Trumpet all Protestant.

What sober man stands not amazed at these Revolutions? and yet like Mother
like Daughter: and how zealous are we their offspring for another impression
and better edition of a National Canaan (in imitation of Judah and Josiah)
which if attained, who knows how soon succeeding Kings or Parliaments will
quite pull down and abrogate?

Thirdly, A National Church ever subject to turn and return, etc.
in all these formings and reformings, a National Church of natural
unregenerate men was (like wax) the subject matter of all these forms and
changes, whether Popish or Protestant: concerning which National State the
time is yet to come when ever the Lord Jesus has given a word of institution
and appointment.


CHAP. CXIX.
Peace. YOu bring to mind (dear Truth) a plea of some wiser Papists for the
Popes supremacy, A woman Papissa or head of the Church.
viz. that it was no such exorbitant or unheard of power and jurisdiction which
the Pope challenged, but the very same which a Woman, Queen Elizabeth her self
challenged, stiling her Papissa, or she Pope: withal pleading that in point of
Reason it was far more suitable that the Lord Jesus would delegate his power
rather to a Clergy man then a Lay man, as Henry the 8. or a woman, as his
daughter Elizabeth.


Truth. I believe that neither one nor the other hit the white, The Papists
nearer to the Truth concerning the government of the Church then most
Protestants.
yet I believe the Papists arrows fall the nearest to it in this particular,
viz. That the government of the Church of Christ should rather belong to such
as profess a Ministry or Office Spiritual, then to such as are merely
Temporal and Civil.

So that in conclusion, the whole controversi^ concerning the government of
Christ Kingdom or Church, will be found to lie between the true and false
Ministry, both chalenging the true commission, power and keys from Christ.


Peace. This all glorious diadem of the Kingly power of the Lord Jesus has
been the eyesore of the World, The Kingly power of the Lord Jesus troubles
all the Kings and Rulers of the Wo^ld.
and that which the Kings and Rulers of the World have always lift up their
hands unto.

The first report of a new King of the Jews puts Herod and all Jerusalem into
frights; and the power of this most glorious King of Kings over the Souls and
Consciences of men, or over their lives and worships, is still the white that
all the Princes of this World shoot at, and are enraged at the tidings of the
true Heir the Lord Jesus in his servants.


Truth. You well mind (dear Peace) a twofold exaltation of the Lord Jesus, A
twofold exaltation of Christ.
one in the Souls and Spirits of men, and so he is exalted by all that truly
love him, though yet remaining in Babels captivity, and before they hearken to
the voice of the Lord, Come forth of Babel my people.

A second exaltation of Christ Jesus upon the Throne of David his Father in his
Church and Congregation, which is his Spiritual Kingdom here below.

I confess there is a tumultuous rage at his entrance into his Throne in the
Soul and Consciences of any of his chosen; The world ^^o^meth at both.
but against his second exaltation in his true Kingly power and government,
either Monarchical in himself, or Ministerial in the hands of his Ministers
and Churches, are mustred up and shall be in the battles of Christ yet to be
fought, all the powers of the gates of Earth and Hell.

But I shall mention one diff^rence more between the Kings of Israel and Iud^h,
A fourth difference. Kings of Israel ^ypes.
and all other Kings and Rulers of the Gentiles.

Those Kings as Kings of Israel were all invest^d with a typical and
figurative respect, with which now no Civil power in the World can be invested.

They wore a double Crown, They wore a double Crown
First, Civil: Secondly, Spiritual, in which respect they typed out the
Spiritual King of Israel, Christ Jesus.

When I say they were types, I make them not in all respect so to be, but as
Kings and Governors over the Church and Kingdom of God, therein types.

Hence all those Saviors and Deliverers, which it pleased God to stir up
extraordinarily to his people, The Saviors of the Jews, ^igures of the
Savior of the World.
Gideon, Baruc, Sampson, etc. in that respect of their being Saviors, Judges,
and Deliverers of Gods people, so were they types of Jesus Christ, either
Monarchically ruling by himself immediately, or Ministerially by such whom he
pleases to send to vindicate the liberties and inheritances of his people.


CHAP. CXX.
Peace. IT must needs be confessed that since the Kings of Israel were
ceremonially anointed with Oil: and

Secondly, in that they sat upon the Throne of David (which is expressly
applied to Christ Jesus, Luc. 1. 32. Acts 2. 30. John 1. 49.) their Crowns
were figurative and ceremonial: but some here question whether or no they were
not types of civil Powers and Rulers now, when Kings and Queens shall be
nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers, etc.


Truth. For answer unto such, The Monarchical and Ministerial power of Christ.
let them first remember that the dispute lies not concerning the Monarchical
power of the Lord Jesus, the power of making Laws, and making Ordinances to
his Saints and Subjects: But concerning a deputed and Ministerial power, and
this distinction the very Pope himself acknowledges.

There are three great Competitours for this deputed or Ministerial power of
the Lord Jesus. 3 Great Competitours for the Ministerial power of Christ.


First, the Arch-vicar or Satan, the pretended Vicar of Christ on Earth, who
sits as God over the Temple of God, exalting himself not only above all that
is called God, The Popes great pretenders for the Ministerial power of Christ.
but over the souls and consciences of all his vassalls, yea over the Spirit
of Christ, over the holy Scriptures, yea and God himself, Dan. 8. and 11 chap.
and Rev. 15. together with 2 These. 2.

This pretender although he professes to claim but the Ministerial power of
Christ to declare his Ordinances, to preach, baptize, ordain Ministers, They
also upon the point challenge the Monarchical also
and yet does he upon the point challenge the Monarchical or absolute power
also, being full of self exalting and blaspheming, Dan. 7. 25. and 11. 36.
Rev. 13. 6. speaking blasphemies against the God of Heaven, thinking to change
times and Laws: but he is the son of perdition arising out of the
bottomless pit, and comes to destruction, Revel. 17. for so has the Lord
Jesus decreed to consume him by the breath of his mouth, 2 These. 2.

The second great Competitour to this Crown of the Lord Jesus is the Civil
Magistrate, The second great pretender the Civil Magistrate.
whether Emperors, Kings, or other inferior Officers of State who are made to
believe by the false Prophets of the World that they are the Antitypes of the
Kings of Israel and Judah, and wear the Crown of Christ.

Under the wing of the Civil Magistrate do three great factions shelter
themselves, 3 Great factions chalenging an Arm of Flesh.
and mutually oppose each other, striving as for life, who shall sit down
under the shadow of that Arm of Flesh.

First, the Prelacie, 1. The Pre^aci^.
who (though some extravagants of late have inclined to wave the King, and to
creep under the wings of the Pope, yet) so far depends upon the King, that it
is justly said they are the Kings Bishops.

Secondly, the Presbytery, 2. The Presbytery.
who (though in truth they ascribe not so much to the civil Magistrate as some
too grossly do, yet they) give so much to the civil Magistrate as to make him
absolutely the Head of the Church: The Pope and Presbyte^i^ make use of the
Civil Magistrate but as of an Executio^er.
For, if they make him the Reformer of the Church, the Suppressour of
Schismatics and Her^ticks, the Protector and defendour of the Church, etc.
what is this in true plain English but to make him the Judge of the true and
false Church, Judge of what is truth, and what error; who is Schismatic,
who Heretical, unless they make him only an Executioner, as the Pope does in
his punishing of Heretics?

I doubt not but the Aristocraticall government of Presbyterians may well
subsist in a Monarchy (not only regulated but also tyrannical) yet does it
more naturally delight in the element of an Aristocraticall government of
State, and so may properly be said to be (as the Prelates, the Kings so these)
the States Bishops.

The third, 3. Independents.
though not so great, yet growing faction is that (so called) Independent: I
prejudice not the personal worth of any of the three sorts: This latter (as I
believe this Discourse has manifested) jumpes with the Prelates, The
Independents: who come nearest to the Bishops
and (though not more fully, yet) more explicitly then the Presbyterians cast
down the Crown of the Lord Jesus at the feet of the Civil Magistrate. And
although they pretend to receive their Ministry from the choice of 2 or 3
private persons in Church Covenant, yet would they feign persuade the Mother
Old England to imitate her Daughter New England's practice, viz. to keep out
the Presbyterians, and only to embrace themselves, both as the States and the
Peoples Bishops.

The third competition for this Crown and power of the Lord Jesus is of those
that separate both from one and the other, The third competition, of those that
separate.
yet divided also amongst themselves into many several professions.

Of these, they that go furthest, profess they must yet come nearer to the
ways of the Son of God: And doubtless, so far as they have gone, they bid
the most, and make the fairest plea for the purity and power of Christ Jesus,
let the rest of the Inhabitants of the World be Judges.

Let all the former well be viewed in their external State, pomp, riches,
conformity to the World, etc. And on the other side, let the latter be
considered, Their nearer conformity to Christ.
in their more through departure from sin and sinful Worship, their
condescending (generally) to the lowest and meanest contentments of this life,
their exposing of themselves for Christ to greater sufferings, The Churches of
the Separation ought in Humanity and Subjects Liberty not to be oppressed,
but (at least) permitted.
and their desiring no Civil sword nor Arm of Flesh, but the two-edged sword
of Gods Spirit to try out the matter by: and then let the Inhabitants of the
World judge, which come nearest to the doctrine, holiness, poverty, patience
and practice of the Lord Jesus Christ; and whether or no these later deserve
not so much of Humanity, and the Subjects Liberty, as (not offending the
Civil State) in the freedom of their Souls, to enjoy the common air to
breath in.


CHAP. CXX.
Peace. Dear Truth, you have shown me a little draught of Zions sorrows, her
children tearing out their mothers bowels: O when will He that stablisheth,
comfort, and builds up Zion, look down from Heaven., and have mercy on
her? etc.


Truth. The Vision yet does tarry (says Habacuk) but will most surely come:
and therefore the patient and believing must wait for it.

But to your last Proposition, ^ Reasons proving that the Kings of Israel and
Judah cannot have any other but a Spiritual Antitype.
whether the Kings of Israel and Judah were not types of Civil Magistrates?
now I suppose by what has been already spoken, these things will be evident.

First, that those former types of the Land, of the People, of their Worships,
were types and figures of a spiritual Land, spiritual People, and spiritual
Worship under Christ. Therefore consequently, their Saviors Redeemers,
Deliverers, Judges, Kings, must also have their spiritual Antitypes, Civil
Types and figures must needs be answered by Spiritual Antitypes.
and so consequently not civil but spiritual Governors and Rulers; lest the
very essential nature of Types, Figures and Shadows be overthrow^e.

Secondly, although the Magistrate by a Civil sword might well compel that
National Church to the external exercise of their Natural Worship: Civil
compulsion was proper in the National Church of the Jews, but most improper
in the Christian, which is not National.
yet it is not possible (according to the rule of the New Testament) to compel
whole Nations to true Repentance and Regeneration, without which (so far as
may be discerned true) the Worship and holy Name of God is profaned and
blasphemed.

An Arm of Flesh, and Sword of Steel cannot reach to cut the darkness of the
Mind, the hardness and unbeleefe of the Heart, and kindly operate upon the
Souls affections to forsake a long continued Fathers worship, and to embrace a
new, though the best and truest. This work performs alone that sword out of
the mouth of Christ, with two edges, Rev. 1. and 3.

Thirdly, we have not one tittle in the New Testament of Christ Jesus
concerning such a parallel, neither from Himself, nor from his Ministers,
Neither Christ Jesus nor his Messengers have made the Civil Magistrate Isreal's
Antitype, but the contrary.
with whom he conversed forty days after his Resurrection, instructing them
in the matters of his Kingdom, Acts 1.

Neither find we any such commission or direction given to the Civil
Magistrate to this purpose, nor to the Saints for their submission in matters
spiritual, but the contrary, Acts 4. and 5. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Coloss. 2. 18.

Fourthly, Civil Magistracy essentially civil, and the same in all parts of
the World.
we have formerly viewed the very nature and essence of a Civil Magistrate,
and find it the same in all parts of the World, where ever people live upon the
face of the Earth, agreeing together in Towns, Cities, Provinces, Kingdoms. I
say the same essentially Civil, both from, 1. the rise and fountain whence it
springs, to wit, the p^^ples choice and free consent. 2. The Object of it, viz.
the commonweal or safety of such a people in their bodies and goods, as the
Authors of this Model have themselves confessed.

This civil Nature of the Magistrate we have proved to receive no addition of
power from the Magistrates being a Christian, Christianity adds not to the
nature of a Civil Commonweal, nor does want of Christianity diminish it.
no more then it receives diminution from his not being a Christian: even as
the Commonweal is a true Commonweal, although it have not heard of
Christianity; and Christianity professed in it (as in Pergamus, Ephesus,
etc.) makes it never no more a Commonweal, and Christianity taken away, and
the candlestick removed, makes it never the less a Commonweal.

Fifthly, Romans 13. evidently prove^ the Civil work and wages of the Civil
Magistrate
the Spirit of God expressly relates the work of the civil Magistrate under
the Gospel, Romans 13. expressly mentioning (as the Magistrates object) the duties
of the second Table, concerning the bodies and goods of the subject.

2. The reward or wages which people owe for such a work, to wit, (not the
contribution of the Church for any spiritual work, but) tribute, toll, custom
which are wages payable by all sorts of men, Natives and Foreigners, who enjoy
the same benefit of public peace and commerce in the Nation.

Sixthly, Since the civil Magistrate, whether Kings or Parliaments, States,
and Governors, can receive no more in justice then what the People give, and
are therefore but the eyes and hands and instruments of the people (simply
considered, Most strange, yet most true consequences from the Civil
Magistrates now being the Antitype of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
without respect to this or that Religion) it must inevitably follow (as
formerly I have touched) that if Magistrates have received their power from the
people, then the greatest number of the people of every Land have received from
Christ Jesus a power to establish, correct, reform his Saints and servants,
his wife and spowse, the Church: And she that by the express word of the Lord
( Psalm. 149.) binds Kings in chains, and Nobles in links of iron, must her
self be subject to the changeable pleasures of the people of the World (which
lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.) even in matters of Heavenly and spiritual
Nature.

Hence therefore in all controversy concerning the Church, Ministry and
worship, the last Appeal must come to the Bar of the People or Commonweal,
where all may personally meet, as in some Commonweales of small number, or in
greater by their Representatives.

Hence then no person esteemed a believer, If no Religion but that which the
Commonweal approves the^ no Christ, no God, but at the pleasure of (...) world.
^ Ep. Jo 9.
and added to the Church.

No Officer chosen and ordained.

No person cast forth and excommunicated, but as the Commonweal and people
please, and in conclusion, no Church of Christ in this Land or World, and
consequently no visibly Christ the Head of it. Yea yet higher, consequently no
God in the World worshipped according to the institutions of Christ Jesus,
except the several peoples of the Nations of the World shall give allowance.


Peace. Dear Truth, Oh whither have our Forefathers and teachers led us?
higher then to God himself (by these doctrines driven out of the World) you
cannot rise: and yet so high must the inevitable and undeniable consequences of
these their doctrines reach, if men walk by their own common Principles.


Truth. I may therefore here seasonably add a seventh, which is a necessary
consequence of all the former Arguments, The true antitype of the ^^ngs of
Israel and Judah.
and an Argument it self: viz. we find expressly a spiritual power of Christ
Jesus in the hands of his Saints, Ministers and Churches, to be the true
Antitype of those former figures in all the Prophecies concerning Christ his
spiritual power, Isa. 9. Dan. 7. Mich. 4. etc. compared with Luc. 1. 32. Act.
2. 30. 1 Cor. 5. Math. 18. Marc. 13. 34. etc.


CHAP. CXXI.
Peace. GLorious and conquering Truth, me thinks I see most evidently thy
glorious conquests: how mighty are thy spiritual weapons (2 Cor. 10.) to
break down those mighty and strong Holds and Castles, which men have
fortified themselves withal against thee? O that even the thoughts of men may
submit and bow down to the captivity of Jesus Christ!


Truth. Your kind encouragement makes me proceed more cheerfully to a fourth
difference from the Laws and Statutes of this Land, A fourth difference of
Laws and Statutes from all others.
different from all the Laws and Statutes of the World, and paralleled only
by the Laws and Ordinances of spiritual Israel.

First then consider we the Lawmakers, Moses a type of Christ.
or rather the Law-publisher or Prophet, as Moses calls himself, Deuteronomy. 18. and
Act. 3. he is expressly called that Prophet who figured out Christ Jesus who was
to come, like unto Moses, greater then Moses, as the son is greater then the
servant.

Such Lawgivers or Law-publishers never had any State or People as Moses the
type, or Christ Jesus, miraculously stirred up and sent as the mouth of God
between God and his people.

Secondly, The Laws of Israel unparalled,
concerning the Laws themselves: It is true, the second Table contains the
Law of Nature, the Law Moral and Civil, yet such a Law was also given to this
people as never to any people in the World: such was the Law of worship, Psalm.
147. peculiarly given to Jacob, and God did not deal so with other Nations:
which Laws for the matter of the worship in all those wonderful significant
Sacrifices, and for the manner by such a Priesthood, such a place of
Tabernacle, and afterward of Temple, such times and solemnities of Festivals,
were never to be paralleled by any other Nation, but only by the true
Christian Israel established by Jesus Christ amongst Jews and Gentiles
throughout the World.

Thirdly, the Law of the ten Words ( Deuteronomy. 10.) the Epitome of all the rest,
Gods own finger penned Laws for Israel.
it pleased the most high God to frame and pen twice with his own most holy,
and dreadful finger upon Mount Sinai, which he never did to any other Nation
before or since, but only to that spiritual Israel, the people and Church of
God, in whose hearts of flesh he writes his Laws, according to Ier 31. Heb 8.
and 10.


Peace. Such promulgation of such Laws, by such a Prophet, must needs be
matchless and unparalled.


Truth. In the fifth place consider we the punishments and rewards annexed to
the breach or observation of these Laws. Fifth difference Temporal prosperity
most proper to the temporal National State of the Jews.


First, those which were of a temporal and present consideration of this life:
Blessings and Curses of all sorts opened at large, Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28.
which cannot possibly be made good in any State, Country or Kingdom, but in a
spiritual sense in the Church and Kingdom of Christ.

The reason is this, The spiritual prosperity of Gods people now, the antitype.
such a temporal prosperity of outward peace and plenty of all things, of
increase of children, of cattle, of honor, of health, of success, of
victory, suits not temporally with the afflicted and persecuted estate of Gods
people now: And therefore spiritual and soul blessedness must be the
Antitype, viz. In the midst of revilings, and all manner of evil speeches for
Christ's sake, soul blessedness. In the midst of afflictions and persecutions,
soul blessedness, Math. 5. and Luc. 6. And yet herein the Israel of God
should enjoy their spiritual peace, Gal. 6. 16.

Out of that blessed temporal estate to be cast or carried captive, What
Isreal's excommunication was.
was their excommunication or casting out of Gods sight, 2 King. 17. 23.
Therefore was the blasphemer, the false Prophet, the idolater, to be cast out
or cut off from this holy Land: which punishment cannot be paralleled by the
punishment of any State or Kingdom in the world, but only by the
excommunicating or outcasting of person or Church from the fellowship of the
Saints and Churches of Christ Jesus in the Gospel.

And therefore (as before I have noted) the putting away of the false prophet,
The corporal stoning in the Law, typed out spiritual s^oning in the Gospel.
by stoning him to death, Deuteronomy. 13. is fitly answered (and that in the very
same words) in the Antitype, when by the general consent or stoning of the
whole Assembly, and wicked person is put away from amongst them, that is,
spiritually cut off out of the Land of the spiritually living, the people or
Church of God, 1 Cor. 5. Galat. 5.

Lastly, The rewards or punishments of the Laws of Israel not to be paralleled.
the great and high reward or punishment of the keeping or breach of these
Laws to Israel, was such as cannot suit with any State or Kingdom in the
World beside: the Reward of the Observation was Life, Eternal Life. The Breach
of any one of these Law^ was death, Eternal death or damnation from the
presence of the Lord. So Romans 10. Iam. 2. Such a Covenant God made not before
nor since with any State or People in the world. For, Christ is the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. And he that
believes in that Son of God, has eternal life; he that believes not has
not life, but is condemned already, John 3. and 1 John 5.


CHAP. CXXII.
Peace. Dear Truth, The wars of Israel typical.
you have most lively set forth the unparalled state of that typical Land
and people of the Jews in their peace and quiet government: Let me now
request you in the last place to glance at the difference of the wars of this
people from the wars of other Nations, and of their having no Antitype but the
Churches of Christ Jesus.

First, all Nations round about Israel more or less, sometime or other, had
indignation against this people, Egyptians, Edomites, Moabites, Isreal's
Enemi^s round about.
Ammonites, Midians, Philistians, Assyrians and Babylonians, etc. as appears
in the History of Moses, Samuel, Judges and Kings, and in all the Prophets: You
have an express Catalogue of them, Psalm. 83. sometimes many hundred thousand
Enemies in pitched field against them: of Ethiopians ten hundred thousand at
once in the days of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. and at other times as the sand upon the
Sea shore.

Such Enemies the Lord Jesus foretold his Israel, The Enemies of mystical
Israel.
The World shall hate you, John 16. You shall be hated of all men for my Names
sake, Matthew. 24. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must be persecuted or
hunted, 1 Timothy 4. And not only by flesh and blood, but also by Principalities,
Powers, Spiritual wickedness in high places ( Ephesians. 6.) by the whole Pagan
World under the Roman Emperors, and the whole Antichristian World under the
Roman Popes, Rev 12. and 13. Chap. by the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17. And Gog
and Magog, like the sand upon the Sea shore (Rev. 20.)


Peace. Such Enemies, such Armies, no History, no experience proves ever to
have come against one poor Nation as against Israel in the type; and never was
nor shall be known to come against any State or Country now, but the Israel of
God the Spiritual Jews, Christ's true followers in all parts and quarters of
the World.

Beside all these without, Enemies against Israel in her own bowels.
Israel is betrayed within her own bowels, bloody Saul's, Absaloms, She^aes,
Adonljahs, Ieroboams, Athal^ahs raising insurrections, conspiracies, tumults,
in the Antitype, and Parallel the Spiritual state of the Christian Church.

Secondly, consider we the famous and wonderful battles, victories,
captivities, deliverances, which it pleased the God of Israel to dispense to
that people and Nation, and let us search if they can be paralleld by any State
or people, but mystically and Spiritually the true Christian Israel of God,
Gal. 6.

How famous was the bondage and slavery of that people and Nation 430 years in
the Land of Egypt, The famous typically captivities of the Jews.
and as famous, glorious and miraculous was their return through the Red Sea
(a figure of Baptism, 1 Corinthians. 10. and Egypt a figure of an Egypt now,
Rev. 11. 8?)

How famous was the 70 years captivity of the Jews in Babel transported from
that Land of Canaan, and at the full period returned again to Jerusalem, a
type of the captivity of Gods people now Spiritually captivated in mystical
Babel, Rev. 18. 4?

Time would fail me to speak of Joshua's conquest of literal Canaan, Their
wonderful victories.
the slaughter of 31 Kings, of the miraculous taking of Jericho and other
Cities; Gideon his miraculous battle against the Midianites; Jonathan and his
Armor bearer against the Philistims; David by his 5 smooth stones against
Goliath; Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezechia, their mighty and miraculous victories
against so many hundred thousand Enemies, and that sometimes without a blow
given.

What State, what Kingdom, what wars and combats, victories and deliverances
can parallel this people, but the Spiritual and mystical Israel of God in
every Nation and Country of the World, typed out by that small typical
handful, in that little spot of ground the land of Canaan?

The Israel of God now, The mystical battles of Gods Israel now.
men and women, fight under the Great Lord General, the Lord Jesus Christ:
Their Weapons, Armor, and Artillery, is like themselves Spiritual, set forth
from top to toe, Ephesians. 6. So mighty and so potent that they break down the
strongest holds and Castles, yea in the very souls of men and carry into
captivity the very thoughts of men, subjecting them to Christ^ Jesus: They are
Spiritual conquerours, as in all the 7 Churches of Asia, He that overcommeth:
He that overcommeth, Rev. 2. and 3.

Their victories and conquests in this are contrary to those of this World, for
when they are slain and slaughtered, yet then they conquer: So overcame they
the Devil in the Roman Emperors, Rev. 12. By the blood of the Lamb: 2. By
the word of their Testimony: 3. The cheerful spilling of their own blood for
Christ; for they loved not their lives unto the death: And in all this they are
more then Conquerors through him that loved them, Romans 8.

This glorious Army of white Troopers, The mystical Army of white troopers R.
19.
horses and harness ( Christ Jesus and his true Israel) Rev. 19. gloriously
conquer and overcome the Beast, the false Prophet and the Kings of the Earth up
in Arms against them, Rev. 19. and lastly, reigning with Christ a thousand
years they conquer the Devil himself and the numberless Armies (like the
sand on the Sea shore) of Gog and Magog, and yet not a tittle of mention of
any sword, helmet, breastplate, shield or horse, but what is Spiritual and of
a heavenly nature: All which Wars of Israel have been, may be, and shall be
fulfilled mystically and Spiritually.

I could further insist on other particulars of Isreal's unparalled state, and
might display those excellent passages which it pleases God to mention, N^hem
9.


CHAP. CXXIII.
Peace. YOu have (dear Truth) as in a glass presented the face of Old and New
Israel, and as in water, face answers to face, so does the face of typical
Israel to the face of the Antitype, between whom, and not between Canaan and
the Civil Nations and Countries of the World now, there is an admirable
consent and harmony: But I have heard some say, was not the civil state and
Judicialls of that people presidentiall?


Truth. I have in part, Whether the Civil state of Israel was presidentiall.
and might further discover, that from the King upon his Throne, to the very
Beasts, yea the excrements of their bodies (as we see in their going to War,
Deuteronomy 23. 12^) their civills, moralls, and naturalls were carried on in types:
and however I acknowledge that what was simply moral, civil, and natural in
Isreal's state, in their constitutions, Laws, punishments, may be imitated and
followed by the States, Countries, Cities and Kingdoms of the World: Yet who
can question the lawfulness of other forms of Government, Laws and
punishments which differ, since civil constitutions are men's Ordinances (or
creation, 2. Pet. 2. 13.) unto which Gods people are commanded even for the
Lords sake to submit themselves, which if they were unlawful they ought not to
do?


Peace. Having thus far proceeded in examining whether God has charged the
Civil State with the establishing of the Spiritual and Religious, what
conceive you of that next assertion, viz, It is well known that the remissenes
of Princes in Christendom in matters of Religion and Worship, divolving the
care thereof only to the Clergy, and so setting the^ Ho^^es upon the Churches
head, has been the cause of (...) invention, usurpation and corruption in the
Worship and Temple of God.


Truth. It is lamentably come to pass by Gods just permission, The true
Christendom
Satan's policy, the peoples sin, and the malice of the wicked against
Christ, and the corruption of Princes and Magistrates, that so many inventions
(...), and corruptions are (...) in the Worship and Temple of God throughout
that part of the World which is called Christian, and may most properly be
called the Popes Christendom, in opposition to Christ Jesus his true Christian
Commonweal, or Church the true Christendom: But that this has arisen from
Princes remissness in not keeping their watch, to establish the Purity of
Religion, Doctrine and Worship, and to punish (according to Isreal's pattern)
all false Ministers, by rooting them and their worships out of the World, that,
I say, can never be evinced; and the many thousands of glorious Souls under
the Altar, (whose blood has been spilt by this position) and the many hundred
thousand souls, driven out of their bodies by Civil Wars, and the many
millions of souls forced to hypocrisy and ruin eternal, by enforced
Vniformities in Worship, will to all Eternity proclaim the contrary.

Indeed it shows a most injurious idleness and unfaithfulnes in such as
profess to be Messengers of Christ Jesus, Great unfaithfulness in Ministers
to c^st the ^hiefest burden of judging and establ^sh^ng true Christi^nity upon
the Commonweal or worl^ it self.
to cast the heaviest weight of their care upon the Kings and Rulers of the
Earth, yea, upon the very Commonweals, Bodies of People, (that is, the World
it self) who have fundamentally in themselves the Root of Power, to set up
what Government and Governors they shall agree upon.

Secondly, it shows abundance of carnal diffidence and distrust of the
glorious power and gracious presence of the Lord Jesus, who has given his
promise and Word, to be with such his messengers to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28.

That Dog that fears to meet a man in the path, runs on with boldness at his
masters coming and presence at his back.

Thirdly, To govern and judge in civil aff^^^es load enough on the Civil
Magistrate.
what imprudence and indiscretion is it in the most common affairs of Life, to
conceive that Emperors, Kings and Rulers of the earth must not only be
qualified with political and state abilities to make and execute such Civil
Laws which may concern the common rights, peace and safety (which is work
and business, load and burden enough for the ablest shoulders in the
Commonweal) but also furnished with such spiritual and heavenly abilities to
govern the Spiritual and Christian Commonweal, the flock and Church of
Christ, to pull down, and set up Religion to judge, determine and punish in
Spiritual controversies, Magistrates can have no more power then the common
consent of the people shall betrust them with.
even to death or banishment: And beside, that not only the several sorts of
civil Officers, (which the people shall choose and set up) must be so
authorized, but that all respective Commonweales or Bodies of people are
charged (much more) by God with this work and business, radically and
fundamentally, because all true civil Magistrates, have not the least i^ch of
civil power, but what is measured out to them from the free consent of the
whole: even as a Committee of Parliament, cannot further act then the power of
the House shall arm and enable them.

Concerning that Objection which may arise from the Kings of Israel and Judah,
Thousands of lawful Magistrates who never hear of the true church of God.
who were borne members of Gods Church, and trained up therein all their days,
(which thousands of lawful Magistrates in the world, possibly borne and bred
in false Worships, Pagan or Antichristian, never heard of) and were therein
types of the great anointed, the King of Israel, I have spoken sufficiently to
such as have an ear to hear: and therefore

Lastly, The Spiritual and Civil Sword cannot be managed by one and the same
person.
so unsuitable is the commixing and intangling of the Civil with the Spiritual
charge and Government, that (except it was for subsistence, as we see in Paul
and Barnabas, working with their own hands) the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles,
kept themselves to one: If ever any in this world was able to manage both the
Spiritual and Civil, Church and Commonweal, it was the Lord Jesus, (wisdom
it self:) Yea he was the true Heir to the Crown of Israel, being the Son
of David: yet being sought for by the people to be made a King, The Lord Jesus
refused so manage both.
Joh. 5. he refused, and would not give a president to any King, Prince, or
Ruler, to manage both swords, and to assume the charge of both Tables.

Now concerning Princes, Nero and the persecuting Emperors not so injurious to
Christianity, as Constantine and others who assumed a power in Spiritual
things. Under Constantine Christianity fell into corruption, and Christians
fell asleep.
I desire it may be remembered, who were most injurious and dangerous to
Christianity, whether Nero, Domitian, Julian etc. Persecuters, or Constantine,
Theodosius, etc. who assumed this Power and Authority, in and over the Church
in Spiritual things: It is confessed by the Answerer and others of note, that
under these later, the Church, the Christian State, Religion, and Worship, were
most corrupted: under Constantine, Christians fell asleep on the beds of
carnal ease and Liberty: insomuch that some apply to his times, that sleep of
the Church, Cant. 5. 2. I sleep though mine heart waketh.


CHAP. CXXIV.
Peace. YEs, but some will say, this was not through their assuming of this
power, but the ill managing of it.


Truth. Yet are they commonly brought as the great Presidents for all
succeeding Princes and Rulers in after Ages: and in this very controvesi^,
their practices are brought as presidentiall to establish persecution for
conscience.

Secondly, Who force the consciences of others, yet are not willing to be
forced themselves.
those Emperors and other Princes and Magistrates acted in Religion according
to their consciences persuasion, (and beyond the light and persuasion of
conscience can no man living walk in any fear of God.) Hence have they forced
their subjects to uniformitie and conformity unto their own consciences (what
ever they were) though not willing to have been forced themselves in the
matters of God and Conscience.

Thirdly, Constantine and others wanted not so much affection as information of
conscience.
Had not the light of their eye of conscience, and the consciences also of
their Teachers been darkened, they could not have been condemned for want of
heavenly affection, rare devotion wonderful care and diligence, propounding to
themselves the best patterns of the Kings of Judah, David, Solomon, Asa,
Iehosaphat, Josiah, Hezekiah: But here they lost the path, and themselves, in
persuading themselves to be the parallels and antytipes to those figurative and
typical Princes: whence they conceived themselves bound to make their Cities,
Kingdoms, Empires new holy lands of Canaan, and themselves Governors and
Judges in spiritual causes, compelling all consciences to Christ, and
persecuting the contrary with fire and sword.

Upon these roots, Sad consequences of charging the Civil powers with the
care of Spiritualls.
how was, how is it possible but that such bitter fruits should grow of
corruption of Christianity, Persecution (of such godly, who happily see more
of Christ then such Rulers themselves) their Dominions and Jurisdictions being
overwhelmed with enforced dissimulation and hypocrisy, and (where power of
resistance) with flames of civil combustion, as at this very day, he that runs
may read and tremble at.


Peace. They add further, that the Princes of Christendom setting their
Horns upon the Churches head, have been the cause of Antichristian inventions,
etc.


Truth. If they mean that the Princes of Europe giving their power and
authority to the seven-headed and ten-horned Beast of Rome, Civil Rulers
giving and lending their Horns or Authority to Bishops, both dangerous to the
truth of Christ.
have been the cause, etc. I confess it to be one concurring cause: yet
withal it must be remembered, that even before such Princes set their horns or
authority upon the Beasts head, even when they did (as I may say but lend
their horns to the Bishops, even then rose up many Antichristian abominations.
And though I confess there is but small difference (in some respect) between
the setting their horns upon the Priests heads (whereby they are enabled
immediately to push and gore whoever cross their doctrine and practice) and
the lending of their horns, that is, pushing and gori^g such themselves, as
are declared by their Bishops and Priests to be heretical, as was and is
practiced in some Countries before and since the Pope rose: yet I confidently
affirm, that neither the Lord Jesus nor his first ordained Ministers and
Churches (gathered by such Ministers) did ever wear, or crave the help of
such horns in Spiritual and Christian affairs: The spiritual power of the
Lord Jesus in the hands of his true Ministers and Churches (according to
Balaams prophecy Number. 23.) is the horn of that Unicorn or Rhinocerot (Psalm
92.) which is the strongest horn in the world, The Spiritual power of the
Lord Jesus compared in Scripture to the incomparable horn of the Rhinocerot
in comparison of which the strongest horns of the Bulls of Basan break as
sticks and reeds. History ^ells us how that Unicorn or one-horned Beast the
Rhinocerot, took up a Bull like a Tennis ball, in the Theater at Rome before
the Emperor, according to that record of the Post: Quant^^s erat cornu cui
pila Taurus erat?

Unto this Spiritual power of the Lord Jesus, the souls and thoughts of the
highest Kings and Emperors must subject, Math. 16. and 18. 1 Cor. 5. and 10.
chapters.


CHAP. CXXV.
Peace. Dear Truth, You know the noise is made from those prophecies, Isa. 46.
Kings and Queens shall be nursing Fathers, etc. and Revel. 21. the Kings of
the Earth shall bring their Glory and Honor to new Jerusalem, etc.


Truth. I answer with that mournful Prophet, A time when Gods people are
wholly at a loss for Gods worship.
Psalm. 74. I see not that man, that Prophet, that can tell us how long. How
many excellent Penmen fight each against other with their pens (like swords)
in the application of those prophecies of David, Isa. Ier. Ezekiel, Daniel,
Zachary, John, when and how those Prophecies shall be fulfilled!

Secondly, Nursing fathers and mothers.
When ever those prophecies are fulfilled, yet shall those Kings not be Heads,
Governors, and Judges in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual causes, but be
themselves judged and ruled (if within the Church) by the power of the Lord
Jesus therein. Hence says Isaiah, those Kings and Queens shall lick the Dust
of thy feet, etc.


Peace. Some will here ask, What may the Magistrate then lawfully do with his
Civil horn or power in matters of Religion?


Truth. His horn not being the horn of that Unicorn or Rhinocerot, the power
of the Lord Jesus in Spiritual case^, his sword not the two-edged sword of the
Spirit, The Civil horn or power being of a humane constitution cannot but be
of a humane operation.
the word of God (hanging not about the loins or side, but at the lips, and
proceeding out of the mouth of his Ministers) but of an humane and Civil
nature and constitution, it must consequently be of a humane and Civil
operation, for who knows not that operation follows constitution? and
therefore I shall end this passage with this consideration:

The Civil The Civil power owes 3 things to the true Church of Christ.
Magistrate either respects that Religion and Worship which his conscience is
persuaded is true, and upon which he ventures his Soul: or else that and those
which he is persuaded are false.

Concerning the first, if that which the Magistrate believes to be true, be
true, I say he owes a threefold duty unto it:

First, approbation 1. Approbation.
and countenance, a reverent esteem and honorable Testimony, according to
Isa. 49. Revel. 21.) with a tender respect of Truth, and the professors of it.

Secondly, 2. Submission.
Personal submission of his own Soul to the power of the Lord Jesus in that
spiritual Government and Kingdom, according to Mat. 18. 1. Cor. 5.

Thirdly, Protection 3. Protection.
of such true professors of Christ, whether apart, or met together, as also of
their estates from violence and injury, according to Romans 13.

Now secondly, The Civil Magistrate owes to false worshippers.
if it be a false Religion (unto which the Civil Magistrate dare not adjoyne,
yet) he owes,

First permission (for approbation he owes not to what is evil) and this
according to Matthew 13. 30. for public peace and quiet sake. 1. Permission.


Secondly, 2. Protection.
he owes protection to the persons of his Subjects, (though of a false worship)
that no injury be offered either to the persons or goods of any, Romans 13.


Peace. Dear Truth, in this 11 head concerning the Magistrates power in
Worship, you have examined what is affirmed: that the Magistrate may do in
point of Worship, there remains a second; to wit, that which they say the
Magistrate may not do in Worship.

They say, The Magistrate may not bring in set forms of prayer^ Nor secondly,
bring in significant ceremonies: Nor thirdly, not govern and rule the acts of
worship in the Church of God, for which they bring an excellent similitude of a
Prince or Magistrate in a ship, where he has no governing power over the
actions of the mariners: and secondly, that excellent propheci^ concerning
Christ Jesus, that his government should be upon his shoulders, Isa. 9. 6, 7.


Truth. Unto all this I willingly subscribe: The Civil Magistrates conscience
torn and distracted between the diverse and contrary affirmations even of the
most godly Reformers.
Yet can I not pass by a most injurious and unequal practice toward the
Civil Magistrate: Ceremonies, Holy days, Common Prayer, and what ever else
dislikes their consciences, that the Magistrate must not bring in: Others
again as learned, as godly, as wise, have conceived the Magistrate may approve
or permit these in the Church, and all men are bound in obedience to obey him.
How shall the Magistrates conscience be herein (between both) torn and
distracted, if indeed the power either of establishing or abolishing in Church
matters be committed to him?

Secondly, The Authors of these positions deal with the Civil Magistrate, as
the soldiers dealt with the Lord Jesus.
me thinks in this case they deal with the Civil Magistrate as the Soldiers
dealt with the Lord Jesus: First they take off his own clothes, and put upon
him a purple Robe, plat a Crown of Thorns on his head, bow the knee, and
salute him by the name of King of the Jews.

They tell him that he is the Keeper of both Tables, he must see the Church do
her duty, he must establish the true Church, true Ministry, true Ordinances, he
must keep her in this purity. Again, he must abolish superstition, and
punish false Churches, false Ministers, even to banishment, and death.

Thus indeed do they make the blood run down the head of the civil
Magistrate, The rise of high Commissions. etc.
from the thorny vexation of that power which sometimes they crown him with
(whence in great States, Kingdoms or Monarchies, necessarily arise delegations
of that spiritual power, High Commissions) etc.

Anon again they take off this purple robe, Pious Magistrates and Ministers
consciences are persuaded for that, which other Magistrates consciences
condemn.
put him into his own clothes, and tell him that he has no power to command
what is against their conscience. They cannot conform to a set form of prayer,
nor to Ceremonies, nor Holy days, etc. although the civil Magistrate (that
most pious Prince Edw 6. ^ and his famous Bishops (afterward burnt for Christ)
were of another conscience^ which of these two consciences shall stand, if
either Magistrate must put forth his civil power in these cases, the strongest
arm of flesh and most conquering bloody sword of Steel can alone decide the
Question.

I confess it is most true, that no Magistrate (as no other superior) is to
be obeyed in any matter displeasing to God: To profess the Magistrate must
force the Church to her duty, and yet must not judge what that is, what is it
but to play in Spiritual things?
yet, when in matters of worship we ascribe the absolute headship and
government to the Magistrate, (as to keep the Church pute, and force her to
her duty, Ministers and People) and yet take unto our selves power to judge
what is right in our own eyes, and to judge the Magistrate in and for those
very things, wherein we confess he has power to see us do our duty, and
therefore consequently must judge what our duty is: what is this but to play
with Magistrates, with the souls of men, with Heaven, with God, with Christ
Jesus? etc.


CHAP. CXXVI.
Peace. Pass on (holy Truth) to that similitude whereby they illustrate that
Negative Assertion: The Prince in the Ship (say they) is governor over the
bodies of all in the Ship, An apt similitude discussed concerning the Civil
Magistrate.
but he has no power to govern the Ship or the Mariners in the Actions of
it: If the Pilot manifestly err in his Action, the Prince may reprove him,
(and so say they may any Passenger) if he offend against the life or goods of
any, the Prince may in due time and place punish him, which no private person
may.


Truth. Although (dear Peace) we both agree that civil powers may not
injoyne such devices, no nor enforce on any Gods Institutions, since Christ
Jesus his coming: Yet for further illustration I shall propose some Quaeries
concerning the civil Magistrates passing in the ship of the Church, wherein
Christ Jesus has appointed his Ministers and Officers as Governors and
Pilots, etc.

If in a ship at Sea, First quaerie: what if the (...) command the Mr. or Pilot
to steer such a course which they know will never bring them to the harbor
wherein the Governor or Pilot of a ship undertakes to carry the ship to such
a Port, the civil Magistrate (suppose a King or Emperor) shall command the
Master such and such a course, to steer upon such or such a point, which the
Master knows is not their course, and which if they steer he shall never
bring the Ship to that Port or harbor: what shall the Master do? Surely all
men will say, the Master of the Ship or Pilot is to present Reasons and
Arguments from his Mariners Art (if the Prince be capable of them) or else in
humble and submissive manner to persuade the Prince not to interrupt them in
their course and duty properly belonging to them, to wit, governing of the
ship, steering of the course, etc.

If the Master of the Ship command the Mariners thus and thus, 2. Quaerie. If
the Mr. of the Ship command the (...) thus, and the Prince command the
contrary, who is to be obeyed?
in cunning the ship, managing the ^elme, trimming the sail, and the Prince
command the Mariners a different or contrary course, who is to be obeyed?

It is confessed that the Mariners may lawfully disobey the Prince, and obey the
governor of the ship in the actions of the ship.

Thirdly, what if the Prince have as much skill If the Prince have as much
skill as the Mr. or Pilo, etc.
(which is rare) as the Pilot himself? I conceive it will be answered, that
the Master of the ship and Pilot, in what concerns the ship, are chief and
above (in respect of their office) the Prince himself, and their commands
ought to be attended by all the Mariners: unless it be in manifest error,
wherein it is granted any passenger may reprove the Pilot.

Fourthly, 4. Quaerie.
I ask if the Prince and his Attendants be unskilful in the ships affairs,
whether every Sayler and Mariner, the youngest and lowest, be not (so far as
concerns the ship) to be preferred before the Princes followers, and the
Prince himself? and their counsel and advice more to be attended to, and
their service more to be desired and respected, and the Prince to be
requested to stand by and let the business alone in their hands.

Fifthly, 5. Quaerie. Whether the meanest saylor (in respect of his skill and
service) be not to be preferred before the Prince himself
in case a wilful King and his Attendants, out of opinion of their skill, or
wilfulness of passion, would so steer the course, trim sail, etc. as that in
the judgment of the Master and Seamen the ship and lives shall be endangered:
whether (in case humble persuasions prevail not) ought not the Ships company
to refuse to act in such a course, yea and (in case power be in their hands)
resist and suppress these dangerous practices of the Prince and his followers,
and so save the ship?

Lastly, 6. Quaerie. Whether if the Mr. of the ship gratify the Prince to the
casting away of the ship and Prince, etc. he be not guilty and (...) to answer?
suppose the Master out of base fear and cowardice, or covetous desire of
reward, shall yield to gratify the mind of the Prince, contrary to the rules
of Art and Experience, etc. and the ship come in danger, and perish, and the
Prince with it: if the Master get to shore, whether may he not be justly
questioned, yea and suffer as guilty of the Princes death, and those that
perished with him? These cases are clear, wherein according to this
similitude, the Prince ought not to govern and rule the actions of the ship,
but such whose office and charge and skill it is.

The result of all is this: The application in general of the ship to the
Church, etc.
The Church of Christ is the Ship, wherein the Prince (if a member, for
otherwise the case is altered) is a passenger. In this ship the Officers and
Governors, such as are appointed by the Lord Jesus, they are the chief, and
(in those respects) above the Prince himself, and are to be obeyed and
submitted to in their works and administrations, even before the Prince
himself.

In this respect every Christian in the Church, The meanest Christian according
to his knowledge and grace, to be preferred before the highest who have
received none or less grace of Christ.
man or woman (if of more knowledge and grace of Christ^ ought to be of higher
esteem (concerning Religion and Christianity) then all the Princes in the
world, who have either none or less grace or knowledge of Christ: although in
civil things all civil reverence, honor and obedience ought to be yielded by
all men.

Therefore, if in matters of Religion the King command what is contrary to
Christ's rule (though according to his persuasion and conscience) who sees not
that (according to the similitude) he ought not to be obeyed? A true Minister
of Christ ought to walk by another rule then the command of Civil Authority in
Spiritual causes.
yea, and (in case) boldly with spiritual force and power he ought to be
resisted: And if any Officer of the Church of Christ shall out of baseness
yield to the command of the Prince, to the danger of the Church, and souls
committed to his charge, the souls that perish (notwithstanding the Princes
command) shall be laid to his charge.

If so then, I rejoyne thus: How agree these truths of this similitude with
those former positions, viz. that the Civil Magistrate is keeper of both
Tables, That he is to see the Church do her duty. That he ought to establish
the true Religion, suppress and punish the false, and so consequently must
discern, judge and determine what the true gathering and governing of the
Church is; what the duty of every Minister of Christ is; Former positions
compared with this similitude, and found to contradict each other.
what the true Ordinances are, and what the true Administrations of them; and
where men fail, correct, punish, and reform by the Civil Sword: I desire it
may be answered in the fear and presence of him whose eyes are as a flame of
fire, if this be not (according to the similitude, though contrary to their
scope in proposing of it) to be Governor of the Ship of the Church, to see the
Master, Pilot, and Mariners do their duty, in setting the course, steering the
ship, trimming the sails, keeping the watch, etc. and where they fail, to
punish them; and therefore by undeniable consequence, to judge and determine
what their duties are, when they do right, and when they do wrong: and this
not only in manifest Error, (for then they say every passenger may reprove)
but in their ordinary course and practice.

The similitude of a Physician obeying the Prince in the Body politic; The
similitude of the Magistrate prescribing to the Physician in civil things but
the Physician to the Magistrate concerning his body.
but prescribing to the Prince concerning the Princes body, wherein the Prince
unless the Physician manifestly err) is to be obedient to the Physician, and
not to be Judge of the Physician in his Art, but to be ruled and judged (as
touching the state of his body) by the Physician: I say this similitude and
many others suiting with the former of a ship, might be alleged to prove the
distinction of the Civil and Spiritual estate, and that according to the rule
of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel, the Civil Magistrate is only to attend the
Calling of the Civil Magistracy, concerning the bodies and goods of the
Subjects, and is himself (if a member of the Church and within) subject to the
power of the Lord Jesus therein, as any member of the Church is, 1 Cor. 5.


CHAP. CXXVII.
Peace. Dear Truth, you have uprightly and aptly untied the knots of that 11
Head, let me present you with the 12 Head, The 12 Head examined.
which is

Concerning the Magistrates power in the Censures of the Church.

First (say they) he has no power to execute or to substitute any Civil
officer to execute any Church censure, under the notion of Civil or
^cclesiasticall men.

Secondly, Though a Magistrate may immediately Civilly censure such an
offender, whose secret sins are made manifest by their casting out, to be
injurious to the good of the State; yet such offenses of excommunicate persons,
which manifestly hurt not the good of the State, he ought not to proceed
against them, sooner or later, until the Church has made her complaint to
him, and given in their just Reasons for help from them: For to give liberty
to Magistrates without exception to punish all excommunicate persons within so
many months, may prove injurious to the person who needs, to the Church who
may desire, and to God who calls for longer indulgence from the hands of the^.

Thirdly, for persons not excommunicate, the Magistrate has no power in
mediately to censure such offenses of Church members by the power of the Sword,
but only for such as do immediately hurt the peace of the State: Because the
proper end of Civil Government being the preservation of the peace and welfare
of the State, they ought not to break down those bounds, and so to censure
immediately for such sins which hurt not their peace.

Hence, first, Magistrates have no power to censure for secret sins, as
deadness, unbeleefe, because they are secret, and not yet come forth
immediately to hurt the peace of the State; we say immediately, for every
sin, even original sin, remotely hurts the Civil State.

Secondly, hence they have no power to censure for such private sins in
Church members, which being not heinous may be best healed in a private way by
the Churches themselves. For that which may be best healed by the Church, and
yet is prosecuted by the State, may make a deeper wound and greater rent in the
peace both of Church and State: the Magistrates also being members of the
Church, are bound to the rule of Christ, viz. not to produce any thing in
public against a brother, which may be best healed in a private way.

Now we call that private,

First, which is only remaining in Families, not known of oothers: and
therefore a Magistrate to hear and prosecute the complaint of children against
their parents, servants against masters, wives against their husbands, without
acquainting the Church first, transgresses the rule of Christ.

Secondly, that which is between members of the same Church or of diverse
Churches: for, it was a double fault of the Corinthians (1 Cor. 6.) first to
go to Law, secondly to do it before an Infidel, seeing the Church was able
to judge of such kind of differences by some Arbitratours among themselves: So
that the Magistrates should refer the differences of Church members to
private healing, and try that way first: By means whereof the Churches should
be free from much scandal, and the State from much trouble, and the hearts of
the godly from much grief in beholding such breaches.

Thirdly, such offenses which the Conscience of a Brother dealing with another
privately, dares not as yet publish openly, coming to the notice of the
Magistrate accidentally, he ought not to make public as yet, nor to require
the Grand Jurie to present the same, no more then the other private brother,
who is dealing with him, until he see some issue of the private way.

Thirdly, hence they have no power to put any to an oath ex officio, to accuse
themselves, or the brethren, in case either criminis suspecti, or praetensi,
because this preserves not, but hurts many ways the peace of the State, and
abuses the ordinance of an Oath, which is ordained to end controversies, not
to begin them, Heb. 6. 16.

Fourthly, hence they have no power to censure any for such offenses as break
either no Civil Law of God, or Law of the State published according to it, for
the peace of the State being preserved by wholesome Laws, when they are not
hurt, the peace is not hurt.


Truth. In this passage (as I said before) I observe how weakly and partially
they deal with the souls of Magistrates in telling them they are the
Guardians of both Tables, must see the Church do her duty, punish, etc. and
yet in this passage the Elders or Ministers of the Churches not only sit Judges
over the Magistrates actions in Church affairs, but in civil also, straitning
and enlarging his commission according to the particular interests of their
own ends or (at the best) their Consc^ences.

I grant the Word of the Lord is the only rule, light and lanthorn, To give the
government of the Church to the Civil Magistrate (as before) and yet to
abridge his conscience, what is it but to sport with holy things? etc.
in all cases concerning God or Man: and that the Ministers of the Gospel are
to teach this way, hold out this Lantern unto the feet of all men: but to
give such an absolute power in Spiritual things to the Civil Magistrate, and
yet after their own ends or Consciences to abridge it, is but the former
sporting with holy things, and to walk in Contradictions, as before I noted.

Many of the particulars, I acknowledge true, where the Magistrate is a Member
of the Church: yet some passages call for Explication, and some for Observation.

First, in that they say, the Civil Magistrate ought not to proceed against
the offenses of an Excommunicate person, which manifestly hurt not the good of
the state, until the Church has made her complaint for help from them. I
observe 2 things:

First, An evident contradiction.
a clear grant, that when the Church complayneth for help, then the
Magistrate may punish such offenses as hurt not the good of the state: and yet
in a few lines after, they say, the Magistrates have no power to censure such
offenses of Church members by the power of the civil sword, but only such, as
do immediately hurt the peace of the civil state; and they add the Reason,
because the proper end of the civil Government, An excellent confession of the
proper end of Civil Government. When Civil Laws are not broken, it is
confessed that Civil Peace is not hurt.
being the preservation of the peace and welfare of the state, they ought not
to break down those bounds, and so to censure immediately for such sins
which hurt not their peace. And in the last place, they acknowledge the
Magistrate has no power to punish any, for any such offenses as break no
civil Law of God, or Law of the state, published according to it: For the
peace of the state, (say they) being preserved by wholesome Laws, when they
are not hurt, the Peace is not hurt.


CHAP. CXXVIII.
Peace. Dear Truth, here are excellent confessions unto which both Truth and
Grace may gladly assent: but what is your second Observation from hence?


Truth. I observe secondly, what a deep charge of weakness is laid upon the
Church of Christ, the Laws, Government and Officers thereof, and consequently
upon the Lord Jesus himself: to wit, that the Church is not enabled with all
the power of Christ, to censure sufficiently an offendour (on whom yet they
have executed the deepest censure in the world, A grievous charge against the
Christian Church, and the King of it.
to wit, cutting off from Christ, shutting out of Heaven, casting to the
Devil) which offenders crime reaches not to hurt the good of the civil
state, but that she is forced to make complaint to the civil state, and the
Officers thereof, for their help.

O let not this be tole in Gath, nor heard in Ashkalon! and O! how dim must
needs that eye be, which is blood shot, with that blo^dy and cruel Tenent of
Persecution for cause of Conscience?


Peace. But what should be meant by this passage? viz. That they cannot give
liberty to the Magistrate to punish without exception all excommunicate
persons, within so many months.


Truth. It may be this has reference to a Law made formerly in New England, A
strange law in New England formerly against Excommunicate persons.
that if an excommunicate person repented not within (as I have heard) three
months after sentence of excommunication, then the Civil Magistrate might
proceed with him.

These worthy men see cause to question this Law upon good reasons rendered,
though it appears not by their words that they wholly condemn it, only they
desire a longer time, implying that after some longer time the Magistrate may
proceed: and indeed I see not, but according to such principles, if the
Magistrate himself should be cast out, A dangerous doctrine against all civil
Magistrates.
he ought to be proceeded against by the Civil state, and consequently deposed
and punished (as the Pope teaches) yea though happily he had not offended
against either bodies or goods of any subject.

Thirdly, from this true confession that the Magistrate ought not to punish for
many sins above mentioned: I observe how they cross the plea which commonly
they bring for the Magistrates punishing of false Doctrines, Many sins
prohibited to be punished by the Magistrate and yet they also charge him to
punish all sin, Romans 13.
Heretics, etc. [ viz. Romans 13. The Magistrate is to punish them that do
evil:] and when it is answered, True, evil against the Second Table, which is
there only spoken of, and against the Bodies and Goods of the Subject, which
are the proper object of the Civil Magistrate, (as they confess:) It is
replied, why is not Idolatry sin? Heresy sin? Schism and false Worship
sin? Yet here in this passage many evils, many sins, even of Parents against
their Children, Masters against their Servants, Husbands against their Wives,
the Magistrate ought not to meddle with.

Fourthly, Original sin charged to hurt remotely (but falsely) the civil
state.
I dare not assent to that assertion, That even original sin remotely hurts
the civil State. It Is true, some do, as inclinations to murder, theft,
whoredom, slander, disobedience to Parents and Magistrates: but blindness of
minds, hardness of heart, inclination to choose or worship this or that God,
this or that Christ, beside the true, these hurt not remotely the civil state,
as not concerning it, but the spiritual.


Peace. Let me (in the last place) remind you of their charge against the
Magistrate, Magistrates strangely forbidden to hear civil complaints.
and which will necessarily turn to my wrong and prejudice: They say, the
Magistrate in hearing and prosecuting the complaints of children against their
parents, of servants against their masters, of wives against their husbands,
without acquainting the Church first, transgresses the rule of Christ.


Truth. Sweet Peace, they that pretend to be thy dearest friends, will prove
thy bitter enemies.

First, I ask for one rule out of the Testament of the Lord Jesus, to prove
this deep charge and accusation against the Civil Magistrate? Thousands of
Commonweals where no true church of Christ.


Secondly, This is built upon a supposition of what rarely falls out in the
World, to wit, that there must necessarily be a true Church of Christ (in every
lawful State) unto whom these complaints must go: whereas how many thousand
Commonweals have been and are, where the name of Christ has not (or not
truly) been founded.

Thirdly, The complaints of families properly fall into the cognizance of the
civil Mastrate.
The Magistrates office (according to their own grant) properly respecting the
bodies and goods of their Subjects, and the whole body of the Commonweal
being made up of Families (as the members constituting that body) I see not how
(according to the rule of Christ (Romans 13) the Magistrate may refuse to hear
and help the just complaints of any such petitioners, Children, Wives, and
Servants, against oppression, etc.


Peace. I have long observed that such as have been ready to ascribe to the
Civil Magistrate and his Sword more then God has ascribed, They who give to
Magistrates more then is due, are most apt to dis^o to be them of what is
theirs.
have also been most ready to cut off the skirts, and (in case of his inclining
to another conscience then their own) to spoil him of the robe of that due
Authority with which it has pleased God and the People to invest and cloth
him.


But I shall now present you with the 13. Head: whose Title is.

CHAP. CXXIX.
What power Magistrates have in public Assemblies of Churches.
13. Head.
FIrst (say they) the Churches have power to assemble and continue such
Assemblies for the performance of all Gods Ordinances, without or against the
consent of the Magistrate, renuente Magistratu, because

Christians are commanded so to do, Matthew. 28. 18. 19. 20.

Also because an Angel from God commanded the Apostles so to do, Acts 5. 20

Likewise from the practice of the Apostles, who were not rebellious or
seditious, yet they did so, Act. 4. 18. 19. 20. Act. 5. 27 28.

Further from the practice of the Primitive Church at Jerusalem, who did meet,
preach, pray, minister Sacraments, censures, Act. 4. 23. renuente Magistratu.

Moreover from the exhortation to the Hebrews, 10. 25. not to forsake their
Assemblies, though it were in dangerous times, and if they might do this under
professed Enemies, then we may much more under Christian Magistrates; else we
were worse under Christian Magistrates then Heathen: therefore Magistrates may
not hinder them herein, as Pharaoh did the people from sacrificing, for Wrath
will be upon the Realm, and the King and his Sons, Ez^^ 7. 23.

Secondly, it has been a usurpation of foreign Countries and Magistrates to
take upon them to determine times and places of Worship: rather let the
Churches be left herein to their inoffensive Liberty.

Thirdly, concerning their power of Synod Assemblies:

First in corrupt times, the Magistrate desirous to make Reformation of
Religion, may and should call those who are most fit in several Churches, to
assemble together in a Synod, to discuss and declare from the Word of God,
matters of Doctrine and Worship, and to help forward the Reformation of the
Churches God: Thus did Josiah.

Secondly, in the reformed times he ought to give Liberty to the Elders of
several Churches to assemble themselves by their own mutual and voluntary
agreement, at convenient times, as the means appointed by God, whereby he may
mediately reform matters amiss in Churches, which immediately he cannot nor
ought not to do.

Thirdly, Those meetings for this end we conceive may be of two sorts.

1. Monthly, of some of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches.

2. Annual, of all the Messengers and Elders of the Churches.

First monthly of some: First, those members of Churches which are nearest
together, and so may most conveniently assemble together, may by mutual
agreement once in a month consult of such things as make for the good of the
Churches.

Secondly, the time of this meeting may be sometimes at one place, sometimes at
another, upon the Lecture day of every Church where Lectures are: and let the
Lecture that day be ended by eleven of the clock.

Thirdly, let the end of this Assembly be to do nothing by way of Authority,
but by way of Council, as the need of Churches shall require.

Secondly Annual, of all the Elders within our jurisdiction or others, whereto
the Churches may send once in the year to consult together for the public
welfare of all the Churches.

First, let the place be sometimes at one Church, sometimes at another, as
Reasons for the present may require.

Secondly, let all the Churches send their weighty questions and cases six
weeks or a month before the set time, to the Church where the Assembly is to be
held, and the Officers thereof disperse them speedily to all the Churches, that
so they may have time to come prepared to the discussing of them.

Thirdly, let this Assembly do nothing by Authority, but only by Council, in
all cases which fall out, leaving the determination of all things to particular
Churches within themselves, who are to judge, and so to receive all doctrines
and directions agreeing only with the Word of God.

The grounds of these Assemblies.
First, need of each others help, in regard of daily emergent troubles,
doubts, and controversies.

Secondly, love of each others fellowship.

Thirdly, of Gods glory out of a public spirit to seek the welfare of the
Churches, as well as their own, 1 Cor. 10 33. 2 Cor. 11. 23.

Fourthly, The great blessing and special presence of God upon such Assemblies
hitherto.

Fifthly, the good Report the Elders and Brethren of Churches shall have
hereby, by whose communion of Love others shall know they are the Disciples of
Christ.

CHAP. CXXX.
Truth. I May well compare this passage to a double picture: A strange double
picture
on the first part or side of it a most fair and beautiful countenance of the
pure and holy Word of God: on the later side or part, a most sour and uncomely
deformed look of a mere humane invention.

Concerning the former, they prove the true and unquestionable power and
privilege of the Churches of Christ The great privileges of the true Spouse
or Church of Christ.
to assemble and practice all the holy Ordinances of God, without or against
the consent of the Magistrate.

Their Arguments from Christ's and the Angels voice, from the Apostles and
Churches practice, I desire may take (...) impression written by the point of a
diamond, the finger of Gods spirit, in all hearts whom it may concern.

This Liberty of the Churches of Christ he inlargeth and amplifieth so far,
that he calls it an usurpation of some Magistrates to determine the time and
place of Worship: and say, that rather the Churches should be left to their
inoffensive liberty.

Upon which Grant I must renew my former Quaerie, Whether this be not to walk
in c^ntradictions, to hold with light, yet walk in darkness? To hold with I^ght
and walk in darkness.
for

How can they say the Magistrate is appointed by God and Christ the Guardian of
the Christian Church and Worship, bound to set up the true Church, Ministry,
and Ordinances, to see the Church do her duty, that is, to force her to it by
the Civil sword: bound to suppress the false Church, Ministry and
Ordinances, and therefore consequently, The Magistrate lift up to be the chief
(...) of the Church, and yet cast down not to have power to appoint the place
or time of meeting.
to judge and determine which is the true Church, which is the false, and what
is the duty of the Church officers and members of it, and what not: and yet
(say they) the Churches must assemble, and practice all Ordinances, without his
consent, yea against it: Yea and he has not so much power as to judge what is
a convenient time and place for the Churches to assemble in; which if he should
do, he should be an usurper, and should abridge the Church of her inoffensive
liberty.

As if the Master or Governor of a Ship had power to judge who were true and
fit officers, mariners etc. for the managing of the Ship, 2 Similitudes
illustr^ting the Magistrate (...) be ^oth governor of the Church and yet
usurp^r in commanding.
and were bound to see them each perform his duty, and to force them
thereunto, and yet he should be an usurper if he should abridge them of
meeting and managing the vessel at their pleasure, when they please, and how
they please, without and against his consent: Certainly if a Physician have
power to judge the d^sease of his patient, and what course of Physic he must
use, can he be counted an usurper unless the patient might take what physic
himself pleased, day or night, summer or winter, at home in his chamber, or
abroad in the air?

Secondly, by their grant in this passage that Gods people may thus assemble
and practice ordinances without and against the consent of the Magistrate.
I^infer, If a Church may assemble without and against the Magistrates consent
(as is assi^^ed) then much more constitute and become a Church, etc.
then also may they become a Church, constitute and gather without or against
the consent of the Magistrate: Therefore may the Messengers of Christ, preach
and baptize, that is, make disciples and wash them into the true profession of
Christianity according to the commission, though the Magistrate determine and
publikly declare, such Ministers, such baptismes, such Churches to be
heretical.

Thirdly, it may here be questioned what power is now given to the Civil
Magistrate in Church matters and Spiritual affairs?

If it be answered that although Gods people may do thus against the
Magistrates consent, yet others may not.

I answer (as before) who sees not herein partiality to themselves: Gross
partiality.
Gods people must enjoy their Liberty of Conscience, and not be forced; but all
the Subjects in a Kingdom or Monarchy, or the whole world beside, must be
compelled by the power of the Civil Sword to assemble thus and thus.

Secondly, I demand who shall judge whether they are Gods people or no, If the
Civil Magistrate be to build the Spiritual or Christian house, he must judge
of the matter.
for they say whether the Magistrate consent or consent not, that is judge so
or not, they ought to go on in the Ordinances renuente Magistratu?

How agrees this with their former and general assertion, that the Civil
Magistrate must set up the Christian Church and Worship, therefore by their
own grant he must judge the godly themselves, he must discern who are fit
matter for the House of God, living stones, and what unfit matter, trash and
rubbish?

Those worthy men, the Authors of these positions, and others of their
judgment have cause to examine their souls with fear and trembling in the
presence of God upon this intergatory, A close and faithful intergatory to the
consciences of the authors of these positions
viz. whether or no this be not the bottom and root of the matter: If they
could have the same supply of maintenance without the help of the Civil
Sword, or were persuaded to live upon the voluntary contribution of poor
Saints, or their own labor, as the Lord Jesus and his first Messengers did: I
say, if this lay not in the bottom, whether or no they could not be willingly
shut of the Civil power, and left only to their inoffensive liberties?

I could also put a sad Quaerie to the consciences of some, A sad quaerie to
some concerning their practice.
viz. what should be the reason why in their native Country where the
Magistrate consented not, they forbore to practice such Ordinances as now they
do and intended to do, so soon as they got into another place where they
might set up Magistrates of their own, and a Civil Sword, etc. How much is it
to be feared that in case their Magistracy should alter, or their persons be
cast under a Magistracy prohibiting their practice, whether they would then
maintain their separate meetings without and against the consent of the
Magistrate, renuente Magistratu?

Lastly, it may be questioned how it comes to pass that in pleading for the
Churches liberty more now under the Christian Magistrate, since the Christians
took that liberty in dangerous times under the Heathen, A marvallou^ challenge
of more Liberty to Christians under a Christian Magistrate then under the
Heathen.
why he quotes to prove such liberty, Pharaohs hindering the Israelites from
worship, and Ezra 7. 23. Artaxerxes his fear of wrath upon the Realm?

Are not all their hopes and arguments built upon the Christian Magistrate,
whom (say they) the first Christians wanted, and yet do they scare the
Christian Magistrate (whom they account the governor of the Church) with
Pharaoh and Artaxerxes that knew not God, expecting that the Christian
Magistrate should act and command no more in Gods worship then they?

But what can those instances of Pharaohs evil in hindering the Israelites
worshipping of God, and Artaxerxes giving liberty to Israel to worship God, and
build the Temple, what can they prove but a duty in all P^^ces and Civil
Magistrates to take off the yoke of bondage, which commonly they lay on the
necks of the souls of their subjects in matters of Conscience and Religion?


CHAP. CXXXI.
Peace. IT is plausible, If Magistrates^ were appointed by Christ Jesus
Governors of his Kingdom, it were not reasonable that Christians should more
freely break the commands of the Christian, then of the Heathen Magistrate.
but not reasonable that Gods people should (considering the drift of these
positions) expect more liberty under a Christian then under a Heathen
Magistrate: Have Gods people more liberty to break the command of a Christian
then an Heathen governor? and so to set up Christ's Church and Ordinances after
their own conscience against his consent more then against the consent of an
Heathen or unbeleeving Magistrate? what is become of all the great expectation
what a Christian Magistrate may and ought to do in establishing the Church, in
reforming the Church, and in punishing the contrary? It Is true (say men) in
Christ's time and in the time of the first Ministers and Churches there were no
Christian Magistrates, and therefore in that case, it was in vain for
Christians to seek unto the Heathen Magistrates to govern the Church,
suppress Heretics, etc. but now we enjoy Christian Magistrates, etc.


Truth. All Reason and Religion would now expect more submission therefore (in
matters concerning Christ) to a Christian Magistrate, then to a Pagan or
Antichristian rule^ ^ But (dear Peace) the day will discover, the fire will
try, 1 Cor. 3. what is but wood, hay, and stubble, though built (in men's
upright intention) on that foundation Jesus Christ.

But (to wind up all) as it is most true that Magistracy in general is of God
(Romans 13.) for the preservation of Mankind in civil order and peace, The
necessry of Civil government in general of God, but the special kinds of
men, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
(the World otherwise would be like the Sea, wherein Men^ like Fishes would
hunt and devour each other, and the greater devour the less:) So also it is
true, that Magistracy in special for the several kinds of it is of Man, 1.
Pet. 2. 13. Now what kind of Magistrate soever the people shall agree to set
up, whether he receive Christianity before he be set in office, or whether he
receive Christianity after, he receives no more power of Magistracy, then a
Magistrate that has received no Christianity. For neither of them both can
receive more, then the Commonweal, the Body of People and civil State, as men,
communicate unto them, and betrust with them.

All lawful Magistrates in the World, both before the coming of Christ Jesus,
Civil Magistrates are derivatives from the fountains or bodies of people.
and since, (excepting those unparaleld typical Magistrates of the Church of
Israel) are but Derivatives and Agents immediately derived and employed as eyes
and hands, serving for the good of the whole: Hence they have and can have no
more Power, then fundamentally lies in the Bodies or Fountains themselves,
which Power, Might, or Authority, is not Religious, Christian, A believing
Magistrate no more a Magistrate th^n an unbeleeving.
etc. but natural, humane and civil.

And hence it is true, that a Christian Captain, Christian, Merchant.
Physician, Lawyer, Pilot, Father, Master, and (so consequently) Magistra^e,
etc. is no more a Captain, Merchant, Physician, Lawyer, Pilot, Father, Master,
Magistrate, etc. then a Captain, Merchant, The excellen^^^ (...) Christ's (...)
etc. of any other Conscience or Religion.

It Is true, Christianity teaches all these to act in their several callings,
to an higher ultimate end, from higher principles, in a more heavenly and
spiritual manner, etc.


CHAP. CXXXII.
Peace. O that thy Light and Brightness (dear Truth) might shine to the dark
World in this particular: let it not therefore be grievous, if I request a
little further illustration of it.


Truth. In his season God will glorify himself in all his Truths: but to
gratify thy desire, thus: A Pagan or Antichristian Pilot may be as skillful to
carry the Ship to its desired Port, as any Christian Mariner or Pilot in the
World, and may perform that work with as much safety and speed: yet have they
not command over the souls and consciences of their passengers or mariners
under them, although they may justly see to the labor of the one, and the
civil behavior of all in the ship: The Magistrate like a Pilot in the Ship of
the Commonweal.
A Christian Pilot he performs the same work, (as likewise does the
Metaphorical Pilot in the ship of the Commonweal) from a principle of
knowledge and experience: but more then this, he acts from a root of the fear
of God and love to mankind, in his whole course. Christianity ste^^es a
Christian Pilots course.
Secondly, his aim is more to glorify God then to gain his pay, or make his
voyage. Thirdly, he walks heavenly with Men, and God, in a constant
observation of Gods hand in storms, calmes, etc. So that the thread of
Navigation being equally spun by a believing or unbelieving Pilot, The
Christian Pilot has no more power over the souls of his Mariners or
passengers, then the unchristian or Pagan Pilot.
yet is it drawn over with the gold of Godliness and Christianity by a
Christian Pilot, while he is holy in all manner of Christianity, 1 Pet. 1 15.
But lastly, the Christian Pilots power over the Souls and consciences of his
Sailers and Passengers is not greater then that of the Antichristian, otherwise
then he can subdue the souls of any by the two-edged sword of the Spirit, the
Word of God, and by his holy demeanor in his place, etc.


Peace. I shall present you with no other consideratioon in this first part of
the Picture, but this only:

Although the term Heathen is most commonly appropriated to the wild naked
Americans, The terms Heathen and Christian Magistrate.
etc. yet these worthy men justly apply it even to the civilized Romans, etc.
and consequently must it be applied to the most civilized Antichristians, who
are not the Church and people of God in Christ.


Truth. The Word (...) in the Hebrew, and (...) in the Greek, signify no more
then the Gentiles or Nations of the Earth, which were without and not within,
the true typical national Church of the Jews before Christ, and since his
coming, the Gentiles or Nations of the World, All out of Christ are heathens,
that is of the Nations or Gentiles.
who are without that one holy Nation of the Christian Israel the Church
gathered unto Christ Jesus in particular and distinct congregations all the
World over.

Translatours promiscuously render the words Gentiles, Heathens, Nations:
whence it is evident that even such as profess the Name of Christ in an
unregenerate and impenitent estate, whether Papist or Protestant are yet
without, that is Heathen, Gentiles or of the Nations.


CHAP. CXXXIII.
Peace. Dear Truth, it is now time to cast your eye on the second part of this
Head or picture uncomely and deformed.


Truth. It contains two sorts of Religious meetings or assemblies.

First, more extraordinary and occasional, for which he quotes the practice of
Josiah.

An. Josiah was in the type, Josiah a type of Christ Jesus the King of the
Church.
so are not now the several Governors of Commonweales, Kings or Governors of
the Church or Israel, whose state I have proved to be a Nonesuch, and not to
be paralleled but in the Antitype the particular Church of Christ, where
Christ Jesus alone sits King in his own most holy Government.

Secondly, they propound meetings or assemblings ordinary stated and constant,
yearly and monthly unto which the civil Magistrate should give liberty. For
these meetings they propound plausible arguments from the necessity of them
from Christian fellowship from Gods glory, from the experience of the benefit
of them, and from the good report of them, as also those two Scriptures, 1 Cor.
10. 32. 2 Cor. 11. 38.

To these I answer, An unjust and partial desire of liberty to some
consciences, and bondage unto all others.
If they intend that the civil Magistrate should permit liberty to the free
and voluntary Spiritual meetings of their Subjects, I shall subscribe unto
them; but if they intend that the Magistrate should give liberty only unto
themselves, and not to the rest of their subjects, that is to desire their own
souls only to be free, and all other souls of their subjects to be kept in
bondage.

Secondly, if they intend that the Magistrate should enforce all the Elders of
such Churches under their Jurisdiction, to keep correspondencie with them in
such meetings, then I say (as before) it is to cause him to give Liberty with
a partial hand, and unequal Balance: for thus I argue. If the Civil State
and Civil officers be of their Religion and Conscience, it is not proper for
them to give liberty or freedom, but to give honorable testimony and
approbation, and their own personal submission to the Churches. But if the
civil State and Officers be of another conscience and worship, and shall be
bound to grant permission and liberty to them, their consciences and meetings,
and not to those of his own Religion and Conscience also, how will this appear
to be equal in the very eye of Common peace and righteousness?

For those yearly and monthly meetings, as we find not any such in the first
Churches, So neither will those general arguments from the plausible pretense
of Christian fellowship, Gods glory, etc. prove such particular ways of
glorifying God, without some precept or president of such a kind.

For those Scriptures, 1 Cor. 10. 33. and 2 Cor. 11. 38. expressing the Apostle
Paul his zeal for glorifying God, and his care for all the Churches, it is
clear they concern such as are indeed Paul's successors, The Commission. Mat.
28. of preaching and baptizing not properly directed to the Churches, or fixed
Teachers of it, least of al to the Commonweal.
sent forth by Christ Jesus to preach and gather Churches^ but those Scriptures
concern not the Churches themselves, nor the Pastors of the Churches
properly, least of all the Civil State and Commonwealth, neither of which (the
Churches, the Pastors, or Commonwealth) do go forth personally with that
commission, Matthew. 28. to preach and baptize, that is, to gather Churches unto
Christ.

For as for the first, the Churches are not Ministers of the Gospel: the Angels
or Messengers of the Churches, and the Churches themselves were distinct, Revel
2. and 3.

As for the second, A quaerie, who have now the care of all the Churches?
the pastors and Elders of the Church, their work is not to gather Churches,
but to govern and feed them, Acts 20. and 1 Pet. 5.

As for the civil Magistrate, it is a Ministry indeed: ( Magistrates are Gods
Ministers, Romans 13.) but it is of another Nature, and therefore none of these,
the Churches of Christ, the Shepherds of those Churches, nor the civil
Magistrate, succeeding the Apostles or first Messengers, these Scriptures
alleged concern not any of these to have care of all the Churches.


Peace. Dear Truth, who can hear this Word, but will presently cry out, Who
then may rightly challenge that commission, and that promise, Math. 28. etc.


Truth. Sweet Peace, A Ministry before the Church.
in due place and season, that Question may be resolved; but doubtless the true
successors must precede or go before the Church, making Disciples, and
baptizing as the Apostles did, who were neither the Churches, nor the Pastors
and fixed Teachers of them, but as they gathered, so had the care of the
Churches.


CHAP. CXXXIV.
Peace. I Cease to urge this further; and, in the last place, marvel what
should be the reason of that Conclusion, viz. There is no power of
determination in any of these meetings, but that all must be left to the
particular determination of the Churches.


Truth. At the meeting at Jerusalem, Acts 15. commonly misapplied.
when Paul and Barnabas and others were sent thither from the Church of Christ
at Antioch, the Apostles and Elders did not only consult and advise, but
particularly determined the Question which the Church of Antioch sent to them,
about Acts 15. and send their particular determinations or decrees to the
Churches afterward.

So that if these Assemblies were of the nature of that pattern or president
(as is generally pretended) and had such a promise of the assistance and
concurrence of the Spirit, as that Assembly had, they might then say as that
Assembly did, Acts 15. It seems good to the holy Spirit and to us: and should
not leave particular determinations to the particular Churches, in which
sometimes are very few able Guides and Leaders.


Peace. But what should be the Reason to persuade these worthy men to conceive
the particular Congregations or Churches to be more fit and competent Judges in
such high points, then an Assembly of so excellent and choice persons, who must
only consult and advise, Christ's promise and presence only makes an Assembly
blessed
etc.?


Truth. Doubtless there is a strong conviction in their Souls of a professed
promised presence of the Lord Jesus in the midst of his Church gathered after
his mind and will, more then unto such kind of Assemblies, though consisting of
far more able persons, even the flower and cream of all the Churches.


Peace. It is generally conceived, that the promise of Christ's presence to the
end of the World (Matthew. 28.) is made to the Church.


Truth. There is doubtless a promise of Christ's presence in the midst of his
Church and Congregation, Matthew. 18. but the promise of Christ's presence, Matthew.
28. cannot properly and immediately belong to the Church constituted and
gathered, The promise of Christ's presence, Mat. ^ 8. distinct from that, Mat.
28.
but to such Ministers or Messengers of Christ Jesus, whom he is pleased to
employ to gather and constitute the Church by converting and baptizing: unto
which Messengers (if Christ Jesus will be pleased to send such forth) that
passage, Acts 15. will be presidentiall.


Peace. The 14. general head is this, 14. Position examined.
viz. What power particular Churches have particularly over Magistrates.

First (say they) they may censure any Member (though a Magistrate) if by sin
he deserve it.

First, because Magistrates must be subject to Christ, but Christ censures all
offenders, 1 Cor. 5. 45.

Secondly, Every Brother must be subject to Christ's censure, Mat. 18. 15, 16,
17. But Magistrates are brethren, Deuteronomy, 17. 15.

Thirdly, They may censure all within the Church, I Cor. 5. 12. But the
Magistrates are within the Church, for they are either without, or within, or
above the Church: not the first, nor the last, for so Christ is only above it.

Fourthly, The Church has a charge of all the Souls of the members, and must
give account thereof, Heb. 13. 17.

Fifthly, Christ's censures are for the good of Souls, I Cor. 5. 6. but
Magistrates must not be denied any privilege for their Souls, for then they
must lose a privilege of Christ by being Magistrates.

Sixthly, In Church privileges Christians are all one, Gal. 2. 28. Col. 3. 11.

2. Magistrates may be censured for apparent and manifest sin against any
Moral Law of God, in their judicial proceedings, or in the execution of their
office. Courts are not Sanctuaries for sin; and if for no sin, then not for
such especially.

First, because sins of Magistrates in Court are as hateful to God. 2. And
as much spoken against, Isa. 10. 1. Mic. 3. 1. Thirdly, God has no where
granted such immunity to them. Fourthly, what a brother may do privately in
case of private offense, that the Church may do publicly in case of public
scandal. But a private brother may admonish and reprove privately in case of
any private offense, Mat. 18. 15. Luc. 19. 17. Psalm. 141. 5.

Lastly, Civil Magistracy does not exempt any Church from faithful
watchfulness over any member, nor deprive a Church of her due power, not a
Church member of his due privilege, which is to partake of every Ordinance of
God, needful and requisite to their winning and salvation. Erg^,


CHAP. CXXXV.
Truth. THese Arguments to prove the Magistrate subject (even for sin
committed in judicial proceeding) I judge, like Mount Zion, immovable, and
every true Christian that is a Magistrate will judge so with me: Yet a Quaerie
or two will not be unseasonable.

First, Church administrations are charged firstly upon the Misters thereof.
where they name the Church in this whole passage, whether they mean the
Church without the Ministry or Governors of it, or with the Elders and
Governors jointly? and if the latter, why name they not the Governors at all,
since that in all administrations of the Church the duty lies not upon the body
of the Church, but firstly and properly upon the Elders.

It is true in case of the Elders obstinacy in apparent sin, the Church has
power over him, having as much power to take down as to set up, Col. 4. Say to
Archippus, etc. Yet in the ordinary dispensations and administrations of the
Ordinances, the Ministers or Elders thereof are first charged with duty, etc.

Hence first for the Apostles, The Ministers or Governors of Christ's Church to
be acknowledged in their dispensations.
who converted, gathered and espoused the Churches to Christ, I question
whether their power to edification was not a power over the Churches, as many
Scriptures seem to imply.

Secondly, for the ordinary Officers ordained for the ordinary and constant
guiding, feeding, and governing the Church, they were Rulers, Shepherds,
Bishops, or Overseers, and to them was every letter and charge, commendation or
reproof directed, Revel. 2. 3. Acts 20. And that place by them quoted for the
submission of the Magistrates to the Church, it mentions only submission to the
Rulers thereof; Heb. 13. 17. Those excellent men concealed not this out of
ignorance, and therefore most certainly in a silent way confess that their
doctrine concerning the Magistrates power in Church causes would too g^osse, A
paradox, Magistrates made the Judges of the Churches, and Governors of them,
yet censurable by them.
if they should not have named the whole Church, and but silently employed the
Governors of it: And is it not wonderful in any sober eye, how the same
persons (Magistrates) can be exalted over the Ministers and Members, as being
bound to establish, reform, suppress by the civil sword in punishing the
body or goods, and yet for the same actions (if the Church and Governors
thereof so conceive) be liable to a punishment ten thousand times more
transcendent, to wit, excommunication, a punishment reaching to their souls
and consciences, and eternal estate, and this not only for common sins, but
for those actions which immediately concern the execution of their civil
office, in judicial proceeding.


Peace. The Prelates in Q. Elizabeth's days, Queen Eliz. Bish p^truer to their
principles, then many of a better spirit and profession.
kept with more plainness to their principles, for acknowledging the Queen to
be Supreme in all Church causes, (according to the Title and Power of Henry the
8. her Father, taken from the Pope, and given to him by the Parliament) they
professed that the Queen was not a sheep, but under Christ the chief
Shepherd, and that the Church had not power to excommunicate the Queen.


Truth. Therefore (sweet Peace) it was esteemed capital (in that faithful
witness of so much truth as he saw, Mr. Borowes profession concerning Queen
Elizabeth.
even unto death, Mr. Barrow) to maintain before the Lords of the Council,
that the Queen herself was subject to the power of Christ Jesus in the Church:
which Truth overthrew that other Tenent, that the Queen should be Head and
Supreme in all Church causes.


Peace. Those Bishops according to their principles (though bad and false)
dealt plainly (though cruelly) with Mr. Barrow: but these Authors, whose
principles are the same with the Bishops (concerning the power of the
Magistrate in Church affairs) though they wave the Title, and will not call
them Heads or Governors (which now in lighter times seems too gross) yet give
they as much spiritual power and authority to the civil Magistrates to the
full, Is not this too like the Popes profession of servu^ servorum Dei, yet
holding out his slipper to the lips of Princes, Kings and Emperors?
as ever the Bishops gave unto them, although they yet also with the same
breath lay all their honor in the dust, and make them to lick the dust of the
feet of the Churches, as it is prophesied, the Kings and Queens of the Earth
shall do, when Christ makes them nursing fathers, and nursing mothers, Isa,
49. The truth is, Christ Jesus is honored, when the civil Magistrate a member
of the Church, punishes any member or Elder of the Church with the civil
sword, even to the death, for any crime against the civil State so deserving
it; for he bears not the sword in vain.

And Christ Jesus is again most highly honored, when for apparent sin in
the Magistrate, being a member of the Church (for otherwise they have not to
meddle with him) the Elders with the Church, admonish him and recover his
Soul, or if obstinate in sin, cast him forth of their Spiritual and Christian
fellowship, which doubtless they could not do, were the Magistrate supreme
Governor under Christ in Ecclesiastical or Church causes, and so consequently
the true heir and successor of the Apostles.


CHAP. CXXXVI.
Peace. THe 15. 15. Head examined.
Head runs thus: viz. In what cases must Churches proceed with Magistrates in
case of offense. We like it well, that Churches be flower in proceeding to
excommunication, as of all other, so of Civil Magistrates especially in point
of their Judicial proceedings, unless it be in scandalous breach of a
manifest Law of God, and that after notorious evidence of the fact, and that
after due seeking and waiting for satisfaction in a previous Advertisement. And
though each particular Church in respect of the Government of Christ be
independent and absolute within it self, yet where the Commonweal consists of
Church members, it may be a point of Christian wisdom to consider and consult
with the Court also, so far as any thing may seem doubtful to them in the
Magistrates case, which may be further cleared by intelligence given from them;
but otherwise we dare not leave it in the power of any Church to forbear to
proceed and agree upon that on Earth, which they plainly see Christ has
resolved in his Word, and will ratify in Heaven.


Truth. If the scope of this Head be to qualify and adorn christian
impartialitie and faithfulness with christian wisdom and tenderness, I honor
and applaud such a Christian motion: but whereas that case is put, which is no
where found in the pattern of the first Churches, nor suiting with the Rule of
Christianity, to wit, that the Commonweal should consist of Church members,
which must be taken privatively, to wit, that none should be admitted members
of the Commonweal, but such as are first members of the Church (which must
necessarily run the Church upon that Temptation to feel the pulse of the Court
concerning a delinquent Magistrate, before they dare proceed) I say let such
Practices be brought to the Touchstone of the true frame of a civil
commonweal, The inventions of men in swarving from the true essentialls of
Civil and Spiritual Commonweales.
and the the true frame of the Spiritual or Christian commonweal, the Church
of Christ, and it will be seen what wood, hay, and stubble of carnal policy
and humane inventions in Christ's matters are put in place of the precious
stones, gold and silver of the Ordinances of the most High and only wise God.


CHAP. CXXXVII.
Peace. Dear Truth, We are now arrived at their last Head: the Title is this,
16. and last Head examined.
viz.


Their power in the Liberties and Privileges of these Churches.
First, all Magistrates ought to be chosen out of Churchmembers, Ezod. 18. 21.
Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Prove. 29. 2. When the Righteous rule, the people rejoice.

Secondly, that all free men elected, be only Church Members.

1. Because if none but Church members should rule, then others should not
choose, because they may elect others beside Church members.

2. From the pattern of Israel, where none had power to choose but only
Israel, or such as were joined to the people of God.

3. If it shall fall out, that in the Court consisting of Magistrates and
Deputies, there be a dissent between them which may hinder the common good,
that they now return for ending the same, to their first principles, which are
the Free men, and let them be consulted with.

Truth. In this Head are 2 branches: A great Quegion, viz. Whether only Church
members (that is as is intended) Godly persons in a particular Church estate,
be only eligible or to be chosen for Magistrates.
First concerning the choice of Magistrates, that such ought to be chosen as
are Church members: for which is quoted, Exodus 18. 21. Dut. 17. 15. Proverbs
19. 29.

Unto which I answer: It were to be wished, that since the point is so weighty,
as concerning the Pilots and Steeresmen of Kingdoms and Nations, etc. on whose
ability, care and faithfulness depends most commonly the peace and safety of
the commonweales they fall in: I say it were to be wished that they had more
fully explained what they intend by this Affirmative, viz. Magistrates ought to
be chosen out of Church members.

For if they intend by this [Ought to be chosen] a necessity of concenience,
viz. that for the greater advancement of common utilitie and rejoicing of the
people, according to the place quoted ( Prove. 29. 2.) it were to be desired,
prayed for, and peaceably endeavored, then I readily assent unto them.

But if by this [Ought] they intend such a necessity as those Scriptures
quoted imply, viz. that people shall sin by choosing such for Magistrates as
are not members of Churches; as the Israelites should have sinned, if they had
not (according to Iethro's counsel, Exodus 18. and according to the command of
God, Deuteronomy. 18.) chosen their Judges and Kings within themselves in Israel: then
I propose these necessary Quaries.

First whether those are not lawful Civil combinations, societies, and
communions of men, in Towns, Cities, States or Kingdoms, where no Church of
Christ is resident, Lawful Civil States, where Churches of Christ are not.
yea where his name was never yet heard of: I add to this, that Men of no
small note, skillful in the state of the World, acknowledge, that the World
divided into 30 parts, The world being divided into 30 parts, 25 never heard of
Christ.
25 of that 30 have never yet heard of the name of Christ: If their Civil
polities and combinations be not lawful, (because they are not Churches, and
their Magistrates Church members) then disorder, confusion, and all
unrighteousnes is lawful, and pleasing to God.

Secondly, whether in such States or Commonweales, where a Church or Churches
of Christ are resident, such persons may not lawfully succeed to the Crown or
Government, Lawful heirs of Crowns and Civil Government, although not
Christian and godly.
in whom the fear of God (according to Iethroes council) cannot be
discerned, not are brethren of the Church, according to Deuteronomy. 17.) but only are
fitted with Civil and Moral abilities, to manage the Civil affairs of the
Civil State.

Thirdly, since not many Wise and Noble are called, but the poores receive the
Gospel, as God has chosen the poor of the World to be rich in Faith, 1 Cor. 1
Jam. 2. Whether it may not ordinarily come to pass, Few Christians wise and
noble, and qualified for affairs of State.
that there may not be found in a true Church of Christ (which sometimes
consists but of few persons) persons fit to be either Kings or Governors,
etc. whose civil office is no less difficult then the office of a Doctor of
Physic, a Master or Pilot of a Ship, or a Captain or Commander of a Band or
Army of men: for which services, the children of God may be no ways qualified,
though otherwise excellent for the fear of God, and the knowledge and Grace of
the Lord Jesus.

4. If Magistrates ought (that is, ought only) to be chosen out of the Church,
I demand if they ought not also to be dethroned and deposed, Some Papists and
some Protestants agree in deposing of Magistrates.
when they cease to be of the Church, either by voluntary departure from it, or
by excommunication out of it, according to the bloody tenants and practice of
some Papists, with whom the Protestants (according to their principles)
although they seem to abhor it, do absolutely agree?

5. Therefore lastly, I ask if this be not to turn the World upside down, to
turn, the World out of the World, to pluck up the roots and foundations of all
common society in the World? to turn the Garden and Paradise of the Church
and Saints into the Field of the Civil State of the World, and to reduce the
World to the first Chaos or confusion


CHAP. CXXXVIII.
Peace. Dear Truth, thou conquerest^ and shall triumph in season: but some
will say, How answer you those Scriptures alleged?


Truth. I have fully and at large declared the vast differences between that
holy Nation of typical Israel, and all other Lands and Countries, how
unmatchable then and now, and never to be paralleled, but by the true Israel
and particular Churches of Christ residing in all parts (and under the several
civil Governments) of the world: In which Churches, the Israel of God, Those
Scriptures, Exodus 18 Deuteronomy. 17. and 18. etc. paralleled in the true spiritual
Israel, by 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1.
and Kingdom of Christ Jesus, such only are to be chosen spiritual Officers
and Governors, to manage his Kingly power and authority in the Church, as are
(according to the Scriptures quoted, not Pope, Bishops, or Civil powers, but)
from amongst themselves, Brethren, fearing God, hating cove^ousnesse or filthy
lucre, according to those golden Rules given by the Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 3. and
Tit. 1.

The want of discerning this true parallel, between Israel in the type then,
and Israel the antitype now, is that rock whereon (through the Lords righteous
jealousy, punishing the World, and chastising his people) thousands dash, and
make woeful Shipwreck.

The second branch, viz. that all Freemen elected be only Church members, I
have before shown to be built on that saudy and dangerous Ground of Isreal's
patterns: O that it may please the Father of Lights to discover this to all
that fear his name I then would they not sin to save a Kingdom, nor run into
the lamentable breach of civil peace and order in the world, nor be guilty of
forcing thousands to Hypocrisy, in a State worship, nor of profaning the holy
name of God and Christ, by putting their Names and Ordinances upon unclean and
unholy persons: nor of shedding the blood of such Heretics, etc. whom Christ
would have enjoy longer patience and permission until the Harvest: nor of the
blood of the Lord Jesus himself, in his faithful Witnesses of Truth: nor
lastly, of the blood of so many hundred thousands slaughtred men, women, and
children, by such uncivil and unchristian wars and combustions about the
Christian faith and Religion.


Peace. Dear Truth: before we part, I ask your faithful help once more, to
2 or 3 Scriptures, which many allege, and yet we have not spoken of.


Truth. Speak on; here is some sand left in this our hour glass of merciful
opportunity: One grain of Times inestimable sand is worth a golden mountain;
let us not lose it.


Peace. The first is that of the Ninevites fast, The Ninevites Fast examined
commanded by the King of Ninevie and his Nobles, upon the preaching of Jonah;
succeeded by Gods merciful answer in sparing of the City; and quoted with
honorable approbation by the Lord Jesus Christ, Jonah 3. and Math. 12.


Truth. I have before proved, that even Iehosaphats fast (he being King of that
National Church and people of Israel) could not possibly be a type or warrant
for every King or Magistrate in the World (whose Nations, Countries or Cities
cannot be Churches of God, now in the Gospel, according to Christ Jesus:

Much less can this pattern of the King of Ninevie and his Nobles, be a
ground for Kings and Magistrates now, to force all their Subjects under them in
the matters of Worship.


Peace. It will be said, why did God thus answer them?


Truth. Gods mercy in hearing does not prove an action right and according to
rule.

It pleased God to hear the Israelites cry for Flesh, and afterward for a
King, given both in anger to them.

It pleased God to hear A^abs prayer, yea and the prayer of the Devils (Luc.
8.) although their persons and prayers in themselves abominable.

If it be said, why did Christ approve this example? Object.


I answer, the Lord Jesus Christ did not approve the King of Ninevies
compelling all to Worship, Answ.
but the men of Ninevies repentance at the preaching of Jonah.


Peace. It will be said, what shall Kings and Magistrates now do in the
plagues of sword, famine, pestilence?


Truth. Kings and Magistrates must be considered (as formerly) invested with no
more power then the people betrust them with.

But no People can betrust them with any spiritual power in matters of
worship, but with a Civil power belonging to their goods and bodies.

2. Kings and Magistrates must be considered as either godly or ungodly.

If ungodly, his own and peoples duty is Repentance, and reconciling of their
persons unto God, before their sacrifice can be accepted. Without Repentance
what have any to do with the covenant or promise of God? Psalm. 50.


Again, if Godly, they are to humble themselves, and beg mercles for
themselves and people.

Secondly, upon this advantage and occasion, they are stir up their people (as
possibly they may) to Repentance: but not to force the consciences of people to
worship.

If it be said, Object.
What must be attended to in this example?

Two things are most eminent in this example. Answ.


First, the great work of Repentance, which God calls all men unto, upon the
true preaching of his Word.

Secondly, How England and London may yet be spared.
the nature of that true repentance whether Legal or Evangelicall: The people
of Ninevie turned from the violence that was in their hands: And confident I
am, if this Nation shall turn (though but with a Legal repentance) from that
violent persecuting or hunting each of other for Religion sake, (the greatest
violence and hunting in the wilderness of the whole World) even as Sodom and
Gomorrah upon a Legal repentance, had continued until Christ's day; so
consequently might England, London, etc. continue free from a general
destruction (upon such a turning from their violence) until the Heavens and
the whole World be with fire consumed.

Peace. The second Scripture is that speech of the Lord Christ, Luc. 22. 36. He
that has not a sword, let him fell his coat, and buy one.


Truth. For the clearing of this Scripture, Luc. 22, the felling of the Coat,
to buy a Sword, discussed.
I must propose and reconcile that seeming contrary command of the Lord Jesus
to Peter (Mat. 26.) Put up thy sword into his place, for all that take the
sword, shall perish by it.

In the former Scripture ( Luc. 22.) it pleased the Lord Jesus, speaking of his
present trouble, to compare his former sending forth of his Disciples. without
scrip, etc. with that present condition and trial coming upon them, wherein
they should provide both scrip and sword, etc.

Yet now, first, when they tell him of two swords, he answers, It is enough:
which shows his former meaning was not literal, but figurative, foreshewing
his present danger above his former.

Secondly, in the same case at the same time (Mat. 26) commanding Peter to put
on his sword, he gives a threefold Reason thereof.


1 ( verse. 52.) from the event of it: for all that take the sword, shall perish
by it.

2 The needlesnes of it: for with a word to his Father, he could have 12
legions of Angels.

3 The council of God to be fulfilled in the Scripture: Thus it ought to be.

Peace. It is much questioned by some, what should be the meaning of Christ
Jesus in that speech, All that take the sword, shall perish by the sword.


Truth. There is a threefold taking of the sword: First, A threefold taking of
the Sword.
by murtherous cruelty, either of private persons, or secondly, public States
or Societies, in wrath or revenge each against other.

Secondly, a just and righteous taking of the sword in punishing offenders
against the Civil peace, either more personal, private and ordinary; or more
public, Oppressors, Tyrants, Ships, Navies, etc. Neither of these can it be
imagined that Christ Jesus intended to Peter.

Thirdly, There is therefore a 3. taking of the sword, forbidden to Peter, that
is, for Christ and the Gospels cause, when Christ is in danger: which made
Peter strike, etc.


Peace. It seems to some most contrary to all true Reason, that Christ Jesus,
(...) it self, should not be defended.


Truth. The foolishnes of God is wiser then the wisdom of Man.

It is not the purpose of God, that the Spiritual battles of his Son shall
be fought by carnal weapons and persons.

It is not his pleasure that the World shall flame on fire with civil
combustions, for his Sons sake. It is directly contrary to the nature of Christ
Jesus, his Saints and Truths, that throats of men (which is the highest
contrariety to civil converse) should be torn out for his sake, who most
delighted to converse with the greatest sinners.

It is the council of God, that his servants shall overcome by 3 weapons, of a
spiritual nature, Revel. 12. 11. And that all that take the sword of steel,
shall perish.

Lastly, it is the Council of God, that Christ Jesus shall shortly appear a
most glorious Judge and Revenger against all his Enemies, when the Heavens and
the Earth shall (...) before his most glorious presence.


Peace. I shall propose the last Scripture much insisted on by many, Revel. 17.
16. the Kings having of the Whore, discussed.
for carnal weapons in spiritual cases, Revel. 17. 16. The 10 horns which
thou fawest upon the Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire.


Truth. Not to controvert with some, whether or no the Beast be yet risen and
extant.

Nor secondly, whether either the Beast, or the Horns, or the Whore may be
taken literally for any corporal Beast or Whore.

Or thirdly, whether these 10 Horns be punctually and exactly 10 Kings.

Or fourthly, whether those 10 Horns signify those many Kings, Kingdoms, and
Governments, who have bowed down to the Popes yoke, and have committed
fornication with that great Whore the Church of Rome.

Let this last be admitted (which yet will cost some work to clear against all
opposites:) Yet,

First, can the Time be now clearly demonstrated to be come, etc?

Secondly, how will it be proved, that this ^atred of this Wh^re shall be a
true, chaste, Christian hatred against Antichristian whorish practices, etc?

Thirdly, or rather that this hating and desolating and making naked and
burning shall arise, not by way of an ordinance waranted by the institution of
Christ Jesus, but by way of providence when (as it uses to be with all whores
and their lovers) the Church of Rome and her great lovers shall fall out, and
by the righteous vengeance of God upon her, drunk with the blood of Saints or
holy Ones, these mighty fornicators shall turn their love into hatred, which
hatred shall make her a poor desolate naked Whore, torn and consumed, etc.


Peace. You know it is a great controversy how the Kings of the Earth shall
thus deal with the Whore in the 17 Chap. and yet so bewail her in the 18
Chapter.


Truth. If we take it that these Kings of the Earth shall first hate, and
plunder, and tear, and burn this Whore, and yet afterward shall relent and
bewail their cruel dealing toward her: Or else, that as some Kings deal so
terribly with her, yet others of those Kings shall bewail her.

If either of these two answers stand, or a better be given, yet none of them
can prove it lawful for people to give power to their Kings and Magistrates
thus to deal with them their subjects for their conscience; nor for
Magistrates to assume a title more then the people betrust them with; nor for
one people out of conscience to God, and for Christ his sake, thus to kill and
slaughter and burn each other: However it may please the Righteous Judge,
according to the famous types of Gideous and Iehosaphats battles, to permit in
Justice, and to order in Wisdom these mighty and mutual slaughters each of
other.


Peace. We have now (dear Truth) through the gracious hand of God clambered up
to the top of this our tedious Discourse.


Truth. O it is mercy unexpressible that either Thou or I have had so long a
breathing time, and that together!


Peace. If English ground must yet be drunk with English blood, O where shall
Peace repose her wearied head and heavy heart?


Truth. Dear Peace, if thou find welcome, and the God of peace miraculously
please to quench these all-devouring flames, yet where shall Truth find rest
from cruel persecutions?


Peace. Oh, will not the Authority of holy Scriptures, the Commands and
Declarations of the Son of God, therein produced by thee, together with all
the lamentable experiences of former and, present slaughters prevail with the
Sons of Men (especially with the Sons of Peace) to depart from the dens of
Lions, and mountains of Leopards, and to put on the bowels (if not of
Christianity, yet) of Humanity each to other!


Truth. Dear Peace, Habacacks Fishes keep their constant bloody game of
Persecutions in the Worlds mighty Ocean; the greater taking, plundring,
swallowing up the lesser: O happy he whose portion is the God of Jacob! who
has nothing to lose under the Sun, but has a State, a House, an Inheritance,
a Name, a Crown, a Life, past all the Plunderers, Ravishers, Murderers reach
and fury!


Peace. But lo! Who Is here?


Truth. Our Sister Patience, whose desired company is as needful as
delightful: It Is like the Wolf will send the scattered Sheep in one: the
common Pirate gathers up the loose and scattered Navy: the slaughter of the
Witnesses by that bloody Beast unite the Independents and Presbyterians. The
God of Peace, the God of Truth will shortly seal this Truth, and confirm this
Witness, and make it evident to the whole World,

That the Doctrine of Persecution for cause of Conscience, is most evidently
and lamentably contrary to the doctrine of Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace.
Amen.


FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 23. line 28. for this, re^d that. p. 31. l. ult. his soul. p. 32. l. 12.
read month, ^bid. r. person. p. 35. l. 16. r. turned off, or loosed from. p.
37. l. 8. for to, read doc. p. 38. l. 2. dele affirm. p. 41. l. 22. his
perilous soul. p. 43. l. 20. r. or l. ult. Answers. p. 44. l. 2^. b^ closer.
p. 49. l. 1. last p 57. l. 22. cut. l. 24. l ^^rme that Justice. p. 58. l. 5.
the lying. p 98. l. 6. road, or do these p. 114. l. 29. r, the 31 question. p.
119 l. 10. remembers. p. 139. l. 9. immunitie. p. 161. l. 28. or Christ. p.
214. l. 36. dealt shall. p. 225. l. 19. the Churches of God. 225. l. 25. not
might not.


