The Frontispiece.
SPare Hours, spare Minutes, Leisure, did incline
My Head to study Poetry Divine:
Who spare some time, to read what I did write,
They both my Pains and Studies best requite.
But Candid Readers, where You see me halt
In these my first Fruits, pardon my default:
This I acknowledge; that I had a will
To Versify, although I wanted Skill;
Which contradicts a Proverb, 'cause I find
Verse smoothly made, hard to my willing mind.
On the License of this Book.
April the Twelfth, its License will appear,
The Sixteen Hundred Seventy Seventh Year:
And on the Thirteenth day, if that you look,
'Twas Entered in the Stationers Hall-Book.
An Advertisement.
AN Author of my Name, has lately writ
A Sacred Book in Verse, and some thought it
To be my Study; and their reason why,
Because mine Poems were, and Piety.
But to content the World, I dare it tell,
This Author's Writings mine may much excel:
Moreover, thus I differ from that Man,
He Is Cornwall born, and I am Cardigan:
And likewise in our Age, we disagree,
I am near Thirty; he near Sixty three.
POETICAL PIETY: OR Poetry made Pious, By rendering into its Method Obesrvations
arising from various Divine Subjects, useful for these Profane and Enormous
Times.

To which is added, A Brief Alphabetical Expositor; Explaining the most
Intricate Words made use of in this Book, to the Conception of a mean Reader;
And may serve as a Remembrancer to the Imperfect Memory.

By WILLIAM WILLIAMS, a respecter of Piety, and Pious Poetry.

Psalm. 30 4. Sing unto the Lord O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at the
Remembrance of his holiness. Psalm. 104 33. I will sing unto the Lord as long as
I live: I will sing praise to my God, while I have my Being. Vouchsafe, whose
Aspect on this Title look, To bar your Censure, till you read the Book.

London, Printed for W. Williams at the White Swan in Blackfriars near the
Kings Printing House. 1677.

To the Honorable, but my most Honored, most Obliging, and most Beloved
Friend, Sir THOMAS PRYSE of Go-gerthan, in the County of Cardigan Baronet,
W. WILLIAMS wishes all Temporal Blessings here, and hereafter Eternal
Blessedness.
Honored Sir,
GReat and many are the Obligations (since Providence so ordered it) that moved
me to request your Patronage of these Poems, as I might thus variously
instance. First, in that Nature so far befriended my Birth, as to be a Native,
both of your Neighborhood, and County; Likewise upon that acquaintance, (and
if I may so far presume, I might style if the intintate acquaintance) that I
had with your Honor in the days of Infancy, and Minority of my Age; the
renovation of which acquaintance in my Maturity or riper Years imposed an
Obligation upon me to Reverence, and Regard your Honorable Person, especially
when I had Intelligence of your late approach to London, and the Honor of your
Courteous Visit at my Habitation, before I had Information of your Abode;
besides these Obligations, I have a regard to some others in a more peculiar
manner; namely those Virtuous Qualifications which manifested, and still do
manifest themselves in the whole course of your Sober Conversation, (to wit)
Meekness and Familiarity: with these forementioned motives; More I might still
nominate, as touching your Candid Deportment toward my Parentage, and that
Affection and Amity my Father continually enjoyed from the Bounty of your Noble
Progeny; all which were main Inducements, provoking my Ambition to shelter my
slender Conceptions under the Ornament of your Patronage; and to further my
attainment in this attempt, I observed the Caution of the wise man in Pro. 27.
v. 10. Thine own Friend and thy Fathers Friend forsake not, or as I might fitly
add, forget not; and to Reverence your Noble Name, to whom I am a Debtor in
respect of Service, Affection and Gratitude, I conjectured it expedient to be
the Memorial of this Dedication, by reason the first Fruits of my Intellectual
Productions, flowing from a Divine Instinct, both in this; and the ensuing
method: I must needs acknowledge it to be my great Encouragement and
Satisfaction, in that I am Honored with so worthy a Patron as your Generous
and Ingenious self, whose Virtue, Candor, and Affability, doubles your Honor,
while others exalted to a higher degree, by Pride maculate their Promotion. May
your Honor, as you are my Patron, be pleased to peruse these ensuing Poems,
and may these Poems, be worthy your perusal: The best Apology J can make in
mine or their defense, is only this: That there are variety of Inferences,
drawn from variety of Subjects, comprehended in this little Volume; some
whereof may be smoother polished than others, and thereby the more approveable:
In case that if any be found knotty and unevan, I hope they may be the more
dispensible, if observed as deriving from a Novice in the Potent Science of
Poetry.

I am dubious that your Discerning eye may find Imperfections in their
Perusual. But I had rather lisp and stammer forth the Praises of my God, than
be bruitishly silent; yet must acknowledge the Theme deserved an abler Poet,
and I fear may in some places seem Maculated by my ruder Pen: Wherefore I am
Importunate in the Imploration of your Candor, to Connive at my Misdemeanors
in all respects, and vouchsafe my Pardon from your Clemency for the presumption
of this Address, and those Expressions that stand in need either of Gravity or
Gratitude in reference to your Parts and Person: Thus Craving your Honor to
accept of my Will for the Deed; the which shall impose upon my self a further
Obligation, entituling me to remain acccording to the style of this my sincere
Subscription,

SIR, Your Honors most Humbly Devoted and Submissive Servant to Command.
WILLIAM WILLIAMS.

An Encomium on the Honorable Sir Thomas Pryse Baronet.
TO speak your Fame, your Merit, and your Praise,
Befits a Lawreat Poet, decked with Bays:
Not such as I, who never gained the Skill,
To Court the Muses on Parnassus Hill;
My Rustic, and Domestic Genius yields,
No charming Rapture of Elizian Fields;
Allows me not the prospect of such things,
Nor yet to taste of Heliconian Springs,
Abjures all Fiction, (though the Poets due;)
And prompts me these fair stories are not true,
Persuading my belief, they cannot be,
Or it would tolerate my leave to see:
Then to request these things I shall omit,
And praise you as my Fancy thinks most fit:
Vouchsafe me Sir, although my pen be slow,
To pay your Honor that respect I owe:
Your just Encomiums duly, to Rehearse,
Unto a Volume soon would swell a Verse;
But time, and tediousness for to omit,
I Will speak in brief, what I conjecture fit;
Who would complete your Praise by due Applause,
Much to enlarge shall find there is a Cause;
But my slow Tongue, finds tedious to begin,
That Noble Narrative, what you have been:
Therefore I pardon crave, from this to start,
And for the whole, to manifest a part:
This is observed wherever you resort,
With Love, and Meekness, there your self Comport,
Natures Ambition, and her vaunting pride,
Your humble Spirit, ever lay aside.
Thus would your goodness never hold in scorn,
No more the Beggar, than the higher born:
As knowing well, man's nature is the same,
Though Riches make a difference in the Name;
Methinks your Disposition in this thing,
Resembles Philip's Macedonia's King;
You see all mortal, every thing to pass,
Like as the sand in humane natures glass.
Which makes Promotion unto you no more,
Than that enjoyment you possessed before:
Thus have you still the Courteousie you had,
Which doubtless, much should to your Virtue add
It Is known your Country Echo forth that fame
Embellishing your true Britanick name:
The which I more Respect, because that mine,
Likewise is British, from Britanick Line;
And in a stricter sense your Country man,
Whose Birthright Styles, a Cardiganian.
And could my Plummet that vast Ocean sound,
I in my Countries praise, should more abound,
Where Noble men and Senators were found.
So rarely qualified in every thing,
True to themselves, their Country, and the King;
Learned, Religious, Loyal, for Renown,
Meek to the Miter, Courteous to the Crown,
Such worthies as deserved the Scarlet Gown.
Of whom surviving you are thought, a man
Beloved through all the Coasts of Cardigan.
Now Noble Sir, your Clemency I Crave,
To pardon my Expressions if not Grave;
I know my County it is due, I scarcely gave.
It Is not for lack of Themes my Tongue declines
My Counties praise, both Lead, and Silver Mines
Have there been found, and to this day remains;
Deep in the Ground, and under Hills in Veins,
For Englands profit, and Wales greater Gains.
Be pleased to accept my Will, my Deed is less,
Your deeper Judgment spies my shallowness.
Your Honor may find mean, what I distill
From my own Brain, and Issues from my Quill:
I question not, but your discerning Eye
Spies me a Poet in his Infancy;
Vouchsafe kind Sir, in goodness to connive
At my defects, and 'twill my hopes revive:
And may your Condescension stoop so low,
As to Ingratiate one that Service owe
To God, the King, and unto your Command,
While life permits his Service in the Land:
God save the King, vouchsafe him long to Reign,
And such as you, his Honor to maintain:
Prolong Charles life, and your Life for Charles sake
So shall your Country of true Peace partake;
And Cause our Land, to render God the praise
For Jubilees, and such Halcyon days:
The which God of his Mercy grant we may;
Thus shall Charles Subject, and your Servant pray.
W. W.

The Preface to the Ingenious and Courteous READER.
I Dare be confident that the Composing of a Book, and the Exposing thereof to
the public view of the World, is looked upon by the Censorious Captiousness of
this Critical Age, as a piece of the highest presumption; especially when it
proves the first Fruits of its Author, by reason of the variety of eminent and
Learned men, as well Ancient as Modern: Who derived their Discourses almost
from all Subjects imaginable; principally from the Sacred Records of Divinity,
by Authentic and Orthodox extractions, in as much as their Excellent and well
Composed Volumes, have either Comentaried, or Paraphrased all the Commands,
Precepts, Promises and Examples, pertaining both to the Old and New Testaments;
and this in such an amplitude, that many men's opinions allow no ground to
extract or derive any thing from Scripture, save what have been treated of at
large by others; though this be granted, yet I might say that we and the
posterity of these exemplary Patterns of Piety, are not absolutely created by
the Divine Power; to live by the Industry and pains of others, but rather as
our Incumbent duty according to the Capacity of our endeavors, we ought to be
Imitators of these Divines, as well in the Theorick, as in the Practick part of
Divinity, provided we err not from their forementioned Authentic Doctrine;
nor from such Points and Principles as have a right correspondency with
Scriptures.

Wherefore Candid Reader, my Genius has so far presumed, as to contrive in a
Poetic method those observations which I derived from the Contemplation of
Sacred Subjects: And because I would not willingly be deceived by the first
Fruits of my Undertakings in this enterprise; I endeavored to make choice of
the best Basis and surest Foundation for my intended superstructure, namely the
Eternal God; in hopes the attempting of so good a beginning would prove the
means of attaining an happy End.

These and the like Cogitations gained the prevalency over my Inclinations so
far, as to insist upon more Subjects of this Nature. For while I was musing of
God, and his goodness, I found even as the Psalmist expressed in Psalm. 100. v.
34. That my Meditation of him was sweet: The oftener I reflected on Divine
things, the more I was allured by them: The Subjects I pondered upon are very
winning in themselves, and so is the Method whereto I reduced them; and since
thus mutually alluring, I considered they were meet exercises for my vacant
hours: And indeed so I have found them in both these respects. First in my
Restriction from un^^essary Expenses. Secondly in confining my mind (...) to
Caelestial than Terrestial things.

But as touching the ensuing Poems, this is my request to the Impartial Reader,
that he would be pleased to connive at the Authors Frailty. For did he know his
Inabilities, he should have good reason to be very indulgent, and desire no
further Apology than this ingenious acknowledgment. That these are the first
fruits of my unexperienced Pen, and therefore may be capable of Errata's: For
though my will and design aimed no Error in their Composure, yet the
accomplishing of these Intentions without an Error, exceeds the limits of
humane frailty, the which I am too much guilty of.

This little Volume consists of several Subjects expressed in the Contents of the
Book, and the observable passages drawn as Inferences from these Subjects with
other Additions, are in two Tables cited immediately following the Contents: And
for the benefit of meaner Capacities and such as want Memory, I have compiled a
Brief Alphabetical Expositor, and placed it at the end of the Book for the
Explanation of the most difficult words that I have made use of in these Poems,
least the misapprehension of some passages might cause their misconstructions.
The which would expose the Book and the Author to greater Censure: Therefore
Courteous Reader, be pleased to cast a favorable eye upon these Poems, and
where thou can truly relish them, give God the Praise, for that belongs to
him: But where thou shall find them savor of weakness and Imperfection, impute
this to the Author, and he shall own it; but e're I leave, I conjecture it very
expedient to render thee my experimental opinion, touching the Science or
faculty of Divine Poetry. It is one of the best Companions a man can be
acquainted with: I verily believe it is as much pleasing to God as any Virtue
pertaining to a Christian, because it ties as it were the Head, Heart and Soul
of a man to the Contemplation of Heavenly things; and if so, doubtless God is
much Glorified by it: It activates a man's memory, by representing unto the mind
Objects and Subjects meet for Meditation; it causes much Seriousness, and
Evacuates the mind of Vanity, and as a watchful Sentinel protects the Heart
from the Stratagems of Satan's Temptations. These benefits in some measure I
have experienced by it, through the blessing of God; and may thou in their
perusal experience the same likewise, so recommending it and thee to the
Protection and Benediction of God, in hopes these my first Fruits may not prove
fruitless: I shall take my leave and subscribe my self truly thine in love and
service, if thou art a sincere Christian, whilst

W. Williams.

The Contents of the ensuing Poems.
SUbject I. page 1. Of God and his Eternal Being. Subj. II. page 7. Of the
Incomprehensible Eternity: Subj. III. page 15. Of Time and Death, with the
Certainty and Uncertainty of them both. Subj. IV. page 29. A Prospect of the
Glorious Creation, and the Creator understood by the Creatures. Subj. V. page
38. The model of the mavelous Creation; (to wit) the Heaven and the Earth,
and all the Hosts of them, with their accomplishments inthe space of six days.
Subj. VI. page 54. A Reflection on the wonderful Creation, with the Formation
of Adam and Eve, their Happiness in the state of Innocence; as also the
Institution of Marriage. Subj. VII. page. 60. Of the Temptation and fall of
man. Subj. VIII. page 68. On the fall of Lucifer, and the Apostate Angels. Page
75. An Appendix to the fall of Angels. Subj. IX. page 77. A brief Narration of
the second Adam, intimated by the Woman's seed in Genesis 3. v. 15. as in repairing
the loss of the first Adam, etc. Subj. X. page 95. The right Description of a
true Christian, and those Quallifications pertinent to this Believer in his
state of Grace and Christianity. Subj. XI. page 100. A discovery of the
faithful and devout Christians Quality and Conversation. Subj. XII. page 106.
Supremacy and Subordination considered, both as to the Legality of Sovereignty,
and the loyalty of Subjection, from the impartiality of our Saviors Expression
to the Jews, concerning the Tribute Money in Mat. 22.21. Render therefore unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods.
Subj. XIII. page 111. Tribute and Custom are commanded by God to be rendered
the Ministers of Christ, because their due as well as their lawful
Magistrates; observed from Romans 3. v. 6, 7. For this cause pay you Tribute
also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.
Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Sub. XIV. page 114. Gods
love to mankind, and the Terms of Salvation, considered from Joh. 3.16. God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Subj. XV. page 117. A
Meditation on Isa. 55. v. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near. Subj. XVI. page 121. A Contemplation on Job 20. v. 5. The
Triumphing of the wicked is short, the Joy of a Hypocrite is but for a moment.
Subj. XVII. page 123. A reflection on Eccles. 7: v. 4. The heart of the wise
man is in the house of Mourning, but the heart of Fools is in the house of
Mirth. Subj. XVIII. page 125. A reflection on Psalm. 49. v. 20. Man that is born
in Honor, and understands not, is like the Beasts that perish. Subj. XIX.
page 128. An Observation on Prove. 22. v. 22, 23. Rob not the poor because he is
poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the Gates, for the Lord will plead their
Cause, and will spoil the Soul of them that have spoiled him. Subj. XX. page
131. An Extraction from Isa. 5. v. 11. Woe be to them that rise up Early in the
Morning to follow Strong Drink, that continue till night until Wine inflame
them. Subj. XXI. page 134. An Observation from Mat. 5. v. 33. Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. Subj. XXII.
page 138. On Luke 12. v. 47, 48: And that Servant which knew his Lords will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beat with
many Stripes. But he that knew not, and did things worthy of Stripes, shall be
beaten with few Stripes. Subj. XXIII. page 141. A Contemplation on Mat. 6. v.
24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Subj. XXIV. page 144. A Pause upon Prove.
12. v. 2. When Pride comes, then comes shame; but with the lowly is Wisdom.
A Table of the observable Instances in these Poems, hinted by the Marginal
Notes.
SOadmirable is God, that no one can display what he is should he require so
many days to study him as Simonides did page 3. *

God Created some things in the space of time, which shall in duration exceed
some other things, though from all Eternity p. 18. *

Some things there are that have neither beginning nor end, as God himself p.
19. *

Death varies often, and is full of uncertainties p. 20.

It is hard for a man to foresee what manner of Death is ordained for him, p.
22.

The wisdom of God created man an Epitome of the great World; and made man the
great Ruler of it p. 28. *

God may be understood by every Creature. Ibid *

God is the efficient cause of all causes p. 29.

Nature is a second cause p. 30. *

If the Stars govern men, God governs the Stars p. 34. *

The opinion of the Atheist, and the confutation thereof Ibid *

Reason allows the creation of Angels to be on the first day p. 39. *

It may be supposed that Hell was Created on the first day p. 40. *

Man was made the Image of God p. 50. *

Adam gave names to all Creatures according to their kind p. 58. *

The Serpent tempts Eve, p. 60. *

Eves reply to the Serpents temptation Ibid

The Serpents reply to Eve p. 61. *

The woman possessed with the Serpents temptation Ibid

Eve beholds the forbidden Tree, through Avarice takes of its Fruit, eats
thereof her self, gives Adam of the same, and both sin alike Ibid *

The Devil told truth p. 52. *

Adam and Eve hide themselves from Gods presence Ibid

God calls upon Adam p. 53.

Adams excuse Ibid *

None knew but God whick was worst, Adam, Eve, or the Serpent p. 64. *

The woman must conceive in sorrow p. 65.

Adam must eat bread in the sweat of his face, till he returns to the ground p.
66.

On Luciser and his confederate Angels p. 96.

The Angels ambition p. 71. *

The names ascribed to the Devil, and the distinction of Devils Ibid.

None called Angels in Hell but those that fell with Lucifer. Ibid

Lucifer Tempted Adam and Eve in Paradise p. 73.

Since the Devil must remain in Hell, he would have all in his condition p. 74.

The difference betwixt Lucifer and Adams ambition p. 76.

Every Soul alive may be capable of Salvation p. 78. *

Christ died for every Soul alive. Ibid

The damned might be saved could they but repent p. 81. *

This side the Grave the vilest wretch may be freed from sin. Ibid *

Man's election considered, Ibid.

Predestination, and Gods rigorous decree qualified p. 82.

The Arguments drawn from the strictness of election and reprobation. Ibid *

An objection arising from the position of Gods decree, and the Solution
thereof. Ibid

All mankind fell in Adam p. 83. *

The elect must be sinners by nature, as well as others.

For all sinned without exception Ibid *

An opinion of the Heathen World, as how judged and how saved p. 85. 1

God stamped a law in man's heart, which is the law of nature. Ibid 2

God made a Law of works and delivered it to Moses, writ in Tables of stone p.
86. 1

Faith the Tenor of the Gospel Ibid 2

Gods Covenant with Abraham p. 87. 2

Whom the Law convicts, the Gospel will reprieve Ibid 2

Some derive ill consequences from the doctrine of predestination p. 88,

Cain no Reprobate, by positive decree p. 89. 1

Esau no Reprobate by predestination p. 91.

Election and Reprobation depending on Man's penitence, or his presumption p.
93. 1

God intended the Salvation of all, by the mission of Christ p. 94. 1

The Christian his behavior toward God p. 96. 1

His deportment toward Man p. 97.

His decency toward himself p. 98. 1

His carriage toward the World. Ibid 2

The Christian resembles the Publican p. 100.

He will not bring forth Fruit to himself p. 102. 1

He has content in every State. Ibid 2

He has nothing yet possesses all things Ibid 3

His life is hid with Christ in God p. 103. 1

No weapon formed against him shall prosper p. 104.

Monarchy Metamorphosed to Democracy p. 108.

Obedience deniable to the Usurpers of Authority p. 109.

Ministers ought to be paid their Tribute p. 112.

Man ought to be really holy and not so thought of p. 122.

A Brief Table of additional observations, pertinent to this Book.
DIvine Ejaculations or pious breathings p. 154.

A spiritual Hymn to the praise of God p. 147.

The various significations of the word World in Scriptures p. 156.

On the words Exploration, Deploration, Imploration Ibid

On the words Easeless, Endless, and Remediless. Ibid

On Faith, Hope and Charity p. 157.

On God, the King, and the Church. Ibid

Of God, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Ibid

Of Gods afflicting man for evil p. 158.

Of Gods not regarding sometimes the prayers of his own Servants. Ibid

On Mat. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God p. 159.

On the the word Amen, and its significations. Ibid

On the happiness of him that truly fears and serves God. Ibid

On Servitude and Freedom p. 160.

An Inference touching Mortality, drawn from the temporality of the Popes
Holiness. Ibid

PARADOXES.
On the righteousness of man in Christ. p. 161.

Of death either in sin, to sin, or for sin.

On man's Birth, Death and Burial, as naturally and spitually considered. Ibid

On Genesis 31.5. And Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac.

On the words of David in Psalm the 47. v. 8. Awake up my glory. Ibid

Upon this expression of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 51.16. Thy words were found
and I did eat them. Ibid

The conclusion p. 163.

The Authors Apology for himself to God.
GLorious, and Grations, thou great God of might,
Assist me by thy Spirit to Indite
Some extract from thy Book, and this Rehearse,
Though thy Divinest Prose, in Divine Verse:
Perchance hereby it may take some effect
In Verse, on those that all the Prose neglect;
Yet I expect not to attain this end,
Unless thy Blessings do the means attend:
Permit me, Lord, if it thy pleasure be
To ponder what may render praise to thee;
Vouchsafe me thy assistance, so each Line
Shall have dependence on what is Divine:
For it is my Aim, I speak it without shame,
I this request to magnify thy Name;
But as I should, I dare not say I can,
Without thy Aid, because I am a man:
Consider my defects, be pleased to guide
My Head, Heart, Hand, lest my Penslip aside:
Grant whilst I study in thy Word, thy Will
I may my self the same seek to fulfill,
And through thy Grace prevent my doing ill.
Often have I craved thy pardon for my Crimes,
Again the same committed diverse times;
Offend and pardon crave, crave and offend,
Will be, I fear, my course to my lives end;
But not without a willingness to be
From all offenses Innocent and free;
And whilst my will and my acknowledgment,
To my transgressions render no assent:
Thus I conclude, though seeds of sin remain
Within me; over me sin shall not Reign.
E're death begins my fleshly Veil to Rent,
By true Repentance make me Innocent;
Good God my maker, I thee humbly pray,
That Hallelujahs I may sing for aye:
To thee with those thy Mercies did translate,
From Earth to Heaven, there to contemplate
Thy Glory and thy Greatness, where among
Ten thousand times, ten thousand Saints is Sung
The Song of Moses, and that of the Lamb,
Which the Prophets bore a part, and Miriam:
So full of Triumph so Harmoniously,
That Angels Echoed forth its Mellody;
Oh! could I but obtain my sweet desire,
To Sing my part with this Caelestial Quire;
Then I thy greatness, greatly should admire.
And were I but prepared for Heavens mirth,
My Gladness should transport me there from Earth:
Where Choristers of Saints and Cherubims,
Angels, Archangels, Sacred Seraphims,
Each in their order, warble forth and Sing
Caelestial Hymns and Anthems to their King,
And Christ their Savior for his Suffering.
That I might sing in Heaven evermore,
I fain would try to Sing on Earth before:
Thus I ambitious am to find my Tongue,
By thee refined to sing a sacred Song
Unto thy Holiness whilst here below,
Thou do my Being, Lord! to me bestow
A Song of Recantation from each sin,
To Sanctity, Salvation for to Win;
And that I may thy Servant ever be,
Thy Blessing and thy Grace confer on me:
The Weakness and the Errors, Lord! are mine,
But all that is Good, to thee I re-assigne;
And let the Praise and Glory all be thine.
The Authors Apology for himself to Men.
THe Reason why on Divine things I write,
Is that my Subjects will my pains requite;
I dare affirm, who best perceives the cause,
It Is not conceited, nor to gain applause:
They are allowed, the contrary will judge,
While these pass Censure, I Will forbear to grudge.
I can discern it does exceed the Pen,
Of the most skilful, for to please all men:
One likes not this, another likes not that,
The Writer's mean, or's writing dull and flat,
Can please all fancies, there is no who, nor what.
Who reads the Ancient Proverb truly finds,
So many men, so many various minds:
Let the Censorious then, these Lines deride,
And let the Captious them abase through pride;
And let the Libertine have them in scorn,
Shall disregard from these my hopes forlorn?
No of a truth, I hope they pleasure can,
The Wise, Religious, and the sober man:
It matters not with these, nor should with those,
If good what style is used or Verse or Prose;
But at this time I purpose to rehearse,
What I derived from Prose in Modest Verse:
Which has decayed, and daily does decline,
In Subject matters serious and Divine:
Divinity did once adorn the Verse,
And pious Meeter's now become perverse,
What did refine the Tongue and Charm the Ear,
Lies in Oblivion, like what is out of wear:
Divinity is but withdrawn, not dead,
Drolls clear the Stage, Divinity is fled:
Tho it is remote, yet still it does remain,
In the usurping room os these to Reign:
I see those times how Sions Rhims decay,
Drolls, Prologues, Epilogues, these bear the sway:
With other things that Echo in the Streets,
As Ballads, Garlands, and Licentious Sheets:
Some so delight in these, this present Age,
They Would shun the Sanctuary for the Stage;
And if I Am not mistaken, some these days
Would rather part with Preaching than with Plays
Which is absurd to think, can such be free
From Sin in the Superlative degree;
I dare not judge, I do but this suppose,
And wish we were not to our selves such foes;
Approving of Repentance, to prevent
Those dreadful Judgments which are Imminent;
May this a Caution be to us always,
To seek Gods Praises, more then Songs and Plays:
Plays profit not, but Praises will afford
Both Grace to man, and Glory to the Lord:
Plays and prophanness, let us therefore scorn,
Since for Gods Praises all mankind were born.
May this suffice, unless to verify
The pleasantness of Divine Poetry.
It is a faculty, whereby one may
The same time with the Spirit Sing and Pray.
Converse with God, and make known his Request
Unto Gods Spirit that dwells in his breast;
Which is a pleasant profitable thing,
That man Salvation to his Soul may Sing,
This Poetry, the Poet make, not poor,
But rich by Treasures, lasting evermore:
This method does impoverish it is said,
And some we find to affect it are afraid.
Yet Divine Poetry shall gain consent,
It does enrich, and not make Indigent.
He that all Idle Subjects will decline,
May make his Pen an unexhausted Mine,
And amongst Worthies in true Glory Shine.
Though this Poetic Science has the name
Of making poor, yet it is the Poets shame:
Thus Poetry is charged, when wilfulness
Makes poor the Poet, through his own Excess.
The Richest man that ever lived on Earth
A Poet was, and partly so by Birth.
His Father was a Poet, so was he,
And both were Kings, which now few Poets be.
To nominate the Father and the Son,
They were King David and King Solomon;
Those Princely Poets could Divinely Sing,
Sweet Psalms and Hymns to their Caelestial King.
These did exceed all others; or I should
Entreat their Muse, if I durst be so bold:
But since I find her of too high a strain,
I Will beg a meaner, and will their, refrain:
Thus then I crave, would God but me infuse
With Herberts, Cowleys, or with Quarles's Muse,
Then would I write in Meeter what was meet,
And should not care if all the World did see it:
But as for me all Poets I prefer
Before my self, so apt am I to Err.
Wherefore my Brethren think the best of me,
In many things we all offenders be:
And for my Deed, accept of my good Will,
My Theme is good, although my Verse be ill.
ERRATA.
Nemo sine Crimine vivit. When no man living, can from Faults be free,
Then many Errors may be found in me:
My Readers with your Pens, please to correct
Faults Literal, or Faults through my defect.
PAge 1. line 4. read ought, p. 3. l. 21. r know, p 16. l. 1. r. finite, p. 31.
l. 4 r. Cause p 41. l. 15. r. divided, p 43. l. 12. r. admits, p. 47. l 9. r
Stars, p 49 l. 15. r. did, l. 29. r jum, p. 51. r. be in l. 15. before found in
l. 16. p. 69. l. 14 r. a Witchcraft, p. 74. l. 10. r. them, p. 76. l. 8. r
Lures, p 92. l 6. r. brake, p. 98. l. 9. r. time, p. 104. l. 1. r. Christians,
p. 115 l. 21 r. Souls, p. 122. l. 3. r. that they. p 130. l. 5 r. is, p. 137.
l. 3. r. his, p. 142. l. 15. r. most, p. 145. l. 21. r. the, p. 160. l. 7. r.
tho.

Admire not, Friends, if Errors you do see,
Besides these in my Book, when more in me:
I am the faulty, let the faultless man
Cast the first stone, and hit me if he can.
POETICAL PIETY, OR Poetry made Pious.
SUBJECT I. Of GOD, and his Eternal Being.
God is a Spirit, 'biding evermore,
Whom Man in Truth and Spirit should adore.
WHat shall I think! how shall I thee define?
Indefinite thou art, and so Divine,
Not apprehensive to this heart of mine.
Thee to describe so ample as I thought,
Exceeds the Finite means that I have sought.
This Rule I Will take, and by this Rule enquire
What I cannot apprehend, that I Will admire,
Thus dread to Dive in thy blessed Deity,
By some inquisitive fond scrutiny.
Because a curious search may prove my shame,
And the Dishonor of thy Holy Name.
Not one retains thy Knowledge save in part,
Thou can not be conceived Lord by man's heart
A God so pure and perfect as thou art.
Who search thy Essence, Thee to know aright,
Do in effect, but lose their Faith and Sight:
Absurd are those who seek this Depth to sound,
In Justice God their Judgments might confound.
Some have inquired as thinking it no crime,
What Is God! and where was he e're space of time?
Or doing what! before He did Create
The World? are Questions strange and Intricate:
And whether God Decreed or framed a Hell
Before a Heaven, Scripture will not tell.
Whereby we may percieve God takes it ill,
Of those that pry into His secret Will,
And aim to search His Council by their skill.
Gods Will revealed sufficient is to Man,
The mind of God in needful things to scan;
And farther than he has his Will revealed,
It is his pleasure it should be concealed:
All curious questions ought to be forgot,
Since their Solutions to be found are not.
What God keeps secret we must not desire
To search into, but rather it admire.
Thy Will revealed (Lord's) our Directory,
Wherein at large thou do thy self descry
to be a God Eternal, and therefore
Existing of thy self for evermore:
A Being of all Beings, and from thee
Sprang all Beginnings whatsoever Be,
I crave thy leave one higher step to clime,
And view a scantling of thee, though sublime;
Not curiously to search into the same,
But to admire thy Nature and thy Name:
Thy Nature for its Sanctity so bright;
Thy Name as the Immortal God of Might.
So Wonderful thou art, who can display
What is the Lord, should he require a day.
Well may thou be most wondrous unto me,
That did him puzzle who required Three,
Symonides desired three days to consider what God was but could not find out
his perfection.
Symonides, his Tongue was tied by thee.
This I foresee, and this thou have foreshown,
Hereafter Man shall know thee as Man's known.
I know thee but in part, the which therefore
Makes me ambitious for to know thee more:
The more I know thee, more I do admire;
Yet in admiring more, I still desire,
Till Heaven makes my Knowledge more entire.
I lose my self in searching after thee,
Since Comprehensive thou art not to me.
O manifest thy self unto me more
Hereafter, then thou have done heretofore;
That I may know thee, as thou may be known,
Of those that do themselves thy Servants own.
I would Importune more, but fear I should,
(Who am a Worm) be with my God too bold:
In being too familiar, some thereby
Create Contempt through familiarity.
Lo then my Muse, let us for a while be mute,
Admiting God in every Attribute:
As in his Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Might,
Love, Mercy, Meekness, let us take delight;
And all he makes apparent to our sight.
In all Transactions still on him depend,
That neither had Beginning, nor has end,
Whose Knowledge as he is, Man's Thoughts transcend.
It is too high a Theme, this God to know
Essentially by Mortals here below,
Whom Angels do admire, may men adore;
That ever lived, and lives for evermore.
Know God essentially, no Creature can
Within this world, that is a living man.
For God, he is a Spirit; and therefore
In truth and Spirit men should him adore.
To know him as he is, man is denied,
The sight's too glorious till man's gloryfi'd.
Abraham's, Isack's, Jacob's God is he,
One undivided, and in Persons Three.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each one,
Of these Three Persons, make but God alone.
The Essence is but one; none can divide
The Godhead where Three Persons do abide.
Though this man's Reason cannot comprehend,
To this belief man must his Faith extend,
Till death unvails this hidden mystery,
By man's translation to Eternity.
Mean while may men beware, lest they should make
An Idol God, and the true God forsake.
Some things there are adored as Gods, the same,
Bear no relation, to God save the name,
Therefore to worship such, is sin, and shame.
Though there be Idol Gods, the God of might,
From Heathen Gods, I thus declare the right.
God is my God, and God my God shall be;
No God but God, the God of Gods is he
Three Persons in one Godhead that agree.
Of the Consubstantiality of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine
Essence.
These Trinity of Persons be,
For Nature, Co-essential,
Coequal each for Dignity,
For Time, they 're Coeternal.
The Father's God, the Son is God,
The Holy Ghost, likewise,
Is not a person, that is odd,
But both these equalize.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The Godhead, appertains;
Who Is Lord of the Caelestiall Host,
Eternal that remains.
SUBJECT II. Of the Incomprehensible Eternity.
There is no Subject save our God so high,
To treat upon, as is ETERNITY.
Observation I.
WHat head, what heart, what tongue of mortal man
Imagine, apprehend, or utter can
The meainng of this word Eternity?
In it is extensive latitude that pry;
What it imply's, not one aright can tell,
Unless he were in Heaven, or in Hell.
Observation II.
Some things there are whereby it is descried
As though by these it should be signified.
But few comparisons that can descry,
It Is boundless, bottomless, profoundity.
When these cannot be Fathomed I declare,
It is superlative, and not t'compare.
Observation III.
Some in their shadows of Eternity,
Present a wheel, the same to signify.
This signature is endless; and therefore
Does represent Eternity the more.
It Is being endless, like a wheel or Ring,
Pourtrays Eternity, some wheeling thing.
Observation IIII.
By wheels and Rings, the Ancients did of Old,
Eternity as endless then behold;
All things Orbicular in their esteem;
Like to Eternity it self did seem.
They thought of it when they themselves turned round,
And by their making Circles on the ground.
Observation V.
These Metaphors are helps to signify,
The things that be obscure to mortal eye.
But not the things as in themselves they are,
What Is signified by signs are not t'compare.
For Instance, when man's Pictures drawn by Art
Though it is man's Picture, cannot act man's part.
Observation VI.
No Sphere, nor Globe, nor round Circumference,
Can represent the magnitude, Immense,
Of boundless, bottomless Eternity,
For aye continuing in its constancy.
Without all doubt there is no emblem fit,
Whereby resemblance may be made to it.
Observation VII.
Of all the temporal things mine eyes have viewed,
I Have not seen its true similitude.
Some to describe it, did proceed thus far,
That it resembles what is Orbicular.
If to their thoughts herein we condescend,
The Reason is, because it has no end.
Observation VIII.
Circles, and Rings, Spears, Globes, the Sun and Moon
Eternity foreshews, like night the noon.
The night so gloomy that, it vails our sight,
The noon so glorious by Meridian light;
Thus what is Eternity not one can tell,
On this side Heaven, nor on this side Hell.
Observation IX.
Number the Sands that on the shore do lie.
The Grass o'th Fields, or Stars in the Azure sky,
All creeping, flying, and all swimming things,
All Gravel, Stones, and all the watery springs.
As these, man's apprehension do excel,
So what is Eternity no man can tell.
Observation X.
Yet some resemblance thus to it is made,
As if we meant the Sunshine by the shade:
Or like a thing hid by some noted mark;
That Is seen by day, but groap'd for in the dark.
By glimering light sometimes we chance t'espy,
The duskish shadows of Eternity.
Observation XI.
Eternity considered in Hell.
is a night of Sorrow,
And such a night as never knows a morrow
This side the grave, what mortals Estimation,
Admits of it is nocturnal Termination:
Let him conjecture it in Hell remaining,
For evermore remain without refraining.
Observation XII.
Eternity confidered in Heaven.
Eternity is such a day of Pleasure,
As everlasting and immense for measure,
Such endless joy, and such surpassing glory,
As far transcends the reach of humane story,
Of which these Characters may well be given,
If but considered as it is in Heaven.
Observation XIII.
Eternity considered both in Heaven, and in Hell.
Eternity is sorrow, dread, and sadness,
Eternity again is joy, and gladness:
In Hell it is grief, it is horror and damnation;
In Heaven glory, Honor, and Salvation.
And thus you see by this my breviate story,
It Is Hells dishonor, and it is Heaven's glory.
Observation XIII.
No mortal man can in his heart or brain,
The meaning of Eternity contain.
So great will be man's weal, so great man's woe,
None ever did, or shall on Earth it know.
Exceeding mind, surpassing memory;
Transcending reason is Eternity.
Observation XV.
What metaphor or figure can be found,
Whereby Eternity for to expound.
Save Sun and Moon, Globes, Circles, Spears and Rings,
Lustres Olimpaids, Jubile's, which things,
Are all uncertain, that none can descry,
By transcient things, what is Eternity.
Observation XVI.
Eternity does evermore abide,
And there are no Eternities beside.
For were there more Eternities to be,
Time with Eternity would thus agree:
Beginning, and of end, it would admit,
But it is only one that is Infinite.
Observation XVII.
Thus much is said, and now I know no more
To say, unless what I have said before.
Of this Grand Subject which secludes man's heart,
Deluding, Humane Reason, Wit and Art:
To search its nature where confusion's found;
Impossibilities so much abound,
Observation XVIII.
Eternity, some knowledge now I have
Of thee, thou dos't reside beyond the grave:
Thou art not to be found this side the same,
Thy natur'es there, although we have thy name.
Thou art men's Portion, they must thee possess,
Beyond the grave in woe, or happiness.
Observation XIX.
Terror thou art to some, to others joy,
And thus thou can both comfort, and annoy.
Because thou do for ever more abide,
Where sorrow, and where solace is beside.
Where sorrow is, thou do augment the grief,
And that is Hell, from whence is no relief.
Observation XX.
Of vast Eternity I this can tell,
What thing it is not, that I know full well.
But what it is my Reason does extend,
Its boundless limits do my thoughts transcend.
Though it is resembled often, to this, or that,
Its true resemblance is, I know not what.
SUBJECT III. Of Time, and Death, with the Vncertanty, And the Certanty of them
both.
Both Death and Time, are certain things to be,
Yet make my life uncertain unto me.
WHen God began all Creatures to Create,
The space of Time did these Anticipate,
Or else God could not properly begin,
For to Create, had no beginning been;
And this beginning was the very prime,
Or first production of the space of time.
This modicum of Minutes, Hours and Days,
God made for to perpetuate his praise.
And for the greatest Creation he required:
But six days space the more to be admired;
Accomplishing what things himself thought best;
In these Six days, the Seventh day to Rest.
Time is an Infinite thing; for time began
Not long to be e're God Created man,
And has a termination to decay,
With man again at Gods great Judgments day;
Without permission to endure for aye:
Time is that space or circumstance wherein,
Angels and men, acquaintance got with sin.
'Twas in this space both Heaven and Earth did err.
That Adam fell, and lofty Lucifer.
All good and evil, acted is in Time,
Which will diminish, or increase man's Crime;
This time, although a pittance, or a span,
Yet it is a mercy lent to mortal man:
When man in Time against God did rebel,
He might have turned Man, from Time to Hell:
But God who did Eternally decree;
The great Messiah of mankind to be,
Forbore this rigor, and exalted Man,
The universal Metropolitan;
And gave man means whereby he might repent:
And through Repentance to be Innocent.
Thus for this end this interim of time:
Enjoyes fallen man to make him more sublem;
But so uncertain's Time, not one can say
With safety he shall see another day;
Time steals away, and takes its flight with speed
Of transient Time may Mortals take more heed;
It is a Thought, a Shadow, and a Dream:
A Bubble that soon glides along the Stream.
So short is Time, its length is but a Span,
And yet of greatest consequence to Man;
God often sollicits man, Time to redeem:
As if Time precious were in Gods esteem,
From which we might derive this inference,
Time is regained by double diligence:
That is, by taking care, and minding more,
The things of God hereafter then before;
He that does thus, no doubt but every crime
By him committed, perish with his Time:
And when the Term of Time, Man thus expires;
Eternity compleats all his desires.
What Is Time but Finite, and does soon decay;
As when the Sunshine drives the shade away:
With some declining thing I might it style
To be, and yet is not within a while;
Minntes and Hours, Days, Weeks, Months, Years
It spends it self, and yet has not to spare. declare
And when it is fully spent, no more appears,
This season to supply the place of years:
Methinks the true description of Time is,
A circumstance in a (Parenthesis.)
It seems to be beset as in this kind,
Eternity, before it, and behind;
And yet the style remaining still the same
Eternity nor Time, will bear the Name:
God Created some things in the space of time, which shall in duration exceed
some other things, though from all Eternity.
Though God in Time did every thing Create,
Some things with Time shall never terminate;
As Angels and Men's Souls these shall exceed,
What God from all Eternity decreed.
Some things God did before Times space ordain,
Which after Time, were never to remain;
There were decrees e're time which did relate
To man in Time, with Time to terminate,
For instance, God appointed Christ (to be)
Man's great Messiah, by Divine Decree,
For sin to suffer on a Cursed Tree.
His merits may be pleaded, during Time;
But afterward they expiate no crime;
Marriage ordained has been e're Time began,
But there is no Marriage after Time for man:
And thus I prove some things to be decreed
Eternally, yet shall not Time exceed.
Some things there are, that have neither beginning nor ending; as God himself.
Again some things there are, and these admit;
Of no beginning, nor of end (to wit,)
As God himself Eternally to name,
From everlasting, evermore the same:
Eternity it self is God alone,
He no beginning had, nor end has none:
And hence we learn, time's temporality,
Bears no proportion to Eternity.
But is so short a space described to man,
Its Longitude, and Latitude, a span.
And this small Circumstance of Time has bin,
The stage of man's transactions, and man's sin.
And will be while that mortals do traverse,
The great Theater of this Universe;
By wilful Sports, and Comic Tragedies,
Or other mischiefs, which from sin arise;
Until the final fatal overthrow,
By Death and Time, of mankind here below;
Death is uncertain, and it is sure no doubt;
Times torch-light wastes, and quickly will be out;
Both Death and Time, unconstant are to men,
In every Circumstance, how, where, or when;
That still at unawares men are bereaved
Of life, and so by Time, and Death deceived;
Death varies often, and is full of uncertanties.
As for example, he that is but Young
So surely dies, as he that lived long;
And thus we see mortality presage,
Our Infancy, Youth, Manhood, and old Age.
Sometimes our sinful Lives we do expire,
In floods of waters or in flames of fire;
Sometimes for horrid deeds we recompense,
Our selves by doing wilful violence:
Sometimes Gods Judgments for man's sins are found
Like Pharohs Host in the Oacen men to drowned:
Some wicked men the Lord comits in Ire,
With Nadab and Abihu to the fire:
Others there are whom Death does thus deprive,
Like Sechems men are Swallowed up alive;
Others again like Sisera were brought
To death, by Stars, which in their courses fought.
And some we read another way are Dead,
By Houses overwhelming on their head;
Which Sampson and Job's children did devour,
With those Eighteen interred by Shiloams Tower
Some with wild Beasts there are in pieces torn,
As were those scoffing boys, in Bethel born;
And some are found like Achan stoned to Death.
That Is presently bereft of mortal Breath:
Again we find, that Justice often times,
Hangs men like Haman, for malignant crimes:
And there are men by their acquaintance slain,
As Abner, or as Abel was by Cain;
For Abel, as he walked in the Field,
Through Cain's assault, his life to death did yield:
To show the uncertainty of Death the more,
It slew old Eli sitting at his door,
To Eglons Summer Parlor death retird,
And Eglons life by strange surprise required;
Betwixt the Temple and the Altar, Death
Met Zachary, there him deprived of Breath:
Senacharib, of life likewise was Robbed,
By Death in Nisrah's house, though 'twas his God
Again it is said, whils't sleeping Isboseth:
In his Bedchamber, was surpised by Death;
Death the Philistines smote, in their resort:
To the Theater, there themselves to sport.
And stately Herod, he within a Trice:
After Deaths Summons, was destroyed by Lice;
An Archer from his Bow, did let to fly
An Arrow which Josiah's caused to die
A Prophet of the Lord, we find again:
Was by a Lions Teeth both torn, and slain.
The falling of a Stone, did break the head;
Of stout Abimeleck, and made him dead:
And cruel Jezabel as strangely died,
Entombed by Dogs for her accursed pride.
Zimri and Cozby, for their wicked Fact,
Were slain by Phineas, in the very Act:
Two Captains with their fifties bore Gods Ire,
And were consumed by his Caelestiall Fire;
Cursed Ananias and Saphira died,
Because against the Holy Ghost they Ly'd.
Thus Judas, who betrayed his Lord, that Elf
Withdrew from Christ, went forth and hanged himself
To Period these examples, who from hence:
It is hard for a man to foresee what-manner of death is ordained for him.
Is It can derive the proper inference;
Of his own death; fith these mutations are
So incident to men in them to share;
Thus may the question be resolved then,
Those that fear God shall die like Godly men;
That is a timely death in man's full Age,
Or when some sickness does man's death presage;
There is a certain Time for man that is born,
Like Harvest season for the Shock of Corn;
And there is a death untimely that does lop:
Man's life like to the Ears of Corn, men crop;
And there is a Lingering death which seems to be
A Prison to the Soul, till it gets free;
So there is a sudden death which gives a blow,
Without its warning, and this death is woe;
There is a tranquil death to die in peace,
As not perceiving of the souls Release;
And there is a death attended with distress,
As raving, raging and unquietness;
What man is he, that can the knowledge have
Which of these deaths, shall bring him to his grave
Thousands of deaths there are that men befall,
And yet no man can tell which of them all
Belongs to him; these Issues do depend,
On God alone the lives of Men to end;
Thus all transactions acted from the prime,
Of man's Creation, periods death and time;
As touching man, both time and death might well
In some opinions thus run Parallel. --
Yet Death and Time, from Paralells have ran:
In a (Parenthesis) to limit man.
Time past behind him, Time to come before,
Where death arrests him to pay natures score;
But not to leave till rendered Time its due,
Great benefits to men herein ensue;
If that but seriously we recollect,
What God for man's salvation did effect.
The accomplishment of every thing was done,
By Gods Incarnate word, (or Christ his Son)
The best production of the space of Time,
Was man's Redemption from each mortal crime;
By our (Emanuel) which cherishes
A christians heart, and gives him life in death:
So that he is willing to dismiss, Times Span,
Since life Eternal purchased is for Man.
As much as in us lies, let us all apply,
Our hearts in time, to gain Eternity.
I mean this present space, although that some
Will say: if time is past, there is Time to come,
But when the time to come, likewise is past,
Through carelessness, great proves the loss at last;
If we regard our Time but Righteously,
Our sure reward will be Eternity;
Neglect we Time Eternity we gain,
In everlasting torments to remain;
Improve we Time, and doubtless we shall find
Joys to Eternity remain behind.
Thus of a Truth Eternity rewards
Him that esteems it, or it disregards;
Since thus it is I am resolved therefore,
Betimes in Time, the grace of God t'implore.
That after Time I may my soul supply,
With life and joy, in blessed Eternity;
Of which through mercy may all men partake,
When Time's no Time, for Man's Messiah sake.
SUBJECT IV. A prospect of the Great Creation, And the Creator, understood by
the Creatures.
All living Creatures most apparently,
A God that is Omnipotent descry.
O What contrivance I behold,
When seriously I gaze;
On Gods Creation wrought of old,
Such as my mind amaze.
II.
Methinks Gods wisdom did fore-run,
His might when as I see,
Above, and eke beneath the Sun,
Such wondrous works to be.
III.
The Lord did by his prudence frame,
And by his word has wrought,
All things to Glorify his name,
And framed the same of naught.
IV.
All things that are, once nothing were,
Which nothing, every thing
At Gods command was made to bear,
What he to pass should bring.
V.
Then how might mortal men admire,
The wisdom of the Lord;
Who at his pleasure and desire,
Made all things by his word.
VI.
The Earth which is, through wisdom was
Made uniform in frame.
Of that Rude Lump, confused, when as
It from the Chaos came.
VII.
So was the world although so wide;
Of nothing made to be,
So great a Bulk it is not denied;
By God, and none but he.
VIII.
The Wisdom of God Created man an Epitom of the great World, and made man the
great Ruler of it.
Which Macrocosm, was since comprizd
Or modeliz'd to man,
This Microcosm Epitomized;
Its Metropolitan.
IX.
Lo here is prudence most profound;
Discretion to behold,
And understanding to a bound,
By wisdom manifold.
X.
These are Gods works, and they do seem
Most wondrous in the sight
Of Prudent man, and his esteem,
That ponder's them aright.
XI.
God may be understood by every Creature.
God may be seen in every thing,
All Creatures comprehend,
Some sign of God from whom they spring,
And on whom they depend.
XII.
Created beings rational,
Nay sensible as Brutes,
And Vegetables likewise, shall
Display Gods Attributes.
XIII.
Behold his Wisdom in their frame,
His Power to appear
In the Enlivening of the same,
His Providence them cheer.
XIV.
Man, Beast, Fish, Fowl, and every thing
Created, does explain;
Its species sprang from such a Spring,
None could but God ordain:
XV.
God is the efficient cause of all causes.
The efficient Cause of all Effects,
Is God, and only He
In either of these two respects;
Creation, or Decree.
XVI.
Ascribe lets not, to Nature, what
Does properly belong,
Unto the God of Nature, that
Were a Blasphemous wrong.
XVII.
Nature is a Second cause.
For Nature, is no otherwise
Than as an Officer,
A Second cause which does arise;
From God the cause of her.
XVIII.
And hence we are Informed then,
No Science, Skill, nor Art:
Nor Nature wondrous were to Men;
Should God not Act his part.
XIX.
For God first moves, and whithout doubt,
Gives motion to the rest;
He brings in order things about;
Although by these expressed.
XX.
Though Nature, Science, Art and Skill,
Occasion, men's applause,
More these admire than God, do ill,
Who Is their primordial causes.
XXI.
Nay let men but conjecture this,
It Is God that gives man wit,
For to accomplish and not miss
What else he could not hit.
XXII.
Unless it be when as that Man
Does project, and does Plod,
With all the cunning Plots he can,
Regardless of his God:
XXIII.
This is not wisdom, which derives
From God where goodness dwell,
It Is madness which the Devil drives;
Within Man's heart from Hell.
XXIV.
There are which be reputed wise,
But in mischevious Acts;
Such as in falsehood, exercise
Themselves, or such like facts.
XXV.
As for the wisdom from above,
It Is sacred and secure
'Its relatvies, are Grace and Love,
So peaceable, so pure.
XXVI.
But all the wisdom from below,
Absurd to God dos seem,
And those that know it most, do know
The least in Gods esteem.
XXVII
It Is Pious prudence Elevates,
Man's mind when seriously,
He Gods Creation contemplates,
For his complacency.
XXVIII.
He gains both knowledge and delight,
That ponders often upon
The objects which delight man's sight,
Of Gods Creation.
XXIX.
Behold the Earth, the Sea, the Sky,
The Rivulets that run
From Sea, to Sea, continually
Keep course like to the Sun.
XXX.
As swift as do the Rivers glide,
So swift the Sun and Moon,
In motion are for Time, and Tide,
These slip away so soon.
XXXI.
God made the Sun the Lamp of day,
To render mortals light,
The Moon a Lanthorn to allay
The dimness of the night.
XXXII.
The darkness and the light do seem,
To God as if the same,
The night is bright in his esteem;
That both of these did frame.
XXXIII.
The luminaries of the Sky,
Those sparkling Stars so bright,
Display on Earth although so high,
Their Influence and light.
XXXIIII.
Such influence from Stars derive,
Astrologers do hold
As governs every one alive,
Poor, Rich, or Young or Old.
XXXV.
If the Stars Govern men, yet God Geverns the Stars.
Suppose that Stars do thus Rule men,
And over them bear sway,
God Rules the Stars, he is Ruler then,
Whom Stars and men obey.
XXXVI.
The which does plainly intimate,
The Rule and Government,
Of every Creature to relate;
To God Omnipotent.
XXXVII.
And this may serve for to convince,
The opinion of the Atheist, and the confutation thereof.
The Atheist, who maintains
The world to make it self, long since
By chance, and so remains.
XXXVIII.
If thus, 'twas chance that did inform,
Just Noah to prepare
An Ark, to Lanch the delluge storm,
Himself, and his to spare.
XXXIX.
But otherwise it is understood,
God, Noah gave command;
To build an Ark, and float the Flood
Which should surmount the Land.
XL.
Then Noah's God, not Atheist's chance,
Informed Noah's mind
To build an Ark, the same to Lanch:
With Creatures of all kind.
XLI.
It is an Odium to relate
What Atheists have revealed,
As how did chance, the world Create:
Of Atoms small congealed.
XLII.
And since that chance has took the pains,
To frame so large a space,
They have a course, which now remains
For to supply Chance place.
XLIII.
Thus are they grown so politic,
Not God in Heaven does dwell,
The Devil by some cunning trick,
They would deprive of Hell.
XLIV.
Now course is made for to succeed,
What chance before did frame,
All comes by course, they have agreed
To nullify Gods Name.
XLV.
Denying both, and Attribute
To chance what does belong
To God, that all did constitute,
Whom Atheists should not wrong;
XLVI.
Of things seen, and unseen, the cause
Jehovah is indeed
All for his Pleasure and applause
Were made, and not for need;
XLVII.
God never stood in need of one
Created Creature, he
God all sufficient was alone,
E're one was made to be.
XLVIII.
One Cubit to his stature add,
No Creature is that can,
When as it is not to be had
From Angel, nor from Man.
XLIX.
For both these Creatures did excel
All others in degree,
None but these Twain, were made to dwell
With God, like God to be.
L.
But not like God in every thing,
For he did both Create,
That the Creator might be King
Of Angels, and Men's state.
SUBJECT V. The Model of the Mravelous Creation, (To wit) the Heaven and the
Earth, And all the Host of them, with their Accomplishments in the space of Six
Days.
THE PROLOGUE,
All things that are, of nothing God did frame
In Six Days space, to magnify his Name,
Save, him, no Actor never could Act the same.
A Scene of the First Days Creation.
I Thus might speak, and think it proves no crime
Eternity, conceived, and brought forth time.
Time, now appears a space which was decreed
By God himself, all living things to breed.
Thus God alone, from all Eternity,
Designed a time, and what should time supply,
E're time began, there was no form nor place,
But a confused Chaos was the Case;
Of Heaven and Earth, until by Gods decree:
Their true Materials should Created be,
And these comprised, for to enlarge his praise
Within the bounds; and limits of six days,
When God determined this, he did begin
To frame the Heavens; what he pleased therein.
Rreason allow's the Creation of Angels to be on the first day.
By consequence the Heavens to possess,
Now Angels framed, gave them this happiness:
We have no witness, neither can we say,
They of a Truth, Created were this day.
But yet we may assurely this scan,
They had Creation e're God formed man;
Pardon me Reader, if herein I err,
E're Adam was, a Hell found Lucifer;
And by this Plea, we seem to intimate,
That Hell was one thing, God did first Create.
It may be supposed that Hell was Created the First Day.
Heaven was First, did First, against God Rebel,
And this Implies, the Second framed was Hell;
To damn those Angels, which from Heaven fell.
But since there is no mention made as when,
I leave this seruple to be Judged by men.
And will according to Gods word proceed,
To what he has Created, or decreed.
Behold! the formless Earth, confused and void,
Its matter, and formation now enjoyed,
This time the darkness, that did vail the face,
Of the great Abbisse, found its proper place;
Which deep, no doubt the waters were, whereon
Gods breathing Spirit, had his motion:
His Spirit on these waters surface moved,
By which the watery Element, was proved;
And made productive, that therein might breed,
Those various Broods for aye should thence proceed
This Element, does not alone produce,
Supply for food, but is it self of use;
To heal Diseases, this will do beside,
Since by Gods Holy Spirit, qualified.
Note those effusions that from hence do flow,
And those extractions, God gave men to know,
From Chimick mysteries, in things below.
But to return to what should follow next,
Let Us take a view of what lies in the Text;
It Is not amiss to look a little back,
The Text implies, of light there is a lack.
And God who did Eternally foresee,
The need of light commands that Lamp to be,
Who in this manner said, let there be light,
And it appeared in presence of his sight;
It seems that God no sooner this had said,
But lightimme diately his voice obeyed.
Such was the ruling power of his word,
That every thing could but obey the Lord,
And with his pleasure presently accord.
God saw the light that it was good, and he
From darkness, made the light divined be,
Which light he called day, it is glorious sight
Rendered the darkness to be named night;
By this time light, and darkness; both display
The Evening and the Morn of the first day.
One act is acted, God leaves this aside,
Nights Curtain draws, the Terrene stage to hide.
A Scene of the Second Days Creation.
AGain God said (whose pleasure did invent
'Twixt Heaven and Earth, a fixed Firmament)
Amid'st the waters, or betwixt them let
The Firmament my word has framed, be set.
And to regard command, we find the sky
Render submission to his potencie,
To show subjection gains sublimity.
Thereby exalted unto that degree,
The highest thing, that mortal eye can see,
Which firmament created was applied,
The waters; from the waters, to divide.
That is, by its attraction does retain
The Clouds, sometimes permits them not to rain.
Upon these lower springs, which would increase
Our floods too great, but as its greatness cease;
And thus we find the showers congealed to Snow,
Or unto Hail, not long prevail below:
God having made this sirmamentall frame
Above it, waters were beneath the same.
Likewise were waters, as God had decreed,
At the Creation, and 'twas so indeed.
The water that is above the firmament,
Is mixed with fire, sometimes in its descent.
When thus it is seen, the Heavens seem to shake,
Their voice of thunder makes the Earth to quake.
Till consternation, mankind over take.
Thus Water seems for to wage war with Fire,
While trembling mortals at their sound admire;
The noise so loud, as if designed to rent
In sunder the Caelestial Firmament.
Which firmament, admits an other Name;
And that is Heaven, thus God calls the same.
What I have said, with Scriptures will accord;
Which Oracles, most magnify the Lord,
And thus I have endeavored to explain,
What on the Second day God did ordain;
Until the Evening from the Morning Tide,
Closed up the day, and drew this Scene aside.
A Scene of the Third Days Creation.
NOw God was pleased who all things did design
For his own Praise the waters to confine.
And gather these together to one place,
Which by appointment in a little space;
Effected was, and at the Lords command,
Immediately appeared the dry Land.
To this dry Land God did ordain a Name,
The which is Earth; from its Terrestial frame;
To th'gathering of the waters he did please,
As he knew fit, to give the Name of Seas:
Which deluge rage, his power did since appease.
So God himself, saw that all this was good,
And pleased him, as may be understood.
He gave command that Earth should bring forth grass
At whose command, the Earth brought it to pass.
All things obeying him who had decreed,
From evermore the Herb to yield its seed;
The Fruit Tree, to yield Fruit, each in his kind:
To the fulfilling of his will Inclined.
Whose Seeds in these remain, and have their birth
In them to propogate upon the Earth;
This barren Earth, thus Fruitful now became,
Through their supply replenishing the same,
And since thus fertile every thing is found,
According to his kind, in it to abound;
It brings forth grass to satisfy the need,
Of what God should Create on Earth to breed
That is, all Creatures which threon should feed.
Thus bounteously did God give every thing,
Its proper species, that from Earth does spring;
Likewise the Herb, did render of its Seed;
And so the Tree according as decreed.
And this was good in God Almighties eye,
When he reviewed all things with their supply,
These are the works of God, and safely may,
Be said to have been Created the third day,
And now the Morning and the Eve restore,
This days Perfection as the days before;
Thus wise this Scene seems to dismiss our sight,
Veiled by the sable Curtain of the night.
A Scene of the Fourth Days Creation.
AGain God pleased to dictate thus, and said,
Let there be lights, and lights themselves displaid
Which lights fixation, in the firmament
Of Heaven; was designed for this event,
The separation of the day from night;
Or if you please the darkness from the light:
And these were constituted by decree,
For signs, for Seasons, Days and Years to be.
These Luminaries God was pleased to fet
In the Caelestial firmament, and let
Them render brightness on the Earth, and be
Light to all things, God should Create, to see.
For nothing more can satisfy the sight,
Than from the darkness to distinguish light;
And to behold its glory, when most bright.
When to Create the light, our God inclined;
Some passages observable I find.
This for a Truth methinks I might relate,
God did command, and his command Create.
He never did command the least of things,
But presently from him its fountain springs
Immediately from nothing some thing brings,
This Author of the Great Creation, he
Made two great lights; and makes them rulers be,
To Rule the Day, appoints the greater Light;
Commands the lesser for to Rule the Night;
Thus having made the Sun, and Moon, now he
Proceeds to make the Stars; which in degree,
Exceed each other, as in Influence,
So in proportion there is a difference.
Who reads the Scriptures Astrologick story,
Will find them likewise differ in their glory;
In his Caelestiall Orb, the God of might,
Did fix these shining Lamps on Earth to Light.
Which Lights God gave unto a power to sway,
Not only over the Night, but over the Day:
And to divide the Darkness from the Light,
Which thing was good in the Almighties sight.
And thus the Evening and the Morn again,
Compleats that work, the Fourth Day did explain.
And now this Scene so splendid, and so bright,
God drew behind the Curtain of the Night.
A Scene of the Fifth Days Creation.
GOd spoke, whose words the Thunder does outvie
Let the waters now bring forth aboudantly
The moving Creatures that have life to move,
And Fowl which may take flight, and soar above
The Globe of Earth, in the open firmament,
Of Heaven as the place of their Assent.
With these great Whales, Created God, and all
Live Creatures that have motion great and small,
Which by the waters were abundantly,
After their kind brought forth to multiply;
And every winged Fowl in his own kind,
Obeyed his Maker, sought to please his mind,
Wherefore he every Creature had designed
When he renewed his works, we find, that he
Affirmed the sight was good which he did see.
By reason good, we find him recommend
To them his blessings, which did then descend.
Upon these Creatures, unto which, said he,
Replenish, Multiply, and Fruitful be.
With plenteousness the waters of the Seas,
Ye Fishes fill; and on the Earth increase,
Ye winged Fowls, that for a full supply,
Your species may produce most plentiously.
At your Creation, this was my intent,
Then gender in your liquid Element;
Be still increasing to a greater store,
You had Creation to supply the shore.
Thus to be Fruitful, seems to intimate
That Creature Man, whom God was to Create;
The Inhabitants of the great Ocean,
God did Create, to serve the Creature man.
Without dispute 'twas only for Man's use,
He caused the Seas so flush, Fish to produce;
In these productions aid the God of might;
Rejoice, they were his raptures of delight
Deriving from his Wisdom and his Might.
The Evening and the Morning now display,
The Sun of Gods Creation, the Fifth Day;
This Evenings darkness, dims its Mornings dawn,
And thus the Curtain over the Scene is drawn.
A Scene of the Sixth Days Creation.
THe great commander speaks and constitutes,
The Earth for to bring forth all living Brutes,
Each one according to his species; and
The grovelling thing that creeps on the Land.
The Beast of the Earth, and Cattle, he confined
To be brought forth according to their kind;
And so it was, which words do here attest,
The verity of what God has expressed.
Again we find by powerful command,
The Beasts, the Cattle, what creeps on the Land
Each after his own kind he made, and lo,
All this was good, for God did find it so,
Which Epithete he used his mind to show.
He gave the word once more and spoke it thus,
(As in Plurality, says God let us,
Man was made the Image of God.
Make man according to our Image, he
After our likeness, shall Created be.
And let them have Dominion; where I find
The Plural Number, note what God designed.
E're this Dominion was conferred on Man,
Over the Fish in the great Ocean;
Or over the Fowl in the Air, or had command
Over Cattle, or what creeps upon the Land,
We find the blessed Trinity consult;
Here Man's Creation, what could the result.
Of this so wise a consultation be?
But to make Man, next Angels in degree;
Thus in his likeness God Created Man,
Both Male, and Female, Metropolitan.
And Universal Potentate to Reign,
Over all in Earth, in Air, or in the Main;
To whom his Blessing he did not deny,
That they should Fruitful be, and multiply:
Replenish all the Earth, herein be abound,
That plenteousness in it for Man found;
The which unto Gods Glory should redound.
Again to speak we find the Lord began,
And say behold; unto this formed Man;
I give you every Herb that bears seed,
Which on the surface of the Earth do breed.
Likewise the Fruit of every seeding Tree,
To you for meat, appoint I it to be:
To every Beast of The Earth, each Fowl that flies
Up in the Air, beneath the lofty skies;
To every thing that on the Earth does crawl,
Wherein is life, are given even all.
Green Herbs; and these to be their proper meat,
For them to feed themselves therewith, and eat.
So God looks back on every thing which he
Created, and of nothing made to be;
And when he these reviewed, he understood,
And said, that all his works was very good;
Again the Evening and the Morn attest,
What God the Sixth day framed that he might rest.
The Epilogue.
This Sixth and last Scene now I do present,
And hope herein spectators to content;
Expert the Actor is, it was but Play,
With him to Act Creation every day.
Doubtless, delightful this had been to view,
When every day, God did this Play renew.
Six days the Lord, his pleasure did engage,
To Act Creation, on Time's transient Stage.
God had a certain Scene for every day,
Or new additonals, unto the Play,
Which was but his command, and all obey.
Creation, Recreation needs must be,
To him that had designed it by decree.
But God to clear the Stage did not refrain;
To draw the Curtain over the Scene again,
And thus the Evening darkness did allay,
The Morning Light, and Luster of the day;
Three persons Acting every Act, I Have shown,
And yet no Act, was Acted, save by one.
SUBJECT VI. A Reflection on the wonderful Creation, With the Formation of Adam
and Eve, Their happiness in the state of Inocency As also the Institution of
Marriage.
This pleasant story, plainly does relate
In Paradise how happy was Man's state.
THus were the Heavens and the Earth completed
And all their Hosts, in their right stations seated
And on the Seventh day from the Creation,
God fixed a Period, and a termination;
Unto the Six days works, and for a closure:
Upon the Seventh took his blessed reposure.
From all the things that he before Created,
And from all Creatures, which he animated.
Thus-wise the Heavens had their generation,
And thus the Earth, when all had their Creation.
The very day when they of God were framed,
The Heavens, and the Earth, they then were named
Of him, by these for ever shall be famed,
To every Plant, God Planted in the Fields,
And every Herb its flower, and Seed that yields.
He gave production, that thereby might grow,
And appellation, by which men all know;
Though when God planted these, their growth was slow.
To nourish which, his wisdom found away,
Whereby to moisten, Earths obdurate clay,
Cause these to root, and afterward to spring;
Their gendring Seeds, and gay flowers forth to bring
This means God used, the Lord caused it to rain?
The which these Vegetables would sustain,
And make them to increase and grow amain.
But yet one thing most needful, was not found,
And that was Man, for to manure the ground;
Yet God Almighty, would not form the same,
Without a liquid matter in his frame,
He from the Earth, a mist made to ascend,
The which dssiolv'd in Dew, and for this end,
The Superficies of the ground to wet,
That God the mould to make this man might get.
And now methinks we easily might scan,
That from this Earthly slime God formed Man,
Made him a perfect substance of this slime,
And then inspires him, so became sublime,
When God man's substance, to man's shape did frame
In this he breathed so man alive became.
And thus this man was made a living Soul,
Who once over Gods Creation did control;
When thus he was perfected, God did seem
To have this object Man in great esteem.
Whose pourtraiture he was to represent
His Maker, in his inward liniament.
God in his Image now takes great delight,
And plants a Garden, pleasant to his sight;
East ward in Eden, where he placed the man
Whom he had formed, through which a River ran,
A glorious River, that did rarely glide,
To water Edens banks on either side:
Even Euphrates, thus Paradise supplied;
These silver streams, by their fertility,
This pleasant Garden made to fructify.
That from the ground, the Lord God caused to grow,
Even every Tree, that pleasant was for show.
Unto man's sight, and likewise that was good,
Not only to his sight, but for his food.
In The midst of this fair Garden was the Tree
Of Life so styled, a glorious sight to see;
And th'Tree of knowledge both of good and evil,
Where man first grew acquainted with the Devil.
Thus-wise God pleac'd the man in happiness,
Even in this Eden, it to keep and dress;
Where God informs him, and thus wise said he
Eat freely that thou may of every Tree;
But of the Tree whence knowledge does derive,
Of Good and Ill, eat not if thou will live;
The day thou tastes thereof assuredly
Shall fatal prove, and by it thou shall die,
Beware O man t'incur this destiny.
Now God conjectures with himself; says he,
It is not good for man alone to be;
First God considers what course he should take;
And then a help meet for this man did make,
But from the ground the Lord God he did frame
Each Beast o'th Field, each Fowl, and brought the same.
To Adam, whom we find by name to be
Related to his Earthly Pedigree.
Before whom all the Creatures great and small,
God brought to know what Adam would them call
What ever Adam every thing did Name,
Remained the appelltion of the same,
What kind soever, whether wild or Tame.
Adam gave Names to all Creatures according to their kind.
But though he did behold variety,
Of Creatures, none was found for his supply;
Until that God Almighty caused a sleep,
To fall on Adam, and the same was deep.
So fast he slept, he could by no means wake,
Till God a Rib out of his side did take;
And close the Flesh instead thereof, e're he
From so profound a sleep could waked be,
And of this Rib that God from man did take,
A woman was the help meet he did make,
For Adam, and when she to him was brought,
He knew that of his Rib; 'God had her wrought.
For when he did behold her thus, said he,
Bone of my Bones, Flesh of my Flesh is she,
Made of my side a Bride to comfort me;
To call her woman, Adam now began,
Because that she was taken out of man,
As much this woman did to Adam seem,
Himself; as was himself, in his esteem.
Adam gave Names to all Creatures according to their kind.
Thus Marriage was ordained by God alone,
In Paradise to make of twain but one,
Therefore this obligation must remain,
That nothing sever these united twain.
A man must now his Father leave, and Mother,
And cleave unto his wife, and not another,
And they for ever after must remain,
Both as one flesh; and no more termed twain:
Till death; from seneration to abstain.
Both these were naked, yet they had no shame;
Their Innocence thus far kept both from blame.
Hereto man's History of happiness,
Consists; unhappy further to express.
SUBJECT VII. Of the Temptation, and fall of Man.
The Subtle Devil in a Serpents shape,
On Adams Innocence did cast a Rape.
WE now shall treat of the most subtle Creature
And that is the Serpent which defiled man's Nature
How by his wily stratagems invented,
Deceived man, to sinfulness assented;
The Serpent tempts Eve.
As may appear by that it is disputation,
With Eve by Serpentine Interrogation?
Who questioned, thus said God ye should not eat
Of every Tree that is in the Garden set?
Eves reply to the Serpents Temptation.
To which the Woman answered and said,
As at the Serpent nothing yet dismayed:
Eat of the Fruit that is on every Tree,
Within the the Garden liberty have we,
But of the Tree in Edens center placed,
The Lord allows us not its Fruit to taste;
Ye shall not eat of it, he does deny
To taste it, or to touch it, least we die.
The Serpents reply to Eve.
Again the Serpent to the woman said,
Ye shall not surely die, be not afraid;
For God does know that in the day when ye
Do eat thereof, your eyes shall opened be,
And then as Gods, you shall the knowledge gain
Of good and evil; eat, do not abstain.
The Woman possessed with the Serpents Temptation.
The woman now possessed with this Temptation,
And with this Serpentine Insinuation.
Eve be holds the forbidden Tree, through avarice takes of its Fruit, eats
thereof her self, gives Adam of the same, and both alike do sin.
Beholds the Tree, and view's it where it stood,
Perceiving that its fruit, for food was good;
A Tree that was most pleasant to the eyes,
A Tree desirable to make one wise.
Puffs up the woman with Ambition, she
Through Avarice adventures on the Tree.
Supposing it for every thing complete,
Took of its Fruit, whereof her self did eat;
And gave unto her Husband of the same,
Who fared with her, and shared with her in shame
And now because they both did thus transgress,
Their eyes were open to see their nakedness.
The Devil told Truth.
And here we find the Father of all lies,
Told them the truth, by opening of their eyes;
That both of them were naked. They did know,
And to prevent disgrace, fig leaves did sow
Together, for a covering to their shame,
And apron-wise, it is said they sowed the same,
But yet alas; these aprons were too thin,
And far too scant for to conceal their sin,
The shady Trees, nor yet the Paths untrod:
Could not obscure their sin and shame from God,
Now God in Eden walks, and they should hear,
His angry voice, the which pierced them with fear
Adam and Eve, hide themselves from Gods presence.
And made them conscious, so that both retire,
To hide themselves from the Almighties Ire;
Adams excuse.
And likewise from his presence, thus they made
The Trees their refuge, and their shield the shade
Tohide them from his wrath would both invade
God calls upon Adam.
But God the Lord upon the mancalls now,
And says unto him, Adam, where art thou?
And Adam startling gave, God this reply,
Thy voice within the Garden hear did I,
And was afraid, because that nakedness
Was now my clothing, and no other dress;
Adams excuse.
Therefore I from thy presence went to hide
My self, for fear thou should me smartly chide.
God.
Who told thee Adam that thou naked-wast,
Did eat the Fruit forbidden, tell me; have?
The man replied again, replied so large,
That with his sin, he God himself did charge;
Adam
For thus unto the Lord his God said he,
The woman thou thy self, did give to me,
Gave me to taste thereof, and I did eat
The same in Innocence, she was the cheat.
God.
What have thou done! thus God his mind displaid
Unto the woman, and the woman; said,
That Creature which the Serpent thou do style
Eve.
Gave me to eat, and so did me beguile,
'Twas its Temptation did us both defile.
None knew but God which was worst, Adam, Eve, or the Serpent.
As for the Serpent God the same accursed,
None knew but God, which of these three were worst
The Serpent in beguiling, or the twain;
By it beguiled their maker to disdain,
However God did first his wrath display,
Upon the Serpent, cause it did betray
This man and woman to degenerate,
And thus relapse from this their happy state;
Gods curse upon the Serpent fell out so,
That on the Belly it should ever go;
And by the Lords appointment also must,
During its life each day eat of the dust;
Betwixt thee and the woman Enmity,
I Will place, says God, for this thy Treachery.
The Seed of the Woman, should bruise the head of the Serpent
And so betwixt your seed thus God did speak
Such envy, as the Serpents head may break.
For truth, thou Serpent, shall this hatred seel,
To bruise thy head, when thou do bruise man's heel
The Womanmust conceive in sorrow.
God said unto the woman, now will I
Thy sorrow and conception multiply;
Henceforth with grief thou shall thy children bear
And of him that is thy Husband stand in fear;
Though thy desire be toward him, yet he
Shall notwithstanding bear rule over thee,
Obedient to thy Husband thou shall be.
Again to Adam, his Creator said,
Because that my command was disobeyed
By thee, and thou dids't listen to the voice,
Of her that is thy wife; and have made choice,
To take and taste of the forbidden Tree:
The which even I my self commanded thee
Thou should not; therefore the ground I make
To be accursed for thy Rebellion sake;
In sorrow thou shall eat thereof always,
And in laborious grief wear out thy days;
Thistles and Thorns, these shall it bear to thee,
And th'Herb, o'th field likewise thy food shall be
Adam must eat Bread in the sweat of his face till he returns to the ground.
For such O man, is now thy wretched case,
Thou shall eat Bread, but with a sweaty face;
And thus to do by my command art bound,
Until thou do return unto the ground;
Earth is thy Origin, thence taken wast,
Art dust shall, unto dust return at last.
Thus-wise, was sinful Adam doomed to die;
And in his loins, all his posterity,
Death to himself, and his, this was the all,
That Adam purchased by his wilful fall;
He made all Satan's slaves, to undergo
The warth of God, in misery and woe,
Destruction was the Portion of us all;
Had not the woman's seed us freed from thrall,
He interposing, did Gods wrath abate,
Reduced our cursed, to a blessed state;
How we possess a better for a worse,
I leave until a following discourse,
And will fall back to Adams state, till I
First period his unhappy History;
Again, this is observed in Adams life,
How he imposed a name upon his wife.
His wife by name, he did call Eve, 'cause she
The mother of all living was to be,
And unto Adam, and his wife; did God
Make coats of skins, with which they both were clad.
And to the Council of his will speaks thus;
Behold the man's become as one of us;
Both good and evil, he does understand;
And now least that he should put forth his hand,
To take from the Tree of life, and taste
Its fruit, and live for ever, God made have
To send him forth from Paradise, to till
The ground; from whence he came for doing ill.
Thus-wise from Edens garden, God exiled
Adam, and Eve, because by sin defiled;
And at the East Edens pleasant land,
Caelestiall Cherubins, he placed to stand,
Gave these a flaming Sword, all times to sway,
The Tree of life, defending every way;
Thus wretched Adam, never could regain,
His Paradise, but must exiled remain.
SUBJECT VIII. On the fall of Lucifer, and the Apostate Angels.
Declare how Angels fell, in brief I shall;
From Heavens bliss, to Hell's infernal thrall.
on Lucifer.
CReated Creature, what can I suppose
Blew thy Ambition great as God to be?
Thy wise Creator, thought it were to lose
The orb Caelestiall, which he framed for thee,
Unless thy Glory Puffed thy fond conceat,
Greater to be, though none but God so great.
II.
In thy Creation thou did far excel
All Creatures, thy Creator did Create;
His goodness placed thee with himself to dwell:
In Heavens bliss, this glorious happy state,
Was thy endowment, where thou might remain
For evermore, did thou from pride abstain,
III.
I wonder since such glory was enjoyed
By thee, thou should ambitious be for more,
Thy avarice of glory made thee void
Of that too much thou did enjoy before,
Which ornament of thy Angellick name;
God took away, and clothed thee with thy shame.
IV.
What Lucifer could thou like no degree,
Save that comparative with God alone?
Wa'st not enough superlative to be,
Above all Creatures, when like thee not one?
This did afford thy loftiness the ground
Of arrogance, and thereby thee confound.
V.
On Lucifer and his confederate Angels.
Thou Lucifer to woe did find a way,
For thy rebellion, like witchcraft, sin
More Angels did delude, and them betray
To thy confusion and thy shame; wherein
Both thou and they for ever must remain,
Wailing and Howling in uncessant pain.
VI.
Caelestiall Spirits, what Infernal Ghosts
Are ye become, since Heaven you forsook,
The habitation of the Lord of Hosts;
With your disorder, could not justly brook,
Ye sinned against a Justice could not spare,
For your destruction Tophet to prepare.
VII.
When God Created Heaven, he designed
The best of Creatures should the same possess;
Which Angels were of nature more refined,
Than Earthly Man, as touching holiness;
But having freedom, some of them have fell
To bondage, in the horrid place of Hell.
VIII.
I question not but the supernatural Realm,
Was framed of God as large as it had need,
For lack of Room he did not overwhelm;
From thence the Angels, with so swift a speed,
To be all Gods, through Pride they did aspire:
For which God made them Devils in his Iro.
IX.
Their Ambition.
They aimed for Heaven, either all or none,
As Governors therein, to rule and dwell;
They envied God who sat upon his Throne,
Till Lucifer their Prince, he throned in Hell,
To be the Prince of Devils, that is his name,
The Prince of darkness does imply the same.
X.
The names ascribed to the Devil, and the distinction of Devils.
Pluto, old Serpent, Beelzebub, imply
No more than what by Lucifer is meant,
These noted names, do only fignifie
The Prince of Devils; or their President:
Those that Inferior are to his degree,
His Devilish Angels, Imps, and Fiends must be.
XI.
None called Angels in Hell, but those that fell with Lucifer.
As I conceive his Angels are no more,
Than those with him at first from Heaven fell;
The name of Angels, they enjoyed before.
Conferred by Heaven, not imposed by Hell;
And since that Heaven, canonized the name
Of Angels; Hell cannot Create the same.
XII.
Tho Hell cannot Create, it can confound
Those Angel Spirits that have fallen therein;
Whilst they in their ambition did abound:
Foresaw not this the consequence of sin;
Until experience did by woe convince,
Them of their doom, with Lucifer their Prince.
XIII.
Dismal their case that from so happy state,
Were Damned Eternal, to Infernal flame;
Kindled in wrath, as their deserved fate,
That through presumption thus accursed became
Objects of hatred, Captives chained to woe,
In Hells Dark Region with those flames below.
XIV.
Proud Lucifer fell to the lowest pit
Of sorrow, from the highest place of Joy,
'Twas loftiness made him descend to it;
Where consternation does the damned annoy;
When they conceive how endless is their grief,
And how remediless is their relief.
XV.
Lucifers Court.
His subterranean and sub-marine Court,
Is Hell's Infernal fiery liquid Lake,
Th'admitted Subjects there to him resort?
Are those that Heavens Monarch do forsake,
Where all do envy men on Earth, and hate
Angels, that still keep their Caelestiall state.
XVI.
Lucifer tempted, Adam and Eve in Paradise.
Prince Lucifer it was that cast a rape
On Adams Innocence, and that of Eve;
This Satan did assume the Serpents shape
In Paradise, both parties to deceive;
Persuading them that they should gain the skill
Of God, as Gods, to know both good and ill.
XVII.
I steadfastly believe he cannot err,
Who says that Adam tempted was to fall,
And that his Tempter was this Lucifer,
God demoniz'd, whom we a Devil call,
His fraud through Envy Treachery and Spite,
Robbed Adam of his Innocence and right.
XVIII.
Since the Devil must remain in Hell, he would have all be in his condition.
This Angel now infernal, envies those
Caelestiall Angels that remain in bliss
He can no comfort to himself propose,
But misery, since mercy he did miss;
Which adds unto his malice; so that he
In his condition covets all to be.
XIX.
Nor is his malice toward these alone,
But as unlimited, it does abound
To Adams Race of mankind; every one
Should God permit, he would then all confound,
For like a Roaring Lion, seeking prey:
The world he ranges, duly, night and day,
XX.
But to conclude, and to encourage man;
The Devils chained by Gods Immortal might;
His force and power overcome, none can,
Unless to do his will they take delight;
Which some attempt, as if of reason void,
Dread no destruction, till they are destroyed.
A brief Appendix, to the fall of Angels.
AS for these damned Spirits that have fell;
Through Sin from Heaven, or from Earth to Hell
They are confined for ever there to dwell.
There Lucifer can never more regain,
A place in Heaven, him to free from pain,
He Is bound there Captive, by Eternal chain.
To manifest a real truth; in brief,
Hell shall deliver all, not for relief;
But at the Judgment to augment their grief.
Pride and ambition did the Angels sway,
Unto Rebellion against their God, and they
Gained condemnation, vengeance was their pay.
Though these from Heaven unto Hell did fall,
Their case did caution Adam not at all,
He through presumption throw's himself in thrall.
When God made Adam Innocent, and free
From sin, almost an Angel in degree;
Like Lucifer, this man, a God would be.
The difference betwixt Lucifer and Adams ambition.
But here the difference lies betwixt these twain;
Proud Lucifer, Gods power sought to gain;
Fond Adam, aimed Gods knowledge to obtain.
One did the other tempt, this that bewrayed
'Twas Lucifer alone his lewres displayed.
For Adam and his Innocence betrayed.
And since that both did thus alike transgress,
God executes on both his righteousness,
Both sinned, both suffered, Justice to express.
SUBJECT IX. A Brief narration of the Second ( Adam) Intimated by the Woman's
(Seed) in Genesis 3.15. as in repaying the loss of the first Adam, and
purchasing Heaven for his posterity; who in the Loins of Adam had forfeited the
same, by his Prevarication in Paradise.
The first man Adam sinned; in him men fell,
The Second Adam, men redeemed from Hell.
ADam's destroy'ds the Woman him misled,
The Serpent poisoned Eve, his Seed are dead;
But yet her Seed shall bruise the Serpents head.
Of all Gods promises this is the prime,
Of man's Redemption, in the space of time,
From death and Hell, incurred by Adams crime.
Though death from this first Adam did derive
To all his Seed, and all of Life deprive,
The Second Adam can make all alive.
In case that any should of me demand;
Do I mean those, who are already damned?
I answer no, all that on Earth shall stand.
Believed I not this Doctrine, then too blame
I were, since under Heaven found no name,
Save Jesus, and salvation by the same.
Every Soul alive may be capable of Salvation
I Question not but every Soul alive,
Might gain Salvation that will truly strive
To know his Savior, and in grace to thrive.
Christ di'd for every Soul alive.
The Universe so great, so large, so wide,
Can in no secret place obscure, or hide
One single Soul, for which Christ has not di'd.
But yet it follows not, because that he
Thus di'd for all, that all should saved be,
Faith and Repentance, must to this agree.
On this condition Christ saves all from woe,
He saves not whether that we will or no,
To save he is all-sufficient, saves none so.
Salvation then was rendered on this-wise;
Christ made himself an humble Sacrifice,
That humble sinners, might his Saints arise.
When the offender has through his offense,
To the offended offered violence;
He shall be freed through Faith and Penitence.
That freely sinned, as freely should confess,
All his offenses, be they more or less,
If he be Righteous, by Christ's Righteousness.
A Christian man himself learns to deny,
That Christ is all in all for him did die;
Is his profession and Christianity.
A Christiain is a man that is full awake,
His eyes do see the care that God did take;
To find a Savior, him should not forsake.
This Savior lacks no power to save all,
If all repent, they all be saved shall;
Presumption leads through Justice, unto thrall.
Acknowledge Justice we sincerely must,
And of a truth confess it is but just
To punish those Christ's merits do distrust.
He has repaired our loss by Adans sin,
Through his obedience mankind Heaven win;
Or Adams race had ever wretched been.
When Adam died his seed in him did die,
Death was his Portion to posterity;
Till Christ from death, brought life and liberty.
If all did die, all may be made alive,
By him that did our life from death retrive,
The Second Adam, Adams seed revive.
All shall be made alive, this (all) is meant,
An (all) so wide, and large in its extent,
As Adams (all) shall die since Christ was sent.
Christ was Gods (word) incarnated, decreed,
TO assume man's flesh, conceived a woman's seed,
To suffer both for man's and woman's deed.
This God and man, or this Emanuel,
Did conquer death, likewise the Grave, and Hell,
That all true Christians might in safety dwell.
But to explain what I have said before,
All shall be made alive, implies far more
Than these true Christians, that this Christ adore.
This all imports the men that ever were,
Since Christ on Earth, that are or shall be here;
But not the damned in Hell, confined there.
The damned might be saved could they but repent.
They should come thence, if they could but repent
There grace is wanting, and this does prevent
Their freedom, makes them more impenitent.
This side the grave, the vilest wretch may be freed from sin.
This side the grave, the vilest wretch may be
By true repentance, Friends with God, and he,
From all offenses, quitted fully free,
Man's Election considered.
Which brings me to consider what is impli'd,
By man's Election, since Gods Son has di'd,
And how man's reprobation to decide.
Election then I understand by those,
Whom God in Christ, unto Salvation chose
Before the world, when neither Friends nor Foes
Predestination and Gods Rigorous decree qualified.
Predestination seems to have this event,
To save the just and unjust that repent;
Else to what end was Christ, Man's Savior sent
If God did limit by a strict decree,
A certain number that should saved be;
What are the merits then of Christ to me?
The arguments drawn from the strictness of Election, and Reprobation.
If I am found but one of Gods Elect,
For his names sake, his mercy will accept
Of me, my Soul and body to protect.
Again, if I am found a reprobate,
For my repentance 'twill be found too late;
Unto Eternity God will me hate.
And neither of these cases do rely
On Christ his merits, since that misery,
And mercy, God decreed Eternally.
An objection arising from the position of Gods decree.
Suppose that God by positive decree,
Ordained men both saved and damned to be,
What Souls are they, Christ from defaults do free.
To answer this objection thus I say,
God Christ designed to save men Souls that stray,
I mean those Souls out of Salvations way.
But first, I shall be cautious, and take care,
For to enquire and know whose Souls they are,
In Adams sin that had, and have their share.
As foremost, then with Adam I begin;
Who was the fountain, source, and origin;
Of that distemper Epidemick Sin.
This root was rotten, we the branches all
Did fade, our leaves of Holiness did fall,
Because our Bud, and Blossom brought forth thrall.
All mankind fell in Adam.
We all alike in Adams fall have fell,
The best and worst, did equally rebel;
Against God in him, that all deserved Hell.
In sin's and tresspasses, by nature dead,
Is every man, since Adam forfeited
His Innocence, for which Christ's blood was shed.
The Elect are siners by nature as well as others, for all sined without
exception.
If dead without exception every man,
Through Adams sin by nature, who is it can
Prove Gods elect, free from all mankinds, ban.
From sin original, they were not free,
If that from actual, they so could be
Therefore, not righteous by divine decree.
Elections limit doubtless does include,
All persons with Gods grace should be endu'd,
Before, and since, Christianity ensued.
As well the Penitent that has transgrest,
As he that legally his life expressed;
To be religious, and therefore was blessed.
And this depending by divine decree,
On Christ his merrits which God did foresee;
On man's account, most needful things to be.
Let us make man, says God, Christ was in place,
Though not incarnate, yet as God the case
Of Uncreated man, foresaw most base.
He who beheld the matter, and the frame
Of Adams substance, did assume the same,
And so a man like other men became.
Mankind's election doubtless did relate,
To Christ, before God Adam did Create;
Else why should Christ in woe participate.
All Adams seed, God of a truth designed,
Unto Salvation, thus was he inclined;
Or who Christ's mission could have right defined.
Since Adam sinned, the Scriptures say that none
Of Adams Race are Righteous, no not one;
Save Christ according to the flesh alone.
The sacred Records give out this Report;
Of Adams seed, they sinned in such a sort,
That of Gods glory, all mankind came short.
Since all thus sinned in Adam, all have need
Of Christ his merits, if they would be freed;
From that destruction due to Adams deed.
An opinion of the Heathen world, as how judged, and how Saved.
But of the Heathen world, some thus might say
These know no Christ, in what a case are they:
That have no Faith, nor Gospel to obey.
God stamped a Law in man's heart which is the Law of nature.
This query I thus briefly answer then,
God stamped a (Law) within the hearts of men;
Commands in nature not the moral Ten.
In Adams heart God did create a Law,
To keep his Soul and conscience in such aw,
That from his God he might dread to withdraw.
And this the Law of nature we do name,
Whereby some shall be judged to suffer shame,
Some justified that have omitted blame.
God made a Law of works and delivered it to Moses writ in Tables of Stone.
Another (Law) delivered God alone,
To Moses hand in Tables made of stone;
A Law of works fulfilled entire by none.
Faith, the Tenuer of the Gospel.
Mercy to many God did freely give,
According to this Law, (do this and live)
But now thou shall be saved (if thou believe.)
E're God to men the Gospel tidings sent:
Not many knew, who the ( Messiah) meant,
Patriarks and Prophets, these knew Gods intent.
Abram rejoy'd Messiah's day to see.
And Job foreknew who should his Savior be,
Whereto the Prophets by consent agree.
Gods Covenant with Abraham.
With Abraham God made a Covenant,
And with his Seed, that none of them should want
Through Faith, Salvation, that from sin recant.
The Angel of this Covenant is he,
Whom Abraham's seed, their only Savior see;
Through that belief, required in them to be.
For to comprise the Gospel scope in brief,
Repentance from all sin, and true belief
In Christ his merits, are men's Souls relief.
Whom the Law condemns, the Gospel will reprieve.
He whom the Law condemns let him but grieve
No doubt the Gospel, will find a reprieve;
For such if but the Gospel he will believe.
Although Gods justice does man's deeds require,
Gods mercy will accept of his desire;
Therefore Gods mercy, should all men admire,
Since mercy thus Gods justice do exceed,
Let none suppose God evermore decreed;
Man's reprobation that repents his deed.
Nor yet that man's Election stands secure,
Because he some temptations may endure;
Sin's man's infection, penitence his cure.
I am afraid too many men defined,
Election stricter than God e're designed;
By his decree, concerning humane kind.
God by predestination left a space,
Wherein Christ's merits might for man take place
Since evermore he saw man's wretched case.
Election thus considered, does repair
Men's hopes and prompts them unto frevent prayer,
And proves their Antidote, against despair.
But when delivered in a stricter sense,
It has Created fear, and diffidence;
By its possessing men, with negligence.
Some derive ill corsequences from the Dectrine of predestination.
How many Persons now a days declare,
Who be Elected, such sure saved are;
Let them sin on, Election will them spare.
Again one man will to another say,
Some hear Sermons every Sabbath day;
I hear none, am saved as well as they.
For ought I know the Preacher may be one
Designed of God for reprobation,
What need of Preachers, Sermons will save none.
Thus will the vulgar and Illiterate men
Dispute the case, and argue now and then,
Enquiring who are saved, who not, or when?
Which thus Creates destruction in the brain,
Some blessed as Abel are, some cursed as Cain
To those damned by decree, Devotion's vain.
Cain no Reprobate by positive decree.
Who can affirm, or for a truth dare tell,
Cain by decree, was reprobate of Hell;
When God would him accept had he done well.
Mercy was offered unto Cain, when he
Had Abel slain; says God shall thou not be
Accepted, if thou do but well by me.
To say that God did Cain commiserate;
And prove that Cain was then a reprobate,
Seems from Gods justice much to derogate.
Cain in his wrath, did first his Brother kill,
And cause his blood upon the Earth to spill;
Then vengeance overtakes him for the Ill.
From which I might attract this inference,
Just Abel died, was saved through Innocence,
And Cain condemned, for his Impenitence.
Had Cain repented of his crime and sin,
This homicide, and fratricide had bin
An object doubtless should Gods favor win.
Therefore his Condemnation I believe
Was not so strict, but mercy might reprieve
His Life from death, did he repent and grieve.
My reason is, because I no where find
His doom, precede his deed; but come behind
His Brothers murder, whereto he inclined.
If Cain was reprobated ever more,
Should mercy say, that sin lay at his door;
Since so decreed, he could have not forbore.
'T would seem Injustice in our God, should he
First damn this Cain, then him Create to be,
A man of mischief; from sin never free.
This circumstance proves God the Origin,
And fountain of corruption, whence man's sin
Since Adams days, derivative has bin.
Esau no reprobate by predestination.
Let Us take a view of cursed Easau's state,
and see if God this Creature would Create;
To be an everlasting reprobate.
This inconsistent, doubtless needs must be
With him that is mercy, in the highest degree;
Then for damnation, none Created he.
God by his life has sworn, that his delight
Is not in sinners death; but that they might
Return, and live religious in his sight.
He would have all men to be saved, and they
To understand the truth, and it obey;
Thereby salvation to secure for aye.
Jacob I loved, and Esau did I hate,
These words some wrest, and wrongfully translate
To mean this Esau, born a reprobate.
Of Easau's reprobation by decree
I never read; nor of his doom, till he
To Jacob sold his Birthright for a Fee.
No more then of Cains, doom before he slew
His Brother Abel, which doom did ensue
The murder, as the stipend that was due.
The Potter he has power over the clay,
This is a truth, that no man need gainsay;
But who made Pots, designed to cast away.
It Is like the Potter may sometimes mistake
In temp'ring mould, and so a vessel make
Fit for no use, or in its forming break.
But God admits of no mistakes, for he
Was all-sufficient when he did decree
What matter and formation man should be.
Now for to honor God, and reprehend
Their Judgment, who to know Gods will pretend,
Yet bound his boundless mercies without end.
Mercy and Meekness, Justice, Truth and Grace,
Could not admit, not in the least embrace
Damnation, for his un-born Creatures case.
This is foreseen if prudetnly men pause,
God will not execute without a cause,
All his commands are true, and just his Laws.
But yet this truth is not by me denied,
By man's damnation, God is glorified,
By man's salvation more, and more beside.
The one God from his presence does expel,
For his transgressions to the pit of Hell;
The other suffers, with himself to dwell.
And both these persons represent his might,
That goes to Hell, where is everlasting night:
To Heaven this, where is eternal light.
And thus I have endeavored to express,
Gods Acts of mercy, and his righteousness,
The harmless state, and their state that transgress.
Predestination's danger to allay,
Pass lightly over this bogg thou can not stray;
Faith and Repentance, miss not Heavens way.
I know I shall be either damned or saved,
And shall be Judged as I my self behaved;
Yet hope for mercy which I ever craved.
I Will Judge my self, and will my self condemn,
My frailties urge me to it now and then,
Not damn my self least God should me contemn.
Election and reprobation, depends on man's penitence or his prisumption
Man's Reprobation, and Election, dreams
Appear to some, to others strictest theams;
To me a medium 'twixt these two extremes.
My reason prompts me, that all persons may
Obtain salvation, that repent and pray;
In faith to God, through Christ their crimes t'allay.
God intended the Salvation of all by the mission of Christ.
Salvation to all mankind was Gods aim,
In sending Christ, the Appostles do proclaim,
Christ has a balm for each believers maim.
Then blessed Jesus who for man did die,
Grant me thy grace for ever to rely
Upon thy death; until I live thereby.
So shall I render praise for evermore,
To thee whom I in spirit do adore,
With heart and voice according to my Lore.
SUBJECT X. The Right description of a true Christian, and those qualifications
pertinent to this believer in his state of Grace, and Christianity.
A Christian is a man that is sincere,
And honor's God with reverentiall fear;
One who believes in Christ as crucified
For his transgressions, all his sin's to hide:
One that declares he nothing does possess,
As rightly his, save what is unrighteousness;
One that stark naked to himself does seem,
Yet clothed with Righteousness in Gods esteem,
One of his worth and merit, never brags;
But strips himself of his unrighteo us rags.
He makes himself as naked as was Job,
For Christ to cloth him with his righteous robe
And thus you see the Christian man is one,
That would be righteous either all or none.
Although to this he has a willing heart,
He Is never righteous here, but in part;
He on the one hand, will himself deny,
Thereby his God the more to glorify,
And on the other hand, he will confess;
That Christ is all in all, his righteousness,
One thinks him rich enough whilst he can plead,
His Saviors merits and that Christ was dead.
The Christian, his behavior toward God.
The Christian man foresees it him be fit,
When God commands he should to God submiti
Let God rebuke him, then will he not faint,
Nor yet of his correction make complaint;
When vile temptations seek to do him wrong.
He sheilds himself with faith and so is strong,
He ever dreads he shall himself disgrace;
Thus to the Devil, never will give place;
He Soldier like keep-Guard, does watch and pray
In these is exercised, both night and day,
Through Christ his merits, still he recommends
To God his Soul, and God his Soul defends;
He always trembles at the Almighties Rod,
Which makes him more religious toward God.
All his deportment does derive from grace,
Whose love and meekness mercy will embrace;
His duty toward God discern I can,
But what is this Christians duty toward man?
His deportment toward man.
His carriage toward man, is just and true,
For he will render to all men their due,
He hates contention, and the cause of strife,
Loves Peace and Friendship, as he loves his life.
Of quietness, he does so much approve,
He would have all things to be done in love;
He bears in mind no bitterness, nor gall
To none, but pure affection toward all;
He is not willing Gods commands to break,
Therefore will use forbearance with the weak.
He honors others, does himself debase;
Gives them the better, keeps the worser place
Of others sins, by no means will partake;
But warily, these and their guilt forsake;
And thus his carriage toward men you see,
In all respects is from offenses free;
Yet some would know, since that it may be known
What Is his decorum to himself alone.
His descency toward himself.
Truth to declare he does in very deed,
At all times to himself, take care and heed;
Is always sober, and does duly watch,
That no temptations unawares him catch,
Since Christianiz'd he holds it fit, that he
His sins of Youth, and Youthful lusts should flee:
Christ is his Captain, Devils him despite;
With whom Faiths battle he is engaged to fight,
Though Devils aim his strength, and force to blast,
He questions not to overcome at last,
He Is found in Armor, fears no stab nor scar,
During the manage of his holy War;
He knows this is well doing, is not tired,
In hopes his warfare will be soon expired,
His youthful Time he now seeks to redeem,
Which he found lost in his, and Gods esteem;
With wickedness resolves he to contend;
Till God shall bring his life unto an end,
Which times he knows shall gain so great renown,
God will himself reward him with a Crown.
His carriage toward the World.
His carriage to himself we saw, would see,
What yet might to the world, his carriage be,
Within the world he Circumspectly walks,
With whom herein converse's wisely talks.
He views the world which is by him forgot,
And seems to use it, as if used it not,
Himself he fashions not, nor will he frame;
Like to the world because he shun's the same;
Nor with the cares thereof will he like some,
That are unwise, be likewise overcome,
Nor lay up treasure on the Earth where rust;
And moth corrupt men's riches unto dust,
Content he is with the tallent, God him gave;
For to maintain his life this side the grave;
He meddles with no business but his own,
For he would not a meddling Fool be known,
During his life in this world all his care;
Is how for life Eternal to prepare,
To God, to Man, himself, the world, thus I
In brief have writ the Christians History,
Which may all ever practice till they die.
SUBJECT XI. A Discovery of the Faithful and devout Christians, Quality, and
Conversation.
A Christian by belief, those things obtains,
Promised in Time, and after Time remains.
DEad was this man that is now alive,
His death from Adam did derive,
In Adams sin he lay as dead,
Till Christ awaked his drowsy head.
No sooner did this man awake,
But presently he does forsake
His bed of sin, wherein he lay,
And to the Temple goes to pray.
The Christian resembles the Publican.
The gesture of the Christian man,
Is like that of the Publican;
Who thinks himself to be so base,
Not worthy there, of the worst place.
He villisies himself, that he
The chief of sinners thinks to be,
And seriously will it confess;
Christ is alone his Righteousness.
He Is meek in Spirit, and is Poor,
Therefore will pray hard by the door;
T'approach the Altar, fears affront,
Till he does penance at the Font.
There falling down upon his knee,
O Lord be merciful to me,
A sinner prays, it is not denied,
And by this prayer is Justified.
Now since his Maker made him just,
In his Redeemer put's his trust;
To whom he bears an upright heart,
Till death his Soul and body part.
He Is now alive, and dead to sin,
When the dull world, lies dead therein,
But he while living lives to God,
And fears his wrath, to shun his rod.
He will not bring forth Fruit to himself.
He Will not be found that fruitless Elf,
Like many one lives to himself;
By him shall Christ be glorified,
To him will live, for whom he died.
He has content in every state.
In every state to be content,
He learned all dangers to prevent,
The Christian can for truth relate;
He has content in every state.
He has nothing yet possesses all things.
He nothing has yet does possess
All things, because Christ's Righteousness:
And should he not possess the same,
He all things else would (nothing) name.
He seems to sorrow, and to joy,
Enjoys both comfort, and annoy,
He Is like a Ship by waves that is tossed;
Sometimes all his Intents are crossed,
He Is often cast down like one forgot,
And yet we find him Perish not;
Sometimes to fall God gives him scope:
To rise again by Faith and Hope.
Likewise he seems for to decay,
Yet is renewed that very day;
So that no man on Earth can know,
The Christian's state by outward show.
He Is poor, but rich can many make,
That of his Council will partake,
Whose Treasure's there; where is his bliss;
In Heaven's Kingdom, not in this.
One that is in darkness to our sight,
But in this darkness find's the light;
It Is he of whom the Scripture says,
He lives by Bread, but more by Faith.
One will converse on Earth in love,
While's Conversation is above.
His Treasure's there, where is his heart;
We have him hear but in part.
His life is hid with Christ in God.
His life is hid with Christ in God,
Who when chastis'd, will kiss the Rod;
The Christian life I thus descry,
To be a hidden mystery.
He is but weak, yet has the might;
To do all things in others sight,
For Christ upholds him by his hand,
And gives the Christian Strength to stand.
But what he does through Christ his strength,
Shall to Gods glory tend at length;
For he would not enjoy the same,
Unless to glorify Gods name.
He knows that God alone did give
Unto him life, thereby to live;
And if to live, to live aright,
He of a truth find's Gods delight,
The Christian man to none does wrong,
Yet meets sometimes an envious tongue;
The noise of which does him annoy,
Least God should justly it destroy.
No weapon formed against him shall prosper.
He knows no weapon prosper shall,
Against him that is formed, nor cause his thrall.
His life with Christ in God is hid,
To malice can defyance bid.
Yet would with mercy be involved,
Therefore desires to be dissolved,
That he a Mansion might obtain,
For aye in Heaven to remain.
Where now I am resolved to leave,
Him whom the world could not deceive;
An Heir of glory he was born,
And therefore held the world in scorn.
Though he at first was born in sin,
And for a time lay dead therein;
His Second or new birth to grace,
Gave him true glory to embrace.
No doubt he now this happiness,
In Heaven's Kingdom does possess;
Which may all Christian men partake,
With him for Christ our Saviors sake.
SUBJECT XII. Supremacy and subordination considered, both as to the legality
of Sovereignty and the loyalty of Subjection, from the impartiality of our
Saviors expression to the Jews, concerning the Tribute Money in Mat. 22.21.
Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are Gods.
Kings in their Kingdoms, God do represent
They Are Potentates, next God Omnipatent.
WHo to the Crown of glory will be true,
Must give God's Crown and Caesar's Crown their due
Our Savior Christ informed us there are things,
Pertain to God, and appertain to Kings.
As fear and honor, both which do relate
To God himself, and to the Kings Estate;
Kings Gods Vicegerents are, he them enthroned
Because as his their power should be owned,
'Twas God alone these powers did ordain;
Whose cause as lawful Subjects should maintain,
Since God ordained the King, thus to control;
Be Subject then to him let every soul,
Who dare dispute this Power do but plod,
How to resist the ordinance of God,
Who thus resolve, the Scriptures say, shall gain
Damnation: a just Pension for their pain;
The thoughts hereof methinks should much suppress
Sedition and Rebellions wickedness;
All Subjects of their errors should convince,
To fear their God, and reverence their Prince;
Factious Rebellion of a truth has bin,
Found in effect to be a witchcraft, sin,
A sin in Royal crimson deeply died,
An evil of that nature it is denied,
None save the same makes man a Regicide.
Cursed his intent that wickedly will Arm,
Himself to do the Lords Anointed harm,
Kings are ordained these factious men to aw,
By Regal justice, and the Kingdoms Law.
I say their Regal power in a word,
Is not in vain to bear the Kingdoms Sword;
Which to the evil vengeance should afford.
As for the Sword it is clearly understood,
To terrify the bad, and not the good;
Since thus designed then is it not a shame,
To see the Subjects quarrel at the same,
As heretofore did Englands regal Foes,
Who King, from Kingdom, Crown, and Head depose.
Monarchy metamorphosed to Democracy.
That unexpected Englands Monarchy,
Was Metamorphos'd to Democracy;
And Governed by usurping Tyranny,
Which Government we found, not long remain,
Till God restored our Kingdom's King again,
He who exiled was from his regal Throne,
Returned to the enjoyment of his own.
Thus God himself did all his foes withstand,
Brought home in Peace; the regend of our Land.
The Kingdom, subject made to his command.
No doubt but Gods deliverance in this thing,
Should caution men for to obey the King.
Obedience deniable to the usurpers of Authority.
And unto those obedience to deny,
That are Usurpers of Authority,
God thrones the King, when Rebels take him down
Confusion wracks the Kingdom with the Crown
Peace is disturb, scarce one shall stand in aw,
But Plead their will, and conscience is their Law,
Too true our late experience this has found,
When Treachery and Treason did abound;
Till furious rage and cruel worth accursed,
Did without mercy murder Charles the First;
God grant our Charles the Second long to Reign,
In peace the true Religion to maintain;
Make those his friends that were before his foes,
Whose wilfulness his Power did oppose,
And if Gods pleasure, may he rectify,
Our Nonconformists, with conformity;
That Union and Communion may be found,
Unto the glory of our God redound,
Till all with glory shall of God be Crowned.
Preserve this Kingdom, bless the Church and State,
Increase our Love, and nullify our hate;
Vouchsafe that all who shall succeed the place
Of Charles the Second, may his Faith embrace;
The Faith great Charles maintains, may more defend
Until the world, and Generations End.
SUBJECT XIII. Tribute and Custom are commanded by God, to be rendered the
Ministers of Christ, because their due, as well as their Lawful Magistrates
observed from Romans 13. verse. 6.7. For this case pay your Tribute also: for they
are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to
whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor.


God does allow a Tribute to this end,
Those to maintain, his Altar that attend.
GOd this commands, therefore must be his will
What he commands all should seek to fulfill
Who his commands neglect, no doubt do ill.
The reason why it is, because that he
Made these commands, and them observed to be:
In brief, you see the question thus replied,
Where Tribute's due it must not be denied;
And God thereby is also glorified.
Ministers ought to be paid their Tribute.
To Ministers God would have all be true,
In paying Custom, where the Custom's due,
Fear to whom fear, and honor to the same,
Where honor's due, this gain's an honest name
And shelters man from spite, contempt and shame.
And from all scandalls, will a man release,
Make him beloved, and then shall live in peace;
Of Tenths and Tithes the Preacher must partake,
Gods laws allow it, and for conscience sake;
Then those that scruple payment needs must err
Felloniously they rob the Minister,
Not him consider as Gods Messenger.
Dishonor God that gave it to maintain,
The Preacher as his Payment for his pain;
Them to defraud no doubt our God will Ire,
The labourer is worthy of his hire,
And God his due, will at our hands require;
O let us not detain the Preachers mite,
Since Gods commands, confirms the same his right,
But with his Tribute freely to impart,
To him as his (not ours) with all our heart,
For he takes pains and so it is his desert.
So Honor to whom Honor, every thing,
Commanded from the Beggar, to the King,
As loving Subjects, then God will us own,
Both to this Crown, and that of Heavens throne
And shall adopt us children of his own.
Implore we then his grace to live thereby,
While here on Earth in Love and Amity;
Endeavoring and daring to be true,
And to our power render all their due,
Pleasing our God, and bearing right regard
To his commands, that will us sure reward:
SUBJECT XIV. Gods love to mankind, and the Terms of of Salvation, considered,
from John 3.16. God so loved the World; that he gave his only begotten Son:
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Man sinned, Hell gained, and Heaven was his loss,
Christ to save men from Hell: died on the Cross.
GOds goodness did behold man's wretch'd case
Since Adams fall in sin, and void of grace,
This moved his mercy to commiserate,
Poor man's condition, in so cursed a state,
When welt'ring in his blood, through sin he lay,
Gods bowels yearn'd, that he consults a way,
For his salvation that so vile did seem,
In his pure eyes and how him to redeem;
From that so base a case in Gods esteem.
The means whereby he man's redemption wrought
Was by his death, man's life, that dearly bought,
And that was God himself becoming man,
Who made Eternity, to seem a span;
For God incarnate did himself behave,
As man [excepting sin] unto the grave,
Whose sinless nature, never did deprave;
Christ was his name, to death was crucified
Upon a cross, and thus as man he died,
To save believers that in him abide,
By virtue of whose death, men life obtain,
Christ bore the loss, and man enjoyed the gain,
He suffered torments he endured the grief,
And sacrificed himself, for our relief,
Betwixt two malefactors, as a thief.
The way, the truth; the life, he since was found
By those believers, sin their souls did wound,
In him all these find mercy to abound.
We all things have in Christ, and Christ is all,
And every thing, to those on him that call,
For instance, when our sins, our Soul make sick,
Physitian-like does search us to the quick,
By lancing our corruptions, so that we,
From sinful Ulcers are by him set free;
He powers the Oil and Balm in every wound
Of sin sick souls, to cure and make them sound,
And now no more man's duty than belief
In Christ, repenting all his sins with grief;
And when this service is performed, then he
Shall to his Masters joy admitted be;
Will seem to God without a spot of sin,
As not defiled by Adams Origin,
Christ's blood and his repentant tears did flow,
To wash his Leprosy, as white as Snow,
His crimson crimes, no more their redness show.
SUBJECT XV. A Mediation on Esaias the 55. verse. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near.
In seeking God, by Prayer Invoke his Name,
And when he is found O man extol the same.
INquire, my soul, search earnestly, and seek
For him who is most mighty, and most meek;
Use all the means thou can till thou do find
Who is most mighty, and most meek, most kind.
Pursue thy search, and doubtless thou shall see,
who is mighty most, most meek, most kind to thee.
And when thou shall this truth experience,
'Twill quit thee of thy fear and diffidence;
By framing in thy heart a larger scope,
For faith to Act, than was required by hope,
Faith is that powerful grace whereby the soul,
Does over all despondencies control,
And does its self upon Christ's merits roll.
But hope is often assaulted by despair,
Sometimes dejections does poor hope impare,
Yet it is renewed again by fervent prayer,
Faith joined to hope, or hope in Faith to rest;
Are buckler's of such Armour-bearers breast,
These fortify his courage, so that he
Will conquer, more than conqueror, shall be.
Whereas if he had neither of these twain,
Nor faith, nor hope, no conquest could he gain,
But Esau-like, the Lord his God might seek,
With cares and fears, and tears, upon his cheek,
And yet in searching, not find him at all,
Or finding of him in effectual,
Because that love the best Grace of these three
Within his Bosom is not found to be
Where is true hope, O there true Faith begins,
For love to cover multitude of sins,
This hope to no man does create a shame,
But rather renders credit to his name,
Then cease we not to seek God virtually,
Till sound through faith and hope, and charty.
This is the day of grace wherein he ought,
For to be found, and by his Servants sought,
Now is the accepted time, when this is past,
No search for him, no finding him at last,
Seek God my soul, whilst thou can not him see,
Least when he is seen he will not be found of thee,
Seek him by hope, and thou shall find him near,
By Faith this day of grace, though he appear
Not to the eye of sense, to see him clear;
All shall behold him at the Judgment day,
But those far off, his Laws did disobey,
And others near, to save their souls for aye;
If that we would not seek the Lord in vain,
We must seek him in Truth once, and again;
Yea oftentimes, or rather constantly,
Till with his presence he our souls supply,
Let us not seek an other thing to find,
Instead of God; but God whom we designed,
Nor any thing besides God wish in heart,
Nor yet for any thing from God depart,
And since that God is near; this day of grace,
Then let us seek the presence of his face,
With right regard to him, and reverence,
Declining not this search die deligence,
In Truth and Love then, let us seek God ever;
Until we find him, and when found let us never
Cleave unto what from him, our souls may sever.
SUBJECT XVI. A Contemplation on Job 20. verse. 5. The triumphing of the wicked
is short, the joy of a Hypocrite is but for a moment.
An Hypocrite is not within devout,
All his Devotion's visible without,
LO how he Tirumphs, now puffed up with pride
Whose time is as uncertain as the Tide,
One day unto his days he cannot borrow,
To day he Triumphs, tumbles down to morrow;
From goodness and from virtue he will vary,
Although he knows his time, but momentary,
Thus then his Character to amplify,
This is the Hyprocrites Hypocrisy,
It Is said of Hyprocrites, their Congregation;
Shall be destroyed by certain desolation,
Good reason why? the just is more in danger,
Of him although his neighbor than a stranger,
For with his mouth he flatters and dissembles,
And in this case the Devil he resembles;
The Scripture tells us they have a leaven,
Of which we must beware, or forfeit Heaven,
They heap and treasure wrath against that day,
When God his wrath will on their wrath display.
They in their youth do die, their life is found,
To be amongst the unclean, and unsound;
The Hypocrites cannot those things approve,
Which they themselves profess, nor can them love
What they in words pretend for to maintain,
The same they in their practice do disdain;
Which makes their guilt the more, because hereby
They make pretensions unto Piety,
Thus seem what they are not unto man's eye.
And yet they hope to have a good repute,
Although their works their words all times confute
Man ought to be really Holy, and not so thought of.
May we endeavor rather as we ought
For to be Holy, than be Holy thought,
What profit is it, if to men we seem,
To be what we are not, in Gods esteem?
This is debasing of man's nature more,
Than was the baseness of it self before,
To counterfeit true holiness no doubt,
Is as unholy as to be without.
SUBJECT XVII. A Reflection on Eclesiastes Chap. 7. verse. 4. The heart of the
wise man is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth.
Mirth is a feast, and Fools thereon do feed,
Mourning a fast, the Wise do find of need.
THe wise man's heart is in the house of sadness,
The unwise man's, is in the house of gladness,
There is his heart because there is his treasure,
Of Avarice, Lust, Luxury and Pleasure;
His wonted wantoness, delight and laughter,
Seem but to feed him, for the day of slaughter,
Wise Solomon, once said in sober sadness,
Of laughter, that it was but merely madness,
And as for mirth, gave this narration of it,
That it is vain, what does a vain thing profit,
The heart in laughter is through sorrow troubled
And thus is mirth with heaviness redoubled;
Pleasure is but an Airy inclination,
To some unlawful objects acceptance;
What from a mind corrupted is productive,
Allured with sweetness, sinful and destructive,
Who most delight in sin, find most conviction,
Both of the weight, and burden of affliction;
How great therefore must be those persons folly.
Who do defy all dangers to be Jolly,
He that in sin till death makes perseverance,
Shall at the Judgment, pay for his appearance,
When sinful pleasures vanish, guilt remains,
And punishment Eternal is the gains,
But sacred pleasures, never will anoy,
They are forerunners of Eternal Joy,
Such as the pleasure is, such is the Pay,
If good, it is weal if bad then woe for aye;
God grant us all those joys reserved in store,
At his right hand, remaining evermore.
SUBJECT XVIII. A Reflection on Psalm. 49. verse. 20. Man that is born in honor:
and understands not, is like the Beasts that Perish.
Men highly born; that is of a noble Birth,
And void of Knowledge, are as Beasts on Earth.
What Is man's high birth, and to be nobly born?
If Foolish, he is the object of men's scorn,
A Noble man of understanding void,
Is man Ignoble, nere true worth enjoyed;
Honor cannot adorn him in the least,
Whom indiscretion renders like a Beast,
Vain are his vaunting thoughts whose arrogance
Prompts him, it is wisdom when vile ignorance,
Pride and ambition, are those captious Schools,
Or Universities of perverse Fools;
These nurseries teach many to enquire
Their own demerits, their deserts t'admire;
For men to search their glory is not found,
To be their glory, nor thereby renowned,
Who dive's within himself to know his worth,
Should be ashamed to tell, or bring it forth,
What is man's right as man, but what is within
The root and branch of every blooming sin,
All other things in every man alive,
Are not their own but God's from him derive,
May no man glory in himself nor boast,
Of man, but God, and by the Holy Ghost,
May not the wise man in his wisdom joy,
Least God that wise man's wisdom should destroy,
May not the mighty man rejoice in might,
Least justly justice should his joy requite;
May not the rich man glory in his wealth;
Least that he lose his riches and his health;
But may all glory thus with one accord,
That they do know and understand the Lord;
May no man be desirous of vain glory,
It is a sin, for sin men should be sorry:
The worlds vain glory is a sweet deceat,
A labout that is unfruitful; or mere cheat,
A fear which is perpetual, a slavery,
A danger in a counterfeited bravery,
Most void of providence, when it began,
Without repentance finished often by man,
He that desires true honor to obtain,
Let him despise it, and 'twill be his gain,
Who honor slights as trivial that man shall
Without dispute be honored of all,
He that makes transcient honor the reward,
Of his good works, has God in small regard,
He that will glory, but not in Gods name,
It Is feared God will his glory turn to shame,
Remember then O man, all men among,
Thou art a Brother to the dirt and dung,
When as ambition pride and lust sway thee,
Gonsider then thy shameful Pedigree;
Be humble, and humility shall raise,
A Pyramide of fame unto thy praise,
And men shall find the truth of this short story,
In thy translation hence, from Grace to Glory.
SUBJECT XIX. An observation from Proverbs 22. verse. 22.23. Rob not the Poor
because he is Poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the Gate, for the Lord will
plead their cause, and spoil the Soul of them, that have spoiled him.
I fear that man who plunder will the poor,
Robs Christ, and against his soul shuts Heavens door.
ROb not the Poor because his poverty
Requires thy pity, not thy Robbery;
Beware least thou his little should make less,
In doing thus thou do unrighteousness.
Oppress not thou the needy man, least he
By Innocence, Incures a curse on thee,
God pleads his cause whose judgment will recoil
Upon their Souls, the indigent that spoil,
We by our National unrighteousness,
Do rob the poor, and daily them oppress.
It Is Felony to keep the poor man's right
From him, when God allot's it in our might,
There is an overplus for him designed,
In Bags, and Barns, and Grainaries confined;
The poor's revenews God gave men in trust,
On this condition not to mould nor rust;
Appointing distributions to the poor,
According as he should increase man's store,
And to encourage men this truth them told,
That gives in love, receives an hundred fold,
No reason Charity should be so could.
Then let us not who can, withhold the hand,
But be obedient unto Gods command;
It Is he who past his word to see us paid,
And shall we give as of returns, afraid.
No, let us not, may Faith enlarge each heart,
With what is the Portion of the Poor impart
He gives as much, who gives the widows Mite;
As if he gave all Treasures in Gods sight,
And thus it is better, than receive, to give
Unto the Poor, although we poorly live.
Of Fatherless and Widows God takes care,
To do these violence, let men beware:
Likewise the stranger not born in our land,
Should be maintained says love, and Gods command
There is a way for men to pay respect,
To these poor objects, yet not to neglect
The due regards, which to our selves belong,
For else these objects, or our selves we wrong;
Perhaps by giving more than what we can,
Or less than ought unto the needy man,
The surest way is first to mind our store,
Then open our Gate, and give unto the Poor,
He that is merciless, and not inclined
To others, shall from God no mercy find;
But he that is merciful, by him has found,
Mercy from God, compassion to abound,
Such gives the Poor with joy, and will impart
Of his increase to those with all his heart.
But he dishonours God, who will not lend
To him his coin, nor be the poor man's Friend,
He gains that gives unto the needy man,
That gives him not, shall lose, do what he can.
SUBJECT XX. An extraction from Esaias 5. verse. 11. Woe be to them that rise up
early in the Morning to follow strong drink, that continue till night until,
Wine inflame them.
When men o're-charge themselves, with drink or Wine
They are transformed so brutish as the swine.
THere are that take delight to Bib, but know;
To drink, and Wine there does pertain a woe
And it is to such that in the Morning rise,
To render Bacchus early sacrifice,
Continuing till Wine do them inflame,
To pay their Homage unto Bacchus name,
Thus persevering from the morning light,
Until the same is veiled with sable night,
Desirous still of more, in more delight.
There is a kind of Magic found in Wine,
It seems to mock, to laugh, to smile and whine;
And thus likewise strong drink is said to rage,
As challenging who would with it engage;
Drunkenness bereaved men of their senses.
Which some attempt, and these hereby deceived,
Are of five senses, all at once bereaved.
For those then that will in the morning rise,
To follow these till night, they are unwise;
The Appostle twice this caution does repeat,
With him that is a Drunkard not to eat;
And Solomon in his Proverbiall Book,
Says, such companions should be quite forsook
'Cause God their conversation cannot brook;
Such are the qualities of Drink and Wine,
They will transform Men to the shape of Swine;
The Drunkard swallow's Glasses filled to the brim
With Wine, and yet the Wine does swallow him,
God disregards him, Angels do him shun,
Men they deride him, as he is vice's Son;
Virtue declines him, thus he is betrayed,
Unto the Devil there is his wages paid,
Drunkeness the vice, of vices needs must be,
When mother of all evil styled is she,
The matter of all mischief, and the Well,
Whose spring of vices takes its rise from Hell;
The trouble of the senses, and among
The rest, it is the tempest of the tongue;
A vice that much men's consciences do wrong.
What is it more I can of it descry,
Unless the Shipwreck of pure Chastity.
It Is times consumption, and from this to vary,
It is a madness which is voluntary;
Corruption of good manners such a thing,
Where from no goodness but all evil spring,
That much discomfort to the Soul do bring;
The Body and the Soul it does annoy,
Distempers one the other will destroy,
Consider then, who will his strength afford;
To Wine that ever scorned to fear the Sword;
Who have as yet, I wish they may at length,
Reserve for God, and not for wine, their strength
Expel extravagance and so decline,
The superfluity of Drink and Wine,
These are the means to make man's life Divine.
SUBJECT XXI. An observation from Math. 5. verse. 33. Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths.
To swear and forswear, is a vice so base,
No sin more sinful, nor breeds more disgrace.
THree ways there are whereby a man forswear
Himself may doubtless, if he he does not fear;
First swearing that which proves false, and he
Himself foreknows the same most false to be,
Though God his thoughts, his words, and works do see
And secondly when swearing what is true
Mean while in thoughts of falsehood to ensue.
And thirdly, swearing what proves but a lie,
The very time he holds its verity,
Which thing incurs the guilt of perjury. There are three ways whereby man may
commit prejury.

Of these two former Oaths let men beware,
Abominable, and absurd they are;
In conscience Court, the third proves not a sin,
One's cogitation conceives truth therein;
Which is the real reason rendered, why
Man may swear false; and yet not swear false-ly,
Great is the danger then no doubt when man
To swear, and forswear, does the most he can,
In this he does defy God to the face;
Though more then half in Hell's condemned case,
To style the swearer (man) almost is evil,
Because he is worse; in somethings than the Devil:
For instance, at Gods frowns the Devil trembles,
The swearer does not thus, he but dissembles;
Yet of the swearer for to speak the best,
He is a man the Devil has possessed,
But least some chide me for my willful railings,
I mean not those who often have their failings;
Nor such as swear, when lawfully required,
But who presume to swear, when not desired;
And this I term the wilful common swearer;
Forewarned by God and men, yet is no fearer
To take the name of God in vain by Oath,
And by a curse, or as sometimes by both.
Is such as horrid sin, not one can be
Without repentance; from its guilt set free;
Much more then when it is lightly took in vain.
Void of a curse, or Oath, yet guilt remain,
Swear not at all, says God to every one;
No not by Heaven, for it is Gods Throne;
Nor by the Earth to swear do thou accord;
Because it is the footstool of the Lord;
May men's communication be therefore;
Yea, and yea, nay, nay, and no more;
Yea, for truth to nullify an Oath,
Nay, for denial, there is the scence of both.
It Is well God has forbidden man to swear,
Least that by custom man would not forbear;
Apt to mistake sometimes we are hereby,
And so incur the guilt of Perjury,
Which is a desperate Iniquity.
There Is none can safely swear but God, 'cause he
Is not deceived, which mortal man may be,
It Is best not to swear at all, least by the same,
Men should attain facility of shame,
And to a custom from facility,
And from a custom into Perjury;
Who often swears, sometimes forswears no doubt
To shun the danger, men should be devout;
Who gives the reins too much to's own tongue,
May chance his name and reputation wrong.
By speaking that, which may create his shame,
And make him blush in silence for the same,
For Oaths and curses past, may men repent,
'Twill make oaths guiltless, and may oaths prevent
This is most true, try this experiment.
SUBJECT XIV. On Luke 12. verse. 47.48. And that Servant which knew his Lords
Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes.
But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes.
That man who know's Gods will, dos't not, and he
His will that knows not, these shall beaten be.
WHo knows Gods will, and does it dis-regard
I find that many stripes are his reward,
That knows it not, yet renders God the wrong:
Again, I find few stripes to him belong,
How vain is it then for men, themselves t'excuse,
In either of these cases God abuse,
Who knows, his Masters will, and does it not
It Is just that many stripes fall to his lot
That Is Ignorant thereof, and will begin
To plead his Ignorance, that is found a sin.
Then let none think, whose Ignorance abuse
Their God, this sin will others sins excuse.
Yet it is Gods will that man should be so mild;
And Innocent as is the harmless child,
That is like these in malice, but what then!
In understanding would have all be men;
To know himself he would have all to learn,
And it is their shame, that cannot him discern.
Men's Ignorance excuses, will deny,
When they exceed the days of Infancy,
Youth, Manhood, and old Age, if these neglect
To mind their God, how can he them protect,
That never cordially did him affect.
Justice must have its course, in the event,
On these no mercy craved, nor did repent;
Thus some men's understanding are so dim,
Tell them of God, and they care not for him,
If scriptures we peruse the cause we find,
Is Ignorance, that makes their hearts so blind.
It Is good much to discern, and to live well,
Is found that good the other do excel;
In case that men, cannot them both attain,
True Piety e're wisdom let them gain,
Though without Knowledge, Piety seems vain.
The knowledge of all things, none happy makes,
Nor is he blessed because of these Partakes,
A life Religious toward God it is this
That makes a man participate of Bliss:
Of all that may be known, that knowledge's best
Which makes us better, till of God we are blessed;
And ignorance shall not excuse an elf,
Because that ignorance is sin it self;
Then it is his duty that does know Gods will
As much as in him lies this to fulfill.
By his obedience to Gods pleasure still.
And it is his duty that knows not the mind
Of God to seek, until the same he find;
Who loves not, that men always should be blind
SUBJECT XXIII. A Contemplation on Math. 6. verse. 24. Ye cannot serve God and
Mammon.
Mammon's man's friend, but God's a greater one,
When God hates Mammon, let us love God alone.
WHo would serve God, must Mammon set a part
For he affects not man's divided heart.
My Son give me thy heart: God does require
The giver, to give him this gift entire;
For man has nothing worthy to bestow
On God, save, this yet this to him does ow,
As very clear the sacred Records show.
God rendered this to man, that man might give,
The same to God, that gave him life to live;
Then ought it not on any thing be set,
Too much, least it Gods goodness should forget.
It Is full of Avarice, does this express,
By coveting more wealth, with greediness;
Triangular's man's heart, the world is round,
Therefore to fill its Corners is not found,
God framed it such a thing, that no supply
Might satiate it, unless the Trinity,
Yet covets most those things it cannot gain,
Or must, could they be got, not long remain.
Then covet not fond man, from this abstain,
Man with all diligence should keep his heart,
That no temptations cause it to depart,
From God that made it such a wondrous thing,
From whence the Issues of man's life do spring;
Blessing and cursing, good and bad do flow
From this receptacle of weal or woe.
Blessing and good, when loving God entire;
Cursing and bad, when Mammon must desire.
Thus God and Mammon never will agree;
Therefore not lodged within one heart can be
No more than greatest, in the least degree,
God either all or none requires man's heart,
A Piece to Mammon he will not impart,
Since God therefore cannot be satisfied
Without it all, let Mammon be denied;
No doubt the Mammonist would give his wealth
To God, did God deprive him of his health.
Wealth is but grief and trouble to enjoy,
When God the comfort does of health destroy,
Confider this and let it be your care,
To make you friends that may of Mammon share;
That when you fail, and when your health do cease
They may receive you where is e'relasting peace.
I mean all poor, blind, lame, sick, weak, young, old,
Are Mammons friends, to feed and keep from cold;
Then harbor these they will you entertain,
To habitations that for aye remain,
Mansions of glory doubtless will reward,
Their Souls, who for Christ's sake the poor regard
And Heavens Gates against such shall near be barred.
SUBJECT XXIV. A Pause upon Proverbs 11.2. verse. When Pride comes, then comes
shame, but with the lowly is wisdom.
When Pride approaches, strife does it attend;
From which humility will men defend.
IF shame's the destiny that will betide
Conceited man, what reason is for Pride?
Why may not this vain thing be set aside?
Who would be haughty, arrogant, and proud,
Since God with shame this sin does threat so loud.
What Is loftiness, or to aspire the place
Of Lucifer when gaining but disgrace,
Too often experience teaches this to know,
Who pride exaults, Gods justice brings him low.
That Is proud in heart, the Scripture will accord,
This man's Abomination to the Lord,
That Is arrogant, his justice will reject,
That Is meek his grace and mercy will protect,
This is that truth, against which none need except
By others harms, henceforth may men beware
Of Pride least they in its destruction share;
For pride it is an elevated thrall,
So sure as it stands high, so sure must fall,
Like to those Angels that for this have fell;
From the highest Heaven, to the lowest Hell;
That pride themselves those doubtless God does hate
In this the Devil they do imitate;
If not remidi'd in a devilish state;
Men fall most desperate, when they do aspire,
The highest pitch, they can themselves admire;
The higher men's presumption climb, they shall
Without dispute the greater find their fall;
But for the lowly, humble, meek and wise,
When others fall, God fails not these to rise,
They seem most lovely in his purest eyes:
Then of a Truth, to those that lie most low,
To greater exaltation God will show;
For he himself that humbles, shall embrace
Gods glory, that exalts himself, disgrace.
Thus then you see as by a Touchstone tried,
What are the Fruits, and the effects of pride;
It soars on high, and bears a lofty name,
But in the sequel, nothing's found but shame
And that affect it most, are most too blame,
Then shun we pride because a shameful evil,
That has its derivation from the Devil,
So base a thing is pride, wise men it know;
TO have brought the proud to want from want, to woe.
A Spiritual Hymn, to the praise of God, who is Omnipotent, Omniscient, and
Omnipresent,
Lord frame my tongue.
To sing a Song.
O Could I sing
To Sions King,
A Song that would him please;
No doubt but he
Would pity me,
And my grieved heart soon ease.
Teach Lord, my King,
My tongue to sing.
To God alone,
Besides him none,
I Will make my moan, that he
May mercy take,
For his Sons sake,
On such a wretch as me.
I would thee praise,
My God always.
I am defiled,
Sin me beguiled;
So wretched is my case;
Since Adams fall,
That I, and all
Gods Image did deface
May I begin,
Lord to hate Sin.
God did Create,
Man in a state
Of blessedness at first;
In Edens land,
Placed him to stand,
Where he became accursed.
O Lord do thee
From sin me free.
In Paradise
Did Satan tice,
Man to transgress Gods Laws,
Forbidden fruit,
There like a Brute,
Accepts, his sin's the cause.
Lord, from the Devil
Sprang all evil.
Man did rebel,
Deserved Hell;
But God to help man's need,
Procured a Friend;
Should man defend,
Of Adams woman's seed,
Gods love descends,
Christ makes amends.
O! here is news,
Let none refuse,
The message that is sent,
Man's Savior's found,
May praise redound,
To God Omnipotent.
God from above,
Showed men his love.
(Messiah) blessed,
Gave man kind rest,
By restless agonies
Man to restore,
Gods wrath Christ bore,
And on a Cross he dies.
Christ on the Cross
Repaired our loss.
Joy to all men,
Abounded when
Their Savior Christ was born,
The Angels praised
Their God that raised
A King whose Crown was thorn.
An Angels voice
Made the Earth rejoice.
Glory above,
And on Earth love;
This Song did Angels sing,
With one accord
Unto the Lord;
And Christ their new born King.
Glad tidings came
With Christ his name.
Christ died for those
That were his foes,
This was exceeding love;
Which far excells
All paralells,
Men in compassion move.
For's foes Christ died,
None so beside.
God him commends
That loves his friends;
And with his friends his foes,
Though such as he,
may chance to be:
Not many are of those
Man will deny,
For's Friend to die.
Man for some end
Affects his friend,
This I have seen most plain,
His love is set,
In hopes to get
Some benefit or gain.
Save God above,
Few have true love.
Love is a cheat,
Or mere deceat,
As now a days it is used,
This but in part
's lodged in the hear;
Which makes it thus confused.
Love oft-times skips
From heart to lips.
Gods seeing eye
's ubiquity.
And his omiscience can,
know by his might
And present sight
The Inward thoughts of man.
God man's intent
Knows, and how bent.
Thrice blessed then
Be God of men,
O Praised be his name,
For evermore,
Let Us him adore
That sees and knows our frame.
Amen say I
Eternally.
Divine Ejaculations, or Pious breathings.
O Lord prepare my Soul to seek
Thy self, and make my Spirit meek.
O Thou preserver of mankind,
May through thy grace; my heart,
Will, Conscience, Spirit, Soul, and mind,
From what is impure depart,
Lord cleanse my heart, and make it thine,
Then without doubt thou will be mine.
O rectify each faculty,
That to my Soul pertains;
And every member bodily
Redress from sinful stains.
O show some token Lord on me,
That I am washed from sin by the.
That in thy sight as Innocent,
And sinless I appear;
Possessing mercy to prevent;
The Judgment drawing near.
My Soul being freed from sin, I say
Will make me joy at Judgment day.
Because that then all works of men,
To Trial shall be brought;
As acted, how, and where, and when,
Both good and bad they wrought.
All works I did, Doomsday shall try;
Lord pardon my iniquity.
There to receive their recompense,
And stipend of reward,
According as with Reverence,
To God they had regard.
If my good works out-poise my bad,
O this will make my conscience glad.
They that obediently did serve
The Lord, in Heaven shall dwell;
That disobediently did swerve
From God, shall go to Hell.
If that my evil works outweigh
My good, I am undone for aye.
The significations of the word World, in Scripture.
A formed world, deformed, reformed again,
I find a truth, Scriptural proofs maintain;
Formed first of God, deformed through Satan next
Reformed through Christ, this tenet proves the text
Formed free from blame, deformed through shame and sin,
Reformed from faults, as if they would never bin.
On the words Exploration, Deploration, Imploration.
Explore, Deplore, Implore, these words contain
Three certain grounds which proves the Christians gain:
First Exploration, to search out his crimes;
Next deploration; these bewail betimes.
Then Imploration, to invoke, or call
On God for absolution from them all.
On the words Easeless, Endless and Remediless.
Easeless and Endless, and Remediless
Are Hells amazing Torments to possess;
Easeless, because no respite of the grief;
Endless, in that no period for relief;
Remediless, 'cause sinners would not turn
From sin, for which they chose for aye to burn.
On Faith, Hope and Charity.
Faith, Hope and Charity, three Virtues are
So transcendental, none with these compare;
Faith flies to Heaven by Caelestial wings;
Hope waits till Faith from thence some comfort brings,
But Charity both Faith and Hope excels;
Man's Heaven on Earth, is love, wherein God dwells.
On God, the King, and the Church.
God and the King to rule the Church agree,
Though the King bear rule, God rules the King and she;
First God inclines the King to rectify
The Church-deformers with Conformity;
The Church enjoyes her union by this thing,
From that Communion, of God, and the King.
On the Personality of God, to wit, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
The Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all three
To make man in Gods Image, did agree;
The Father did command the Son Create;
The Holy Ghost this Image animate;
Thus man was made next Angels in degree
By God, that is Three in One, and One in Three.
Though God afflicts man for evil, yet Gods afflictions to man are not evil.
The evils of chastisements, truly are
No evils, nor with Evil things compare,
For from the chiefest good, even God, they flow,
Lead to the chiefest good, this God to know;
And in the chiefest good likewise are found,
Even Jesus Christ abundantly t'abound.
Sometimes God will not hear, nor regard the Prayers of his own Servants.
The Lord will not bow down his sacred Ear;
Nor will the Prayers of his own Servants hear
When they ask, either things in nature bad,
Not good for them, nor by them to be had;
Or things right good for some malignant ends,
Such gifts as these bestow, God never intends;
The Scriptures say according to his will,
Soshould we pray, if God our prayers fulfill.
On Matthew 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.
Gods Kingdoms and his righteousness these ought,
The very first things in man's life be sought,
First, in each day of man's mortallity,
First in each business of each day, and why?
It Is Gods command that these should be the prime
Of all man's enterprises during time.
On the word Amen, and its signification.
Amen, this word may mortal men admire,
Amen's a witness, and Amen's desire;
Amen's a Truth that never will decay,
Amen concludes Petitions when we pray;
Amen procures Gods blessing or his Ban,
Amen shall Seal the woe, or weal of man.
Happiness will be his Portion, that truly fears and serves God.
O happy he that serves his God in truth,
Thrice happy he so serves him from youth,
Unhappy he that happens happiless,
For happening short of this sure happiness.
On Servitude and Freedom.
Thrice happy he from Servitude that is freed,
Yet what is Freedom if not free indeed;
The freest Freedom's to be free with them,
By a new Birth of new Jerusalem.
The days of the mightiest Monarch on Earth, are but the days of a mortal
man, hence I inferred an observation from the Temporality of the Popes Holiness.
The Pope his Period has, the mightiest man,
Dame natures date, Points him his mortal span,
And when his span's expired, what is the Pope
More than the meanest, beyond natures scope.
The mightiest and the meanest thus you see,
Though not in Earth, yet in Earths womb agree.
On the Righteousness of man in Christ.
I am Unrighteous, but my Righteousness,
In Estimation is of worth no less
Than best deserving Honor and Reward,
If Righteously I Righteousness regard,
When as not right in raged Righteousness,
Then am I Righteous in a righter dress.
Of Death either in Sin, to Sin, or for Sin.
I have been dead, but am a live again;
Yet needs must die, or else in death remain;
For would I live, and not desire to die,
My doom were death to all Eternity,
Both death and life I highly do esteem;
Though this to some a Paradox may seem,
Of man's Birth, Death and Burial, as naturally and Spiritually considered,
Twice born, twice dead, twice buried would I be,
The living, dying death, of death to flee;
One birth, one death, one burial common are,
In two of each I hope to have my share;
Twice born to live is man, once born to die,
The life or death, that dures Eternally.
On Genesis the 31. ver 5, And Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isack,
(viz,) The God of his Father Isaac.
I am a fraid because I dread to bear
What Is Pertinent unto my cause of fear;
I fear my fear, yet not, as though not true,
But least I fear my fear, less than fears due,
My fear requires my fear at fears command;
Who fears a right, these fears shall understand.
On the words of David in Psalm the 47. verse. 8 Awake up my glory; namely his
tongue.
Awake my glory, have to glorify
Thy glorious glory in sincerity;
That glories, and is glorying in my fear,
If fruits of glory plentiously I bear;
And glorifying cannot be denied,
Because Gods glory mortals glorified.
Upon the expression of the Prophet Jeremiah Jer. 15.16. Thy words were sound,
and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart.
By me thy words were found, who did them eat,
Internally the same often to repeat;
And it is my hope with these not to depart,
The Joy and the rejoicing of my heart,
To me they are since I the same retain,
Within my Bosom as my greatest gain,
THE CONCLUSION.
Thus far arrived my pious muse, and I
Delighting Scripture verse, to versify;
It Is pity then that I should not peruse,
And practice what is the precepts of my muse,
For she designed, that all she writ might tend,
Unto Gods glory e're she made. --
AN END.
A Brief Alphabeticall Expositour, explaining the most difficult words, made
use of in this Book.
This Table's Trivial in the Seholar's eye,
Yet serves the mean, and that want's, Memory.
A
ABoade A dwelling place Abound To Increase Absolute Perfect Absurd Foolish
Abstain To forbear Abiss A bottomless pit Actual What is done or committed
Activate To make active or lively Admit To allow of Affect To love Affirm To
prove a thing true Affabillity Kindness or curteousie Allay To over power a
thing Allure To entice by love Alphabeticall Belonging to the 24 letters of the
Alphabet Ambitious Desirous of a thing Amity Love or Friendship Ample Full or
large Amplitude Largeness Angellick The likeness of, or belonging to an Angel
Annoy What offends one Anthems Divine verses Anticipate To take place before
another thing Animate To enliven or encourage Applause To clap hands in ones
praise Apology What man speaks in his own behalf Apprehend To understand
Appellation To give things their proper names Approach To draw near Approvable
What may be liked of Arrogance Pride Argue To reason the case or hold an
argument Ascribe To impute or apply a thing to him that deserves it.
Astrologick Belonging to Astrology or the study of Stars Assume When one thing
takes to its self the nature of another Assaulted One that is followed with
hatr'd Attribute To ascribe or impute Attraction To draw unto Attest To witness
a thing Attempt To aim at, or adventure on some notable thing Author The first
that invents or makes any thing Augment To make greater Authentic What is
well esteemed of Avarice Coveteousness Awe Fear or dread
B
Baccus A title given the God of wine Ban A curse Basis A foundation Bereave To
deprive or leave one destitute of something Benediction A blessing Bibbe To
drink often Bliss Blessedness Bounty Goodness Boundless Without bounds or
closure Bottomless Without a bottom Brief Little or short Breviate A lesser
thing made of a greater British Belonging to Wales, or Britain Brittanick The
same as British Bruits Beasts or Cattle
C
Candor Courtesy Canonized One declared to be a Saint Capable Able Capacity
Abillity Captious Fantastical or quareling at others words Cardiganian
Belonging to the County of Cardigan Caution A watchword to take heed of a
thing Caelestial Belonging to Heaven Censorieus A person that finds faults when
he cannot mend them Characters Names or descriptions Charm To delude or allure
Chaos Confusion Chastised One corrected or afflicted Christianis'd One made a
Christian Circumference A Circle or Compass Circumstance A space of time or an
argument Clemency Mercy or gentleness Cleave To Close unto Cogitation A thought
or thinking Comprehend To conceive in mind Comprehensive What may be received
in the mind Complacent Delightful Compiled What Is framed or set together
Commiserate To take pity Communication A partaking in talking Competent
Convenient Comprize To contain or comprehend Composing Framing of a thing
Commentary'd Notes made on Scriptures to explain their meaning Condescension To
be humble or meek Confer To reason together Confine To limit or put in bounds
Confute To disprove one Converse To discourse Control To bear rule or sway
Conversation Carriage or beheaviour Connive To wink at a fault Conviction
Guiltiness Conjecture To think or suppose Consist To contain Contempt To
despise Contemplate To mediate Constitute To appoint Consternation Great fear
or a mazement Consequence What must needs follow athing Contemn To hate or
despise Contension Stife or debate Crime A fault Critic One highly learned in
Books Correspondency The agreement of things together Cubit Half a yard
D
Debase To make base or vile Decree Gods Eternal purpose Decline To avoid or
shift of a business Deck To adorn or make beautiful Decorum Decency or good
order Define To describe a thing Defiled Corrupted or made bad Defy To dare or
challenge Default A fault or crime Degenerate To wax out of kind Deity The
being of God or his Godhead Dejection A casting of one down in despair Delude
To deceive Demonized One made a Devil Deprive To take away a thing from one
Deplore To lament Deportment Beheaviour Derrivative What is derived from a
thing Derogate To take away Describe To tell the manner of a thing Descry To
show a thing Deside To put a case in order Despite To be spiteful Dispondency
A despairing Detest To loath or abhor Determine To appoint Diffidence Distrust
Discern To perceive Disdain To shun a thing Dismal Sad or heavy Display To
spread abroad Dispencible To dispense with a thing or make the best of it
Dubious Doubtful or uncertain
E
Echo An answering voice Effect What derives from another cause Efficient The
first cause of others Effusion A shedding abroad Election A making choice
Elevate To lift up Elfe Properly a Fairy, but often used for a Fool Elizian The
Poets Paradise Emanuel God with us Embellish To make beautiful Emblem The
shape of a thing Eminent High or Honorable Encomium A song made in ones praise
Enmity Hatred or strife Enormous Very wicked Ensue What follows after a thing
Enterprise Some great undertaking Entire Wholly or altogether Epidemick What is
very catching Epilogues Speeches made at the conclusion of some matters
Essential What belongs to the essence or first principle of a thing Event The
end of a matter Excess Which exceeds or is too much Excisting Remaining in
being Exemplar An example Expedient Convenient or necessary Expel To drive
away Experimental Full experience Expire To end or decay Expiate To pacify or
appease Explanation Explaining or making clear a thing Expose To set forth or
set a broad Expositor An explainer, or that makes plain Extend To stretch forth
Extensive What is stretched forth Extraction A drawing out one thing from an
other
F
Facility Easiness Faculty Power or ability Fallibility A failing or deceiving
Fame Good report Fathomed Deep waters or pits measured by a line and plumet
Fellonious Theevish Fertile Fruitful Fiends Evil spirits Finite What is
Temporal or may be understood Fixation Fastening Floate To Swim or bear above
water Formless Without fashion Fortify To Strengthen or make strong Fratricide
One that killed his Brother Fructify To bear fruit
G
Gall Bitterness Generous Virtuous or one of a brave Spirit Genious One's
natural inclination Gender To increase in kind Gesture Beheaviour Glide The
passage of a River's clear stream Ghost Spirits Globe What is round like the
World Grave Wise or disceet Gravity Discreetness Gratitude Thankfulness or
thanks Granaries Store houses for grain Grovelling A lying on the ground
Guiltless Not guilty
H
Halsyon days Peaceable days Heliconaean Belonging to the springs of Helicon
Homage A servile duty Homicide A Manslayer Hymns Divine verses Horror Great
fear
I
Illiterate Unlearned Impoverish To make poor Impose To lay on Imputation A
layng something to ones charge Importunate To be very earnest Imploration A
beseeching or entreating Impair To put out of order Imps Evil Spirits
Impenitent That cannot repent Impartial Just or righteous Imply To signify
Immense That cannot be measured Imitation A doing as another did Immortal
Everlasting Incur To get guilt Indefinit What cannot be defined or made to
appear what it is Indigent Poor or needy Infuse To put in Iniquisitive One that
is full of Inquiry Intricate Hard to be understood Instance An example Intermin
Mean while Inference An observation drawn from a Subject Influence A power
flowing from Stars Incident What happens to a thing Incumbent What is
necessitated Intimate To signify Inspire To breath into Inform To give notice
Interrogation A question Insinuation To put a thing cuningly in ones mind Ire
Anger Infernal Belonging to Hell Inferior Lower or more base Incarnate Made
flesh Include To shut in Ingratiate To get in ones favor Insist To continue
Indiscretion Without wisdom Institution An appointing Inducements Things which
brings or draws in Intellectual Belonging to the understanding Instinct
Asecret prompting in ones mind Invade To assault or set upon Jubilees Years of
joyfulness
L
Latitude The breadth of athing Laureate Crowned with Laurel Legal Lawful
Libertine A loose liver Line A Stock or Family Lineament The form or draught of
a thing Limits The compassings or bounds of things Liquid What is watery Lofty
High Longitude The length of a thing Loyal Respective and true to the King Lore
Learning or knowledge Luminaries The lights of the sky Lures Traps or snares
Lustras Every fourth year kept by the Romans for their pleasure and recreation
Luxury Lust or wantoness
M
Main The waters of the Sea Maim A wound Magic Sorcery or witchcraft
Magistrate A Ruler or Governor Malignant Evil or wicked Macculation A staining
or blotting Mammon Wealth or Riches Matter The substance of a thing Maturity
Ripeness of age Manage To follow a business Mansion A dwelling house Manure To
till the ground Manifest To show or make plain a thing Macrocosme The great
World Memorize To remember Method The manner or form of a thing Merits Deserts
for good deeds Meeter Verses or Rythmes Metaphors Helps to make rare
expressions Meridian The Noon Memorial A rememberance Messiah Christ
Metropolitan The chief Ruler in a place, or chief place Minority Youthful
years Mirour A looking glass Microcosme The lesser World, or man Mission A
sending forth Modicum A minute Modelize To put in form or order Modern Living
now in our age Monument A thing built to remember what was noted Motives
Motions causing a man to do this or that Moral Manners or good behavior Muse
On of the Poets Godesses of Poetry Mute To be silent Mutually Agreeing together
N
Native Natural National Belonging to the nation Nay A denial Nocturnal
Belonging to night or nightly Nominate To name a thing Novice A young learner
Nullify To bring a thing to nothing
O
Objects Things placed before men eyes Objections Doubts, or charging men with
some noted things Obligation A binding by some strong tie Oblivion
Forgetfullness Obscure Dark or Gloomy Obdurate What is hard Ocean The great Sea
Odium An hatredor hateful thing Olimpiads Taken by the Greeks for the space of
four years Omit To leave a thing undone Omnipotent Almighty or all sufficient
Omniscient Knowing all things Omnipresent Present in all places Orb A round
thing Orbicular What is round Ornament A making brave or beautiful Oracles The
sacred Scriptures Orthodox Belonging to the true faith or the true Religion
Overplus More than enough Outpoise To whgh hevier Outvy To exceed the sound of
an other thing
P
Parentage Belonging to a Father or Mother Paratlel What is equal with an other
thing or lines made thus = Parenthesis A saying in writing that may be read, or
not read, and the sense remaining marked thus () Participate To partake
Paraphraise A translation or interpretation of a thing Patron A great friend
that supports one Patronage A defense Paradoxes Hard sayings not understood as
they are writ Permit To allow of Presevere To continue or be steadfast
Prepetuate To make Eternal Period The end of a thing Perjury A false Oath
Pertinent Meet, or convenient Piramide A Pillar built in remembrance of
something past Pitance A little space of time Pollished Made smooth or shining
Potent Mighty or strong Poetique Belonging to Poetry Pourtray To draw a Picture
Pourtrayture A shape or picture Ponder To mediate Potentate A Prince or great
Ruler Posterity Those that live on Earth after the death of others Positive
Expressly or down right Practick What is practiced Presage To fore tell a thing
President A chief judge or ruler Predestination An appointment before hand what
shall follow Prevalency An increasing or prevayling Prevaritation Deceat or
false dealing Prime The morning or space of time Primordiall The most primitive
or first thing Principal The chifest Production A brining forth Proverbiall
Belonging to a Proverb Progeny A stock or Family Prologues Prefaces or
fore-speeches Profaness Wickedness Profoundity The depth of a thing Propagate
To increase or breed Proportion The convenience of one thing with an other
Propose To set forth or to offer Prospect A place where one may see a far way,
or a large sight Promotion An advancing or lifting up Prye To search into
Psalmist A maker, a writer, or singer of Psalms Public To make a thing common
Pursue To follow a thing close
Q
Qualify To make apt or fit, to appease, or spacisie Qualification Fiting,
appeasing or pacifying Qualities Tempers or constitutions Query A question
R
Rape A violent ravishing Raptures Joys Reassign To give a gain Recantation
Repentance Recoile To fly back Remote Far off, all-alone Reside To abide or
continue in a place Retire To apply one self Recollect To gather again or call
ones wits together Relatives Things that belong and are related to others
Rectify To direct or to make straight Replenish To fulfill Result To redownd
or to leap back Reposare Rest Reply To answer Relaps To back-slide Resort To
frequent or meet at a place Reprobate One past grace and Salvation Reprobation
To make graceless Reprive To delay Prisoners Execution Reprehend To reprove
Reverentiall One that is mannerly or reverent Rebuke To check or chasten
Recommend To commit or commend Reflection A looking back on a thing Reduce To
restore, or bring back Restriction A restraining or bringing back Repute To
esteem or account Reputation Esteemation Revenews Yearly rents or payments
Request A desire Renovation A renewing Remediless What cannot be remedied
Riceptacle A place of receipt or a vessel to receive a thing in Refrain To
abstain or keep from Rivulets Little Brooks or Rivers Rigor Harshness or
hardship
S
Sable Blackness Sacred Holy Sanctity Holiness Sanctuary A place of Divine
worship Science Knowledge Scan To prove Scrutiny A search or inquiry Scene A
division in a play Seclude To shut against Sever To part a sunder Serpentine
Belonging to a Serpent Sentinel One that keeps watch and ward Sencorious One
that censures what is done by another Senators Councillors or wise men
Signature The sign of a thing Similitude The likeness of a thing Slime Mould or
Clay Sollace Comfort Solicit To urge or move Soar To fligh Source An head or
the Original beginning of a thing Solutions Expositions or explainings Spher A
round Circle Stature Height Stations Resting places Stratagems Subtle devices
Sublime High or lofty Surpassing Exceeding or going beyound an other thing in
greatness or goodness Superficies The outside of every thing Surface The
outside or face of a thing Surmount To surpass or exceed Surmise To grudge or
grumble Supernal What is above Subteranean What is under the Earth Submarine
What is under the Sea Surviving The over-living of another Superfluity More
than needs be overmuch Sequel That which follows the matter following
T
Termination The end of a thing Terestiall Earthly Theorick The inward
knowledge of a thing Theme A sentence or argument to speak of or to write upon
Thral Misery Theater A place made for Plays and Games Tolleration To give leave
or liberty Transport It is properly to send over by Ship Transcend To exceed or
go beyond Transient What is passing away or decaying Transactions Deeds or
actions Traverse To march up and down Tranquil Peaceable Trivial Base vile of
no estimation Tribute A certain payment Twain It signifies two
V
Vacant Void or wast Vast Big or great Vaunting Proud or high-minded Vege
tables What lives and grows as plants do Veild Covered or hid Verity Truth
Verify To make true Vindicate To maintain a vouch or defend a thing
Vnexhausted A Fountain cannot be drawn dry Vollum The size or bigness of a Book
Voluntary Willful Universe The whole world Universal Belonging to the
Universe, or the World Vnlimit Without bounds or limits Usurping A taking
willful possession of another right Usurpers Wrongful men Vulgar What is
common
W
Warily Carefully or heedfully Weal Hear it fignifies happiness Wily Subtle or
crafty Wiles Cuning devices Wrabble To sing sweetly or to quaver
May not the unlearned and forgetful vary
With him, for them writ this small Dixtionary.

FINIS.

