Scripture the Rule of Faith.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Febr. 3. 1695/6. BEING THE
Second of the LECTURE For this Present YEAR, Founded by the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL, Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Senr and Junr: At the
Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the
Poul^r^y. MDCXCVI.

JOHN V. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life,
and they are they which testify of me.
AFTER that our Savior had Cured the Impotent Man at the Pool Bethesda, Ver.
9. the Jews sought to Slay him, because he had Healed him on the Sa^bbathday,
Ver. 16. And so much the more were they bent upon this, as in Vindication of
himself he had said also that God was his [(...)] own proper Father, making
himself equal with God, V. 18.

Our Savior therefore, in the following part of this Chapter, largely insists
upon the Explication and Proof of what he had Asserted, and Appeals to a
Threefold Testimony for his Justification, Viz. (1.) That of John Baptist, who
bore Witness of him, and to whom for a season they gave Credit, Ver. 32, 33,
34, 35. (2.) His own Works, Ver. 36. they, says he, bear witness of me, that
the Father has sent me. (3.) The Scriptures, Ver. 46. Had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me. And in the Text; Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think, etc.

The Words may be either an Appeal to the Jews, and so are to be read by way of
Affirmation and Concession, ye do search the Scriptures, as it is in the
Margin: Or they may be read Imperatively and by way of Exhortation, as it is in
our Version, Search ye the Scriptures.

If we admit the former, then they are a Reproof to the Jews, that professed to
be very Conversant in those Sacred Books, so that not a Word, Syllable or
Tittle should escape their notice (as it is said in Aftertimes of the
Masorites), and yet so little heeded what was the main Subject of them, that
they observed not how the Characters belonging to the Messiah pointed plainly
to him.

But I conceive the Words are to be understood [Bas. l. 2. Bapt. c. 4. Athan.
Tom. 2. p. 295. Par. 1627.]
as an Exhortation, as the way of our Savior's arguing does show, which is
from point to point, from John Baptist, to his own Works; and from his Works to
the Scriptures: And so St. Basil and St. Athanasius understand them.

And if the Words contain a Duty, then they are an Appeal of our Savior to the
highest Authority, that is, Divine Revelation, and what even the Jews
themselves admitted for such. So that should they reject the Testimony of John
Baptist, whom they did at one time believe to be a Prophet: Or should they be
so perverse (as they sometime were) as to impute our Savior's Miraculous Works
to Beelzebub; yet the Scriptures was a proof not to be gainsaid. For they
themselves thought and judged (as the Word (...) signifies) that Eternal Life
was therein Revealed, and by the direction whereof it was to be obtained; and
yet even those did testify of him. Having brought the Controversy thus far, it
would in reason be at an end: Thither therefore he remits them, to their
Authority he Appeals, these he requires them to Search; and if they Searched,
and Searched sincerely and impartially, they would find Him (whom they now
traduced, and whose Life they sought) to be the Messiah there described. So he
concludes his Discourse, There is one that accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye
trust. For had ye believed Moses and his Writings, ye would have believed me:
for he wrote of me, Ver. 45, 46. Or as it is in the Text; They testify of me.

From the Words I Observe;

1. That notwithstanding there is a Revelation from God, and owned to come from
him; yet there may be Disputes about Points contained in that Revelation. It
was so here, the Jews as well as our Savior believed the Old Testament to be a
Divine Revelation, and to contain all things necessary to Everlasting Life; and
yet there was a Dispute about an Article of no less Importance than whether our
Savior was the Messiah therein Prophesied of, and whom they hoped for
Salvation by.

2. There is a Direction what to do in this Case, and that is to Repair to the
Rule; Search the Scriptures, impartially Examine them, and compare what is
therein Revealed with what our Savior affirmed concerning himself.

3. There is the final Decision of the Case, and that is by the Scriptures. You
grant, says he, they contain all things necessary to Eternal Life, and they
are they which testify of me. Thereby he is willing to abide, and thereby they
ought to be concluded.

4. Here is a further Direction how to Search, implied in the Verses following,
Ver. 41, etc. and that is with Humility and Diligence; with Impartiality and
Sincerity, without Prejudice and Prepossessions.

The Words, we see, contain a plain Resolution of a Case of great Importance,
and that is, what is to be done in Matters of Doubt or Controversy, and how
persons should proceed to obtain due satisfaction.

And here the first thing to be agreed upon, is, By what shall we be tried,
what is the Rule which is to determine us, and which we must abide by?

The next thing is, Who shall be the Judge?

The Third is, What are the Qualifications of such as are to judge?

To the First, our Savior Answers, We must go to the Scriptures; for if it be
a matter of Consequence, and concerns Eternal Life, there to be sure it is
contained, and there it is to be found.

As to the Second, He says, the persons concerned are to Search; those that
doubt, question or deny, are carefully to examine.

As to the Third, He says, they must lay aside all other Interests, and Search
with all Humility, as those that love God, and seek after the honor that
comes from him only, Ver. 44.

So that by this resolution of the Case we have gained two or three
considerable points, toward the resolving all Doubts, and ending all
Controversies in the Christian Church: And they are,

1. That the Scriptures are the only Rule, by which we are to judge and
determine concerning points of Faith, and necessary to Salvation.

2. That it appertains to all persons to have recourse to, and to judge by this
Rule concerning matters of that nature, and which are of that Importance.

3. A Direction how to Search, and that is with Modesty and Humility, with
Sincerity and Impartiality.

1st. The Scriptures are the only Rule by which we are to judge and determine
concerning Articles of Faith, and matters necessary to Salvation.

It Is on all hands granted, that there must be some Authority which Faith is to
be resolved into: For Faith is no other than an assent to some Proposition or
Propositions upon Authority: And according as the Authority is, such is our
Faith, Humane or Divine.

So that Divine Faith must have Divine Authority, and Divine Authority is no
other than Divine Revelation, delivered at sundry times and in diverse manners,
Written or Unwritten.

And where there is no verbal Revelation by Persons Divinely Inspired, the
Written Word is the only Authority that Faith can be resolved into; which our
Savior here appeals to, and propounds as a means sufficient, and in their
Circumstances, as the only means for ending the Dispute.

The Question here in Debate was (as I observed before), Whether Jesus was the
Messiah prophesied of in the Old Testament? This the Jews denied, and our
Savior affirms, appealing for proof of it to John Baptist, to his own Works,
and to the Scriptures, and there he leaves it. For this was the old and true
way of deciding matters of that nature; To the Law and to the Testimony; if
they speak not according to Isai. 8. 20.
this word, there is no light in them.

Indeed in After ages a party of the Jews rose up, that taught for Doctrines
the Commandments of men; that did exalt their Traditions to an equal Authority
with the Divine Law, and made it equally a fault to transgress them; as our
Savior charges it upon them (of which more anon); But our Savior shows the
invalidity of Mat. 15. 2, 3, 9. Mar. 7. 8, etc.
this, and directs them to the Fountain of all Revealed Truth, the Holy
Scriptures then extant, as a Rule sufficient to guide them, and of Authority
sufficient to determine them.

And this was the course he at other times took: As does the Young Ruler put a
serious Case to him; Good Master, What shall I do that I may inherit Eternal
Life? Our Savior Answers, Mark 10. 17.
Thou know the Commandments.

Do the Sadduces, that denied a Future State and a Resurrection to it, contend
with our Savior about it? He argues with them from the Scriptures, Ye do err,
not knowing the Scriptures. Mat. 22. 29, 31.
-- As touching the Resurrection of the Dead, have ye not read, etc.

Would he instruct the Disciples in the great Articles of Faith? He does it
from those Sacred Oracles: Ought not Christ to have suffered? etc. Luke 24. 26.
And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself.

In like manner did the Apostles proceed to convince the Jews of their
Incredulity: So St. Paul reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, opening and
alleging, That Christ must needs have suffered and risen again, and that this
Jesus is the Christ. Act. 17. 2, 3. Act. 18. 28.
So Apollos showed by the Scriptures, That this Jesus was the Christ.

To this they always remitted them, as to a Rule certain and sufficient, and
without which nothing was to be received as an Article of Faith.

To a Rule certain, called therefore by St. Peter 2. 1, 19. A more sure word of
Prophecy, and which he prefers before a Voice from Heaven.

And a Rule sufficient, that is (as St. Paul says) able to make wise unto
Salvation, and thoroughly to furnish even the Man of God, the Teacher, unto 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
all good works.

And when these things were spoken at that time more immediately of the Jewish
Canon of the Old Testament, they may equally as well be applied to the New;
which is not only as much the Scripture (as St. Peter calls it, 2 Pet. 3. 19.
as I have before proved) but also by the Sermon. 6.
addition of it, renders the Old much more intelligible and complete.

Now there can be no imaginable reason assigned why the Scripture which was
then sufficient in all points necessary to Salvation, and for resolving of
Faith, should now be insufficient after the Revelation made by Christ: That is,
that we should be more at a loss with the more clear, full, and perfect
Revelation, than they were under the less perfect; that what in the last days
God Delivered and Revealed by his Son, should be less sufficient to direct us,
than what he Spoke at sundry times and in diverse manners in times past to the
Jews by the Prophets.

And especially considering, that there was a time when their Circumstances
were much the same with ours, which was in the long interval of 400 or 450
Years between the finishing of the Jewish Canon in the Pr^phecy of Malachi,
(with whom Revelation ceased) and the appearance of John Baptist. In which time
they were left, as we are, wholly to the Written Word of God for their
Direction, and the Sole Authority they were to rely upon.

Since then in the Christian Church there is no more need of any Traditionary
or Unwritten Word, than the Jews had at that time at le^st, under the Law; and
no more proof to be made of it now than there was then; it follows, that the
Scripture is the only Rule, in exclusion to all others; and what is not
contained therein by positive Proof, nor by evident Consequence to be deduced
from it, can no more be of Divine Authority and Obligation to Christians, than
Unwritten Traditions were then to the Jews.

This is the true Re^olution of Faith; and if our Savior in a point of such
Importance, as his being the Messiah, put the Case upon this issue, we have
good reason to think that it is still the true Method of reasoning among
Christians, and of resolving any Point of Faith and Doctrine necessary to
Salvation.

And therefore supposing we would find out the truth of any Doctrine thus
Necessary and Fundamental, we must come hither for direction and resolution;
and if it has no Foundation in Scripture, we are to reject it. For it is a Rule
in the Law, Quod Instrum^ntum non dicit, nec nos dicere debemus; or as it is
usually said, Where that has not a Tongue to Speak, we are not to have an Ear
to Hear* It Is then a Doctrine of Men, and may be a Tradition of the Elders, but
is no Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith.

But grant this; yet it has been before yielded, that Doubts and Disputes may
arise in the Church about the sense of this Written Rule; and therefore who
shall be the Arbiter to Judge and Determine; o^ how shall the Doubter be
resolved; or how shall he be sure of the Sense and Meaning of that which is
Disputed?

Our Savior here directs what is to be done; Search the Scriptures, examine
and prove all by this Rule. He does not direct them to any speaking Infallible
Guide, nor to any Church, nor Persons into whom their Faith is to be resolved,
but puts them themselves upon the trial of it. Whence it follows,

2. That every Man is to judge for himself.

Certainly if ever there were a necessity of an Infallible Judge to Determine
points of Controversy to Men's hands, it had been in the long Interval before
spoken of, between the Cessation of Prophecy, and the Appearance of our
Savior; when there were diverse Sects risen up among the Jews, continually
contending one with another, and oftentimes about matters of very great
Importance.

Of which I shall give a few Instances:

(1.) There was at that time a notable Controversy about the Church, which was
the true. This was the Case between the Jews and Samaritans; as it is stated by
the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 20. Our Fathers, says she to our Savior,
Worshipped in this Mountain Gerizim, and ye say that Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship: That is, ye say, Yours is the true Church, and we
say ours is that true Church: And each of these were so violently addicted to
their own way, that the Jews would have no dealing with the Samaritans, nor so
much as ask drink of them in their necessity, V. 9.

And on the other side, the Samaritans would not so much as receive the Jews
into their Houses, Luke 9. 53.

Nay so high did the Contest grow between them, that it engaged them in the
fiercest Quarrels, even to Assaults and Assassinations, wherever they were,
out of Canaan as well as in it; Joseph Antiq. l. 12. c. 1. and 3.
as their Historian Reports.

And though that Samaritan Temple was afterward utterly destroyed by Hyrcanus
about 130 years before our Savior; yet the Prejudices and Animosities
continued, till both fell under the L. 13. c. 6. and 18. l. 20. c. 5
common and final Destruction by the Romans.

(2.) Another point in Controversy was about a Future State, and the
Resurrection to it. This Acts 23. 8. Matt. 22. 29. Luke 24. 37, 39. V.
Light-foot Tal. Exercit. on Acts.
was Disputed between the Pharisees and the Sadducees: For the Sadducees held
that there was no Resurrection, nor Angel, nor separate Spirit, existing out of
a Body (for that the Jews called a Spirit); but the Pharisees confessed both.

(3.) Another material Controversy that then divided the Church, was, What was
the Rule of Faith? For the Sadducees would admit the Law of Moses only to be of
that Authority; and what was not therein contained, was among them accounted of
no validity; and therefore they denied a Future State, because (as they
pretended) there was no proof of it from that Law. But the Pharisees, whatever
respect they might give to the Law above the other Books of Scripture, yet
allowed both to be of the same Authority; and so what was contained in any of
them, to be the Object of Faith.

Again; The Sadducees were for Scripture alone without any Traditions; but the
Pharisees set their Traditions in the same Rank with the Scriptures, and would
have both of the same Obligation (as has been aforesaid, p. 13) and if either
was to give way to the other, the Scripture was rather to give way to
Tradition, than Tradition to the Scripture. About which Matters there were
often great Disputes and Differences between these Two powerful Factions, as
the Historian relates; so that however they were concerned in the Government,
yet the Flame Joseph Antiq. l. 13. c. 18.
broke out upon every occasion, and which St. Paul made his advantage of, who
when he perceived that the one part of the Council were Acts 23. 6.
Pharisees and the other Sadducees, cried out, I am a Pharisee, and the Son of
a Pharisee; of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.
By these means they filled the whole Nation with Bandyings and Feuds; the Great
Men generally siding with the Sadducees, and the People with the Pharisees, as
the same Author says.

(4.) Another Point in Controversy among them was about the Messiah. This was a
Character much pretended to by several about the time of our Savior; and was
the Chief Subject in Dispute between Him and the Rulingpart of the Jews.

Points surely these were of great Importance; Viz. Which is the True Church?
What is the Rule of Faith? Whether there be a Future Life? And whether Jesus be
the Messiah? And Points these were that the whole Nation of the Jews was
divided about: So that in all Appearance there was scarcely ever a greater
occasion for a Determining-power to put this Case to an Issue.

Now if there had been any such Infallible Authority, any such Concluding-Power
Visible and Known; as it was then, if ever, necessary: so no doubt, there would
have been Appeals to it in these Disputes among themselves, and with our
Savior. And in reason it may be thought our Savior would readily have
Appealed to it; because the Judge being Infallible, could never have Determined
and given it against Him.

But we read of no such Appeals in Scripture; but on the contrary, our Savior
puts them upon another way of Enquiry; not to Search after a Living and
Infallible Judge, by whom they were to be finally concluded; but to Search the
Scriptures, as the Infallible Rule by which they were to be Determined. And
accordingly the Apostles advised their Auditors to the same Course; that they
should thereby prove all things, and hold fast what upon trial they found 1
These. 5. 21.
to be good and true. That they should not believe every Spirit, every
Pretender to Revelation and Infallibility, but should try the Spirits whether
they were of God; and there was good reason it seems for it, because, says the
Apostle, many false Prophets are gone out into the World. 1 John 4. 1. that
pleaded Inspiration and a Divine Mission and Authority for what they Taught; as
is manifest from the Epistles of the Apostles: And yet the Apostles (who
themselves had the 2 Cor. 11. 13. Tit. 1. 10. 2 Ep. John 7. ver.
Spirit of Infallibility and Immediate Revelation) referred the Jews to the
Written Word as the Rule, and to their own Reason and Conscience as the Judge.

If ever any might have required an implicit Faith, and an absolute and a blind
Obedience to their judgment, it was Christ and his Apostles, and yet we find
that they would have all Try and Examine, Weigh and Consider. It being an
innate Privilege of Mankind not to be led blindfold; but to be governed by
their Reason, a privilege that true Religion does evermore preserve, and what
every Man is obliged to defend, since every Man must give an account of himself
to God: And therefore the Bereans Romans 14* 12.
are commended by St. Paul, as (...) more generous and free-spirited, Who
Searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were true, which that
Apostle Taught, and compared one with another, his Doctrine with that Holy
Standard; and finding them to accord, they received the word with all readiness
of mind. So manifest is Acts 17. 11, etc.
it, that in the Apostolical times every Man was to judge for himself, and to
use the same reason in Religion, which he used in the Common Affairs of Life.

All that those Inspired Writers desired, was, That Men would Search, and
search Impartially; and then they did not question but as they would be like
the Bereans in Temper, so they would be alike prevailed with in the conclusion,
and receive the truth with the like promptitude and readiness of mind; toward
the finding out of which, Searching and Honesty go a great way.

And whereas it might have been thought, however, that the times would come
when the Apostles should leave the World, and Immediate Inspiration should
cease with them, and so Men would be left to their own Fallible judgment in the
Interpretation of the Rule: Yet there is no other provision made by our Savior
and the Apostles for preventing any such Inconvenience (though they foresaw and
foretold there would be Deceivers and Impostors); Mat. 24* 24. 2 Timothy 4. 3. 2
Pet. 2. 1.
but all Future-Ages were left in the very same Circumstances with the Jews in
that Period of 450 years before spoken of.

The Divine Writers supposing that there was in the Scriptures such a plain and
full Revelation of all things necessary to be known in order to Salvation, and
there would be so much Reason and Sense in Mankind (where so great an Interest
as their Salvation was concerned) that with Ordinary and Common Helps, such as
Prayer and Consideration, and Advice and appointed Teachers are, that they
would be able to find out the Truth, or as much of it as was necessary to their
Salvation, if they came to it with sincere and well-disposed minds: And that
God would never suffer such to want Ability, Opportunities and Means for it; or
be wanting in mercy to them, in forgiving and passing by such defects as were
unavoidable to them in their Circumstances. But that belongs to the next Head;
and that is,

3. The Direction, what to do in this Case, which is to Search, that is, with
Diligence and Impartiality.

Supposing this, that every Man is to judge for himself, then persons will
judge differently, and there will be Eternal and Endless Disputes. To this our
Savior fits an Answer, not only in the Direction given in the Text, but also
in the subsequent part of his Discourse, which amounts to thus much; that we
are to Search with Diligence and Impartiality.

The former is implied in the Word (...) Search, and which is very requisite in
matters of such Importance as those were which our Savior is here Discoursing
upon, and that is no less than his being the Messiah, the Son of God. A Subject
that from the quality of it, and the various passages in Scripture relating to
it, required due Consideration. For though the Scriptures are so plain in most
necessary points, that in the Prophet's Phrase, the wayfaring men though fools
shall not err therein, and what are as soon understood Isa 35. 8.
as they are read: Yet there are even some of those that in the nature of the
thing require a strict and careful attendance: Of which kind are such as
contain the Characters of the Messiah; and therefore lie not so open to a
superficial Eye, but that they may be misunderstood; and he that would then
know and understand the force of the Argument referring to it, must Search. Our
Savior does not therefore say only, That the Scriptures Testify of him, but
requires them to Search, if they would be satisfied in it. For though proofs of
this nature often are like Mines, that lie deep, yet upon Searching they are to
be found: And if so, then our Ignorance is not to be imputed to their
Obscurity, but to our own Negligence, that we take not that course which is
proper thereunto, and may very justly be required.

But there is a further Qualification requisite, and that is Sincerity and
Impartiality.

Our Savior here resolves the Infidelity of the Jews into Obstinacy and
Insincerity. They had another Interest to mind, a Reputation to maintain, Ver.
40. Ye will not come to me. Ver. 42. Ye have not the love of God in you. Ver.
44. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only?

These and the like Vicious Inclinations hinder from Searching, or from finding
the truth if they Search, or from receiving it though they find it. Persons
thus disposed will then handle the word of God deceitfully, and like artificial
Orators put what 2 Cor. 2. 17. 4. 2. Ephesians. 4. 14. 2 Pet. 3. 16.
Color they please upon it. They will pervert and wrest, distort and writhe
the Text, till they force it to serve the Cause they espouse, and are resolved
beforehand to maintain.

And so it would be, if there were an Infallible Judge, and so it was when
there were Inspired Persons in the Church, when our Savior himself was in the
Chair, and the Apostles were helpers of their Faith.

So that there is no Fence in the World against Perverseness and Obtinacy,
against Pride and Self conceit, against Interest and Self-seeking.

These things indeed will make the Scripture difficult, and Truth
unintelligible, though never so plain in it self, or never so evidently proved:
When in the Phrase of Scripture, Their heart is waxed gross, and their ears are
dull of hearing, and they M^tth. 13. 15.
have closed their eyes, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart. For then it is with such
as with a sickly Stomach, that will nauseate the most wholesome and delightful
Diet: In which Case it is not the fault of the Diet, but of the Stomach, which
wants an Appetite, or of the Palate that wants the savor, which is the
occasion of the disorder; and for remedy of which, the Body is to be Cured, and
the Stomach to be restored to its natural Tone and Temper; and then the same
Diet will be nourishing and grateful as before.

So it is in the Case before us, where it is not the Understanding but the Will
that is in the fault, or some pre-occupations and Sinister Inclinations, that
do Cloud the mind and keep it from judging, or dispose it by such fatal Biasses
to judge amiss.

But now if the contrary Temper prevail, that Men lay aside all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, all Prejudices and Interests, and receive Jam. 1.
21.
with meekness the ingrafted word: If they are candid and ingenuous, free and
impartial, and come with an hearty desire to know the truth, and with a
steadfast resolution to be guided by it (whether it be for or against their
Worldly Interest), and to do according to what they know, they shall not
finally and fundamentally mistake; according to our Savior's resolution of
this Case, Joh. 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or, says he, whether I speak of my self. So
again, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall
know the truth, John 8. 31, 32. For God will not leave an honest mind without
such means as shall be sufficient for the understanding of all things necessary
to Salvation. Acts 8. 26. 10. 5. 9. 4.
He that sent a Philip to an Eunuch, and an Angel to Cornelius, and called to a
Saul out of Heaven, will present such occasions, give such assistance, or
direct to such Instructors, that shall, as Aquila to Apollos, expound unto them
Act. 18. 26.
the way of God more perfectly.

And if we put the Case, that a Person sincerely disposed to know and receive
the Truth should fall into error (for man is a fallible Creature), yet the
Error shall not be Damnable, but what may be as consistent with his being a
Christian and Orthodox, as Infirmities are with a good Man, and Sincerity. For
as in the present State, which is a State of Infirmity, there is no arriving to
such an established temper of Virtue and Goodness, but that Elijah, and Paul,
and Barnabas, and the best Jam. 5. 17. Acts 14.
of Men were subject to like passions with others: So neither is it possible by
the utmost Diligence, and the most laborious Searching, to find out the Truth,
so as never to mistake nor embrace Error for it (for that would as much be
above the state of Nature thus to be infallible, as impeccable); nor is it
necessary, when a person may be saved with all tolerable Errors, as with
natural and unavoidable Infirmities. And this then neither the Providence of
God, nor the Promise of our Savior are concerned to prevent: For these are
like Diseases that belong to the quality of the State we are in; and are no
more to be prevented, than our Nature and our State are to be altered, and of
imperfect to be made perfect.

But so far both the Promise, and the Providence of God, in confirmation of
that promise, are concerned, that a person of a truly sincere mind, continuing
such, shall no more fall into a damnable error without his own fault and
choice, than be guilty of a Damnable Sin; for that would be to leave Him in a
damnable condition, who upon the terms of the Gospel otherwise most certainly
should be saved. For no Sin under that Dispensation damns, but what is wilful;
according to that known Saying of St. Austin, Nihil ardet in Inferno nisi
propria voluntas.

Or however, if he should fall into such an error, as is against a fundamental
Article, and for the quality of it, is damnable: Yet it shall not be damnable
to him. It is a Case special, and what, though it falls not within the ordinary
Rules of the Gospel, shall however taste of the mercy of it.

The Apostle speaks of Damnable Heresies; and we have those Truths which we
call Fundamental, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
and both are rightly so termed; because those Truths are so essential to the
Christian Faith, that it cannot be the Christian Faith without them: And those
Heresies are so destructive to the Christian Faith, that it cannot be the
Christian Faith with them.

But yet because it is an error of invincible Ignorance, and what proceeds from
a mere defect in the Understanding, and not in the Will, we may charitably
conceive, that it being not that sort of Heresy, which is a Work of the Flesh,
Gal. 5. 20.
God will not impute it to such to their Condemnation; and that their Piety
toward God, and Charity toward Men, shall through Christ's Merits and
Intercession do more to save them, than their involuntary mistakes, how great
soever, shall do to damn them: Since God requires according to that a man has,
and 2 Cor. 8. 12.
not according to that he has not.

But because for the most part the Error is rather in the Will than in the
Understanding, or at least is then the more pernicious of the two: therefore as
we should enquire after the truth, and be careful to receive it when it is
proposed; so it is as necessary that we should receive the truth in the love of
it, and then it will have an influence upon us proportionable to the
Consequence 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
and Importance of it.

And as they are the best, most useful and necessary Principles that most of
all tend to make Men Good and Religious; so that is the best Testimony of our
being in the right, and that our Principles are true, that we are thereby made
more holy and pure, more just and charitable. I look upon this as an undoubted
Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Revelation, that it most of all conduces
to such an Excellent end; and it will appear that he best understands it, that
makes it the Rule of his Life as well as of his Faith; which if he does, as he
cannot likely mistake in his enquiry after Truth, so it is certain in the Issue
he shall not miscarry. For then he that comes thus prepared to Search the
Scriptures, will both find what they testify unto, and obtain that Eternal
Life, which is therein revealed and promised.

There it is then that the matters of greatest Consequence are to be found, and
all Points relating to them are resolved, such as do most nearly concern our
Eternal Happiness.

And if Scriptures do require our utmost Diligence and Care to find out their
meaning, yet in the issue when found out, it will reward all our pains, though
it be as great as the Affairs of this present Life are not managed nor
accomplished without.

I do acknowledge the Church of Rome has put this mattet into a far more
compendious course, if it were as true as it is short, by an Infallible Judge,
who by an Ipse dixit, without giving any reason, stamps upon all he says, an
uncontrollable Authority; but that must be, if a person is so near the Papal
Chair, as to have the Infallible Ear to apply himself to, and immediately
receives the dictates from the Infallible Oracle. For if he be remote from him,
and receives all by Written Decrees, or the Oral Tradition of others, it issues
then into a kind of Infallible Rule, and fails to be the Sentence of the
Infallible Judge. For Words and Writings if they once fall into Fallible hands,
according to them, cease to be Infallible, and are as much subject to
difficulties, and about the sense of which have often happened as endless
Contentions and Misunderstandings, as ever they can pretend have happened to an
Infallible Rule. Therefore they are no safer, nor less subject to err by the
having an Infallible Judge, than we by an Infallible Rule: Nay, so much the
worse is it with them, as we cannot suppose that an Infallible Judge (if we go
to their Fountainhead) can more clearly interpret the Divine Rule, than God
himself could and did direct and dictate to those who wrote it. So that at last
they are left with all their Pretenses to Infallibility, in a condition worse
than those that have an Infallible Rule for their Director; and that with their
own Diligence and Searching, and the blessing of God concurring therewith, like
Apollos, become mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18. 24.: For to such is that
spoken which never was said to any Infallible Judge, If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Sermon. 1st. Page 21. Line 17. Read needs. p. 26. l. 4. r. Enthusiastical. p.
29. l. 8. r. of one among them. p. 31. Margin add V. Dr. Gedis, Of the
Ecclesiastical State of Ethiopia. Appendix.

Sermon. 2d. p. 6. l. 7. r. and things. p. 9. l. 18. r. 16.


