The Unreasonableness of Infidelity.

A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, April 6. 1696. BEING THE
Fourth of the LECTURE For this Present YEAR, Founded by the Honorable ROBERT
BOIL, Esquire.

By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill: At the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. MDCXCVI.

LUKE XVI. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead.
FROM the 19th. Verse of this Chapter to the end, under the Parable of (if I
may so call it) the Rich man and Lazarus, Irenaeus, Origin, Cyril, Hierom,
think it not a Parable.
there is a way proposed, by which we may best judge of the wisdom and folly,
the happiness and misery of Mankind. And it is as if our Savior had said;
Suppose we a man as happy as the world can make him, abounding in Prosperity,
Wealth, Ease and Luxury, that wanted nothing for his Vanity, for he was in a
condition honorable and splendid, was clothed in Purple, and five Linen,
(...).
and Silk; nothing for his Appetite, for he fared sumptuously every day. And
when he died, was buried with Ceremony and Pomp agreeable to his Quality.

Suppose we on the other hand a person as miserable as this world can make him,
poor so as to beg; (...).
full of Sores and Ulcers, so as not able to help himself; destitute of
Friends, so as to be cast at the Rich man's gate; (...).
hunger-starved so as to need the very crumbs which fell from the other's
table; contemned so as not to be regarded though lying at the gate, in the
passage and view of all; or if taken notice of, yet so as not to be relieved;
naked, so as not to have wherewith to cover his Body, or to defend his sores
from the cold, and that found more pity among the dogs than men, while alive
(for they came and licked his sores); and when dead through want, pain and
anguish, found as little charity to bury him. Thus far we find them as unlike
as can be in their present condition.

But now let us follow them beyond the Grave, and see what becomes of them in
the other world. There we find the poor Lazarus, that once pitiful,
contemptible, necessitous wretched Creature, that wanted what the dogs had
here, Mat. 15. 27.
the crumbs of the Table, taken care of at his death by the Holy Angels, and
carried by them into a place of safety and rest, comfort and happiness, where
Abraham was, and there preferred to a place of honor and kindness; for he lay
in Abraham's Bosom, having no poverty, nor sores, nor contempt, nor any of the
evil things he received in his Lifetime here.

This he had because of his afflictions that he endured, and bore with
admirable patience; because of his steady dependence upon God, and an humble
submission to him in the most deplorable condition.

On the other hand, the Rich man when he died went to Hell, where he had none
of the Ease and Luxury, the Respect and Honor, none of the good things he
received in his lifetime, but was tormented in a flame, wanting water there as
much to cool his tongue, and quench his insatiable thirst, as Lazarus did
before the crumbs which fell from his Table to satisfy his hunger. There he
was, and there he was to abide, for there was a great Gulf fixed, that rendered
him as incapable of receiving relief in the other world, as he was neglectful
and unwilling to give it to such as needed in this.

This he had for his Pride and Unmercifulness, for his Contempt of God, and of
others better than himself. This he was too late sensible of as to himself; he
lift up his eyes, but he was in torments; he cried to his Father Abraham, but
he proves inexorable; he calls for mercy, but is minded of his former
ingratitude to God, and his uncharitableness to others, and is put to silence
with a Son remember, that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things,
ver. 25.

When he could not prevail for himself, he then turns his thoughts toward his
Five brethren, whom he left behind, that were as careless, and so likely at
last to be as miserable as himself, and entreats Abraham that Lazarus might be
sent to testify unto them, how it was with him, and how it would also be with
them unless they repented, ver. 27. To which Abraham replies, ver. 29. They
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. But that does not satisfy him,
and he urges further: Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went from the dead, they
will repent, ver. 30. This he speaks from his own Experience, who had Moses and
the Prophets as well as they, and yet he was as secure and careless, as if he
had never heard or knew what they Taught; and therefore unless some other
Expedient be thought of, or some other means used, they are like in the
conclusion to be as miserable as himself; and surely that, if any, would
prevent it, if one went from the dead. But to this Abraham replies in the Text,
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rise from the dead; that is, if they give no Credit nor regard to what is
contained in their Writings concerning a Future State of rewards and
punishments, they are incurable, neither will they be persuaded to repent, (as
it is ver. 30.) though one rise from the dead.

That there is a Future State of Happiness or Misery, in which the Souls of men
do live after a separation from their Bodies, has been in all Ages universally
received; But yet was not so convincingly to be proved from the sole light of
Reason, but that a fuller evidence of it was very desirable: For which there
are but two ways, Either that of Divine Revelation, by persons Divinely
Inspired; Or by the return of one from the Dead, who was before known to the
Living. And these are the ways taken here into consideration by our Savior, in
the case before us: Where there may be three sorts of persons concerned.

1. Those that had not Moses and the Prophets, and were wholly without a
Revelation; as was the case of the Heathens: And how shall they believe, who
have not heard? Romans 10. 14.

2. Those that had Moses and the Prophets, and yet were incredulous, and did
not believe what Moses and the Prophets relate concerning a Future State. Such
were the Sadducees, who held there was no resurrection, Matt. 22. 23.
angel, nor spirit existing out of a Body. Acts 23. 8.


3. Those that had Moses and the Prophets, and did believe what was therein
revealed, concerning the Soul's Immortality and a Future Life, but were not
thereby persuaded to repent. Such were the Pharisees, who professed to believe
what the Sadducees denied: And of this sort were the Rich man (here spoken of)
and his Five Brethren supposed to be.

Now toward the conviction of each of these, it might be supposed, that if one
rose from the dead, the former would be persuaded to believe, and the latter to
repent.

Thus the Heathens reasoned, who had no Revelation. As that Excellent person
Canus Julus (that Seneca speaks of) who just before his Execution said to his
Friends, Vos quaeritis an Immortales animae sint. Ego jam sciam.
Ye are inquisitive to know whether the Souls are Immortal; I shall now know.
And he promised, Si quid Explorasset, circumiturum amicos, and indicaturum, qui
esset animarum status. De Tranquil. c. 14.
If he found it so, that he would go about among his Friends, and would inform
themwhat was the state of departed Souls.

And the same Seneca, when discoursing to Lucilius about the behavior of
Bassus Aufidius, how dying he spoke of Death as a Friend, and what a
confirmation this gave to the Doctrine of the Souls Immortality, he adds, Plus
ut puto haberet fidei apud to, si quis revixisset, and in morte nihil mali esse
narraret Expertus. Epist. 30.
But I suppose you would more firmly believe it, if one should return to life
again, and should declare that he found no evil in death. To this they gladly
repaired as an evidence where they found it. And therefore Plato produces the
instance of Erus Armenius, De Rep. l. 10.
that after he had been dead Twelve days, revived, and gave much such an
account of the other State, as we have in this Parable.

But it is the case of Revelation we Christians are more immediately concerned
in, and which our Savior here speaks to, and prefers before the Testimony of
one rising from the dead.

The way here proposed concerning the coming of one from the dead, has somewhat
of common Experience on its side. For we see that notwithstanding the clear
Revelation of another state in Scripture, and the belief that men have of it,
yet generally they are but little affected with these Arguments, though allowed
to be of the greatest importance, because they lie dead in a Book, and are
proposed to them by such as have no more personal Experience of these things
than themselves, having never been out of this world, nor had any sight of, or
conversation with the other.

But now if a special Messenger should be sent from the other world; a Lazarus
who was known to them when alive, and known by them to be dead; one that had
been an ocular witness of the things he spoke of and related, and should tell
them, that as there is a state of Happiness for good men, so a state of Misery
for the wicked, a state of Misery without ease, respit, or hope of deliverance,
and confirmed all by his appearance, surely this would move them: Surely no
heart so hard, but this must penetrate; no mind so stup^d, but this must
awaken; no Sinner so incorrigible, but this must reclaim. And it may be left to
every one to judge, Whether if there were such an Apparition that should come
upon this terrible Errand, any one could see and hear it with the same calmness
and indifference, as he hears a Sermon, or reads a Chapter in the Bible upon
this serious Argument.

So that the advantage seems to be much on the side of the Apparition; and the
Proposal here made, agreeable to the Common sense of Mankind.

But how probable a course soever this seems to be, yet our Savior here
determines on the contrary, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither,
etc. Which Answer may be resolved into these Two parts.

1. That the Arguments contained in the Scriptures, are sufficient to persuade
men to repent.

2. When men disregard the Holy Scriptures, (the ordinary means of Salvation)
so as not to be persuaded to repent by the Arguments therein contained, they
will not be persuaded by means extraordinary, and though, for example, one
should rise from the dead.

The first of these, viz. That the Arguments contained, etc. is supposed, ver.
29. when Abraham says, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them:
And this the other does not deny.

Now the chief Arguments relating to this Subject are briefly touched upon in
this Parable; which are these:

1. That the Souls of men are Immortal, This is implied when the Rich man and
Lazarus are said to be in Being after they were dead, ver. 22.

2. That the state into which the Souls of men are disposed after death, is a
state of recompense, Abraham says, ver. 25. He is comforted, and thou art
tormented.

3. That that state of recompense is a state of unchangeable happiness to some,
and of endless misery to others, ver. 26. Between us and you there is a great
gulf fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you [to relieve you],
cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence [for relief].

4. That men are disposed to happiness or misery there, according to their
behavior in this world, ver. 25. says Abraham, Son, remember, that thou in
thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but
now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

These are Considerations of such force and consequence, that this miserable
person desires not that Lazarus should be sent to argue upon them with his Five
Brethren, but to testify concerning their reality.

Arguments they are of such force, that he that will not by these be persuaded
to repent, will never be persuaded by any other. But though this be all granted
to be true (as it is supposed), yet in his opinion, as the case would admit
further evidence, so it seemed to need it; and therefore if this extraordinary
course were taken of sending one from the dead, they would (in his opinion)
certainly repent, who with the ordinary means continue impenitent.

This brings to the 2d General.

2. When men disregard the ordinary means of Salvation, and are not to be
persuaded to repent by the Arguments revealed in holy Scripture, they will not
be persuaded by means extraordinary, and though one should come from the dead
to persuade them.

For the resolving of which point, we are to consider what are the reasons why
the ordinary means of Salvation, such as the holy Scriptures are, prove
ineffectual; which cannot be from the want of proper and forcible Arguments;
for whatever one from the dead can say to move or persuade, is as plainly
delivered in Scripture. He cannot more expressly tell them that there is a God,
that the Souls of men are Immortal, that there is a Heaven and a Hell, than the
Scripture does. And therefore if what is thus revealed, and believed upon such
Revelation, should not prove as effectual, as what is reported by a special
Messenger from the dead; it must be from some reasons which belong to the one,
and not to the other; but that there is no ground for; and therefore from
whence can this proceed, but from the excessive love to the things of this
Life, and the indulgence men give to themselves in the enjoyments of it? Whence
should this proceed but from the power of those Lusts and Vicious Habits they
have contracted?

And where these and the like causes are, a Messenger from the other world will
make no stronger an impression, nor will an impression thereby made, be of any
longer continuance, than in the other case: But that he that will not be
persuaded by Moses and the Prophets, will not be persuaded though one come from
the dead.

And this I shall make good,

1. By parallel and suitable cases and instances.

2 By a particular inquiry into the causes of impenitence, which will hold in
one case as well as the other.

1. By parallel cases.

As,

(1.) If means as extraordinary, and more extraordinary than the coming of one
from the dead, have failed in this point, and not persuaded men to repentance,
we have as little reason to expect, nor can it reasonably be presumed, that the
coming of one from the dead, should persuade and become effectual.

As for instance; Let us consider the case of Pharaoh, before whom such
stupendous Miracles were wrought, and upon whom such astonishing Judgments
were inflicted, as could not in reason be supposed resistible: When the Waters,
Earth, and Air, Beasts, Fishes, and Fruits of the Earth, Men and Children,
either felt or were made the instruments of Divine Vengeance. Could it be
thought that when the Waters were turned into Blood, and Frogs covered the face
of the Earth, and the Dust of it was converted into Lice, and the plague of
Flies followed that of Lice; and Murrain, Flies; and Boils, the Murrain; and
Hail, Boils; and Locusts, Hail; and Darkness Locusts; and the killing of the
Firstborn, the Darkness; that he should yet be so obstinate as not to let the
people of Israel go; and when he did, should follow them into the midst of the
Sea? Could disappointment, vexation, and revenge, so far infatuate him, that
Miracle after Miracle, Scourge upon Scourge, could not persuade him, nor the
sense of so imminent a danger stop him in his carier, but that he persisted in
his first resolution, and blinded thus with rage, pursued it to his
destruction? Exodus 7. 8, 9, 10.
Can it be supposed now, that one from the dead could more have prevailed upon
him than this Scene of Judgments? Could it have come with so much terror? Or if
it should, may not the Sinner be alike obstinate and infatuated? May not the
like passions and sensual affections, or a habit of Sin, keep a person from
hearkening to, or following the advice of one come from the dead?

Let us consider again, how it was with the Israelites, who had not only been
Spectators of those Miracles and Judgments in Egypt, but stood safe in the
midst of them; Deuteronomy. 1. 32.
that were preserved, Psalm. 78. 22. 32. 56. 106. 24.
directed, and fed by a continued Series of Miracles, and yet were not only
upon every occasion tempting and provoking God by their distrust, Nehem. 9. 16.
impatience and murmuring, but were for returning into Egypt again.

Thus it was also with their Posterity in our Savior's time, who
notwithstanding the plain fulfilling of their ancient Prophesies in him,
notwithstanding the Innocence of his Life, the Purity, Sanctity, and Evidence
of his Doctrine, the Power of his Miracles, changing the course of Nature as he
pleased; healing the Sick, opening the Eyes of such as were born blind, casting
out Devils, and raising the Dead. Nay, notwithstanding his Resurrection, and
the unquestionable confirmation of it, yet continued obstinate and incredulous,
Mat. 12. 13.
and what they could not deny, would impute to Beelzebub.

Now what comparison is there between the coming of one from the dead, and this
case? Or what reason is there to conceive that a wicked Jew should have been
more effectually reclaimed from a Vicious course of Life, and be made a
penitent by the coming of one from the dead, than the Jewish Infidel should be
made a Convert by all those numerous Miracles, and become a Christian? And why
may not the one be as well impenitent, as the other an Infidel?

2. It may be supposed in reason, that what a person hears from another, should
in a matter of importance alike affect him in one case as in another: And if he
is not persuaded by the one, there is no reason to expect he should be
prevailed upon by the other.

Such indeed is the Testimony of one rising from the dead, who must be
acknowledged to be a very fit Evidence concerning the reality of a Future
State, and the condition of Separate Souls in it, as he has been personally
acquainted with it, and had a part in it.

But such also is the Testimony of a trembling Sinner, that after a vicious
course of Life, entering upon the confines of death, and expecting every moment
to be snatched away by that inexorable Enemy, feels now the anguish no less
than he formerly relished the pleasures of his Sin; that cries out in the
bitterness of his Soul, That he is sensible, but he fears too late, of his
former folly: That he is now preyed upon by a Thousand Vipers, and feels a Hell
in himself before he descends into it.

And in this Agony calls upon all about him, and the once Sworn Companions in
his Vices, to take warning by him, and no longer to entertain themselves with
the charms of those noxious pleasures he is now burdened with the guilt of, and
would not for a world repeat, if he was to live his Life over again.

Is not here a living and present Testimony? And if one should come from the
dead, can he say more, or can his Testimony be of greater force concerning the
State he comes from, than this of the awakened penitent, if not despairing
Sinner, is, concerning the Evil, the Guilt, and Terror of Sin?

And yet if this be not attended to, or the force of it be soon carried off by
a Glass of Wine, and the charms of Company and Temptation, or tract of Time;
Can it be supposed that the same Event may not happen to the other? And will
not the hardened and impenitent Sinner as much despise, or as soon forget the
admonitions of this ghostly Monitor, as those of a dying desponding Friend?

3. It may be expected that what a person sees himself, should more affect him,
than what he hears only by the report of others. And if what he sees, (though
in a matter of necessity and importance) makes little or no impression upon
him; how can it be supposed, that what he hears only from another should affect
him? And this is the case: For if one came from the dead to bear witness to the
truth of a Future State of recompense, and of the misery of impenitent Souls in
it, it is only testimony and report, and what can neither be of that certainty
nor force, as if the person to whom he comes upon this errand, had himself been
in that State.

But now there are those things which a person sees, and which should in
reason, according to the nature of the things, as much move him, as the
Testimony of one coming from the dead.

And of this kind is Death, which we every day have in view, and are no more
secured against the very next moment, than those that are already departed.

The plain consequence of which is this, That it is then our greatest wisdom so
to order our selves and all our affairs, that we may meet it withour surprise
or terror, and may live as we would wish we had done, when that fatal hour does
approach.

And yet if we take a view of Mankind, we find them generally as secure, as if
they alone were immortal; or as improvident, as if they had death under such an
obligation, that it must give them time and leisure sufficient to put all
things in order, before it shall proceed to executeits Sentence.

Now if in a matter so apparent, sensible, and certain, there is so little,
where there ought to be the greatest concernment, and Mankind is so difficultly
moved, that they either don't consider, or the consideration of it makes them
no wiser or better; what reason is there to imagine, that the testimony of
another, though it be one from the dead, should make any lasting impression
upon them, and persuade them to repent?

4. What a person feels himself, should in reason more affect him, than what he
hears or sees of others.

And if what he himself feels makes little or no impression upon him, it is not
to be conceived, that what he only sees or hears should move him.

In confirmation of which, we may reflect upon the common state and behavior
of Mankind, in the Judgments and Afflictions that befall them, the Dangers they
are in, the Terrors they are under. In which and the like cases, we shall find
them too often insensible and incorrigible, or inconstant and unresolved.

Sometimes they are insensible under the severest Judgments: As it was with
Ahaz, who for his Idolatry was delivered up to his Enemies; On the East, the
King of Assyria; on the North, the King of Israel; on the South, the Edomite;
on the West, the Philistines, invade and spoil his Territories; as we have it,
2 Chronicles. 28. 5, 6, 17, 18.

And yet when brought thus low for his Transgressions, it is said of him, In the
time of his distress he trespassed yet more against the Lord, ver. 22.

At other times, if sensible, yet they are inconstant, and in the event prove
incorrigible. As it was with the Israelites, Psalm. 78. 34, etc. When he slew
them, then they sought him, and enquired early after God, etc. Nevertheless
they did flatter him with their mouth, etc. For their heart was not right with
God, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.

Now can it be supposed that an Apparition of one from the dead should do more
than these; and that He should by that be disposed to repent, whom the severest
Judgments left impenitent?

Or suppose the Sinner terrified hereby, and melted into an affectionate
temper; yet have we not examples of that kind every day, of persons that after
all the terrors they are under, are set no nearer to a true repentance; and
though they seem for a while by some good resolutions to make toward the
Kingdom of Heaven, are never able to enter, (as our Savior expresses it) Luke
13. 24.

View we then a Sinner under the power of his convictions, in the time of
danger and distress, when he has no way to escape.

How terrified has he been in his own mind at the approaches of death! How
Grave, Solemn and Serious has it made him! How importunate has he been for
Mercy, and for some longer time to finish his Repentance! What Promises,
Resolutions, and Vows has he made! What Imprecations has he wished upon
himself, if ever he should prove false to them; and desired no mercy if ever he
should break them! Lord, will he say, Spare me but this once; try me but once
more, and then if I return to my former Sins, or neglect to put my self into a
capacity for thy favor and mercy, let me never find it. As it was with
Pharaoh, who said to Moses, Forgive my Sin only this once, and entreat the Lord
that he may take away from me this death only, Exodus 10. 16.

Now could the Apparition of one from the dead do more than this? Can we
suppose the Sinner more terrified, more seriously concerned and resolved, than
when he had his own Conscience thus impartially representing the case to him,
and Almighty God awakening his Conscience by an extraordinary Providence?

And now let us consider the event of this, and whether after this tender
disposition of mind, and seeming resolution, he is a true Penitent; or that, in
the Phrase of the Text, he will repent, and that this will necessarily be the
issue of it.

Suppose we then this Languishing person rescued out of the jaws of Death by a
merciful Providence, and put into the Condition of making a second trial, and
of giving a proof of his thankfulness to God, and of his fidelity to his
Sickbed Vows and Resolutions.

Let us suppose him again breathing in a free Air, and having all the enticing
Objects afresh presented to him, that he was before conversant with.

Let us trace him along, and we shall find him, as the terror and sense of his
danger wears off, first covertly looking, then remotely following, at last
overtaking and closing with the same temptations; and perhaps plunging himself
further into the same Licentious state than before.

Grant we now that there is a just reason for the Sinner's terror, if the Ghost
of his Deceased Friend, and the once inseparable Partner in his Vices, should
appear, and plainly represent to him the desert of Sin in the Miseries of
another Life, and the certainty of his having a Portion in them without
repentance. Grant we (and he must be a stone rather than a man, whom it has no
influence upon) that he is brought by it into the state of Belshazzar, Dan. 5.
that his Countenance is changed, and his Thoughts so trouble him, that the
joints of his Loins are unloosed, and his Knees smite one against another. Yet
still this may be, and he be no true Penitent, nor this prove a means effectual
enough to reform him. For a man repents no further than his Will and Temper is
changed; and if these remain the same, he no more repents to whom the dead has
appeared (whatever terrors he may be under) than he that was upon the borders
of Death: And he may and will as soon as he, upon occasion, repent of his
repentance. So certainly true is that which was before observed, That the
causes which hinder men from being persuaded to repentance by the Arguments of
Scripture, will also keep them from being persuaded by means extraordinary,
such as the coming of one from the dead. And that the cares of this world, and
the deceitfulness of riches, Mark 4. 19.
and the lusts of other things, will as well render the extraordinary means
ineffectual, as choke the Word of God, and make it unfruitful.

Let God send all the Plagues of Egypt, and yet Pharaoh will harden his heart:
Let the Sea be divided, and Manna rained from Heaven, and Water break out of
the Rock, and the Water of the Rock follow them for 40 years together. 1 Cor.
10. 4.
Let them have a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night as their Guide,
and an Angel for their Safeguard, and yet the Israelites will be tempting,
provoking, and murmuring. Let one come and do the works which never man did;
give sight to the Blind; feet to the Lame; health to the Sick; life to the
Dead. Let the Sun be darkened; the Rocks rend; the Graves be opened, and the
Dead appear: Nay, let him that did all this, and for whose sake it was done,
rise again from the Dead, and visibly ascend into Heaven; yet the obstinate Jew
will be incredulous. Let a Ghost appear, and preach over the despised Doctrines
of the Soul's Immortality, and the reality of a Future State, and of a Judgment
to come, and reinforce it from his own Knowledge and Experience, and verify all
this by his return from the Dead: And yet the Sinner, the customary Sinner, is
not to be reclaimed; who like the deaf Adder stops his ears against the voice
of the charmer, charm he never so powerfully and wisely, Psalm. 58. 5.

It Is then all one whether it be Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles, Revelation, or the Resurrection of one from the Dead, when the Temper
is otherwise inclined: And if the Honors, Profits, Advantages, and Pleasures
of the world do render the one, they will also render the other ineffectual. So
true is that, Wisd. 4. 12. that wickedness by bewitching, obscureth the things
that are good; and will disarm all Arguments can be produced, of their Force
and Efficacy.

2. I might further prove this, by considering the reasons why Men don't
believe and repent, and the Excuses they make for delays in it, which will as
well frustrate the Testimony and Persuasions of one from the Dead, as it does
the Arguments of Divine Revelation.

(1.) The reasons have been partly showed already, and they are the prevalency
of Corrupt Inclinations; the Presence of Temptations; the Habits of Vice; or a
Worldly Interest; which are the usual Obstructions to Repentance, and have a
greater power over Men to detain them in Sin, than all the Arguments of the
Gospel, and the Convictions of their own Minds, have to reclaim them from it.
We see that though they have Line upon Line, the most powerful Motives in the
World, such threatenings as make them at some times with Foelix to tremble: Acts
24. 25.
Such comfortable Doctrines as make them at other times with Herod to hear
gladly: Mark 6. 20.
Such moving and awakening considerations, as bring them with Balaam to desire
to dye, Numb. 23. 10.
and further than him, to a desire to live the life of the Righteous; yet they
soon fail of their force; and the Foelix was the Foelix that left his Preacher
Paul in bonds: Acts 24. 27.
And the Balaam was the Balaam that as well took, as he loved, Numb. 31. 16.
the wages of unrighteousness: And the Herod was the Herod that beheaded John
Baptist whom he observed and heard with pleasure. 2 Pet. 2. 15.


For all these Passions are like Qualms that soon pass off, and prevail not so
far as to alter the Temper. And where persons are thus under the power of their
Lusts, they will continue in the same state, if one came from the Dead to warn
and reprove them. And therefore if John B. had rose from the Dead, as Herod
once imagined and believed, Matt. 14. 2.
it would no more have made him a true Penitent, than the Preaching of that
Holy Man did, when alive; as long as Herodias was by him to seduce him, and he
was contented to be seduced.

(2.) The case is the same with persons in delaying heir Repentance; and if the
Excuse against the present necessity of it prevail in one case, they will also
prevail in the other. So that he that will not be persuaded to a present
Repentance, by the Arguments of the Gospel, will not be persuaded by the
Testimony and Admonition of one from the Dead.

And upon the whole the Question is, Whether a person may not reason the same
way, and as much to his own Delusion, against the Testimony and Persuasions of
one from the Dead, as against the Authority and Arguments of Scripture, and at
last be as far from Repentance and a present Repentance?

And whether there is not reason to conclude, That if these and the like
Excuses prove sufficient to detain men in impenitency notwithstanding all the
Arguments to the contrary, contained in Scripture; the same will not be of as
much force, and have as much influence upon the Sinner, if one should come from
the Dead to admonish him?

I am confident that this is not to be gainsaid.

And so the Proposition before laid down remains good, That the reasons for
which persons give no heed to, or are not persuaded by the Authority and
Arguments of Scripture, to believe and repent, will keep them from giving heed
to, and being persuaded by the coming of one from the Dead.

But this is a case I shall not further prosecute; for it needs Consideration,
rather than Proof.

I shall therefore close all with Three or Four Inferences.

1. From hence I infer, That there is no absolute need of any other course to
be taken for the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, than what is already
taken; or that extraordinary means should be used, where the ordinary are
sufficient.

If there be a Revelation, which is believed certainly to be Divine, and the
Arguments contained in that Revelation are sufficient to persuade men to
believe and repent, Then there is no need of Miracles, nor of a Voice from
Heaven, nor the Resurrection of one from the Dead. If there be impenitency with
reason and proof sufficient to convince and persuade men, there will be
impenitency still, with such proof as is more than sufficient. These things are
written that ye might believe, Joh. 20. 30. And consequently, what is Written,
is sufficient to persuade us to a belief of what is Written.

2. God is not bound to give, nor can men in reason desire or expect, that he
should use an extraordinary course where the ordinary is sufficient; and that
one should rise from the Dead for their Conviction, who have Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. It was the Temper of Thomas, Except I shall
see in his hands the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe, Joh. 20. 25.

This was the Temper of the incredulous Jews, Let him come down from the cross,
and we will believe, Matt. 27. 42. So Celsus the Heathen will have it, If
Christ were the Son of God, that he should have been (...), like the Sun;
Origin, l. 2.
and the miserable person here would have one rise from the dead.

There will be no end if once we exceed the ordinary bounds, and expect
evidence beyond what is sufficient: For then men may require to be rapt up into
Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. 4.
as St. Paul was; Acts 7. 56.
or to see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of
God, as did St. Stephen: Nay, John 14. 8.
they may be as impertinent as Philip, and say, Show us the Father, and it
suffices.

3. We are bound to believe what we have sufficient evidence for; and to repent
when the Reasons and Motives to it are sufficient, though we have not all the
Evidence that may be given, and that it is possible for God to give. It Is
possible for God to send a Lazarus from the Dead, to testify unto the
impenitent, concerning the certainty of a place of torment in the other World.

And it is possible, though not very probable, (as I have showed) that may be a
means to awaken such, and bring Them to repentance, whom the Doctrine of Divine
Revelation, and the Arguments of Scripture could not prevail upon. But that
does not lessen the Obligation of believing and doing according to Revelation;
and which without such further evidence is of it self sufficient for their
Conversion.

4. Those that have the Evidence of Divine Revelation, and yet do not believe
and repent according to that Revelation, are wholly inexcusable; They have
Moses and the Prophets, says our Savior, let them hear them; for that was
sufficient, and all that was necessary to bring them to Repentance here, and
Salvation hereafter. And if they that had Moses and the Prophets only, were
inexcusable, what can those plead, who have not only Moses and the Prophets,
but Christ and the Apostles, who have brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel? And who must therefore have so many more reasons against
them, as there are more for the confirmation of the Truth of our Religion, and
for the conviction of Unbelievers, than there were under the Law: And therefore
if any continue in a state of Unbelief and Impenitence under the Gospel, it
will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for
them. If such do perish, it is wholly from themselves: If such do perish, it is
not through want of Information sufficient to direct them; not through want of
Arguments powerful enough to convince them; not through want of Authority
sufficient to oblige them; not through want of sufficient Grace to enable them;
not through want of Mercy in God, or Merit in a Savior, or a Will, Desire or
Endeavor in both to save them, but from themselves. And how just will then the
Sentence of Condemnation be to such! How will all Pleas then be prevented! And
how miserable must his case be, that is Condemned by himself before he is
Condemned by God!

To conclude,

Here is Life and Death set before us, in the most pressing Arguments; the most
powerful Motives; the most persuasive invitations to Repentance. We have here
proposed to us all that Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles have
said to convince us: And we have still, through the Merciful Providence of God,
means to assist us in it, and time and opportunity for the performance of it.
But the time is coming, and will most certainly come, when, if we have not
before believed and repented, Neither Moses nor the Prophets, neither Abraham,
nor one greater than Abraham, will or can relieve us. And therefore how
necessary is it for all now to hearken to Moses and the Prophets, to Christ and
the Apostles, in this their Day? For if they now hear them not, they can no
more hereafter be saved, than they would have been persuaded though one had
rose from the dead.

FINIS.

