A VINDICATION OF THE Archbishop TILLOTSON'S Sermons, Concerning the Divinity
and Incarnation of our B. Savior, etc.

IMPRIMATUR,

Lamb. Nov. 17, 1694. RA. BARKER.

A VINDICATION OF THE SERMONS OF His Grace JOHN Archbishop of Canterbury,
CONCERNING THE Divinity and Incarnation of our B. Savior: AND Of the Lord
Bishop of Worcester's Sermon on the Mysteries of the Christian Faith: FROM THE
EXCEPTIONS of a late Book, Entitled, Considerations on the Explications of the
Doctrine of the TRINITY.

To which is annexed, A Letter from the Lord Bishop of Sarum to the Author of
the said Vindication, on the same Subject.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCV.

TO His Honored FRIEND, JAMES CHADWICK, Esquire.
THE Present I here make you being a Vindication of my late LORD of Canterbury,
and the Cause he seasonably appeared in, and successfully defended, the
Dedication of it seems of right to belong to you, who besides the Happiness of
a near Alliance and a long and inward Acquaintance, had a Just Esteem and
Veneration for Him. It was not without His GRACE's Direction and Encouragement
that I entered upon this Work; and had He lived to have perused the Whole, as He
did a Part of it, (a few Days before his Last Hours) it had come with greater
Advantage into the world, and much more to my own Satisfaction, as having
passed the Trial of that Exact and Impartial Judgment which he was wont to
exercise in Matters of this Nature. But however it may fall short in that
Particular, such as it is, I here present it to you, not doubting (though it
may not deserve it for its own sake) but you will accept it in Remembrance of
so Excellent a Friend, and as a Testimony of all due Respect from,

SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, J. WILLIAMS.

THE PREFACE.
THE Subject which the Author of the Considerations undertakes, is a prime
Article of the Christian Faith, and so requires Seriousness and Decorum in the
Management of it: And the Persons to whom he declares himself an Adversary, are
not only of an eminent Order and Station in the Church, but also such as have
approved themselves in their Writings to be of that Learning and Judgment, that
Temper and Moderation, that their Adversary cannot but pay some Reverence, in
Expressions at least, to their Persons for it.

But notwithstanding this, as if he had a distrust in his Cause, and durst not
venture it abroad into the world upon the Strength of its own Reason and
Authority, he soon endeavors to prepossess his unwary Readers with such
Insinuations as he thinks will make them, if not of his own Party, yet suspect
the Sincerity of the other.

For would you know who those are that he proclaims War against? They are one
while a poor sort of weak people at the best, that, he says, neither have nor
can defend their Cause, but have given it up to the Socinians: But if you would
indeed know who they are, in their proper colors; they are the great
Pensioners of the world, that are bribed with great Rewards. They are of a
Church, whose Fears and Aws are greater than their Bribes. Another while they
are great men indeed that defend the Doctrine of the Trinity against them, but
it is that they Must maintain it, p. 44. So that set aside Preferments, Fears
and Aws, and without doubt these Great Men, and the whole Church and Nation (as
he would have it believed) would Socinianise, and become their Proselytes.
Would one think that this Person had ever read the Character his Grace has
given his Predecessors in that Controversy, who used generally to lay aside
unseemly Reflections, etc.? Would one think this to be the Person that in the
Page before said, That the Archbishop instructed the Socinians themselves with
the Air and Language of a Father, not of an Adversary or Judge? Or rather, has
he not given us reason to think he would have these doubtful Expressions
construed to the disadvantage of him whom he therein pretends to commend? Or
does he think, that after all, he has wiped his mouth, and comes off with some
decorum, that he asks Pardon, if there be any thing here said, not respectful
enough.

Solomon says, As a mad man who casts firebrands, arrows, and death, so is
the man that deceives (or as the Septuagint reads it, traduceth) his
neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport? For can any thing blacker be said,
than that because of the Preferments on one side, and the Fears and Aws on the
other, these Great Men defend the Doctrine of the Trinity, and defend it
because they must. All that can be said is, that in his opinion these are fatal
Biasses; in his opinion, I say, who after all his pretense to a freedom from
these Biasses which the Great Pensioners of the world are under the power of,
cannot so smother it, but upon occasion it will break forth: O, says he, Let
the Church-Preferments be proposed as the Reward of only Learning and Piety,
and then mighty things shall be done, and it shall be soon seen how many eyes
this Liberty would open. Surely he must have too fatal an inclination this way
himself, that can think so ill of mankind, and of such who are known to have
been tried when time was, but despised his sort of Bribes and Fears too, when
armed with Power and Authority; when they, with a bravery becoming their
Learning and Integrity, dared to own (in his Phrase) not only an inconvenient
but a dangerous Truth, p. 65.

Surely this is a sort of treatment that these Venerable Persons might not have
expected from one of that denomination, that used to argue with decency. But
what may not be expected from him, who has the confidence to tell the World,
that the Ancient Unitarians did generally reject the Gospel, and other Pieces
now attributed to St. John, and said they were written by the Heretic
Cerinthus? p. 50, etc.

And because he thought himself obliged rather to vindicate those beloved
Predecessors of his (as he would have it) than those Divine Books; he pretends
particularly to set down their Reasons in order; of which matter, though (as he
tells us) he will affirm nothing; yet, says he, I should be glad to see an
Answer to their Exceptions.

After which, I hope these Great men will think it no disparagement to suffer
the utmost indignity in such Company as that of the Divine Evangelist.

But of this more in its proper place.

But why does our Author thus lead up the Van, and bring up the Rear of his
Answer to these Venerable Persons, with this popular Topic of
Church-Preferments, and Church-Fears? Was there never a time when the Church of
God professed the same Tenets which our Church defends, without any of those
great Rewards to bribe them; and when on all sides they were beset with the Aws
and Fears of a Furious and Embitter'd Adversary? Was there not a time when his
Unitarians possessed some of the greatest Preferments, when (as our Author
tells us) they had their Paulus Patriarch of Antioch; and Photinus Metropolitan
of Illyricum; and that their Followers abounded everywhere, etc.? p. 53.

And I may tell him as a secret, Was there not a time when the Power of these
fatal Biasses was abroad, that their Metropolitans were not wont to treat the
Trinitarians with the Air and Language of a Father, but of an Adversary, and a
Tyrannical Judge? What else was the meaning of the Commotions, Violences, and
Outrages used in those days, when Fire and Faggot were even among them in
fashion; when Bishops were deposed, exiled, slain, and the whole Empire in a
Combustion by those Infamous Practices? Surely (as our Author says of his
Adversaries) if those persons had believed as they said, they could never think
it necessary to use the Precaution of such mighty Aws and Draconick Sanctions,
to maintain a Truth so obvious, as they pretend, to every unprejudiced, and
every honest man, p. 54.

This, I doubt me, is in his words a Thorny and ungrateful Subject. And he may
thank himself for giving the occasion; and me for not tracing it further.

For which, as I am not conscious to my self of having done them any wrong; so
I don't think it fit to conclude my Preface, as he does his, with asking his
pardon.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 28. dele from and to Persuasion. p. 12. l. 25: r. uncouth. p. 13.
l. ule. r. Paraphrase. p. 18. l. 16. r. What if. p. 26. l. 15. for usually r.
really. p. 71. l. 15. after place make a (,) l. 16. for and r. And, l. 17.
after created make a ( t)

A VINDICATION OF THE SERMONS Of His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our B. Savior, etc.
SECT. I.
Of the Deity of our Savior.
THE Author of the Considerations having taken a liberty of dispersing the
matter before him without any just order, does accordingly often repeat things
of the same kind; making some ventures upon a Point in one place, and taking it
up again in another; so that his Reader is often rather amused than satisfied.
Tho withal, he takes occasion to quicken his Matter (which would otherwise have
proved nauseous and heavy) with several part Remarks and Reflections. But being
my design is not like a Man of Mystery (as he scoffingly represents it) to
darken the Cause, or to cast a mist before the Eyes of the Reader; I shall
gently lead him by the hand, and endeavor to put what I have to say, into that
order, that whatever force is in it, the Reader may soon discover; or what
defects may be in it, he may be able to detect.

This Author allows His Grace to be open and ingenuous in declaring his Opinion
of the Trinity; and is pleased to allow him a right to allege particular
Scriptures to prove the Divinity of our Savior. And whether he has proved it
or not, is the Point in Controversy.

Before I proceed to which, I shall briefly state the Point, and show what are
the distinct Opinions of the Orthodox, the Arians, and Socinians, concerning
it; for into one of these, is the whole to be resolved.

The Orthodox hold, That Christ the Word, and only begotten of the Father, was
truly and really God from all Eternity; God by Participation of the Divine
Nature and Happiness together with the Father, and by way of Derivation from
him, as Light from the Sun; and that he made all Creatures, and so could no
more be a Creature, than it is possible for a Creature to make it self. Thus A.
Bp. p. 23, 37, 38.

The Arians conceive, That sometime before the World was made, God generated
the Son after an ineffable manner, to be his Instrument and Minister in making
the World. And this Son is called God in Scripture, not in the most perfect
Sense, but with respect to the Creatures whom he made. So our Author, p. 46. a

Socinus held, That the Son was not in Being till he was the Son of the Virgin;
and that therefore he was a God, not in Nature, but by way of Office, Mission,
or Representation, as Moses, and others, are called God in Scripture. So our
Author, p. 48. b

Against these two last, his Grace directed his Discourse, and took them up in
order; and in the first place founded his Argument upon the First Chapter of
St. John's Gospel.

Here his Adversary labors with all his might to put by the force of those
Arguments. Does the Archbishop reason from the Context? If you will believe
this Author, this Text is alleged impertinently by him for the Trinitarians,
which it does not favor, no, not in the least. That his Grace can raise the
Expressions no higher than Arianism, p. 46. That as for the Historical Occasion
assigned by his Grace, there is no Historian (he is sure, no Ancient Historian)
assigns it. And that many of the Ancients did believe that Cerinthus was the
true Author of the Gospel imputed to St. John; and that the Ancient Unitarians
did reject the Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation now attributed to him, p. 49,
50.

This is the Sum of what he has said; all of which will be comprehended under
the following Heads.

1. I shall consider the Authority of St. John's Gospel, and other Writings
ascribed to him.

2. I shall consider the Authority of those Unitarians who, he says, rejected
those Writings.

3. If St. John proves to be the Author of the Gospel, I shall consider the
occasion upon which he is said to have written that Book.

4. I shall defend the Orthodox Explication of it, given by the Archbishop.

1. I shall consider the Authority of those Writings, which are usually
ascribed to St. John, viz. The Gospel, Three Epistles, and the Revelation.

It Is much, that we should be put upon the proof of this at this time of day,
and by one that professes himself to believe the Christian Religion; of which
inconsistency, I think it is much more difficult to give an account, than of the
Writings of that Apostle, called in question by his dear Friends, the Ancient
Unitarians.

It is certain, that there was not the least occasion given him from the Point
in dispute to enter upon this matter, where both sides agreed, or would be
thought to be agreed about the Authority of the Book they reason from: And
which he says, is with great Color alleged for the Arian Doctrine, p. 46.
and that Socinus's Explication of it, would perfectly agree to the Lord Christ.
But I must confess, he has given too great reason to suspect, that he is in
this Point of the same mind with the Ancient Unitarians; and would allow
Cerinthus, or Simon Magus, or any of the like Rabble, to be Author of those
Writings, rather than that Divine Apostle. But as he wisely observes, that
those Ancient Unitarians that had rejected them; Yet, because they saw it begun
to grow into Credit among the other Denominations of Christians, many of which
had been seduced by the Platonic Philosophers that came over to Christianity;
therefore they were careful to show them, that it was capable of a very
allowable Sense; and that it does not appear, that either St. John, or
Cerinthus, intended to advance a Second God, p. 53. a

That is, in plain and honest English, they themselves did not at all believe
those to be the Works of St. John; but because there was no going against the
Stream, and that among the other Denominations of Christians these were
universally received, they would then swim with it; and then whoever was the
Author, whether St. John or Cerinthus, was no Trinitarian. And if they could
have made this out to the satisfaction of the adverse Party, and there had been
nothing wanting but their Approbation of the aforesaid Works to have made the
Christians of other Denominations entirely theirs; then they that at first
held, that Cerinthus, and not St. John, was the Author; and toward an
Accommodation, came so far, as to say for convenience sake, St. John, or
Cerinthus, to remove all rubs out of the way, and to have completed the
design, would without doubt have entirely come over so far to them, whatever
they themseves thought; and they would have consented that St. John, and not
Cerinthus, was the Author. But alas! that was too hard a task, for St. John
himself would not bend and comply, and could not be made a Unitarian. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, etc.
was as stable as a Rock; and therefore if St. John would not be for them, they
would not be for him. And then all the Unitarians with one consent reject the
Gospel, Epistles, and Revelation, and give the Honor from St. John to
Cerinthus, who should be said to write them, to confirm this Heretick's
Cabalastick and Platonic Notions about the(...), or Word, and his Jewish
Dreams about the Millenary Kingdom, p. 50.

Now which part our Author will take to, whether that of the Ancient
Unitarians, Who, he says, were Contemporaries to the First Fathers of the
Church, and were Older than any of those Fathers whose Works are now extant (if
we will believe him); whether, I say, he will take to them and reject these
Books, or whether forsake his Friends, and side with those Fathers whose Works
are now extant, and the rest of the Catholic Church in receiving them, I am
not able positively to determine; for he holds us in suspense and says, He
will affirm nothing in the matter, but should be glad to see a good Answer to
the Exceptions against these Books, which we receive as St. John' s, that were
made by the Ancient Unitarians.

I do not think my self obliged to enter into the merits of that cause, unless
he will yield those Books of St. John to be for the Trinitarians, and therefore
calls their Authority in question: But when he professes St. John not to
favor, no not in the least, the Trinitarian Doctrine, and to be wholly
Socinian, What need is there to prolong the time and postpone the Consideration
of the main Cause, and that I must be put upon the Proof of this, and hew my
way through all those formidable Arguments of the Unitarians against St. John's
Writings, before I must be admitted to Argue the Point in Debate? Which is, as
if when his Grace had said, That the first Chapter of Genesis might as well be
Interpreted of a new Moral Creation, as the first Chapter of St. John; before
he would allow me to proceed to the Proof of this, he should require me to show
that Moses wrote the Book of Genesis, and oblige me to Answer all the Arguments
of Abenezra against it.

But how impertinent soever this may be, yet to show my self a fair Adversary,
I will return him his Complement (since I have time for it) that he shall not
(as he says to his Grace) put that question, which I will not satisfy, if I
can, and reasonably may.

Let us then See (for he has undertaken to show us them) what were the
Allegations of the Unitarians out of Eusebius, but especially out of St.
Epiphanius, who has Written very largely of this matter (as he says).

For these Arguments this Author refers us to Eusebius and Epiphanius, but as
for Eusebius, he says nothing of these Arguments our Author cites him for; and
as for what are in Eusebius, they are not the Allegations of the Unitarians,
but of some of the otherwise Orthodox against the Apocalypse, as I shall show.

As for Epiphanius, our Author says, He has written very largely of this
matter: but if he has, it had become him to have observed that it was because
of the Answer he has given to the Arguments which the Alogi (in our Author's
English, the Unitarians) alleged against St. John's Writings, in which that
Historian is very particular; and not to propose them as if they had stood the
shock of several Ages, and to this day wanted a Reply; for after this manner he
introduces them, I should be glad to see a good Answer to the Exceptions of the
Unitarians, against the Books which we receive as St. John's. But perhaps in
his esteem what Epiphanius has said, is not a good Answer; and as impertinent
and ridiculous as that he makes for him in the case of Thyatira, of which more
anon.

It Is time now to examine them.

Object. 1. The Unitarians said, That it was the current Opinion and general
Tradition, that Cerinthus, and not St. John, was Author of the Gospel,
Epistles, and Revelation, that go under St. John's name: for as to the
Revelation, it was scarce doubted by any to be the Work of Cerinthus; and as
such, was wrote against by diverse Learned men of the Catholic Persuasion, as
it is now called.

A. The Answer Epiphanius gives to that Clause about Cerinthus, is, How could
Cerinthus be the Author of that which was directly opposite to him: for
Cerinthus would have Christ to be a mere and late-born man, whereas St. John
says, the Word always was, and came from Heaven, and was made flesh. Now I
conceive this Answer of Epiphanius to be good, unless they would have Cerinthus
to contradict himself.

As to the other Clauses of our Author's Objections, (for they are not in
Epiphanius) nothing is more false, than that it was the current Opinion and
general Tradition that Cerinthus was the Author of all those Writings; and that
the Revelation was scarce doubted by any to be his, and was wrote against, as
such by diverse of the Catholic Persuasion: For,

1. There were some Books of St. John, of which there never was any question in
the Christian Church, which Eusebius calls (...), Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 24.
and 25.
such is his Gospel, which Irenaus, and Eusebius from him, say he published,
while at Ephesus, at the Instance of the Asian Bishops, Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
and as such is often quoted by the Fathers. This Sandius, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 8.
a late Author of the Unitarians acknowledges, who says, The Gospel was always
accounted Canonical. Such again is the first Epistle of St. John, Hieron.
Eccles. Script. Sandius de Script. Eccles.
which, says Eusebius, is admitted by the present as it was by the ancient
Christians without dispute. So St. Jerome; upon which Grotius says, That it was
never doubted to be St. John's. So Sandius again.

2. Those Books that were not so generally received as St. John's, were yet for
the most part received as Canonical. Such were the 2 d. and 3 d. Epistles; of
which some would have another John, called John the Presbyter, to be the
Author, as St. Jerome says, and Grotius from him; but for the most part it was
believed to be St. John the Evangelist Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.
: Against which (it seems) the Ancient Unitarians had nothing particularly to
object; for else we should have learned it from our Author.

Of this sort is the Apocalypse; of which, says our Author, it was scarce
doubted by any to be the Work of Cerinthus. Eusebius indeed says, Some do
question it: But who and how many were they on the other side that did not
doubt of either its Authority or Author, even such as Justin Martyr, Irenaus,
Tertullian, etc. Iren. l. 4. c. 37. and 50. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 8. Tertull. advers.
Marcion. c. 4. Hieron. Script. Eccles. Origin. Homil. In principio.
some of which interpreted it, (as St. Jerome says) and say that St. John wrote
it when in Patmos. But I shall refer our Author for the rest to Grotius and
Sandius; the latter of which charges them with Blasphemy that would attribute
it to Cerinthus.

Lastly, says our Author, The Revelation was as the Work of Cerinthus, wrote
against by diverse Learned men of the Catholic Persuasion.

A. Dionysius Alexandrinus was of the number of those that questioned whether
St. John the Evangelist were the Author; and for this indeed he offers several
Reasons, but of so little force, that if our Author has seen them, as he has
not so he could not have the confidence to propose them in behalf of his
Ancient Unitarians. But whatever that Father thought of the Author, he allowed
the Book to be Divine.

There were indeed some others of the Catholic Persuasion, that Dionysius
spoke of in the same Book, (as Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 24. relates)
that would have the Apocalypse wrote by Cerinthus; but they were few, and such
as were troubled with a sort of Millenaries, Followers of Nepos an Egyptian
Bishop, (of Repute for his Learning, Faith, and Knowledge of the Scripture) who
for their Opinion quoted the Apocalypse. And it seems, as the Ancient
Unitarians rejected St. John's Writings, because they favored the Divinity of
our Savior; so those (otherwise Orthodox) would, it is likely, have rejected
the Apocalypse, because it favored (as they thought) the Cause of the
Millennium.

Upon the whole it appears, That it was the current Opinion and general
Tradition, that St. John, and not Cerinthus, was the Author of the Works
attributed to that Evangelist.

Object. 2. They objected, he says, 'That this Gospel is wholly made use of by
the Cerinthians and Valeminians, the two chief Sects of the Gnostics, and for
this he quotes Irenaeus, as well as Epiphanins.

A. What is this brought to prove? Will it prove Cerinthus to be the Author of
that Gospel? Then it may as well prove Valentinus to be the Author of it, as
Cerinthus, since the Valentinians wholly made use of it, as well as the
Cerinthians.

Or will it prove that the Gospel is a Valentinian, a Cerinthian, or Gnostick
Gospel? Then so would the other Scriptures be such as the Sects were that
quoted them, that corrupted and wrested them, to serve their purpose. And thus
Irenaeus tells us the Gnostics did, as he gives Instances enough, Haer. l. 1.
c. 15, 16, 17. Nay, Cerinthus himself owned the Gospel of St. Matthew, at least
part of it; will it therefore follow that the Doctrine of Cerinthus was
favored in that Gospel, Ephiphan. Haer. 28.5. Philostrius ^ar.
or might be proved from it?

But his Grace says, This Gospel was wrote against Cerinthus; and then, says
our Author, how came the Cerinthians to use it?

A. They used it as the other Heretics used that and other Scriptures. And
Irenaeus applies this to another purpose; for, says he, By this means they
give Testimony to us.

And this they might so much the rather do, as the Evangelist makes use of
several Terms of theirs (as his Grace and Grotius have showed) such as Life,
Light, Fullness, which the Followers of Cerinthus (who were willing to catch at
any thing, as appears from Irenaeus) finding there, would challenge for theirs;
and this our Author himself intimates, when he thus expounds Irenaeus, That
they, the Gnostics, greedily used this Gospel as a Proof of their Eons.

Object. 3: 'The other Three Evangelists suppose all along that our Savior
Preached but one year, and therefore they reckon but one Passover; but (the
pretended) St. John counts Three years, and Three Passovers; Which, says our
Author,' seems to me an unaccountable contradiction; and yet it is granted on
all bands, some finding a 4 th year and Passover.

Answ. It is an unaccountable Contradiction indeed, if the other Three
Evangelists had said, that our Savior Preached but one Year, and that there
was but one Passover, when St. John says there were three Passovers, and
consequently three years, or thereabouts. But the question is, whether the
three Evangelists gave any such account; I am certain they do not. And if one
will but consider the occurrences in the time of our Savior's Preaching, as
it is impossible (morally speaking) it should all be done in one years time; so
he that will but consider the way of computation, as Epiphanius has done Haer.
51.22. will see that what St. John says must needs be true.

But what then will become of the other Evangelists? Must they be excluded out
of the number of the Canonical? No surely. But we are to consider when each
Evangelist begins, and what he takes in hand to pursue, of which Epiphanius
gives a very good account. Haer. 51.5, 6.


And if we take this course, we shall find the latter Evangelists often to
supply the Omissions of the preceding. V. Wolzegen in loc.
And so St. John, who lived the longest, and wrote last of them, does in the
Case before us, and distributes the time of our Savior's Ministry into Annals,
or Passovers, after the Jewish way of Computation, beginning his Account from
our Savior's Baptism, and connecting it to John the Baptist's Imprisonment
(where the other Evangelists begin) by which means the History is made
complete, and the Evangelists are found to agree, as Eusebius, and St. Jerome
observe. The Omission of which, by the other Evangelists, makes it no more a
Contradiction, than when St. Matthew begins the Genealogy of our Savior with
Abraham, St. Luke carries it to Adam, and St. John makes him to exist before
the World. Omissions are no Contradictions, and such as these no unaccountable
Omissions. And as for that single Passover, the other three speak of, it was
not, as that was a Chronological Character of Time, circumscribing the whole
space of our Savior's Ministry; but a remarkable Point, denoting the special
Season he suffered in, with relation to the great Type under the Law, and for
which he is sometime called our Passover. This, I say, no more describes the
complete Time of his Ministry, than it will follow that because Pontius Pilate
was then said to be Governor of Judea, that he was Governor but one Year only.

Object. 4. 'The other Evangelists agree, that immediately after his Baptism
our Lord was led into the Wilderness to be tempted Forty days. But Cerinthus,
who knew not the Series or Order of our Savior's Life and Miracles, says in
the Gospel, which he has, say they, [ viz. the Ancient Unitarians] forged for
St. John, that the next day after his Baptism, our Savior spoke with Andrew
and Peter, and the day after went to Galilee, and on the third was at a Wedding
in Cana, and after this departed with his Mother and Brethren to Capernaum,
where he abode some time.

A. Our Author says, The next day after our Savior's Baptism, he spoke with
Andrew, etc.

I answer, 1. There is no mention at all of our Savior's Baptism in that
Chapter, but the History of that being particularly relalated by the other
Evangelists, St. John supposes it, and refers to it, V. 15. John bare witness
-- This is he of whom I spoke, that is, formerly; and when that was, St.
Matthew 3.11. shows, which was just before his Baptism.

2. Accordingly, all the way there is an observable difference of Phrase
between St. John and the other Evangelists. Matthew says, He it is that comes
after me, that is, he that is to come. St. John says, Ver. 26. There stands
one among you, he it is that coming after me, [as I have said.] So ver. 29 John
sees Jesus coming; -- he spoke of him, as one then known to himself, but that
was not till his Baptism, ver. 33. So again, ver. 30. This is be, of whom I
said, [formerly] Ver. 32, 34. John bare record, saying, I saw the spirit, --
and it abode upon him. The Phrases, said, saw, bare record, abode, do show that
it was a certain time past, which he refers to. From whence it appears, (1.)
That the Phrase, the next day, has no reference to our Savior's Baptism (for
that St. John is not relating) but to the Discourse then in hand; as the same
Phrase, Ver. 29. had.

(2.) That there was a distance of time between our Savior's Baptism, and that
time that John the Baptist had the Discourse with the Pharisees at Bethabara,
ver. 19, 24, 28. which was the day before he met Andrew, ver. 35.

3. It Is not at all unreasonable to suppose, That our Savior's Temptation in
the Wilderness, etc. did fall in with that time; for after his Baptism he
immediately went into the Wilderness, Mark 1.12. And John the Baptist may well
be supposed to have spent that time in Preaching and Baptizing near to Jordan,
and in the parts adjoining to it; all which St. John omits, as having been
before recorded by the other Evangelists, as well as our Savior's Baptism.

But the Learned Reader may consult Epiphanius, Haer. 51.13, etc. and
Petavius's Notes upon it. And I will refer our Author to Schlictingius's Note
on John 1.26.

Object. 5. 'He has feigned an Epistle, as from St. John, to the Bishop and
Church of Thyatira, etc. But it is certain and notorious, say the Unitarians,
that there was no Church at Thyatira, till a long time after St. John's Death.
It Is a very ridiculous Answer made to this by Epiphanius, who being sensible
(because he was of Asia) of the truth of this Objection, is forced to be
content with this vain Elusion, that St. John writes Prophetically of this
Church.

A. 1. It Is far from being certain, that there was no Church, and if St. John
be of any Authority, it is as certain there was a Church there, as in the other
Six Cities, for it is in the same Style; and it may be as well said, there was
no Church at Ephesus, as at Thyatira, if the way of writing is to be regarded.

2. It Is not probable that there should be no Church there, when Churches were
planted all about, and that it is granted all the other Six were Churches then
in being.

3. If I understand Epiphanius, he is far from granting it: All that he says,
is,

(1.) Supposing it to be so (...). which the Latin Translator has not reached.
, what will follow? why, 'These very Persons are forced from the things which
they object against it, by their own Confession, to assent to the truth; that
St. John foretold things to come by Divine Inspiration, concerning the
Corruption of that Church, and those false Prophetesses that should arise in it
Ninety three Years after our Lord's Ascension.

(2.) He positively says, There was a Church there in St. John's time; for
says he, St. John foresaw that after the time of the Apostles, and of St.
John, the Church would fall from the truth into Error, even that of the
Cataphryges, of which were the pretended Prophetesses, Priscilla, Maximilla,
and Quintilla.

So again, He wrote by Prophecy to those Christians, that then were there in
Thyatira, that a Woman, who would call her self a Prophetess, should arise
among them.

So that our Author is as wide of the Sense of Epiphanius, as his Unitarians
were of the Truth, that would so many years after affirm there was no Church at
Thyatira in St. John's time. I suppose our Author took it up at the second
hand; for I perceive Pererius, and perhaps others, mistook Epiphanius.

It seems that the Church there had been either destroyed by Persecution, or
corrupted by the Cataphryges, out of which Condition it having recovered a
Hundred and twelve years after, (as Epiphanius says) the Alogi ignorantly
concluded there never had been a Church there till that time; or however, made
use of this pretense to countenance their impious Design of overthrowing the
Authority of that Book: A design that our Author has showed himself too great
a well-wisher to, by so formal a Repetition of those sorry, and so often
baffled Objections; and by adding what force he (under the name of the Ancient
Unitarians) could to support them. Which brings into my mind an unhappy passage
in Sermon. 2. of the Archbishop, concerning the Doctrine of Socinus, and his
uncoucht way of managing of it. It was only to serve and support an Opinion
which he had entertained before, and therefore was resolved one way or other to
bring the Scripture to comply with it: And if he could not have done it, it is
greatly to be feared, that he would at last have called in question the Divine
Authority of St. John's Gospel, rather than have quitted his Opinion.

It was evidently so in the Case of the Alogi or Ancient Unitarians; and what
does our Author want of it, that thus rakes into the Dirt of that Generation,
and would have them the best part of the Christian Church? But that remains to
be considered.

II. Who are the Ancient Unitarians, that our Author at all times speaks so
venerably of, and that thus rejected the Books usually ascribed to St. John?

This name of the Unitarians and Ancient Unitarians, is a Title much made use
of, of late; and it is a term of Latitude, that to those that know not the
difference, adds much to the number; for under that, they would comprehend all
that deny a Trinity, or think not alike of it with the Catholic Church,
whether Arians, or Photinians and Socinians; though at the same time they
disagree, as well among themselves, (as I shall show) as with us, and
particularly in the point in question, viz. the Authority of St. John's Gospel,
etc. Our Author often speaks of the Ancient Unitarians; and if we would know
how ancient they are, he tells us, they were Contemporaries to the first
Fathers of the Church, and were older than any of those Fathers whose works are
now extant, p. 50. that is, St. Clemens himself contemporary to St. Paul.

Now whom should we so soon fix upon for his Ancient Unitarians, as Cerinthus
and Ebion, for they were Ancient, as Contemporaries with the First Fathers of
the Church; and were both of them Unitarians, as they both held that our
Savior was a mere Man? But here our Author interposes, and because he
confesses he has met with these two names in the Church History; and when he
did, to be sure finds no passable Character of them; therefore he will not have
Ebion a Person, nor Cerinthus a Unitarian; and for the proof of the latter,
offers no Testimony (the way for proving matter of Fact) but an Argument of his
own; For, says he, if Cerinthus held the Unity of God, and denied the Divinity
and Pre-existence of our Savior (as his Grace and the Moderns suppose) neither
it should seem, would the Unitarians have reckoned him a Heretic, nor have
rejected the Books which they supposed to be his; namely, the Gospel, Epistles,
and Revelation, now attributed to St. John. As if a Person might not be
Orthodox in one Point, and Heretical in others; and the Unitarians might not
reckon Cerinthus a Heretic (who held Jesus was not born of a Virgin, but was
the real Son of Joseph and Mary, and that Christ descended upon Jesus after his
Baptism, and leaving him again, returned to Heaven; and so it was Jesus, and
not Christ that died; with more of these whimsical dreams) though he agreed
with them in denying the Divinity and Pre-existence of our Savior. The matter
of Fact is beyond all contradiction, that Cerinthus was a Unitarian, as
Church History would have informed any smatterer in it, (as Irenaeus, Eusebius,
Epiphanius, etc. abundantly testify) but it is his own Argument that is, in his
Pharse, obscure and puzzling.

But he is not so willing to part with Ebion, the name I mean, and will have it
given by some to the first Christians, because of their Poverty; and then
because the Ebionites were Unitarians in one sense, therefore they must be
Heretics in none. But herein he is as unsuccessful as in his former attempt;
for besides their agreement with the Unitarians in denial of Christ's Divinity,
they held the Observation of the Law of Moses necessary, were Circumcised, and
rejected St. Paul as an Apostate, etc.

Both of these then must be Unitarians, and Ancient Unitarians; but then comes
a very obscure and puzzling part of his History; For whatever Cerinthus himself
thought, yet our Author tells us, that the Gospel of St. John was wholly made
use of by the Cerinthians, his Followers. And then though these were
Unitarians, yet being not of the number of those that wholly rejected St.
John's Writings, we are much at a loss to find out those of them that were
Older than any of those Fathers whose Works are now extant. I doubt we must
come a step lower, and from being Older than those Fathers of the Church, whose
Works are now extant, they will prove at the most Contemporaries with, if not
after several of them, about the close of the 2 d. Century, as is computed. Our
Author himself points to them, and they were the Alogi. so termed by
Epiphanius, because they denied Christ to be the (...), the Word, and the Son
of God; and would have him a mere man. But now though these are Unitarians, and
the most like to the Socinians of all the Ancient Unitarians, if not the only
ones that are so (as Sandius would have it, p. 146, 147, etc.) Though they
agree with his Character again, that they rejected all the Works commonly
ascribed to St. John; yet they seem to be the only Unitarians that did
anciently agree in disowning the Authority of all those Books; and then it will
follow, that the Unitarians were not more Ancient than those Fathers, whose
Works are now extant; though he says, it is certain and confessed by them all,
that the Ancient Unitarians from the Apostolic times to the Nicene Council, or
thereabouts, did reject them. So that I see no remedy, but if he will be
positive in it, that he must be contented to let the Cerinthians as well as the
Ebionites, pass for Unitarians, to make his Sect thus ancient as the Apostolic
times: But how he will do to find out those that did thus professedly reject
all those Writings of St. John before them, and from the Apostolic times to
them; and yet were older than such Fathers of the Church, as Clemens Romanus,
Polycarp, Ignatius, etc. some of whose Works are now extant; I must leave to
his Consideration.

Thus much shall suffice to have said about the Authority of St. John's
Writings, and particularly of his Gospel. But there is another Point yet to be
debated; which is,

III. To consider what was the occasion upon which St. John Wrote his Gospel.
This is one of the first things his Grace does take into Consideration; as the
knowledge of this seemed to him to be the only true key to the Interpretation
of this Discourse of St. John and the neglect of which was one of the grounds
of Socinus's great and fatal mistake, as he says.

How! Socinus mistake! rather let St. John's Gospel, and all his other Works,
labor and sink under the Exceptions of the Ancient Unitarians; and lie by the
walls till the world can give a good Answer to them. Rather let St. John take
up words by chance (as our Author says, p. 49.) and use the words Life,
Fullness, Only begotten, as they came in his way, without any design, than the
great Socinus should be blamed. St. John, indeed, may be said to use words by
chance; but Sociinus, formed, and thought, and concluded, and understood; and
according as he formed, and thought, and concluded, so it must be meant. He was
the man that saw plainly, (as he words it again, p. 48.) And if his Grace, in
Vindication of St. John, and in compliance with the Ancient Historians, will
adventure to Interpret him from the occasion of his Writing, he deserves to be
treated with contempt. The Serene Republic owns none of these Titles, Bishop
and Archbishop, etc. Thus scoffingly and boyishly does he introduce this
serious Argument. O he! says his Grace, How strangely has this man [ Socinus]
mistook for want of the Light of Ancient History! thus he Interprets Scripture
by Scripture, and by Reason and Wit, not by the Fathers and the old Historians
of the Chruches Party, etc. I could find in my heart to Transcribe what his
Grace has Wrote upon this case; his words are these: It was the great and fatal
mistake of Socinus, to go to Interpret Scripture merely by Criticizing upon
words, and searching into all the Senses that they are capable of, till he can
find one, though never so forced and foreign, that will save harmless the
Opinion which he was resolved beforehand to maintain, even against the most
natural and obvious Sense of the Text which he undertakes to interpret. Just as
if a man should interpret Ancient Statutes and Records, by mere critical Skill
in words, without regard to the true occasion upon which they were made, and
without any manner of knowledge and insight into the History of the Age in
which they were written, p.. 18.

And that this was the way Socinus took, our Author's own account of it will
manifest, (...), where he chalks out the method his great Master observed, in
interpreting that Evangelist, and that is, by laying down certain Propositions,
which he resolved to accommodate all to; such was the Unity of God: and
therefore, says he, when the Word is called God, it Must be meant in a Sense
of Office: And whereas it is said, all things were made by him; those things
Must be the Spiritual World, etc. And then farewell Fathers, and Historians,
Occasions, and Scripture too, rather than the Reason and Wit of Socinus be
called in question.

Well, but supposing that our Author is content to have the Historical Occasion
of St. John's Writing inquired into; yet, as for that assigned by his Grace, it
was, he says, below the Gravity of the Apostle to confute the Wild Gnostics,
etc. And if you will take his word for it, he adds, I am of opinion, That there
is no Historian (I am sure there is no Ancient Historian) who assigns that
Historical Occasion of St. John's Writings, even the Gnostics and their Eons,
mentioned by his Grace. In short, he has not very justly blamed Socinus, for
not knowing an Historical Occasion, which is mentioned in no Historian, p. 49.

This is very positive, no Historian, no Ancient Historian, and mentioned in no
Historian.

We have gained before (if it be worth the while to prove it) that Cerinthus
and Ebion (supposing him for the present a Person) did deny the Divinity of our
Savior, according as his Grace represented it.

The next thing is to show, That these their Opinions was an occasion which St.
John took for the writing his Gospel, in the Judgment of the Ancient
Historians, and Fathers of the Church.

Here our Author interposes, and says, the account given of this matter by the
Ancient, is very different from this of his Grace. For they say, according to
our Author's antique Translation, That the other Evangelists having committed
to writing only the Gests of our Savior, during one Years space: Therefore the
Apostle John, being thereto requested, declared in a Gospel according to him,
the time that was passed over by the other Evangelists, and what was done by
our Savior therein Eusebius. l. 3. c. 24.
.

It is very true, That the one of these is different from the other; but tho
they are different, they are not contradictory and inconsistent. For then, not
only the Archbishop would contradict himself, who elsewhere gives the same
account, and tells us from Eusebius That St John wrote his Gospel last, and
that on purpose to supply the Omissions of the other Evangelists Sermon. 2. p. 94.
; but the Fathers also would contradict one another, and often themselves; who
sometimes give the one, and sometimes the other, and sometimes both as the
reasons of St. John's writing, (as I shall presently show). By which way of
arguing, Epiphanius, Eusebius, and St. Jerome, etc. will closh one with
another; when the first of these says, St. John wrote his Gospel Haer. 51.12.
by the impulse of the Holy Ghost; and the other says, it was at the instance
of the Asian Bishops. But now, as these two may well be accommodated, and are
consistent; so it is in the Account given by the Ancients of the occasion of
St. John's writing the Gospel; therefore St. Jerome Script. Eccles.
joins them together, and after he had said, That St. John wrote it in
Confutation of Cerinthus, and other Heretics; adds, there is also another
Cause, and then falls in with Eusebius.

So Irenaeus expressly Advers. Haer. l. 3. c. 11.
So Epiphanius.

And thus Sandius does acknowledge, That against the Heresy of Cerinthus and
Ebion, V. Epiphan. Haer. 51.2, 12, 13.
, St. John (as we have it by Tradition) wrote his Gospel.

Thus far then we are safe, and have the suffrage of Antiquity on our side,
that St. John wrote his Gospel against the Heresies of Cerinthus and Ebion. And
indeed, by our Author's reply to this part, we may guess, That when he met with
these two Names in the Church History, he met with nothing against it. For thus
he goes on.

First, As to Ebion, concerning him, It is, says he, doubted by the Critics,
whether there was any such Man: Nay, a little after, he is got above the
Critics, and positively affirms, That Ebion never was. Now, supposing his
Modern Opposers, and among them the Archbishop, for want of consulting the
Indexes of Names in Church History, had mistaken; yet, how will that confute
his Modern Opposers, who use to quote Irenaeus, Epiphanius, etc. for their
Assertion, that St. John wrote against the Ebionites? For tho Ebion never was,
yet the Ebionites were an early Sect, and as early as they make him.

But says he, This Name was given to the first Christians, because of their
Poverty, according to the signification of the word.

A. Then indeed St. John was in the wrong for writing against these first
Christians, whom St. Paul refers to, as our Author would have us understand, 1
Cor. 1.26. or at least, all those Fathers were mistaken that would have St.
John write against the Heresy of the Ebionites, or that reckon that among the
number of Heresies. For what Heresy is there in simple Poverty?

But if they that would have the name an Appellative, say it was not because of
their Poverty, but because they thought, (...), poorly and meanly of our
Savior, as they would have him the Son of Joseph and Mary, as some of them; or
of Mary, as others; but all of them agreeing that he was a mere Man. So
Eusebius. What if Ebion at last is found to be a Person? So it is affirmed by
Tertullian, Praescript. c. 33, etc. Hieron. in Isai. c. 1, and 3. Hilarious
Epist. de Trin. l. 1. Origin in Matthew. 5, etc.

So Epiphanius expressly, Haer. 30.
Ebionites were so called from Ebion; whose Followers, says he, would be so
called from their being poor like the Apostles: But, says that Father, This is
a Fiction of their own; For Ebion was a proper Name.

As for Cerinthus, all that he has to say, is, That the Gospel of St. John
could not be wrote against Cerinthus, because Cerinthus was said to be Author
of it. But this is to reason about matter of Fact. It Is plain, the Ancients, to
whom our Author appeals, did assert, That it was written against Cerinthus; and
it is as plain, That Cerinthus held these Opinions, against which St. John is
supposed by them to have written. To which he has nothing to reply, but that
Cerinthus is said to be the Author of it; but that I have already considered
before. Thus far then, I hope, it is pretty evident, That there are Historians
and Ancient Historians, that do assign the same Historical Occasion of St.
John's Writings, as is assigned by his Grace.

But it is likely he will reply, That these words of his, no Historian, and to
be sure no Ancient Historian ever assigns that occasion mentioned by his Grace,
are to be limited to the Gnostics. Whatever he may say, yet I doubt few
Readers will suppose it; for he has so artificially mingled all these together,
that what he affirms may be applied to all; and yet, it examined, he can
restrain it to this or that particular. And therefore, that I may show how
little he is acquainted with this Argument, or how little he consults Truth and
Candor in it, I shall consider it with respect to the Gnostics.

He cannot deny, but that the Terms, Word, Light, Fullness, Only Begotten, are
the Phraseology of the Gnostics, or else he must never have read Irenaeus;
which also are used by St. John. Now the question will be, Whether St. John
has used them by chance, as our Author imagines? Or that in Opposition to
these Dreams, St. John shows all these Titles did truly belong to our Savior,
and to which there is a Perpetual Allusion, as his Grace affirms. I verily
believe, That if a Gnostick had accidentally light upon that Chapter, as the
Platonic Amelius is said to have done, he would no less have been convinced
there was this Allusion to their Hypothesis, than that Philosopher was that the
Evangelist did Platonize. Hence it was, That the following Gnostics would have
confirmed their Conjugations and Eons from thence. Iren. l. 1. c. 1. l. 3. c.
11.


But says he, It was below the gravity of the Apostle to confute the wild
Gnostics, and their Chimerical Eons.

Why so? When this Sect so far prevailed, That during the Lives of the
Apostles, it grew to a great height, to the great Prejudice and Disturbance of
the Christian Religion, as his Grace observes; for whose Purity and
Preservation it became even this great Evangelist to be concerned. And tho our
Sage Philosopher may call them, Chimaera's and Sickly Dreams, (as in truth they
were) and so too trivial a Subject for the Apostolical Pen to write of; yet,
when we consider how far those Heresies spread, how long they continued, and
what mischief they did (as may be seen in Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius,
etc.) we may agree to what Epiphanius says upon this occasion. Neither, says
he, Haer. 27.7.
let any one contemn these Dogmata, as full of folly; for foolish People are
persuaded by foolish things. Nay, prudent Persons may decline from the right
way, if the mind be not exercised in the way of truth; as that Father gives an
instance of himself, Adv. Haer. l. 26. c. 17.
when likely to be perverted by the Gnostics.

But lastly, says our Author, I am of opinion, that there is no Historian,
I Am sure no Ancient Historian, who assigns the Historical Occasion of St.
John' s Writings, even the Gnostics and their Eons, mentioned by his Grace.

I answer, That what has been before said is sufficient, when there is a
Perpetual Allusion to the Phrase and Opinions of the Gnostics; and very often
in the Apostolical Epistles, as has been observed by many Learned Persons.

But to put this past dispute, besides what is elsewhere, let our Author turn
to Irenaeus, and he will find that Ancient Author expressly affirming, Adv.
Haer. l. 3. c. 11.
That St John wrote his Gospel against the Error of Cerinthus; and a little
after, that St. John took away all ground of Dissension; and by the words, the
World was made by him, he confuted the Gnostics. So that if our Author was of
that Opinion, it was without any ground.

IV. It Is high time we now proceed to enquire into the sense of St. John. The
Ancient Unitarians finding (as I have observed) the Gospel of St. John not
reconcilable to their opinion of Christ's being a mere man; like Alexander, at
once cut the Gordian knot, which they could not fairly untie; and rejected this
and other pieces now attributed to that Evangelist, as Uncanonical and
Heretical. But an after-generation (whom our Author dignities also with the
same title of Ancient Unitarians) more wary than the former, seeing that
Author, whoever he was, to grow into credit among the other denominations of
Christians, were careful to show them, that it was capable of a very allowable
sense, as our Author says, p. 53. a.

And this seems to be the case of Socinus and this his Defender, who must not
quit St. John, and with the Ancient Unitarians, call his Gospel the Fiction and
Forgery of Cerinthu, (as our Author says they did) for it has been too long in
credit with the other denominations of Christians, to admit of such despiteful
usage and violence: and therefore they will undertake to show them it is capable
of a very allowable sense; but by such pitiful and wretched shifts, by such
precarious and arbitrary suppositions, (as his Grace rightly terms them) and an
invention which no indifferent Reader of St. John, that had not been
prepossessed and biased by some violent prejudice, would ever have thought of,
p. 58, 65, etc.

And this will appear, if we try it by any of those ways by which the sense of
an Author is to be obtained; such as the Occasion, the Phraseology, the Scope,
Design and Context.

As for the Occasion, if the Authors alleged above, are of any Authority, it is
so far unquestionable.

As for the Phraseology, that is to be understood by the common use of the
Words, or the Subject, or Science they relate to; and accordingly were these
Phrases in St. John applied in their proper and ordinary signification, as not
only the Orthodox Christians, but even the Arians, and Amelius the Platonist
did understand them, (as his Grace observes from Eusebius) and our Author is
forced to confess as much; for in the account he gives of the Historical
occasion ( viz. of Socinus's new Project) he thus introduces it, Socinus
finding it to be the first of all God's Declarations, I am the Lord thy God.
etc. he understood in the beginning, to be in the beginning of the Gospel
state; and the Word was a God in a sense of Office; and the World he made, a
spiritual World.

Now what is this, but to carry off the words from a plain literal to a
figurative sense, and so to acknowledge their Doctrine is not favored by the
Phraseology of it?

But supposing it to be so, yet, says our Author, Socinus observed, that the
Scriptures abound with such Metaphors and Figures even when they speak of God,
as when God is said to have Eyes, Arms and Bowels, etc. to denote the sight,
power and mercies of God. P. 49. a.

It Is granted; but withal, as he says, the Scriptures therein trust to the
judgment of the most common Readers, and question not but the most ordinary
capacity will so understand them. But then how comes this to pass, that from
the time of St. John downwards, not the most common and ordinary, nay, the most
accurate Readers, and extraordinary Capacities, were ever so happy as to make
this discovery before the fortunate Socinus? And why were not they as well able
to find out in this discourse of St. John the Ministerial Deity of our Savior,
the beginning of the Gospel state, and the spiritual World, (the only Key, it
seems, to unlock the sense of that Divine Writer) as they were by the Hands,
Eyes and Bowels of God, to understand his Power, Sight and Mercies? It Is
evident that the most ordinary Capacities did, generally speaking, by these
Corporeal Members, understand the abovesaid Attributes of the Deity to be
described. And it is also evident that for Socinus's explication of that
Evangelist, the most famed Expositors, and much more common Readers, no more
thought of it, than the Ancient Navigators did dream of that new World, which
Columbus two Ages ago was so happy as to discover. So that it evidently
appears, that there is not the same reason to interpret the Phrases, In the
Beginning, and the Word was God, and all things were made by Him, in a
metaphorical and figurative sense, as there is for the understanding the
Corporeal Organs of Speech and Action, etc. after that manner, when applied to
God: but that rather they must be understood properly and literally, as the
Orthodox, the Arians, and all others have understood, and his Grace has
expounded them.

But hold, says our Author, 'His Grace himself, when he comes to interpret the
particular expressions, can raise them no higher than Arianism, ( viz. that the
Son was generated some time before the World) though he alleged them to prove
Trinitarianism. p. 46. b.

Well, supposing this, yet if his Exposition hold so far good, the Socinian
Hypothesis, that will not allow our Savior to have any existence before his
Nativity of the Virgin Mary, will then be utterly overthrown.

But what does our Author mean? When he affirms or denies, as he pleases, what
Irenaeus, Eusebius and Epiphanius say; they are Books few understand, and fewer
have: but methinks he should be a little more cautious when he uses the same
liberty in a Book published but the last year, and that has the good hap to be
generally well received and read. How then can he say that his Grace can raise
- the expressions no higher than Arianism? when it is the first of his
Corollaries, viz. The Word here described by St. John, is not a Creature. And
then follows, This Conclusion is directly against the Arians, who affirmed that
the Son of God was a Creature. p. 39.

And there is not a branch of those Verses which the Archbishop does not alike
interpret. Thus he says of Christ the Word, that is, the eternal Son of God.
P. 6, 59.

In the Beginning, that is, he did exist before any thing was made, and
consequently is without Beginning, and eternal. P. 19, etc.

Was God, that is, from all eternity. P. 24, etc.

But perhaps, he will say, this his Grace has attempted, but not proved.

That remains to be tried by what he has to object against it; and then he only
offers somewhat as a Reply to his Graces's Exposition of the Phrase, In the
Beginning, leaving all the rest that was said in exposition and defense of the
other Phrases of the Evangelist, to continue as they were; and if we may judge
of what he could have said of the rest, by what he has said of this, it must
needs have been very insignificant: For thus he argues.

1. In the Beginning, is interpreted without Beginning, which two are
distinctly contrary. P. 48 b.

A. I answer; This is not directly laid down as the interpretation of that
Phrase, but is rather the consequence of what his Grace had said just before,
as the preceding quotation shows, In the Beginning, that is, he did exist
before any thing was made, and consequently is without Beginning, and Eternal.

2. Granting he had thus explained the Phrase, In the Beginning, to be without
Beginning, yet they are not directly contrary. To have a Beginning, and to be
without Beginning, are directly contrary, and more than so, a Contradiction.
But to be in the Beginning, and to be without Beginning, are so far from being
contrary, that they are very well consistent, for else God himself would not
have been in the Beginning. Thus it is, Genesis 1.1. In the Beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth. By which Phrase is showed, that the Heaven and Earth
had a Beginning, and so were not in the Beginning, (for then they had been
before they began to be) and so it could not be said, In the Beginning were the
Heavens and the Earth; for then they had, as God, been without Beginning. But
it is said, In the beginning God created them, that is, he that himself had no
Beginning gave a Beginning to them. After this manner does the Wi^^man express
it, in the place quoted by his Grace, on this occasion, The Lord possessed me
[Wisdom] in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was, Prove. 8.22, 23. So
that to Be in the Beginning, was to be before his works of old; to be without a
Beginning, and from Everlasting.

2. He objects, Though he [ Archbishop] cannot find the Coeternity in the words
of St. John, yet he can interpret his own interpretation of his words, so as to
make out the Coeternity: For he says, in the Beginning, that is, the
Son-already was, when things began to be; and by Consequence, the Son was
without a Beginning; for that which was never made, could have no Beginning of
its Being. And then he smartly returns upon him, How, Sir, is that a good
Consequence, or any Consequence at all? For supposing the Son was when the
World began to be, which is not yet Six thousand years ago, will it follow,
that therefore he was absolutely without a Beginning, or was never made? etc.

Answ. If his Grace had left this Consequence to stand upon its own foot,
without offering any proof for it; yet any one but competently acquainted with
the Scripture-Phraseology, would not have questioned the reason and force of
it; and if not with respect to his Adversary, yet for a salvo to his own
ignorance, would have forbore his How, Sir, is that a good Consequence, or any
Consequence at all? But I much question his ignorance; for his cautious
Adversary, that had been used to write with a due guard as well as strength,
took care to prevent this Objection, and fortify his Consequence with the best
authority, that of Scripture.

For thus he goes on immediately after the words quoted by this Author, (and so
he is the more inexcusable) The Son already was when things began to be, and
consequently is without Beginning, etc. And so the Jews used to describe
Eternity, before the world was, and before the foundation of the world, as also
in several places of the New Testament. And so likewise Solomon describes the
Eternity of Wisdom, The Lord, says he, possessed me in the beginning of his
way, before his works of old, etc.

So that if the Consequence be not good, or if it be no Consequence at all, the
Scripture is to be blamed, and not his Grace for following it in a line of
Argumentation. According to the Scripture way of speaking, that which was
before the world, is accounted eternal: And therefore what was in the Beginning
had no Beginning; and so the whole Cause of Arianism, that would have Christ to
be part of the Creation, though before the world was, must unavoidably
miscarry; which was the Case in hand, and what his Grace undertook to prove.
But this was fit to be concealed; for otherwise our Author would have had as
little to say to the Archbishop's Explication of the Phrase, In the Beginning,
as he has to the other Phrases of the Evangelist. Therefore he chooses rather to
wind off with a bare Repetition or two, to the Socinian Hypothesis, to try
whether he can with better success encounter his Adversary upon his own
Principles, than upon those of the Arian. p. 47. a. b.

Socinus being a person of a sharp and piercing wit, soon perceived that the
Arian Scheme was not consistent with St. John; for since there was nothing in
the world but Creator and Creature, that which was the Creator (as the Arians
did admit the (...), or Word to be, and as St. John's words, if literally
understood, do import) could not be the Creature. And therefore, either he
must, with our Author's Ancient Unitarians, forgo St. John's Authority, or find
out some other Explication than had yet been thought of; and that constrained
him to fly to a Ministerial God, and a Spiritual World, as the Archbishop had
showed, Sermon II.

All that our Author has to say upon the Socinian account, is with reference to
a double Charge brought against it; and that is, the unreasonableness and the
novelty of this Explication.

As to the first of these, His Grace says, Sermon II. p. 75. According to this
rate of liberty in Interpreting Scripture, it will signify very little or
nothing, when any Person or Party is concerned, to oppose any Doctrine
contained in it; and the plainest Texts for any Article of Faith, how
Fundamental and necessary soever, may by the same arts and ways of
Interpretation be eluded and rendered utterly ineffectual for the establishing
of it. For example, if any man had a mind to call in question that Article of
the Creed, concerning the Creation of the World, why might he not, according to
Socinus his way of Interpreting St. John, understand the first Chapter of
Genesis concerning the Beginning of the Mosaical Dispensation; and Interpret
the Creation of the Heaven and the Earth, to be the Institution of the Jewish
Polity and Religion, as by the New Heavens and the New Earth, they pretend to
be understood the New state of things under the Gospel, etc. It is certain that
it was not Phrase of St. John misled Socinus, or gave him any occasion for his
novel Interpretation, but a pre-conceived Principle (as has been before
observed); for indeed the Phrase of St. John bears such a conformity to that of
the First of Genesis, that one seems to be a key to the other; and in the
beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, is so like to in the beginning
was the Word, -- and all things were made by him; that one is naturally led to
think that as they in words seem to relate to the same state of things, so that
the Word that thus was in the beginning, and made all things, was truly God;
and that the whole Phraseology of it is as properly and literally to be
understood in St. John, as in Genesis; and that the one can no more admit of a
Moral and Allegorical Interpretation, than the other.

This is so pertinently alleged by His Grace, and the Parallel so lively
represented by the Bishop of Worcester, in a Discourse there referred to, that
our Author seems perfectly at a loss whether to grant or deny it; and so from
admitting the case as it is proposed, would advance another Scheme of it; for
thus he says, 'Let His Grace put the case, as it usually is, and I am content
to join issue with him upon the instance he has here given. The first Chapter
of St. John speaks of a certain Person, namely of the Lord Christ, who is
confessed to have been a Man, and yet it says of him, All things were made by
him, -- So if the first Chapter of Genesis imputed the Creation there spoken of
to Moses; if it said, In the beginning Moses Created the Heavens and the Earth,
it would be not only absurd, but absolutely necessary, to interpret the Chapter
Allegorically and Figuratively; and to say that the Heavens and Earth are the
Jewish Polity and Religion, the Church and the Discipline thereof, etc.

Now this Answer of his contains somewhat absurd, somewhat untrue, and is also
besides the case.

1. It contains somewhat absurd, which is, To conceive that it is possible for
Moses an Inspired Writer, to have delivered himself after that manner; and that
when he was to Write of the first Institution of the Jewish Polity and
Religion, he should thus describe it, In the beginning Moses created the Heaven
and the Earth; and the earth was without form, etc. and Moses said, let there
be light and there was light, etc. And yet our Author, to salve Socinus's wild
Interpretation of St. John, is contented to grant this; we, says he, say it,
we affirm it, that if the first Chapter of Genesis imputed the Creation to
Moses, it ought to be so interpreted.

2. It contains somewhat untrue, as when to make out his Parallel, he says,
The first Chapter of St. John speaks of a certain Person the Lord Christ, who
is confessed to have been a man, and yet it says of him, All things were made
by him. For he knows very well, that the Person there spoken of, is not
confessed by any of his Adversaries to have been a Man, when that is spoken of
him, that all things were made by him. For then he was the Logos, the Word, the
only begotten Son of God; and was not a Man, or made Flesh, till about Four
thousand Years after the Creation.

3. The Case as he puts it, is not the case put by the Archbishop; which was to
this effect, supposing such a one as Spinosa, that would have the World not to
be Created, but to have been ab Aeterno, finding the Book of Genesis to be in
such credit with his Countrymen the Jews, and the several Denominations of
Christians, that it was not to be gainsaid; he is therefore careful (as our
Author says some of the Ancient Unitarians were in the case of St. John's
Gospel) to show that it is capable of another and an allowable sense; and so in
order to their satisfaction expounds it, of the Jewish Polity and Religion, of
Spiritual Heavens, and an Intellectual Light (in our Author's phrase).

Now the Question upon this is, Whether Spinosa might not as speciously thus
expound the First of Genesis for the advantage of his Hypothesis, as Socinus
did the First of John to serve his design?

And that any one that compares the one with the other, Genesis and St. John,
will be able to discern.

Indeed as absurd as the supposition of his concerning Moses is, it might as
allowably be said of him, as Christ the Word have that said of him in St. John,
if the Word was no more than Moses, a Ministerial and Temporary God, and had no
more been in the beginning than Moses.

And then the Book of Genesis might as well have begun in the same Phrase with
Moses, as St. John with the Word; after this manner, In the beginning was
Moses, and Moses was with God, and Moses was God [or a God, as he will have
it]. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Such pitiful and sorry shifts
are those drove to that first resolve upon an Hypothesis, and then are to seek
how to maintain and defend it.

The only Point remaining with our Author is, That the Evangelist, who was a
Jew, speaks here of the Messiah, in the usual Style and Language of the Jews,
who were want to say, and say it in almost all their Ancient Books, that the
Messiah should make a New World, he should abolish Paganism and Idolatry from
among the Nations; and thereby (as the Prophets also speak) Create a New Heaven
and a New Earth.

Answ. I acknowledge the Scripture sometimes calls a Political or Moral Change
in a Church or People, by the Term of New Heavens and New Earth: But, in our
Author's way of speaking, it trusts to the Reader's Judgment and common sense,
in a matter that it is not well possible for him to doubt in, or to question
what are the Heavens and Earth there spoken of, as Isaiah 65.17, 18. 66.22. 1
Peter 3.13. etc.

But here is no intimation given in the Evangelist, that the Phrases should be
Translated from a Natural to a Spiritual sense; nor can it possibly be without
great violence, as their own Explication of it will show: For they are forced
to understand Christ to be Personally the Word in one Clause, and the Gospel to
be the Word in the other, as Socinus does, In the beginning was the Word,
Christ; and the Word, that is the Gospel, was with God. Or for the avoiding of
that difficulty, others of them make Christ to ascend Actually, Personally, and
Bodily into Heaven before his Ministry (though the Scripture speaks not one
word of it) that they may put a color upon the Phrase; The Word was with God,
as His Grace has showed Sermon II. p. 62. of which more anon.

But now if we take the words in their natural and proper sense, there are
several other places to confirm it, as His Grace has showed, p. 101, etc. and
which it shall suffice for the present to refer to.

The next thing to be considered is, the Novelty of this Exposition of St. John
by Socinus, of which says the Archbishop, it is quite to another sense, and
such as by their own confession was never mentioned, nor I believe thought of
by any Christian Writer whatsoever before him. Sermon II. p. 57. which he more
largely prosecutes, p. 64, etc.

What says our Author to this?

Suppose this; Why may we not own that time and long consideration do improve
all sorts of Sciences, and every part of Learning, whether Divine or Humane? I
do not think it to be any Diminution of Socinus, that it may said of him, and
of this Context, he has rescued it from that Darkness in which it long lay.

A. This Observation of his had in reason been prevented, if he had well
weighed what his Grace had said upon it, who thus pursues his Argument.

1. That the literal Sense was so obvious, that the Orthodox, and even the
Arians and Platonists (as Amelius) agreed in it. But here our Author, like a
flying Tartar that dares not in a Pursuit look behind him, throws a spiteful
Dart at his Adversary. As to Friend Amelius, I think it sufficient to say, That
the Credit of the Trinitarian Cause runs very low; when an uncertain Tale of an
obscure Platonist, of no Reputation either for Learning or Wit, is made to be a
good part of the Proof that can be alleged for these Doctrines. This is spoke
at all adventures; for if he had read Eusebius Praepar. p. 540.
upon it, he would have found the Platonist to have deserved a better
Character, and neither the Person to be so obscure, nor the Relation of it such
an uncertain Tale, as he would represent it V. Sandius, p. 115, 119.
.

But he that can make Historical Occasions out of Propositions, and will prove
matter of Fact by reasoning upon it without Authority, may be allowed to make
Characters at his pleasure, and stamp what he will upon a Quotation.

Let him however take or refuse Friend Amelius, it is a small part of the proof
depends upon that Tale; the use made of that in concurrence with the Judgment
of the Orthodox and Arians, was, that not one of them ever imagined that there
was any other World alluded to in that place, than the Natural and Material
World, nor other Beginning than that of the Creation.

2. His Grace goes on; Surely it ought to be very considerable in this Case,
that the most Ancient Christian Writers, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, etc. and even
Origin himself, are most express and positive in this matter, etc. And if this
Interpretation of Socinus be true, it is almost incredible that those who lived
so very near St. John's time, and were most likely to know his meaning, should
so widely mistake it. And then that the whole Christan World should for so many
Ages together be deceived in the ground of so important an Article of the
Faith; and that no man did understand this Passage of St. John aright before
Socinus. This very consideration alone, if there were no other, were sufficient
to stagger any prudent man's Belief of this Misrepresentation.

3. And as his Grace goes on, That which makes the matter much worse, is, that
the Religion which was particularly designed to overthrow Polytheism, and the
belief of more Gods, has according to them been so ill taught and understood
by Christians for so many Ages together, and almost from the beginning of
Christianity, as does necessarily infer a plurality of Gods. An inconvenience
so great, as no Cause, how plausible soever it may otherwise appear, is able to
stand under the weight of it, p. 73. And which the Reader may there see
admirably enforced.

For which reasons it cannot well be supposed, that either Time or long
Consideration, would place a man in so advantageous Circumstances, that he
should beat out that Track, which all Christians for 1500 years together, were
not able before him to descry. But after all, this shall be no Diminution to
Socinus, as our Author will have it.

But tho in words he will not allow it a Diminution, yet he in Fact betrays it;
and after all, is not willing to own the Charge. For thus he argues, Why does
his Grace say, That not only all the Fathers, but all Christians have for this
Fifteen Ages, agreed in his Interpretation of this Context? Have there been no
Christians in the World for 1500 Years, but only the Arians and Trinitarians?

This is a little too gross, for he knows full well, that this is not asserted
by the Archbishop; therefore he makes another attempt.

Or was Socinus the first (for that (it may be) was his Grace's meaning) who
departed from the Arian and Trinitarian Sense of the Context? What an obscure
Writer does he make his Grace to be, when he is, as it were, forced to come
again and again upon the Enquiry, and at length to conclude with, it may be it
was his meaning? And yet at last he is so unfortunate as to mistake it.

For his Grace does no more say, That Socinus was the first man that departed
from the Arian and Trinitarian Sense of the Context, than he says, That not
only the Fathers, but all Christians have for Fifteen Ages agreed in it. For he
knew full well, that there were Cerinthians, and Ebioniter, and Photinians, and
others, that went under the General Name of Christians, that differed as well
from the Arians as the Orthodox, and would allow our Savior no other
Existence, than he had as the Son of Mary, and so could not with consistence to
their Principle, expound St. John, as the Orthodox and Arians expounded him.
But let his Grace speak for himself, viz. Not only all the Ancient Fathers of
the Christian Church, but, so far as I can find, all Interpreters whatsoever
for Fifteen hundred years together did understand this passage of St. John in a
quite different Sense, [from Socinus] namely of the Creation of the Material,
and not of the Renovation of the Moral World.

And however our Author would evade and molify it, his Grace had proved it
beyond Contradiction by the Confession of his great Oracle Socinus, and his
Advocate Schlictingius, that own the true Sense of these Words was never before
rightly explained V. Archb. Sermon. 2. p. 69.
.

And indeed, what our Author himself alleges, is a tacit Confession of it; for
he produces nothing from Paulus or Photinus, or the Ancient Unitarians, of the
Word that was God by Office, or of the beginning of a Gospel State that Word
did exist in, or of a Spiritual World he made, or of the Word's being with God
in the Revelation of the Gospel, or of the Personal Word's being with God
before his Ministry to receive that Revelation: But on the contrary, he tells
us that according to them, the Word was God, as his Generation was Divine, and
was from the beginning with God, in God's Decree and Intention; and that the
World was not made by him, but for him; a quite different Explication from that
of Socinus.

Thus far then it is evident, That his Grace has sufficiently showed the Novelty
of the Socinian Explication of St. John's Gospel. This was a tender point, and
what our Author had no mind to touch upon, but something must be said, for else
the Cause would have suffered, and he had lost the opportunity of showing his
Reading about their Patriarch Paulus, and their Metropolitan Photinus, (
Titles, it seems, owned in their Commonwealth of Learning) and the whole
Provinces possessed by their Followers, p. 53.

But if our Author is of any Credit, they did not only possess whole Provinces,
but Ages too, the two first undoubtedly (as he suggests). And says he, We are
ready to dispute it in the presence of the Learned World, that the Fathers
mentioned by his Grace were less of the mind of the Trinitarians, than of ours.
They held the Doctrine that was afterward called Arianism, p. 52. b. 54. a.

The first false Step he makes, is, That he takes it for granted, that his
Grace allows the two first Ages of Christianity to be for the Socinians, or at
least not against them. For, says he, if of Seventeen Ages, we have (as we
have undoubtedly have) the two first, much good may do his Grace with the other
Fifteen. He must not deny us the two, nay, the three first, generally speaking.
It seems his Grace must not, nor indeed can deny him if he insists only upon
the last Fifteen Ages as his Period, for then he quits the two first. But now
any indifferent Reader will soon see, that when his Grace speaks of Fifteen
hundred years, it is with respect to the Ages intercurrent from the Apostles to
the time of Socinus, whose Exposition he charges with Novelty. [So p. 64, 73,
etc.] And who lived in the last Century.

The second false Step, is his way of proof, which is this, We will [ says he]
wrest it from all the World, that the Apostolic Creed, which was the only
Creed of the three first Ages, is wholly Unitarian, and perfectly contradicts
that Interpretation of the beginning of St. John's Gospel, which his Grace
seeks to advance, p. 52.

How that is, we must seek further, viz. p. 53. b. where he takes it up again.
In the Apostles Creed, The Lord Christ is uncontestably spoken of, as having no
Existence before he was generated in the Womb of the Blessed Mary, by the
Spirit of God.

Not to insist upon that, that it was the only Creed of the three first Ages,
it will require a more than an obstinate Resolution to wrest it out of the
possession of the Trinitarians, who both from the distribution of the Creed
under its three General Heads, do assert a Trinity, and from the Character
given to our Savior of being the only Son of God, do maintain his Divinity.
But for this, being he has offered no proof, I shall refer him to Bishop
Pierson upon that Point, which he has at large explained and defended.

3. His next false step is, That whereas his Grace particularly names Ignatius,
Justin, Athenagoras, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Origin, as of the same mind with
himself; this Author affirms, That contrariwise they held the Arian Doctrine;
where yet he fails in his main Point, which was to clear Socinus's Explication,
and his Doctrine, from Novelty: But instead of that, all he attempts is to show
that the Ancient Fathers were for the Arian Doctrine; which is to say they were
not for the Socinian: And yet even there he fails again; as has abundantly been
proved by Dr. Bull; and which I shall look upon as unanswerable, till I see the
Book he promises us in Answer to it.

Having all this while been employed in Vindication of the Authority of St.
John's Gospel against the Ancient Unitarians that questioned it, and our Author
that proposes their Arguments; and in Vindication of the Orthodox Exposition of
it, against the Arian on one side, and the novel one of Socinus on the other; I
shall now proceed to the Consideration of those Texts of Scripture which the
Archbishop occasionally made use of for the Explication of St. John; and they
are, Heb. 1.1. And Col. 1.15.

His Grace has alleged Heb. 1.2. several times in his Sermons, twice in his
First, for the Explication of St. John, and Col. 1.16. And thus far our Author
goes along with him in the bare quotation; but he manifestly wrongs him, when
he thus triumphs as he goes off from the Text; Would a man build the belief of
more gods than one, contrary to the whole current, and most express words of
the rest of Scripture, on a Text so uncertain as this is? p. 51. b. I say he
manifestly wrongs him; for he knows very well, that his Grace agrees with the
current and express Words of Scripture, in asserting the Unity of the Godhead;
and so could never attempt to build the Belief of more Gods than one, upon any
Text whatsoever, unless he would contradict himself.

What is it then his Grace alleges this Text for? Why, it is to justify St.
John, when he says, That all things were made by the Word; and consequently
the Word that made all things must be God. The Proposition is St. John's, the
Consequence is indeed his Grace's, but what will necessarily follow, as he has
proved it from Heb. 1.2. I perceive our Author needs to be remembered upon
occasion: For tho this is the use his Grace makes of that Quotation in Sermon
First, yet our Author is to know there is a Second Sermon, where his Grace does
not criticize upon Words, and show how they may be expounded this way and that
way, and leave it, in our Author's Phrase an uncertain Text; but fully shows,
That this Verse, and Col. 1.16. must necessarily be understood of the old
Creation of the Natural World and not of the Moral World, and the Renovation
and Reformation of the Minds and Manners of men by the Gospel. And this he not
only at large confirms, but also gives a particular Answer to the Comment of
Schlictingius and Crellius upon it; Sermon II. p 103, 106 etc. Now our Author
in reason should have interposed to the behalf of these his deserted Friends,
and have given a just Reply to their Adversary; but his business is rather to
propose, and repeat, and make some sudden fallies, than grapple with his
Opponent, and come to downright Blows.

The first Adventure he makes is, That the word (...), which we render Worlds,
more usually and properly signifies Ages; and its so translated by St. Jerome;
and therefore diverse of the most Learned Critics understand this Text of the
Gospel Ages; of which the Lord Christ is (under God) the undoubted Author.

A. It seems the Learned Critics go different ways, and our Author dares not
lay too much on their side, that understand this of the Gospel-Ages; for he saw
that the Phrase, he made the Ages, was harsh, and as unusual as it is usual for
the Greek word to signify Ages: And which is worse, that the word Ages in the
Jewish and Scripture-Stile, ordinarily signifying the Age before and the Age
under the Messiah, it must follow, That the Lord Christ must be the undoubted
Author of both the Ages; of that from the Foundation of the World to the
Gospel, as well as that from the Gospel to the End of the World: And if so, he
must have been existent before the Ages; for else how could he be the Author of
them? This he that has been so conversant in the Learned Critics of the
Trinitarians, cannot be ignorant of: And because I have not a List of them at
hand, I shall for the present refer him to Dr. Hammond on Luke 1. p. etc.

Whether he foresaw this or no, I cannot divine; but however, he has another
answer in reserve. For thus he goes on;

But, says he, let us say (...) here is World, yet Grotius gives very good
reasons why we ought to render the word thus, For whom he made the Worlds; i.
e. God made the World for the Messiah, or with intention to subject it to him
in the fullness of time.

A. But supposing it may be so rendered, yet there is no such salvo for verse
10. where it is said of Christ, (as the Archbishop has unanswerably proved)
Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, etc.

2. The Greek Phrase, (...), is the very same with what is used, John 1.3. All
things were made by him; where the ordinary Translation is allowed; and as far
as the Phrase will go, it may as properly be applied to our Savior, as the
efficient, as the final Cause, i. e. That the World was made by him, as for
him: And that it is here to be understood of the former, his Grace has showed.

3. The Apostle, Col. 1.16. uses these two distinctly, (...) by him; and (...),
for him. But to this our Author has somewhat to say.

For the Archbishop having made use of that place of St. Paul to confirm what
he had before produced out of St. John, the Opponent thinks himself bound in
honor to attack him: But in his usual way: For whereas his Grace had spent
about twelve Pages in both his Sermons upon the Explication of this Text, and
in Answer to the most considerable Objection against it; our Author replies, He
urges that Text. -- He observes moreover, That in the foregoing Verse the Lord
Christ is called the Firstborn of every creature. And he seeks to prove, I
think he has proved it, That Firstborn here is as much as to say Heir or Lord
of every creature. P. 51. b.

A. He speaks as coldly, as if he durst not trust his Reader with his
Adversary's Arguments, or so much as suggest for what reasons or upon what
grounds the Archbishop urged that Text. Only he grants, That when his Grace had
showed that by Firstborn was principally meant an Heir, he softly answers, I
think he has proved it. And if he has, he has so far wrested none of the least
of the Texts produced both by the Arians and Socinians, out of their hands.
Arebb. p. 33, 34.

But he goes on, if I may call omitting so.

I will omit, That the greater number of Critics and more Learned
Interpreters, of his Grace's own Party, and among them, Athanasius himself,
translate and interpret that Text, not of real Creating, but of the Modelling
of all things. A. 1. I hope he will admit those to be Critics that are in the
Critici Sacri, or those whom Mr. Pool has inserted into his Synopsis; but if we
may pass a judgment upon the Learned I^erpreters by them, we shall be far from
finding a Number, and I believe it will be a Number of one, if he will be so
favorable to us as to allow Grotius to be one of his Grace's Party.

As for Athanasius, I had the curiosity to consult him (though it is too hard a
Task to put upon his Reader to turn over two Folios to search for a Quotation)
but could find no such Explication of the Apostle, as he suggests. But on the
contrary, from that place he shows that all things were created by him, and so
he could not be a Creature. So in his (...), and his Synod. Nicenae Decret.

A. 2. He says he will omit this, that is, as I thought, give it up; but I
find rather it is that he will not be obliged to defend it: He finds the
Archbishop had made the Point of a Moral Creation a little too hot to be
maintained; but being it is what he himself has a great liking to, he goes on to
say all he can say, in hopes his Reader may think as favorably of it as
himself. But he comes off as to himself, as I said, I will not insist on this
Concession.

He therefore comes to another Retrenchment, and that is the Account given of
it by St. Chrysostom (as he will have it) in the Opus Imperfectum, who reads it
thus; For him were all things created. So says he, the Sense is, all things
were originally created by God for the Lord Christ; namely, to subject them, in
the fullness of time, to him, and his Law.

A. As for what he says of the Opus imperfectum of St. Chrysostom, whoever was
the Author of it, it is granted by the Learned that it is not St. Chrysostom's.
But let it be whose it will, I am pretty confident that there is no such
Exposition of that Phrase in the Book (though it consists of 54 Homilies.) And
besides the turning it over, I am confirmed in it from what is said there,
Homil. 30. upon that, Who is my mother, etc. I, who before the constitution of
the world, created the world, know no such worldly Parents, etc.

Indeed this Version of (...), for him, is merely to serve the Hypothesis that
he is advancing. For when he can apply it to a Moral Creation, he admits it, as
John 1.2. and so it is necessary to be understood here, v. 20. (...), by him to
reconcile all things to himself.

And accordingly as the Apostle begins, so he ends the Verse with the same
Phrase; By him were all things created; and as one would think to prevent all
cavil, uses Phrases as distinct as the efficient and final cause, for so he
closes the Verse, All things were created by him, and for him; by him, as the
efficient; and for him, as the final cause. But here our Author would fain find
out an evasion, and that is by translating (...), to him; and then it shall be,
All things were created for his use, and to his service. And if any one should
ask what is the difference? he answers immediately, that the latter, to his
service, is exegetical and explanatory of the former, for his use. This, he
says, is probably designed by the Greek, and yet he knows how (by a peculiar
Rule of Logic) to crowd more into the Conclusion than is in the Premises, and
out of what, in his own opinion, is but probable, to infer a necessity; for
thus he concludes, the Greek word being probably designed as exegetical:
Therefore the sense of necessity is, for him, and to him, i.e. for his use, and
to his service. Just as if I should say, it is probable that he never read the
Opus imperfectum, that calls it St. Chrysostom's; and therefore it is certain he
has not.

To conclude, Tho he would as to this Text fairly, if he can, get rid of this
moral Creation, and Athanasian spiritual modelling of things, for a reason he
knows; yet he is still within the enchanted Circle; for at the last his
probable Explication leaves him there; and what was it else when he says, All
things were originally created by God for the Lord Christ, namely, to subject
them in the fullness of time to him, and his Laws? And how does that differ from
the modelling and changing all things in Heaven and Earth, to a new and better
estate? on the Earth, by abolishing Paganism, and Idolatry, etc. and in Heaven,
Angels and heavenly Powers being put under his direction, etc. as he tells us
in the Column of those things that are omitted.

Lastly, It Is not probable that his is the just Explication of this place, and
that for a Reason or two.

1. Because the Apostle discourses this afterward, v. 20. Having made peace
through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself; by
him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.

For the clearer understanding of which, I shall take liberty to set before the
Reader the connection of a few Verses. The Apostle, v. 14 speaking of our
Savior, in whom we have redemption through his blood, etc. proceeds to show
who this Redeemer was, and that in a twofold capacity. First, in respect of
his Divine Nature, who is the image of God, the firstborn or heir of the whole
creation: And then gives the reason of such his pre-eminence, and why he
bestows so great a Title upon him; and that is v. 16, 17. For by him were all
things created, etc. From thence he proceeds to discourse of him as to his
Human Nature, and the station he is in, v. 18. And he is the head of the body
etc. And this done v. 20. he returns to the point where he set forth, v. 14.
And accordingly his Lordship's Explication is very easy and natural, p. 34. Who
is the image of God, the heir and Lord of the whole creation; for by him all
things were created.

2. This Author's account of this place is not probable; for Christ's being the
Head over all things, was not till his Death and Resurrection, when his
Mediatory Kingdom began; whereas our Author says, That all things were
originally created by God for the Lord Christ; and without doubt as for his use
and to his service, so for the advantage of them that were under his government
and direction. But what a v^st solitude was there, a Chasm of 4000 years before
his Birth and Being? and in what a condition was the whole World of Intelligent
Beings, till our Saviors Resurrection and Ascension? What Service could he
challenge from them, when he himself lay in the Embrio of nothing? And what
advantage could they have from him that was to come into the world for the
Redemption of Mankind 4000, 3000, etc. years after? Where was the Paganism and
Idolatry he in that dismal Interval abolished? Where the Angels and Heavenly
Powers that were put under his direction, and by him employed in defense and
succor of the faithful? What was it to those unhappy souls, born so many ages
before his time, under the Constellation of Paganism and Idolatry, that some
thousands or hundreds of years hence should arise the Lord Christ, who in the
fullness of time was to be actually set above all Thrones and Dominions, etc.
and in whom as in their Head, all things should be united and consist? as our
Author words it.

Of the Pre-existence of our Savior.
THat the Word described by St. John had an Existence before his Incarnation,
and his being born of the Virgin, was a Conclusion his Grace inferred from the
Phrase, In the Beginning. Sermon. 1.

This he confirmed by several Texts of Scripture, which he ranked under the two
following Heads. Sermon. 2. p. 84.

1. Those which expressly assert the Son of God to have been, and to have been
in Heaven with God, and partaker with him in his Glory, before his Incarnation
and appearance in the World.

2. Those which affirm that the World and all Creatures were made by him.

Of the first sort are Joh. 3.13. 6.62. 8.58. 13.3. 16.27. 17.5. 1 John 1.1. in
which it is said of our Savior, that he came down from Heaven, was with God,
was before Abraham; that he had a Glory with the Father before the World was.

To those which say our Savior was in Heaven, and came down from Heaven, our
Author returns some general Answers, (as for method's sake I shall consider
them.)

First, He answers in general, That these Texts, in their most literal sense,
amount to no more than this, that the Lord Christ is a Messenger, really come
forth from God to men. As much is true of every Prophet, and the very same is
used concerning St. John Baptist, Joh. 1.6. There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John.

Answ. 1. If these Texts amount to no more than this, that the Lord Christ is a
Messenger from God to men, then can no more be concluded from thence, than that
he was no more a Prophet, and no more with God, and no more sent from God, than
other Prophets, or than John the Baptist.

And if as much as this is true of every Prophet, then it may be said of every
Prophet, and of John the Baptist as well as our Savior, that he ascended into
Heaven, and came down from Heaven, and was with God, and had a Glory with him
before the World was, etc. But where do we find the Scripture to express it
self after this manner of any but our Savior, no not of Moses, as much a
Friend of God, and conversant with him, as he is affirmed to be?

2. If these Texts amount to no more than this, that Christ is a Messenger from
God to men, then how will our Author be able to make use of any of these Texts
for that new Doctrine of theirs, concerning Christ's Ascension into Heaven,
before he began his Ministry? For if as much is true of every Prophet, then our
Savior no more ascended than other Prophets; and then what becomes of his
express proof for such an Assertion?

Secondly, He answers again, How little these Texts are to his Grace's purpose,
would have been obvious to every Reader, if he had set down some few of the
many Texts which so plainly expound to us what is meant thereby. Joh. 7.28. I
am not come of my self. Joh. 5.43. I am come in my Father's name. Joh. 8.42. I
came not of my self, he sent me. Joh. 7.16. My doctrine is not mine, but his
that sent me, etc.

A. These Texts would have not been to his Grace's purpose, if they prove no
more than that our Savior was a Messenger sent from God to men, and which is
as true of every Prophet. For if our Savior no more came from God than other
Prophets (as far as these Texts will then signify) he was no more pre-existent
than they. But these Texts are to his purpose if they expressly say, that Christ
actually came down from Heaven to declare the will of God to men (as our Author
in the next Paragraph, forgetting himself, does affirm.) For if that be
allowed, then all the Difficulties his Grace has urged against their imaginary
Doctrine of our Savior's Ascension into heaven, before his Ministry, will
return upon them, and require an answer.

As for what he adds from these latter Texts, Would our Savior have said he
came from God, is sent by God, to deliver a Doctrine which is not the
Messenger's, if he had himself pretended to be God?

A. This, I am sure is nothing to the purpose; for what is this to the Pre
existence of our Savior, the present subject of the Discourse? But however,
what inconsistence is there in this, for our Savior to say, the Doctrine is
not mine, but his that sent me, tho he himself be God, and partake of the same
Nature with the Father, when he is the only begotten of the Father, and was
also Man? Why is this any more inconsistent, than to have it said, that he is
God, and yet the Man Christ Jesus; that he was in the beginning with God, and
yet born in the fullness of time; that he knew all things, John 16.30.21.17. and
yet knew not the time or day of Judgment? Mark 13.32, etc.

These things are consistent upon the Principles of the Orthodox or
Trinitarians, that hold the Word to be God and Man; but not upon theirs that
hold, that he is Man and not God.

3. He answers again in general, That his Grace propounded to prove the
Pre-existence of our Savior, by the Texts that expressly say our Lord Christ
ascended into Heaven before he began his Ministry, and then came down from
Heaven to declare the Will of God to Men. That is, be propounds to prove the
Trinitarian Doctrine, but really proves the Doctrine of the Unitarians.

A. 1. If this be so, his Grace was mightily mistaken, to attempt the proof of
this Point by such Texts as expressly say the contrary. A great and inexcusable
oversight, if it were true. But where are those Texts that expressly say, that
our Savior ascended into Heaven before his Ministry? It was a prejudice
Socinus would infuse into his Reader, that there is but that one Text of St.
John 1. to prove the Pre-existence of our Savior before his Incarnation, which
the Archbishop has disproved, p. 81. But here it holds; for his Texts that he
says expressly prove what he asserts, shrink all into one, viz. No man has
ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven.

2. Where is it expressly said in that, or any other Text, that our Savior
ascended into Heaven before his Ministry? It is not so expressly said, That our
Savior ascended into Heaven, but that Servetus understood it Spiritually, and
says that it was so expressed, because his Spirit was from the beginning in
Heaven, and that his words were heavenly. But it is neither there, nor any where
expressly said, That our Savior ascended into Heaven before his Ministry, and
then came down from Heaven to declare the Will of God to Men. That is wholly a
Fiction of a Case, as his Lordship has sufficiently proved. Our Author, indeed,
would represent it, as if his Grace had only found fault with them for this
their Opinion; and after the having bestowed a few hard words upon it, and
called it an Arbitrary and Precarious Supposition, (tho he himself understands
the Text in a literal Sense) should then give it up.

But that this is a Fiction of their own, I may say again, his Lordship has
sufficiently proved; and so much the more reason have I now to say it, as his
Adversary has not dared so much as to take to task any one Argument or
Paragraph relating to it. For with what strength does his Grace argue against
it from the exact History of our Savior's Life, from the importance of the
matter (if true), from the Silence of the Evangelists, and especially of St.
John? How does he argue against it from the Weakness of the Socinian attempts
to prove it, and for which in effect they have nothing to say? How from the
inconsistency of it with Scripture? and that whereas St. John says, The Word
was in the beginning, and then was made Flesh: They say, That he was first made
Flesh, and then a great while after was in the beginning with God. How, lastly,
does he argue from the disagreement in the several parts of this their
Interpretation; as it may be worth the Reader's while himself to observe Sermon.
2. p. 93, etc.
?

All this our Author has prudently passed over; but that he may seem to say
something, and have a fair opportunity to Complement where he wants a Reply; he
forms a Question for his Grace, (for it is a Charge, and not a Question,
Archbishop, p. 92, 93.) He demands, says he, when did this Ascension of our
Savior into Heaven happen? His Grace had indeed charged it upon them, that
they themselves cannot agree precisely when; and without doubt he wanted a fair
account of it. But our Author unfortunately pitches upon that time for it,
which his Adversary had beforehand prevented. For thus he answers, St. John
has resolved this Question in these words of his Gospel, [in the beginning the
Word was with God] i. e. in the beginning of his Ministry, just before be
entered thereon; the Lord Christ was with God by ascending (as himself expressly
and often says) into Heaven. This Account of it is very precise. But to this
his Grace had already made two Exceptions.

1. That this is not consistent with their own Explication of the Phrase, in
the beginning, that is to say, when the Gospel first began to be published;
which was by Authority from him ( he having ascended into Heaven, and came from
thence to declare the Will of God to men, as our Author says) but that was not
began to be published, till after he had been with God (in their sense.) And
therefore if the Word was at all with the Father, so as to ascend from Earth to
Heaven, it must not have been in the beginning, but before the beginning.

2. He shows, this is not reconciliable to another Opinion of theirs, which
is, that Christ was not God but by Office and Divine Constitution, and that he
was not so constituted and declared till after his Resurection, and his being
advanced to the right hand of God; but if in the beginning, is in the beginning
of the Gospel-state, then the Word was God in the same beginning that he was
with God, and so must be God by Office, before he entered upon his Office of
Public Ministry, and consequently long before his Resurrection. But if he was
so constituted not till after his Resurrection, he was not God in their sense
of the beginning, and so consequently was not with God, nor did ascend into
Heaven before he began his Ministry. So that there is no manner of proof,
either for the Matter, or the time of this Legendary Doctrine of theirs,
concerning our Savior's Ascension into Heaven before he began his Ministry, if
the aforesaid Arguments hold good.

But that which our Author presses most, (without regarding the Arguments
against it) is the literal sense of the Phrase, No man has ascended, etc. in
which, he says, the Archbishop does understand it. But this is no more true
that his Grace so understands it, than that it is expressly and often said in
Scripture, that our Savior ascended into Heaven before his Ministry, (as our
Author affirms) unless it be when his Grace undertakes to prove that such an
Ascension never was.

But supposing it were literally to be understood, yet will it not serve their
purpose. For then, according to the letter of it, our Savior must have come
down from Heaven before he ascended thither. If it had been worded, that no man
has come down from Heaven, but he that has ascended into Heaven, then he
would have ascended first, and after that have descended: But when it is said,
No man has ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, (if the
manner of speaking is to be our Guide) then he must have came down before he
ascended, after the way the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Now that he
ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first, etc.

I say, the order of Words then shows, that his Descent must have been before
his Ascension; which is diametrically opposite to the Socinian Hypothesis, and
is not to be accommodated but by the Orthodox sense of it, viz. that he that in
the Beginning was with God, and had a Glory with the Father before the World
was, in the fullness of time was made Flesh, and came down from Heaven, to
fulfill and declare the Will of God to men. And then it orderly follows, No man
has so ascended into Heaven, and no man has been there to understand the Will
of the Father, but he that first came down from Heaven, and is in due time to
ascend thither; as if he had said, (to transcribe the Paraphrase of a very
learned person) from me alone are these things to be learned, for none can go
up to Heaven to fetch the knowledge of them from thence, but I came down from
Heaven to reveal the Will of God Lightf. Third Part of the Harm, in loc.
, etc.

The second sort of Texts which speak of our Savior's Existence before his
Incarnation, are these, Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee before the World was, John 17.5. And before Abraham
was, I am, etc. John 8.58.

To the first our Author replies, that according to St. Austin and Grotius,
this is to be understood of God's Decree, after this manner, Let me now
actually receive that glory with they self, which I had with thee in thy Decree
and Purpose before the World was. And if we may take his word, he says, that
he has sufficiently confirmed this Interpretation in the Second Edition of his
Brief History of the Unitarians.

He very seasonably refers us to his Second Edition, (which I have not seen)
for in the first it exceedingly wants some Confirmation. All that he has to say
there, is, that we in Scripture are sometimes said to have that which we have
in God's Decree. From whence he infers, Therefore so also we may understand,
that Christ had Glory before the World was. An inference very cautiously
worded, Therefore we may understand, etc. And it was not without reason, as I
shall immediately show.

A. 1. I grant that the Scripture does often represent things after this
manner, so that that which is to be hereafter, is spok^n of as if it was
actually present and existent, as Isaiah 53.3. He is despised and rejected of
men. And in like manner we are reputed to have that which we have by promise,
as in the place he quotes, 2 Cor. 5.1. We have a building of God, etc. But then
as Decrees and Promises do in the nature of them respect the future, so there
must be some reason for this manner of speaking, which without such reason
would be absurd. Now, the reason of such Forms of Speech, is to represent the
certainty of the thing, that it being thus appointed and promised by Almighty
God, it shall as certainly be fulfilled in its season, as if it was now
actually present. But set aside such Reason, and such Forms of Speech will be
absurd; as for Example, if I should say, all Generations that shall be to the
Worlds end are now in being, and have been ever since the World was. But there
is no such reason for such an Interpretation here, for this respects the time
past.

2. Tho we should be said to have that which we are decreed to have, yet we
cannot be said to have it before the World was; as for instance, we cannot be
said to have a building of God before the World was; for that is to have it
before we were. We may be said by the foresaid Prophetical Scheme of Speech to
have what we that are in being, shall have in its proper time; but we are not
said to have it, or to have had it before the Foundation of the World. God
indeed may be said to give before the World, by virtue of his Decree and
Intention so to do, because he always was, is, and ever will be, and to him all
things are present in their Causes, over which he has an absolute Power. But
tho we may be said to have, with respect to the time to come, as well as
present (in the Cases aforesaid) yet we cannot properly be, nor are in
Scripture said to have it before the World was, because we are born in the
World. Thus God may be said to give us Grace or Salvation before the World
began; in the place he cites, 2 Timothy 1.9. but we are not said to have a
building of God before the world was. And so when it is said, Father, glorify me
with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was;
as it does suppose our Savior to have been in being, and to have had a Glory
with the Father before the World, so he cannot be said to have it in Decree
before the World was.

3. And that the words are not capable of such an Interpretation will further
appear from the Phrase, with thee, which answers to that which went before,
with thine own self; and if the latter does signify the actual Enjoyment of
that Glory, then so does the former. Indeed, the Phrase with thine own self,
and with thee, (for they are both one) does suppose the Person that is with God
to be in being. As it was when God is said to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; thereby is implied, that those Holy Patriarchs are alive, according to
our Savior's reasoning, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living,
Matthew. 22.32. And if to be the God of Abraham, did imply that Abraham was in
being; then surely, if it had been said of Abraham, that he was with God, it
must also imply that Abraham actually was. For he could no more be said to be
with God, and not be; than God could be said to be his God, and he not alive.

And accordingly it might as well be said of Abraham, that God was his God in
Decree and Intention, as Abraham might be said to be with God, and yet be no
otherwise so than in God's Decree. So absurd is it, with our Author, to allow
our Savior to have had no Being before the World was, and yet to say he was
with God before the World, which is in the same breath to say he was not, and
yet he was. A difficulty our Author, with those he follows, found to be so
great, that they chose rather to give a new interpretation of the Phrase, in
the beginning, John 1.1. (as has been before showed) and so to allow the Word
to have then been actually with God; rather than to maintain, as some others
before did, that the Word was with God in his Decree, contrary to the plain and
evident meaning of that Phrase.

4. I may add, If the sense of this Prayer of our Savior is, Father, glorify
me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee in thy Decree and
Promise before the world was; then (according to what our Savior says, ver.
22. The glory which thou have given me, I have given them, the like Glory being
promised to and decreed for all the Faithful) every good man may use the same
Prayer with our Savior, and say, Father, ^lorify me with thine own self, with
the glory which I had with thee before the World was. But I suppose St. Austin,
(who our Author says was for this decretal sense) would not have presumed to
do so.

I confess I have done more than in strictness I was obliged to, when he refers
us to another Book of his, and to another Edition of that Book; but I am apt to
think this Answer will serve for either Meridian.

The second Text produced by the Archbishop, is John 8.58. Before Abraham was,
I am: The obvious sense of which words (says his Grace) is, That he had a real
Existence before Abraham was actually in Being, p. 86.

But on the contrary, the Socinians say, That he was before Abraham was, in the
Divine Foreknowledge and Decree. This his Lordship took to task, and showed,

That this is nothing but what might have been said of any other man, and even
of Araham himself; and that our Savior had then no preference or advantage
above Abraham. And then argues from the words I am, as the proper Name of God,
whereby is signified the Eternal Duration and Permanency of his B^ing. Which he
confirms by several other places.

To this our Author has nothing to reply; but would insinuate as if his Grace
had only proposed the place, without any manner of Proof; for after this
ridiculous manner does he represent it: His Grace will not hear of this [about
the Decree]; we cannot help it; but we know the reason to be, because he takes
it as a ground of his Interpretation of this Text, that our Savior was (not
only in God's Decree, but) in actual Existence before his Progenitor Abraham;
but that is the Point which his Grace had to Prove, not to Suppose as a ground
of Interpretation. This person writes, I perceive, for a Party, and presumes
his Readers will never consult the Books he pretends to answer; for else he
would not so boldly venture thus to impose upon the world, and to tell us that
his Grace only supposes, but does not prove what he proposes; and accordingly
he himself slips over the Argument, and runs from it as far as he can.

2. He replies, Here again I must mind his Grace, that none of his Proofs, in
their utmost stretch, run higher than Arianism.

A. Proofs: He should have called them Suppositions, if he had not forgot
himself.

But what if those Proofs run no higher than Arianism? they are sufficient: For
all his Grace was under any obligation at this time to prove, was our Savior's
Pre-existence, against the Socinians, Sermon II. p. 56, etc. (having in his
former Sermon maintained the Point of our Savior's Deity, against the Arians,
etc.) And if he has proved that, he has gained the Point under Consideration.

All that our Author has further to say, is, To give us his Opinion of this
Text over and over, and ushers it in with a Magisterial Authority: But if we
can, let us make both Arians and Trinitarians sensible what is the meaning of
these words, Before Abraham was, I am, from the Circumstances and Context.

But if I may not too much incur his displeasure, by laying aside his Supposals
for the present, I will venture to propose the Case as the Evangelist relates
it, and then discourse with him upon it.

In Verse. 48. Our Savior replied upon the Jews, Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day; and he saw it and was glad. To this they captiously object, Thou
art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? That is, Was It thou
coexistent with him, and born in his time, who has been so long dead? Whom
make thou thy self? [ ver. 52, 53.] To this our Savior answers, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. Which Text, according to our
Author, is elliptical and imperfect, and wants somewhat to supply it: Which he
thus attempts, I was long before Abraham' s time in the decrees and promises of
God.

Now supposing it so to be, Why must it thus be supplied? O, says he, it
cannot be true in any other sense, being spoken of a son and dependant of
Abraham.

Supposing that to be spoke of such a one, why may it not as well fall upon the
former as latter part of the Clause, and so be read, Before Abraham was the
Father of the Gentiles, (signified in Isaac) I am, or I was in the world?

Or why may it not be said, Before Abraham was, I was in being? For though our
Savior was a Descendant of Abraham according to the Flesh, yet he was the
begotten Son of God (as none of Abraham's Posterity was) that was in the
beginning, and before the World with God; and so he might literally say before
Abraham was, I was or am.

But supposing we admit his Explication, that before Abraham was, I was in
God's decree.

Would this prove what was to be proved, That he that was not fifty years old,
had seen Abraham, or that he was Co-existent with Abraham? Suppose we take it
as he would have it, independent of what it was to p^^^^ what a mean (...) was
it for our Savior to allege, I was (...) Abraham, namely, in God's Decree?
For,

Might not the Jews then reply, So Abraham was before Adam, and so both Abraham
and Adam were before the World?

Might they not say, so were we then before Abraham; Abraham before himself,
and we before we were they, might they not say, Is any thing before another
(...) Art thou before Abraham, or Abraham before us, since all would then be
co-existent alike in Decree, being the Decrees are alike Eternal?

Might not our Savior as well have said, I have seen Abraham, reserving to
himself, in the Book of Genesis; as say, before Abraham was, I was, reserving
to himself, in the Book of God's Decree?

Lastly, If our Savior had said, Before Abraham was, I was in God's Decree, or
had been so understood, where was the Blasphemy for which the Jews would have
stoned him?

It is apparent that the Jews presently understood him being a Title known to
all, and known to belong only to God, as well known (by reason of that noted
place it relates to in Exodus) as Jehovah, and so immediately they took up
stones to cast at him.

But his Grace has not so done with this Text, but goes on to fortify it with
other parallel places, as to the phrase and signification, p. 100. as Hebr.
13.8. The same yesterday, to day, and for ever. And Revelat. 1.8, 17. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty, Rev. 22.13, 16.

This our Author declines, and instead of proposing it as it lay in his Grace's
Sermon, he takes up the latter of these places in the close of his Discourse
upon this Head after this manner, The last of his Grace' s Texts to prove the
Pre-existence and Divinity of our Savior, is Rev. 1.8. p. 58. b.

Though out of its place, I am content to take it as he proposes it; and
especially because I may hope now, if ever, to make a Convert of him; for thus
he answers, When his Grace proves that these words are spoken, not of God, but
of Christ, I will thank him, and give him the Cause.

Fairly offered, and fit to be accepted.

In the first place, I take it for granted, that I need not remind him of what
his Grace has observed, That these Expressions are the common Description which
the Scripture gives of the Eternity of God, whose Being is commensurate to all
the several respects of Duration, past, present, and to come. For this is the
reason why our Author denies this to belong to our Savior, since that would be
to ascribe such a Being to him, as is commensurate to all these Durations.
Therefore with his usual assurance, he affirms, That they are not spoken of our
Lord Christ, seems to me as clear as Meridian Light, from what is said v. 4.
From him which is, which was, and which is to come, and from Jesus Christ.
Where we see plainly, that Jesus Christ is distinguished as a different person
from that Almighty who is, and who was, and who is to come; therefore he cannot
be intended in the Description, v. 8.

Answer. I suppose that he intends this as a general Answer to the several
places of the Revelation quoted by his Grace; and then it is as much as to say,
that since Jesus Christ is distinguished from him who is, and was, and is to
come, v. 4. therefore he cannot be intended at v. 8. nor 17. nor Chapter 22.13, 16.
That is, that these Expressions, which are the common Description the Scripture
gives of the Eternity of God, are never applied in any of those places to our
Savior: But if it appears that they are at any time applied to our Savior,
his Argument is utterly ruined, and it will unanswerably follow, that if Jesus
Christ is, and was, and is to come, then he is alike Eternal as the Father, and
partaker of one and the same nature with him.

2. How does it follow that Jesus Christ is distinguished as a different person
from him who is, was, and is to come; therefore he cannot be intended in the
Description at ver. 8.? For he may be a different person from the Almighty
Father, who is described by that Character, v. 4. and yet as the Son have the
same property Essential to the Divine Nature ascribed to him. This we contend
for, and this I shall endeavor to prove.

I shall begin with v. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,
says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
All the question is, who is the Lord that thus says of himself, I am Alpha and
Omega, etc? For this we must consult the context, and then the Character will
appear to be his that comes with Clouds, v. 7. That made us Kings and Priests
unto God and his Father, v. 6. the first begotten of the Dead, the Prince of
the Kings of the earth, that loved us and washed us in his blood, even Jesus
Christ, v. 5. So that he is no less the Alpha and Omega, than he is the Prince
of the Kings of the earth.

But let us go on with that Divine Writer, whom we find after the same manner
describing our Savior, v. 11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.
And that it is given as a Character belonging to him, is evident, for he is the
same that commanded St. John to write, and whose Voice he heard, the Son of man
that he saw in the midst of the seven candlesticks, v. 12, 13. So again, v. 17.
he that says of himself, I am the first and the last, is the same with him
that says of himself, v. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am
alive for evermore. So again, he says of himself, chap. 2.8. These things
says the first and the last, which was dead and is alive. And as St. John
begins, so he ends this Prophetical Book, cap. 22.13. I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, the first and the last; viz. the same with him that
says, ver. 12, and 20. Behold, I come quickly; -- Jesus that sent his Angel to
testify these things, v. 16.

From all which laid together it is very manifest, and as clear as the Meridian
light, that these Phrases are applied to our Savior, that he is the beginning
and the ending, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
But how can the Being of a Creature be commensurate to all the several respects
of Duration, past, present, and to come? And what a presumption would it be in
a Creature that had a beginning, to say of himself, I am Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last? So that our Author must in the conclusion side with his
Ancient Unitarians and deny the Revelation to be Canonical; or be as good as
his word, and give his Adversary the Cause, and write a Retractation.

The last place our Author touches upon (omitting several other material Texts
cited by his Grace) is 1 Job. 1.1, 2. That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, etc. which he thus expounds (calling into his aid Grotius and
Vorstius, in his Opinion two the ablest Interpreters the Church has yet had.)

1. The Word of Life, that is, the Gospel.

2. Eternal Life, i. e. the Immortality therein promised.

3. From the beginning, that is, they were always intended and purposed by him,
but not manifested till revealed in the Gospel.

4. We have seen and handled, is to signify their knowledge of it was most
assured and absolute. For the Hebrews are wont to declare the certainty and
clearness of things by Terms borrowed from the Senses.

Ans. Though the Hebrews are wont to express the certainty and clearness of
things after that manner; yet I don't find that the Scripture is wont to speak
thus of the Gospel, viz. The Gospel which was from the beginning, which we have
seen with our Eyes, and our Hands have handled, and which was with the Father.
But I find that Saint John in his Gospel speaks of our Savior in the like
terms, for thus he says of him, In the beginning (which is the same with (...)
here, as his Grace observed p. 19. and Grotius before him) was the Word, and
the Word was with God, v. 4. In him was life, v. 14. We beheld his Glory, and
he is said to be manifested, Joh. 14.21, 22. and 1 John 3.5, 8.

Now what can be more evident than that when the Author is the same, the phrase
the same, and more agreeable to the Subject under consideration, that it should
be alike understood in one Book as the other, and so that which we have heard,
and seen, and looked upon, and handled, and was with the Father, should be the
Son, and not the Gospel of God?

But says our Author, Grotius and Vorstius think otherwise; and he goes on, I
know not why his Grace overlooked this Interpretation of two of the most
learned and judicious Critics of this or any other age.

Answer, I answer in his phrase, I marvel much how our Author should know that
his Grace overlooked it, for it is likely that he might not have the same
opinion with this Writer of these two great men, so as to think them the ablest
Interpreters the Church has yet had: Vorstius for many reasons, and Grotius for
his posthumous Notes (I should rather call them adversaria) come not up to that
Character. Besides his Grace knew very well what both the Ancient and learned
and judicious Critics of latter Ages, thought of this Text. In the number of
the former is Tertullian, adv. Praxeam. c. 15. Amongst the latter is Erasmus;
and even Grotius is inconsistent with himself, when he goes off from the Gospel
to the Miracles that attested it, in his Explication of the word (...), which
we have looked upon.

Before his Grace leaves the Argument of our Savior's Deity, he takes notice
of a usual plea of the Socinians, that they glory they have Reason clearly on
their side in this and the other point of the B. Trinity; and that the
Difficulties and Absurdities are much greater and plainer on our part than on
theirs, A.B.p. 115.

To each of these his Lordship made a distinct Reply, and showed particularly
as to the Doctrine of the Trinity, that though it was above, yet it was not
contrary to Reason; that though there were Difficulties, yet no Absurdity in
it. This our Author thought fit to pass over in silence.

As to the latter, his Grace undertook to prove that the Opinion of our
Adversaries has greater Difficulties in it, and more palpable Absurdities
following from it, than any they could charge upon the Orthodox.

As when they say, That the Son of God is a mere Creature, not God by Nature,
and yet truly and really God by Office, and by Divine Appointment and
Constitution; to whom the very same Honor and Worship is to be given which we
give to him who is God by Nature. p. 123.

In which his Grace observes two Difficulties and Absurdities. 1. That they
hereby bring Idolatry by a backdoor into the Christian Religion, as they give
Divine Worship to a mere Creature, and as they willingly admit two Gods, the
one by Nature, and the other by Office. 2. That they cannot vindicate
themselves in this point in any other way, than what will in a great measure
acquit both the Pagans and Papists from the charge of Idolatry.

This our Author says, is not an uncommon imputation on the Socinian Doctrine,
and thus far he is in the right, for besides Modern Writers, the stream of the
Fathers charge the Arians with Idolatry as they Worship Christ, whom they
suppose to be a mere Creature. Thus Athanasius, Gregory Naz. and Nyssen. St.
Basil, Epiphanius, etc.

And this Charge our Author does rather avoid than deny; for which purpose he
divides the Unitarians into two sorts:

Such as give Christ no Divine Worship: Of these he says, It is certain we
have wrote no Book this seven years, in which we have not been careful to
profess to all the world, that a like Honor or Worship (much less the same) is
not to be given to Christ-as to God. And then he will by all means have this
Charge of worshipping our Savior, to be a soul Calumny thrown on them by the
Trinitarian Preachers. Do the Trinitarians think, says our hussing
Controvertist, they may devise a Religion for us, and then come up into their
Pulpits to declaim against the Schemes that are purely of their own Invention?
In good time we shall have a Pulpit Socinianism, as there was in the late Reign
a Pulpit Popery; for this Author writes in the very way and Phrase of
Misrepresentation and Representation. But after all, is this a
Misrepresentation? Did never any Unitarians or Socinians give Honor and
Worship, a like and even the same to Christ as to the Father? Is that Charge a
Device of the Trinitarians? Our Author will undertake for himself, for that is
the We in this Book, the Author of the History of the Unitarians, the Author of
the Criticisms on Mr. Milbourn, etc. and so for Seven Years backwards. We,
says he, have wrote no Book this seven years, in which we have not been
careful, etc. But were there no years before the last Seven, that can be looked
into? He knew what the Arians, and what Socinus and his Followers held and do
hold. But he and his, for whom we want a Name, (for they are in this neither
Arians nor Socinians) unless we will call them Francisco-Davidists, are herein
very reserved and cautious, that they may not give the same nor alike Honor to
our Savior as to God. Indeed if they were of another mind before the seven
years past, they have done well to change it, to ease themselves of a
troublesome Charge of giving Divine Worship to a mere Creature, as did the
Arians and Socinians; and of as troublesome Adversaries as Socinus found
Franciscus David to be, that would not allow Divine Worship to be given to
Christ, because he was a Creature, and that by so doing they should be guilty
of Idolatry.

But after all his suming, and his talk of a Devised Religion, and declaiming
Pulpits, and Schemes purely of their own Invention, he is forced to own that
there is a second sort of Unitarians that give Divine Worship to our Savior;
and that is an Objection in his way. But his Grace will say perhaps, Why? Do you
not pray to Christ? And to close the Objection, Do you not then give the like,
nay the same Honor to Christ as to God?

His Answer to this is well worthy our Observation.

1. There are indeed some Unitarians who pray to the Lord Christ. But why Some?
Did not the numerous Arians, and did not Socinus, and generally all called
after his name do so; and did they not think themselves obliged so to do,
inveighing against those that did not?

2. He adds by way of Excuse, They prayed to him indeed, but it was to him, as
that Mediatory King, who is (say they) appointed by God to succor us in all
our straits and wants. But is not this to equal him with God, to whom alone we
are taught to direct our Prayers? Nay, is not this to attribute to him the
Divine Properties of Omniscience and Omnipotence, when he is supposed to know
and succor us in all our straits and wants? No, says he, for they own that
his knowledge either of our wants or Prayers is only by Revelation from God;
and his Power by which he relieves us, is wholly of God's giving.

But is not Prayer a part of Divine Worship, and peculiar to God? And don't
they then equal him to God, when they pray to him? And is not that Idolatry, to
give to a Creature the Worship belonging to the Creator? And can any Divine
Appointment make that not to be Idolatry, which in its nature is so? (as the
Protestants use to maintain against the Church of Rome). And besides, don't
those Socinians that worship our Savior, affirm that they worship him as God?
Thus Socinus himself pleads, Vt pro Deo ac Domino suo venerentur, Tom. 2. p.
631. That they worship him as their God and Lord. And much more to the same
purpose. And what is it to worship him as God, but to give him Divine Worship?

The Second Difficulty and Absurdity his Grace charges upon them, is a
Plurality of Gods, the one by Nature, the other by Office, a Creature-God, a
God merely by Positive Institution.

All that he has to say to this, is, Will he deny positively and directly, that
the Lord Christ is a God by Representation and Office? And then steals off
with, Let his Grace give it under his hand, That the Lord Christ is not a God
in these senses.

A. This is much as if when charged with Idolatry for giving Divine Worship to
Christ, if a mere Man, he should say, Will his Grace deny positively and
directly, that Christ is a Man? For though he denies not Christ to be a Man,
yet he affirms, That Christ, if no more than a Man, is not to be worshipped
with Divine Honor. So tho he should not deny Christ to be a God by
Representation and Office, yet he affirms that one who is so and no more,
cannot be the True God, nor be worshipped as God; for that would establish a
Plurality of Gods. But his Grace on the other hand took not himself concerned,
nor does the Case require, that he should positively assert, That Christ is a
God by Representation; for that is more than our Author himself dares to do,
who faintly enough concludes, That as Moses is called a God, so also Christ may
be called a God by Mission, Representation, and Office.

Now how unreasonable a thing is this, That he should put it so hard upon his
Grace, to deny positively and directly, what this Author himself dares not
positively and directly affirm? for he cautiously says (for fear a Proof
should be required), So also may Christ be called a God. But our Author is too
sparing and modest in his expressions, for the Socinians are not backward to
acknowledge, That our Savior is True God, and that there are more True Gods
than one; and that to say there is One only Supreme Independent God, and to
worship one God by Nature, is Judaical, and a renouncing of the Christian
Religion. Vid. Smalcius Exam. Cent. Err. and Refutatio Smig. de novis monstris,
etc.

To conclude, His Grace had said, That the Socinians cannot vindicate
themselves in this Point any other way, than what will in great measure acquit
both the Pagans and the Papists from the Charge of Idolatry.

This our Author calls a Thunderclap; and truly by his own Pleas he makes good
the Imputation. For,

1. He says, They pray to Christ as a Mediatory King, who is appointed by God
to succor us in all our straits: And of this kind were the Dii Medioxumi among
the Heathens; and so are the Mediators of Intercession, the Saints and Angels,
in the Church of Rome, who they say are appointed by the Supreme God to hear
and succor us.

2. He says, That the knowledge our Savior has either of our Wants or
Prayers, is only by Revelation from God; and his Power is wholly of God's
giving.

So the Romanists say, That the Saints have their Knowledge of our state,
either by Revelation, or in speculo Trinitatis, in the Glass of the Trinity;
which is much the same.

3. Our Author says, The Worship given to Christ is not the same which is
given to God. So the Church of Rome has their Superior Worship, Latria, which
they give to God; and an inferior, Dulia, which they give to Saints.

4. Our Author says, Though these Socinians pray to Christ, yet they don't
hereby equal him to God. This is the very Plea made by the Church of Rome for
the Worship they give, and the Prayers they offer to Saints and Angels.

From all which we see how much Modesty as well as Truth there is in what his
Grace observes, That they cannot vindicate themselves in this Point any other
way, than what will in a great measure acquit both the Pagans and the Papists
from the Charge of Idolatry.

SECT. II.
Of the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior.
AFTER a Discourse of several Pages, which our Author declines, his Lordship
proceeded to the most usual and considerable Objections of his Adversaries
against the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation. As,

Object. 1. They say, That this Union of the Divinity with the Humane Nature,
is, if not altogether impossible, yet very unintelligible.

To this his Grace replies, That there is no impossibility, is evident from the
Union between the Soul and Body of a man, p. 147, and 158.

Against this our Author makes two Exceptions.

Except. 1. In a personal Union of a Soul with a Body, the Union is between two
Finite and Commensurate things; which is not only possible, but very
conceivable. But in the pretended personal Union of God to Man, and Man to God,
the Union is between Finite and Infinite.

Answer. Here our Author over-runs the Point, when he considers the personal
Union of a Soul and Body, merely as a Union between two Finites; for instances
between such, the World is full of: Whereas the Difficulty is, as the Union is
between Soul and Body, that is, Spirit and Matter, which are two extremes, and
so incommensurate; and yet notwithstanding they are not only vitally united,
but they both retain their distinct Natures and Properties, as his Grace
observes. Under which Notion, the personal Union between two such unequals is
as difficult to conceive (were it not that we are sure that it is) as the
personal Union between the divine and humane Natures in our Savior.

But our Author pursues his Point. For, says he,

The personal Union of God to Man is between Finite and Infinite; which cannot
be without admitting one of these things; Either that Finite and Infinite are
Commensurate; which every one knows is false: Or, that the Finite is united
only to some part of the Infinite, and is disjoined from the rest of it; which
all Trinitarians deny and abhor; because if so, Jesus Christ should not be
perfect God, but only God in part.

Answer. By this way of arguing our Author may as well undertake to prove, that
there is no such thing as a personal Union between the Soul and Body; For, that
cannot be imagined without admitting one of these two things; either that Soul
and Body are commensurate and equal, and alike extended, which every one knows
is false: Or, That Body and Soul are united as to some part only, which is
disjoined from the rest, and that is of a Spirit to make it material. What more
plain, if his Argument be true, than that there can be no personal Union
between the Soul and Body, such distant extremes? So that you may as soon
expect that the soft and impalpable Air should be united to a Thunderbolt, or a
Speculative thought to a Millstone, as that there can be a Union between things
so incommensurate and unequal, as a Body and a Soul are. But if notwithstanding
such conceived Difficulties, Soul and Body are thus found to be united; then is
it alike consistent that the two Natures in our Blessed Savior be united in
one Person.

Again, by the same way he may go on and prove that Immensity is no perfection
of the Divine Nature; and that it is impossible God should be every where, and
Essentially present. For Immensity (if it be) has a relation to place, that is,
Infinite to Finite: but such a relation cannot be in God, without one of these
two things, that Finite [place] and Infinite [immensity] are Commensurate,
which every one knows is false: Or, that the Finite [place] has a relation to
some part of the Infinite, and is disjoined from the rest of it; and so the
Divine Essence is particle and divisible, which all deny: The Difficulty we see
presses as hard upon the personal Union of Soul and Body, and God's Immensity,
as upon the Union of the Divine and Humane Natures in our Savior; and which he
must deny, or give up his Argument.

Indeed it is not for us to talk Metaphysically of the Divine Nature, till we
understand our own; nor of the Nature, Kinds and Modes in higher matters, till
we understand the Connection and Union of parts in a pebble or a bubble: left by
such an Attempt we run our selves into Heresy, a dangerous and inevitable
Rock, as our Author represents the Case; or into his downright Nonsense, of
uniting two Understandings, or Persons, by the Abolition of one of them.

Except. 2. The Union of Soul and Body may be personal, that is, may constitute
or make one Person: because it is not the Union of two Persons, but only of one
Person (the Soul) to a thing which is otherways without Life, Reason, Memory,
or Free Will -- But in the (pretended) Union of God with Man, there are two
distinct, and very different Lives, Reasons, Memories and Free-Wills, which
utterly destroy the Notion of a personnl Union. For a personal Union supposes
but one Life, one Reason, one Memory, one Free Will. Because if these things
which constitute a Person are found more than once, there is no longer one
Person but two, and consequently no personal Union in the sense in which we are
arguing.

Answer. I deny that two Lives, or two Understandings, or two Free Wills, do
necessarily make two different Persons or Beings, when there is a Subordination
between them; for then they receive their Denomination or Title from the
Supreme. As we usually say there are three sorts of Life, Vegetation in Plants,
Animality in Brutes, and Rationality in men; now if one of these is alone, that
gives Denomination to it, as a Plant is called a Vegetable. But when the
Vegetative life is united to the Animal, it loses that Character, and the
Creature then is called an Animal, and is so called as if there was no
Principle in it of Vegetation. And the rational (though there be Vegetation and
Animality) is so called, as if there was no Vegetation or Animality. That is,
when there are several Powers one in Subordination to another, they make not
several Beings (as they would do if alone) but the Supreme gives the
Denomination to the whole.

And thus it is in the Case before us, where there are two Natures, the Divine
and Humane; two Lives, the Immortal and Mortal; two Understandings, an infinite
and a Limited; two Wills; and yet not two Persons: because the Understanding
and Will of the Inferior (the Humane Nature) is subordinate to the Superior
(the Divine) and so the Person is as much one, as if there had been but one
Nature, one Life, one Understanding, and one Will.

As to our Author's History of Apollinarius, Nestorius, and Eutyches, (were I
disposed to make Excursions) I could present him with the Rhapsody and Bedrole
of the Opinions of those he calls Unitarians, from Cerinthus and Ebion downward
to Socinus, and of the Violences and Outrages of the Arians against the
Photinians and Orthodox; and of the Rancour of the Photinians against the
Arians and Orthodox: but that I shall refer to a more proper occasion.

Object. 2. It Is a thing incongruous, and much beneath the Dignity of the Son
of God, to be united to Humane Nature.

To this his Grace makes a large Reply, and amongst other things says: The
lower any Being, be he never so high, condescends to do good, the Glory of his
Goodness shines so much the brighter.

To this passage alone our Author returns an Answer, if I may call a
Representation so, and in requital I shall return him the Reverse of his
Comparison, mutatis mutandis. If Christ by the just interest he has in the
favor of his Father, procures the pardon of Sinners, and to keep them for the
time to come from the like bad courses, should obtain the Grant of eternal
Happiness, and then give them such Counsel and Precepts, as might best dispose
them to a new Course of Life; -- Would not this Care and Benignity be
sufficient, unless the Son of God himself came, and be content to be clothed
with the Rags of Humanity, and to be bound and buffetted, Imprisoned,
Arraigned, Condemned and Crucified for them? In his Judgment, Such a Scene
would have more of Folly than Goodness. And he concludes, Therefore much less
is it to be supposed of God, than of a Wise man.

This needs no farther Animadversion, the Impiety of it is a sufficient Reply.

Object. 3. The Incarnation is not necessary, says he. For our Opposers grant
this, that the pardon of Sin might have been offered to mankind by a Prophet in
the name of God; so that there was no apparent cogent Necessity, no
extraordinary and indispensable cause for it; and so must be allowed an
unaccountable, causeless Debasement of the Divine Majesty; and seeing no such
cause is assigned, says he, we have leave to believe it never was.

A. The Objection is of our Author's own forming; and there are two Uses he
makes of his Adversary's Concession (which for the present we will take as he
represents it.)

1. That if there was no apparent cogent Necessity, no indispensable cause for
the Incarnation, it must be an unaccountable and causeless Debasement.

2. Seeing no such cause is assigned, therefore they have reason to believe it
never was.

As to the First, it is a gross Mistake; for there may be a good and sufficient
cause for that, which there is no Cogent and Indispensable, and much more no
Apparent necessity for: He tells us, That the Gospel and pardon of Sin might
have been offered to Mankind by a Prophet in the name of God, and so there was
no Apparent and Cogent necessity for Christ's Incarnation. And surely if the
offering Pardon by a Prophet was sufficient, there was no Apparent, Cogent, and
indispensable Necessity for Christ's coming into the World; and then (according
to our Author's way of arguing) Christ's coming into the World is as
unaccountable, and causeless, as he would have his Incarnation to be.

2. As to the Second: Seeing no such cause is assigned, therefore the Son of
God was never incarnate.

A. I answer, By this way of arguing, Christ was never Crucified, any more than
he was Incarnate. For if there was no Indispensable cause for it, it might have
been omitted; and there was no Indispensable cause for it, where the Teaching
of a Prophet was sufficient. And without an Indispensable cause, our Author has
taught us The Wisdom of God would not stoop to such a Humiliation; And
consequently, our Savior was no more Crucified than he was Incarnate, if our
Author argues right.

Under the covert of this Objection, our Author takes to Task the Reasons which
his Grace offers for our Savior's being Incarnate; and excepting the case of
Mysteries (which I shall reserve for another place) our Author frames one
general Answer to them all, viz.

'That these Considerations do not prove the Incarnation expedient in the Age
of Augustus; for they were much more forcible in the Time of Adam, than of
Augustus. For in the last, God could propound only to reclaim Men from their
Idolatries, Errors and Impieties; but if he had been incarnate in the Age of
Adam he had prevented them. And if these are good Arguments, it is Morally
impossible, either that there was in the Age of Augustus, or ever shall be an
Incarnation. He concludes, I think I may say, this is an accurate and just
Reasoning: it being founded on this Maxim of common Prudence, that what was
more expedient to be done at first than afterward, would have been at first,
if it had been at all expedient to be done.

A. The Reasons given of Christ's Incarnation, viz. The reclaiming Mankind from
their Idolatries, Errors and Impieties, are the same with the Reasons for
Christ's coming into the World: And where the Reasons are the same, they are to
be tried in the same way. Let us therefore put Christ's coming into the World,
into the room of his being Incarnate; and we shall find it as requisite (if our
Author's Argument be of any force) that he should have come into the World from
the beginning, as that he should have been Incarnate from the beginning; and as
Morally impossible he should have been born in the Age of Augustus, as that he
should have been Incarnate in his time. For these Reasons were much more
forcible in the Age of Adam than of Augustus. For by so late a Nativity as the
Age of Augustus, God could propound only to reclaim Men from their Idolatries,
etc. but by being born in the very time of Adam, he had prevented the
Idolatries of 4000 Years. -- If these be good Arguments for Christ's Nativity,
' it is Morally impossible, either that there was in the Age of Augustus, or that
there ever shall be a Savior born into the World.

The same Argument will also affect the Gospel, and make it necessary, that it
should have been as completely published in the Age of Adam as of Augustus.

This is a home Charge indeed, a charge of a great Overfight and neglect in
Almighty God, for want, it seems, of attending to a Maxim of common Prudence,
viz. Of doing what was more expedient to be done at first than afterward. For
according to our Author, the whole design of Salvation by Christ was mistimed,
and the fullness of time for it was in the Age of Adam, and not of Augustus.
This he accounts acurate and just Reasoning; and I suppose the next News we
hear, will be Amendments upon the Gospel; and a Set of Chronological Tables to
rectify us in these Matters. And to that work I leave him. For I suppose he
will not expect from his Adversaries, that they should prove to him, that the
time of Augustus was better than that of Adam, for our Lord's appearance in the
World; or to give him the Reasons, why Almighty God chose the time of Augustus
for the Nativity of our Savior, and the publishing the Gospel by him, rather
than the time of Adam.

A Vindication of the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Sermon concerning The
Mysteries of the Christian Faith, from the Exceptions made against it, by the
Author of the Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity.
IF the Author of the Considerations had a mind to have writ upon a Noble
Argument, this Learned Adversary gave him a fair occasion to try his Skill, by
proposing the two different Hypotheses concerning the Salvation of mankind by
Jesus Christ, and showing the agreeableness of the one, By his assuming our
Nature, and suffering in our stead, to the revealed Will of God. Which he
confirms, as it is most plain and easy, and agreeable to the most received
Sense of the Words; as it suits with the Scope and Design of the whole New
Testament; has been generally received in the Christian Church; and best
agrees with the Characters of those Persons from whom we receive the Christian
Faith, viz. Christ Jesus and his Apostles. Upon the last of these his Lordship
more particularly Discourses.

But instead of taking his Adversary to Task about this weighty Subject, our
Author chooses rather to fall upon some other Points, where he may have a
greater Scope for the gratifying his roving Fancy; not caring to be tied up by
the Rules and Measures of strict Argumentation; and therefore for the fitting
to his purpose what he had to say, he passes over the other, under the
Character of a great many Heads, too troublesome for a Reader's view, whereas
the Chief of all (as he will have it) lies in these Three.

1. God may justly require of us to believe what we cannot not comprehend.

2. Those who reject the Mysteries of Faith, do themselves advance greater
Mysteries than those they declaim against.

3. The manner and way of Salvation the Church teaches, tends more to the
benefit of mankind, than the way of Salvation by Christ taught by the Socinians.

Of these Three Propositions our Author thus passes his Judgment. The first is
true; but not to the purpose. The Second is home to the purpose, but not true.
The Third is neither true nor to the purpose.

When he elsewhere read this Character of a certain Book, without doubt he
thought the Cadence of it very pretty, and might be divertive for his Reader,
whether it were right or wrong, and fit for his purpose or not. But because I
am apt to suspect the Exactness of such Turns of Fancy, I shall make bold to
examine them, and see how his Character and the Heads of Discourse he applies
it to, will agree.

The first, says he, is true, but not to the Purpose.

The contrary of this used to be accounted true by his Predecessors in the same
way; Socinus himself, as his Lordship showed [Serm. p. 21.] denied the Divine
Prescience, because he could not comprehend it; and the incomprehensibleness of
a Doctrine used to be a mighty Argument amongst the Socinians, against the
truth of it, as might be shown. But our Author is of another mind, as he tells
us, for the present: And if his Lordship could by Prescience have foretold his
mind, and foreseen he would have replied upon him, he might have spared to
himself (as he gravely observes) the Pains of these ten Pages in his Sermon, in
which he seeks to prove, that there are many things we do not comprehend. But
his Lordship is not to be blamed for want of that Prescience, which the acute
Socinus would not allow to God himself. And to say the truth of it, he thought
he had wrote against a Socinian Point, but our Author can tell him, He utterly
mistakes; perhaps his Lordship had not read the Notes on the Creed of
Aibanasius, nor the Trinitatian Scheme of Religion, nor the Answer to Mr.
Milbourn, (Books our Author recommends) nor the History of the last Seven
years; for it is likely he might there have found the Index Expurgatorius to
Socinus, and his Successors; and the Alterations made in this Refining Age in
their grosser Doctrine, without which they will tell him he writes against
imaginary Socinianism. But our Author within the compass of Three pages changes
his mind. In page 4. All the works of God are Incomprehensible, and we cannot
comprehend the least Spire of Grass. But page 7. He cannot understand why his
Lordship and many others are so positive, that we cannot comprehend an infinite
Attribute, as Eternity. Now I should have thought that the works of God, and a
Spire of Grass are as comprehensible as an infinite Attribute. He tells us,
Contradictions are by all confessed to be Impossibilities; and so I take
Comprehensible and Incomprehensible to be; it remains therefore upon him to
show that they are possible; and-that while it is not possible for a Spire of
Grass to be comprehended, that yet Eternity may. He bears a little too hard
upon his Readers, to suppose their Memory or Attention will not hold out Three
pages together; and that he may have the liberty to affirm and deny, and
contradict himself (as shall best serve his end) without offense to their
understanding. But perhaps, The heat of Writing and Controversy was the
occasion of this Inadvertency.

The first of these, The Incomprehensiblenss of God's works, is left in it is
place to try its fortune, and to subsist upon its own Credit. But when he
maintains the Comprehensibleness of an infinite Attribute (he might have said
Infinity, for that is a Divine Attribute) because it sounds not so well, and
these Men that have taught the World, that to do Contradictions would not be a
Perfection, but an Imperfection in the Divine Nature, may have also taught
them, that Infinity cannot be comprehended by a Finite understanding, nor God
be comprehended by a Creature; because of this he takes himself concerned to
make good his Paradox, by setting up such a Notion of Comprehension as he
conceives may support it: And that is, that to comprehend a thing, is to have a
clear, distinct and adequate Conception of it. And he adds, May we not have
such a Notion of an infinite Attribute? I think we may. Let us suppose for the
present, his Definition of Comprehension to be good and right; may we not then
have as clear, distinct, and adequate Conception of a Spire of Grass, or any of
God's Works, as of Infinity and Eternity? And then how comes he before to
acknowledge the Truth of that saying of his Lordship's, that we cannot
comprehend the least Spire of Grass?

But how true soever his Notion of Comprehending may be, he mistakes in the
Application, when he says, We may have a clear, distinct, and adequate
Conception of an infinite Attribute. Now we used to say (till the days of
discarding Mysteries came on) that only God can comprehend his own Essence, and
nothing less than Infinite could have a clear, distinct, and adequate
Conception of Infinite. For it is evident we have not a clear, distinct, and
adequate Conception of that which we can give no adequate Definition of. But we
can give no adequate Definition of Infinite; and therefore-are forced to speak
of it by way of Negation, and rather say what it is not, than what it is. Thus
he himself describes God's Eternity, viz. It Is that Duration by which he is
without all Beginning and End. which is by no means, a clear, distinct, and
adequate Definition of it. For first Duration applied to Eternity, is what is
usually called a Contradiction in Adjecto: For says our Author, It is of the
Nature of a Duration to consist in a Succession; But in Eternity is no
Succession. For what Succession was there before the Creation of the World? And
yet there was the same Eternity then as now. So that to describe Eternity by
Duration, and to cut that Indivisible into parts by Succession, is to make a
temporary Eternity, which methinks sounds as ill as an Eternal moment.
Secondly, Its by no means an adequate Definition of Eternity, because it
consists of Negatives, without all Beginning and End. A greater Proof cannot be
given of the Inadequateness of our Conception, than thus to go through the
World of Beings, and Assertions, and to say it is not this, and it is not that,
and yet we are never the nearer to tell what the thing really is. As if I would
ask, What is an infinite Attribute? And he should answer, A Perfection without
bounds. What is a Spirit? A Being that has no Flesh and Bones. What Eternity?
A Duration without Beginning or End. Do we understand Infinity, a Spirit, or
Eternity, the better for all this? As suppose when the word Spirit is applied
to God, Angels, and Souls departed; will the abovesaid Definition give me any
clear, distinct, and adequate Conception of it, and assign the difference
between what it is in God, and what in a Creature, or what at all? A mistake
then it is in the thing, as well as a Contradiction in him; and the reason of
this Blunder (next to a Carping-Disposition of mind, watchful to take all
advantages) is, that he was not aware of the difference between apprehend and
comprehend, and confounded Existence with Essence, That the thing is, with what
the thing is. And of both of these he himself has given us a remarkable
Instance.

For the Bishop having said, If nothing is to be believed but what may be
comprehended, the very Being of God must be rejected too. P. 22. Our Author
upon it makes this Observation, ' That the Attributes of God are
Incomprehensible, I have often heard; but never till now what his Lordship adds
'in the next place, purely from himself, If nothing, says he, is to be
believed, etc. But why is this purely from himself? For this admirable Reason,
subjoyned by our Author, To comprehend the Being or Existence of God, is only
this, to comprehend that God is: and if we cannot comprehend that, all Religion
ceases. But how came that word Existence in? To comprehend the Being or
Existence of God is only this, etc. For his Lordship has no other word than
Being, which plainly there refers to the Nature, and not the Existence of the
Almighty. So in the Paragraph just before, It is Madness to pretend to
comprehend what is Infinite: And in the close of the same Paragraph, As long as
they believe an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, it is Nonsense to reject
any other Doctrine which relates to an Infinite Being, because it is
Incomprehensible. So that it is God, as an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being,
that his Lordship is Discoursing of; not of his Existence, but his Essence and
Nature. And yet we are not at an end of these Difficulties, were we to consider
his Existence.

To return to the Bishop's first Proposition (as recited by our Author) viz.
God may justly require of us to believe what we cannot comprehend. To what
purpose is this? For our Author says, He [the Bishop] utterly mistakes, in
thinking that we deny the Articles of the New Christianity, or Athanasian
Religion [concerning the Trinity, the Deity, and Incarnation of our Savior,
etc.] because they are Mysteries, or because we do not comprehend them; we deny
them, because they are Contradictons, Impossibilities, and pure Nonsense, p. 4.
b.

Surely this New Christianity, this Athanasian Religion, is no other than
Babylon in the Revelation, that had Mystery wrote on her Forehead, that was the
Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the whole Earth; and deserves to be
treated in like manner, if she vends Imposture and Contradictions under the
name of Mysteries, as he represents it. But in defect of a Royal Authority to
consummate the Sentence, there is a terrible Scourge, a Book wrote by a Learned
Friend of theirs, that has wrought wonders, and with the like Success as the
Whips were showed to the Sicilian Slaves, to their utter Discomfiture. So that
the Merchants of these Wares have their Markets spoiled, or much hindered, if he
is to be believed. And yet after all, if we may guess at the Book by his Sample
out of it, it is as gentle as one could wish; and falls in with his Adversaries.
For what does he say, but what they have said before him? As,

1. There are in Religion some Mysteries, and Incomprehensible Secrets.

2. We are not to give the venerable Name of Mystery to Doctrines contrary to
Nature's and Reason's Light.

3. The ordinary meaning of Mystery in Scripture, is not something in it is own
nature dark and obscure, but something intelligible, and kept secret in past
Ages, and was revealed in Gospel Times. But for all this, may not the word
Mystery be applied to such things as are in some measure known, but in much
greater unknown to us (as his Lordship says)? And when our Author's Friend
does say, the ordinary meaning of Mystery in Scripture, is for what was a
Secret, but now made known; it supposes that he was sensible it was also
sometimes there used for what was in its own nature dark and obscure. I thought
to have pursued this Argument, but I the rather pass it, because it is under the
Consideration of a Learned Pen.

Amongst the Instances that are Incomprehensible, his Lordship begins with
Eternity; and says, That he is apt to think, there is no greater Difficulty in
the conception of the Trinity, and Incarnation, than there is of Eternity. A
bold Saying! And he deserves to be exposed for it. Difficulties the Bishop
calls them, but our Author will have it Contradictions, and many Contradictions
in the Trinity and Incarnation; and insinuates that his Lordship would himself
have called his Difficulties in Eternity, Contradictions, if he durst; For thus
his Adversary goes on, He dares not call them Contradictions (though as he
states them they are undeniable Contradictions) because if they were confessed
to be Contradictions, he would be forced to deny an Eternity. And it is not
long before we are told the Bishop denies that also.

There are two Difficuties his Lordship observes in the Eterternity of God.

The first is, 'That if God was for ever, he must be from himself; and what
Notion can we have in our minds concerning it?

Our Author represents this, as if it was the Bishop's design to argue against
God's Eternity, after this manner, I am sorry an Eternal God must be a
Contradiction. Had he no way to defend his New Mysteries, but by espousing the
Cause of the Atheists? etc.

A Calumny as black as Hell! For, is there any word leaning this way? What! to
prove that there are Contradictions in the Notion of Eternity, or that an
Eternal God is a Contradiction! Does not his Lordship both affirm there is
great reason to believe the Eternity of God, and in the same breath effectually
prove it, and confute those Atheists whose Cause this Slanderer would have him
to espouse? But this is his usual way of prefacing an Argument; the reason for
it lies open enough.

But where is the Contradiction? At last it proves one of his own making. For,
says he, What makes him [the Bishop] say, God must be from himself, or
self-originated? For then he must be before he was.

For God to be before he was, is a Contradiction. But I do not see how it
follows, that if he is from himself, he must be before he was? For he may be
from himself, and yet be necessarily and eternally Existent. This it is likely
our Author saw, and therefore to clinch his Argument, he joins an alias to the
Phrase, From himself, and then it is From himself, or Self-originated. And now
he has put a pretty varnish upon it; for Self-originated, if strictly taken,
implies an Origin or Beginning from himself: And (as he says) All Origination
of what kind soever is inconsistent with an Eternal Being. If his Lordship had
said, God had his Beginning or Origination from himself, or in his Adversarie's
phrase were Self-originated, there had been some color for him to have
inferred, Then he was in Being before he was. But to be from himself, is no
more liable to such an inference, than when we say he is Self-existent, or in
the word used by the Fathers, '(...), God of and from himself, that is, so as
to have no Cause nor Beginning.

The second Difficulty his Lordship proposed about God's Eternity, is, How God
should co-exist with all the differences of times, and yet there be no
Succession in his own Being? -- And Succession being not consistent with the
Absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature, therefore God must be all at once
what he is.

This our Author says, is a great many Contradictions, and proposes no less
than Five Queries upon it, which he gives his Lordship time till Doomsday to
answer. For thus he closes them, The Notion of the Trinity, and this Notion of
Eternity, will be vindicated both in a Day.

However we will try if the Day for it be not already come; and for trial's
sake, I will venture to offer them again to the Reader, as they stand in his
Treatise.

Q. 1. What is the difference between an Eternal Moment, (which every one
discerns is a Contradiction in the very terms) and between possessing Eternal
Life all at once, which is his Lordship's Definition of Eternity?

A. The difference is as great, as between Contradiction and Truth. An Eternal
Moment is a Contradiction; for a Moment is a moveable point, and passes as soon
into not being, as it came into being. It was not, it is, and immediately is
not; and so nothing more opposite in the nature of it to Eternity. But Eternity
admits no Succession, no Divisibility, no Moments, no Past, no Future, no
Motion, no Change, and consequently must be all existent together, and all at
once: For there is no mean between Succession, and all at once; and since
Succession is imcompatible with Eternity, Eternity must be all at once. And if
God did not possess himself all at once, he could not be Eternal.

Q. 2. Seeing it is of the Nature of all Duration to consist in a Succession,
else it were not Duration but a Moment, I ask whether it be not unavoidable,
that if Almighty God possesses Eternal Life all at once, he must have passed
into some Durations before they are? The Duration, for example, in which the
Day of Judgment shall be, is not actually come. But if God possesses Eternity
all at once, he is already entered upon that Duration, that is, he is entered
upon it before it is.

A. If it be of the Nature of all Duration to consist in a Succession, then
there can be no more Duration than there is Succession in an Eternal Being: And
consequently, it is a gross Absurdity to conceive of God, as entering upon a
certain Duration, and passing into some Duration, which is to conceive of him
as a Temporary Being, and that began to be, (for so it is in all Succession)
and not as one that is Eternal.

Q. 3. Seeing it is a Contradiction, and therefore impossible, that any Being
should possess a Duration before such Duration is; I desire to know of his
Lordship, how it can be an Imperfection (as he affirms) in the Divine Nature,
not to do that which implies a Contradiction, etc.

A. It Is true, that it is a Contradiction, and therefore impossible for a
Creature, to whom Duration and Succession belong, to possess a Duration before
such Duration is. But it is a Contradiction, and therefore impossible for God
to possess any Duration (which consists in Succession) because he is Eternal.
For him to possess a certain Duration and Succession, would be to suppose him
in Duration A, before he removed to Duration B, and when he is in Duration B,
to have left Duration A. Eternity in God, is with respect to Time, what
Immensity is to Place; and so he is all at once, as he is at once in all
places; and as notwithstanding the innumerable Divisions in place, God is no
more divided, than he was before Place was created. So, notwithstanding the
manifold distributions of time, God is no more in one Duration than in another,
but is now the same Eternal undivided Being, when there is a Before, a Present,
and an After in Time, as he was before there was any Time, Duration or
Succession.

Q. 4. How is it more an Imperfection to pass from not being, into such a
Duration, to such a Being in it, than it is an Imperfection to pass from not
operating in such a Duration, to operating in it? This last all men must
confess to be true of God; for none will dare to say, God made all his Works at
once.

A. To pass from Duration to Duration, and from not being in such a particular
Duration to a Being in it, is no other than Succession which (as has been
showed) is utterly inconsistent with the Nature of God, who is Eternal.

To pass from not operating in such a Duration, to operating in it, is to
suppose there was a Duration before God did operate in it, which is manifestly
absurd. For Duration is a continuance of Time; but what Duration was there in
Eternity, before there was any Time, or God began to operate and make the World?

Again, To argue from the Works of God to his Nature, is to circumscribe him to
Time and Place, as they are. And he may as well argue, That God began to be,
when he began to Operate, as to argue from Succession in the Creatures, or a
Succession of God's Operation in the Creatures, to a Succession in Himself; and
that he cannot be all at once, because he did not make all his Works at once.

Q. 5. What shadow of Imperfection is it to pass from one Duration to another,
when the Person so passing, carries with him all perfections into every
Duration?

A. If this were so, the Almighty would want one perfection of his Nature,
which is Eternity. For he can no more carry his Eternity with him into the
various Successions of Duration, than he can pass from place to place, and
carry his Immensity with him.

It Is the Upshot (I will not say the Design) of these his Queries to overthrow
the Eternity of God, under color of disproving the Notion of the Platonists
and Boethius, the Schoolmen and the Doctors, and Professors of Mysteries in
our Times, (as he derives its Pedigree, and is pleased to give their Character)
viz. That Eternity is a possession of all at once: And so turns all the bitter
Invectives upon himself, with which he so virulently, and without any pretext
endeavors to wound his Adversary. For what else is the effect of his Doctrine
of Succession in God, and passing from one Duration to another? For where there
is Succession, there was a beginning, unless he will make the first Moment in
his Succession to be Eternal, which he knows is a Contradiction in Terms.

The Two remaining Difficulties which his Lordship offers to our Consideration,
and to show how incomprehensible things are, are the Spirituality of God's
Nature, and his Prescience.

To the former he makes no other Reply, than to disavow (if it is so) what was
charged upon some of their Way about God's Corporeity.

As to the latter, nothing will serve his turn, but that the Bishop opposes the
Unity of God (that envied Doctrine) by finding Contradictions in his Eternity
and Foreknowledge.

But what if the Bloody Charge fall upon Socinus, who found the Difficulties,
and as he thought, the Contradictions in the Doctrine of God's Prescience to be
so great, intrenching upon the Freedom of Humane Actions, and making God the
Author of Sin; that he thought it the better way wholly to deny it. But this
our Author is very careful to suppress.

2. Proposition. The difficulties, says his Lordship, are in point of reason
more insuperable in the Socinian way than ours; of which he gives several
Instances that may be called Mysteries.

1. The Mystery on the part of the Orthodox, is the Eternal Son of God's being
with the Father before the World was made by him.

The Mystery on the other side is, 'That although Jesus were born Six months
after John Baptist, yet he was in dignity before him. Now this, says the
Bishop, is a Mystery; forasmuch as it cannot be conceived that the Evangelist
should, in lofty expressions, and profound language, prove a thing which was
never disputed.

It is St. John that is referred to, and if he may be esteemed the Author of
that Gospel, yet our Author cannot find that profound language and lofty
expressions in him. The sense indeed, says he, is sometimes profound, but the
expression is always mean.

So little judgment had Friend Amelius, when at the first reading he thought
the Barbarian (as he called that Divine Evangelist) to Platonize; and in his
profound language to imitate his great Master. Indeed our Author rather thinks
of a Character befitting a Rhetorician, Orator, or Poet, than a Philosopher or
Divine Writer. As if because the Evangelist had not an elevation of conceit or
expression, like or above the Greek or Roman Orators, or Poets, his language
could not be profound, nor his expressions lofty.

2. Says he, If the language were profound, it would not follow, the Sense
intended must be a Mystery. But it would follow, that St. John that wrote of
such sublime things, after that manner, would not take pains to prove what was
never disputed, viz. that although Christ were born six months after John
Baptist, yet he was in dignity before him.

At last, by head and shoulders, he brings in a Paraphrase of the Socinians on
the beginning of St. John, which has already been considered; but because I am
not willing to be behind-hand with him, I shall repay it with another,
borrowing some help toward it from his own Exposition, viz.

In the beginning of the Gospel, the Word Jesus Christ being about 30 years
old, was then in being and alive: And about that time was rapt up into Heaven,
as St. Paul was, which we are piously to believe, being the Scripture is silent
in it. And after a very short stay there, but so long as it may be said, he was
with God, this Word came down again from Heaven, which we are upon the same
consideration to believe, as his former Ascension. And then or some time after,
perhaps at his Resurrection, he was constituted a God, not an Eternal God, but
a Man God, a Creature-God, a finite temporary God, that dates the beginning of
his Deity from the term aforesaid. And being thus a God, he made a New World,
as the Eternal God made the Old. And though he had nothing in him of the Divine
Nature, (for that God could not give him) nor any of the Incommunicable
Attributes of the Deity, Omnipotence, Omnipresence, Omniscience, and such like.
(Wherefore ' it is better to use the words Christ, Lord and Savior, than God,
because there may be no small inconvenience with respect to the Vulgar) yet he
was to have the same honor given him by Angels and men, which they gave to the
Father, the Eternal, Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient God. And to
encourage them in this, they are to know, that Faustus Socinus had cause to
think, that his Uncle Laelius had, by many prayers obtained from Christ himself
a very dextrous and admirable Interpretation of a difficult place in St. John.

Now this I take to be an unintelligible Mystery, and fit to be put to that,
That although Christ Jesus were born six months after John, yet he was in
dignity before him.

But here he says they have on their side the principal Critics of the
Trinitarians, particularly Erasmus and Beza, who understand the Phrase, For he
was before me, John 1.15. of a priority of dignity and excellence, not of a
priority of time.

Admit this for the present, then the sense of that place will amount to this,
He that comes after me, is preferred before me; for he was preferred before
me: Or, He that comes after me, is more excellent than me; for he was more
excellent than me. Thus St. Chrysostom expounds (...), is preferred before me,
by (...), more excellent, more honorable.

2. The Mystery on the Orthodox side is, That a Divine Person should assume
Humane Nature, and so the Word be made Flesh. The Mystery on the other side is,
'That an Attribute of God, his Wisdom or Power, is made Flesh; that is, for an
Accident to be made a Substance.

In Answer to this our Author says,

1. By the Word we do not understand God the Son; the rather, because no such
person is once mentioned in all Holy Scripture.

Answ. If that were a Reason sufficient why the Word in that Proposition, The
Word was made Flesh, should not be understood of God the Son; then it is as much
a Reason why the Word in the first Verse should not be understood of God the
Son: But if notwithstanding that no such person is once mentioned in Scripture
as God the Son, yet the Word in Verse 1. is to be understood of a person; then
notwithstanding that, Verse 10. may as well be understood in like manner of the
Personal Word. But is no such person ever mentioned in Scripture, as God the
Son? What is the Word but the Son of God, and when the Word and the Son are the
same, what is the difference between God the Word, and God the Son? And when
the Son is called God in Scripture, what is the difference between God the Son,
and the Son that is God?

2. But what do they understand by the Word, when the Word is said to be made
Flesh?

He answers, The Power and Wisdom of God.

Now if so; where then is the Fault, when the Bishop charges it upon them as a
Mystery beyond all Comprehension, that they say that an Attribute of God, his
Wisdom or Power, is made Flesh?

Here he comes in again with his, We do not mean hereby, as his Lordship would
insinuate, that the Wisdom or Power of God was turned into Flesh, or Man.

Now this is more than his Adversary charges them with: But what do they mean?

Why, We mean, says he, as the Trinitarians thereby also mean, that the Word
was Incarnate, tabernacled in Flesh, abode on the Man Christ Jesus in more
ample manner, and much larger measure, then on former Prophets.

Answ. If they mean, By made Flesh, as the Trinitarians themselves also mean;
then they must mean, that the Wisdom and Power of God is Incarnate, and took
upon it the Flesh and Nature of Man; or else they do not mean by that Phrase as
the Trinitarians do. But suppose we give him back again what he has granted,
and allow that they do not mean as the Trinitarians mean, when they say, the
Word was Incarnate; but that they mean, the Word abode on the Man Christ Jesus;
that is, the Word, Power, or Wisdom, abode on the Word Christ; yet how comes he
from the Word's tabernacling in flesh, or was made flesh, to interpret it,
abode in Christ. Methinks there is much of Mystery in this.

But I have not yet done; for tho he says, The Language and Expression of St.
John is always mean, yet I apprehend St. John to be consistent with himself,
and to write intelligibly.

But our Author brings all this into question, by a forced Interpretation, and
setting up his own meaning against that of St. John; as will appear to any
indifferent man, from the Connection and Order of this Chapter; whether it be
the part before verse 14. or that which follows.

Before; for thus the Evangelist proceeds, In the Beginning was the Word, --
And that Word was the true Light. -- And the Word was made Flesh. So that the
Word that was made Flesh, was the same that was the true light, and that was in
the beginning. And therefore if by the Word that was made Flesh, is to be
understood the Power and Wisdom of God, then so it is to be understood when the
Word is said to be in the beginning, after this manner; In the Beginning was
the Power of God, and the Power of God was with God, and the Power of God was
God.

Let us consult the Words following the Clause, [ the Word was made flesh] and
it will be yet more evident; The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and
we beheld his glory, the glory of the only begotten of the father, etc. John
bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spoke; etc.

So that the same Word that was made flesh, dwelt among them; the same Word
that was made flesh, and dwelt among them, and whose Glory they saw, was the
only begotten of the Father. The same Word that was made flesh, and dwelt among
them, was he of whom John bare witness. Now if the whole Tenor of that
Discourse, before and after, belong to the Personal Word, then so does the
Clause between; or else he will make St. John write so as no Intelligent Writer
can be supposed to write.

3. The Mystery on the side of the Orthodox, is, That the Son of God ' came
down from Heaven, and took our Nature upon him. The Mystery on the other side
is, 'That Christ should be rapp'd up into Heaven.

This Mystery of theirs our Author will have to be no more difficult than St.
Paul's being caught up into the third heaven. And so far he is in the right;
for that was no more impossible than this, and Christ might have ascended
before his Ministry, as well as after his Resurrection. But this is not the
Mystery that his Lordship lays his hand upon; but it is this, That in a matter
of so great Consequence, and so remarkable a Part of History (if it had been
true) the Scripture should be wholly silent; that when it is so punctual in the
relation of Moses's Converse with God at the giving of the Law, and of our
Savior's Forty Days Temptation in the Wilderness, and his Transfiguration,
etc. that there should be no more said of this Ascension of our Savior, than
of the Virgin Mary's Assumption, tho (as they would have it) it was to receive
Instructions in the Will of God concerning the Gospel Dispensation; and when he
was constituted and made a God, (as some of them say.) This is a Mystery. But I
acknowledge that the invention of this is a new Mystery; it being apparent,
that it was by them thought necessary to make some tolerable sense of these
words, He came down from Heaven, as his Lordship observes of this before.

As for the Mystery on the other side, we acknowledge it to be so, but not for
the Reason he gives, because to descend or ascend belongs only to Limited and
Finite Beings. Since notwithstanding that, God in Scripture is said to go down,
that that is not to be understood of a local Descent, but of a manifestation of
the Deity. And the Son of God is said to come down from Heaven when he became
Man, because he took the Humane Nature into Union with the Divine; and where
the Humane was, there was also the Divine.

4. The Mystery on the Orthodox side is, That God should become Man by taking
our Nature upon him.

The Mystery on the other side is, 'That Man should become God, etc. In
the-former, an Infinite is united to a Finite; in the latter, a Finite becomes
Infinite.

Our Author says, the Bishop found it necessary to misinterpret their
Doctrines, before he could find Mysteries in it.

A. But surely he does not misreport their Doctrine, when he says, That they
make a Man to be God. Our Author is very tender in the Point, and says he may
be called a God; and says, That it cannot be satisfactorily proved, that any
Authentic Copies of the Bible do give to him the Title, God. But Socinus, and
his Followers, are not sparing to call him a True God, and to give him Divine
Worship as such (as has been showed); and I question whether our Author can say
more about the Authentic Copies than Sandius, which has been sufficiently
confuted before he published his Brief History,

2. As for what our Author says concerning the case of Moses, Magistrates and
Angels being called God: I ask, whether any of them may be called a True God.
For if Moses was, for example, as much a God as Christ, he might have, and
challenge the same Divine Worship as is given, and is due to Christ.

5. The Mystery on the side of the Orthodox is, 'That Christ suffered for our
sakes; as a voluntary Sacrifice of Expiation of the Sins of Mankind, and not
for his own sake.

The Mystery on the other side is, To make him suffer as one wholly innocent;
which is, to make the most innocent persons as apprehensive of suffering as the
most guilty.

Here our Author interposes, and says, His Lordship seems not to understand
the state of the Question, because he had said, ' It Is more reasonable to
believe that Jesus Christ suffered for our sakes, than for his own. Whereas he
suffered for both; for his own sake, to obtain a glorious reward, etc.

Answ. It is plain, that when his Lordship says, Christ suffered for our sake,
and not for his own; he means thereby, not for his own sake, as he did for
ours; for our Sins, and not for any of his own: so it immediately follows, We
are all agreed, that the Sufferings of Christ were far beyond any thing he
deserved at God's hands.

2. He says, The Unitarians never denied, as his Lordship here fancies, that
Jesus Christ made himself a voluntary Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of
Mankind.

Answ. Let us suppose this, what is it then they deny? They deny, he says,
that this Sacrifice was by way of true and proper Satisfaction, or full and
adequate payment to the Justice of God.

A. That there might be a Sacrifice of Expiation where there was no full and
adequate payment to the Justice of God, is true, because it is not possible,
says the Apostle, that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins. But
the case is not the same in this Sacrifice, (for that which is denied to the
former, is yet granted and given to the Sacrifice of Christ, Heb. 10.4, 10.)
which may not improperly be called a Satisfaction and Payment; and if so, in
regard of the Dignity of the Person, may be said to be full and adequate; since
as Sins are called Debts, so Sinners are Debtors to the Justice of God's Law,
in respect of which we are said to be redeemed by the Blood of Christ, as
Captives or condemned persons were redeemed by Silver and Gold, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

But yet we are not come to the bottom of their Doctrine; for when we might
reasonably have thought the controversy to be at an end (since they grant that
Christ was an Expiatory Sacrifice for our Sins) they take all away again by an
Explication that makes the Sacrifice no Sacrifice, and the Expiation no
Expiation.

For he thus determines the Point.

3. We say this Sacrifice (as all other Sacrifices) was only an Oblation or
Application to the Mercy of God. Or as it follows, He suffered for our sakes,
that he might recommend us to the Mercy and Forgiveness of God.

A. I have said before, by this account of an Expiatory Sacrifice, the
Expiation is no Expiation; for the Definition here given of an Expiatory
Sacrifice, is this, that ' it is only an Oblation, Application, or Recommendation
of a Person to the Mercy and Forgiveness of God.

Now that can be no Definition of a thing, which is as well applicable to a
thing of another Nature, as to the thing defined: And that is the Case here,
for according to this Definition of an Expiatory Sacrifice, Intercession would
be such a Sacrifice.

For it may be thus described, Intercession is only an Oblation, Application,
or Recommendation of another to the Mercy and Forgiveness of God. So that in
effect, an Expiatory Sacrifice is no other than an Intercession. And then
indeed we, and I think Mankind (except our Author, and those of his way) have
been under a great mistake, that have been taught, that Sacrifices of Expiation
were instead of the Offender, in whose Sufferings he was reputed to suffer, and
upon whose Sufferings and Penal Death, he was supposed to be in a respect
discharged.

6. The Mystery on the part of the Orthodox is, That the Son of God took upon
him the Form of a Servant for our advantage. The Mystery on the other side is,
That a mere Man should be exalted to the Honor and Worship which belongs only
to God.

As to the former our Author replies,

It Is more reasonable to suppose with the Unitarians, that God has admitted us
to Conditions of Pardon and Favor, for his own mercy's sake, and in
contemplation of the unblemished Life, and voluntary Sufferings and Sacrifice
of Christ Jesus; than to suppose with his Lordship, and his Party, that God
himself took on him the Form of a Servant, and suffered in our steads, to
reconcile us to himself.

Answ. 1. He might as well suppose, that it is more reasonable that God should
admit us to Conditions of Pardon and Favor, for his own mercy's sake, than for
the Sufferings and Sacrifice of Christ. For what needed such a Sacrifice, and
the Son of God to be exposed to such Extremities, when God could have pardoned
men for his own mercy's sake, as well without these Sufferings of Christ, as
without a Satisfaction.

2. What he supposes is very absurd that God should admit us to Conditions of
Pardon, upon the contemplation of the voluntary Sacrifice of Christ; and yet
that he did not suffer in our stead, nor to reconcile us to God. For
Substitution, or to die in the stead of another, is of the nature of an
Expiatory Sacrifice: And he might as well say, Christ is our Intercessor
without mediating for us; as that he was our Sacrifice, and not be sacrificed
for us; or be a Sacrifice for us, and yet not suffer in our stead.

3. It Is not more reasonable to suppose God admitted us to Conditions of Pardon
for his own mercy's sake, than it is to suppose that he suffered in our steads,
and to reconcile us to God: For that is not unreasonable which has God for its
Author.

But will he say, the difficulty is not yet solved; for it is God's Reconciling
us to himself, and Suffering for himself, and Paying to himself the Debt of the
Debtor, and Satisfying the wrong done to himself? Which says he is a
Mock-satisfaction, such a ridiculous son, that begets Laughter or Contempt in
considering men. Surely he means such as himself, that writes Considerations.

Our Author is so used to forget himself, to leave out, put in, or alter, that
he can no more flip an occasion, (how small soever) than those that are used to
another way, can let go an opportunity, though it be but a a Petty-larceny.
Thus he says, His Lordship and his Party suppose that God himself suffered in
our steads, as well as took on him the form of a Servant.

Now to say the truth, his Lordship had not this Scene in his eye under Mystery
the 6th; for in that he is speaking of the Incarnation of our Savior, when he
took on him the Form of a Servant; but it was in Mystery the 5th that he spoke
of Christ's Sufferings and Sacrifice. His Lordships words are, The Son of God
took upon him the Form of a Servant; so that he was so far from saying, God
suffered in our stead, etc. that he did not so much as say, the Son of God
suffered in our stead, (though it be true.)

But will he say, Is not this all one, when he that suffered and died, is, in
our opinion, God as well as Man?

I answer No, with respect to his Observations.

For restore Son of God to its place (as it is in his Lordship) instead of God,
and then we shall see the difference.

As 1: It Is more reasonable to suppose with the Unitarians, that God has
admitted us to Terms of Pardon for his own mercy's sake, etc. than that his Son
should suffer in our stead, to reconcile us to God.

2. It Is an Incomprehensible Mystery, that God should rather choose to send his
Son to suffer for us, than to forgive us.

3. It Is a Paradox, for the Son of God to pay the Debt of the Debtor to God,
and to satisfy for the wrong done to Him.

How is the Scene changed upon this? And where does the Absurdity lie? While
indeed he put God in the place of the Son of God, it looked somewhat
speciously; but restore the term Son of God to its place instead of God, and
the pretended Absurdity lies apparently at his own door.

But may he urge, Don't you acknowledge the Son of God to be God? And then it
may be as well said, God himself suffered in our stead, etc. as the Son of God
suffered, etc.

I answer, God (as that signifies the Divine Nature in Christ) could not
suffer: All that we say is, That the person that took upon himself the Form of
a Servant was God, and not Man, before such an Assumption of Humane Nature:
that when he assumed that Nature, he was God as well as Man; and that person
who was God suffered in Humane Nature, but the Godhead or God no more suffered
and died when Christ died, than the Manhood could be Omnipresent and Immortal,
because the Godhead was so; or the Soul die, when the Man is said to die.

2. I answer further, That the Son of God is not the Father; and that there
being such an incommunicable personality, if I may so speak, those things
belong to the Son that could not belong to the Father. And as the Father was
not Incarnate but the Son, so the Son became responsible, and paid the price of
our Redemption to the Father; and therefore it was the Act of the Son that was
God, and not of the Godhead, as common to three persons to reconcile us to God.

As to the Mystery on their own side, the Worship of a mere Man, it has been
already considered, only he should have had some moderation in his Charge, when
he says his Lordship might as well have accused them of Sodomy or Witchcraft,
as of giving proper Divine Worship to a Creature, to the Man Christ Jesus; when
his Party owns it, and he himself makes a feeble Excuse for it. For, says he,
if it is a mistake, it is simple Error, not Mystery, much less Idolatry. Now,
methinks, it is an unintelligible Mystery, that there should be a proper Divine
Worship, peculiar to God; and yet there be no Idolatry in giving the same to a
Creature. It Is an Incomprehensible Mystery again to say, the giving proper
Divine Worship to a Creature, is not Idolatry.

It Is a Mystery again, That the Church of Rome should be charged with Idolatry,
for giving Divine Worship to Creature-Mediators, and yet in these persons it is
simple Error.

It Is a Mystery again, That Christ should be esteemed by them a God, and so
constituted by God, and yet there be no small Inconvenience with respect to the
Vulgar to have him so called.

It Is a Mystery again, That St. Paul blames them who do service to such as are
not Gods: And yet if God himself had set them up, and given them the Name above
every Name, and they had not mistook in the kind, nor exceeded in the degree of
that service they did to them, they should not have been blamed. And so the
Saints and Angels might have been made Objects of Worship as well as Christ,
and the Virgin Mary might have been established Queen of Heaven, and a
Hyperdulia accordingly given to her.

So that he has made as pretty a Defense in this Part for the Creature-Worship
of the Church of Rome, as their heart can wish, and as he has made for
Transubstantiation in the next Part.

d Proposition is, The way or manner of saving Sinners by Christ, taught by the
Church, is more for the Benefit of Mankind, than the Socinian Hypothesis.

This I shall be as short upon as he; and till I see an Answer to what his
Lordship has said, and was also said by the Archbishop upon that Argument, I
shall rest contented, and not think the Proposition evertheless true or
pertinent, for his saying ' It Is neither true, nor to the purpose.

To the Reverend Dr. WILLIAMS.
Reverend Sir,
I Understand that you are now about a Vindication of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury's Sermons concerning the Trinity, in Answer to the Animadversions
that were made upon them. I am very glad so great an Argument is in so Good a
hand: But since the Animadverter gave a late Discourse of mine a share of the
same Book, I think it may be proper, that somewhat in Justification of what I
writ, should accompany this Performance of yours: And because every Man is
naturally more the Master of his own Thoughts than another, though in other
respects he may be much Superior to him; I shall therefore give you a
particular account of what occurs to me, with relation to my Discourse on this
Subject, and shall leave it to you, either to Publish it with your Book, in the
same simplicity in which I am forced to Write at this distance from my Books
and Collections, or which will be much to the advantage of what I am to offer
to you, though it may put you to a little more trouble, I leave it to you to
draw such things out of this Paper as seem of the greatest weight, and mix them
with your own Composition. By this they will appear with those solid Characters
of true Judgment and Learning, by which all your Writings are distinguished.

I shall without any farther preamble, enter upon the matter that is before me;
and shall in the first place offer you some general Considerations, before I
come to what is more particular and Critical. The Foreign Writers of this
Author's Persuasion, have indeed in their way of Writing, set a pattern to the
world: Their Style has been Grave and Modest, free from Reflection or Levity.
They have pursued their Point with a Strain that deserves great Commendation.
But those, who have taken great liberties with them, have said, That this was
only an Artifice to soften the Horror that their Opinions were apt to give; and
to possess the world with such favorable thoughts of their Persons and
Doctrines, as might both remove Prejudices, and dispose all men to believe well
of those who seemed full of a Christian Spirit; and they have been apt to
suspect, that as their Numbers and their Hopes might increase, they would
change their Style, and raise their Spirits. This Writer has done what lay in
him, to justify those suspicions. It seems he thinks the Party is now so
strong, that the hard words of Nonsense, Contradiction, and Absurdity, may be
let fly liberally; though upon so grave a Subject, Modester Words would have
imported full as much, and would have had a much better appearance. He loves
also to divert himself as often as he can: I had in the general part of my
Discourse said, P. 90.
That since there may be Mysteries in the Divine Essence that are far beyond
all our Apprehensions; therefore if God lets out any hints of any such to us,
we are to receive them in such a plain sense as the words do naturally bear.
From hence he runs division upon the word hint; and studies to make the whole
appear ridiculous: Cons. p. 20, 21.
Though when I come to treat of the proofs that ought to be relied on in this
matter, I had laid this down for a ground, That in so sublime a Point, there
ought to be a greater fullness of express words, P. 109.
than for bare precepts of Morality, or more easily received Notions: And that
we ought not to suppose, that if God intended to Reveal any thing to us that
should pose our Understandings, he would only do it in hints, or in Words and
Expressions of doubtful Signification, and that therefore those who denied
Mysteries, had a right to demand full and Copious Proofs of them. The taking
notice of this would have been more sincere, but some of the mirth into which
hints led him, would have been spoiled by it. I mention no other Strains of
this sort, though he does often with the same Candor and Modesty endeavor to
make those he writes against look Ridiculous; which is pursued so flatly, that
one would think that the Civil and more Artificial Words with which he begins
his Considerations, Cons. p. 15.
were writ by another Pen, but were in the Management spoiled by his own.

To pass over his many indecent Reflections, especially when nothing of that
sort was used, to give a Provocation or Color for such returns; there is
another imputation of a much higher Nature, which deserves a severer
Expostulation. He frequently Reflects on the Aws, and other Biasses, and
Interests, Cons. p. 19, 23.
that he apprehends are the Considerations which engage men to persist in the
Persuasions which he writes against. This is, with a slight disguise, to say,
that because the Law would turn Men out of their Benefices, if they owned the
contrary Doctrine, therefore to save these, they not only Speak and Write, but
Worship God in Acts that are plainly against their Consciences. This is often
repeated, though perhaps more broadly in the other Considerations, than in
those that relate to my self. I reckon my self to be equally involved with my
Brethren in the Imputation; and will therefore Answer it with the solemnity
that so grave a matter requires: I call God to witness, how unjust, as well as
black, this Accusation is. If I did not sincerely Believe this Doctrine, I
should think it a horrid Prevaricating with God and man, to make Confessions
which I do not Believe, and to join in Acts of Worship which I think
Idolatrous. No man of Conscience can think himself clear of so Criminal an
Imputation by holding his Peace, when those Confessions of Faith are made; his
Standing up to them, nay, his continuing in the Communion of the Church that
uses them, is a plain avowing of them: And he must live and die in a state of
Damnation, who can make those Professions, and continue in such solemn Acts of
Worship, when all this is a lying both to God and man.

The blackest part of the charge of Idolatry which we lay on the Church of
Rome, is a mild thing compared to this, if true. Here is not only material, but
formal Idolatry committed in the highest Instances possible, if we Worship One
as the Great God, whom we believe to be but a mere Creature. A man who can upon
any consideration whatsoever, sell himself at this rate, can have neither
Conscience nor Religion; no Sincerity, nor true Piety: If this insinuation
carried only a Personal Reflection on our selves; though the injustice of it be
very great, yet it might be more easily passed over, if it were not for the
great advantage it gives to Atheistical and Profane Minds, who are inclined
enough to think that all the Professions of Religion which men make, are only
matters of Custom or of Interest: These are now fortified as much as the Credit
of this Writer can amount to. When some Persons of whom the world has not
otherwise had very ill impressions, are represented as over-awed and biased by
Interest, to go against their Conscience, and to lie daily to God, and deceive
the world by false Professions; no wonder that Religion it self should pass for
a Cheat, if things of this nature could be generally believed. Men who could
sell and stifle their Consciences at this rate, might as well deliver
themselves up to all Immoralities, and should make no scruple to go over to all
the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, where they might make the better
bargain, and be much less guilty than this Writer would make us seem to be.
God, who knows the sincerity of our Hearts and of our Professions, will I hope
both clear us from so base an Imputation, and forgive those who either lay it
on us themselves, or do too easily believe it upon the suggestions of others.

As in this, so in several other respects our Socinians seem to be serving the
Designs of the Atheists. This Writer is not contented to weaken the Credit of
the Books that are believed to be S. John's; Cons. 29.30.
but studies to make the whole Bible pass for a vitiated and corrupted Book;
and that these Corruptions are as ancient as Epiphanius's time; because that
Father speaks of some places that were found in the Copies that had not been
Corrected; upon which he concludes, That some have been Modelling the common
Bibles far above Twelve hundred years. This is the very Plea of the Mahometans,
who do not deny the bulk of the Christian Religion, which is acknowledged in
the Alcoran, they only say that the New Testament is much altered from what it
was at first, the Christians having put in and left out a great deal of it: Or
to use this Writers word, they having modelled it anew. If this be as true, as
it is boldly assorted, there is indeed very little regard due to that Volume,
about which he thinks there has been so much dishonest Dealing; and that for so
many Ages. The opening this matter, he thinks would raze the very Foundations
of Babylon; He might have rather said of the Christian Religion. For if the
Books that are the Text of it are so mangled, what certainty is there left
about any part of it? He does not seem to design this as a Service to the
Church of Rome; where the current Doctrine is, that no Submission is due to the
Scriptures, but as they are attested and explained by the Church; though the
great Pains he takes to excuse Transubstantiation, looks very kindly toward
them.

The true Consequence of this must be, that the Scripture may (perhaps) contain
many good things: But that we are sure of nothing concerning it; since it has
had so strange a sat upon it for so long a time. This is to be answered only
by attacking him as a downright Deist, by proving that we have the Scriptures
Genuinely conveyed down to us. The Attempts of a Mercenary Critic on this Head
ought not to pass upon us; who know how little regard he has to any Religion.
No doubt there was anciently great Care taken to compare the Manuscripts of the
Bible. In some Copies, Marginal Notes and Glosses might have been mixed with the
Text; and Copied out as a part of it: And that might be discovered by other
more Correct Copies. This is all that can be gathered from Epiphanius's words;
how much further soever an impious Critic may endeavor to stretch them. There
is no harm done by attacking our Translation; or by showing the various
Readings of some Copies, and endeavoring to establish the true Reading, from
ancient Copies or Quotations: but it strikes at the whole, to accuse all the
Copies now extant, as having been long vitiated by Fraud, and on Design.

I shall offer you but one other general Consideration, on that part of this
Writers Book, in which he thinks he has the greatest advantage given him
Because there have been some different Methods taken, in explaining, the
Trinity, Cons. p. 18.
in which some seem to have adhered so much to the Unity of the Deity, that
their Trinity seems unconceivable; while others have asserted such a Trinity as
seems inconsistent with Unity, he represents us all as so divided and broken,
that we agree in nothing, but in the maintaining of some Terms and Phrases
against them: in which we have very different Apprehensions from one another.

This seems to give Scandal to some good minds, as well as advantage to bad
ones: and therefore it ought to be well explained. There is then a great
difference to be made between that which is a part of our Religion, and those
Conceptions by which we may more distinctly set it forth, both to our selves
and others. To make this more sensible by Instances that are foreign to this
Matter: Many Protestants have different Apprehensions concerning the manner of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament; some asserting Consubstantiation, others a
real Presence, and others only a Figurative one: But all agreeing, That this is
a Sacred Institution of Christ's, accompanied with a Divine Virtue and
Blessing, to those who worthily receive it, by which the Benefits of the Death
of Christ are conveyed to them; they are all of the same Religion, who do agree
in this, though they have different Methods of apprehending and explaining the
matter. In like manner, as to the Decrees and Providence of God; some think
that all arises from the Antecedent and fixed Acts of God; whereas others
believe that a foresight of all future Events is to be considered as Antecedent
to those Acts: Upon these two Supposions, there seem to be very different Ideas
formed of the Power, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and Truth of God, and yet all
who confess a Providence, who adore it, submit to it, and depend upon it, are
of the same Religion; for in these consists Religion with Relation to
Providence. Religion being the Sense that we have of God and Divine Matters, by
which our minds go toward him, in Acts conform to it. Therefore all those who
do worthily receive the Sacrament, or sincerely acknowledge Providence, have
the same Religion upon these Heads, how different soever their Explanations of
them may be. So as to this great Point, all those who worship God as One, and
who do also worship the Son, and the Holy Ghost, together with the Father, as
God, have truly the same Religion, the same Acts of Piety and Adoration; though
some of them may have different ways of explaining either the Unity of the
Essence, or the Trinity of the Persons. If this is well weighed, I hope it will
put an end to the Insultings of some, and the Offenses of others.

I confess the less men go into Explanations, it will be the better, and the
less liable to censure: unless it be to offer such Illustrations, as rather
show how a thing may be explained, than affirm how it ought to be explained:
And therefore since God is unsearchable, and past finding out, to Perfection,
the best Method is to consider what is the clear meaning of these Texts of
Scripture, that declare any of those Depths to us, and to judge of them
according to the plain Importance of the Words, examining that by the Context,
the Style and Phraseology of the Scriptures, and by all the other Indications
by which we may find out their true meaning.

This leads me to the first Remark that I shall make on this Writer's
Considerations which fall on me, and on that part of my Discourse that relates
to Mysteries in General. He yields that there may be great Difficulties in some
things, of the truth of which we do not doubt; but then, says he, we are well
assured that these things are truly so: whereas some Ambiguous words of
Scripture cannot give us such an assurance concerning pretended Mysteries.
Cons. p. 19,
But all that I aimed at in this part of my Discourse was, that if any such
things should happen to be revealed to us in the Scriptures, that then we
should be bound to believe them, notwithstanding all Objections to the
contrary: as we believe the Objects of Sense and Reason, though we cannot answer
all those Difficulties that arise about them; for if we are once sure, that
such Books are come from God, and that they are faithfully handed down to us;
then, unless we will submit to an infallible Tribunal, we must trust our own
Reasons with the finding out of the true and plain meaning of them: When that
is found out, we are as much bound to believe it, as we can be to believe any
of the Objects of Sense: since this is laid down for a truth, contested by
none, that God is the God of Truth, and cannot lie. There lies no Exception
against any part of this Discourse; since it runs all upon the Supposition,
that the thing is clearly revealed in the Scripture; and that yet there lie as
unanswerable Difficulties against it, as against those Truths which our Senses
or Reasons do attest to us.

The excursion made by him to excuse Transubstantiation, Cons. p. 21, 22.
is not so much meant in favor of it, as in opposition to these (pretended)
Mysteries; but indeed it is so little to the purpose, that it seems to me not
to deserve to be examined. P. 94.
My words are not faithfully reported by him; for whereas I had said, That we
had the fullest evidence of sense against it, in an object of sense; he has
left out fullest, and then diverts himself by showing how the Evidence of Sense
may be mistaken; as in an Our that appears crooked in Water, with other
Instances of the like force; whereas all this had failed, if he had considered
the Importance of the word fullest, that is, an Evidence given with all the
Exactness, and after all the Corrections that Sense can lay before us. Sense it
self has led us into a whole Theory of Refractions, according to the Medium
through which we see an Object pass: What he says about Accidents, is too
slight to be remarked: We see the same Objects in the same manner after their
pretended Transubstantiation, that we saw before it; therefore either our
Senses are not infallible in their strictest application to their proper
Objects, or they are as true after Transubstantiation as they were before it.
The Inference after all that he would draw from what he says upon this Head,
shall be easily acknowledged by me; That where the Evidence of Reason is as
plain and full against an Object of Reason, as the Evidence of Sense is here
concerning an Object of Sense, that there we have very good ground to reject
it. If it were pretended that God were both One and Three in the same respect,
the Evidence of Reason against this is so clear, that I acknowledge that no
Authority whatsoever ought to induce us to believe it: P. 93.
But if it is revealed that the same Being is both One and Three, then since
the Notion of Unity is capable of such difference, since also that of diversity
is of the same largeness, and since the same Being may be One in one respect,
and More in another; this opposition between such Unity and such Trinity, is no
proper Object of Reason, nor can Reason give us a full Evidence, much less the
fullest against it.

I think there remains nothing to be considered on this Head, except the Scorn
with which he treats me; which I thank God I can very easily bear, and will
make no returns. He might after all, treat those Matters for which so many
Persons of Worth and Learning have so particular a Veneration, with more
Modesty. It seems he thought a Boldness of Expression, and a Scorn of his
Adversaries, would have some effect on ordinary Readers; which very probably it
may have; but better Judges will put another Construction upon it. I wish him a
better Temper, and so I leave him, to come to the main Argument on which I had
chiefly relied.

I will only say this for an Introduction to it, That the best Rule of
Criticism is to consider the whole Thread, Strain, and Phraseology of a Book,
and not to descant upon the various Significations that the Words themselves
taken severally may be capable of. The not considering this aright, seems to
have given the occasion to all the odd Comments of the Socinians.

The Name Jehovah was the peculiar designation that was appropriated to God in
the Old Dispensation. This the Seventy have rendered quite through their whole
Translation, (...); and through the whole New Testament this is the designation
that is given to Christ, sometimes with, and sometimes without the Article, and
other emphatical Words: From which, since the greatest part of the New
Testament was particularly and in the first place addressed to the Jews, great
numbers of whom Read the Old Testament at that time most commonly in Greek;
this conformity of Style seems very plainly to demonstrate, that Christ was the
true Jehovah; Cons. p. 23, 24.
or at least that the true Jehovah dwelt in him. In Answer to this, he denies
that Jehovah was the peculiar designation of God, and sets up an Argument for
this, of which I had made no use, and then he pretends to Answer it; for after
he has quarrelled with our Translation of a Verse in the Psalm, and has laid
aside some other Translations of those Words, he at lasts settles on this as
the true one, Ps. 83.18.
Thou whose name is Jehovah, art alone the most high over all the earth. I will
at present accept of this Translation; for it yields all that I pretend to,
That Jehovah was the known Name of God in that dispensation. I will not enter
into the Rabinical Niceties concerning it, as whether it signified the Essence
or Eternity of God, or whether it imported only God's being in Covenant with
them, and the truth and stability of his Promises: Whatsoever might be the
proper signification of the word Jehovah, it was at first delivered to Moses in
such a manner, that there was no need to go to any of the Psalms to find out
that it was the Name by which God made himself particularly known to the Jews.
That whole Discourse with Moses in Exodus, Ex. 3. from v. 2. to the end. v. 6,
7, 8, 10.
is spoken by God in the First Person: I am the God of thy Father, -- I have
seen, -- I am come down, -- I will send thee: Here is no intimation of a
Message carried by an Angel, but plainly the contrary: And when Moses asked how
he should answer them that should ask him what was his Name; God said unto him,
v. 13, 14, 15.
I am that I am. These words come very near the formation of the word Jehovah;
and it is plain by what is said Three Chapters after that, I am the Lord, or
Jehovah; Ex. 6.2, 3.
and I appeared unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the Name of God
Almighty; but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them. It is clear, I say,
that by that first Apparition to Moses, the Name Jehovah was then understood:
And it is expressly said, This is my name for ever, this is my memorial
throughout all generations. To all this he may object, That in the beginning of
that Vision it is said, Ex. 3.2.
that an Angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in a flame of fire: From which it
may be inferred, That all that is set down there, was said by this Angel, who
speaks in the Name of God, and assumes his Person as being sent by him; and
that therefore this Name may be given to any one who speaks in the Name of God.
But that Vision of the Angel will import no more, but that an Angel appeared in
the Fire; and by that Moses was led to go toward the Bush, and then God
himself did immediately speak. This agrees with the whole Context, and puts no
force on any part of it: Whereas it is a very violent strain to make an Angel
thus speak as if he were the Great God, without any Intimation given that he
only spoke in his Name. This agrees with that general Remark of the Jewish
Writers, who observe that when ever the Sheckinah appeared, Angels Accompanied
it. This a grees also with what is said often in the New Testament, 7 Acts 38.
3 Gal. 19. 2 Heb. 2.
that the Law was given by Angels, though it is said as plain as words can make
a thing, that God himself appeared; that is, that by an immediate Act of his
own Power, he made all those Glorious Representations to be seen, and the Voice
of the Ten Commandments to be heard. To this also belong those words of Christ
concerning his Appearing at the last Day, In his own glory; 16 Mat. 27. 25 Mat.
31. 8 Mark 38. 9 Luke 26. 13 Mat. 41. 24 Mat. 31. 1 Timothy 5.21. Jer. 33.16.
in his Father's glory; and in the glory of his Angels: Together with all that
is said of Angels Appearing with him at the final Judgment: The Charge given to
St. Paul, Before God, the Lord Jesus, and the elect Angels, does also agree
with this. So that the Angel that first appeared to Moses, was only one of the
Attendants on this Sheckinah, or Manifestation of God himself. Any Name that is
given to a Place, into the composition of which Jehovah enters, such as Jehovah
Isidkenu given to Jerusalem, is too slight a thing to be stood upon. It is
therefore plain, that Jehovah was a Name peculiarly appropriated to God in the
Old Testament, which the Seventy do always render (...). So since Christ is all
through the New Testament called by the same Name, this Argument has great
force; nor is it shaken by the giving the term (...) as a common compellation
to other Persons; Cons. p. 24.
as we say Sir, or Lord; which, as is not to be denied, occurs frequently in
the New Testament; but the use of it in a particular discourse, where it is
restricted to that Person, cannot be compared to a constant Style of calling
Christ simply, and without limitation, Lord, the Lord, my Lord, or our Lord, as
the designation that belonged properly to him.

Soon after the New Testament was written, Suct. in Dom.
Domitian would be called Dominus simply. Now this was looked on as a strain of
Insolence beyond what the former Emperors had assumed: for though the word
Dominus, as applied to some particular thing, implied no more, but that such a
thing belonged to such a Person; yet the term Dominus without a restriction,
imported that all the Romans were his Slaves, and that he was the Master of all
their Properties. The same is to be applied to the use of the word (...): In a
limited sense it signifies not much; but in so large and so general a sense, it
must be understood to be equivalent to the common use of that word in the
Septuagint Translation. St. Paul rejects their being called the servants of men
with a just indignation: And yet if Christ is but a Man, and at the same time
the Lord of all, he was no better than the servant of a man. 1 Gal. 10.
So I think this Argument is not weakened by any thing that this Writer has
offered against it.

I had brought a confirmation of it from the Prophecy of Haggai, of filling the
second temple with glory: Cons. p. 24, 25.
Nothing was built upon the addition of his glory; so that this Writer might
have concluded, that there was no design, but only the want of exactness in
using it. Filling with glory, was that upon which the force of this Argument
was laid. I shall not enlarge here to show, that by Glory in the Old Testament,
the Sheckinah is generally to be understood. St. Paul thought so; for in one
place reckoning up the Privileges of the Jews, he says theirs is the Glory,
and the Covenants; 9 Romans 4. 9 Heb. 5.
and in another place describing the Holiest of all, he speaks of the Cherubims
of glory. So that by Glory with relation to the Temple, that immediate
Manifestation of God, could only be meant: This is also confirmed from the word
Fill, which cannot be applied to any building or decoration, but must be meant
of somewhat that was to be shed abroad in the Temple. All this will appear very
plain if we consider the last words of the Book of Exodus, 40 Ex. 34.
where this Phrase is first used. The Tabernacle was set up with every thing
relating to it, according to the Directions that God had given to Moses; and
then it is said, that a Cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the
glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle: which is again repeated in the next
Verse. These words are also repeated when the History of the Dedication of
Solomon's Temple is given; it is said, That the cloud filled the house of the
Lord; and in the next Verse it is repeated, 1 Kings. 8.10, 11. 2 Hag. 6, 7, 8,
9.
That the glory of the Lord had filled the house. This gives the true key to
the understanding of Haggai's Prophecy, which must be explained according to
the Mosaic Phrase: This gives the key likewise to understand those words of the
fullness of the Godhead that dwelt bodily in Christ, 2 Col. 9. 1 John 16.
and of our receiving of his fullness. But to apply that Prophecy, as this
Writer does, to the rebuilding the Temple by Herod, agrees no ways with the
words that accompany it, on which I had chiefly built; of his giving peace in
that place, and of his shaking the Heavens, and the earth, and all Nations: To
that he has not thought fit to make any sort of Answer; and yet either these
are only pompous words that signify nothing, or they must signify somewhat
beyond any thing that can be ascribed to what Herod did. That which is the only
key by which we can be led into the sense of those words, I mean the words of
Exodus and Kings, does in no sort belong to it: Whereas the Prophecy was
literally accomplished by Christ's coming into the Mountain of the House, if
the Sheckinab lodged in him in a more eminent manner than it had done in
Solomon's Temple. So, I think, no part of this Argument is shaken.

To this I shall add another remark, which in some sort belongs to this matter,
though in his Book it stands at some distance from that which I am now upon. He
insults much upon the advantage he thinks he has, because in a place of the
Romans, it is in our Bibles, 9 Romans 5.
God blessed for ever; whereas he thinks God is not a part of the Text. Cons.
p. 29.
I will not at present enter upon the discussion of that, but shall only
observe, that the force of the Argument from that place, lies chiefly upon the
word, blessed for ever. After the Jews began to think that the Name Jehovah was
so Sacred, that it was not to be read, instead of it they used this
Circumlocution, the Holy, and the Blessed, sometimes both together, sometimes
the one, and sometimes the other. 26 Mat. 63. 14 Mark 61.
This was a practice in use in our Savior's time: One of the Evangelists says,
that the High Priest asked, If Christ was the Son of God; the other reports it,
that he asked if he was the Son of the blessed: And St. Paul in that same
Epistle speaking of the Creator, adds Blessed for ever; a form of speech that
among them was equivalent to Jehovah; and therefore when he says the same of
Christ, it was a customary form of Speech, importing that he was Jehovah. So
whether the word God was in the Original Text, or not, the place is equally
strong to this purpose.

The next Argument that I insisted on, From p. 121.
was the Worship that is paid to Christ in the New Testament; which as it has
in it self great force, so it seemed to have the more weight upon this account,
because it must be confessed, that the Jews who could not be unacquainted with
the Worship of the Christians, never Objected that to them, if we believe the
Apostles to have writ sincerely: They mention their other Prejudices, and
Answer them, but say nothing of this: Which shows, that if they are allowed to
be candid Writers, there was no such prejudice then set on foot. And yet if
Christ was Worshipped in the Arian, or Socinian Hypothesis, this was so
contrary to the fundamental Notions of the Jews at that time, that we cannot
imagine that they could pass it over, who were concerned on so many accounts to
blacken the Christian Religion, and to stop its progress: Therefore there being
no other Notion in which this Worship could give them no Offense, but that of
the Godheads dwelling bodily in him; and since they were not offended at it, 2
Coll. 9.
we cannot conceive that there was then any other Idea of this matter, but
this, which was both suitable to their Doctrines, and to the Practice of their
Ancestors during the First Temple.

This seems to be such a Moral Argument, as goes farther to satisfy a man's
mind, than even stricter proofs will do: As some Presumptions do convince men
more effectually than the most positive Evidence given by Witnesses. To all
this he has thought fit to say nothing but in these words; There are abundance
of exceptionable things in that Discourse, Cons. p. 26
to which I have neither leisure nor inclination to Reply, as some others
(perhaps) would. A man who is at leisure to Write against any Discourse, should
give himself the leisure to consider the most important things that are in it,
especially if they seem to be New. As for his inclinations, I will not be so
severe as to judge of them; though what he has said to question the Authority
of the New Testament, as we now have it, gives a handle to a very heavy
suspicion, That he thought this was not to be answered, but by a more explicit
attack made upon the whole New Testament, than he thought fit to adventure upon
at present.

He goes on alleging some instances where God and Creatures seem to be mixed
in the same Acts and Expressions: Ibid. 1 Chronicles. 29.20. 1 Timothy 5.21. 1 Samuel
12.18. 14 Ex. 31.
The People worshipped the Lord and the King. St. Paul is adjured before God,
Christ, and the elect Angels. The people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel;
and they believed the Lord and Moses. From which he infers, That both Kings and
Prophets were Worshipped and Believed without any Idolatry. If we had no other
warrants for the Worship of Jesus Christ, but such general Words, I should
easily acknowledge that there were no great force in them: The falling down to
him prostrate, and Worshipping him while he was here on Earth, and the
Believing what he then said, will not infer Adoration: But the Prayers Offered
up to him now that he is in Heaven, the command of honoring the Son, even as
the Father is honored; the Worship that Angels and Saints in Heaven Offer to
him, are such evident. Characters of Divine Honor, that we have lost all the
Notions of Idolatry, if these things can be offered to a Creature. Ibid.
This Writer would indeed reduce all this to as narrow a point as can be; as if
Christ did only in the Virtue of his Death, offer up on our behalf a general
Intercession; for he doubts whether there is any special Intercession made for
us or not. The Story of St. Paul's Conversion is plainly contrary to this: 9
Acts 5.17. 2 Cor. 12, 8, 9.
St. Paul Praying to him when he was in his Temptation by the Messenger of
Satan, and the Answer he obtained, do very clearly show Christ's Immediate
Hearing and Answering of Prayer; which is urged by Socinus himself with great
force against those who did not Worship the Lord Jesus. St. Stephen died
Worshipping him, and Praying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and, Lord lay not
this to their charge. 7 Acts 59, 60.
These are such express Authorities of a Spiritual Worship, which do so fully
explain the meaning of that general Rule, That all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father; that the Invocating and Worshipping of Christ
is as fully set forth in the New Testament, as any one part of the Christian
Religion whatsoever. Invocation must import both Omniscience, and Omnipresence,
as well as Omnipotency. We call on him as supposing that he is near us, that he
hears us, and both will and can help us. Now this Writer had best consider how
all this can be offered to a mere Creature. The Honor or Worship that we give
to the Father, is the acknowledging his Infinite Perfections, together with the
tender of our Homage to him. This cannot be offered to a Creature, without
manifest Impiety: Nor can any such Worship become ever the matter of a Divine
Precept; because there is an essential Incongruity between these Acts and a
created Object; and by consequence, there is an essential Immorality in them.
Now that all Idolatry should be so severely forbid in the New Testament, and
yet so grossly practiced in it, must be indeed a very strong Argument against
the whole Christian Religion, if Christ was a mere Creature, which cannot be
excused by any softenings whatsoever.

But since this is a Consideration so much insisted upon, it may be proper to
open it with its utmost force: When the New Testament was writ, there were Four
sorts of men that could only be considered by the Penmen of it; 1 st. The Jews,
to whom it was to be offered in the first place. They were strongly possessed
against all the appearances of Idolatry; and had never Prayed to Moses nor
Elijah, the Chief of their Prophets. 2 dly. The Gentiles, they were abandoned
to all the several sorts of Idolatry, from all which they were to be reclaimed,
and to be taught to Serve and Worship none but the Living God. 3 dly. The false
Christians, that began early to corrupt Christianity, and to suit it with
Judaism and Paganism: They set themselves against the Apostles, and studied to
raise their own Credit, by derogating from theirs. The 4 th. were the true
Christians, who were generally weak and ignorant, who needed Milk, and were not
capable of hard or sublime things. With respect to all these, we ought to
believe that such a Point, as at first view might offend the Jews, and harden
the Gentiles in their Idolatry; as might give advantage to false Christians,
and be a stumbling block to the true ones, was to be plainly and simply
delivered; not in pompous expressions, or figures that might seem to import
more than was meant by them; but in measured and severe words. The nature of
man carries him too easily to Idolatry; so that this inclination was to be
resisted and not complied with; and yet St. John begins his Gospel with a
solemn set of Phrases, that are as it were the Frontispiece and Introduction to
it: which if the Exposition of these men is to be admitted, must be only a
lofty saying of ordinary matter in very high-flown Expressions. Such likewise
must be the Second Chapter to the Philippians, with a great deal more of the
same strain. If it was meant by all this to worship Christ as the true Jehovah,
that is, as having the Eternal Word, and the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in
him, then the matter was properly expressed, and suitably to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Old Testament, and was delivered in a Phrasiology agreeing with
it.

But if a new Doctrine was introduced concerning a man that was made a God,
that was so called, and was to be worshipped as such, here was such a
stumbling block laid in men's way, and so little care taken either to restrain
those Excesses into which Humane Nature is apt to run, or to explain the
Scruples and Difficulties that must naturally arise upon it; that it seems to
be scarce conceivable how any can entertain this, and yet retain any value for
that Religion; I must confess I cannot; and it is so natural for a man to judge
of others by himself, that I do not think others do it, or indeed can do it.

I mentioned some other passages of the New Testament, and I did but mention
them, because others have examined them so Critically, that nothing was left
for me to say upon them. But to all these this Writer opposes a very specious
thing; Cons. p. 29.
he says there is not one of all those passages, but some one or other of the
most Learned Assertors of the Trinity, has Translated or Interpreted them to
another sense: Upon which he takes occasion, according to the Modesty of his
Style, to reproach me for my Confidence; he thinks, that assuredly I will be
ashamed of such Rhetorications. It is certain, that when a great many passages
look all one way, though every one of them singly might not come up to a full
proof; yet the combination of them all shows such a Phraseology running through
the Scriptures, that the conjunction of them all together, gives a much fuller
satisfaction to the mind, than any one of them, or indeed all of them taken
severally could do: Many circumstances about a fact concurring, grow up to a
proof; which any one, or indeed all of them, in their own nature, could not
amount to: And therefore if such a Style runs through the Scriptures, that at
every step a man feels himself straightened, and that he must disintangle himself
by the Subtilties of Criticism, and these often very much forced; a Book full
of such Passages, may be called a Book of Riddles, darkly writ to puzzle
ordinary Readers: But it will be hard to maintain a Reverence for such
Writings, to esteem them Inspired by God, and delivered to plain and simple
Readers as a Lamp, or Light for their Instruction, that by them the man of God
may be made perfect. The concurrence of those Passages, the Thread of them, and
the Style of the whole, has a force beyond what is in every one of them apart.
If therefore all Critics have not been equally certain of the force of every
one of them, this will not weaken the Argument from them all together.

Critics are like other men, apt to overvalue their own Notions, and to affect
singularities; some to raise the strength of those Arguments which seem
clearest to them, may be willing to make all others look the weaker; others may
study to lessen the Credit of such Writers, against whom they may have, on
other accounts, some secret resentments; and so they may undermine those
Arguments on which they had chiefly built. The first great Critic that begun
the weakening of most of the Arguments drawn from Texts of Scripture on this
Head, I mean Erasmus, did not understand the Hebrew so well as he did the
Greek; so that he considering the Greek Phraseology more than that which had
arisen from the Hebrew and Siriack, might often mistake. Therefore the
diversities among Critics concerning particular places, does not weaken the
force of those Inferences that are drawn from them; much less the Evidence that
arises out of the whole, when laid all together.

Ibid.
He thinks I would have done a Generous thing if I had acquainted the English
Reader with the doubtfulness of that passage in St. John' s Epistle, of the
Three that bear witness in heaven. I cannot oblige any man to read all that I
have writ, and so do not charge him for not doing it: I have done that more
fully than any that I yet know of, and that in a Book, which of all those that
I have yet writ, was the most universally read by the most different sorts of
People: Nor has my doing that so copiously, and in a Book of such a nature,
escaped some severe, but unjust censures. I will not lie for God, nor suppress a
truth that may become an honest man to own.

Thus I have gone over all that seemed material, and to need explanation, on
the first Head concerning the Divinity of the Son of God. I must only explain
one thing, with which he concludes those his Considerations. I had Illustrated
this matter by the indwelling of the Cloud of Glory, and had explained from
that, Cons. p. 32.
the fullness of the Godheads dwelling bodily in Christ: From thence he fancies
this to be Nestorius's Doctrine, and that it is also theirs, who own That God
(by his Spirit or Energy) was in the Lord Christ in a very especial and
powerful manner: and so he pretends that they submit to my Doctrine. I can
assure him, that both the spirit with which he writes, and the Doctrines which
he espouses, are such, that I reckon this the heaviest of all the Imputations
that he has laid on me; but it is as just and true as the rest are. We do not
certainly know what Nestorius's Doctrine was, if it was no more than that he
did not allow the term of the Mother of God to be due to the Blessed Virgin, as
some pretend; and that all that was further charged on him, was only a
consequence drawn from that; this was no heinous thing: But whatever Nestorius
himself might be, the Opinion charged on him, and Condemned by the Church, was,
That the eternal word in Christ, was only of the nature of an assisting Power,
like the Spirit of Prophecy in the Prophets; but that it was not so united to
him, as to make One Person with his Human Nature. In this sense I have fully
condemned that Doctrine; for as the Soul is united to the Body, and dwells in
it, in another manner than a man dwells in a House; and as the Soul actuates
the Body, in another manner than a man actuates such Tools as he works by; so
the Union of the Human and Divine Nature in Christ is represented in Scripture
as the compounding one Person, as much as in other men the Union of Soul and
Body makes one Man.

If he submits to this Doctrine, I shall be glad of it; for then he submits to
a Doctrine which, I think, is very expressly Revealed in Scripture: But for any
Indwelling, like that of the Spirit of Prophecy, even in the eminentest degrees
imaginable, the Epistle to the Hebrews does so plainly carry this so much
higher, 3 Heb. 3, 4, 5, 6.
to a thing of quite another nature; and states such an opposition between
Christ and all Prophets, even Moses himself, like that of a Son and a Servant,
that I think the reading that with due attention, will soon satisfy a man, that
this Indwelling is a vital one, like that of the Souls dwelling in the Body,
and not an assisting one, like Inspiration, or the gift of Tongues, or of
Miracles.

When Christ Commanded all to be Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; 28 Mat. 19.
he plainly mentioned Three: If therefore I, to adhere to Scripture terms, had
avoided the frequent use of any other word but the Three, I thought how much
soever this might offend others, Cons. p. 17, 32.
who might apprehend that I seemed to avoid mentioning of Trinity, or Persons
(which yet I showed flowed from no dislike of those Words, but merely that I
might stick more exactly to Scripture-terms) yet I had no reason to think that
men of the other side would have found such fault with this. Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are the Three of whom I Discourse; so instead of repeating these
words at every time, I shortened it by saying the Blessed Three: Now it is a
strain particular to this Writer to enlarge on this.

I go now to the second Head, concerning the Death of Christ: Here this Writer
affirms that, which if it flows from Ignorance, as in Charity to him I hope it
does, then certainly he ought not to have Writ concerning a matter, to the
History of which he was so great a stranger. He says, that the Doctrine which I
propose concerning the Propitiation by the Death of Christ, as an Expiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, Cons. p. 31.
has been the very Doctrine of the Socinians, which they have owned from the
beginning in all their Books. To seem to justify this, he sets down some of my
words, leaving out, with his usual candor, those that were most Critical; for
whereas I had said, That Christ had suffered on our account and in our stead;
he leaves out these last words, and in our stead; which are the very words on
which the Controversy turns, as is well known to those who have studied it to
any degree; the turn being whether Christ died Nostro bono, or Nostro loco: And
whereas I had added, that upon the account of Christ's Death, God offered the
world the Pardon of Sin; he leaves out that which was most Critical here, upon
the account of it; nor does he mention that with which I concluded the Period;
And He (God) will have us in all our Prayers for Pardon, or other Favors,
claim them through that Death, and owe them to it. Such an unfaithful recital
of my words, gives no advantageous Character of the rest.

It is indeed a strange degree of assurance to make us believe, that the
Socinians have at all times owned this Doctrine; since not only all their first
Writers denied it, and the Racovian Catechism is express to the contrary; but
after Grotius had managed the Controversy merely in order to the asserting the
Expiatory Virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, without insisting on the
Metaphysical Notions which had been brought into it; yet Crellius not satisfied
with this, endeavored to Answer that whole Book, and adhered still to the
first Notions of Socinus. I do not deny, but that since that time some of their
Followers have come off from them, and have acknowledged the Expiatory Virtue
of that Sacrifice: Therefore though I have no mind to increase the number of
Controversies; and am very glad when any do forsake their Errors, especially
such heinous ones; yet it is a peculiar strain of confidence to say, That this
was their Doctrine from the beginning.

As for the Niceties with which the Primitive Church was not acquainted, In
lib. cur Deus homo.
and which were not started before Anselm's time in the end of the XI th.
Century, concerning the Antecedent necessity of a Satisfaction, and the
Subtleties that the Schoolmen did afterward devise concerning Equivalents; I
do not think they belong to this matter, as it stands Revealed to us in the
Scriptures, and therefore I did not insist on them. It is no part of the
Doctrine of our Church; and Dr. Outram's Learned Performance on this Subject,
has been so universally applauded and acquiesced in, that I thought all men
were satisfied from thence, what is the Doctrine generally received among us.
Our Articles are the only standard to judge of our Doctrine, as far as they go;
but they have determined nothing in this matter, but rest in the general
Notions of Expiation and of Reconciling us to God.

I have now done with all that part of the late Book which falls to my share;
and have made those Explanations and Reflections upon it, that seemed
necessary. I have said this once for all, and shall no more return to it, upon
any new provocation whatsoever: Such crude and bold Attempts, are oftener to be
neglected than Answered. These men are at best the Instruments of the Deists,
who design by their means to weaken the Credit of the Christian Religion, and
of those Books that are the standards of it. I hope they do not know whose work
they are doing, nor what ends they are serving. I pray God give them a better
discerning, and more serious Tempers. I wish you may be happily successful in
your Attempts to undeceive them, as well as in all your other Labors, in which
you lay out your Time and Studies so worthily for the Service of the Church;
for which great is your reward in heaven. I pray God to Bless and prosper you
in them; and am with a very particular esteem,

Reverend Sir, Your Affectionate Brother, and most humble Servant, GI. SARUM.
Westminster, 2 Feb. 1693.
THE CONTENTS.
Of the Authority of St. John's Writings. Page 3 An Answer to the Objections of
our Author's Ancient Unitarians, against the Authority of St. John's Writings,
particularly the Gospel and the Revelation. 6 Of the Name Unitarians. 13 Of
Ebion and Cerinthus. 13, 18 Of the Alogi in Epiphanius. 14 Of the Occasion of
St. John's writing his Gospel. 15 Of Socinus's Exposition of the Beginning of
St. John's Gospel. 21 The Unreasonableness and Novelty of that Exposition. 25
The Archbishop's Exposition of Hebr. 1.1. and Col. 1.16. vindicated. 33 Of the
Pre-existence of our Savior. 39 Of Christ's coming down from Heaven; and the
modern Socinian Exposition of Christ's personal Ascent into Heaven before his
Ministry. ibid. A Vindication of his Grace's Exposition of John 17.5. John
8.58. Revel. 1.8. and John 1.1. 47 Of the Difficulties and Absurdities in the
Socinian Hypothesis. 53 Of the Incarnation of our Savior. 57 Of the Argument
for the Incarnation, taken from the Personal Union of Soul and Body. ibid. Of
the Humility of our Savior in his Incarnation, and of the fullness of time for
it. 60 A Vindication of the Bishop of Worcester's Sermon. 63 Of Things
Incomprehensible. 64 Of the Author's Self-contradiction. ibid. Of God's
Eternity, and his being of Himself, and possessing all at once. 68 Several
Queries about God's possessing all at once, answered. 70 Socinian Mysteries. 73
The Bishop of Sarum's Letter to J.W. Of the Socinian way of managing
Controversies. 81 Of this Author's way of Calumniating. 83 His Charge of the
Corruptions in the Sacred Text considered. 84 Of the different Opinions
concerning the Trinity; and that the Trinitarians may notwithstanding be said
to be of the same Religion. 87 The Name Jehovah peculiarly appropriated to God,
and yet given to our Savior. 89 Of the Name Lord; and of the Shechinah among
the Jews. 91 Haggai a. 6, 7. and Romans 9.5. explained and vindicated. ibid. Of
the Worship given to our Savior. 92 Of some modern Critics. 97 Of Nestorius's
Doctrine. 99 Of the End for which Christ died. 100
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
MEmoirs of the most Reverend THOMAS CRANMER, Archbishop of Canterbury. In
Three Books Collected chiefly from Records, Registers, Authentic Letters, and
other Original Manuscripts. By John Strype, M. A. Fol. 1694.

Dr. John Conant's Sermons. Published by Dr. Williams. 1693. 8 vo.

Of the Government of the Thoughts. By Geo. Tully, Sub-dean of York. The Second
Edition. 8 vo. 1694.

A Commentary on the First Book of Moses called Genesis. By Simon Lord Bishop
of Ely. 4 to. 1695.

The History of the Troubles and Trial of the most Reverend WILLIAM LAUD, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; wrote by himself during his Imprisonment in the
Tower. To which is prefixed, the Diary of his own Life faithfully and entirely
published from the Original Copy; and subjoyned a Supplement to the preceding
History; The Archbishop's Last Will; His large Answer to the Lord Says Speech
concerning Liturgies; His Annual Accounts of his Province delivered to the
King, and some other things relating to the History. Published by Henry
Wharton, Chaplain to Archbishop Sancroft, and by his Grace's Command. Folio.

Bishop of Sarum's Sermon at the Funeral of Archbishops Tillotson 1694.

-- His Sermon preached before the King at St. James's Chapel on the 10th of
February, 1694/5 being the first Sunday in Lent, on 2 Cor. 6.1.

The Possibility, Expediency, and Necessity of Divine Revelation. A Sermon
preached at St. Martins in the Fields, January 7. 1694. at the beginning of the
Lecture for the ensuing Year founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire;. By
John Williams, D. D. (The Second Sermon is in the Press).

A Sermon of Holy Resolution, preached before the King at Kensington, December
30. 1694. By his Grace Thomas, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Elect.

ADVERTISEMENT. Feb. 25. 1694/5.
THere will be Published several Sermons and Discourses of the most Reverend
Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by Order of his
Administratrix; faithfully Transcribed from his own Papers, by Dr. Ralph
Barker, Chaplain to his Grace; which are disposed of to Richard Chiswell, and
his Assignees. If any Person pretend to publish any other, except those already
Printed, they are to be looked upon as Spurions and False.

The first that will be published, are his Sermons of Sincerity and Constancy
in the Faith and Profession of the True Religion. Which are in the Press, and
will be finished in Easter Term next.


