MNEMONICA; OR, THE Art of Memory, Drained out of the pure FOUNTAINS OF ART and
NATVRE. Digested into Three Books.

ALSO, A Physical TREATISE of cherishing Natural Memory; diligently collected
out of diverse Learned Men's WRITINGS.

By John Willis Batchelour in Divinity.

Omne bonum Dei donum.

Ut unaquaeque ars nobilissima ac divinissima fuit; ita ad mortalium
cognitionem tardissime pervenit.

Cardanus. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Leonard Sowersby, at the
Turn-stile, near New Market, in Lincoln's Inn fields, 1661.

To the Honorable William Pierrepont, Esquire
Honored Sir,
IF Lines were capable of Humane affections, these would blush, they are so
mean a present to so Illustrious and person; at least conscious of their
Masters presumption, they would condole his unhappiness, that had not greater
ability to accommodate some more worthy Fabric to so fair a Frontispiece. The
Original compiled by a learned hand, among some vulgar things and trifles,
contains very excellent and profitable matter; I hope it has not lost its
utility (though Grace) in English.

Honored Sir, I fear, good intentions are no sufficient Plea for temerous
Enterprises, especially the Undertaker being privy to his own imperfections;
Therefore like a Criminal acknowledging my vanity in ambitiously affecting
things above my Sphere, I humbly re-implore your Honors pardon and admittance
to be what I was before,

Your Honors most humble Servant Leonard Sowersby.

THE PREFACE.
THough I hope Courteous Reader, this my Art of Memory is so perfect and
complete in all parts, that it will outlive the envy of Detractors; yet seeing
like a newborn Infant, it does now first present it self to the world, let me
in a word or two demonstrate how agreeable this Art is, both to Reason, and the
principles of Nature, that so I may recall, what the prejudice of many has
long proscribed. I do very well understand the whole Controversy about this
Art, is principally referred to that part which is called Local: Therefore
wholly omitting the other helps of Memory, described in the first and second
parts of this Book, I will only insist upon defense of this which is handled
in the third Book, and will prove by most evident reasons, it does not so much
vary from Art and natural use of Memory, as ignorant persons prate.

First I acknowledge and willingly confess, that Writing is the surest Guardian
of memorable things, far excelling all other Art of Memory; but a man cannot
always commit to writing every thing he desires to remember, and must
therefore necessarily sometimes make use of other helps: As writing Memorandums
is worthily esteemed the best way of Remembering; so that may rightly challenge
the next place, which bears greatest affinity thereto. Now if men deal
impartially, they will easily find, that the Art of Memory by Places and Idea's
or Images, does very nearly resemble Writing. The Places in artificial Memory,
are as it were Leaves; the Idea's, Letters; the distribution of them in Places
represents Writing; lastly, the repetition of them, Reading: which thing
Cicero in his Partitions, but more copiously in his second Book De Oratore,
does elegantly declare.

Secondly, experience teaches, that Places and Idea's do much conduce to
faithful remembrance of things; particularly as to Places, their usefulness
does hence appear, that if a Traveller observe any remarkable thing in a
cross-way, or some noted place of his journey, returning the same way, he does
not only remember the place, but calls to mind what soever he had seen
there, though at present removed. The same thing often happens in Repetition
of Idea's; for the mind as it were walking through the same Places, in which
formerly it had disposed Idea's, and carefully marshalled them in order, with
purpose of perusal, by occasion of the Places, is much assisted in recalling
Idea's to mind there placed: So Printers by Distrribution of their Letters into
several Boxes, do without any hesitation fetch them thence upon occasion,
extending hands to the right Box. The history of Simonides of Chios is very
pertinent to this purpose, who being at Supper among many other Guests, at a
wealthy man's house named Scope, was acquainted two young men attended at the
door to speak with him; Simonides arising from the Table went to them; whiles
he was at the door, the Guests were every one slain by a sudden fall of the
chamber, whereby their bodies were so bruised and defaced that they could not
be distinguished one from another when their friends came to bury them; but
Simonides bearing well in mind in what place each of them was seated, pointed
out the bodies of them all, and was hereby first admonished, that Places and
order might be very advantageous to quicken Memory. He also left to posterity
some Precepts of the Art of Memory, which are all since drowned in the deep
gulf of Antiquity. Another singular example correspondent in some sort to
this, is the Election of Darius to the Persian Monarchy; Cambyses being dead
(as says Herodotus) it was concluded among the seven Persian Princes, next
morning to take horse together, and to ride forth of the City, unanimously
agreeing the chief sovereignty, without any further contest, should reside in
him whose Horse first neighed. Darius one of the seven, through the craft of
his Groom Oebares, obtained the Supremacy. Oebares was a subtle wily fellow,
to whom Darius discovered the whole business, and warned him to use all
diligence to prevent his Competitors: Oebares desired him to take no care, for
he would effectuate his so much desired design: Before night Oebares led forth
a Mare, chiefly affected by Darius his Horse, and tied her in the highway,
through which the Princes were to ride next morning; afterward he brought forth
Darius his Horse, and leaving him at liberty, suffered him to cover the mare.
At Sunrising the seven Princes of Persia mounted together, and rode forth of
the City; when they came to the place where Oebares had tied the Mare the night
before; immediately Darius his horse began to neigh, and presently the other
Princes, as hearing some divine Oracle, alighted, and saluted him King. This
example, if I am not deceived, does sufficiently evince the utility of Places
to rouse up Memory, seeing even bruit beasts remember things placed by the
place.

Further, that Memory is quickened by Idea's is thus manifest: No man is
ignorant, that Memory is stronger conversant about sensible things then about
insensible; and of sensible things, those which are visible make deepest
impression; therefore things heard are more firmly retained in Memory, then
those which are barely conceived in mind, and things seen better then those
which are heard, according to the Poet:

Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus,
Et quae ipse sibi tradit spectator.
Things heard in mind no such impression make,
As those whereof our faithful eyes partake,
And whereof we our selves spectators are.
For this cause Physicians persuade Students of Physic, not only to read over
the works of Hippocrtes, Galen and other most skilful Physicians, Philosophers,
Anatomists Herbarists, and to frequent public Lectures, but also to be present
at Dissections, and to gather Herbs with their own hands, that they may never
after forget, what their eyes have once seen. I persuade the same thing in this
Book; form a lively Idea of that thing which you desire to remember with an
imagination so strong, as if you did see it indeed: For even as an ember almost
dead, is resuscitated by application of a Match, and breaks forth into a
flame; So a Notion languishing of it self, by mental conspection of its Idea,
is vivified, and reassumeth strength. Seeing all understanding is deduced from
external sense, it does consequently follow, that intelligible things reduced
to sensible, will sooner inform the understanding. Hence the Holy Ghost
submitting himself to humane capacity, does oftentimes in Scripture attribute
corporeal members and external senses to God himself, and to invisible
Spirits; Because we do better understand the nature of such things veiled in
that manner with sensible things. I omit the Imaginative faculty is so called
of framing Idea's or Images in the Brain; As also that Intellect is said to be
derived ab interna lectione Idearum, from internal election of Idea's retained
in Memory. Memory, so far as it is strictly taken for the common receptacle of
Memorandums, is merely passive, and does retain and conserve imaginary Notions,
transmitted thereunto by the understanding, in the same manner as Paper
preserves words written therein. As it is the office of a Scribe, not of
Paper, to write, and read things written; so to dispose Idea's in Memory, and
aptlp to use them, is the work of Understanding, not of Memory. Why are there
any memorable monuments extant, as it were truly visible Idea's, by which the
memory of things past are committed to posterity? Thus the Funeral Pile of
Semiramis, and the Columns of Hercules have preserved the memory of them both
in succeeding ages. Thus in sacred story we read that twelve Stones were reared
in the River Jordan for a lasting monument of the Israelites passage, Josh.
4.9. Also that a great stone was placed under an Oak, in memory of the peoples
Covenant with God, Josh. 24.27. Why else were Sacraments ordained by God, but
as visible Idea's of invisible things, whereby he admonishes us, too forgetful
of his benesits? Lastly it is a common thing, even amongst illiterate and
ignorant men, to remember things by Idea's. One being to keep in mind the name
of a certain man called, Fisher, to imprint this name deeper in memory,
thinks of a Fisherman placing his Nets. Another having some business
committed to his care, which he fears to forget, binds a Ribbon or Thread
about his little finger, by sight of which visible Idea he is admonished of his
charge. Whence it is apparent, that the excogitation of Idea's to fix things in
memory, is in some sort natural, seeing Nature it self has taught men,
destitute of Learning, to use the same.

Now there only remains Answers to Objections, by which the Adversaries of
this Art endeavor to obumbrate the luster, and diminish the credit thereof.

First they object, that the faculty of Natural Memory and Ingenuity, by use of
this Art, is unmeasurably impaired; for such Authors as have treated of this
Art, do usually prescribe provision of a multitude of Places, wherein occurring
Idea's of Memorandums may be distributed to remain always, with a weekly, or
at least monthly perusal, or over-looking of them all, least at any time they
should be forgotten, which is certainly a transcendent labor, and must needs
dull the edge of humane understanding. To which I answer, I am of the same
opinion; to wit, that if any man endeavor to retain all things he desires to
remember by Places and Idea's, to be reviewed once a month, he undertaketh a
work that would weary the dullest witted men, much more ingenious persons, who
loath nothing more then frequent meditation of things formerly learned; It is
also unnecessary, because writing of things worthy, memory in books, is much
easier, more certain and readier for use. The way of Memory I prescribe, (...)
only to preserve things lately heard, read, or invented, until they may be
transcribed, that the mind sinking under this burden, may be relieved as
speedily as may be. Moreaver it is certain, that the virtue of natural Memory
is very much corroborated by this way of Remembering proposed in this book: For
the mind being daily accustomed to Revocation of sentences slipped out of
Memory, and that of thy a word or two, is more enabled in discharge of its
office, then is credible to one unexperienced, whereby also wit is more and
more exacuated. Neither have I used any principles in this Art prejudicial to
the faculty of Memory; but do rather admonish you not to use them, least they
procure great damage to your natural Memory.

Secondly, they say it is a great trouble, in the Roposition of one Idea, to
enter upon two or three considerations. I answer, that they which speak Latin,
observe a manifold construction of words, yet do readily pronounce each word in
its case, gender, number, person, and tense, without study; nor is the Memory
thereby any way confounded, because they are frequently conversant in practice
of Grammar rules; In like manner, when all the rules of the Art of Memory are
exactly known, it will not be difficult to attire all Idea's with their proper
circumstances.

If any man blame or accuse me as dissenting from Logicians, who affirm that
any thing may be kept in memory by help of Logical method, he is much mistaken;
for it is evident they speak only of long speeches; But no sober man did ever
ascertain that method was sufficient to remember common businesses, words,
phrases, numbers, and particular sentences, all which things are faithfully
kept in memory by Idea's aptly disposed. The dignity of method reserved (which
I acknowledged to be very great) it cannot be denied, but the very method of a
long Oration partly forgotten, may be recalled to mind, by the order of
disposed Idea's.

But some may say, it is a fantastical business to be employed in excogitating
and composing toys, and therefore this is not worthy to be called an Art,
which is occupied in such trifles. How, I pray, is the Art of Memory wholly
fantastical, when it is only busied in framing phancies, whereby fantasy is
aided to serve the memory more faithfully? That this is an Art, I prove thus;
Reason and Memory are distinct faculties of the mind, though not divided
asunder; Therefore if there be any Art to inform Reason, as such is Logic, why
not also an Art to inform Memory as this is?

Lastly if any man ask, what cause moved me to divulge this Art, my answer is,
that having diligently read over all the books, I could procure of this Art,
and bestowed much labor, with great loss of time, besides great defatigation
of mind, in practicing other men's precepts, when I perceived some things
impious, obscure, and superfluous admitted in this Art; also many things very
necessary quite omitted, with so much confusion and disorder, that scarcely any
certainty could be found wherein to insist, I did heartily desire to raise this
excellent Art out of the thick fogge wherein it was inveloped, and eliminate
all its superfluities wherewith it was defiled. Accordingly I undertook it at
leisure hours, and by dismissing superabundancies, and supplying defects, have
reduced it into a new and (if I be not deceived) much better form, which
experience having proved very beneficial to my self, I conceived might also
profit others, and therefore have boldly published the same.

These are the things I had to say in approbation of artificial memory, whence
I think does sufficiently appear, that the principles hereof are derived from
the most internal Fountains of Art and Nature. Such as have good natural
memories, may well want the use of this Art, like as healthy people need no
physic; but it will be of singular advantage to such as have dull, remiss
momories, especially if they be quickened and sharpened by diligent practice of
this Art from theit younger years. No man is endued with so happy a Memory, but
he may improve it by this Art; for as all liberal sciences help nature to
perfection, by demonstrating some more accomplished method then Nature it self
has taught, so also this; Men compose Arguments naturally, but learn to argue
better by Logic; so though Nature teach us to remember, yet we learn to commit
things to Memory more surely, by benefit of this Art. How mean soever these
things are, exposed in the ensuing Books, they have been divulged with a desire
of your Utility; It is your part therefore, to take my endeavors and labors
in good part, as I acknowledge it mine, to give glory to God in all things, and
to look upon him as the Author of all good Arts, and the Fountain of Wisdom:

Farewell: J. W.

The Art of Memory. The first Book.
CHAP. I. Of remembering common affairs.
MNemonica, or artificial Memory, so far as it falls under our present
consideration, is twofold: in Writing, or without Writing.

The Written way of Remembering, depends on naked handwriting, which is more
certain and facil then the other; and therefore always to be used when
opportunity does permit. In treating hereof, it were superfluous to speak of
writing notes superfluous to speak of writing notes in Table-books, or to
pursue every trivial matter, but only deliver such things as seem more
useful: First I will handle Notation of common business, afterward such
things as pertain to learning

Concerning the former of these two I will only add one precept, omitting
such as are in frequent use, Provide an Almanac with blank pages, in which
every evening, against the proper day of the month, set down your chiefest
business of that day, and also the names of such persons as you have conversed
with about any serious affair, either at home or abroad. Though the utility
hereof be not presently conspicuous, yet many times afterward, it is of great
consequence to resolve difficulties of very great importance. Suppose that
after some revolution of time, three months, a year or more, question arise
about the very day whereon such or such a thing happened, an exact knowledge
whereof will be very profitable; the certain day you have forgotten, but well
remember it was on the same day your sheep were shorn, or the day after such
friends dined with you; this being considered, your Almanac will exhibit the
particular day. Moreover by the men's names with whom you spoke that day, happily
you may learn many things most necessary to be known in the present cause.

This briefly shall suffice concerning remembering ordinary business.

CHAP. II. Of remembering Words.
THere are four kinds of Memorandums belonging to Discipline, or Learning:
Words, Phrases, Sentences, and Set-Speeches.

A Word may be remembered by Derivation or Connection. Derivation is proper, or
Improper; Proper Derivation is an apt interpretation of Words; as Pellex an
Harlot, of (...), and (...) of (...) a word compounded of (...) and (...) the
division of man and wife; or if you please of (...) and (...) because an Harlot
is a Divided Wife. (...) blessed, as it were of (...) immortal: Filii and
filiae, Sons and Daughters, (...), from the love they procure between Parents*
vir a Man, a viribus; Mulier a Woman, quasi mollior, from the Sexes tenderness;
Puer a Boy, a puritate corporis; Panis Bread, of Pan, who (as Olaus Magnus
says) first invented the Bakers Art; Popa a Glutton or Victualler, from Popina
a Cooks-shop; Lucus a Grove, a lucendo, for it properly signifies a place
planted with trees, enlightened with Torches, and hallowed to some Idol: Babble
of Babel; a Soldier of Soldurius, who served under Caesar, Lib. 3. Ces. Com. or
if you had rather, quasi sole duratus; Church, anciently called Kirk, of (...)
sup. (...), the Lord's-house; Neighbor, as it were nigh thy bower, a word
formerly used for a dwelling house; Gospel, of good spel, anciently used for
speech or tidings; Partridge, of parting a ridge, for they are usually found in
ridges of Land.

Improper Derivation, is a strained interpretation of a word; as (...)
drunkenness, (...), because after sacrifice they feasted their pallates; (...)
smoke, as it were (...), the steam of something burning; (...): Lachrimae a
lacerando, so Tears in English, of tearing the heart: Monumentum quasi monens
mentem; Domus ex do and mus; Cottage as it were a coat for age: Beer as it were
Bee-here; Gossip of go-sip; Simony as it were See-mony; and Derivation
howsoever absurd or wrested, printeth words in Memory; yea the further it is
fetched, the deeper impression it makes.

A Word is retained by Connection, when it is aptly composed in a sentence
amongst other words: Homer said well, Words have wings, both because being
spoken, they cannot be recalled; and that if they be neglected in the scope of
sentences, they are forgotten: for example, let these words Oestrum a Gad-bee,
and Cynomya an Horse-flie, be propounded to be remembered, they may be
comprehended in a sentence thus; Viminia tibi lotione macerantur, quae cynomya
adeoque etiam oestro vehement ius pungent; Rods steeped in piss, sting worse
then a Horse-flye or Gad-bee: So these words, Vitricus a Father-in-law,
Acupedius a Footman, illunis moonless, are thus comprised in a sentence;
Illunis licet, sublustris tamen nox erat, qua Acupedius ad Vitrici aedes
deflecteret; It was a light night, though the moondid not shine, in which the
Footman called at my Father in law his house. Again, suppose these words to be
kept in mind; Alyptes a Surgeon, succenturiatus substituted, tympanotriba a
Drummer, strigosus bare bone: they may be thus framed into a Sentence; Alyptes
strigosus in locum tympanotribae caesi succenturiatus est; A bare-boned
Chyrurgeon was substituted in place of the slain Drummer. This is a profitable
kind of exercise for unknown, out-worn, foreign or seldom used words, which
occur sometimes in reading, and are to be observed, that they may be better
known. Learners, who study the primitive words of any Language; as Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew, may reap no small benefit by Derivation and Connection of
words, if they imitate the following method Having provided a Paper-book to
contain the Primitive words, divide every page into three Columns, of which let
the third be broadest: In the first column write down the Primitive words, in
the second their significations, in the third their Etymologies, or
Derivations. But if you meet with any word that does not presently admit
Derivation either Proper, or Improper, leave the space in the third column
void, and pass on to the next word, that you may not lose time by a perplexed
indagation of the Etymology: Then collect all the words you find in the page,
which decline Derivation, into one sentence, so by Connection you may imprint
those words in Memory, which you cannot by Derivation. Every such sentence must
be written at the bottom of the page; I will give you an Example in the first
twelve primitive words of the Greek tongue, as they are exhibited in the
Catalogue of John Surcinus, in this order.

(...), to exhale, from the feigned sound we make in breathing. Scap. (...),
to hurt, of (...), the first Passive Aorist, of the verb (...), to hurt,
according to the Ionick dialect. (...), kind, of (...) the privative particle,
and (...), envious. (...), to meet, of (...), signifying the same. (...), a
Maidservant, delicate. These words have a manifest Relation one to the other.
(...), These words have a manifest Relation one to the other. (...), foolish.
(...), a heap. (...), good: As it were (...), Divine; or of (...), to be
admired; hence comes our English word Aghast. (...), Overmuch: Hence comes our
English word, Again, and Again. (...), to love. (...), Posts: From Angeri, to
afflict, for so they do their Horses with their Spurs; and hence may come our
English word Angry.

(...); What should a fool do with heaps of goods?

Here you may see two words admitting no derivation, comprehended in one
Sentence; but the Verb (...), to love, is so frequent, it needs no connection.
The manner of exercise to learn these, is thus: First, lay a flat Ruler, or
your finger, over the middle Column, in such sort, that the words of the first
and third Column (which contain the primitives and their derivations) may
appear on both sides; by mutual comparison of which, you must try to
investigate the significations latent under the Ruler: Afterward conceal the
first Column in like manner, that by comparing the significations and
derivations lying in sight, you may study the primitive words latent under the
Ruler or your finger. If you dispatch but one page a day after this order,
(which is scarcely an hours work in few days you may fix all the primitive
words of the whole tongue in your mind without any labor, nay rather with
delight. If you can procure some companions in scrutinie, of the derivations,
equally lovers of the same study, your labor will be rendered much more
delectable and facile.

CHAP. III. Of remembering Phrases.
A Phrase may be committed to memory, by accommodating it to some fit subject;
as if this phrase were to be remembered, Very much estranged from filthy
affections; I apply it to a Christian Soldier, as to a meet subject in this
manner, A Christian Soldier ought to be very much estranged from all filthy
and sordid affections of mind.

Or this example, To forgo manhood through effeminate delicacy, may be fitly
accommodated to Sardanapalus King of Assyria; thus Sardanapalus by effeminate
delicacy and luxury, lost all manhood, and led a Womanish life.

Again, this example, A man furnished with abundant store of Learning, may be
thus applied; Usher the renowned Bishop of Armagh, was furnished with abundant
store of good Literature, and manifold Learning; so that he did justly bear the
prize from most ^relates of the World.

This manner of applying Phrases, is principally necessary in learning the
Elegancies of any Tongue, and is very well worthy to be more frequently used in
public Schools: I confess Masters do usually command their Scholars to
collect phrases and elegant sentences out of their Lectures, and to write their
gleanings in Books, not in loose Papers, which is somewhat; but if they did,
also urge them to refer every phrase by them collected, to some friend or
acquaintance, they would by this means reap a far greater Harvest of Learning:
For phrases thus accommodated, sink deeper, and continue longer in memory.

CHAP. IV. Of remembering Sentences.
SEntences worthy of Memory, are either frequently or seldom used: Sentences of
common use (I mean such as we desire to preserve not only in paper, but in our
hearts, because of their singular Elegancy, serious Gravity, concise brevity,
or witty ingenuity) are to be stored in a Manual every kind in a peculiar
place: Epigrams by themselves, Anagrams by themselves, so Proverbs, Epitaphs,
Jests, Riddles, Observations, etc. by themselves: This Enchiridion wherein you
write such remarkable sentences, ought always to be carried about you, (and may
therefore be called, Vade mecum) that you may peruse the same at leisure-hours
when you are abroad, not having other employment; by which means, Time, most
precious of all things, will not be unprofitably spent: And hereby you will
keep in mind things worthy remembrance, better, safer, sooner, more certainly,
profitably, and delightfully, then by that monstrous repetition, prescribed by
some Authors in this Art of Memory, which nevertheless cannot be effected
without long study, very great defatigation of the understanding and pernicious
damage of the memorative faculty; besides, a perpetual Oblivion of some Idea's,
occasioned by so long space of time interposed.

A sentence seldom used, is either an interpretation of some Classick Author,
or a common Observation; by Classick Books or Authors, I mean those which are
accounted Authentic by common consent of professors in every Science; such are
the Scriptures among Divines, Decrees and Statutes among Lawyers, the works of
Hypocrates, Galen, or Paracelsus, among Physicians: Euclids Elements among
Mathematicians, etc.

If you meet with any memorable interpretation of a Classick Book, note it down
in short hand in the Margent, near the Text to which it properly relates; or
if you had rather, cause clean paper to be bound between every leaf, to receive
such Comments: Or, (which is better) have plenty of white Paper bound at the
end of the Book, in which write your Interpretation, and relate them to the
text by like numbers or letters prefixed before the Notes and Text.

CHAP. V: Of remembering long Speeches.
NOw lastly, I will treat of Speeches; A speech, according to my acceptance,
is any large Treatise composed of many sentences of one kind; such are Sermons,
Orations, Declarations, Heads, or Sections of Books; or finally, any long
Treatise, or memorable Speeches, are either such as are framed by our selves,
or by others: Again, Speeches of other men are either extant in Books, or are
delivered by word of mouth.

If the Speeches to be remembered, are already extant in print, it is sufficient
to set down their Titles in your Commonplace-Book, under their proper Heads, to
advertise you in what Chapter or part of a Book, this, or that Argument is more
largely handled: As for example, In the first Book of Calvin's Institutions,
and thirteenth Chapter, the three persons of the Godhead in one Essence, is
proved by diverse reasons; to transcribe which Treatise, though in Epitome,
would be very laborious: Therefore it is better under the title of Trinity,
among other common observations pertaining to the same purpose, to write down
these words, That three Persons are contained in one only Essence of God, Call.
Institut. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. By which Citation you are directed to that place of
Calvin whenever you please.

If the Speech you desire to preserve be verbally pronounced, you must take it
in shorthand, if you have skill; otherwise in long hand, with as much celerity
as you can: If you be at any time left behind through nimble volubility of the
Speakers tongue, it will be sufficient to write only the essential words of
every Sentence (as for the most part are Substantives and Verbs) leaving vacant
spaces, in which either words of less weight may be interposed, which must be
supplied immediately after the Speech is ended.

Four things must be observed, that speeches contrived by our selves, may be
deeply fastened in memory; Method, Writing, Marginal Notation, and Meditation;
the Method ought to be so disposed, that every part of an entire Speech, and
every sentence of those parts, precede according to their dignity in nature;
that is, that every thing be so placed, that it may give light to understand
what follows: Such a method is very effectual to ease the memory both of
Speaker and Hearer; for in a speech methodically digested, each sentence
attracteth the next, like as one link draws another in a Golden Chain,
therefore Method is called the Chain of Memory: For this cause let every former
sentence so depend on the latter, that it may seem necessarily related
thereunto.

In writing a Speech, let your first care be, that your Lines extend not too
far, but that space enough be left in the Margent: In the next place, that your
whole speech be distinguished into heads; for a distinct mind apprehends
better then one confused. After you have compiled a Speech you are shortly to
deliver, do not transcribe it, though it be both blotted and interlined, lest
you lose as much time in new Writing, as would suffice to learn it: Besides the
blots and interlining do more firmly fasten in mind the sentences so blotted
and interlined, then if they were otherwise. This is also to be noted, that
although it be necessary to write over the entire Speech, or at least, brief
notes thereof, before it be publicly pronounced; yet ought that Transcription
by no means to be seen publicly, unless Memory languish, and be weak: For the
mind does better recollect it self in the absence of Notes, and by united force
is better prepared to speak.

Marginal Notation is when one or two chief words of every sentence is placed
in the Margent, which so soon as seen, (which is with the least cast of an eye)
revoketh the whole sentence to mind: As if this ensuing small Treatise of the
Resurrection were to be learned by heart; I distinguish the sentences thereof
by words placed in the Margent, by which means they are speedily remembered.

That there shall be a Resurrection of the dead at the last day, is confirmed
by these reasons.

Because it is imperfect.
First, that which is imperfect, is incapable of perfect felicity in its kind;
but the soul separate from the body is imperfect, and therefore not capable of
perfect felicity. Thence follows a necessity of the Bodies Resurrection, that
by the conjunction thereof with the Soul, the Elect may enjoy perfect felicity:
How are they happy, Tertullian.
(says Tertullian) if they shall perish in part?

Seals of Salvation.
Secondly, If the Body by Christ's command, ought to be as well partaker of the
seals of salvation, as the Soul; then it shall as well participate of Eternal
Salvation; but the Body, according to Christ's institution, ought to partake of
the seals of salvation: For the Body is washed with water of Baptism, and
nourished by Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper: Ergo, etc.

As Seeds.
Thirdly, Like as Seeds cast into the Earth dye, and revive again; so humane
bodies buried in the ground, dissolved and corrupted, shall rise again at the
last day, by the quickening virtue of Christ: Paul brandeth him with folly, 1
Cor. 13.35. who cannot conclude the resurrection of the dead out of the
vivification of Seeds buried in the ground; 1 Cor. 13.35.
whence Augustine, Augustine.
He which vivisieth dead and putrified Seeds by which men live in this world,
more facilely will raise you up to live eternally.

Revolution of things.
Fourthly, The Revolution of all things is an argument of the Resurrection; as
Day follows night, Waking Sleep, Rest Labor, and Winter Summer; so Life
follows death, and Resurrection Sepulture. That which Tertullian speaks in
his Book Of the Resurrection of the flesh, Tertullian.
is pertinent hereto; Day (says he) dies into night, yet is enlivened again
with glory all over the world.

Fifthly, It is evidently proved by the Resurrection of Christ; seeing Christ,
which is our head, is already risen, it is a testimony that we also, who are
his members, shall live after death. Where the head is, thither will the
members be gathered; Christ our head. 1 Cor. 15.20.
in this respect Christ is termed the first fruits of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20.

Resurrection of others.
Sixthly, The particular Resurrection of some, to a temporal life in this world,
was a sign of the general Resurrection to eternal life to be at the end of the
world.

These were raised again after death.

1. The son of the widow of Sarepta, 1 King 18.22. 2. The son of the Shunamite,
2 King. 4.33. 3. A certain man by the touch of Elias bones, 2 King 13.21. 4.
The son of the widow of Naim, Luke 7.15. 5. The daughter of Jairus, Luke 8.48.
6. Lazarus, John 11 43. 7. Tabitha, Acts 9.40. 8. Eutichus, Acts 20.10.
Who though.
All which, though they dyed again, after their Resurrection, yet may we not
think those Saints dyed any more, of whom mention is made, Matt. Saints cut of
their Tombs.
27.52. who rose out of their Tombs after Christ's Resurrection, that they might
pass to eternal life with him, by virtue of whose Resurrection they were
raised.

Finally, there are almost innumerable places of Scripture, Places of Scripture,
which may be produced to evince to the certainty of this Article, of which I
will only cite a few at present.

Job 19.25, 26, 27. For I am sure that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and he shall stand the last on the earth; and though worms destroy this body,
yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and none other for me.

Isaiah, 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, Isai. 26.19
even with my body shall they rise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust, for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 37.5.
37.5, 6. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, behold, I will cause breath
to enter into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and make
flesh grow upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, that ye
may live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. These quotations were indeed
spoken to the Prophets, Isaiah and Exekiel, of the Restoration of the people
out of Captivity, nevertheless thereby the Resurrection is evidently
confirmed; Tertullian.
as Tertullian says, that must be necessarily first, which illustrateth
another; a Similitude, Comparison, Metaphor, or Allegory, cannot be deduced out
of nothing.

Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12.2.
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual
contempt.

John 5 28* John. 5.28
For the hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice, and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life, but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

1 Cor. 15. Paul in that whole Chapter, 1 Cor. 15.
treats of the Resurrection of the body, and establishes the same by many
reasons, which I will not press further, but only reply to a common argument
of Atheists, wherewith they do stubbornly seal up their hearts against this
truth.

They Object, Object. Resolution of bodies.
that often times the bodies of many are buried in one and the same monument,
whose carcasses must inevitably be commixed by corruption; that the bodies of
some are burned to ashes, that others are drowned in the sea, and devoured of
fishes, those fishes perchance of men, and those men of beasts and ravens;
lastly, that there are men in some Regions who eat humane flesh, by which means
the substance of one must be necessarily converted into the substance of the
other; How then say they, is it possible, that every man's proper body should be
restored in fire?

I answer, Ans. Above our capacity.
that the Resurrection is a work above man's capacity, whereof we are no more
able to assign a certain reason, than of the worlds creation; wherefore though
the above recited things seem impossible to us to be done, yet all things are
possible to God. You may ask, says Tertullian upon the Apocalypse, how matter
when it is dissolved, may be restored? Tertullian
I reply, you who once were not, are made, and so when you cease to be, shall
be made again.

Furthermore, we see that a skillful Alchymist, Alchymist
by his Chemical art, can separate and extract Gold, Silver, Tin, etc. each
severally apart out of the same mass; cannot God then produce out of the
Elements humane bodies, how many alterations soever they undergo? seeing the
bodies of the dead are only changed, never reduced to nothing.

God created light out of darkness, ill things out of nothing, Light out of
darkness
power out of weakness, grace out of sin, and procured us a blessed life out
of our Saviors cursed death. Shall not any thing be possible to him? It is
impossible.

Conclusion a secret part.
I conclude, At the final Resurrection, every person shall have a secret portion
of his body, out of which by operation of Divine Omnipotency, it may be formed
a new entire, Of the Rib.
so that a man may be perfect. He which created the woman of the man's rib, and
cause a grain of Mustard Seed to become a stately plant, can also compose an
entire body of the least part of one. Like as in the seed of plants, there is
some hidden thing by which they daily gain vigor and grow; As in the seeds of
Plants.
so there is some hidden thing in every humane body, out of which the body
(dissolved) will be again new made. Aquinas.
Thomas Aquinas thinks it is the primary being of each person, which being
restored to every one in the Resurrection, will be dilated in an instant, as
Adams rib in the woman's creation, and the loaves of Elizeus and Christ, Loaves.
with which so many were satisfied. What nature produces by long intervals of
time, God can effect in an instant.

Thus having dispatched Marginal notes, I descend to Meditation, concerning
which, take these following Canons.

Can. 1. After you have copied over your whole Speech or Sermon, aptly divided
into heads, and marked the principal words of each sentence in the Margent, go
diligently to meditation, trying whether you can repeat all the Sentences in
their order by bare sight of the Marginall notes. You need not be sollicitous
of every word, so that you do accurately remember the sense or scope, because
the mind esteems it an unworthy thraledom to be obliged to every conceived
word; Horace has most truly said,

Rem been praevisam verba haud invita sequentur. The scope foreseen, words
readily occur. But if you stick at any place, read over the sentence (which the
Marginall note does not suggest) with no less diligence and attention of
mind, than if you had never seen the same. I dare promise such manner of
proceeding in Meditation will produce more happy success, then Opinion can
readily conceive: If you do not benefit your self by Marginal notes either in
Learning a Speech or Sermon, you will make slow progress, and be sensible of
very great trouble in Meditation; whereas by their help, you may fix sentences
in Memory with great celerity (not to say, with pleasure) as you may make an
experiment, if you please, in the foregoing Tractate.

Can. 2. The manner of Meditating, is to learn by parts; That is, First to
commit the first Section to Memory, then the Second, afterward the Third, and
so forth; the rest in their order: When you have dispatched all the heads
severally, apply your self to repeat the whole, observing Quintilians method,
to learn with low voice and soft murmr, whereby Memory is benefitted with the
double motion of speaking and hearing. This counsel seems especially
appropriated to such whose minds are slippery, and subject to wander, starting
presently aside, if they be not thus restrained; on the contrary, fixed stable
minds will experience silent Meditation the more speedy and efficacious way to
imprint Notions in Memory.

Can. 3. Furthermore seeing a vehement and earnest application of mind is
required in Meditation, whereby the spirits are much exhausted, you must be
careful to avoid longer study then agrees with your health, least your spirits
fail through too great intention of mind: And beware you do not lose a moment
of that little time you assign unto Meditation; when you must meditate, let it
not be with weariness, but do that willingly, which you must do necessarily.

Can. 4. The first and last hours of the day are most apt for Meditation; that
is, immediately before and atfer sleep: Let your first Essay in Learning your
task be at Evening, about an hour after Supper, reading over twice or thrice
what you intend to commit to Memory against the next day, your study being
finished, betake your self to your rest, that your mind (no other ways
diverted) may repose upon your Evening Meditation. In the morning so soon as
you have shook off drowziness, and prepared your self, repeat those things
diligently you meditated the night before. It is to no purpose to study before
sleep, unless in like manner you ruminate after sleep.

Can. 5. All that speak publicly, especially Dispensers of the Word, ought to
make it their great care, not to utter things disorderly, but thoroughly
digested by Meditation; lest they be be like such Cooks as buy good meat in the
Shambles, but mar it in the Dressing, sending it raw, or half-boiled to the
Table. Besies, if any man appear publicly, either in Pulpit, or otherwise,
before he is provided what to say, he becomes timorous, and the vital spirits
(the eyes of reason) have recourse tot he heart through fear, whereby he is
rendered much more unapt to speak then before.

Can. 6. Lastly, which is peculiar in delivering Sermons, let Speakers apply
more general Doctrines to themselves jointly with the rest, in Confession,
Petition, Deprecation, imprecation, intercession, thanksgiving or praising God,
as occasion is given by the Doctrines themselves; so they shall not only
remember all things better, but also edify their own consciences; Nay further,
frequent use of this ioint-application, proves finally a Manuduction to speak
with sense of Divine grace and evidence of Spirit, which is the most excellent
ornament of a Preacher.

The end of the First Book.
The Art of Memory. The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of remembering without writing.
HAving dispatched vulgar ways of Memory, I descend to helps conducing to the
same purpose without Handwriting, which is then most pleasant, when we are
destitute of the aid of Paper, Ink, or Table-Books, or when by some obstacle we
are debarred the free use of them. This consists of two operations,
Reposition and Deposition.

Reposition is the manner of charging Memory with Note-worthy things; herein it
is not to be expected that each particular word of every sentence be retained;
but only, that the general sense be fastened in mind. At all times when a man
is about to commit any thing in custody to his Memory, first let him study to
drown all unnecessary thoughts in oblivion, that he may perfectly intend the
things he is to learn; Oblivion being such a principle of Memory, as Privation
is of Generation; and a ready remembrance most commonly proceeds from right
understanding the thing in hand; therefore a man must prepare himself
diligently, and so unite the force of his imagination, that he may as it were
engrave and imprint occurrent things in his Memory. Lead does facily receive
impression, because it is tenacious, which Quicksilver cannot admit, by reason
of its Fluxibility: In like manner fleeting inconstant minds continually
hurried into new and strange cogitations, is far from gathering fruit by any
thing heard. The method of a speech is chefly to be observed, regarding
seriously what is the general subject thereof; Secondly, the greater parts, and
with what Logical Arguments each part is handled; the perfect Method of a
speech does much conduce to remember the whole; or if the Contexture thereof be
inartificial, imperfect, and unsatisfactory, comprehending many things forcibly
applied, rejecting things of a like kind, yet a strong Memory will retain the
same by observation of the absurdities and rude Artifice of the whole.

Deposition is when we recollect things committed to memory; and having
transcribed or transacted them, discharge our memories of them, which is
always to be practiced at the first opportunity: Things charged in Memory by
day, are to be deposited at least before sleep, if not sooner; things charged
by night, are to be deposited immediately after sleep, that the mind be no
longer burdened then is convenient, and that things negligently laid up in
mind, be not forgotten, Writing being the faithfullest Guardian of Memorandums.
If in dis-burthening your Memory, something charged happen to be forgotten,
shut your eyes, that no no external object may divert your mind, and try to
recall it by importunate scrutiny; which operation may be called Revocation,
and is an Art that by help of certain Rules teaches the investigation of
things lapsed out of memory.

To conclude, Deposition, or discharging things committed to mind, is not
unlike expunging writing out of Table-Books: If therefore there be any Art of
Oblivion (as some affirm) it may be properly referred hither. So much in
general; now to explicate the particular species thereof.

CHAP. II. Of remembering by certain Verses purposely born in mind.
THe method of charging Memory without writing, is twofold, Poetical and Ideal.

The Poetical way of remembering, is accomplished by virtue of Poetry, either by
Verses purposely afore-composed, or ex tempore. The manner of remembering by
Verses already composed, is when a man does excogitate or retain remarkable
things by repetition of Verses provided to that purpose. Suppose an Attorney be
to wait upon Judges riding the Circuits from one County to another, it may be
worth his labor to repeat these verses at leaving his lodging, least he forget
some necessary thing, which we may imagine formerly framed by him to this end.

Scalpellum, calami, cornugraphiumque libelli,
Charta, pugillares, capitalia, cera, sigillum,
Sic crepide, gladius, cultellus, pugio, burssa,
Muccinium, indusiumque monilia, penula, pecten
Fascia cruralis, cruralia, dactylothece.
Penknife. Quills, Ink-horn, Books, Paper,
Table-Books, Caps; Take
Wax, Seal and Slippers, Sword, Knife and
Dagger, safe make
Purse, Handkerchiefs, Shirts, Rings, Coat,
and for your own sake,
Comb, Garters, Stockins, Gloves.
Thus a Carpenter often employed to work abroad, may ingenuously make the Tools
and Instruments belonging to his Art, in Verse; by repetition of which on
occasion, he may be admonished what Tools to take along with him: In like sort
all ordinary business frequently incumbent upon any man, may be conveniently
committed to memory in Verses, which may advertise him to omit nothing.

Here I have thought expedient to propose certain Verses lately composed by my
self, that they may be beneficial to others (if they please) as they have
sometimes been to me, which are these.

An? Quis quid? cujus? cui? quo? quibus? auxilijs? cur?
Quomodo? circa quid? qualis? quantum? ex, in and a quo?
Quamdiu? ubi? quando? quoties? quotuplex? quot and unde?
If? who? what? whose? to what? whether? why? about what?
How? what fashion? how much? by, of, in, and from what?
How long? how often? how manifold? whence came that?
Where? when? how many?
These Verses (craving the Readers pardon for the ruggedness) contain twenty
two Questions of excellent use to invent, retain, as also to recall to mind
things of great concernment and worthy memory in urgent affairs; which being
prudently applied by way of interrogation, do necessarily extort the answer of
all Logical places, which (though I suppose no man will deny) may be thus
illustrated.

1. If there be any such thing? If?
This question is referred to an indefinite argument. 2 Who was Author of the
Motion, Who?
Work, Fact, Saying, Writing, Counsel.

This question respects the efficient Cause. Definition.

3. What it is? Effects. does it contain? Effects. does depend on it? Effects.
is moved? Effects. is done? What?
Effects. is spoken? Effects. is written? Effects. is consulted? Effects.
4: Whose it is? Whose?
5. To what it is compared, To what?
either in quantity equal, greater. lesser.
quality like, unlike.
6. Whither it tends? Whether?
7. Why the final Cause? Why?
8. About what subject or object About What?
in procreating? conserving? abolishing? destroying?
9. How was it done, naturally? How?
purposely? necessarily? accidentally? carelessly?
10. What fashion form, connection, What Fashion?
description?
11. How much quantity? 12. By what? whether alone? as principal equal, How
Much? By what?
inferior with others? as principal equal, inferior with instruments? as
principal equal, inferior
13. Of what matter? Of what?
14. In what it is contained? In what?
is exercised?
15. From what it is is distinguished, as diverse, unlike, related, contrary,
contradictory, privative.
16. How long? 17. How often? 18. How manifold? distribution of causes, of
whole into parts of effects, of genus in species of subjects, of accidents.
19. Whence came it? is it derived? is it proved?
20. Where? 21. When? 22. How many? induction of causes, parts, effects,
species, subjects, accidents.


Hereby it does accidentally appear, these Verses are both useful to recollect
things slipped out of memory, and also to invent new; in handling any subject,
many things may escape our scrutiny, which a careful repetition of these
Verses, and prudent application, may prompt the mind: As for example, suppose a
learned Counselor were to be consulted about some difficult nice Case, in
which a man would not willingly omit any material business, lest his labor be
frustrated; let the Interrogations included in these verses, be severally
applied to the cause in controversy, viz. asking,

1. If such a suit be triable in such a Court* 2. Who are the adversaries
Counselors? Who his Witnesses? Who enjoined to him in a strict tie of
friendship? Who did, spoke, writ this or that? Who is Tenant of the
controverted form? 3. What is exhibited in the Adversaries Declaration? What he
thinks they do now deliberate? 4. To what Manor, the Farm in question
appertains? 5. To what case this is like? 6. How far he has proceeded in the
business, and how far he is like, till the suit be determined? 7. Why he said,
or did such a thing? 8. About what the controversy chiefly depends? 9. How
he must proceed in the cause? 10. What is the condition of the Judges? 11. How
much cost the drawing of the Reply or Declaration? 12. By what means the
possession was regained?
The most material passages in any depending cause, may be investigated by
propounding such like questions: I hope no man will repent his labor in
committing these lines to Memory, whereby he may reap so much benefit in his
studies and common affairs.

Whereas I first made mention of an indefinite Argument, I shall entreat the
Readers patience, whilst I declare the cause thereof, not finding any
sufficient Reason to banish or expel an Indefinite Argument out of the Logical
Commonwealth, and admire that Ramus has pretermitted it: I think (reserving
place for better Judgment) an argument absolutely consentaneous, is branched
more artificially in this manner.

An argument absolutely consentaneous, is indefinite, or definite; indefinite
is that which argues a thing indefinitely, as, God is. There is a fifth
Essence; Definite is that which argues a thing definitely: Definite is the
cause and effect.

Now in this axiom (God is) we do not affirm that God is this or that, but
simply, that he is: And when we say (there is a fifth Essence in rerum natura)
we do not show what causes it has, or what effects, subjects or adjuncts,
only indefinitely pronounce, there is such a thing. To conclude, it is
manifest, that an indefinite argument is sufficiently distinguished from all
other arguments, because it does properly answer this peculiar question (If it
be?) which yeildeth very profitable use in Discourse: This by the way.

Lastly, In this way of remembering by Verses formerly excogitated, both the
parts, Reposition and Deposition, are dispatched in like manner as before; for
like as by one repetition of the Verses we charge the memory; so by another we
discharge it: Whence there is no need here of any Rules of Revocation, seeing
that if the Verses be once firmly fixed in memory, no part of them will be to
seek.

This may suffice for the first Poetical way of remembering, that is by Verses
provided beforehand: Now I will pass to the next way of Remembering by
extemporary Verses.

CHAP. III: Of remembering by ex tempore Verses.
THis order of remembering by extemporary Verses, is when the occurring subjects
to be remembered, are disposed in Verse, in the same order as they present
themselves; by repetition of which they are again recalled to mind: First, I
will handle how to charge the memory ex tempore, afterward I will propound the
Deposition or discharging of things so committed to mind.

Extemporary Reposition is, when many sentences are delivered in custody to the
mind, by certain essential words interwoven in Meeter, and often repeated; in
which case great care must be used to imprint the first Letter of each portion
perfectly in memory. For example, suppose in a Sermon preached in your hearing,
you do principally observe these Sentences, which you would preserve in mind,
Viz.

1. Earth dug out of a Well, how deep soever, exposed to the air upon a high
Tower, although it seems to retain no Seed of Herbs, neither is sown by man,
yet of its own accord produces green Herbs; Whence is proved, That there is an
innate faculty in every part of the Earth to germinate, infused by God
thereinto in the Creation, by his Word, Let the earth bud, etc. Genesis 1.11.

2. It is better to doubt of secret things, then to strive about such as are
uncertain, Augustine.

3. The birth of God is to be silently adored, not busily pried into.
Nazianzene.

4 Not to sin is God's Righteousness; man's Righteousness is God's Indulgence.
Bernard.

5. Magistracy cannot compel to Faith and Religion; but may and ought to
constrain to the means of Faith and Religion.

6. The folly of Schoolmen is ridiculous, not unlike Mahomets Dreams,
contending that the place of Terrestrial Paradise was elevated many degrees
above the Earth level, when as Paradise was certainly defaced by the Deluge, if
not before.

7. He who moderateth himself in unlawful things, never falls into unlawful.

8. In natural and civil actions, man does yet retain free will; but in
spiritual and supernatural he lies in a dead-sleep til he be vivified by
infusion of Christ's Grace.

9. In sacred Baptism, the administration is of great efficacy; but the
Administrator of small.

10. Missa, whence comes the English Word Mass, of the same signification,
denoted no more primarily, then Missio, like as Remissa is the same as
Remissio, and Offensa as Offensio: It is certain, the original thereof was
derived from a custom among the Fathers living in the primive times, of
celebrating the Eucharist always after public prayers, and reading and
expounding the Scriptures; at which Novices in the faith, persons unbaptized
and excommunicate might not be present, though they had all permission to
attend at Prayers and Sermons. Therefore a Decree was made, that they which did
not communicate of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, should be dismissed before
the Celebration. Coun. Carthage, 4. Can. 8. Whence Augustine in his Sermon of
Time, 237. says, Behold after Sermon, dismission is pronounced to such as are
not sufficiently instructed in Christian Religion; the faithful stays. Hence it
is manifest, the Papistical Mass is far different from that of the Fathers; for
neither do the Priests dismiss those who do not communicate, but do not
sometimes admit any to the Sacrament.

11. Ephesians. 5.14. Wherefore he says, Rise up thou which sleep, stand up from
the dead, and Christ will give thee light. By the first clause of this verse
(wherefore he says) seems to be implied, that Paul did not pronounce this
sentence of his own Authority, but cited it from some other place; yet seeing
this sentence is no where read in Scripture, it is probable that Paul does here
introduce Christ, speaking by his Apostles in their ordinary Gospel Ministry,
saying, Rise up thou which sleep, etc. These words are daily pronounced
(...) Reg. 1. If any portion of a Sentence negligently committed to memory, be
lost in deposition, you must try if it may be recovered out of oblivion, by the
number of syllables of which such portion did consist; for the number of the
syllables will either bring it to light, or instruct ye to conjecture probably
what it was. For example, in the practice of Poetical Reposition, delivered in
the former Chapter, suppose that the second portion of the second Verse be
forgotten, the first and third portions being these:

Not to sin -- Paradise on Earth. By numbering the syllables of these two known
portions, the middle-portion is found to consist of four syllables; which
consideration alone may happily recall the latent portion.

Reg. 2. If this way fail, bend your study to find out the first Letter of the
same, repeating the Letters of the Alphabet in order, taking good heed which
your mind does suggest to have been the first Letter, wherein your memory will
certainly prompt you, unless you were very remiss and negligent in charging the
same: The first Letter being found, the rest unknown, you must apply that
severally to every Letter of the Alphabet, because your mind will likewise
acquiesce, when you come to that which was the second. Thus having recovered
the two first Letters of the elapsed portion, though the rest be unknown, they
may be easily enquired out by help of a Dictionary: As in the former example,
running speedily over the words beginning with Un, you will soon meet with
unconstrained, which was the first word of the lost portion.

Reg. 3. If you cannot attain to the same this way, you must compare the parts
placed on either side (if the latent sentence were any part of a continued
Sermon composed methodically) to inform your self how the Speaker passed from
the precedent to the subsequent; because if a man remember the fourth and sixth
observations of a late-heard Sermon, disposed in good method, he may regain the
fifth, lying as it were in the way, with little or no trouble, by consideration
of the method, how he descended from the fifth to the sixth.

Reg. 4. If still you remain unresolved, take in hand the indagation of the
matter and form thereof; By matter, I mean the subject of the sentence in
quest; by form, I understand the structure thereof (Conscience is a natural
faculty of the mind, placed in the supremest part thereof, assenting to good,
disallowing evil, and therefore of it self never sins) the matter of this
Sentence is Conscience, the form, the description of the same.

If the Matter of a sentence be swallowed up in Oblivion, then the more general
Classes of common places are to be leisurely perused, possibly when you come at
the right head, the mind demurring there, may produce the whole Sentence, or at
least, the matter thereof will discover it self. The more general Heads or
Classes (in my Opinion) are these.

Of God in general. Of the Trinity. Of the Holy Ghost. Of Christ. Of the
Counsel of God. Of the Creation. Of God's Providence. Of the World. Of Time. Of
Angels. Of Devils. Of man in general. Of godly men. Of wicked men. Of brutish
Creatures. Of insensible Creatures. Of the blessings of this life. Of the
affliction of this life Of Duties. Of sin. Of indifferent things. Of Household
Government. Of Policy. Of the Church in general. Of the typical Church. Of the
Evangelical Church. Of the Word of God. Of Sacraments. Of Heresies. Of the end
of the World. Of eternal Life. Of eternal Death.
In like manner to find out the latent form, the formal words included in this
Hemistick, are to be rehearsed, which do naturally show the form of any
Sentence.

Not, Some, Or, Though, Therefore, Like as, If, None, And, All.

That these words, or their Synonymaes, do show the formal manner of all
sentences, may thus appear.

Negative, The Note whereof is, Not, Particular, The Note whereof is, Some,
Disjunctive, The Note whereof is, Or, Discretive, The Note whereof is, Though,
Illative, The Note whereof is, Therefore, Relative, The Note whereof is, Like
as, Conditional, The Note whereof is, If, General Negative The Note whereof is,
None, Copulative, The Note whereof is, And, General Affirmative, The Note
whereof is, All.
If, the Matter being found, the form be still wanting, then apply the Matter
of the Sentence leisurely to all Logical places, enquiring first if it be? in
the next place, What are the efficient causes, matter, form, end, subjects,
adjuncts thereof, etc. So may you extort it, though it were dormant in the
Brains remotest Cell, or drowned in the River Lethe.

Finally, If the Sentence sought for, cannot be discovered by any of these
ways, let it pass, and despair not of finding it; for though now it be
concealed, when you seek it; yet if that portion of the sentence comprehended
in your verse, be read or heard any where, that same, or the next day, it is a
hundred to one but the whole sentence will present it self to mind.

Here we will conclude the manner of Remembering by extemporary Verses, which
seems principally referred to them, who employ their study much in Poetry,
and are endued with a good memorative faculty. Thus much may also suffice for
the Poetical Art of Remembering: Now let us pass to the method of remembering by
Idea's, which quickens even the dullest memories.

The end of the Second Book.
The Art of Memory. The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of Repositories.
THe Art of Memory, which we now treat of consists of Ideas, and places,
wherein we will first handle the Reposition of Idea's, and afterward their
Deposition.

Reposition of Idea's is, when things to be remembered, are charged upon Memory
by Idea's, disposed in certain places of a Repository; but before I descend to
the manner of Reposition, it is necessary for better explanation, to speak of
Repositories, Places, and Idea's in distinct chapters.

A Repository is an imaginary fabric, fancied Artificially, built of hewn
stone, in form of a Theater, the form whereof follows; suppose the Edifice to
be twelve yards in length within the walls, in breadth six yards, and in height
seven yards, the roof thereof flat, leaded above, and pargetted underneath,
lying wholly open to view, without any wall on that side supposed next us: Let
there be imagigined a Stage of smooth gray Marble, even and variegated with a
party colored border, which Stage is to be extended over the whole length and
breadth of the building, and raised a yard high above the Level of the ground
on which the said Edifice is erected: Let all the walls, that is, the opposite
wall, and two ends be wainscotted with Cypress beards, so artificially plained
and glewed, that the joints be indiscernable; suppose also a Groove or Gutter
cut in the middle of the Marble Stage, three inches broad, extended from the
opposite wall to the hither side of the Stage, whereby it is exactly divided
into two equal parts, and that upon the further end of the said Groove, there
is erreared a Column, a foot and half thick, arising up to the Roof of the
building, almost touching the opposite wall, and deviding it into two equal
parts, as the Groove divides the Stage; so that by the Groove, and the Pillar,
the whole Repository is parted in twain, and consists of two Rooms, siding
each other, each of them being six yards long, six yards broad, and six yards
high. For the better understanding this invention, I have caused a Type of the
Repository to be here delineated, the explanation whereof immediately follows.



The Letters, a, b, c, d, show the length of the Edifice, a, c, b, d, the
height, a, e, b, f, the height of the Stage, g, i, k, h, are boundaries of the
opposite wall, e, c, i, g, the side wall upon the left hand, h, k, d, f, the
side wall of the right hand, c, l, m, d, design the Roof, g, i, n, p, the
opposite wall of the first Room, e, g, o, p, the Stage of the first Room, r, q,
k, h, the opposite wall of the second Room, s, r, h, f, the Stage of the second
Room, n, o, the Pillar dividing the opposite wall, o* p, the Groove wrought
into the Stage.

A Repository according to this fashion, is to be represented before the eyes
of our mind, wheresoever we are, as often as we intend to practice this Art;
supposing our selves to stand about two yards distant, against the midst
thereof.

CHAP. II. Of Places.
A Place (as to our consideration) is an apt space in a Repository, designed
for reception of Idea's.

There are only two Places in every Repository of equal form and magnitude,
that is the two rooms of each Repository determinated as a foresaid by the
Pillar and Groove.

That place is said to be the former, which is on the right hand of the
Repository, that which is on the left hand, the latter; That part of the
Repository is said to be on the right hand, which is opposite to the left hand
of a man standing against the middle of the Repository, that on the left hand
which is opposite to the right.

Thus in the Scheme exhibited in the former Chapter, the letters, g, i, n, o,
demonstrate the opposite wall of the right hand part, or first place or room of
the Repository, and the letters, e, g, o, p, the Stage thereof; so r, q, k, h,
are Indices of the opposite wall of the left hand part, or second Place or room
of the Repository, and s, r, h, f, the Stage of the same.

CHAP. III. Of Idea's in General.
AN Idea is a visible representation of things to be remembered, framed by a
strong imagination, by help whereof the mind by reflection caleth to memory,
together with the Idea, the thing represented. Idea's are to be vested with
their proper circumstances, according as their natures require, for like as
Writings, the fairer they are, are more facilly read; so Idea's, the more aptly
they are conceived, according to the exigency of their nature, are more
speedily recalled to mind; and also consequently the things by them signified.
Motion is to be attributed to Idea's of moveable things; quiet to Idea's of
quiet things, and good or evil savours, to Ideas representing things so
qualified. Examples of moveable Idea's, are Artificers at work in their shops,
women dancing, Trees shaken by the wind, Water running from Cocks, and such
like. Idea's of quiet things, are Henns laying in their nests, Thieves lurking
under bushes, etc. Idea's to which sound is ascribed, are a Lion roaring, a
Bell ringing, whistling, murmr of Trees, a Quirister singing, a Huntsman
hollowing, etc. Moreover, if Perfume, burning in a Chafing Dish, be used for an
Idea, a sweet and pleasant odor must be attributed thereto, on the contrary to
vaults under ground, a filthy, unwholesome stink, is to be assigned; so Idea's
of merry men, require cheerfulness of countenance, of sickmen, pale-nesse and
sadness. After this manner Idea's sot Edifices, Machines, and all Artificial
things whatsoever, ought to be signalised; proportion of form, and splendor of
colors, must be attributed to Pictures, grace and liveliness of Letters, to
Writings, glory and excellency of Wormanship, to Engravings,; Finally, every
Idea must have such illustration as may render it most notable and conspicuous,
and seem principally coherent to its nature.

But before I proceed further, it is expedient to take into consideration, the
common Affection of Ideas, their Species, shall succeed after, in a more proper
place.

The common Affections of Idea's are three: Quantity, Position, and Color.

CHAP. IV. Of the Quantity of Idea's.
AN Idea in respect of Quantity, is either equal, greater, or lesser then the
thing represented.

An equal Idea is, when the thing represented, is bestowed in a Place of the
Repository, in its proper and due magnitude, as being neither too great to be
contained therein, nor so small it cannot be discerned by one standing before
the Repository; such are Chairs, Pictures, Tables, Beds, Heaps of Stone, Piles
of Wood, two Combatants in a single Duel, and the like.

An-augmented, or greater Idea, is when the thing to be remembered, is increased
to a multitude, that it may be better viewed at a distance, which else being
small, would not fall under cognizance; as if the thing to be deposited in the
Repository, were a Penny, a Pearl, a Grain of Mustard Seed, or a Spider, which
are so small, that disposed in a Room of the Repository, they escape the sight
of a man standing before the Repository: In such cases, instead of one Penny,
imagine a heap of Pence new coined; Instead of one Pearl, a multitude of
Pearls; Instead of one Grain of Mustard Seed, fancy certain Bushels scattered
about the Stage; And for one Spider, suppose a multitude creeping about the
opposite Wall.

A contracted or lesser Idea is, when the thing to be remembered is so great,
that it cannot be comprehended in its proper natural quantity, within such
narrow limits as a room of a Repository, and is therefore imagined to be
pourtrayed with elegant lively colors, in a Picture fixed to the opposite
Wall. Thus space of places how far soever distant, and all great things, may be
facilely represented in a Picture: As if the thing to be remembered were a
Battle, a triumphant spectacle, hunting or hawking through Woods and Groves, a
Naval conflict, large Territories, Castles, a Mountain, or Church, etc. whose
Idea's cannot be contained in the memorial places, unless contracted, and aptly
and artificially comprised in a Picture, conceited by imagination hanging
against the opposite Wall, that so it may be fully comprehended.

CHAP. V. Of the Position of Idea's.
LEt the Position of every Idea be such as in vulgar use does most commonly
appertain to the thing signified; Let the Idea's of things usually hanged
against a Wall, be so disposed in the Repository, as Musical Instruments, Arms,
Looking-Glasses, Pictures, Brushes, written Tables, etc. Such things as are
customarily fastened to, or in a Wall, imagine them accommodated in the
Repository in like manner, as Title-pages of Books pasted against the Pillar,
Proclamations, or printed pages nailed to the Wall, Funeral-Streamers, or
Pendants, in the higher part of the opposite Wall, as you see in Churches: Such
things as are commonly set upon shelves, fancy them so placed in the
Repository, as Vessels of Gold, Silver, Glasses, Books, Mercery Wares, etc.
Such things as are usually placed on a Table, conceive them so marshalled in
the Repository, as Victuals, Sums of Money, Table-Boards, etc. such things as
lie, or are any ways situate on ground, must be so placed in the Reyository,
as heaps of Wheat, a Cradle, Chest, Table, living Creatures, whether standing,
fitting, or lying, etc. Such things as are frequently under ground, are to be
supposed under the Marble-Stage; for though they escape the eye of a man
standing before the Repository, yet they cannot be concealed from the eyes of
his mind, which are only exercised in this matter; of this sort are Graves,
Wells, Wine-Cellars, Mettaline-Mines, Subterranean passages, through which
streams have their course, as Blood in the Veins, etc. Like method is to be
observed in site and position of all other things.

CHAP. VI. Of the Colors of Repositories and Idea's.
HEre you are to be admonished, that though every Repository is supposed to be
uniform in Building; yet they are distinguished from one another by the pillar
in the middle of every Repository, which must be imagined of several colors;
as if you use ten, that which you design for the first, must be conceived to
have a Golden Pillar; the second a Pillar of Silver: the third of black stone;
the fourth of blew stone; the fifth of red stone; the sixth of yellow stone; the
sevench of green stone; the eighth of purple stone, the ninth of white stone,
the tenth of Cinnamon color. Now for distinction sake, Gold is called the
color of the first Repository; Silver the color of the second Repository;
black of the third Repository; and so successively as before. If you use more
than ten Repositories, you must repeat the same colors over again, as before;
so that the eleventh is imagined to have a golden pillar, the twelfth a silver
pillar, the thirteenth a black pillar, the fourteenth a blew pillar, and so the
rest in order. After the same manner every Idea must be conceived clothed,
adorned, or some way illustrated with the proper color of the Repository,
wherein it is imagined to be placed. Take an example or two for better
explanation: Suppose a Saylor in a Canvase Suit be retained for an Idea in the
first Repository, I represent him standing there with a Golden Chain over his
shoulder like a Belt; if in the second, imagine he wears a silver Chain about
his neck, with a Whittle fastened thereto: If in the third, that he has black
Boots on his legs: If in the fourth, that he has a blew Skarf on his Arm, tied
in a rose-knot: If in the fifth, that he wears a Red Monmouth Cap on his head:
If in the sixth, that he swaggereth with a yellow Feather in his Cap: If in the
seventh, that he has a Green Silk Garter on his right leg: If in the eighth,
that his Canvase Coat is imbellished with a border of Purple Velvet: If in the
ninth, that his neck is beautified with a very white Orient Pearl; If in the
tenth, that he has a pair of Cinnamon colored Breeches.

Howbeit, if the Idea of its own nature be any ways related to the color of
its Repository, whereby it may be presently understood to have the color
thereof, it will need no other attribution: For example, if a Mayor of a City,
(who in regard of his Office is dignified with a purple Gown, and Gold Chain)
be placed as an Idea in the first or fifth Repository, there will be no need of
Attribution of color, because the Golden Chain does manifestly represent the
color of the first Repository, the purple Gown the color of the fifth. In like
sort, if a black Bull be placed as an Idea in either room of the first
Repository, his horns must be conceived gilded with Gold; if in the second,
with silver; if in the third, black, being the proper color of that
Repository, excludes any other addition: If in the fourth, let him be decked
with a Chaplet of blew Flowers; if in the fifth, with a Garland of red Roses,
etc. So a Picture imagined to be painted on the opposite Wall of the first
Repository, must be illustrated with Gold in some convenient place: If in the
opposite Wall of the second Repository, with silver; of the third, with black,
etc.

This attribution of a Repositories color, is of mavelous use, both to keep
in mind the Idea's themselves, as also their order; hereby the mind re-perusing
Idea's formerly bestowed, has always some certainty to guide it self, and
recollect any Idea at present latent; because it is unquestionable, that the
missing Idea is either wholly, or at least in part, illustrated with the proper
color of its Repository.

Moreover, in attributing a Repositories color to an Idea, (of it self not
partaking thereof) you must be careful that the color of the Repository be
accommodated to the most eminent part of the Idea, or as near as may be: If the
History of the Prophet Jonah thrown into the Sea by Mariners, be used as an
Idea, it must be represented in a picture according to the third Chapter
preceding; in which, though the Whale, Sea, Ship and Land are to be pourtrayed,
yet the Effigies of Jonah himself is the most remarkable part of the picture,
because Jonah is of the History there painted: If therefore this Story be to be
deposited in the first Repository, let the border of his Gown be supposed of
Gold; if in the second, of Silver; if in the third, let the Gown be fancyed
black; if in the fourth, blew, etc. so the top of a heap of Wheat is the most
conspicuous part; therefore if a heap of Wheat be placed in the first
Repository, imagine a Golden Streamer two foot long fixed in the top of the
Heap; if in the second Repository, let the Streamer be Silver; if in the third,
black; if in the fourth, blew, etc.

Thus much may suffice for common Affections of Idea's, in quantity, position
and color; their species follow.

CHAP. VII. Of Direct Idea's.
AN Idea is simple or compound: A simple Idea is uniform, and is fourfold,
direct, relative, fictitious and written.

A Direct Idea is when a visible thing, or conceived under a visible form, is
bestowed in the Repository, according to the same form, under which it is
naturally apprehended: So a Goat is the direct Idea of a Goat; a Rhinocerot of
a Rhinocerot; a Peacock of a Peacock; a Dove of a Dove. Thus a Majestical man
adorned with a Scepter, Imperial Diadem and Robe, is the Idea of a King: A
person arrayed in Academical habit, of a Scholar; An ancient woman in mourning
weeds, weeping and wiping her face with an Handkerchief, of a widow: A Virgin
apparelled like a Nun, of a Nun: A Satyr, as the Poets describe them, of a
Satyr: So a Temple is the direct Idea of a Temple, a Book of a Book, a Bed of
a Bed, a Sheath of a Sheath, an Image of an Image* a picture of a picture, an
Epistle of an Epistle, a Bond sealed, of a Bond: So good Angels and Spirits,
though they be incorporeal and invisible, (seeing they are commonly conceived
under visible forms) may be reposited as the other. To conclude, the mind of
man does naturally and immediately present direct Idea's of all visible things,
or such as are conceived under a visible form, that it is in vain to excogitate
any, but rather life those that offer themselves. If a man hears the relation
of a Naval Battle, does not he presently seem to behold the Sea, Ships, smoke
of great, Ordnance, and other things obvious in such matters. If speech be made
of muttering an Army, does not the Hearer form in his mind the Effigies of a
Field, replenished with Soldiers marching in Military postures. No precept in
this kind is delivered, which Nature it self has not dictated; but only to
imprint these Idea's more deeply in memory, we bestow them methodically in some
place, left otherwise they be forgotten through light apprehension. To explain
this more evidently, I will use an example.

An Example of remembering a History.
Diogenes the Cynick entering Plato's Hall, when he saw the Table covered with
a rich Carpet, the Shelves glittering with Silver, Gilt Cups, Vessels, and
other sumptuous furniture, laid hold of the Carpet with all his might, threw it
to the ground, and trod thereon with his feet, saying, I tread upon Plato's
pride: To whom Plato replied, But with greater pride:

The Idea of this Story is not so great, but that it may admit Reposition in
its equal quantity: Therefore I suppose in the place of the Repository where it
is to be bestowed, that there is a table covered with a rich Carpet, which a
sordid fellow in beggarly Raiment, throws on the ground, a grave man clothed in
honest sober apparel looking on. The attribution of the color of the
Repository is not to be forgotten: If therefore it be the first Repository in
which this Idea is to be placed, I imagine the Carpet to be imbellished with a
fringe or border of God: If in the second, of Silver: If in the third, of
black: If in the fourth, of blew, and so forth in the rest.

Another Example.
When Caius Julius Caesar first invaded Britain, the inhabitants taking arms set
upon him, and in set-battel drove him and his old Soldiers to flight: Whence
that of Lucan concerning Caesar's repulse.

Territa quaesitis oftendit terga Britanis.
Unto the Britains found, afrighted backs he showed.
The Idea of this history must be contracted, because it cannot be contained in
the memorial place in its due magnitude, C. 4. Therefore I imagine the
representation of a sharp Battle, fairly interwoven in the hangings, does cover
the half portion of the opposite Wall, either on the right or left hand, not
omitting the fit attribution of the Repositories color; wherein one part of
the Combatants personating the Romans, are armed and clad more civilly, their
General and Standard Bearer, with their whole Squadron, giving ground, whereby
their fellows take an occasion of flight; the other part, designing the
Britains, in more rude and Savage attire, press their flying Enemies, and
prosecute their victory.

An example of a Sentence to be remembered, the Subject being visible.
An Ant is a small Insect, the coldest and dryest of all Creatures, and
therefore the wisest; for cold and dry do chiefly contribute to Wisdom. The
Idea of this sentence ought to be augmented; for the magnitude of an Ant is so
inconsiderable, that being bestowed in a memorial place, it escapes sight:
Therefore I suppose an Ant-heap in the middle stage of the memorial place,
seeming almost black with Ants, swarming hither and thither; As for assignation
of color if this Idea be placed in the third Repository, the color of the
Repository, is sufficiently noted by the blackness of the Ants; if in the
seventh, by the greenness of the Ant-hill; so that there needs no addition of
color, if placed in the third or seventh Repository: But if it be designed to
the first Repository, let a Triangular Golden Streamer be supposed fixed in the
Ant-hill, a foot high; if in the second, a Silver Streamer; if in the fourth, a
Streamer of blew Silk; if in the fifth, of red; if in the sixth, of yellow; if
in the eighth, of purple; if in the ninth, of white; if in the tenth, of
Cinnamon color.

Another Example.
(...). Or as Ovid has it in his first Book De Amore:

Qnid magis est durum saxo? quid mollius unda?
Dura tamen molli saxa cavantur aqua.
What is harder then a stone? then water soft?
Yet Stones are worn by Water dropping often.
Either sentence signifying the same thing, are disposed after a like manner,
by supposing a Leaden Spout, sustained by an Iron Prop, fastened in the upper
part of the opposite Wall of the Repotory, does discharge plenty of water upon
the Marble Stage, which is worn beneath with the continual drip: In this case
the prop of the Spout may exhibit the color of the Repository.

All Histories, Actions, Fables, common Affairs; all visible things, or
conceived under a visible form; finally. All sentences whose subject is
visible, may be disposed in Repositories by Direct Ideas, in equal, augmented
or contracted quantity.

CHAP. VIII. Of Relative Ideas.
A Simple relative Idea is, when something to be rememembred is expressed by
his Correlative.

First, when the Cause is signified by the effect, as Melancholy by a sad man,
with his hat pulled over his eyes, his arms folded a cross, his eyes looking on
the ground, standing immovable: The Spring by Green Meadows and Flowring
trees: Winter by houses, Plants, earth, and all other things covered with Snow,
and rigid with Frost: Gluttony by a Fat man, vomitting half digested morsels.

Secondly, when the effect is signified by the Cause, as you did note the
oppression of the poor, by some eminent Oppressor, generally spoken against
for his unjust accumulation of riches: blasphemy by some notorious blasphemer,
whose discourse is frequently forced with impious oaths.

Thirdly, when the Subject is noted by an Adjunct, as Regal dignity, by a
Scepter and Crown; a Tavern, by a Bush; Exorcisme, by a Figure or charm; the
Planets and twelve houses, by their proper characters appropriated unto them.

Fourthly, when an Adjunct is signified by the Subject; as Cold, by Ice; heat,
by fire; light, by a candle; love, by a heart, the seat of affection; pride by
a Peacok spreading his tail; Gluttony, by an Estrich; Drunkenness, by a noted
drunkard; Impudence, by a norious whore; Avarice by a rich man counting money,
etc.

Fifthly, when one like thing, is put for another, as Parallel Circles, for the
world; a clean writing book* for a soul; a Serpent with a tail in his mouth,
for a year,; a woman embracing a broken pillar, for Fortitude; a Virgin
veiled, holding a drawn sword in her right hand, and a pair of balances in her
left, for Justice; a Winged old man, having long hair in the forepart of his
head, bald behind, and holding a Sithe in his hand, for Time: A man lading
water out of a pond with a Sive, for a fool undertaking an imposible thing, etc.

Sixthly, When a sentence is denoted by some particular example, by which the
truth thereof is notably demonstrated* as, No Element is qualified with gravity
in its proper place: This Philosophical axiom may be fitly illustrated by a
man diving under water, who so long as he is in the Water, is not sensible that
is ponderous, but out of the water finds exprimentally a pail full of water
heavy: The quantity of such Ideas is equal; for I imagine all the Stage of the
Memorial place, where this Idea is to be represented, converted into a Bath,
with a capacious Marble Cistern, a foot thick round about, filled to the brim
with fair water, in the middle whereof a naked man stands upright, lifting a
Tankard of water with both his hands, as if he were showing it: If this Idea be
placed in the first Repository, the Tankard must be supposed of Gold; if in the
second, of Silver; in the third, of Potters earth, black, in the fourth, blew,
etc. that the Idea may be some way related to the color of its place.

Another Example.
The body heated with wine, boileth over with lust. This Sentence may be
expresed by an Idea of Lot, sporting wantonly with his two Daughters in the
Grot, is a notable illustration thereof. To this purpose I imagine the Stage of
the memorial place, wherein this Idea is to be conserved, transformed into a
Cave, as it were framed out of a natural Rock, and seem to behold Lot revelling
with his two Daughters: Here Lot's outer Garment must be deemed to bear the
Repositories color.

Another Example.
Judicial Astrology is a busy vanity. Basil in Hexaemer. Hom. 1, This may be
relatively fancied by the History of Thales the Philosopher, about to take a
Stars height with an Astrolobe in a clear night, who being somewhat heedless of
his station, fell into a Ditch, for which he was worthily derided of a Woman
standing by; because he did so curiously mind things over his head, he did
neglect those under his feet.

In brief, if any thing may be readily understood by its Correlative, the same
maybe used for a Relative Idea; by which kind of Idea, all kind of
Hyeroglyphicks and innumerable sentences ingenuously exemplified, may be
repofited in Repositories.

CHAP. IX. Of Fictitious Ideas.
A simple Fictitious Idea, is when any thing is bestowed by way of a
substitute, wherewith it is feigned to have some supposed convenience; as when
a word of Homonymous signification, denoting some visible thing in one sense
(either in our our own language, or another) is substituted for something
invisible or unknown. After this manner proper names are often reserved in
Memory: as in Latin, Ramus, a man's name, may be signified per ramum viridem, a
green branch; Remus, per remum, an Oar; So in English, Smith a man's name, may
be reposed by a Smith blowing up fire in his Forge. Pinke, by the Flower so
called: Carpenter, by one of that trade plaining boards: Penelope, by the
Picture of Penelope and her web: Lucrece, by the Picture of the Roman Lady so
called, procuring her own death. Thus strangers names may be conserved by
friends or acquaintance of the same name; as John a strangers name, by a
brother or friend, so called; so Grace, signifying favor, may be retained by
Grace, a woman's name.

Thus words or names (which at large signify no visible thing) which divided
into parts, signify one or many things, may be laid up in Repositories on the
Stage, wall, or hangings in decent order; as these Barbarous words in Latin,
^er, ^s, sis, sus.
Aperglissus, by a Clay bank, on the right hand whereof (which is toward our
left hand) a Bear walloweth, and on the left (toward our right hand) a Sow.
Tedaspis, by a Torch and an Asp, ^a, aspis. (...).
Bosarnos, by an Ox and a Lamb. Araphos, by an Altar and a Light. (...).
Sustineamus, by a Sow, a Moth, and a Mouse, according to that noted ^^rse,

^^rfur edit* pannum, panem quoque sustineamus. Sow eats Bran, a Moth Cloth, a
a Mouse Bread. So Coxcomb in English, may be represented by two Cocks fighting,
and pulling each other by the Comb. Birdlington, by a Bird, Ling fish so
called, and a Tun. Harbottle, by a Hare and a Bottle, etc.

Some men to fix single words and letters more firmly in memory, use the images
of men and women for substistuted Ideas of Letters, and for animation (to use
their own phrase) attribute actions to them, whereby the mind may be provoked
to the affections, Mercy, Mirth, Lust, Fear, Avarice, Wrath, etc. But such
Ideas are by no means to be approved, First, because it is impious, and
dangerons to cherish lustful or scurrulous images in the mind, which infect
the soul, and render it more dull in performing its Office. Secondly, it wholly
perverteth the natural manner of Remembering; for Nature teaches men from their
infancy, by the images of men, to apprehend men, not letters, which order to
infringe, is all one as to unteach Nature, which is both dangerous and
difficult. Thirdly, too much time is lost in animation of such Ideas, which, is
therefore done, that being revolved in Memory, they may be more deeply
engraven. Lastly, it is vain and altogether unprofitable, to frame an Alphabet
of living Creatures, and learn them by heart, seeing they serve only to
apprehend naked Letters or single words, whose use is not frequent.

CHAP. X. Of Written Idea's
A Single written Idea, is when the thing to be Remembered, is imagined to be
written with black letters in a plain white Table, four foot square, hanging
against the opposite wall of the Repository. Written Idea's will perhaps at
first seem too weak and infirm to prompt the Memory with any thing to be
remembered; but if all our Rules which are required in disposing written Idea's,
be strictly observed, you will think otherwise.

In every such Idea, six things are required.

First, that the Characters (such as are Letters and Arithmetical figures) be
supposed of such magnitude, that they may be plainly read by one standing
somewhat remote; for so they are most easily attracted by the visual faculty,
and transferred to Memory, such like writings and inscriptions are frequently
seen in walls of Churches and houses.

Secondly, That every Idea be conceived written in the same form as are
commonly exposed in Books or Paper.

In remembering Proofs, you must fancy the names of the Books abbreviated, as
Genesis 20.6. Romans 8.13. Catalogues of names are distinguished by their descent
downward in order, as in the Alphabetical Catalogue of the Heretics.

Aetians. Agnoites. Albanenses. Anthropomorphists, Apollinaries. Apellites.
Arrians. Artemonites. Athelites, etc.
Distribution of parts distinctly placed, being referred to the whole, are thus
explicated.

Jewish feasts have been more solemn, 3. Passover. Penticost. Feast of Tab.
less solemn, 3. New Moons, or of blowing the Trumpet. Feast of Expiation.
Feast of Dedication, instituted by Herod the Great.



A Syllogism consisting of a Proposition, Assumption, and Conclusion, is
placed in diverse distinct sections, after this manner.

He which devoureth things consecrated to God, procures destruction to his own
family, Prove. 20.25.

But he which appropriated a portion of Glebe (pertaining to the Priest) to
himself and his heirs, devoureth that which is consecrate to God, Ezekiel. 45.4.

Therefore he which appropriateth a Portion of Glebe, etc.

A Comparison distributed into its two parts, has Protasis and Apodosis
collaterally disposed thus.

As there is great difference between the faculty of seeing, and the act of
seeing; for the faculty is always present, the act is often intermitted.

So there is great difference between the faculty of faith, and the act of
believing: regenerate persons after conversion, do always possess the former,
but the latter is often interrupted.

So Poetical fragments are expressed in single Verses and Lines, long Sentences
in prose are described in Lines of equal length, summarily fancy all kind of
writings in their usual mode.

Thirdly, it is required, That you suppose the Writing to begin at the upper
end of the Table.

Fourthly, One word at least in every written Idea, must be very carefully
apprehended and supposed to be expressed in Text-Letters, with all the Vowels
in Gold, especially let the first Letter be very great, and the other
transcendent Letters, if there be any, drawn somewhat longer then customarily.
Here you may observe, that of the small Letters some are interlineary, some
transcendents: Interlineary letters in all kind of Writing, are such as lie
equally between two parallel lines, as a, c, e, m, n, o, r, u, w.

Transcendent letters are such as exceed the Interlineary space, some of which
do only penetrate the upper line, as b, d, i, k, l, t, h, some the lower, as
f, s, j.

Fifthly, It is necessary, according to the Doctrine delivered in the sixth
Chapter, that every Idea be rendered some way partaker of the color of his
Repository) that the frame or border of every Table be imagined of the same
color as his Repository.

Lastly, you must so long contemplate your supposed written Idea, till you have
made at least some small impression thereof in your memory, diligently
observing in your mental meditation, the length of the whole; Writing the first
letter of the principal word, as in the fourth Rule the Golden Vowels,
transcendency and order of the letters, with such like considerations as
chiefly conduce to imprint the written Idea firmly in your imagination: For
seeing Writings make less impression in the mind, then things, they must be
more carefully and longer revolved in mind, that they may accomplish by
assiduity, what they cannot perform through imbecility.

These generally required in every written Idea, may suffice: Now I will
descend to particular Rules; but considering that to treat of every particular
kind of written Idea, would be both laborious and unnecessary, I will only
insist upon the more usual, which are four, a Word, a Proof, a Phrase, a
Sentence.

A single Word, and a Proof, cannot be supposed to have any principal Word,
because they be singular, which never theless must be carefully taken notice of
as in the fourth Rule.

Let this Word (Spagyrus) be the Example of a Word to he imaginarily written,
signifying according to Paracelsus, one which can dexterously discern good from
evil, truth from falsehood: Fancy the same thus written.

SPAGYRUS.
In the Inscription I diligently weigh the length of the Word* the first
letter, the figure and order of the other letters, their color and
transcendency: Three are of Gold, a, y, u. three descend beneath the lower
line, p, y, g.

In the inscription of a Proof, besides the Name of the Book, the quantity of
the Numbers is to be carefully observed: Number being the measure of quantity,
and therefore merely related to visible things, is facilely kept in mind; the
only observation of the quantity of Numbers, fixes them perfectly in Memory.
Take an Example of a Proof.

Exodus 10.16
The letters e, and o, are fancied of Gold, x, and d, are transcendents, the
former ascending above the line, the latter descending beneath.

In writing a Phrase and Sentence, the first Word is to be heedfully observed;
and therefore the first letter must be imagined very large, all the Vowels
written with Gold, and the transcendents very largely extended, as is
aforesaid, Rul. 4.

Moreover in writing of Phrases, all the Words except the first, must be
supposed written with small letters, after this manner.

To entice with flattering words.
Conceited with vain glorious bubbles.
A Sentence consists of one or more clauses.

A Sentence of one Clause may be supposed wholly written with Capital letters,
as,

NO CALAMITY IS ALONE. THE LAW OF GOD IS THE LIGHT OF MAN.

(...).

FRIENDS HAVE ALL THINGS IN COMMON.

In Sentences of many Clauses, you may suppose all the words of the first
Clause marked with capital letters, the rest with small letters: As

SOLA SALUS SERVIRE Deo; sunt coetera frauds.

GODS SERVICE IS CHIEFEST BLESSEDNESS; other things are deceits.

QUANQUAM BONUM NON EST MALUM; est tamen bonum ut sit malum. Augustine.

ALTHOUGH EVIL IS NOT GOOD; yet it is good that there should be evil.

WHATSOEVER IS TO BE BELIEVED BY EVERY MAN IS TRUE.

But every wicked man is to believe that he shall be saved:

Therefore it is true, that every wicked man shall be saved.

Here you must note, that every wicked man is not to believe absolutely, that
he shall be saved, but conditionally, viz. If he repent, and believe in Christ.

Another Example.
AUREAM QUISQUIS MEDIOCRITATEM DILIGIT; tutus careat absoleti Sordibus tecti,
careat invidenda Sobrius aula. Horat. THE GOLDEN MEAN WHO IS CONTENT WITHAL,
Wants no spacious Palace, nor envied Hall.

By written Idea's you may conserve all Characters, single Letters, naked
Numbers, calculations of Nativities, Cosmographical Descriptions and Proofs, as
also all Words, Phrases and Sentences, not to be aptly expressed otherwise.

Now having dispatched all written Ideas, and such as are single, we will
proceed to the compound.

CHAP. XI. Of Compound Idea's.
THis kind is compounded of single Idea's, representing either a naked word or
sentence: A compound Idea signifying a single word, consists of a Fictitious
and written Idea; As for example:

If you were to remember (Edline) a friends Name, imagine (Ed) written on the
opposite Wall on the right hand, and a line extended thence all along to the
left aside.

So Lambert may be retained by a Lamb placed in one of the Repositories, and
[ert] written on the opposite Wall on the left hand.

Many words may be conveniently reposited by Idea's compounded of fictitious
and written Idea's.

A compound Idea representing an entire sentence, is twofold, consisting either
of a Direct and Written Idea, or of a Relative and Written Idea; the nature of
both will appear perspicuous by examples.

Example of an Idea, compounded of a Direct and written Idea.
In the third Book of Ovid's Elegies, the Fable of Jupiter and Danaes, is thus
morally applied.

Jupiter admonitus nihil esse potentius auro,
Corruptae pretium Virginis ipse fuit.
Dum merces aberat durus pater, ipsa severa,
Aerati posts, ferrea turris erat.
Sed postquam sapiens in munere venit adulter
Prebuit ipsa sinus, and dare jussa dedit.
Jove having heard Gold was of greatest power,
Would for a Maidenhead himself have sold:
Without a Bribe, Father and Maid looked sour,
Brass gates and Iron Walls did him withhold;
Till in a shower of Gold wise Jove descending,
The Daughter loved, the Father did befriend him.
To remember this Moral, imagine the story of Jupiter and Danaes, drawn to the
life in the upper part of a large frame hanging against the opposite Wall, and
these Verses of Ovid writ according to the usual manner, in the lower part,
which is vacant.

Another Example.
The seven Electoral Princes first instituted Otho, third Emperor of that Name,
and Pope Gregory the fifth, are included by Manlius, in these Verses.

Moguntinensis, Trevirensis, Colonensis,
Atque Palatinus Dapifer, Dux portitur ensis.
Marchio Prepositus camere, Pincerna Bohemus.
The Prelates of Mentz, Trevers and Colen.
The Palsgrave Carver, Of Brandenburg.
Marquess Chamberlain,
The Of Austria.
Duke Sword Bearer, Cup Bearer the Of Bohemia.
King.
Suppose an Emperor sitting on a throne in one of the Repositories, seven
Princes standing about him, and these Verses writ on a table, hanging against
the opposite Wall.

Another Example.
An Epigram of Sir Hugh, a vainglorious Knight, taken out of Nicholas Borbon.

Sepelapis motus non fit muscosus, ut aiunt,
At barbam e bello retulit Hugo domum.
Moss (as they say) grows on no rolling stone;
Yet Sir Hugh from the Wars brought a Beard home.
Imagine an armed Knight, of a fierce Martial aspect, with a long Beard,
walking in a memorial place, bearing a white Shield on his left arm, wherein
this Epigram is inscribed.

Another.
An Epitaph upon the Empress Matilda, Daughter of Henry the First, King of
England; Wife of Henry the Fourth, Emperor; and Mother of Henry the second,
King of England.

Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima prole;
Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa parens.
By Birth Great, Wedlock greater, greatest in Progeny,
Here lies the Daughter, Spouse, and Mother of Henry.
Fancy this Epitaph graven on the hither side of an Alablaster tomb, standing
in a memorial place.

All Histories, Acts, Fables, Apologies, Morals described in Verse, or other
Writing; also Epigrams, Epitaphs, Anagrams and Mottoes may be retained in
Memory, by an Idea compounded of a Direct and Written.

Example of an Idea compounded of a Relalative and Written.
Theodore Beza writes thus, under the Emblem of a man spitting toward Heaven.

Cernis, ut hic foedo coelum qui conspuit ore,
Non coelum, imo suos conspuit ore sinus:
Et tu coelorum Dominum contemptor, in illum
Non quot verba jacis, tot tibi probra vomis?
This Drivil who does spit at Heaven high;
Not Heaven, but his bosom does defile;
So contemners of Divine Majesty
Do hurt themselves, not God, by speeches vile.
In the upper part of a table hanging against the opposite Wall, imagine the
picture of a man with his hands on his sides, his legs stradling, and his head
bended backward toward Heaven, spitting thereat; this Tetrastichon written
underneath, according to the usual manner in Emblems.

Another.
The same Theodore Beza has another Emblem of a Circumference, equally
distant on every side from its Center, with these Verses.

Cernis ut haec medium cingat teres undique punctum
Linea, and hinc spacio distet and inde pari.
Scilicet illa refert, quod nos tegit undique coelum,
Tellurem hoc punctum quod tenet ima notat,
Cur igitur doleas? quorsum (dic quaeso) labores
Tu, patria pepulit quem pietatis amor?
Coelum si versus tendis, quocunque recedes,
Hinc spacio coelum cernis and inde pari.
See how this Circumference does enclose
The middle point, like distant every where:
The Circle, Heaven round about us shows,
The Center notes Earth which does us bear.
Why then (I pray) thy labor blam'st thou so,
Who art expelled thy country for Gods love?
If thou to Heaven tend, where e're thou go,
Thou see all places like near Heaven above.
In the upper part of a fair large table, fancy a center and circumference to
be described, with these Verses writ underneath.

Another.
Magnus Aristoteles trutinando cacumina rerum,
In duo divisit quicquid in orb fuit.
Great Aristotle weighing all things here,
Concluded, in the World but two there were.
Suppose two Parallel circles drawn in the upper part of a table, in the center
of which, let the figure 2. be written, and underneath this Distich, whereby is
signified Subjects and Accidents.

Another.
(...), Hesiod.
The Lord has pleased openly to place
The sweat of Virtue before each man's face.
Suppose the versicle of Hesiod elegantly painted at the foot of Cebes table.

All Emblems, Hyeroglyphical Sentences or illustrated with similyes, may be
deposited in Repositories by a Relative and written Idea; of which the Picture
occupying the upper part of the Table, is a a Relative Idea, and that written
underneath, a Scriptile. So much for compound Idea's, and all the other kinds.

CHAP. XII. Of choosing Ideas.
IT is sufficiently manifest out of the five precedent chapters, what Idea, and
how qualified, every thing to be remembered does appropriate to it self; but to
render all more perspicuous in this chapter, I will briefly ennumerate the
Rules dispersed in several places, for choice of Idea's; though such
Recapitulation may be accounted tautology; yet it is very profitable; the Rules
follow.

Rule 1. All Histories, Actions, Fables, Apologies, common businesses, visible
things, or conceived under a visible form, all sentences whose subject or
matter is visible, and without any dependent written illustration, ought to be
laid up in the Repositories by a Direct Idea, in quantity equal, augmented or
contracted. Cap. 1.

Rule 2. All Histories, Actions, Fables, Apologies, Morals and Similyes,
remarkable for some coherent Verses or Writing, as all Epigrams, Epitaphs,
Anagrams and Impresses are generally to be expressed by a compound Idea,
consisting of a Direct and Scriptile. Cap 2.

Rule 3. All Emblems and Sentences illustrated by some notable Example, or
expressed Hyeroglyphically, are to be bestowed in Repositories by a compound
Idea, consisting of a Relative and Scriptile, Cap. 2.

Rule 4. All Characters, single Letters, nakes Numbers, Calculations of
Nativities, Cosmographical descriptions and citations, are to be always
disposed in Repositories by a Scriptile Idea.

Rule 5. All single words signifying no visible thing, whose Idea either
relative, fictitious, or compound of fictitious and scriptile, does presently
occur, is to be so placed in the Repository, either relatively, fictitiously,
or compoundly: If no such Idea occurr, then it is to be represented by a
Scriptile Idea.

Rule 6. All Phrases and Sentences inexpressible by a Direct Idea, may be
conserved by a Relative Idea, or compounded of a Relative and Scriptile, if any
present it self commodiously, or if no such offer it self quickly, by a
Scriptile Idea. Cap. 8.10. and 11.

So much shall suffice for choice of Ideas.

CHAP. XIII. The manner of Reposing Ideas.
NOw there remains to speak of the manner of laying up Idea's in their places,
to which purpose take these ensuing Rules.

Rule 1. Every Idea is to be placed in its order, viz. that which first
occurreth in the first place; the second in the second place of the first
Repository; the the third in the first, the fourth in the second place of the
second Repository; fifth in the first, the sixth in the second place of the third
Repository; the like method is to be used in all the Repositories, till all the
Idea's be placed.

Rule 2. Due quantity, convenient site, color of the Repository, and peculiar
attributes, are to be imposed on each Idea, and very carefully minded.

Rule 3. After you have rightly disposed the first Idea of any Repository, note
it very diligently with the eye of your mind, as if it really stood there,
observing its kind, subject, quantity, site, attribution of the Repositories
color, and other such like peculiar attributes, if it have any. For example,
whether the Idea deposited in the first place of any Repository (as to the
kind) be direct; as to the subject, concerning a man; in respect of quantity,
equal; in regard of sight, placed on the ground; and as to peculiar attributes,
whether moving or yiedling a sound; go over all these things in your mind,
saying, The Idea which I have here bestowed, is Direct, of a man, equal, placed
on the ground, moving and yiedling a sound: For by such considerations an Idea
is more firmly graven in memory.

Rule 4. After you have fitly disposed the second Idea of any Repository, you
must excogitate foam apt relation thereof to the former, in respect of likeness
or unlikeness of site, likeness or unlikeness of subject; or else in regard of
the action of the latter Idea referred to the former; you can pitch upon no
Idea which may not be related to the former by one of these five ways, which
shall plainly appear by example: if both Idea's of one Repository, precedent
and subsequent, be fixed to the wall, placed on a table, the ground, or under
ground, etc. they agree in site: But if one be fastened to the Wall, the other
placed on a Table, on the ground or under ground, they are unlike in site: When
the subject of both Idea's is Justice, Sin, a Man, War or Sleep, etc. they
agree in subject; but when the subject of one Idea is Justice, of the other
Drunkenness, the one of a man, the other of a stone, or any other opposite
thing, they disagree in subject. Taken an example of transferring the action of
a latter Idea to a former: Suppose that a man in a Gown, sitting at a Table,
and over-looking some Books of Accounts, with Counters lying ready to compute
the total sum, be an Idea disposed in the first place of a Repository; and the
Idea to be placed in the second room of the Repository, be a Farryer giving a
Horse a Drench with a Horn: In this case, that the action of the latter may
have some dependence on the former, imagine that the Horse (as soon as the
drench is poured into his mouth) leaps back and disturbeth the man in his
reckoning, who sits at the Table in the first place of the Repository. This
mutual Relation of Idea's placed in the same Repository, is as it were a
linking of them together, and does admirably conduce to the remembrance of both.

Rule 5. If two or more distinct Idea's concur, whose relation to one another
is found so near, as if they were combined together; bestow them in one same
Memorial Place: As if the Idea immediately preceding be a Silver Basin full of
fragrant Water, set upon a joined Stool, and the subsequent Idea be an idle man
doing nothing; you may conjoin these two Idea's in one, imagining that this man
washes his hands in that odoriferous Water; so if the former Idea be two
Virgins talking together, the latter a Skein of Green Silk, to join these two
Ideas by a proper connection, you may fancy that one of the Virgins holds the
Skein upon her wrists, whilst the other windeth it off her hands into a
bottom. In like manner if the Antecedent Idea be Scriptile, and the Consequent
likewise Scriptile, if so be you allow space enough in the Table, the latter
may be subscribed under the former in a convenient distance from one another.
Thus three Scriptile Ideas concurring together, if they be not too large for
one Table, may be supposed written therein; the first in the highest place, the
second in the middle, the third in the lowest, allowing nevertheless a fit
distance. But always when you comprize two or three Ideas in one place, you
must remember carefully, that so many Ideas were constituted in such a place.

Rule 6. When you have laid up any Idea in its Place, (whether it be in the
first or second Room of the Repository) peruse all the foregoing Idea's in
their order, if you have time, that they may reside more deeply in Memory, and
make the stronger impression in mind. For as a Schoolboy by often reading
over his lesson, learneth it by heart, so the more frequently you peruse
Idea's, the more firmly you will retain them.

Rule 7. Lastly, have a care not to load your Memory with a more numerous
multitude of Idea's then is fit, for as it is unwholesome to burden the stomach
above its strength, so also to overwhelm the Memory with multiplicity of
Idea's, does lead into great confufusion. Temperate men admit only so much meat
as they think they can well concoct; so do you only commit such worthy things
to Memory, as you trust faithfully to remember; for it is better firmly to
retain a few remarkable things, then many of mean base nature.

CHAP. XIV. Of the practice of the Art of Memory.
I Think now convenient to illustrate the premised precepts by examples,
whereby the practice of this Art, may be rendered more facile. First, I will
propose examples of common affairs, afterward of observations; Lastly, I will
briefly exhibit the Art of Dictating, and discharging of Memory.

Examples of ordinary business.
I. Suppose (as taking it for granted you were to go to some great Market Town,
it concerns not our purpose whether the place be known, or unknown, and intend
in the first place to enquire the price of Seed Barlie: imagine then in the
first Place of the first Repositorie (that is the part on the right hand) you
see a man measuring Barlie out of a Sack into a Bushel, with a company of men
standing about him, as is the usual manner in Markets, not forgetting to fancy
the Bushel handles to be Gold, that so the Idea in some part may be related to
the Repository in color, as is required in the sixth Chapter:

II. Moreover, That in the same Town lives a Labourer whom you know, and must
enquire out to work in your Hay-harvest; fancy him to stand in the second place
(on the left hand) of the first Repository, sharpening his Golden Sithe on a
whetstone, as it were preparing for such Rustical employment: I say Golden
Sithe, that it may participate of the color of the Repository; this Idea
agrees with the former in sight and subject, for both Idea's of this
Repository are of men, and placed on the ground.

III. Furthermore, That in your Journey, our mind full of Cogitation, is
transferred from ordinary affairs, to Philosophical Contemplation, and in such
Meditation you pitch upon something worthy further discussion; place the Idea
thereof in the first Room of the second Repository; for example, if this were
your Meditation; Even as Terrestrial exhalations condensed are the material
cause of the Thunder-stone, though engendered in the air, which is no Matrix
of ponderous bodies: So of the rays (which are as it were exhalations) of
celestial bodies, there is generated a certain substance, called Quintessence,
which by commixion with the four Elements, through their tenacity, grows into
one with them, whereby they are altered, and indewed with new forms, according
to the disposition of the matter into which those celestial rays are conveyed,
the hand of the Almighty directing them. This Idea must be augmented, Chapter
3. Imagine therefore a multitude of Thunder-stones, heaped up in the midst of
the first Memorial place, of the second Repository, some of the uppermost
gilded with Silver, to represent the color of the Repositorie.

IV. A while after you call to mind some Aromatical Spices you are to buy: To
remember which, fancy the second place of the second Repositorie converted into
a Grocers shop, the opposite wall garnished with Nests of Boxes full of several
Spices, with Titles writ upon the Boxes, after the usual mode; two foot on this
side the wall, let there stand a Counter, the Wares exposed thereon you are to
buy: as if the first thing you nominate to buy be Pepper, let a Silver Box full
of Pepper stand upon the further end of the Counter; if the second thing
designed be Nutmegs, place a loose bag of Silver gilt Nutmegs in the middle
of the Counter; if the third be Sugar, set a Sugar loaf on the hither end of
the Counter, with a Silver string tied about the top, that it may in some part
bear the color of the Repositarie. In this case you must remember that three
Idea's were bestowed in one Place, whose coherence with the Idea in the other
Repository, is taken from their unlikenesse of sight; for that Idea was heaped
on the ground, these three are placed upon a Counter.

V. Your next incident business is to remember to speak with a Counselor of
the same town (a man of a very great repute and credit for knowledge in the
Law) about a friends suit depending in Chancery: Imagine that Counselor in a
Lawyers Gown, sitting in a Chair, overlooking some writings, in the first Place
of the third Repository; seeing his Gown is black, you need no other
attribution of color of the Repository.

VI. If another new occasion present it self to mind, as that you are to buy a
piece of Black Velvit of a Mercer in that town; the second Place of the third
Repository must be transformed into a Mercers shop, a piece of Black Velvet
neatly laid in folds of equal length, lying on the Counter, which does in like
manner as well denote the Repositories color, as the Gown of the Counselor
sitting in the former Place; whence also is deduced a manifest relation to the
precedent Idea, the Lawyers Gown supposed to be lined with Velvet.

Examples of remarkable Observations.
If you dined the same day among many learned men at an Ordinary, and in their
discourse did observe some things worthy of further consideration; the Idea's
of such Observations, are to be reposited in their following Repositories, in
the same order as they occur.

I. The first Remarkable sentence may be this, Desire of things not attainable,
procures wretched madness. I would signify this Sentence relatively, in the
first Place of the fourth Repository, by some young man aparelled in Blew silk,
deeply enamoured of a Virgin nobly descended, whose enjoyment he could not
expect, weeping and lying on the ground, till surprised with Melancholy, he
became mad: the truth of the Sentence is evidently demonstrated by this Example.

II. The second Sentence may be that of the Poet Lucretius.

Praeterea si nulla fuit generalis origo
Terrarum and Coeli, semperque aeterna fuere.
Cur supra bellum Thebanum, and funera Trojae,
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
Besides if God did not Heaven create, And Earth, they are Eternal, and each
thing:
Beyond the Theban War, and Troys sad fate,
Why do not Poets then, elder deeds sing.
The Idea of this Sentence is to be compounded of a Direct and Scriptile, you
must imagine the Wars of Thebes and Troy severally depainted in the upper part
of a large spacious Table, and beneath these Verses of Lucretia's fairly
written; because it is put in the fourth Repository, suppose a Blew Line three
inches broad, drawn between the Pictures of Thebes and Troy besieged: The Line
is more remarkable in this Idea, showing the Pictures to be divided into two
equal parts, Chapter 6. The frame must hang against the opposite wall of the
second place of the fourth Repository; this Idea may be referred to the Idea in
the former Room from their diverse situations, the precedent placed on the
ground, this hanging against the opposite wall.

III. Let this be the third Sentence, Every thing that is just, is not
agreeable to equity, Manlius Torquatus, did justly, but not equally, when he
commanded his son, a courageous young man (who had deserved well of the
Republic) to be beheaded, because that contrary to his order, provoked by the
enemy, he brought forth the Roman Legions and joined battle in his father the
Generals absence, though he was Victor. The Idea of this Sentence is Direct, to
be placed in the first Place of the fifth Repository; imagine a Martial man
standing there in complete armor; a plume of Feathers in his Crest, of a
severe frowning aspect, a great Golden chain (the Index of his name) girt round
about his body, holding a Red Trunchion in his right hand, applied to his
sides; and seeming imperiously to command one clothed like an Executioner,
holding an Ax sprinkled with blood, to put his Son, arrayed in Red silk, to
death.

IV. A man may wittingly do his neighbor a prejudice, without committing an
injury; for if there be two Innes in one Town, the one Inkeeper must needs
endamage the other, by endeavoring to draw Guests to his own Inn, yet is such
damage without injury, nor condemned by any Law. This Idea is Direct, but in
quantity contracted. Imagine therefore in the second Place of the fifth
Repository, a Town elegantly described on a Table, hanging against the opposite
Wall, containing two Innes, the signs of both sustained by Posts of a Red
color; it has reference to the former Idea in respect of subect, for Justice
is the basis of both Idea's.

V. No excellent wit it free from some madness, may be expressed Relatively by
a learned man who through too great intention of mind in study, is become
frantic, wearing a yellow Plume of Feathers in his hat (yellow being the
color of the sixth Repository) and carrying some childish Geugaws in his
hands, at which he laughs so heartily, that the Reponant hears him; he is to
be set in the first Place of the sixth Repository, near the opposite wall.

Ilia a vestal Virgin, great with child by Mars, brought forth two twinns,
Romus and Remus at one birth, which she put forth to be nursed by a notable
harlot, named Lupa, of whom all Bawdy-Houses after in Latin were called
Lupanaria: Hence certainly arose the Fable, that they were nourished by a
She-Wolf: Romus in process of time being created King, imposed his own Name
upon Rome, by the Citizens whereof in flattery, he was called Romulus. This is
a Direct Idea; imagine in the second place of the sixth Repository, a She-Wolf
suckling two Twins with her dandling Dugs, as if they were her own Whelps, her
neck invironned with a yellow Collar, which with howling does divert the mad
man in the precedent place from his mirth. This Relation is in regard of
action, passing from the latter Idea to the former, according to the fifth Rule
of the 13. Chap. Moreover both Idea's of this Repository agree in clamorous
sound, and in their site on the ground.

Milo of Croton, a famous Wrestler, first crowned in the Olympic Games, when
through age he had left off his youthful exercise, and traveled through some
Woodlands of Italy, espied an Oak near the way rifted in the middle, and
willing (as is supposed) to try whether any of his ancient vigor remained,
thrust his hands into the Clefts of the Tree) to rend down the middle part; but
the Oak thus forcibly writhed (so soon as his violence ceased) returned to its
pristine Estate, and closing fast upon his hands, detained him a prey for wild
Beasts, Aul. Gell. Attic. Noc. 15 16. The Idea of this History is Direct, of
equal magnitude to be placed in the first place of the seventh Repository, in
the midst whereof I fancy a cleft Oak full of Green Leaves and Acorns, in that
cleft of which a strong great limbed man, crowned with Laurel, is fast held by
the hands, who bending back his head and body, cries with a horrible
vociferation, that you really seem not only to see his wretched body, and the
Beasts preying about him; but also hear his outcries and lamentations.

VIII. To drive forward the night with old Wives fables. This phrase is
expressed by a Direct Idea, supposing the opposite Wall of the second place in
the seventh Repository, converted into the form of a Chimney, containing a
great Fire, about which some women sit gossipping, among them an old woman in a
Green Gown (like an Ape in Purple) laughing and holding up her hands, her
countenance, gesture and action conformable, tells a Tale to the rest, which
affects the whole Conventicle of Women with mirth. The relation of this Idea
to the former, arises from the great noise in both, only the former is a
lamentable doleful sound, this a merry jocund noise.

IX. Men are certainly more ancient then the Heathenish Gods, because these are
the others invention. The Idea of this sentence is direct, viz. a Statuary in a
Purple Wastcoat, fashioning an image, which is to be disposed in the first
place of the eighth Repository.

X. Every particle of Snow, if it be not somewhat melted, is of a six angular
figure, proclaiming the admirable Artifice of the Creator, to such as curiously
contemplate the same. The Idea of this Sentence is Direct, in quantity
augmented; for seeing one flake of Snow is so small, that bestowed in a
memorial place, it cannot be seen afar off; a heap of Snow is to be substituted
in the middle of the stage of the second place of the eighth Repository; and
because this Idea has nothing of Purple in it (the proper color of this
Repository) fancy a Purple Streamer two foot high, placed in the midst of the
heap of Snow, Cap. 6. The Relation may be deduced from the subject, there being
Artifice in both Ideas, though of much greater excellency and admiration in the
latter, then the former, Snow being a Divine Artifice, a Statue but humane.

XI. There are three most beautiful Mothers, of three very deformed Daughters;
Familiarity breeds Contempt, Truth procures Hatred, and Peace engendereth
idleness. This Idea is Direct, imagining in the first place of the ninth
Repository, three most amiable women in very rich Apparel, having Garlands on
their heads, sitting upon three-legged Stools, and giving suck to three crying
misshapen Children, lapped up in pure white swaddling Clothes: The cry of the
children gives this Idea a loud sound.

XII. A Privilege is that which is granted in favor of certain persons
contrary to common right, and is called Privilege quasi privata lege, that is,
by a private law. This may be expressed relatively, by some well known person
deeply in debt, who procured a Privilege for himself fairly written in white
Parchment, authorized with the Great Seal, to protect himself from molestation
of Creditors: The Parchment of the same color with the Repository, excludes
all other assignation of color as useless. Lastly, A dependency upon the
former Idea, may be deduced from a transient action, supposing that this man in
the second place, looking on the Women in the first place, does salute them
very courteously and civilly after the gentile posture, by whom he is mutually
saluted again.

XIII. He does not live, who takes no care but to live. The Idea of this
Sentence is Scriptile, and must be supposed written in a large white Table,
noting such observations as you had formerly delivered to this purpose, which
may be supposed committed to the man standing in the second place of the last
Repository to hold, as having no other employment, whereby he is somewhat
diverted from conference with the women; by this means both these latter Idea's
are as it were one, Cap. 13. Rul. 5. and being deposited in the ninth
Repository, needs no attribution of color, as is shown before, Cap. 10. Rul.
4*

XIV. The ancient Gauls and Britains used English Mastives in Military service,
instead of Soldiers. Strabo. This Idea is direct, but contracted by reason of
the great space, to be assigned for a field Battle: Let therefore this skirmish
of men and dogs be imagined interwoven artificially in colors to the life. in
the hangings of the opposite Wall of the first place of the tenth Repository,
the Collars of the Mastives of Cinnamon color (the proper color of the tenth
Repository, full of iron spikes.

XV Good works justify faith, faith justifies the person, is a Scriptile
Idea; therefore I suppose this sentence fairly written (according to the Rules
in the tenth Chapter) in a large square table, the frame of Cinnamon color,
hanging against the opposite Wall of the second place. The relation of one Idea
to the other, is taken from their like site both hanging against the Wall.

XVI. Dic ubi tunc esset, cum praeter, cum nihil esset?

Tunc ubi nunc, in se, quoniam sibi sufficit ipse.

Say where was God, when him beside Not any thing had been?
Then there where now, in himself, for Himself suffices him.
This is likewise a Scriptile Idea, and may be fitly comprehended in the table
of the preceding Idea, observing such Rules as are delivered concerning
repositing a Scriptile Idea, and noting that two Idea's are comprised in this
place, Cap. 13. Rule 5.

17. In the year 1530. in the time of Charles the fifth, Emperor, the Germane
Princes exhibited their Confession of Faith at Augspurgh, with a solemn
protestation because of that perilous time, whence afterward they, and all
such as embraced the same confession, were called Protestants. This Idea is
Direct; but all the ten Repositories being already occupied, you must imagine
ten other Repositories of the same color as the former, to be used in the same
order as was proposed in the 16. Chapter: So the color of the eleventh
Repository will be gold. I suppose in the first place thereof an Emperial
Throne, adorned with badges of the Empire, glittering with Gold and Gems, upon
which the Emperor crowned with a Golden Diadem sits, to whom his Nobles
bare-headed, present their Confession fairly engrossed in paper.

XVIII. Philip King of Macedon, sent a Prolix Epistle to the Laconians, wherein
he did require some things which did not please them: They returned him an
answer containing but one syllable (that is) Not, which the Writer did describe
in so great a Character, that it equalized a large Epistle. Another time the
same Philip menaced the same people, That if he did once invade their Country,
he would cause an utter extirpation of them; the Laconians on the contrary sent
no other reply but this particle, ei, that is, if; insinuating thereby, that
the word if was well inserted by Philip, who could never hope to penetrate
their Region: Hence was derived the Proverb, Laconical brevity, This is a
Direct Idea, these two words fancied to be drawn in two sheets of paper, with a
Golden Margent round about, an inch broad, and pasted against an opposite Wall.
Coherence with the former Idea offers it self from similitude of subject,
supposing that these two words [not, if] contain an answer to the aforesaid
Confession presented to the Emperor.

XIX. Passionate anger is temporary madness. This sentence may be relatively
exemplified in Saul, who transported with anger, endeavored to smite Jonathan
his most beloved Son and Heir, with a Javelin; imagining the point of the
Javelin to be silver, that it may in something represent the color of the
twelfth Repository.

It will be unnecessary now to proceed further, because I think the precedent
examples will sufficiently declare by what kind of Idea's all memorable things
are to be expressed, and in what place to be deposited. If you please to essay
the rehearsal of all the Idea's of this Chapter in their order, without looking
in the Book, provided you have first read them over with good intention, I
doubt not but you will ingenuously confess the great utility and certainty of
this act.

Any man may easily apprehend, though he were never admonished, that observable
notes of Sermons are to be laid up after the same manner, as these
observations, which I have set down for better observation, as taken at a
Banquet.

CHAP. XV. Of Dictation and Reposition.
MOreover, the practical part of this Art is perspicuously seen in the
Exercises of Dictating and Repetition.

The use of Dictating is, when a person is to dictate to several Scribes or
Secretaries, what every one must write, so as to direct and exercise them all
at once, which is frequently incumbent upon Princes and Generals of Armies in
perilous times: In such cases there must be assigned a peculiar Repository to
every Scribe, wherein the affairs and sentences by him to be dispatched must be
reported in order; that is, the first Repository to the first Scribe, the
second Repository to the second, the third to the third, the fourth to the
fourth, and so forth if there be more: All Idea's of things to be dispatched by
the first Secretary, must have some attribution of Gold appertaing to them; all
Idea's of the second Repository, something of Silver; of the third, something
of black, of the fourth, blew, etc. In this case also it is permitted to place
two, three, or more Idea's if it be necessary, in one place of a Repository:
All businesses and sentences being thus reposited in order, and faithfully
digested before in mind, it is no difficult matter by the first Idea of the
first Repository, to dictate to the first Scribe what he must write first; by
the first Idea of the second Repository, to tell the second Scribe what he
shall write; by the first Idea of the third Repository, to inform the third;
and in like manner all the rest in their order. Again, by the second Idea of
each Repository, the second sentence is facilely delivered to each Scribe: By
the third, every Scribes third business; by the fourth Idea their fourth, and
so forward in the residue. This is the Exercise, which by some is called the
Art of Dictating.

Repetition is when a man repeateth sentences spoken by several persons, so as
to return each persons sentence in order as it was delivered; as if six, seven,
or more friends sitting together (to experience your happy memory) do every one
in order speak some sentence, to have them repeated again, after the same or a
retrograde manner, which way they please; dispose the Idea's of your first
friends sentences in the first Repository; of your second friend in the second
Repository; of your third friend in the third, and so forward in the rest. All
which being rightly disposed, you may with little trouble restore to every
friend his saying, either in the same order as they were spoken, or in a
retrograde or inverted order.

I have not thought expedient to illustrate these with Examples, because I
think them sufficiently explained by what has been already said; as also, that
this Exercise of Dictating and Repeating have little or no use, but vain
ostentation; though I have inserted them here, it was not done as necessary,
but because the knowledge of them did not seem superfluous for such as are
learned of this Art.

CHAP. XVI. Of irregular Reposition.
I Have thought good to annex a few words of irregular Reposition, which is
only one Rule, that is, a real Repository may be sometimes substituted instead
of a feigned, which irregularity is admitted upon a double occasion:

First, A thing it self being at hand, may be fitly used instead of its proper
Idea: As if a man sitting in his Study, light on some Book whose sheets are
transplaced, which he intends when he goes forth of his Study, to send to a
Bookbinder to be amended: That Book is to be cast at the threshold of the
Study, that the sight thereof may admonish him departing, to get it bound: So
also if Ink be wanting, an Ink-Glass or Bottle may be set by the Book.

Secondly, When a man must exonerate one or more Idea's, as soon as he has
reposited them; as when something offers it self to a man's mind, talking to a
powerful or rich man, which he judges convenient to be communicated to him
with the first opportunity, let him speedily reposite the Idea of that thing in
the same house, field, plain, or wheresoever he then is, in some certain place
conversant before his eyes, that he may be always put in mind to propound the
same when occasion serves: As if he think to do some friendly office for a
person absent, by preferring some business of his to the rich man; let him
imagine that Friend always obvious in some determinate place in sight, not
suffering the object to slip out of view, till he have courteously performed his
officious enterprise. Or if there intervene some thought of buying fuel,
whereof the rich man has great plenty, let him suppose a great quantity of
Wood piled up in some place not distant out of sight: This is all I have to say
of irregular Reposition.

CHAP. XVII. Of depositing Idea's.
HAving spoken copiously of repositing Idea's, now I will conclude with
Depositing them.

Deposition of Idea's is, when things charged upon Memory by Idea's, are
recalled, and the mind exonerated of them, the Memorial Places after such
Deposition, being left empty, and prepared to recive new Idea's. Now in this
case, if it happen at any time that an Idea negligently reposited, is lost or
forgotten, when it should be deposited, the recovery thereof must be
endeavored by these ensuing considerations.

First, This is always assuredly known, every lost Idea did bear the color of
his Repository, either in whole or part; therefore the first thing to be
inquired is, in what respect the color of the Repository did agree with the
Idea sought; by this sole consideration, forgotten Idea's are often discovered.

The Idea being not discovered thus, make diligent indagation for its relation
to the Idea placed in the same Repository, in regard of site, subject or
action, Cap. 14. Rul. 4. One Idea of a Repository being known, does easily call
the other to mind, by mutual dependence whereby they were connexed together,
unless there did precede very negligent Reposition.

If still you are disappointed, happily you may find it out by repetition of
such things as are especially remarkable in laying up Idea's, of which I have
spoken in the 13. Chapter. That is by enquiring whether the latent Idea's was

In respect of kind
Direct, Relative, Fictitious, Scriptile, Compound, Double, treble, etc.
In respect of subject,
Of God, Of Christ, Of the Holy Ghost, Of Angels, Of Men, Of Animals.
In respect of quantity,
Equal, Augmented, Contracted,
In respect of site,
Under ground, Upon ground, Upon a Table, Upon a Shelf, Against a wall.
In respect of attribution,
Moving, Quiet, Giving a sound. Yiedling a smell.
An Idea is often recovered by discussing these few questions in a man's thoughts.

If it be certain the forgot Idea was Scriptile, but the inscription is in
oblivion, the first inquiry must be, whether it were a single word, proof,
phrase, or sentence or one or more clauses; a single word, proof, or principal
word of a sentence, may be regained by applying each Letter of the Alphabet in
the same manner as is prescribed in the second Rule of Poetical Revocation, in
the second Book, Cap. 3. till you have obtained the first Letter; the other
Letters may be found by transcendencies and gilded Vowels; the chief Word being
obtained, the rest come easily to mind.

If you cannot yet discover the Idea, have recourse to the third and fourth
Rules of Poetical Revocation, 2. Book. 3 Chap, an Idea being revocable in the
same manner.

Finally, if it continue irreparable by all these ways, let it pass, and be no
longer sollicitous in search thereof: For as a Book carelessly laid up in a
Study, is not many times to be found when it is sought, though you remove
several Volumes; yet afterward comes to hand beyond expectation, when another
Book is reached that stands by it: So it does often happen in this business,
though an Idea negligently reposited, cannot be found when it is sought, yet at
another time when a Notion reposited in the cell of Memory near it, is excited,
that also of its own accord discovers it self.

If a man do prudently follow these Rules of recovering latent Ideas, as with
Ariadnes thread, he will doubtless wind himself out of the Labyrinth of blind
Oblivion, and with admirable facility recall to mind forgotten sentences, and
vanished Idea's.

FINIS.
A TREATISE Of cherishing Natural Memory.
CHAP. I. Of such as debilitate Memory.
NAtural Memory is a faculty which every man has naturally to apprehend and
retain note-worthy things; if Memory be diligent in its Function, endeavor
must be used to conserve it unprejudiced; if it be impaired, care must be taken
to have it restored and erected: I will therefore first treat of the
conservation of Natural Memory indamnified, afterward of the restoration
thereof impaired.

Three things conduce to preserve Natural Memory in good Estate, viz.
Declination of such things as debilitate Memory; use of such things as
corroborate the same, and a well instituted method of living, whereby the
Memorative faculty may be most preserved in vigor.

Things that debilitate Memory are these.
1. Unwholesome air that is infected with vapor of standing-waters, Marshes,
Woods, Prisons, Dunghils, Common Sewers, etc.

2. Air shut up from penetration of Wind and Sun; for air not purified by Wind
or Sun, engendereth a malign venomous quality, like standing water in Ponds and
Lakes; therefore when you walk abroad, leave the Windows of your Chamber and
Study open.

3. Windy air, that is, agitated with violent winds.

4. Air that procures rain.

5. Moist air, such as discendeth a little before Sun set, and hovereth about
the earth all night, and some part of the morning, especially in Maritime
places. Go not forth before the rising Sun has purified the air by his Rays,
nor after Sun setting, when cloudy darkensse of night invadeth the air.

6. Air infected with smoke of strong sented combustible things, as Sea
coals, Weeds, Turfe, Dung and Char-coales, unless they be well kindled.

II. Drinks, Broths, and Decoctions made of unwholesome waters, offend the
Memory, of which kind is the water of Ponds, Marshes, of Ice and Snow
dissolved, as also of Muddie, Salt, Bitter, and ill smelling water.

Rain water, especially falling in time of Thunder, or Lightning (because it is
lightest) is chiefly commended for Domestical uses; but serves only for
present occasion, by reason of its speedy corruption: Fountain or Spring Water
challenges the next place, which devolveth from Mountains, through stony
craggy clifts; to this succeeds River water, when the channel of the River is
deep and gravelly; Well-water is ranked last, if it smell of Mudd; the Well
must be cleansed and purged by casting in Lyme, and the bottom afterward
covered with great store of Chalk, through which the water bubling, is
defecated and rendered more Salubrious. To conclude, the clearer, lighter,
further distant from any taste or smell, colder in Summer, hotter in Winter
water is, the more wholesome it is.

III. Food hurts the Memory.

1. If it be crude, as raw flesh, unboiled water, immature fruits, green
herbs, chiefly if they beef cold quailty, etc.

2. If it be Vaporous, that is, replenish the head with gross Vapors, as thick
drinks, strong wine, Beans, Pease, Garlic, Onyon, etc. but Onyons are more
noxious then the rest, because they lose not their Malignity by Decoction, even
then procuring the headache, offending the eyes by causing obstructions in the
Optic nerves, dulling the Senses, and raising troublesome dreams.

3. If it be very moist, and engender phlegm, as Milk, Chickens before they
are feathered, young Piggs etc. especially any food that has a slimie taste.

4. If it digest slowly, as Cheese, marrow, fat, principally of Fish, flesh of
Cranes and Herons, fruit included in shells, as Wall-nuts, Small-nuts,
Chest-nuts, Almonds, etc.

5. Variety of dishes, diversity even of wholesome meats is evil, of Sauces
worst of all, distracting the stomach by concocting food of several qualities.

Nevertheless healthful persons may eat any meats, though they be esteemed
somewhat hurtful, when the appetite does as it were long; For such victuals as
the appetite does greedily covet, the stomach does earnestly embrace, quickly
Concoct and Transmit to the lower parts, whence they offend less; however it
is safer to eat such meats at Dinner, then at supper.

IV. All Repletion of Drink, or food is hurtful, chiefly of Bread; too much
Repletion dulleth wit, and is a great enemy to the Memorative faculty. Plato
says, The soul is diseased in a full fed body. It is often seen by experience,
that if a learned or wise man, accustomed to live sparingly through poverty, be
exalted to some eminent degree of dignity or honor, and does afterward indulge
his appetite by eating and drinking immoderately, he becomes less learned and
wise: The reason is by access of gross humors to the brain, the Notional
Figures imprinted therein before, by degrees wear out and vanish, and new
figures take no such deep impression, but are quickly erased through overmuch
humidity of the brain. Fly therefore Drunkenness and Gluttony, as the
mortallest enemies of a good Memory.

V. Sleep offends Memory. If it be First, overmuch. Secondly, if taken in a
windy place, or under Lunar rays. Thirdly, in the day, most of all with shoes
on, or being miry. Fourthly, upon the back, for it preventeth expulsion of
Excrements, at mouth and nostrils, their proper conveyances, and causes their
Conflux to the back, whence arises Obstructions. Fifthly, upon the belly,
because it endamageth the eyes, being dangerously prejudicial to such as are
molested with Rhumes in their eyes.

VI. Venus, 1. if it be immoderate. 2. upon a full stomach. 3. when the body is
less moist, as at New Moon, in time of hunger, etc. 4. when sleep does not
follow, for it is requisite that the loosned members of the body, be refreshed
by ensuing sleep. Persons very young or very ancient, of a frigid constitution,
and all such as find inconvenience after the act, must wholly abstain
therefrom.

VII. Coldness of the hinder part of the head, of the neck, stomach, belly and
feet.

VIII. Labor or exercise of body. 1. Exceeding moderation, which exhausteth
strength. 2. In windy or moist places. 3. On a full stomach, which replenisheth
the head with crude Vapors, and augmenteth Choler.

IX. Idleness.

X. Perturbation of mind; as anxious care, fear, grief, too much bashfulness,
covetous hope, Jealousy, etc.

XI. Filthy desires, as avarice, envy, thirst of revenge, lust, love of
harlots, and the ardent Passion, Love.

XII. Rash answers.

XIII. Disorderly reading of Books, imitating Children in trivial Schools.

XIV. Night study.

XV. Wearing head-hair over long.

XVI. Dipping or washing the head in cold water.

XVII. Distraction of mind about severl studies at one time, as if a
Schoolmaster be intent at his private study, when his Scholars attend and
repeat their lessons.

CHAP. II. Of things corroborating Memory.
OF this kind are these that follow. 1. Wholesome Air, that is clear, light,
sweet, open, mild, speedily growing warm with the rising sun, and cold with
his setting.

2. Sweet sents, for they comfort the heart, brain and mind, in some sort
nourish the Spirits, and indue the brain with a tenacious quality, whereby it
is more apt to retain Idea's, This is experimentally proved in honey composed of
the breath of flowers, mingled with morning dew, the substance of honey being
gummy.

3. Of meats.

First, All such as engender good nutriment, that is, which procreat pure
blood, full of Spirits; such are Capons, Partridges, Pheasants, Weather,
mutton, Goats flesh, and like meats as administer pure aliment to the Body.

Secondly, Brains of Partridges, Sparrows, Hares, Conies and Hens, which being
dryer then the brains of other creatures, are thought to profit Memory very
much; if Wekerus may be credited, brains of Hens frequently eaten, has
recovered diverse persons of the Frenzy.

Thirdly, These herbs used in sauces, Bawm, Bugloss, Watercresses, in
commendation of which there is extant a Proverb, Ede nasturtium, Savorie,
Beets, Penniroyall, Hysope, Time, Nigella, Rosemary flowers, Cardnus
Benedictus, these are not only beneficial to exacuate the Memory, but do also
exhilarate the mind, and eaten last at supper, procure pleasant dreams.

4. Washing the feet once a month in water moderately heated, wherein Bawm,
Cammomill, Bay leaves, and other odoriferous herbs have been boiled.

V. Exercise.

1. If If it be moderate, thereby unproficable excrements are expelled, natural
heat augmented, the motions of the Spirits rendered free, the body recovers
vigor, and the soul made more apt to perform its functions.

2. If it recreate the Spirits and all parts of the body exercised, also the
Breast and Lungs by vociferation, such are shooting, bowling, hunting, hawking,
but stool-ball playing, is by Gallen preferred before them all.

3. Such as is done upon an empty stostomack.

4. In delightful places, not subject to wind.

Exercise must be moderate at first, more vehement in the middle, more remiss
at lattet end: Moreover let preparation precede exercise, by evacuation of the
belly, bladder, and nostrils, etc. and extension of the members; in like manner
after exercise, there is required stretching of the members, modederate
friction of the body with warm linen, and cohibition of the Spirits. Finally,
your apparel close fitted, walk leisurely abroad, if the wind breath a gentle
gale, otherwise within doors. Such persons as are of exceeding hot and dry
Complexions, must abstain from laborious excercises, using such as are moderate
and provoke sweat less.

CHAP. III. Of a prescript order of life.
NOw in the next place I will deliver some precepts or Rules of well ordered
living, (chiefly regarding Students, for whose sakes this work was undertaken)
in such sort that the Memorative faculty may be benefitted. The Rules are these.

Rule 1. Divine assistance is to be diligently and frequently implored in
Prayer, to sanctify our souls with Celestial grace; for as the mild
influences of Celestial bodies immediately transfused into our corporeal,
contribute much to the good estate thereof: so Divine influences of grace,
infused by God into our souls, recreate and restore them much more: And seeing
divine irradiations are always voluntary, there is doubtless no Rule more
powerful or efficacious to procure the Lords good will toward us, then pious
supplications-made to God in Christ, as James testifies in his Epistle, 5.
Chap. ver. 16, 17. nor is it imprudently said,

Cedunt astra Deo, precibus Deus ipse suorum.
The Stars give place to God, he to his peoples prayers.
Rule 2. Comb your head every day backward, to loosen excrements from the hair
roots, let it be done fasting, so soon as you are ready in a morning. Combing
the head (the stomach extended with meat) is very damage able by alluring
humors into the vains.

Rule 3. Excrements of the mouth are to be vacuated by spitting, of the lungs
by hauking, of the nostrils by wiping as often as there is a motion. It is more
healthy to eject such superfluities by the mouth and nostrils, than than to
lade the stomach with excrements of Gormandising: the brain also is much
impaired by impure exhalations ascending from unclean stomachs.

Rule 4. Urine, Ordure, and Wind, must be exonerated at the first motion; many
by retaining Urine, and other excrements, have been seized by dangerous and
mortal diseases.

Rule 5. Wholly abstain from all Evacuations by virtue of Physic, as Purges,
Vomits, Blood-letting, unless very urgent necessity compel you. Phlebotomy and
Purges, as well as they do expel evil humors, exhaust the good and profitable,
yea the Vital Spirits, whereby natural virtue does decay. Therefore Plato in
Timeo, forbad the use of Purgations, when the cure of the body might be
otherwise accomplished.

Rule 6. To eat twelve Raisons of the Sun stoned, every morning, without
drink, instead of breakfast, conserveth Memory, comfort the stomach and
Liver, diminishes Phlegm, augmenteth blood, and preserves youth,

Rule 7. Let your Supper be larger then Dinner, because the subsequent distance
of time is longer; but such as are encumbered with nocturnal distillations, (as
old men, and cold constitutions) must eat more plentifully at Dinner then
Supper. At meals hot things are to precede before cold; things of easy
digestion before things of hard; and liquid things before solid, for their
better concoction in the stomach. All solid meat requires long chewing: Drink
must be swallowed leisurely by degrees: Beware of consuming much time in eating
and drinking. Eating too slowly is as noxious as eating overfast. Conclude your
meat with a piece of Bread, Coriander Confects, Marmelade of Quinces, dried
Pears, or the like. Lastly, let the quantity of Food be proportionable to the
takers strength, not his appetite; for as Varro says, It is one thing to
suffice a man, another thing to suffice humanity.

Rule 8. Observe constant accustomed hours of eating: Nature coveteth to
perform her office of concoction at certain limited hours, as is manifestly
seen in sits of intermitting Fevers: Moreover after Supper drink not at all
(ensuing sleep will moisten sufficiently) nor between Dinner and Supper, unless
you be very thirsty, or so accustomed by long use; yet such vicious customs are
to be omitted by degrees.

Rule 9. Refrain from labor both of body and mind after meats, spend about an
hour in delectable discourses with company sitting, standing or walking gently.
Sitting near the fire after meat, does much impede digestion, by revocation of
the internal heat to the external parts: Likewise after Supper abstain as long
from sleep, it being very obstructive to the brain to sleep upon a full stomach.

Rule 10. At bedtime shut all the Windows of your lodging, that no Wind may
enter; and also the Window-shuts, least Lunaries penetrating the Window, molest
you sleeping. Sleep under the Moon-beams causes headache, though it does not
hurt such as are awake. Let your head and ears be covered; yet too much
covering offends the head. When you go to bed, first lie down on your right
side, your head only so much elevated, as in height may equallize your left
shoulder, your arms and thighs somewhat contracted; by such position of body,
stomachical heat is increased: when you are about to sleep, turn on your left
side: Again, when you awake, turn on the right side, and extend your legs at
full length: Let your sleep be equal to your waking, not in time, but
proportion, left the brain be too much exsiccated by watching, or moistened by
sleeping.

Rule 11. Elect learned men well educated for Companions and Consorts, such as
near as may be, whose conversation may render you better and more learned, not
such as your society may improve. It is a notable argument we may be infected
by the manners of those with whom we converse, seeing Education among Country
Clowns, makes men rustical; among godly people, makes men pious; those who live
with learned men, grow more learned; and they which are educated in Families of
noble men, ill governed, are most commonly scoffers and drunkards. So powerful
is the custom of those among whom we live, that it is of greater efficacy to
form men's manners, then natural inclination it self; you cannot therefore be
too curious in choice of your company.

Rule 12. The mind must be constantly exercised in learning some sentences by
heart (yea though there be no need) that the faculty of remembering may be
quickened by use and practice; for as corporal vigor is continually augmented by
labor and exercise, and diminished by sloth and neglect of labor, so the mind
accustomed to diligent study of learning, gains strength, by ease and idleness
is impaired: As frequent disputation rendereth Students skilful Logicians, and
customary Preaching makes a man an eloquent Orator: So frequent practice of
learning by heart, makes Memory more prompt in operation. There is nothing
says Ludovicus Vives, does more delight in pains and labor, then Memory, nor
does sooner corrupt and perish by idleness; therefore something must be learned
every day (though there be no necessity) if it be only but to prevent
stupidity of Memory, which of all Diseases is most pernicious to it. Hence
these two Versicles aptly represent a Rule.

Sepe recordari medicamine fortius omni
Solus and artificem qui facit, usus erit.
Practice of Memory does more conduce
Then Medicine, Skill does arise from use.
Rule 13. The aptest time for Study, is when the Stomach is empty, then purest
spirits ascend from the heart to the brain. Hence Aurora is esteemed most
grateful to the Muses; it is also convenient to repeat every night briefly what
you have studied by day, which is reported to have been Pythagoras his custom.
It is a wonderful thing, and the reason not easily perceptible (says
Quintillian) how much firmness one nights interposition does contribute to
labor, whether quiet, mature, or concocted; so soon as sleep is shaken off,
the same things are to be rehearsed again, which were meditated before sleep
the evening last past, otherwise nocturnal lucubration does yield little
benefit.

Rule 14 Let no man devote himself to a Study or Profession for which he is
unapt by Nature; whatsoever Science you advisedly make choice of, delight
therein, employ all diligence in studying the same, accounting it greater glory
to excel therein, then to be able trivially to dispute of many other Arts.

Rule 15. Addict your self to the skilfullest Master in that Profession you
have chosen; give attention to him with deep admiration, as to one delivering
Oracles; forsake him not till you participate of the profoundest mysteries of
the profession. Many would have proved singular, had they not esteemed it a
shame to be Scholars too long.

Rule 16. Read the choicest Authors, such as do not force their Books with
trifles: Seeing we cannot be ignorant, that study exhausteth the Spirits, we
must have a care of consuming them in reading unlearned Commentaries of
illiterate men.

Rule 17. Covet not to read many Books, but to understand perfectly what you
read. It does not so much concern Bodily health, how much we eat, as how well
we digest what we eat: So deliberate Reading is more advantageous then confused.

Rule 18. Follow the concisest method in study; for as in going a journey, he
which takes the shortest and plainest way is less defatigated at Evening, then
he that diverteth to rough or by-ways; so it is in this case; the more
succinct method we observe in learning any Science, the more and speedily we
attain the same.

Rule 19. Apply not your self to solitary Study, if you can procure any
Companions in the same, at least use frequent conference with others, of things
pertaining to Discipline.

Mutual Discourse about profitable questions, will not only promote your
Studies much, but also bring promptness of tongue, rendering you more capable
to speak publicly.

Rule 20. To conclude, if your mind be at any time disturbed with study, use a
little relaxation. It is better study be intermitted, then the understanding
overwhelmed.

Arcus enim si nunquam cesses tendere, lentus erit, as sung the Poet; A bow
that is always bent, will stubborn grow. Recreations of the mind only, are
music, disputes with merry facetious persons; beholding solemn spectacles,
etc. Some scantling of time must be also allowed for daily exercise of body,
but not in the morning, to be set a part for more solid Studies; rather in the
afternoon, or a little before Supper, that the heat extracted externally, may
have recourse before you take refection.

CHAP. IV. Of restoring a debilitated Memory.
HAving premised Rules for conservation of Natural Memory in good estate, I
will next prescribe some helps for the same debilitated.

Imbecility of Natural Memory proceeds from too much heat, coldness;
moisture, or dryness of the brain. Overmuch heat wastes and consumes animal
spirits; too much coldness obstructeth motion of the Spirits lodged in the
Cells of the Brain; superfluous dryness causes such callocity, that the
species cannot be imprinted: Redundant moisture does erase and obliterate forms
of things, as soon as they are imprinted. If there happen excess in two
qualityes (as if the Brain be hot and moist, cold and moist, hot and dry, or
cold and dry) the Brain, and consequently memory is more infested. Therefore
the whole business of curing debilitated memory, consists in augmentation or
diminution of callidity and humidity of brain.

Weakness of memory arises from some small indisposition or Disease; if it be
only indisposed through bad diet or disordered course of life, those precepts
are to be observed which are assigned particularly to every man, according to
his constitution in the sixth Chapter, not neglecting the general diet before
prescribed, and common rules of living delivered in the former Chapter, so far
as is found agreeable to each man's Temperament.

That a man may better judge of his brains temperament, I have thought
necessary briefly to enumerate the signs of the brains temperament, collected
out of the works of learned Physicians. Although the temperaments of the brain
as to degrees of quality, are almost innumerable, yet they are reduced to nine
more general, the signs of which I will demonstrate in few words.

CHAP. V. How to discern the temperament of the BRAIN.
IN the first place take the signs of a temperate Brain, which are these: The
possessors thereof are not offended with heat, cold, moisture, or dryness,
procured from external causes; they also enjoy entire senses, most apt to learn
all Discipline and good Arts, nor are they hastily precipitated into passions
and perturbations of mind; their dreams are few and pleasant, sometimes they
dream of flying, because their bodies, encumbered with no excrements, seem
endued with very great levity and agility; sometimes they dream of Stars, and
such like splendid things, the color of such persons hair (if they live in
temperate Regions) whiles they are children, is yellowish; when they are men, a
deep yellow; then also the hair of their heads becomes curled, in age they wax
hoary slowly, and are seldom bald. To conclude, they are moderate in all
things, both in animal faculties, (as pulse, respiration, sleep, etc.) and in
redundancies, as Excrements of the Ears, Nose, Mouth, and superfluities of
other parts, all which in quantity and quality are found to be in mediocrity.

II. Signs of a hot Brain. When heat predominates, the Head is hot in feeling,
the parts about the head are hot and ruddy, the eyes are red and quick in
motion, the veins conspicuous, hair begins togrow upon the head presently after
Nativity, and increase apace; such as far exceed temperate persons in heat,
have black curled hair on their heads, which in age does shed, and cause
baldness: Superfluities of their pallats, nostrils, eyes and ears are few,
their sleep is short, and not deep; their heads are offended with hot meats,
potions and odours, so much the more if these things be naturally hot: Pulse
and Respiration is quicker then in persons possessed of a temperate Brain; they
excel in memory, are agile in their actions, prone to wrath and venery, and
enjoy perfect senses.

III. Signs of a cold Brain. If coldness predominate, the Head is cold in
touch, scarcely any red does appear in the face, and that in cold seasons
converted to a bleak bluish hue, their eyes are weak, their veins
inconspicuous, their Pulse and Respiration more slow then in temperate persons,
their hair grows not till some space after birth, thin, smooth, not shedding
and turning hoary, without baldness; their head is seldom hurt by hot, but
facilely offended by cold causes, whence proceeds frequent distillations,
rheums, stoppings, stuffings and pozes of the Nostrils; they are sleepy,
timorous, slow to anger, less desirous of Venery; their memory is treacherous,
mind stupid, and senses weak, especially their hearing; subject also to
swimmings of the Head, called Vertigo.

IV. Signs of a moist brain. In such in whom moisture does abound, the
head-hair is plain and copious, plenty of hair proceeding from moisture, as
color does from heat, for which cause moist brains never wax bald; their hair
also seems bedewed with an airy oily fat humor, if it arise from natural
humidity of the brain, or else with a waterish thin humor, if procured by
preternatural humidity of Brain: Moreover such people have dull wits, are slow
in motion, retain faithfully in memory things lately past, but forget things
acted long since; their sense of smelling is weak, their other senses
imperfect; they abound with Excrements expelled by the nose, mouth, eyes, etc.
their sleep is long and deep; they dream sometimes they are in jeopardy, and
unable to move themselves from the place, because bodies laden with
superfluities are made sluggish.

V. Signs of a dry Brain. Dry Brains learn slowly, and do not easily forget;
superfluities of Nostrils, Eyes and Palate are few, but Ear-was much; their
Eyes are hollow, the hair of their heads hard and curled, growing speedily bald.

VI. Signs of a hot and moist Brain. Such as partake of hot and moist brains,
have hot heads, humors also find passage through the sutures of the Scull,
they have a good color in their faces, their eye-veins are conspicuous,
headhair copious, straight and yellowish; their senses somewhat dull, soon grow
bald, prone to Venery, quicker in motion then temperate people, propense to
anger, yet not cruel; cannot watch much, yet are they vigilant, often see obscure
Visions in Dreams, their Excrements arc copious.

VII. Signs of a hot dry Brain. They which are possessed of a hot dry Brain,
are slender of Body* yet their joints and muscles firmly knit together; they
have great Veins, perfect Senses, complete nimble motion, a strong loud
sounding Voice, hard brown Skins, their Headhair grows speedily, being black
and curled, but sheds speedily; their bodies are very hairy, they excel in wit
and memory, are inconstant in their Opinions; their sleep is light and short,
dreaming most commonly of fiery things; they are little eaters, have few
excrements, and are audacious, proud, liberal, temeracious, and prone to Venery.

VIII. Signs of a cold moist brain. Such as are endued with cold humid brains,
have dull senses, weak pulse, slow motion, heads replenished with
superfluities, rendering them obnoxious to Rhumes and Poses; their sleep is
much, great and profound; they dream of water and watery meteors, as snow,
rain, hail, etc. seldom become bald, are not long angry; finally, they abound
with superfluous humors.

XIX. Signs of a cold dry Brain. Such as partake of a cold dry brain, enjoy
sound entire senses in youth, which presently begin to decline, they soon grow
old and hoary; the Veins of their Eyes are inconspicuous, little annoyed with
excrements, but easily prejudiced by cold causes; they often dream of smoke,
mysts and great darkness: If cold predominate over dryness, they grow bald more
slowly; if dryness exceed cold, more speedily; Respiration and Pulse is more
slow and rare, they participate of small quantity of Blood; have somewhat hard
bodies; to conclude, they are not quickly pacified being angry.

CHAP. VI. Of Diet properly convenient to every temperament.
HAving exposed to your view the signs of the Brain's temperament, Order
requires I should in the next place specify a particular Diet for every
temperament, only omitting the first kind, compounded of an equal Commixtion
of the four qualities for whosoever is possessed of such a temperament of
Brain, or nearly related thereto, enjoys a good memory, and therefore needs
no Physical Precepts; the chief business incumbent on such a blessed Estate, is
to preserve it, by shunning all things pernicious to the memorative faculty,
and using those profitable things before prescribed.

II. If the Brain suffer through excessive heat, endeavor must be used to
qualify the same; persons so infested must abstain from all things augmenting
or exciting heat; such are most Aromatical Spices, as, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves,
etc. All sorts of Wine and strong Drink; Garlic, etc. violent exercises must
be eschued, and hot Solar beams, especially at noon and after meat, as also
study after Supper, let such persons eat cold sour fruits after meals, smell
often to things of a cold scent, as are Violets, Roses, Saunders, natural
Camphire, Rose Water, Wood-bine Flowers, Mullein, etc. recreate their Spirits
sometimes in Gardens, where Flowers and odoriferous Herbs breath a fragrant
smell, walking in the shade: So soon as they are ready in a morning, let them
wash their faces in cold water, dipping their eyes open therein, that the water
may soak and refrigate their eyes; in like manner at Evening toward Bedtime,
let them anoint their temples, and two uppermost Spondyle, with Oil of Roses,
which does diminish the heat of the Brain, and also procure Ileep, which hot
brains want not a little.

III. If the Brain be over-cold, it must be tempered by abstinence from things
of a refrigerative nature, and use of hot things; persons afflicted with a cold
Brain, must desist from using all things which cool the Brain, as Lettice,
Musk-Melons, Brown-bread, Brains of living Creatures that are humide, as of
Calves, Pigs, etc. unripe fruits, green herbs, unboiled water, etc. Let them
decline the Moon and Northerly Winds, eat hot victuals, use these Aromatical
Spices, being very profitable, Pepper, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger,
Juniper Berries, Ivory-shavings, etc.

Hot Odours comfort the Brain, exhaled from Balm, Mint, Galangal, Rosemary,
Lignum Aloes, Oranges, Amber, Musk, etc. Moreover Green Ginger eaten fasting
twice or thrice a Week, in quantity of a small Nut, does much commodate a cold
Brain. Likewise Wine of good color, taste, and Odor taken moderately. It is
expedient once a month to wash the hinder part of the head and neck toward bed
time, with hot water, wherein Balm, Cammomile, Sage, Bay Leaves, Hyssope,
Fennel, Sweet-Marjerome, etc. have been decocted; Lastly, Unction of the nape
of the neck, and two uppermost spondyles with tepid oil of Dill or Rue,
administreth great benefit to a cold Memory.

4. If the brain abound with superfluous humors, care must be taken to consume
them, and reduce the brain to its due temper. Let moist brains therefore
abstain from all humid and Phlegmatic things, as Broths, Pottage, Milk, Swines
flesh, especially Pigge, young Lanbs, Chickens before they are plumed,
Musk-Melons, etc. Let them refrain from use of Garlic, Onions, Strong Drinks,
and all other things which replenish the brain with gross Vapors; and be
careful their food be free from all viscosity, lest through augmentation of
Phlegmatical matter in the brain by fly mie meat, they render themselves
obnoxious to Apoplexies, Lethargies, or Palsies. Let their meat be well
seasoned with salt, for that does very much exiccate and cut Phlegmatic
humors, and rarifies the Spirits, being best of all sauces for moist brains.
Let them shun Southern winds, and all things replenishing the head with humors.
Chewing of Mastick with Ginger and Pellitory of Spain, does mightily purge the
head of Phlegmatic superfluities; the same effect is procured by Sage held
some space in the mouth: it is also salutiferous to swallow a grain of the
purest white Frankincense. Tobacco (so called from the Isle Tobacque)
temperately taken, is beneficial* for moist brains, chiefly when the head is
repleat with more then usual superfluities, but too frequent use thereof
decays Radical moisture, augmenting Rhumes and distillations by accident; for
as a Well (the more it is exhausted with buckets) does more abound with water,
so the head frequently evacuated by smoke of Tobacco, is daily replenished with
greater abundance of humors. Juice of Citrons taken fasting is much more
excellent to digest Phlegmatic matter, then Tobacco, which I think, no man
that makes experience will deny.

5. If the brain be too dry, it must be lenified with moistners, such people
must abstain from salt meats, and all drying things, and avoid the east wind,
Let them eat moist and succulent things, as Rear Eggs, Capons, Pheasants,
Mountain Birds, Kidds flesh, new Cheese unsalted, fresh water fish caught in
gravelly places, Milk, Broth, Cheries, Prunes, Pomegranats, Figgs, Melons,
Succory, Endive, Lettice, and like things, small drink, if they drink wine at
any time, let it be allayed with water, and eschew all violent motion; if their
bodies be costive, let them rather use cooling moistening Clysters, than
Purgations.

So much for the four simple qualities annoying the Brain, which things well
observed, I may be more brief in the other four temperaments, as consisting of
these compounded; for if the Brain be infested with two peccant qualities, as
too hot and moist, or two hot and dry, in such compound temperaments, such
things as we have exhibited to mittigate either quality, are to be used, so far
as one does not impede the alteration of another. If of two qualities, one is
more predominant than the other, and more affect the Brain, we must
proportionally more oppose the stronger; but to return to our purpose, and say
something of compound temperaments, as well as of simple.

6. He which has a Brain too hot and moist, must fly all moistening and
heating things, refreshing himself with cold and dry things; for such the North
wind is good, the South wind hurtful: cold dry odours are most fit for them,
as Saunders, Rosewood, Eglantine, etc. Lotions made of cooling drying herbs
decocted; unctions with cooling drying oils, as oil of Myrtleberries, of
Cammomil flowers, oil of Honey, oil of Roses.

7. Brains hot and dry in excess, must decline hot and dry things, and recover
themselves with cooling moistners, avoiding the East wind: Let them be most
commonly bare headed, and choose their habitations (if they may) in a cold
moist Region, near some river; let their lodging-Chamber be a low room, paved
with Tyles. Toward sleep let them anoint their heads with oil of Violets, or
of Water Lillies,; cold moist scents are most advantageous for them, as of
Mullein, Nightshade, Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, Willow leaves, etc.

8. Persons afflicted with brains too cold and moist, (to which distemper most
Students are incident) have a very weak Memorative faculty, for of the four
primary qualities, Humidity and Frigidity, are most noxious to Memory, but
Frigidity most of all; yet the Brain is more facilely and speedily cured of
these distempers, than of the others, because the Brain (of the seven
principal Members) is naturally moist, cold, and humid, so that hot and dry
things applied to qualify its intemperateness, are less dangerous. To those
things which are severally delivered before for help of cold moist Brains,
these things may be added, all hot and dry things, as Aromatical spices,
Nutmegs Ginger, Cynnamon Powder of Euphorbium, Zedoarie, etc. Of Herbs, Balm,
Marjerome, Watercresses, Hysope, Time, Piony, Elecampane, etc. In Conserves. Of
Food, Sparrows, Partridges, Turtles, Larkes, Pheasants, Capons, Weather-Mutton,
and Goats-flesh, etc. Sack drunk temperately. Also Conval Lillies distilled
with strong wine, the quantity of a spoonful drunk, is singular against all
infirmities of head or Brain, proceeding from a Frigid or humid cause, does
Vivifie the Memory and Senses, and exhilerate the heart: Conserve of Rosemary
flowers is of like virtue. After meat it is good to eat Conserve of Quinces,
Anniseeds, or Cynnamon in Confects, or Coriander seeds boiled in vinegar, and
afterward Confected. Heating drying Odours yield much comfort, such as is
exhaled from Lignum Aloes, Styrax, Musk, Civet, Ladanum, Bettony, Nigella,
Rosemary, Lavander, etc. It is also very profitable to anoint the Temples once
a month with Partridges Gall, till it penetrate. Frication of the head in a
morning fasting with course clothes perfumed with Frankincense, as also much
and frequent Exercise, is very beneficial. Moist humors may be sometimes
expelled from the head by sneesing powders, amongst which Nutmegs challenge the
first place; Bettony rubbed to powder, and snuffed up into the Nostrils,
provokes sneesing without any offense, but is only to be used the stomach
being empty. Oil of Tyles, or Oleum Philosophorum (as some call it) tepified,
and anointed on the hinder part of the head, and uppermost rackbones, does
wonderfully restore Memory, decayed by a cold or humid cause. To conclude, all
cold moist food and sauces, are hurtful, no less noxious is moist air, and
cold morning, evening, or Nocturnul seasons, especially to lie out all night in
the open air.

9. Such as are oppressed with too much coldness and dryness of Brain (to
which qualities most aged men are subjected) must eat frequently a little at a
time, nourishing themselves with humective diet, such as heateth moderately, as
Rear Eggs, New butter, sweet Almonds, Filbirds, Pine-apple-kernels, Chestnuts,
Pistachioes. All nourishing meats, and sweet things, as Lyquorice, Honey, Sugar,
Raisins, Conserves of Borage and Buglosse, Cytron peel Preserved. Strong sweet
wine, as Muskadine, Ipocras, drunk temporately is most restorative for old
folks, and cold and sickly persons, more efficaciously Gold (made almost red
hot in the fire) quenched therein, does marvellously restore and exhilerace the
heart. Concerning this matter, Roger Bacon, a famous Philosopher, in his
Treatise of old age, has this story; An ancient husbandman (says he) wearyed
with plowing, and thirsty with his hot labor, drank water of a Cytron color,
and after he had greedily swallowed the same, was changed both in complexion
and strength like one of thirty years of age, possessing more excellent
discretion, memory and understanding, than ever he enjoyed before, from which
time he lived eighty years in the Kings Court, Bacon who recites this thought,
that water or liquor received its yellow Tincture from Gold, as he there
testifies. Moreover to anoint the hind part of the head, neck, stomach,
belly, feet, (and other parts of the body, if you please) with Oil of Lillies
or Cammomil, is very beneficial. The answer of Pollio does notably instruct us
how profitable Wine and Oil are to conserve health, who having attained to the
age of an hundred years, and asked by the Emperor Augustus (as Pliny relates)
by what means he had preserved vigor both of mind and body to that age?
replied, By wine within, and oil without. Baths made of Decoctions of hot and
moist herbs are most useful, as also hot Odours, but all things moist and
cold are to be avoided. The convenientest time of Study for old men, is when
their brain is moderately warmed with wine, or meats of good nutriment; then
the Idea's of Notions do as it were bubble and erect themselves, whereby
Invention is exacuated; for Fantasy pertaking of corporeal quality, is
excited by meat and Drink. It is usually seen at first fitting down of Guests
to a banquet, deep silence occupies them all, but after their brains are
tepified with Spirits of Wine and good meat, their Fancies are elevated, and
all the company begins to prate.

This may suffice for recovery of debilitated Memories, when no disease is
contracted.

CHAP. VII. Of Diseases of the Brain.
IF Memory be so far impaired, some disease ensues, recourse must be had to
Physic as to the last refuge, wherein nothing is to be undertaken without a
Physicians advice; for though there be many medicines found in approved
Authors, whereby a very much decayed and languishing Memory may be restored,
yet it is unsafe to rely wholly upon such written directions: so long as Memory
does prosperously discharge its Office, according to the innate temperament of
the Brain; yea though declining somewhat from temperatenesse, there must be a
total abstinence from Physic, because Nature often accustomed to Physical
remedies, will always expect them, when interrupted, and so become remiss in
undergoing its charge so true is that common Proverb,

Natura sonos frustra medicina fatigat.

In health, they do abuse
Nature, who Physic use.
But now it is high time to contract sails, and put this work into a Harbor,
concluding with Horace,

Vive, vale si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.

