The Hireling Ministry None of CHRIST'S, OR A Discourse touching the Propagating
the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS.

Humbly Presented to such Pious and Honorable Hands, whom the present Debate
thereof concerns.

By ROGER WILLIAMS of Providence in New England.

London, Printed in the second Month, 1652.

In this Discourse are briefly touched these Particulars.
1. THe National and Parishional Constitution of Churches, is found to be the
Grand Idol of the Nation. 2. The enforcing of the Nation to such a
constitution, is the greatest soul oppression in this Nation. 3. The Hireling
Ministry attending upon such assemblies or others, is none of the ministry of
Christ Jesus. 4. The Universities of the Nation, as subordinate and subservient
to such ministries and Churches, are none of the Institutions of Christ Jesus.
5. It is the absolute duty of the civil state to set free the souls of all men
from that so long oppressing yoke of such ministries and churches. Yet 6.
Ought the Nation and every person in it, be permitted to see with its own eyes,
and to make free choice of what worship and ministry, and maintenance they
please, whether parochial or otherwise? 7. The Apostolical Commission* and
ministry is long since interrupted and discontinued. Yet 8. Ever since the
beast Antichrist rose, the Lord has stirred up the ministry of Prophecy, who
must continue their witness, and prophecy until their witness be finished, and
slaughters probably near approaching accomplished, 9. The provocation of the
holy eyes is great in all courts throughout the Nation, by millions of legal
oaths, which if not redressed, may yet be a fire kindled from his Jealousy;
who will not hold him guiltless which takes his name in vain. 10. The free
permitting of the consciences and meetings of conscionable and faithful people
throughout the Nation, and the free permission of the Nation to frequent such
assemblies, will be one of the principal. Means and expedients (as the present
state of Christianity stands) for the propagating and spreading of the Gospel
of the Son of God.
To all such Honorable and Pious hands, whom the present Debate touching the
propagating of CHRIST'S Gospel concerns: AND TO All such gentle Bereans, who
with ingenious Civility desire to search whether what is presented concerning
Christ Jesus, be so or no.
All humble respective Salutations.
IT being a present high Debate ( Honorable and Beloved) how the Gospel of
Christ Jesus might more be propagated in this Nation: 2. And being desired by
eminent friends, The Author's Call to this Endeavor.
to cast in my mite toward it: 3. And having been engaged in several points of
this Nature, in my former and later Endeavors, against that bloody Tenent of
Persecution for cause of Conscience: 4. And also having been forced to observe
the Goings of God, and the spirits of Men, both in Old and New England, as
touching the Church, the Ministry and Ordinances of Jesus Christ; I did humbly
apprehend my Call from Heaven; not to hide my Candle under a Bed of Ease and
Pleasure, or a Bushel of Gain and Profit; but to set it on a Candlestick of
this public Profession, for the Benefit of others, and the Praise of the
Father of all Lights and Godliness.

2. For the Substance and most of this, I suddenly drew it up, and delivered
two Copies unto two eminent friends of Jesus Christ, Contrary to Intention and
Desire.
and this Nation: But being importuned for more Copies then I was possibly able
to transcribe, and being (therefore) advised by some honorable Friends, to use
the help of the Press; I am thus beyond my first Intentions and Desires) held
forth in Public.

3. If ought I have expressed seem harsh, dissatisfactory, or offensive; I am
humbly bold (I hope in the power of the Most High) to profess my readiness to
discuss; debate; dispute; either by Word or Writing, with whom, or before whom
soever the present Debate concerns, with all Christian meekness, and due
submission.

4. It is true, I do absolutely deny it (against all comers) to be the Burden
of the Civil State to take cognizance of any Spiritual cause; The Civil Power
in all Ages, deceived by the deceived and deceiving Hirelings,
and I do positively assert it, to be the proper and alone work of the holy Son
and Spirit of God in the hands of his Saints and Prophets, to manage Heavenly
and Spiritual causes (and that only with Spiritual Weapons against Spiritual
Oppositions.) And therefore that the Higher Powers have been constantly
deceived by the Mercenary and Hireling Ministry; who being themselves deceived,
deceive; and tack about (as the Wind, and Time, and Advantage blows) from
Popery to Protestanisme, from Protestanisme to Popery, from Popery to
Protestanisme again! From Prelacy to Presbytery, from Presbytery, many to
Independency; and will again to Presbytery and Prelacy, if not to Popery (in
some cases) rather then lose (as they say) the Liberty of Preaching. But what
that loss is of somewhat else (Gain, Honor, etc.) let themselves, and all men,
judge impartially in the fear of God. Yet

5. I humbly acknowledge (as to Personal worth) I deal with men, for many
excellent gifts, elevated above the common rank of men; yea, and for Personal
Holiness (many of them) worthy of all true Christian Love and Honor: In which
respects when I look down upon my self, The excellent Gifts and Spirits of
many, who are yet captivated with a mercenary spirit and principle.
I am really persuaded to acknowledge my unworthiness to hold a Candle or a
Book unto them. And yet, if I give flattering Titles unto men, my Maker (said
Elihu) would quickly take me away; and why therefore (since I have not been
altogether a stranger to the Learning of the Egyptians, and have trod the
hopefullest paths to Worldly preferments, which for Christ's sake I have
forsaken) since I know what it is to Study, to Preach, to be an Elder, to be
applauded; and yet also what it is also to tug at the Oar, to dig with the
Spade, The Author's humble advice to such excellent and worthy Spirits as are
^et captivated in the Trade of Hirelings.
and Plow, and to labor and travel day and night amongst English, amongst
Barbarians!) why should I not be humbly bold to give my witness faithfully, to
give my counsel effectually, and to persuade with some truly pious and
conscientious spirits, rather to turn to Law, to Physic, to Soldiery, to
Educating of Children, to Digging (and yet not cease from Prophesying) rather
then to live under the slavery, yea and the censure (from Christ Jesus and his
Saints, and others also) of a mercenary and Hireling Ministry?

6. To which end, my humble and hearty cry is to the Father of Lights, to plead
with all his Children of Light effectually; so that they may look up, wonder,
and say, Am I a Child of Light? Holy persons most unfit for unholy places:
Is the Father of Lights my Father, and the Saints my fellow Brethren and
Scholars in Christ Jesus, the children of Light also? What make I then in dark
places, like those that have been dead of old? What make I amongst the Graves
and Tombs; the Livings, Benefices, Promotions, Stipends etc?

I have been told a quick passage between the truly Noble Earl of Essex (in
Queen Elizabeth her days) and a truly able and zealous Nonconformist: I have
said the Earl, been studying a great while these two points; First, the Persons
of the Bishops; and I have labored with the Queen to prefer none but good men
to her Bishoprics.

The next thing is their Places; which if I find them to be as bad as their
Persons be; then, then etc. But they soon cropped off that Noble head etc.

That same blessed Spirit breaths (I doubt not) in many heavenly spirits of our
Times in Parliament, in Council in the Army; and their holy desire has been to
prefer the choice and flower of Able and Godly men to Places in City* God most
wisely disposes of his work, some to the Fathers, and some to the Children.
in Country, in University. It may yet so please the Father of Spirits, to stir
up their Noble minds to meditate as well Hirelings places, as they have too
well known their persons. It may also be, that his most holy and pure Eye sees
they have been highly honored, and enough already: More work is left for
growing sprigs, for whom some Crowns are kept to which their Fathers heads
were not so fitted.

7. And yet although I humbly give the Civil state it is Right, to wit, to take
down places or persons which themselves or Fathers have erected: yet am I also
far from taking off a yoke from one, Impartial soul freedom to all the people
of the Nation.
to clap on the neck of others. Let the Towns, the Parishes, and divisions of
people in the three Nations be undisturbed by any civil Sword, from their
consciences and worships; though traditional, though Parochial: and let their
maintenance be by Tenths and Fifths, or how they freely please.

1. Only let it be their souls choice and no enforcing Sword, but what is
spiritual in their spiritual causes.

2. I plead for Impartiality and equal freedom, peace, and safety to other
Consciences and Assemblies, unto which the people may as freely go, and this
according to each conscience, what conscience soever this conscience be (not
transgressing against Civilities) whether of Jews or Gentile.

Object. But would you have say some, Jews, Turks, and Papists live in
Protestant countries?

I answer, I judge it here only seasonable to say, that I humbly conceive, that
this objection, and all that can be said (as to piety or policy) is satisfied
in my late unwashing of M. Cotton's washing of the Bloody Tenent: in that late
endeavor, I humbly hope, I have made it evident, that no opinion in the world
is comparably so bloody, or so blasphemous as that of punishing, and not
permitting, in a civil way of Cohabitation, the consciences and worships, both
of Jews and Gentiles.

Ireland has been an Akeldama, a field of blood; probable it is, that the
guilt of all that blood, Protestant and Papist, Where the guilt of all the
blood spilt in Ireland lies.
will fall upon this Bloody Tenent, of which both Papist and Protestant are
guilty; to wit, of not permitting the Heretics, the Blasphemers, etc. as the
Sword falls either into the hand of a Popish or a Protestant Victor.

What a voice from heaven is there, in the forepast ages of our Fathers, now
rotten under us! From Henry the second his time, when Englands first yoke was
clapped on poor Irelands neck, I say from Henry the second his time, unto Henry
the eight, while their consciences had freedom under popish Kings of England,
how little blood was spilt, English or Irish, compared with the showers and
rivers both of one and the other, spilt in the few years of our Protestant
Princes, while the consciences of the Catholics have been restrained by the
civil Sword and penalties?

Eighthly, In the discourse it will appear, how greatly some mistake, which say
I declame against all Ministries, all Churches, The ministry of Prophets, and
the People of God have assembled with them all the reign of Antichrist.
all Ordinances; for I professedly avow and maintain, that since the Apostasy,
and the interrupting of the first ministry and order, God has graciously and
immediately stirred up and sent forth the ministry of his Prophets, who during
all the reign of Antichrist, have prophesied in sackcloth, and the saints and
people of God have more or less gathered to and assembled with them: they have
praid and fasted together, and exhorted and comforted each other, and so do,
notwithstanding that some are not persuaded and satisfied, (as others conceive
themselves to be) as touching the doctrines of Baptismes, and laying on of
hands.

Lastly what ever be the Issue of all their public agitations, my humble and
hearty cry to the Father of mercies, is for every soul in the three Nations,
that desire to fear him; whether of higher or lower rank, that we may more and
more cry and endeavor for assurance of personal reconciliation in the blood of
the lamb, more and more for participation of the divine Nature in the purity
and holiness of the spirit of God: more and more lament (with Jeremy) the
division and desolations of God's people and the holy Ordinances and Worship of
God in Christ Jesus; The duty of each particular child of God in the midst of
differences and dictractions.
more and more press after love and all possible communion with God's people in
the midst of many differences: more and more abound in mercy and compassion to
the souls and consciences; and woeful conditions of others, Jews or Gentiles,
and more and more prepared with the golden shoes of the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, ready for all the good pleasure of God in Christ Jesus; for
prosperity, for adversity, for abundance, for want, for liberty, for
imprisonment, for honor, for dishonor for life for death, as knowing that
they that suffer with Jesus, shall not only Reign with him, but here also in
the midst of outward sorrows, be filled with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

Being Desired by some Loving Friends to cast in my Mite as to that Heavenly
Proposition of Propagating the Gospel of Christ Jesus, I am humbly bold to
Propose these Conclusions, and their Consectaries following.
THe two great Prophets of Gods Revealed 1. Conclus.
Council, Moses and Christ reveal from God a Visible Worship.
Moses (the Servant) and Christ Jesus (the Lord) as they have both declared
unto us a Creation, a Creator, the Shipwreck of Mankind, the Restoration, the
Restorer, so have they both revealed unto us a visible Company of the holy
Worshippers of this one most glorious Creator and Redeemer, and that as for
his own most glorious praise, so in opposition to all false Gods, who also are
attended with their visible Worships and Worshippers.

In order to Gods visible worship the Lord Jesus has 2. Conclus.
broken down the Wall of Division between the Jews and the rest of the
Nations of the World, Prove. 9.
and sent forth his Ministers ( Wisdoms Maidens) unto all Nations, to bring
in (by the Gospels Invitation) Proselites, Christ's Messengers sent into the
World.
Converts, Disciples, such as should Eternally be saved, to begin that heavenly
and Eternal Communion in Heaven, here in an holy and visible Worship on the
Earth.

This going forth of the true Ministers of Christ Jesus is represented under
the Figure of the white Troopers The white Troopers.
in the opening of the first Seal where the Lord Jesus in his first Messengers
rode forth upon the White horse, or Horses of the word of truth and meekness
(Psalm. 45.) Conquering and to conquer in the souls of Men.

3. Conclus.
Thirdly, From the 6. of the Revelations to the 19. we hear no more of those
white-horsemen, that is (as I conceive) of the Apostles or Messengers of Jesus
Christ, (the whole stream of the Intervening Prophecies, from the 6. to the
19. insinuating a total Routing of the Church and Ministry of Christ Jesus,
The White Troopers Routed.
put to flight, and retired into the Wilderness of Desolation).

4. Conclus.
Fourthly, during the dreadful Apostasy and Desolation, the Lord has not left
the World without witness, but has graciously and wonderfully stirred up his
holy Prophets and Witnesses, such as were before the Waldenses more obscure, A
state of Witnesses during the Apostasy, Revel. 10. and 11.
but more eminently the Waldenses, the Wicklevists, the Hussites, the
Lutherans, the Calvinists (so called) who have as Witnesses prophesied and
mourned in Sackcloth 1260 days or years (prophetically) I say mourned for
the routing* desolating of the Christian Church or Army: and panted and
labored after the most glorious Rally thereof, and Restoration.

This Testimony is probably near finished, and the Saints by their late and yet
following wars (I say probably) must in rage the Antichristian world, so far as
to provoke the Nations, to their great and general slaughter, called the
slaughter of the Witnesses, Revel. 11. After which and their shame three years
and a half, follows their most glorious and joyful Rising.

5. Conclus.
These Witnesses, these Prophets, are probably those one hundred forty four
thousand Virgins, The 144000. Virgins, the twelve times 12000. mystical
Israelites, Prophets and Witnesses.
mystical Israelites, twelve times twelve, which stand with the Lamb on Mount
Zion, against the Romish Beast, and are the same Number sealed twelve times
twelve, Revelations 7.

But there is in the same seventh Chapter, A twofold famous number of the
followers of Christ Jesus in these times.
a numberles Number, which no man can number, to wit, the Converts of the
Nations of the world, which must yet come flowing unto Christ Jesus, after this
his famous second Conquest over the Devil, the Dragon in the Roman Popes
having before triumphed over him in the Roman Emperors.

The World divided (say our ablest Cosmographers) into thirty parts, The
Fulness of the Gentiles, and Conversion of the Jews.
as yet but five of thirty have heard of the sweet name of Jesus a Savior: His
Messengers must yet go forth into the other twenty five, after the downfall of
the Papacy, when also at the Fulness of the Gentiles, or Nations coming in,
shall be the joyful Raising us from the Dead of the ( Accursed, and yet Beloved
Nation of the) Jews, 6. Conclus.
Romans 11. Revel. 18. and 19.

The Civil state of the Nations being merely and essentially civil, The
Civil state cannot restrain or constrain in Spiritualls.
cannot (Christianly) be called Christian States, after the pattern of that
holy and typical Land of Canaan, which I have proved at large in the Bloody
Tenent, to be a Non-such and an unparalleled Figure of the Spiritual State of
the Church of Christ Jesus, dispersed, yet gathered to him in all Nations.

The civil Sword (therefore) cannot (rightfully) act either in Restraining the
Souls of the people from Worship, etc. or in constraining them to Worship,
considering that there is not a Title in the New Testament of Christ Jesus,
that commits the Forming or Reforming of his Spouse and Church to the civil
and worldly Powers.

Seventhly, no man ever did nor ever shall truly go forth to Convert the
Nations, nor to Prophecy in the present state of Witnesses, against Antichrist,
but by the gracious Inspiration and Instigation of the holy Spirit of God;
according to 1 Cor. 12. where the holy Spirit discoursing of those three [
Gifts, Administrations, Operations ] tells us that No man can say that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit: And Revel. 11. I will give power to my two
Witnesses, etc.

I prejudice not an External Test and Call, which was at first and shall be
again in force at the Resurrection of the Churches (as Mr. COTTON himself
calls it in Revel. 20. No other present Sender but the holy Spirit of God.
) But in the present State of things, I cannot but be humbly bold to say, that
I know no other True Sender, but the most Holy Spirit. And when he sends, his
Messengers will go, his Prophets will Prophecy, though All the World should
forbid them.

Consectarie.
From the former Conclusions we may first see upon what a false Sent or Word our
Fathers and our selves have run as to the true Ministry appointed by Christ
Jesus: Pretenders to that Grand Commission* Matthew. 28. mistaken.
How many thousand Pretenders have been and are (Protestants and Papists) to
that Grand Commission, Matthew. 28. Go into all Nations, Teach and Baptize, etc?

In the poor small span of my Life, I desired to have been a diligent and
Constant Observer, and have been my self many ways engaged, in City, in
Country, in Court, Not the true Begetting or Feeding Ministry appointed by
Christ Jesus, yet extant.
in Schools, in Universities, in Churches, in Old and New England, and yet
cannot in the holy presence of God bring in the Result of a satisfying
discovery, that either the Begetting Ministry of the Apostles or Messengers to
the Nations, or the Feeding and Nourishing Ministry of Pastors and Teachers,
according to the first Institution of the Lord Jesus, are yet restored and
extant.

Quest.
It may then be said, what is that Ministry that has been extant since Luther
and Calvin's time (especially what is that Ministry that has been Isntrumental
in the hand of the Lord, to the conversion of thousands?)

I answer, The Ministry of Prophets or Witnesses, standing with Christ Jesus,
against his great corrivall, and competiour Antichrist, Revel. 10.11.

The whole Books of Martyrs (or Witnesses) is nothing else but a large
Commentary or History, The Ministry of Prophets immediately stirred up by God.
of the Ministry of Witnesses, during all the Reign of the Beast, to this day.

Look upon Berengarius with the Saints enlightened by him; Look upon Waldus with
his Waldenses in France, Wickliffe in England, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague
in Bohemia; Luther in Germany, Calvin in Geneva; what were they but the holy
Prophets of Christ Jesus, in those Parts, and other Places, and Countries, now
examine their Witnesses in two Particulars.

1. Negatively, The two Prophets in Sackcloth.
wherein they Witnessed against the False, against the Usurpations and
Abominations of Antichrist; and therein they were the Infallible Witnesses, and
Prophets of Christ Jesus, Preaching and often times Suffering to the Death for
his Names sake. But, 2. View them in their Positive Practice and Worships, as
they have assumed and pretended to such and such Ministries, and Titles, and
Churches, and Ministrations, and there is not one of them, no not Calvin
himself (the greatest Pretender to Church Order) but the Father of Lights, in
our times of Light, has been graciously pleased to discover their great
mistakes, and wanderings from the first Patterns and Institutions of Christ
Jesus.
I know the multitudes of Interpretations given upon Revel. 11. as touching the
two Witnesses, A glance on Revel. 11.
and that many, if not most, incline to believe, at least to hope and desire,
that their slaughter may be past and over: unto which in all humble submission
to the holy counsels of God, for Zions sake, I most heartily say as Jeremy
once said in another, something a like case, Amen. But all the Interpretations
extant, that ever I have yet heard or read of, they seem to me to look up the
Sun in a Chamber, they are too narrow and particular, and like some Almanacks,
calculated for one Meridian and Climate. The Apostasy the Witness the
slaughter, the after rising all universal.
For Antichristianisme is an Universal plague sore spread over all the Empire
that was Roman: The Roman Popes, as Vicars of Christ Jesus, pretend to a
Roman Catholicisme, or Universality also. The Lord Jesus his cause therefore,
and the cause of his Saints, is of a a more general and universal
concernment, such has the Witness of his Servants been in all Ages and
Countries of Europe. Now notwithstanding many particular slaughters (as the
Book of Martyrs and other Catologues of Christ's Witnesses testify) yet I see
it not possible that that Scripture can be satisfied, but that after the
Universal finishing of the Witness, there must follow an universal
persecution and slaughter unto which an universal provocation, and
Exasperation by the Saints must probably precede and give Occasion.

Quest.
Wherein has the former and latter Ministry been defective?

I answer, In all these four, their Gifts, their Calling, their Work, their
Wages.

Gifts.
First, In their Gifts, for notwithstanding they pretend to the Apostles
Commission, and to succeed them, Mat. 28. yet they have never pretended to the
Gifts and Quallifications of such a Ministry, Pretenses to Mat. 28. examined.
nor have they ever been able to clear up those two Foundations of the
Christian Religion (Heb. 6.) the Doctrine of Baptism, and the laying on of
hands.

Cal^ing.
Secondly, Notwithstanding that some plead their Succession from the Apostles or
Messengers, yet are they forced to run into the Tents of Antichrist, and to
plead Succession from Rome, and neither such nor others which plead their
Calling from the People, can prove to my conscience, from the testimony of
Christ Jesus, that either, Christ's succession did run in an Antichristian line,
or that two or three godly persons might first make themselves a church, and
then make their Ministers, without a preceding Ministry from Christ Jesus unto
them, to gather, and to guide them in such their Administrations.

Thirdly the work of that Commission (Mat. 28.) was exercised and administered
to the Nations, Work.
as Nations, and the World, A stupendous M^stery of Preaching to convert the
converted.
but all our professed Ministrations, former and latter have been carried on
(in a grand and common mystery) for the converting of a converted people, for
if we grant all Protestant Nations to be Christians, and so act with them in
prayer as Christians, and the children of God; how can we pretend to convert
the converted, and to preach unto them to convert them? One or other must be
denied, to wit, that they are converted, or if unconverted, that we may offer
up Christian and Spiritual Sacrifices with them. No Herald, no Ambassador
sent to a city or army of Rebels did ever (constantly least of all) perform
such actions of state with those Rebels, which represents or renders them in a
capacity of honest and faithful Subjects. Oh the Patience and Forbearance and
Long-suffering of the most High, whose Eyes yet are as a flame of Fire.

Fourthly, Wages.
In their Wages, whether by Tithes or otherwise, they have always run in the
way of an Hire, and rendered such Workmen absolute Hirelings between whom and
the true Sheapheard (Joh. 10.) the Lord Jesus puts so express and sharp a
Difference: so that in all humble submission, I am bold to maintain, that it
is one of the grand Designs of the most High, to break down the Hireling
Ministry, that Trade, Faculty, Calling and Living, by Preaching, and that if
All the Princes, States, Parliaments and Armies, in the world should join
their Heads and Hearts and Arms and Shoulders to support it, yet being a part
of Babel and confusion, it shall sink as a Mil-stone from the Angels hand into
the deeps for ever.

Object.
But is not the Labourer worthy of his Reward?

I answer, There is no Reward (by infinite degrees) comparable to an hundred
fold (though with persecution) in this Life, and in the world to come eternal
life, to all that deny themselves in this Life, and do, and teach, and suffer
for the name of the Son of God.

More strictly and particularly I answer,

First, He that makes a Trade of Preaching, that makes the cure of Souls, and
the charge of men's eternal welfare, a trade, Christ Jesus never made Bargain
with his Messengers or Pastors.
a maintenance, and living, and that explicitly makes a covenant or bargain
(and therefore no longer penny no longer Paternoster, no long pay no longer
pray, no longer Preach, no longer fast, etc.) I am humbly confident to
maintain, that the Son of God never sent such a one to be a Labourer in his
Vineyard: Such Motions spring not from the living and voluntary Spring of the
holy Spirit of God, but from the Artificial and worldly respects of Money,
Maintenance, etc.

Qu^st.
Wherein consists the making of the Hirelings, explicit, and implicit Bargain.

I answer, It Is explicit, express and plain, when there is a mutual
declaring and agreeing, The Lands and Countries divided for gain as Daniel
speaks, and men know in a way of Hire what to be sure of expressly.
for so much or so much, in one kind or another, as the Levite agreed with
Micha in the Judges.

Of this sort of explicit and plain Bargains by way of Tithes, stipend, etc.
How is our own and other Nations full, and how many thousands are there of the
instances of moving and removing from Leaner to fatter Benefices, like the
former Levite, from the poor Chaplain-ship of Micahs family, to the more rich
and eminent Devotion of a Tribe of Dan, just like Servants hired by the year
(more or less) stay not when they hear of proffers of more Ease and better
Wages.

Secondly, an implicit or implied Bargain or Compact is when there passes no
express Agreement for so much or so much, An implicit Bargain (like an Onion)
is a Bargain infolded and wrapped up with more subtle peelings, etc.
but having been brought up (as we say) to that only Trade, they must make
their living of it, and therefore being something convinced of the Grosser way,
they are content as Watermen, Porters, and the like, with some kind of
Intimations by word of mouth, or in course which shall amount to such a promise
as this express: I know your Fare, your Due, I will content you, etc. Trust to
my Courtesy: The trial of this is plain, for without such an Implication or
implicit promise, the Hireling will not, indeed he cannot (having no other way
to live on) move his Lip or Tongue, no more then a Waterman or Porter, his Hand
or Foot.

Secondly, as to the Labourer worthy of his Reward, I answer, The first
pattern of Ministers Maintenance.
we find no other pattern in the Testament of Christ Jesus, but that both the
Converting (or Apostolical Ministry) and the Feeding (or Pastoral Ministry)
did freely serve or minister, and yet were freely supported by the Saints and
Churches, and that not in stinted Wages, Tithes, Stipends, Sallaries, etc. but
with larger or lesser supplies, as the Hand of the Lord was more or less
extended in his weekly blessings on them.

Thirdly, when either through poverty or neglect, support and maintenance
failed, yet still they eyed (as Sea men and Soldiers say) the Good of the
Voyage, and the Battle (the common Cause of the Lord Jesus) and their own
hands day and night, supplied their own and others Necessities. And this was
and will be the only way of the Laborers of the Son of God.

Objection.
The Priests and Levites under the Law had settled and constant Maintenance.

I answer, Blessed be the Father of Lights who has shown his people of late
times, the great difference between the stated and settled National Church, the
Ministry, and maintenance thereof, and the (ordinary) afflicted, moving,
flying, state of the Church, and Churches of Christ Jesus all the world over.

Objection.
Although it be granted that the Hireling Ministry, both explicit and
implicit, is none of Christ's, yet this is wonderful, what should be the
Reason why so much good has been wrought thereby, as the conversion of
thousands? etc.

I answer, All the wisdom, mercy, goodness, and piety that is in us, is but
a drop to the Ocean of that which is in the Father of mercies, Gods infinite
patience in bearing with his peoples Failings.
who with infinite pity and patience, passes by the ignorances and weaknesses
of his Children. Hence Luther and other Monks, Cranmer and other Bishops,
Calvin and other Presbyterians, God has graciously covered their Failings, and
accepted his own Grace of good Desires, good Affections and Endeavors, though
many ways defiled with sin.

Thus was his infinite Goodness pleased to overlook the sin of Poligamie, or
many Wives, in which so many of the Fathers or Patriarchs of Israel, were
brought forth.

Thus was he pleased to pass by the sins of the High places, where Solomon
himself offered Sacrifice. And yet as to this great point of good being done,
we may with truth assert two things.

First, where God has been pleased to bring in one soul to Himself by the
Hireling Ministry, many more have been brought home by the voluntary and more
single preachings of some, The most voluntary preaching ever most fruitful.
whether public or private; by the endeavor of private christians, by the
reading of the holy Scriptures, by godly examples, by afflictions, etc.

Hence woeful experience has made it evident, that many excellent men (in
their persons, and the graces of Gods Spirit) have labored a score of years
and more, Excellent Prophets of God, who never knew the pretended School of the
Prophets.
in an Hireling way, without the birth of one child to God: while others singly
out of Love to Christ Jesus, have despised Bargains and Hire, and been more
abundantly blessed with merciful success and fruitfulness. Hence sure it is
that there have been and are many excellent Prophets and VVitnesses of Christ
Jesus, who never entered (as they say) into the Ministry, to wit, Lawyers,
Physicians, Soldiers, Tradesmen, and others of higher and lower rank, who by
Gods holy Spirit (breathing on their meditations of the holy Scriptures, and
other private helps) have attained and much improved, an excellent Spirit of
knowledge, and Utterance in the holy things of Jesus Christ, which spirit they
ought to cherish, and further to improve, to the praise of Christ.

Amongst so many Instances (dead and living) to the everlasting praise of
Christ Jesus, and of his holy Spirit, An honorable remembrance of a despised
Witness of Christ Jesus, Samuel How.
breathing and blessing where he lists, I cannot but with honorable Testimony
remember that Eminent Christian, VVitness, and Prophet of Christ, even that
despised and yet beloved Samuel How, who being by Calling a Cobbler, and without
humane Learning (which yet in its sphere and place he honored) who yet I say,
by searching the holy Scriptures, grew so excellent a Textuary or Scripture
learned man, that few of those high Rabbis that scorn to mend or make a Shoe,
could aptly and readily from the holy Scripture, outgo him. And however
(through the Oppressions upon some men's Consciences, even in Life and Death,
and after death in respect of Burying, as yet unthought and unremedied) I say,
however he was forced to seek a Grave or bed in the very High way, yet was his
life, and death, and burial (being attended with many hundreds of Gods people)
honorable, and (how much more his Rising again) glorious.

But secondly, True and Right prophesying and Preaching, at first was, No
Success in Preaching now comparable to the first, and why.
and shall be (because after Gods own way and Ordinance) beyond all compare
with present Times, gloriously and wonderfully Successful. Thus Acts 2. and 5.
etc. poor Sinners came mourning after a Savior by thousands.

The Church and people of God since the Apostasy, is an Army routed, and can
hardly preserve and secure it self, much less subdue and conquer others, like
a Vessel becalmed at Sea, which though it make some way by Rowing and Towing,
yet not comparable to what it does when the mighty gales of Gods holy Spirit
breath (as most he uses to do) in the ways of his own most holy
Appointments.

3. Consectarie.
Thirdly, We may see a great mistake as touching that great point of Conversion:
There is a great breathing in the souls of Gods people after the Conversion of
the English, No remarkable Conversion of the Nations, as yet to be expected.
Irish, Jews, Indians, and blessed be God for those Breathings. Yet doubtless
the first great work is the bringing of the Saints out of Babel, or confused
worships, and the downfall of the Papacy, after the witnesses slaughtered.
Hence it is probably conceived by some upon Revel. 15. that until the Vyals be
powered forth upon Antichrist, the smoke so fills the Temple, that no man,
that is (few of the Jews or Gentiles) shall by conversion enter in.

Some will say, Quest.
have there not been great and mighty conversions of whole Nations, England,
Scotland, French, Dutch, etc. from Popery to be good Protestants, etc.?

I answer, The bodies of Protestant Nations yet unconverted.
If the holy Scripture, the first pattern, and doleful experience may be
judge, as an eminent Person lately spoke (upon occasion of a Debate touching
the Conversion of the Indians) we have Indians at home, Indians in Cornwall,
Indians in Wales, Indians in Ireland, yea as to the point of true Conversion,
and Regeneration by Gods spirit, who can deny but that the body of this and of
all other Protestant Nations (as well as Popish) are unconverted, and (as
formerly) ready to be converted and turned forward and backward, as the
VVeather-cock, according as the powerful wind of a prevailing Sword and
Authority, shall blow from the various points and quarters of it.

By the merciful Assistance of the most High, I have desired to labor in
Europe, in America, with English, with Barbarians, yea, and also I have longed
after some trading with the Jews themselves (for whose hard measure I fear
the Nations and England, has yet a score to pay) But yet (as before) I cannot
see but that the first and present great Design of the Lord Jesus is to
destroy the Papacy, The present Designs and purposes of Christ Jesus.
in order to which, two great Works are first to be effected.

First, His calling of his people more and more out of the Babel of confused
Worships, Ministries, etc. and the finishing of their Testimony against the
Beast.

Secondly, the great sufferings and slaughters of the Saints, upon occasion of
which Christ Jesus in his holy wrath and jealousy, will burn and tear the
bloody whore of Rome, in pieces. After which effected, the numberless number,
Rev. 7. the fulness of the Gentiles or Nations (Romans 9.) together with the
Jews, shall flow to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, we may hence see our great mistakes, both of our selves and our
Forefathers, 3. Consectary.
as to the pretended Seed-plots and Seminaries for the Ministry, the
Universities of Europe, and the Universities of this Nation, for alalthough I
heartily acknowledge that among all the outward Gifts of God, humane learning
and the knowledge of Languages and good Arts, are excellent and excel other
outward gifts, as far as light excels darkness, and therefore that Schools of
humane Learning, ought to be maintained, in a due way and cherished; yet
notwithstanding, In ordine ad ministerium, as to the ministry of Christ Jesus
(any one of those ministeries, Universities as to the Ministry of Christ Jesus,
none of his Institutions.
Ephesians. 4. and 1 Cor. 12.) upon a due survey of their Institutions and
continual practices compared with the last will and Testament of Christ Jesus,
they will be found to be none of Christ's, and that in many respects.

First, as to the name Scholar, although as to humane learning, many ways
lawful, yet as it is appropriated to such as practice the Ministry, The title
Scholar appropriated to the Ministers, a sacrilegions title.
have been at the Universities (as they say) It is a sacrilegious and theevish
title, robbing all believers and Saints, who are frequently in the Testament of
Christ, styled Disciples or Scholars of Christ Jesus, and only they as
Believers, and this Title is so much theirs, that both men and women believing,
were called Scholars, Act. 9. There was a certain Disciple or Scholar called
Dorkas.

Secondly, As to their Monkish and idle course of life, partly so gentile and
stately, partly so vain and superstious, that to wet a finger in any pains or
labor, it is a disgraceful and an unworthy Act: But the Church is built upon
the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, who were Laborers, Fishermen,
Tent-makers, Jesus Christ (although the Prince of Life yet) a poor carpenter,
Universities in order to Christ's Ministry but refined Monasteries.
the chief corner stone. And I cannot but conceive, that although it should not
please the most holy and jealous God to stir up this renowned State, and their
renowned Cromwell (the 2d) to deal with our refined Monasteries, as that
blessed Cromwell the first did with the more gross and Palpably superstitious
in Henry the Eighth his days: Yet in his time the Lord Jesus whose is all power
in Heaven and Earth will spue out these Seminaries of Hirelings, and mystical
Merchants out of his mouth, as he has done their Fathers the superstitious and
bloody Bishops before them.

Thirdly, Pharisaicall and Popish Titles,
As to their Popish and vaunting Titles, so strange from the New Testament and
language of Christ Jesus, or any word of title that came forth of his blessed
mouth, [ Bachellors of Divinity (or Godliness) Doctor of Divinity, so clearly
and expressly opposite to the command of the Lord Jesus: Call no man Father,
Doctor, etc. that is, by way of Eminency in spiritual and heavenly regards,
and Ceremonies in their Creatings and Commensings.
Rabbi, Rabbi, Doctor, Doctor, etc. I omit (because possibly for shame left off
in these days) their childish ceremonies (used even by the most holy and
conscientious) in their superstitious commencings and creatings, etc. Their
holy Gowns (black and red) holy cassocks, holy caps,, holy scarfs, holy Rings,
yea, and holy boots also, etc. All as far from the purity and simplicity of
the Son of God, as far as the honest- Attire of some sober and chaste Matron,
from the wanton and flaunting vanities, of some Painted Harlot.

Fourthly, Spiritual exercises proper only to the Churches and Assemblies of
Saints, the true Schools of the Prophets.
As to their (pretended) Spiritual and holy exercises proper only to the
Churches and Assemblies of the Saints (the only Schools of the Prophets
appointed by Christ Jesus:) How have they been by Courts imposed upon every
natural and unspirituall man, who (in Truth) perceives not the things that be
of God: How have they been prostituted to every profane and unclean lyp; unto
whom says God ( Psa. 50) What have thou to do to preach my word, and to take
my name into thy mouth?

Fifthly, As to their being prepared and fitted by these means, as in a way of
Prentiship, to set up the Trade and way of Preaching, The Hirelings woeful
Trade and Merchandise.
the science or faculty of Spiritual merchandise ( Revel. 18. in a deep
Mystery) of all sorts of spices and precious things, the precious sweet Truths
and Promises of holy Scripture; yea, (which we may with holy trembling add) a
trade of selling God himself, Christ Jesus, the Holy Spirit, Heaven and Hell,
and (too too often) their own Souls, and the Souls of thousands.

Object.
But have there not come excellent men from thence, famous for Learning,
Holiness, Labors, Success in the Souls of thousands, etc?

Answ.
I say, There have been excellent men (some say Popes and Cardinals, and we are
sure) Lord Bishops and Monks in their personal Holiness, Excellent and holy
men in the bondage of sinful Institutions, Superstitions.
gifts, Learning, Labors, Success, and therein famous Prophets and Witnesses
of Christ Jesus; yea, they have sealed the holy Truths of God, which they have
learned from the holy Scriptures, and which they have declared to others, I say
they have sealed them with their heart blood, but that is no justification of
their evil standings, Institutions, Administrations, etc. which (as by degrees
it has pleased the Father of Lights to discover unto them) they have come out
of such Bondage with shame and sorrow, and labored after the purity and
simplicity of the Son of God.

Quest.
But extraordinary gifts be ceased, how shall now the people of this Nation be
supplied with Ministers, but from such Seminaries of Learning, which fit men
both with Learning to know, and Eloquence to utter the heavenly Mysteries: Or
would you have the people be of no Religion at all, mere Atheists, without God,
without his Word, without a Ministry, etc?

I answer, It Is true, those glorious first ministerial gifts are ceased, The
counterfeit of the Apostolical Ministry.
and that is or should be the lamentation of all Saints, to wit, the desolation
and widow-hood of Zion: yet I humbly conceive that without those gifts, it is
no ground of imitation, and of going forth to Teach and Baptize the Nations,
for, the Apostles themselves did not attempt that mighty enterprise, but waited
at Jerusalem until the Holy Spirit descended on them, and enabled them for
that mighty work: least of all is that a ground of counterfeiting, and of
suborning a livelesse picture of that first Ministry (like Ieroboams
Institutions) when every one that has Friends may be preferred to Fellowships
in Colleges, to the superstitious Degrees and Titles of Divinity (as they call
it) and by these stairs ascend up the Gospel preferments of rich and
honorable Benefices. Yet

Secondly, Far be it from me to derogate from that honorable civility of
training up of Youth in Languages, and other humane Learning, whether in the
City of LONDON, or other Towns and Cities, etc. All that I bear witness
against, Institution of Youth in humane learning withal instructing them with
the knowledge and fear of the Lord, most christian and honorable.
is the counterfeiting and sacrilegious arrogating of the titles and rights of
Gods Saints, and Churches (as before) which are the only Schools of the
Prophets: As also against their sacrilegious and superstitious Degrees (as they
call them) in the profession of Divinity, as if they only knew Divinity,
Godliness, Holiness, and by such skill in godliness, and by such Degrees
might succeed the ancient Scribes and Pharisees, in the uppermost seats in
Synagogues and Feasts, in Reverend titles and salutations, as the only Masters
and Teachers of Religion and godliness, and all this in the way of the
Hireling, dividing ( Dan. 11.) the whole Land for gain: so that there has not
been room (without some special and extraordinary privilege and license) for
the poorest Cottager to live in England, out of the Bishops Diocese and the
Priests Parish, and Payments: therefore,

Thirdly, In all humble reverence and due submission to the Higher Powers, The
Civil State never made good work in spiritualls.
I affirm, there was never merely Civil State in the World (for that of the
Jews was mixed and Ceremonial) that ever did or ever shall make good work of
it, with a civil sword in spiritual matters, and therefore have but builded
and plucked down, planted and plucked up, Churches, Ministries, Disciplines, etc.
I acknowledge with thankfulness, that many heavenly Spirits, in K: Edwards, Q:
Elizabeth's days, and since that, have been forming and reforming the states and
nations, Religion, Worship, Ministry, etc. Doubtless Intentions were holy (as
David's) labors great, and Gods mercy, and pity and patience infinite: yet
experience long and ever has told us That there was never a Nation yet born in
a day to God, That the bodies of all Nations is a part of the world, and
although the holy Spirit of God, in every Nation where the Word comes, washes
white some Blackamores, The body of a civil State or Nation, and the elect or
chosen of God out of each Nation, must be rightly distinguished.
and changes some Leopards spots, yet the bodies and bulks of Nations, cannot
by all the Acts and Statutes under heaven, put off the Blackamores skin, the
Leopard spots, etc. O why then should the wisdom of so many Ages, still each
after other, be preached (by the prevailing Hirelings of each time, again and
again) into the selfsame delusion of washing the Blackamore, etc?

There is not a Town, nor a Parish, nor a person in England, but judge
themselves christian, and to that end challenge the right and use of (a
Minister, in sacris some (as in all Religions in the world it is) to serve the
Dietie they worship, ex officio, as Sacerdotes, or holy persons for and with
them, in prayers and holy Rites.

This mine eyes have often seen among thousands of the wild, yet wise
Americans, who yet (alas) as all the Nations of Europe, and the world are
utterly incapable of Forms and Ministers (or Officers) of Christian worship,
while yet in their natural and worldly capacities, not borne again, made
spiritual and heavenly, by the holy spirit of God. Yet,

Fifthly, Absolutes f^^^^dome in ^^^^ters meer^^ spiritual (...) all the
consciences i^ the world.
I desire uprightly to be far from diverse waights and measures in the things of
God (especially): and therefore I desire not that liberty to my self, which I
would not freely and impartially weigh out to all the consciences of the world
beside: And therefore I do humbly conceive, that it is the will of the most
High, and the express and absolute Duty of the civil powers to proclaim an
absolute freedom in all the 3 Nations, yea in all the world (were their power
so large) that each Town, and Division of people, yea, and person, may freely
enjoy what worship, what ministry, what maintenance to afford them, their soul
desires.

To this end I am humbly bold to offer, The people ought not to be forced to
nor from the paying of Tenths, or Fifths, according to their Conscience.
that it is not the will of the Father of Spirits, that all the consciences and
spirits of this Nation should violently ( Vi and armis) be forced into one way
of worship, or that any Town or Parish (so called) in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, be disturbed in their worship, (what worship soever it be) by the
civil sword: If the people freely choose that way of worship, and ministry,
and maintenance they walk in, yea if they will freely pay them the Tenths or
Fifths, I shall not envy their Ministers maintenance, nor disturb either
minister or peoples conscience by any other sword, but with that spiritual
sword of two edges, the sword of Gods spirit, the holy word of God.

Objection.
Grant the bodies of the Nations to be but natural, but civil, and therefore
cannot without the changings of Gods spirit, be possibly fit as spiritual
flocks of sheep, for spiritual Pastors, or shepherds to feed and build them
up with the spiritual Ordinance of Christ Jesus? yet, need they not a
converting or begetting ministry of Christ Jesus, to preach Repentance to them,
to spiritualize and change them? And if so, where shall ten thousand Ministers
be had to go to (about) that number of Parishes in England, without the
constant supplies of the seed-plots and Seminaries, the Universities of the
Nation?

I answer, First, there are great Disputes among Gods people whether Apostles
or Messengers sent out to teach and baptize, that is, to Convert the Nations,
be yet an Ordinance of Christ Jesus continued, or being extraordinary ceased?
There is a great dispute whether the Ministry of the twelve ( Matthew. 10.) or of
the 70 ( Luke 10.) be continued since they both had an immediate call from
Christ.

And secondly, Such excellent gifts, abilities, and furniture from Christ,
which now we find none are furnished with, as healing the sick, raising the
dead, casting out Devils, The Apostolical Ministry to the lost Nations
interrupted.
etc. Further, whether all these gifts and administrations, Ephesians. 4. and 1
Cor. 12. be to be expected?

For my self I am sure of two things.

First, It is but little of the World yet that has heard of the lost estate of
mankind, and of a Savior, Christ Jesus, and as yet the fulness of the
Gentiles is not yet come, and probably shall not, until the downefull of the
Papacy. Yet

Secondly, Yet of the Prophets and Witnesses mourning in sackcloth continued.
The Ministry or Service of Prophets, and Witnesses, mourning and Prophesying
in Sackcloth, God has immediately stirred up and continued all along the
reign of the Beast, and Antichrist of Rome.

This Witness is (probably) near finished, and the bloody storm of the
slaughter of the Witnesses, is yet to be expected and prepared for: But this,
and the time, and many passages of Revel. 11. is Controversiall, and something
like that of Christ's expected personal presence, the state of the New
Jerusalem, the new Heavens and Earth, etc.

However this is clear, that all that are betrusted with spiritual or
temporal Tallents, must lay them out for their Lord and Master, his Advantage.

That, The Ministry of Prophets more opened.
all (of what rank soever) that have knowledge and utterance of heavenly
Mysteries, and therein are the Lords Prophets and Witnesses against Antichrist,
must Prophecy against false Christ's, Gods Prophets of high or low condition,
must not keep silence, and hide their Talents, etc.
false Faith, false Love, false Joy, false Worship, and Ministrations, false
Hope, and false Heaven, which poor souls in a golden dream expect and look for.

This Prophecy ought to be (chiefly) exercised among the Saints in the
companies, meetings, and assemblies of the fellow- mourners, and witnesses
against the falsehoods of Antichrist: If any come in (as in 1 Cor. 14.) yea if
they come to catch, God will graciously more or less vouchsafe to catch them
if he intends to save them.

But for the going out to the Nations, Cities, Towns as to the Nations,
Cities, and Towns of the World, unconverted, until the downfall of the
Papacy, The Apostolical ministry to the Nations and Peoples.
Revel. 18. and so the mounting of the Lord Jesus, and his white Troopers
again, Revel. 19. etc. For the going out of any to preach upon hire, for the
going out to convert sinners, The Apostolical Ministry to the Nations and
peoples.
and yet to hold communion with them as Saints in prayer: For the going out
without such a powerful Call from Christ, as the twelve and the seventy had:
or without such suitable gifts as the first Ministry was furnished with, and
this especially without a due knowledge of the Period of the Prophecies to be
fulfilled, I have no Faith to act, nor in the Actings and Ministrings of
others: for

There is but one God, Lord and Spirit, from whom those Gifts, Administrations
and Operations proceed, 1 Cor. 12. without whose holy and heavenly concurrence
in all those three, The Lords work only in the Lords way.
both Gifts and Administrations and operations, instead of Glorifying the name
of Christ, and saving Souls, we may Blaspheame his Name, and grieve his spirit,
and hinder and harden poor souls against Repentance, when by fellowship in
prayer with them as with Saints, we persuade them of their (already) blessed
state of Christianity, and that they are Newborn, the saints, and sons, and
daughters of the living God; therefore.

Lastly, If it shall please our most Noble Governors, to search into the
institution and constitution (as they have done of the Diocesan so also) of the
National and Parish Churches* The grand oppression of the whole Nation is the
Parish enforced constitution.
(concerning which I shall humbly subjoyn some Queries in the close of all;)

If they please to take off the Yoaks, the Soul Yoaks of binding all persons to
such parochial or parish forms, permitting them to enjoy their own belief,
whether within or without such Parish worships, Parish maintenance, Parish
maryings, Parish Buryings, by which the souls and consciences of so many have
been inbondaged in life and death, and (their bodies, in respect of buryings)
after death.

If they shall please so far (if not to countenance yet) to permit impartially
All consciences, Freedom for the people to frequent the word in other
Assemblies beside the Parish, a great and hopeful means of blessed and
Soul-saving fruit to the Nation.
and especially the consciences, the meetings and assemblings of faithful and
conscionable people, (the Volunteers in preaching Christ Jesus): so as that
what people and persons please, may peaceably frequent and repair to such
spiritual meetings and assemblies, as they do the Parish Churches: I am
humbly confident, that as to the point of converting souls to God (so far as
the present state of Christianity can be so promoted) the souls of thousands
will bless God more, then if Millions of Hirelings were sent abroad from all
the Universities, both of Popish and Protestant Countries.

Fourthly, Consectary.
Upon the grounds first laid, I observe the great and wonderful mistake both
our own and our Fathers, Christ Jesus no Founder of Covill power, in
spiritual causes.
as to the civil powers of this world, acting in spiritual matters. I have
read (as blessed Latimer once said) the last Will and Testament of the Lord
Jesus over many times, and yet I cannot find by one tittle of that Testament,
that if he had been pleased to have accepted of a temporal Crown and
Government, that ever he would have put forth the least finger of temporal
(...) civil power, in the matters of his spiritual affairs an^ Kingdom.

Hence must it lamentably be against the Testimon^ of Christ Jesus, for the
Civil state to impose upon the Souls of the People, a Religion, a Worship, a
Ministry, Oaths (in Religious and Civil affairs,) Tithes, Times, Days,
Marryings and Buryings in holy ground, yet in force, as I have (I hope) by the
help of God, fully debated that great Question with Master Cotton, and washed
off all his late washings of that bloody Tenent of Persecution, etc.

What is then the express duty of the Civil Magistrate, Quest.
as to Christ Jesus his Gospel and Kingdom?

I answer, I know how woefully that Scripture, Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, etc. has been abused, and elsewhere I have at large discussed that,
and other such Objections: At present, I humbly conceive, that the great Duty
of the Magistrate, as to spirituals, will turn upon these two Hinges.

The Civil Magistrates duty, as to spirituals, turning upon two hinges.
First, In removing the Civil Bars, Obstructions, Hindrances, in taking of
those Yoaks, that pinch the very Souls and consciences of men, such as yet are
the payments of Tithes, and the Maintenance of Ministers, they have no faith
in: Such are the enforced Oaths, and some ceremonies therein, in all the Courts
of Justice, such are the holy Marryings, holy buryings, etc.

Secondly, In a free and absolute permission of the consciences of all men, in
what is merely spiritual, not the very consciences of the Jews, nor the
consciences of the Turks or Papists, or Pagans themselves excepted.

Quest.
But how will this Propagate the Gospel of Christ Jesus?

I answer thus, The first grand Design of Christ Jesus is, to destroy and
consume his Mortal enemy Antichrist. This must be done by the breath of his
Mouth in his Prophets and Witnesses: The breath of Christ Jesus by which he
consumes Antichrist, stopped by the Nations.
Now the Nations of the World, have impiously stopped this heavenly breath, and
stifled the Lord Jesus in his Servants: Now if it shall please the civil State
to remove the state bars, set up to resist the holy Spirit of God in his
servants (whom yet finally to resist, is not in all the powers of the world) I
humbly conceive that the civil state has made a fair progress in promoting
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Quest.
This Mercy and freedom is due to the (merely) religious consciences of all men
in the world. Is there no more due from the Magistrate to Christ Jesus his
saints and Kingdom?

I answer, While I plead the Conscience of All men to be at Liberty,
doubtless I must plead the Liberty of the Magistrates conscience also, The
Magistrates and all men ought to excel in fruits of Piety and Mercy, according
to conscience.
and therefore were his bounties and donations to his Bishops and Ministers, as
large as those of Constantine; who, but the holy Spirit of God in the mouths of
his Prophets can restrain him? Only let not Caesar, (as Constantine in his
settled prosperity did) rob the God of Heaven of his Rights, the consciences of
his subjects their heavenly Rights and Liberties.

But under the pretense of propagating the Gospel of Christ Jesus (it may be
said) what horrible opinions and Spirits will be vented, Object.
as woeful experience has manifested:

I answer, Opinions offensive are of two sorts: some savouring of Impiety, and
some of Incivility.

Against the first, Christ Jesus never called for the Sword of Steel to help the
Sword of the Spirit that two-edged Sword that comes out of the mouth of the
Lord Jesus: And therefore if a world of Arrians deny the Deity of Christ Jesus:
If a Maniche his humane nature: If the Jews deny both, No sword to be used
against the most horrid Blasphemies and Heresies, but the two edged sword of
the Word, the sword of the Spirit of God.
and blasphemously call our Christ a Deceiver: Nay, if the Mahumetans the
Turks (the greater number by far of one Religion in the World) if they I say,
pefer their cheating Mahomet before him, What now? must we rail, revile, etc.
and cry ou Blasphemers, Heretics? Must we run to the Cutlers shop, the
Armories and Magazines of the Cities and Nations? Must we run to the Cities or
Nations, and Senates, and cry, Help you men of Ephesus, help O Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, etc. Or must we fly up to Heaven by Prayers and Curses, to fetch
down Fire upon the persecuting Captains and their fifties? This do the
Nations, this do false Christ's and Christians, but this did not, this will not
do the Lamb of God, the Lion of Judah's Tribe, who with his Word and Spirit
alone (which the Father has promised to put into his Mouth, and the Mouth of
his Seed, and the Mouth of his Seeds Seed ( Isa. 59.) will either kill or save
the gainsaying Opposite.

The Second sort, to wit opinions of Incivility, doubtless the Opinions as
well as practices, are the proper Object of the Civil Sword: according to that
Magna Charta for the civil Magistrate, Romans 13. and that true Apothegme or
saying, Ex malis moribus bonae leges: Good Laws occasioned by Evil manners.

Quest.
But ought not the civil Magistrate to repeal their Ordinance for Tithes,
Tithes ought not to be enjoined, or forbidden.
and also to appoint some course for the maintenance of the Ministry?

I answer, Upon that Ground of Removing Soul Yoaks, and not Restraining, nor
constraining conscience, I humbly conceive, that the civil State cannot by any
Rule from Christ Jesus, either forbid the payment of Tithes to such whose
conscience is to pay them, or enjoyne them where the conscience is not so
persuaded: For the further clearing of which assertion, I distinguish of the
People of this Nation into two sorts.

First, Such as have a Freedom in their mind to frequent the Public Parish
Assemblies of the Nation, and they are also of two sorts.

First, Such as conscienciously frequent such places, either out of a
conscientious zeal of worshipping of God, The people of this Nation according
to their several Consciences distinguished.
or out of a superstitious and traditionall awe.

Secondly such as can go or not go, and care not what Religion themselves and
the State be of.

There is a second sort of people in this Nation, which out of conscience dare
not frequent such Places, and they are such;

First, Such as indeed fear God, and are in their consciences persuaded of an
indelible Character of Holiness upon such Temples, as Temples dedicated to a
Parish worship.

Secondly, Such as out of an utter dislike of all Protestant Worship, and an
high esteem of their own Catholic Faith, are as far from love to such places
as the former sort.

Now all these Consciences (yea the very conscience of the Papists, Jews, etc.
(as I have proved at large in my Answer to Master Cottons washings) ought
freely and impartially to be permitted their several respective Worships,
their Ministers of Worships, and what way of maintaining them they freely
choose.

But if the civil state injoyne not the maintenance of the Ministry: Objection.
If they quite let loose the Golden Raines of Discipline (as the Parliament
expressed, and the Scots objected) What will become of the Ministry of the
Gospel; and the Souls of men? For if each man's conscience be at Liberty to
come to Church or not, to Pay to the Minister or not, the profane and loose
will neither pay nor pray, but turn Atheistical and irreligious: The
Ministers of Worship will be discouraged and destitute, and Parents will have
little mind to expend their Moneys to make their children Scholars, when the
Hope of their preferment is cut off.

I answer, First that Supreme Court in their Declaration never Declared to
bar up all the Doors and Windows of that Honorable House, The Sun of
Righteousness is able to shine more light upon the wisest and the highest.
so that no further Light from Heaven should break into their Souls and
councels from the most glorious Sun of all Righteousness the Lord Jesus,

Although the Loose will be more loose (yet) possibly being at more Liberty
they may be put upon consideration and choice of ways of life and peace yet
however it is infinitely better, Some profaneness better then enforced
Hypocrisy.
that the Profane and loose be unmasked, then to be muffled up under the veil
and hood of Traditionall Hypocrisy, which turns and duls the very edge of all
conscience either toward God or Man.

Thirdly, It is not to be doubted, but that each conscience, the Papists and
the Protestants, both Presbiterians and Independents will aemulously strive for
(their not only conscience but) credit sake, Several consciences sometimes
emulate each other.
to excel and win the Garland in the fruits of bounty, etc. Thus a Jesuit
once in Newgate boasted of the Papists charity to a Protestant (put in also
for his conscience by the Bishops) for, pulling out his hand full of Gold, look
here (said he) are the fruits of our Religion.

Fourthly, Such Parents or children as aim at the gain, Gain Godliness and
God belly
and preferment of Religion, do often mistake Gain and Gold for Godliness,
God-belly for the true God, and some false for the true Lord Jesus: I add,
such Priests or Ministers as can force a maintenance of Tithes or otherwise, by
the Sword, or else cease preaching for want of such or such a maintenance, or
can remove from Bishoprics or Benefices (as Calves and Bulls of Bashan) for
fatter and rancker Pastures: or wanting spiritual work and maintenance, are
too fine to work with their hands, as the first Patterns, Christ first
Ministers did, how can they say as Peter to Christ Jesus, Lord thou know all
things, Thou know I love thee? etc. therefore

Lastly, The Father of Spirits graciously be pleased to preserve the Spirits of
our higher powers from laying on of Hay and Stubble, though upon the Golden
foundation Christ Jesus, The wonderful burning of Hay and Stubble in this
Nation.
for all such work in matters spiritual, which our Forefathers either Popish
or Protestant in their several changes in this Nation have made, they have
been consumed and burnt (like Hay and stubble) and come to nothing.

The Summa totalis of all the former particulars is this, First, since the
people of this Nation have been forced into a National way of Worship, both
Popish and Protestant (as the Wheels of times revolutions, by Gods mighty
providence and permission have turned about) The civil state is bound before
God to take of that bond and yoke of Soul-oppression, and to proclaim free and
impartial Liberty to all the people of the three Nations, Soul-Liberty, ought
to be impartially restored to the three Nations.
to choose and maintain what Worship and Ministry their Souls and Consciences
are persuaded of: which Act, as it will prove an Act of mercy and
righteousness to the inslaved Nations, so is it of a binding force to engage
the whole and every Interest and Conscience, to preserve the Common-freedom and
peace. However, an Act most suiting with the piety and Christianity of the holy
Testament of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, The civil state is humbly to be implored, to provide in their high
Wisdom for the security of all the respective consciences, in their respective
meetings, assemblings, worshippings, preachings, Disputings, etc. and that
civil peace, and the beauty of civility and humanity be maintained among the
chief opposers and dissenters.

Thirdly, It is the duty of all that are in Authority, and of all that are
able, to countenance, encourage, and supply such true Volunteers as give and
devote themselves to the service and Ministry of Christ Jesus in any kind: All
Christ's true Followers, and especially the Leaders among them, are a willing
people and Volunteers.
although it be also the duty, and will be the practice of all such whom the
Spirit of God sends upon any work of Christ's, rather to work as Paul did, among
the Corinthians and Thessalonians, then the work and service of their Lord and
Master, should be neglected.

Such true Christian worthies (whether endowed with humane Learning, or without
it) will alone be found that despised model which the God of Heaven will only
bless; that poor handful and three hundred out of Isreal's thirty two thousand
by whom the work of the God of Israel must be effected. And if this course be
effected in the three Nations, the bodies and souls of the three Nations will
be more and more at peace, and in a fairer way then ever, to that peace which
is Eternal when this World is gone.

A few Queries subjoyned as to the former high Question, of propagating the
Gospel or glad News of a Savior.
1. FIrst, whether the yet remaining Division of the whole Land, into National
and Parish Churches, and the centuring and assembling of People into a Parish
Church, be suitable to the true Religion and Testament of Christ Jesus: Or
rather an invention of Satan and Antichrist, to divide the Land for gain, Dan.
11.
into National, Provincial, Diocesan, Parochial, so that there is not a foot
of land left in the whole Nation, Queries as touching the Parochial Division
of the whole land.
for the holiest or the highest (without some extraordinary privilege) where
to find a resting place out of such a Church compass. And whether is not such
a Profession of Christ Jesus, a denial of Christ Jesus, whether is it not to
make a State-Religion and the ministry thereof (like the Dutch) state
Ministers, as it was truly said of late, that the Bishops were the Kings
Bishops: And if so, since the Head of the National Church, or Parishes is
civil, the body be not so likewise, and consequently the whole frame of
Worship, but civil and Political, and consequently the Grand Idol of
Jealousy, before the flaming eyes of the Son of God.

2. Whether this National and Parishionall Form of Worship be a State-Act,
and so removeable at their pleasure. Or is it the Peoples Act and choice, and
not removeable without the peoples free consent: To which end, The Enforcing of
a national way, a national oppression.
can the Nation give, or the Parliament take a power of framing and imposing a
Religion upon the people, any more (if not comparably so much) then of choosing
and imposing Husbands and Wives (in way of Marriage) to all the people of this
Nation: And whether therefore to enforce an Uniformity of a Nation to one
Religion or Worship (after the Jewish pattern) be not a soul oppression and
usurpation, not after Moses, much less after Christ Jesus the Son of God.

3. If such an holy Division of the Land be a State-Act, and removeable at
pleasure, whether the not removing of such a Form will not be set upon the
Parliaments score, and be a Controversy from the God of Heaven against them;
For sure it is, being a plant which neither God nor the Son of God ever
planted, it must irresistibly be plucked up and cast into the Fire.

4. If the State be found the Founders and Owners of the Parish Churches (the
meeting places) whether ought they not to demolish them as Iehu did, or at
least slight the Holiness and Form of them by reducing them to a civil form
and use, The Parish Churches, Idol Temples.
as the Army of late dealt with some such Holy places. And whether is it
possible for all the men in the World, There is a strange Prophecy extant,
Henry the 8th Abbeys and Cells, Henry the Ninth Churches and Bells.
or Angels in Heaven, to wash off that Popish Character of Holiness while
still only reserved for holy use, which both Papists and Protestants
(successively and interchangeably) have made of them, as the Temple for the
Parish worship, and so consequently the High places, and Idol Temples.

5. Is it not more conducible a thousand fold to the peoples eternal welfare,
that each Town and Division of people in the Land, Traditionall Religion the
Nurse of Hypocrisy and Destruction.
be impartially permitted to make a stand, to examine and choose their way of
worship Ministry, and Maintenance: yet whether or no is it not absolutely
better that they did freely choose rather a false Religion ( Jewish, Popish,
Turkish, etc.) then without their own free choice, to be nusled up in a way of
Traditionall and Customary Religion, or else in an enforced Hypocrisy against
persuasion and Conscience?

6. Whether that policy that refuses to search into these things, Dangerous
State Policy.
pretending danger of discomposing the present Government and peace of the
Nation, the dismounting of the present Governers, the miss of State-Ministers
in every Town, to keep the people in Obedience, by publishing their Acts unto
them; I say, is not such Policy, ungodly, irreligious, unchristian, and the
next way to provoke the jealousy of the most High, against both State and
Statesmen, and to cause from Heaven, some other turn upon this Power and
Commonwealth.

7. Whatever the duty of the civil State be found to be, as touching the
Parish Forms and Churches, yet is not the unquestionable duty of the State to
take off the soul yoaks from the Necks of all that do or may inhabit this
Nation, Jews or Gentiles: and as to Civil things (the proper object of the
civil state) to cast the Nation into a civil form, The want of Civil
Officers in this Nation as to birth of Children, Marriages and Burials being
all but natural and Civil things.
and to appoint civil Officers thorow-out the Nation; To Record the Birth of
children: to take order as to marriages and buryings of all people impartially
in a civil way: The want of which civil Ordinance, as to the latter, has been
a second death in this Nation to multitudes of Yoak-fellows, Parents, etc. who
being not able to walk in the Parish ways of burying in holy ground, and by
the Parish Officers, they have been forced (not without danger also) to the
Highways for succor to their own consciences, and to their Dead-beloveds.

8 Whether since the most high has made bare and naked his holy arm from
heaven for this Nation, this Parliament, this Army, in most wondefull and
singular deliverances, preservations, victories. And since this Nation is set
in the midst of the Nations of the world, Singular mercies call for singular
Acts of Exemplary and singular Gratitude.
wearing a Crown of advantage to be exemplary and presidential to the whole
world about us: Whether has not the most High reserved some wonderful and
singular Acts for the trial of their singular love and gratitude: And since he
rewarded Iehu with temporal honor to many generations, and will not forget to
pay richly for a cup of cold water, etc. since he has promised an hundred fold
in this life, to such as loose for his sake, and in the world to come life
everlasting: Is it not the best Policy, wisdom and reason under Heaven to
search out only what is his only and acceptable pleasure in Christ Jesus, and
to trust his infinite power, wisdom and goodness, what ever be the present
success or consequents.

An Appendix as touching Oaths, A Querie,
ALthough it be lawful (in case) for Christians to invocate the Name of the
most High in Swearing: Yet since it is a part of his holy worship, and
sometimes put for his whole worship, and therefore proper unto such as are his
true Worshippers in Spirit and Truth: and persons may as well be forced unto
any part of the worship of God as unto this, since it ought not to be used, The
Holy name of G^d highly dishonored by the Legal Oaths of this Nation.
but most solemnly, and in most solemn and weighty cases, and (ordinarily) in
such as are not otherwise determinable; since it is the voice of the two great
Lawgivers, from God, Moses and Christ Jesus, that in the mouth of two or three
Witnesses (not Swearing) every Word shall stand: Whether the enforcing of Oaths
and spiritual Covenants upon a Nation promiscuously, and the constant
enforcing of all persons to practice this Worship in the most trivial and
common cases in all Courts (together with the Ceremonies of Book, and holding
up the hand etc.) be not a prostituting of the Holy Name of the most High to
every unclean Lip, and that on slight occasions, and a taking of it by
Millions, and so many millions of times in vain, and whether it be not a
provoking of the eyes of his jealousy who has said it, That he will not hold
him (what him or them soever) guiltless that takes his name in vain.

An Humble and Christian proffer of Disputation.
WHereas in the Epistle I intimated my readiness to debate the Particulars of
this Discourse, etc. I am here humbly bold to Profess, as in the holy presence
of the most High, that I am not Conscious to the least Design or Aim, but
that of a Conscionable and Peaceable presenting Verbum opportunum (an Apple of
Gold in a Picture of Silver) into those Honorable hands whom it so highly
concerns. It Is true, my long Exile into and in America, have rendered me now a
Stranger, and (after the Dispatch of some Civil Affairs) I should unspeakably
rejoice to be gone to morrow; But while the Most High is pleased to force my
stay: He has also (as I believe) enforced my Spirit, again to proffer, in all
Christian meekness and humility to agitate with whom or before whom soever,
these following Proposals.

First, Since the remoulding of this Nation into the Model of Protestanisme:
the Clergy or Ministry (so called) of this Nation, both Prelaticall,
Presbiterian and Independent, and (however in their persons many of them
precious and excellent, yet) as to their Functions and Offices, as to procuring
the Magistrates actings in spiritual cases, as to the Worships and Consciences
of this Nation, they have been bewildred, if not wholly blinded: For as the
Hireling way of Ministry is none of Christ's: So for this Hire, have not only
the Popish, but the Protestant Clergy, tossed up and down (even like Tenis-bals)
the Magistrates and Laws, the Consciences and Worships, the Peace and War, the
Weal and Woe of this Nation.

Secondly, In all ages since Constantine, the Hireling Ministry have must
woefully mislead the Consciences of the Civil state by Preaching them out of
their Civil Sphere and Line, sometimes into an Headship, sometimes into a
Footship, (now over and above, and again as the Revolutions have been)
inferior to, and under the Church: Out of this Civil line or Sphere as this
present Age is forced to confess, that the Civil Magistrates our Fathers
before us never made true Christian Work of it, so I am humbly bold to
maintain they never shall: and therefore

Thirdly, As the Civil permission of all the Consciences and Worships of all
men in Things merely spiritual is no ways inconsistent with true Christianity
and true Civility: So is it the Duty of the Civil Magistrate to suppress all
violencies to the Bodies and Goods of men for their Souls belief, and to
provide, that not one person in the Land be Restrained from, or Constrained to
any Worship, Ministry or Maintenance, but peaceably maintained in his Soul, as
well as Corporal Freedom, To which end I add, that the violent putting in,
and putting out of the several sorts of the Ministers of Worship in this
Nation (if against the Peoples Free choice and desire) has ever and will be
yet, while so practiced, a Grand oppression, and a Powerful occasion, both of
Civil Insurrections, and Soul mischiefs.

Fourthly, The Lord Jesus Christ, has not forgotten to be infinitely
Faithful, and infinitely Wise and Tender to the Souls of his Chosen, but has
in all Ages, and in all Conditions and Changes of his Spouse, stirred up by his
holy Spirit, and sent such Voluntary Laborers into his Vineyard, and so will,
as have been, and shall be abundantly sufficient for this Nation and all
Nations, as may best suit the Holy ends and Periods of his Time and Kingdom.

Fifthly, As he never appointed, so he never needed the casting of whole
Nations into Oecumenicall, National, Provincial, Parochial or Parish forms
and Classes: To feed which Churches and the Ministries thereof, he never
appointed nor needed, the Divinity (or Godliness) degrees of Universities and
Colleges, Nor the enforcing of all the People of a Nation to come to Church
(as they call it) nor the Distinction between enforcing to some Ordinances, but
not to others, as to the Word and Prayer, and Singing and Paying, but not to
the Lords Supper. All which are Plants which God his Father never planted, and
therefore (as all such like, though ^^irer Plants and Inventions) must all in
his holy Season be plucked up, and cast into the Fire.

FINIS.

