PROTESTANCY CONDEMNED BY THE EXPRESS VERDICT AND SENTENCE OF PROTESTANTS.

LUKE 19.22. By thine own mouth I judge thee.



DOWAY. Printed in the Year 1654.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Cannot doubt, but that every Protestant, if he have not a mind to divest
himself of common reason, and proclaim himself to be inexcusable, will confess
Protestancy to be cast and condemned by Protestants, if by their own free and
open Confession, these ensuing points be acknowledged for true; First, That the
first Protestants, who, forsooth, undertook a Reformation of the Universal
Catholic Church existent before Luther, after their pretended Reformation led
so lewd lives, and held doctrines confessedly so absurd, that no man of sense
or wisdom can judge them fit instruments for that supposed, strange, sublime,
supernatural, and divine work. Secondly, That in opposition of the late and
vicious Fathers of Protestants, those men who even by Protestants are styled
Ancient and Holy Fathers, believed, taught, and practiced the very same things,
which we now believe, teach, and practice against Protestants. Thirdly, That
not only the Ancient Fathers, but even the chiefest, and most learned
Protestants, convinced by evidence of truth, stand with us against their
Protestant Brethren in most of the chiefest points of Religion controverted
between us. Fourthly, That our doctrine has been approved by the Omnipotent
hand of God, using for Instruments of working Miracles, those who were
confessedly of our Religon, yea and in express confirmation of points believed
by us, and rejected by Protestants. Fifthly, That by the confession of
Protestants we Catholics may be saved, though we live and dye in the belief of
all those Articles wherein Protestants disagree from us. Which last
consideration, though it were alone, ought effectually to move every one who
believes an Eternity of Joy, or Torment, speedily to join himself with that
Church, wherein by the confession of all, both friends and foes, Catholics and
Protestants, salvation may certainly be attained, if our life agree with our
belief.

Now for proof these Truths, most important to be known, I present not to the
Reader any new Work or Invention of mine own, but in effect only transcribe,
and publish, what I find in that excellent Book, entitled, The Protestants
Apology for the Roman Church; the true Author whereof thought fit to conceal
himself under the name of John Brereley Priest, though indeed he was neither
Brereley, nor Priest, nor Clergyman; not John, but rather James. He dedicated
his Book to King James, and writes with so great exactness, fidelity, temper,
and moderation, that Protestants, though they must needs feel themselves deeply
wounded by the substance of his discourse, yet cannot with any shadow of reason
pretend to be justly offended with his manner of discoursing. In so much as
Thomas Morton confesses, that whatsoever strong argument in any place in Roman
Authors is to be found in favor of that Religion, whatsoever has by chance
fallen from the pen of any learned Protestant but in outward appearance
consonant to their doctrines, which may seem any way to promote the Roman
cause; all that we see in this volume collected to be brought and presly urged
against us, with so singular a choice of the things themselves, with such force
of arguments, with such an elegant and exquisite style, Lastly with so moderate
a kind of expression, as their subtilty, judgment, wit, art and moderation
could do. I wish the Book were in the hands of many, but it being of some bulk,
and not easy to be had, and the points which here I offer being but few, and
comprised in no very great compass, and of themselves very intelligible and
clear to every man's understanding, they will come to the knowledge of more by
being published thus apart, than if they were to be sought in the Book it self
mixed with many other matters by the Author handled in different and distant
places, and upon several occasions, and in a method not obvious to men who have
no great mind to take much pains. If upon occasion I put in a word of mine own,
the Reader will understand it to be mine by the word Publisher abbreviated by
Pu.

I make use of the Edition of An. 1608. It is clear that he is most exact in
his Citations, citing not only the Book, but the year, Edition, place of Print,
and sometimes even the page and line, as appears by the Table set down in the
beginning of his Book, with this title, A Table of certain Protestant writers,
and their particular writings, whose folio, or page (for more ready, and
certain direction) are specially alleged in the subsequent Discourse; and of
their several Editions or year of Print, according to which they be so alleged,
unless it be otherwise noted in the margent. But yet notwithstanding all the
care and exactness used by the Author, it was not in his power to exempt the
Print from many Errors and Omissions, as also I cannot doubt, but he who Prints
this publication of mine, will have his errors. The five Heads or Truths
mentioned above, I will call so many Considerations. Neither have I any more to
say in this place, than with my whole heart to beg of the Protestant Reader,
even for the love he ows to the Redeemer of Mankind, and for the care he should
have to save his own soul, that he will peruse these Considerations with a
hearty desire to find, and an absolute resolution to embrace the truth; laying
aside, prejudice, passion, sloth, and all humane and wordly respects,
seriously meditating the words of our Blessed Savior ( Matthew. 16. v. 26, 27.)
What does it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage
of his own Soul? Or what exchange shall a man give for his Soul? For the Son of
Man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, and then will he
render to every man according to his works. If the Reader come not with such a
disposition, and resolution, every word he reads will rise against him in that
dreadful day of Judgment, upon which all Eternity must depend. O ETERNITY!
ETERNITY!

THE FIRST CONSIDERATION
Concerning the lives of the first Protestant pretended Reformers.
OUR Savior forewarning us (says Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9.
subdivis. 1) That a good Tree yields good fruit (Math. 7.17.) and, beware of
false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Woolvs, by their fruits you shall know them ( Math. 7.15, 16.) omitting petty
examples (says Brereley tract 2. chap. 3. sect 9. subdivis. 2.) we will
entreat of Principals, namely of Luther, of Jacobus Andreas, the greatest
enlarger of his Doctrine, and of Zuinglius, Calvin, and Beza; and of these also
(for other respects) but with a gentle, sparing, and forbearing touch, as not
undertaking to allege any thing of them, but that which is in it self evident,
and for such confessed.

Of Luther.
1 COncerning Luther's Life and Manners (says Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect.
10. subdivis. 11.) for so much as he is strongly privileged with the opinion of
the present time, we will in respect thereof but briefly touch the same, and
that also not without great and respective observation, as forbearing purposely
the credible Testimonies in that behalf, of Cochlaeus, Lyndanus, Staphylus and
other our Catholic Writers, to whom his life and manners were well known, and
choosing specially to speak thereof from no other testimony than of himself,
and his own dearest Scholars. As touching his Life before his revolt from our
Catholic Church it is confessed, that he as then See Simon Voyon upon the
Catologue of the Doctors etc. Englished, page 180. And Luther ad Galatas c. 1.
v. 14. fo. 35. a. after the English Translation.
lived in his Monastery, punishing his body with watching, fasting, and
prayer; See Luthers own words hereof in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Galathians, in English, in c. 1. fol. 35. h.
Honored the Pope of mere Conscience, Luther ibid. fol. 35. b.
kept Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; and Luther ibid. fol. 35. a.
whatsoever (says he) I did, I did it with a single heart, of good zeal, and
for the Glory of God, fearing grievously the last Day, and desirous to be saved
from the bottom of my heart. In so much also as for some small time after his
revolt, there remained yet in him some Relics, or steps of former Sanctimony,
whereof Erasmus (in epistola ad Thomam Cardinalem Eboracensem) affords him
commendable testimony: whereas afterward, upon his further defection from our
Church, he at last became quantum mutatus ab illo? and was so far transported
with sensuality from his former course of intended Chastity, that he says to
the contrary, Luther in Prove. 31. n. 10. adds this amourous Rhyme for a
morginal Gloss, Nicht liebers is it afferden, Ben frawn lieb, wems tan werden:
being in English as is alleged here in the Text.
Nothing is more sweet or loving upon the Earth, than is the love of a woman if
a man can obtain it. And again, Luther tom. 7. in Ep. ad Wolfangum etc. fol.
505.
He that resolves to be without a woman, let him lay aside from him the name
of a man, making himself a plain Angel or Spirit. Yet further, Luther tom. 5.
Wittemberg. sermon. de Matrimo. nio fol. 119. a. verse. finem.
Quam non est in meis viribus ut vir non sim? etc. As it is not in my power
that I should be no man; so is it not in my power that it should be either
staid or omitted, but is as necessary as that I should be a man, and more
necessary than to eat, drink, purge, make clean the Nose, etc. Insomuch as he
acknowlegeth himself to have been Luther in Colloquiis men's. fol. 526. a. et
vide fol. 400. a.
almost mad through the rage of Lust and desire of Women: And ( Luther in
Colloquiis Germanicis cap. de Marmonio says, Ut nemo porest cibo vel potu
carere, sic fieri nequit, ut aliquis a muliere abstineat, etc. Causa haec est,
quia in utero mulierum concept^, eo aliti, inde nati, lactati, et educati
sumus, ita ut caro nostra majore ex part mulieris caro sit, et sic plane fieri
nequit, ut ab eiis separemur. And tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 328. b. post. med.
He says, Puella, in qua non est sublime hoc donum continentiae nihilo facilius
carere potest marito, aut viro, quam cibo aut potu, somno, etc.
to omit his other like sayings) he yet further says ( tom. 1. Epistolarum
latinarum fol. 334. ad Philippum) I am burned with the great flame of my
untamed flesh, I, who ought to be fervent in Spirit, am fervent in the flesh,
in lust, sloth etc. Eight days are now past, wherein I neither write, pray,
nor study, being vexed partly with the temptations of the flesh, partly with
other trouble. But (says he ubi supra fo. 345) O intolerable ingratitude, and
blasphemy, to abuse to Carnalitie the benefit of our Redemption!
it suffices that we have known the Riches of the Glory of God the Lamb which
takes away the sins of the World, from whom sin cannot draw us, although we
should commit Fornication, or kill a thousand times in one day. And being in
this case, he labors not to keep his former kept Chastity by his foresaid
punishing his body with watching, fasting, and prayer, before time continued by
him in his Monastery, when he was a Catholic, which course of resistance by
Prayer, the blessed Apostle (2. Cor. 12.7.) being so assaulted, used, and
thereby prevailed; but unmindfull of his former Vow, and forbearing Prayer,
sometimes even for eight days together, at the last (having Osiander centur.
16. page 97. fine.
cast off his Religious habit Anno 1544) he did in speedy accomplishment of his
longing desire Melancton in epist. ad Joac. Camer. de D. Lutheri conjugio. It
is extant in Melancton 's Consilia Evangelica par. 1. p. 37.
Marry even upon the sudden Katherine Bore the Nunn, without any
communication before had thereof with any of his friends, but having in the
evening (so impatient was he of delay, as not to forbear, but that present
Night, till the usual time of Marriage in the Daytime next ensuing) invited to
Supper Pomerane, Luke the Painter, and Appelles the Lawier, he then so finished
the Espousalls, for which by the most ancient and Imperial Laws (made See
Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. subdivis. 7. page 595) citing Zozomen hist. lib. 6.
c. 3 affirming how that the Christian Emperor Jovian published an Edict, that
who so allured a sacred Virgin to marriage, should be therefore punished with
the loss of his head. This Jovian ( says Brereley) was in course the third
Emperor after Constantine the Great. And the foresaid Law is yet extant, Cod.
lib. 1. de Episcopis et Clericis, wherein it is said, Si quis non dicam rapere,
sed attentare tantum, jungendi causa Matrimonii Sacratissimas Virgins ausus
fuerit, capitali poena feriatur.
not lately, but during the venerable times of the Primitive Church) He should
have lost his head. A thing at that time holden so scandalous by report of
Sleydan in his Commentaries in English l. 5. Anno 25. f. 65. b. paulo post
medium, says, In those days Luther married a Nunn, whereby he gave occasion
to his Adversaries to speak evil of him. And Mr. Fulk in his Answer to P.
Frarines Declamation pa. 32. ante medium, confesses that many men misliked
Luther's marriage with a Nunn. Insomuch as Luther himself in Colloquiis latinis
tom. 2. de con-Jugio, says hereof; Nisi ego clam celebrassem Nuptias, omnes
impedivissent, quia omnes amicissimi clamabant, non illam, sed aliam.
Sleydan, and others, that Luther himself afterward became Melancton ubi supra
page 38. paulo ante med. says, Quoniam Lutherum quodammodo tristiorem cerno
and perturbatum ob vitae mutationem, omni studio ac benevolentia consolari eum
conor.
grieved and ashamed thereat: And his dearest Melancton did therefore specially
Melancton his foresaid Epistle ad Joach. Camer. extant ubi supra.
and speedily Melancton in the end of his foresaid Epistle page 39. ante med.
Ista ad te exposui verbosius, ne eventus inopinatus te perturbaret and
tristitia afficeret etc.
write to a friend of his in excuse thereof, wherein nevertheless he holds it
] Melancton ubi supra says, Ac possit fortassis aliquis mirari illum hoc
infelici tempore bonis and honestis viris ubique graviter laborantibus, non
modo non affici simol dolor, sed videri propemodum nihil penitus curare ea
mala quae ante oculos versantur.
Marveilous, that Luther should be so regardless and little touched with grief
at the Calamity then present, as to undertake that marriage: Only he excuses
it with Luther 's sociable condition of Melancton ubi supra says, Atque ego
rem hanc sic gest am esse arbitror: est vir iste nequaquam ex iis qui homines
oderunt and congressus fugiunt, quotidianae autem vitae illius usum non
ignoras, unde cogitare te caetera quam me scribere melius ut opinor ^uerit.
Life, and other Melancton ubi supra: What daily use of Life and other good
Matters were these which Melancton did thus forbear to write, leaving them
rather to his friends thoughts?
Matters (thereupon depending, and not to be uttered) which (says he) are
fitter for you to imagine than me to write; for Melancton ibidem page 38.
initio, says, Ego naturam Lutherum arbitror coegisse ut fieret maritus.
I am persuaded that Luther was a man enforced to marry by Nature. Hereunto we
may add, that Luther lying thus open, acknowledged his In Sleydan 's
Commentaries in English l. 3. An. 21. fol. 29. b. initio.
Profession not to be of Life or Manners, but of Doctrine, Sleydan ibidem fol.
22. a. circa medium.
wishing that he were removed from the Office of preaching, because his Manners
and Life did not answer to his profession, wherein he was so censured even by
Protestants themselves, that as appears by their own report, Reported by the
Protestant Writer, Benedict Morgenstern in tract. de Ecclesia page 221. circa
med. who says of the Calvinists, Si quando volunt indulgere genio^ non
verentur inter se dicere, hodie Lutheranice vivimus.
If at any time they would give assent to the provocation of Nature, they blush
not to say among themselves (hodie Lutheranice vivimus) to day we will live
Lutheran like. By which confessed premises it appears, that Luther together
with his alteration of Religion made a like answerable alteration of his life.
And yet (says Brereley page 415) was this untoward course of life so peculiar
(in their own confidence and opinion) to their profession of Doctrine, that as
some of them affirmed, that to live thus, was to live Lutheran like; so others
of them likewise doubted not to term it the Evangelical Instruction: affirming
withal a serious and Christian Discipline, to be a new Papacy and Monachism,
as witnesses Jacobus Andraeas conc. 4. in cap. 21. Lucae, saying, Mandat serio
Deus in Verbo suo, and a suis Christianis requirit seriam and Christianam
disciplinam, haec vero apud nos novus Papatus novusque Monachismus
existimantur: sic enim inquiunt, Dedicimus modo per solam sidem in Christum
salvari etc. quamobrem sine and permit ut hujusmodi opera missa faciamus, cum
per Christum alioquin salvari possimus, and solum gratia Dei Christique meritis
nitamur, atque ut totus Mundus agnoscat eos non esse Papistas, nec bonis
operibus quic quam fidere, illorum etiam operum nullum penitus exercent;
Jejunii loco comessationibus and perpotationibus nocte dieque vacant etc.
precationes vertunt in juramenta etc. atque hoc universum vitae genus ab illis
Evangelicum dicitur institutum etc.

As concerning Marriage and Divorce Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10.
subdivis. 5.
Luther (in sermon. de Matrimonio) says, Si non vult uxor, aut non possit,
veniat ancilla, If the Wife will not, or cannot come, let the Maid come. And
whereas Mr. Whitaker (who would make the best Gloss thereof) answers
hereunto ( in respons. ad rat. Camp. rat. 8. page 150) that Luther hereby only
meant first to divorce, and then after to marry the maid; Yet is this Divorce
(though upon such foresaid occasion either of infirmity or willfullness)
utterly rejected even by Mr. Whitaker himself (in the same place, and contra
Duraeum l. 8. page 687. fine) And nevertheless Luther was so vehement against
the wives froward refusal of her Husbands B^d, that he further said thereof,
Luther tom. 5. Wittemberg. sermon. de Matrimonio fol. 123. a. verse. sinem. See
also Luher 's words cited in the Treatise against the defense of the Censure,
page 219. post medium. And see Luther tom. 5. Wittemberg in 1. Cor. 7. fol.
113. a. initio. And Luther tom. 5. Wittemb. in 1. cor. 7. v. 11. fol. 111. b.
ante medium, farther says hereof, Quid si alter cum altero in gratiam redire
nolit, sed simplicter esse velit, and alter continere non valens, comparem
habere conjugem ^^^atur, quid illi faciendum? poteritne cum alio contrahere?
Respondeo, procul dubio poterit.
The Magistrates duty is to bridle this Wife, yea and to put her to death: this
if the Magistrate omit, the Husband must imagine that his wife is stolen away by
Thieves, and dead; and consider how to marry another; For (says he yet further)
See the Treatise against the defense of the Censure, page 213. prope sinem.
we cannot stop St Paul's mouth, etc. His words are plain, that a Brother or
Sister are free from the Law of Wedlock, if the one depart or do not consent to
dwell with the other; neither does he say, that this may be done once only, but
leaves it free, that so often as the case shall require he may either proceed
or stay. In which case (as he signifies) See the Treatise against the defense
of the Censurer, page 213. paulo post medium. And see Luther tom. 5.
Wittemberg. fol. 112. b. fine.
a man may have ten or more Wives fled from him, and yet living. Nay he
doubts not in case of Adultery committed by a married man or married woman,
to give liberty even to the offending Adulterer, In aliam profugere terram
maechus potest, ibique si continere nequeat, uxorem ducere rursum. Luther tom.
5. Wittemberg. sermon. de matrimonio, fol. 123. a. initio.
to fly into another Country and marry again: So dangerously does he incline
to Polygamie, the which himself elsewhere seems to defend, affirming that
Luther in propositionibus de Bigamia Episcoporum edit. An. 1528. pro. 62.65.66.
and vide Luthe. in explicatione Geneseos edit. An. 1525. in Commentario, c. 16.
Polygamie is no more abrogated, than is the rest of Moses Law, and that it is
free, as being neither commanded nor forbidden. In respect whereof he
signifies that Luther in Genes. c. 16. edit. Anno 1525.
he will nether bring in Polygamie, nor condemn it. Insomuch that the
Calvinists themselves do further say, Lutherus de conjugio quaedam, and alia
haudquaquam probanda scripsit. See this in Hospinian in his Concord. Discord.
printed 1607. fol. 99. b. ante med. etc.

3 As concerning Magistracy (says Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10
subdivis. 6.) how fully, plainly, and directly Luther impugned the same,
especialy before the Princes of Germany had undertaken the defense of his
Doctrine, is by his own writings more than manifest, and in part from thence
declared by Brereley tract. 3. sect. 5. where he cites Luther de seculari
potestate tom. 6. Germanico, saying: Among Christians no man can or ought to be
Magistrate, but each one to other equally subject etc. Among Christian men none
is superior, save one and only Christ. And in sermon. de ove perdita, and also
in his Sermons englished by William Gage page 97. fine, and tom. 7. Wittemberg.
fol. 327. b. Luther further says, Therefore is Christ our Lord, that he may
make us such as himself is: and as he cannot suffer himself to be tied and
bound by Laws etc. so also ought not the conscience of a Christian to suffer
them. And in his said Sermons page 261. circa med. He does admonish, that we
obey the Civil Magistrate, for (says he) there comes no loss of Christian
Liberty or faith thereby. For, for so much as they do not contend, that those
things are necessary to salvation which they ordain etc. Howbeit if any should
contend that those Commandments of the Civil Magistrate be necessary to
salvation (as doubtless they be, in regard that they bind us in Conscience, and
to break them were sin) then, as it is said of the Traditions of the Papists,
the contrary rather were to be done. I will add (says Brerely tract. 2. cap.
2. sect. 10. subdivis. 6.) the base and invective Calumniations wherewith he
charged (to omit sundry other Princes and Of his like immoderate railing
against sundry other Princes, as namely against Henry Duke of Brunswick, See
his special Book thereof against the Duke, entitled, Wider Hanse worste etc.
And of his like railing against the Archbishop of Mentz Prince Elector, See
Luther in tom. 3. Germ. fol. 533. a. b and 32.6. and 360. and in Colloq.
mensal. fol. 342. and 343. And against the Princes of Germany, See Luther tom.
2. Germ. fol. 190. b. and 200. and tom. 3. fol. 195. b. See all those more
particularly and at large alleged out of Luther 's own writings by Gasper
Ulemberg^us in his Book entitled, Graves and justae causae cur catholicis etc.
printed 1589. causa 8. p. 234, 235, 237, and 238. And see also reported by
Sleydan (Luther's own Scholar) after the English Edition l. 16. fol. 222. a.
and b. the unworthy, base, scurrilous (and not to be repeated) Pictures devised
by Luther against the Pope. A thing so evident, that the Protestant Landgrave
in his published writing penned by his Divines, says, Lutherus non tantum
magnorum Regum, Principum and Dominorum, utriusque nostrum cognatorum,
quemadmodum etiam privatorum quorundam hominum, ho^estam famam dicacitate
quadam sua arrosit, and gravissimis qubusdam accusationi^us indecenter
traduxit, quo, vel unonomine adducti, Lutheri scripta absque omni exceptione
nullo plane modo probare volumus, nec sine tum nostri, tum laudatissimorum
Majorum nost^orum famae and honoris laesione possumus: verum etiam etc. See
this in Hospinian in Concord. Discord. fol. 99. b. ante medium, Printed 1607.
And the Divines of the Count Palatine in their Admonitio Christiana etc.
Printed 1581. page 233. fine, and 234. initio, do object to Luther his convitia
praeter pietatem and modestiam confidenter and arroganter dicta, scurriles in
rebus seriis lusus, quam multa acerbe and injuriose scripta, non tantum in
Christi insignes Ecclesias etc. sed etiam in magnos P^^cipes.
States) our late Sovereign King Henry the 8th. of famous memory, calling him
(in libro contra Regem Ang. in Praefat.) An envious mad fool, babbling with much
spittle in his mouth, more furious (in the same Book extant tom. 2. Wittemberg.
fol. 333. 334. and 335. etc.) than madness. it self, more doltish than Folly it
self, endued with an impudent and whorish Face, without any one vein of
Princely blood in his Body, a lying Sophist, a damnable rotten worm, a
Basilisk and progeny of an Adder, a lying scurrill covered with the title of a
King, a clownish wit, a doltish head, most wicked foolish and impudent Henry;
and saying further (ibid. fol. 338. a.) he does not only lie like a most vain
scurr, but passes a most wicked knave; and (ibid. fol. 340. b. and vide 333.
b. 335. a) thou lie in thy throat, foolish and sacrilegious King. Whereunto
might be added his exceeding many other more like dispitefull and scurrilous
words used against his Majesty, some of them being so immodestly base, a we a
r^shamed to English them. In the place cited fol. 333. and 337. etc. He says,
Jus mihi erit pro meo Rege Majestatem tuam Anglicam stercore conspergere (and)
sit ergo mea haec generalis responsio ad omnes sentinas infulsissimae hujus
larvae etc. Haec sunt robora nostra adversus quae obmutescere coguntur Henrici,
Thomistae, Papistae, and quicquid est faecis, sentinae, latrinae, impiorum and
sacrilegorum ejusmodi. Sordes istae and labes hominum, Thomistae and Henrici,
sacrilegus Henricorum and asinorum cultus, furor insulsissimorum asinorum and
Thomisticorum porcorum, os Vestrae Dominationis impurum and sacrilegum: with
infinite more such like. This intemperate railing was so evident in Luther,
that himself, in loc. com. class. 4. fol. 35. b. acknowledges the Worlds
Opinion herein had of him, saying there, Video ab omnibus in me peti modestiam,
omnes fere in me damnant mordacitatem, Insomuch as Mr. Fox Act. Monu. page 404.
a. fine, reports, how that Luther's chiefest Patron, even Frederick Duke of
Saxony, wrote grievously to Luther, exhorting him to temper the vehemency of
his Style. To his scurrilous railing we will add what Brereley (in his Book a
part of the lives of the late pretended Reformers, cap 3. sect. 2. initio, page
60.) says, concerning his contentious spirit; which was so abounding in him,
that for fear of being idle, and to keep himself awork in that kind, he
contracted with Carolostadius, and giving him Hospinian in hist. Sacrament.
part 2. at Anno 1525. fol. 32. b. ante med. says, Lutheru^^ Carolostadium ut
contra se public scribat aureum nummum extractum ex pera ipsi oftert,
inquiens: En accipe, and quantum potes animose contra me dimica etc. cumque
aureum nummum marsupio suo recondidisset Carolostadius, Luthero manum in
sponsionem pactae and susceptae contentionis porrexit, pro cujus confirmatione
Lutherus ipsi vicissim haustum vini propinavit, adhortans eum ne sibi parceret,
sed quanto vehementius and animosius contra se ageret, tanto illum sibi
chariorem futurum. See also Lavather hereof, in Histor. Sacrament. fol. 2. a.
post med.
a piece of Gold to write against him, he upon Carolostadius his acceptance
thereof, gave to Carolostadius his hand upon the bargain, and thereupon drunk to
him in a cup of Wine, exhorting Carolostadius not to spare him, but to deal
roundly and vehemently with him, whereupon ensued their most contentious and
invective writings: This fact of Luther was so scandalous, that Hospinian
though See this hereafter in this Consideration number. 7. ^t o. ante fi^em.
favoring Luther yet signifies from what Hospinian in his Histor. Sacrament.
par. 2. fol. 32. circa med. says of Luthers foresaid bargain with
Carolostadius, Haec Christian lector, fuerunt, infelicissimi istius certaminis
(quod ex pacto and sponsione susceptum tot jam annis Ecclesiam gravissime
exercuit) infausta auspicia, quae si quis diligenter apud se animo sepositis
affectibus expendat, ex quo spiritu fuerint profecta tanto rectius etc. est
judicaturus etc. And Daniel Tossanus in lib. consolatorio, cap. 127. says,
that Luther did proceed contra Carolostadium instinctu maligui Spiritus.
Spirit the same proceeded.

4 Concerning the Administration of the Word and Sacraments (says Brereley
tract 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 7.) Luther makes it common to Laymen with
the Clergy, saying to this end Luther tom. 2. lib. de Ministris Ecclesiae
instituendis, fol. 368. a and b. 369. a. b. and vide ibid. l. de abroganda
missa privata, tom. 2 fol. 249. a. b. and in lib. de captiv. Babylon. c. de
Ordine. And see Hospinianus in Hist. Sacrament. part. 1. page 22. paulo post
med. and part. 2. fol. 14. b. circa med.
The first Office of the Priest is to preach the Word etc. but this is common
to all: next is to baptize, and this also may all do, even women etc. the third
is to consecrate Bread and Wine, but this also is common to all no less than
Priests, and this I avouch by the Authority of Christ himself, saying, Do this
in remembrance of me; This Christ spoke to all there present, and to come
afterward; whosoever should eat of that Bread, and drink of that Wine etc.
This also is witnessed by St. Paul, who 1. Cor 11. repeating this, applies it
to all the Corinthians, making them all as himself was, that is to say
Consecrators, etc. If then that which is greater than all, be given
indifferently to all men and women, I mean the Word and Baptism, then that
which is less, I mean to consecrate the Supper, is also given to them. And the
like Doctrine does he affirm no less plainly in Luther in assertionibus damnatis
per Leonem decimum art. 13. says, In Sacramento Paenitentiae ac remissione
culpae non plus facit Papa vel Episcopus, quam insimus Sacerdos: immo ubi non
est Sacerdos, aeque tantum quilibet Christianus etiamsi mulier aut puer esset
etc. quod autem absente Sacerdote etiam puer aut mulier and quilibet
Christianus absolvere potest, Mat. 18. Claree patet, ubi Christus omnibus
Christianis dicit: Quodcunque solveritis super terram, solutum erit in Coeli^:
Hanc invictam authoritatem non mihi subverten^. And see further in loc. commun.
clas^. 2. page 136. and 138. But see his words more full than all this, alleged
out of the Edition of Jena by Cnoglerus in his Symbola tria, page 157.
another of his Writings, being (as Dr. Covell affirms) Mr. Covell in his
defense of Mr. Hooker 's five Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, Art. 15. page
101. post med. And see Luther de Missa privata Edit. An. 1534. And see
Hospinian. in Hist Sacramentar. page 22. paulo post med. And Hospinian in Hist.
Sacramentar. part altera, fol. 1^. b. circa med. says of Luther in 1 b. de
Missa privata An. 34. Eousque progreditur, ut diceret Sacramentum verum
futurum, etiamsi a Diabolo conficeretur.
not afraid to affirm that Sacraments are effectual though administered by
Satan himself. Thus did Luther in respect of want of calling in his Followers,
write against the Pope; though elsewhere to serve his own turn against the
Anabaptists (who upon the same ground used the same weapons against him) he See
Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 6. initio at u. and tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3.
sub. 2. at z.
presses and charge them for their want of ordinary calling: So Variable,
Inconstant, and Temporizing, (as occasion required) was he in his Doctrine:
whereof Zuinglius tom. 2. in responsione ad Confessionem Lutheri, fol. 458.
circa med. says, Lutherus nunc hoc, nunc illud deadem Re pronunciat, nec
usquam sibi constat: haud dubie eain constantia and levitate in Dei Ver
boutendum esse existimat, qua effrictae frontis scurrae inter aleam uti
consueverunt. Also Hospinianus, a learned Calvinist, in his Historia
Sacramentaria, part altera, in his Alphabeticall table, set before the
beginning of that Book, at the letter L. under the word Lutherus, sets forth
Luther's wonderful inconstancy in Doctrine with particular reference to his
contrary sayings and Doctrines, there by him in that book at large alleged, in
which course he charge Luther in the same table, saying; Lutherus sibi ipsi
dissimili, in Doctrina de persona Christi 18. And under the word Lutheri, is
set down Lutheri inconstantia in Doctrina 4. b. Lapsuum and inconstantiae
causae 5. Ejus de coena sententia Prima 5. b. Secunda 7. b. Tertia 8. Quarta
12. Quinta ibidem, De ejus inconstantia in negotio Coenae, Sturmius 12. a. b.
inconstantia de communione sub uno vel utraque specie 12. b. 13. inconstantia
de manducatione impiorum 13. b. inconstantia de concommitantia 13. b.
inconstantia de elevatione Sacramenti 13. b. 14. inconstantia de adoratione
Sacramenti 14. with much more there set down in this kind. And in the Book
exemplified at large from Luther's own inconstant and contrary writing,
according to the figures of direction here as before mentioned. Also concerning
the form of words requisite to a Sacrament, Luther affirms Baptism to be good
with whatsoever words it be ministered, so the same be not in the name of Man
but God. So Luther tom 2. Wittemberg. in lib de captivit. Babylon. cap. de
Baptismo fol. 75. a. initio says, Quocunque modo tradatur Baptismus, modo non
in nomine Hominis, sed in nomine Domini tradatur, vere salvum facit; imo non
dubitem, siquis in nomine Domini suscipiat, etiamsi impius Minister non det in
nomine Domini, vere Baptizatum esse in Nomine Domini.

5 Concerning the Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 8.
sufficiency of our Redemption by our Saviors Passion in his humane nature
upon the Cross, Luther taught thus far to the contrary, as that not only the
Humane Nature of Christ sufferd for us, for (says he) in affirming but so
much, Christ is a Savior of vile and small account, and needs himself also a
Savior. Luther in confessione majori de Coena Domini.
Cum credo quod sola humana natura pro me passa est; Christus ille vilis nec
magni pretii Salvator est. Imo ipse quoque Salvatore opus habet: but also that
the Luther de Consiliis Part. 2. says of the Zuingliand: Pertinacissime contra
me pugnabant, quod Divinitas Christi pati non posset.
Divinity of Christ did suffer, which is so intolerable and gross, that it is
specially contradicted by diverse learned Protestants, as Zuinglius,
Hospinianus, D. Barnes, Beza, Czecanorius (in Brereley page 403, 404.) and
affirmed to be an old condemned opinion in Apollinarius and Eutiches, and
contrary to the Prophets, Apostles, and all true Believers. To this we may add
Luther's wicked Doctrine concerning our Savior's descending into Hell, there
also for to suffer Torments in Soul after his death. Thus Luther (tom. 3.
Wittemberg. in Psalm. 16. fol. 279. a. post med.) says, Christus sicut cum
summo dolor mortuus est, ita videtur and dolores post mortem in inferno
sustinuisse, ut nobis omnia superaret etc. And see this opinion confessed in
Luther, by Fulke in his defense of the English translation of the Bible, cap.
7. page 204. See Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect 10. sub. 8. at 16. page 205.
(it should be 405)

6 Conterning Luther's Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdi. 9.
contempt of the ancient Fathers, and his own great undertaking knowledge, he
says, Luther in libro ad Ducem Georgium. And see his like saying in Colloquiis
Litinis cap. de consolatione. And ad cap. 1. dd Galatas tom. 5. Wittemberg.
fol. 290 b. He says Esto, Ecclesia, Augustinus, and alii Doctores; item
Petrus, Apollo, imo Angelus e Caelo diversum doceant, tamen mea Doctrina est
ejusmodi, quae solius Dei gloriam illustrat etc. Petrus Apostolorum summus
vivebat and docet extra Verbum Dei; And after the English Translation. fol. 33.
b. paulo post med. and 34. a. initio. and in libro de servo arbitrio contra
Erasmum, in the first Edition thereof He says, (if not most arrogantly judge)
Deponite quicquid armaturae suppeditabunt Orthodoxi veteres, Theologorum
Scholae, authoritas Conciliorum and Pontificum, consensus tot saeculorum, ac
totius populi Christiani, nihil recipimus nisi Scripturas: sed fic, ut penes
nos solos sit certa Authoritas interpretandi. Quod nos interpretamur hoc sensit
Spiritus Sanctus, quod afferunt alii quamvis magni, quamvis multi, a Spiritu
Satanae and ^lienata mente profectum est. See this Saying alleged in Nullus and
Nemo G. 6. page 153. And in Cnoglerus his Symbola tria. page 152. And Luther
tom. 2 Wittemberg. fol. 486. b. fine says, Ego vero hoc libro non contuli, sed
asserui, and assero, ac penes nullum volo esse judicium, sed omnibus suadeo, ut
praestent obsequium.
Since the Apostles times no Doctor or Writer has so excellently and clearly
confirmed, instructed, and comforted the Consciences of the Secular States, as
I have done, by the singular grace of God. This certainly I know, that neither
Austine, nor Ambrose, who yet are in this matter the best, are equal to me
herein. And again ( tom. 7. in sermon. de eversione Jerusalem. fol. 271. a.) The
Gospel is so copiously preached by us, that truly in the Apostles time, it was
not so clear. And ( apud Brereley trect 1. sect. 3. subd vis. 14. initio. in
the Margent at the figure 4.) he affirms, ( tom. 2. Wittemberg. Anno 1551. lib.
de servo Arbitrio page 434.) the Fathers of so many Ages to have been plainly
blind, and most ignorant in the Scriptures; to have erred all their life time,
and that unless they were amended before their deaths, they were neither
Saints, nor partaining to the Church. See further Luther's Book de servio
arbitrio printed in octavo 1603. page 72, 73, 276, and 337. Also in Colloquiis
Mensalibus cap, de Patribus Ecclesiae, Luther says of sundry Fathers in
particular, In the writings of Hierom, there is not a word of true Faith,
Christ, and sound Religion. Tertullian is very superstitious. I have holden
Origin long since accursed. Of Chrysostom I make no account. Bazil is of no
worth, he is wholly a Monk, I weigh him not of a hair. Cyprian is a weak Divine
etc. affirming there yet further, that the Church did degenerate in the
Apostles age, and that the Apology of Phillip Melancthon does far excel all
the Doctors of the Church, and exceeds even Augustine himself. See Brereley
Tract: 2. c. 2. sect: 10. subdivis. 9.
How highly he esteems of such Doctrine as himself collecteth from the
Scriptures, and how much he prefers himself therein before the Fathers,
himself signifies saying ( tom. 2. l. contra Regem Angliae fol. 344. b.) Gods
Word is above all, the Divine Majesty makes for me, so as I pass not if a
thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand King Harry Churches stood
against me: Nay he doubts not in plain terms to exempt his Doctrine from all
judgment of Men and Angels, making himself thereby judge of both, saying,
(Adversus falso nominatum Ecclesiasticum statum) Scire vos volo, quod in
posterum non amplius hoc honor dignabor, ut sinam vel vos vel ipsos Angelos de
Caelo, de mea doctrina judicare etc. nec volo meam doctrinam a quoquam
judicari, atque adeone ab Angelis quidem: cum enim certus de ea sim, per eam
and vester and Angelorum judex esse volo. And see these words, though somewhat
altered in the late edition of Wittemberg tom. 2. fol. 306. a. fine. And ( apud
Brereley, tract. 3. sect. 7. page 681. marg. at e.) tom. 2. Wittemberg. lib.
contra Regem Angliae fol. 333. a. fine. he says, Certus enim sum dogmata mea
habere me de Caelo etc. dogmata mea stabunt etc. And will our English Divines
allow this in the Doctrine of Real presence, Images etc. wherewith they charge
and reprove Luther? Luther also ( apud Brerely tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10.
subdivis. 2.) says ( in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 1. after the English Translation
fol. 33. b. paulo post med. and 34. a. initio, and tom. 5. Wittemberg. of anno
1554. fol. 290. b.) Be it that the Church, Austin, and other Doctors, also
Peter, Apollo, yea an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise, yet is my Doctrine
such as sets forth Gods only Glory etc. Peter the chief of the Apostles, did
live and teach (extra verbum Dei) besides the Word of God. And in the same
place fol. 290. a. fine, he further says, Sive S. Cyprianus, Ambrosius,
Augustinus, sive S. Petrus, Paulus, immo Angelus e Caelo aliter doceat, tamen
hoc certe scio, quod humana non suadeo, sed Divina. For this cause sundry
Calvinists have not forborne to tax Luther with excessive Pride. Conradus
Regius ( in lib. Germanico contra Hessium de Caena Domini b. 2.) says, God
has for the sin of Pride ( wherewith Luther extolled himself, as many of his
writings show) taken from him his true Spirit etc. and in place thereof has
given an angry, proud, and lying Spirit. And the Tigurine Divines in
Confessione Germanica, Printed Tiguri 1544. in octavo; say, Luther boasts
himself to be the Apostle and Prophet of the Germans, who has learned of none,
of whom all others have learned; no man has known any thing, but what he
learned of Luther; no man has done any thing, Luther has done all etc. And (
apud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. subdivis. 2. at*) Zuinglius, in
responsione ad confessionem Lutheri, charge Luther with magna Arrogantia, and
cum arroganti verborum fastu, minis quoque plusquam turgidis. And Oecolampadius
in responsione ad confessionem Lutheri, says, that Luther was arrogantiae and
superbiae affect^^ inflatus. Also the Tigurine Divines in their answer to
Luther's Book against Zuinglius, say, Prophetae and Apostoli Dei Gloriae, non
privato honori, non suae pertinaciae and superbiae studebant; Lutherus autem
sua quaerit, pertinax est, insolentia nimia effertur etc. And Simon Lythus
responsione altera ad alteram Jacobi Gretzeri Apologiam, page 333. paulo ante
med. says, Lutherus plusquam debeat tribuit gloriolae partae, cujus particulam
communicari cum aliis indignissime ferebat. And Thomas Naogeorgus (a learned
Calvinist) alleged by Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinistarum l. 2. fol. 131.
a. post med. says of Luther, Plurima scripsit per iram carnalem, and per
aemulationem, ne succumbere cerneretur ulli, Doctorum veterum orbitam reliquit,
indulgens stomacho suo ac honori. And Calvin alleged ibidem fol. 126, a. post
med. Hanc intemperiem qua ubique ebullit, utinam magis fraenare studuisset etc.
Utinam recognoscendis vitiis plus operae dedisset etc. And Conradus Gesnerus in
Universali Bibliotheca, says, Illud non est dissimulandum, Lutherum virum esse
vehementis ingenii, impatientem, and qui nisi per omnia sibi consentientes
far nesciat etc. Dominus faxit, nequid contentione and impudentia oris obsit
Ecclesiae, cujus olim crepundiatam feliciter promovit. Pride, even the
confessed intolerable pride was the only true cause of his persisting in his
revolt, and Apostasy (a point to be carefully considered by all Protestants,
who have any care to save their Souls!) For (says Fox, Acts and Monum. page
404. a. fine) It is apparent that Luther promised Cardinal Cajetan to keep
silence (with this annexed condition of pride) provided also his Adversaries
would do the like. And Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16. page 61. fine, and
62 initio, says accordingly: Quod Lutherus in Pontificem quaedam durius
scripserit, id condonari sibi petit, promittens posthac majorem modestiam,
indulgentiarumque posthac nullam se facturum mentionem, modo adversariis etiam
suis silentium imponatur. And Mr. Cowper, late Bishop of Winchester reports
further (in his Chronicle fol. 278 a. paulo post initium) that Luther by his
letter, submitted himself to the Pope, (with this other like condition) so that
he might not be compelled to recant.

7 As concerning Luther's Brerely tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 12
impugning of the Mass, upon his confessed instruction from the Devil, by
sensible conference had with him, we refer the same to his own Testimony
hereof, hereafter alleged. Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. subdivis. 2. In
the Text and Margent at 17.
He did continue his accustomed saying of Mass, until that among the Manlius,
Luther 's Scholar testifies this in loc. com. page 42. fine. And so also the
Alphabetical Table of that Book, where it is set down Luthero saepe spectra
apparuerunt. And Luther Tuton: ad Senator: Civit: German: speaking of other
Sectaries, to wit the Swenkfeldians and Anabaptists who bragged of Apparitions,
confesses of himself saying, Ego quoque fui in Spiritu, atque etiam vidi
spiritus, si omnino de propriis gloriandum est, forte plulquam ipsi intra annum
videbunt.
several Apparitions hapened unto him (not of Luther in loc. com: class. 4.
page: 36. prope finem, says, Nullas apparitiones Angelorum habeo. And ibidem
page 40. ante med: He further says, Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, nevel
visiones, vel somnia, vel etiam Angelos mihi mittat, etc. vide ibidem post med.
Angels, for therein he disclaimeth, but of wicked Spirits, wherewith he was
infested or haunted, whereof one was so terrible that Manlius in loc. com: page
42. fine, and 43. initio says, Cum Coburgi subsisteret Doctor Martinus
Lutherus etc. accidit ut semper post apparitiones nocturnarum facium, ipse
gravi capitis morbo agitaretur. Accidit autem ut cum praecedente nocte tres
ejusmodi volantes faces vidisset, fere incidiffet in Syncopen, Praesentiens
autem morbum, ministrum vocabat, is Amygdalinum oleum instillabat in aurem.
etc. Luther tom: 7 Wittemberg: An: 1588. in lib. de Missa privata, and unctione
Sacerdotum fol. 443. and tom: 6. Germ. Jenensi fol. 28. in lib. de Missa
angulari. Also Luthers words hereof are acknowledged and set down in the
treatise, against the defense of the censure, page 234, 235, 236. and in Luther
tom: 7 Wittemberg: fol. 228. a. fine.
he was almost cast into a sound (in prevention whereof, Oil was distilled into
his Ear, and his Feet rubbed with hot Clothes) It chanced that upon a certain
time (as himself reports the matter) he suddenly awaked about midnight: then
(says he) Satan began this Disputation with me; saying, Harken right learned
Doctor Luther, thou have celebrated Mass by the space of fiveteen years etc.
And so the Devil with Arguments, which himself there at large sets down,
dissuaded him from further saying of Mass; whereat the Protestants are greatly
ashamed, and strive in vain to answer to this our objecting of Luther's
foresaid Disputation, had, as before, with the Devil. For first Brereley in
his conclus. to the Judges Sect. 9. initio at c.
Mr. Clarke (in his answer to the Censure given upon the Books of W. Clarke and
Meredith Hanmer, in the special tract there, had of this matter) and Mr. Fulke
(in his Treatise against the defense of the Censure page 234 initio) answer,
that by Luther's foresaid discourse of his Disputation had with the Devil, is
meant only a spiritual fight in mind, and no bodily conference. What? no bodily
conference? With what Face can they affirm this? Do not the many other
precedent and confessed like fearful nightly Apparitions argue this also to be
of the like kind? Does not Ltuher himself, in his foresaid Treatise of this
matter, report how the Devil Luther describing there the sound of Satan's
voice, speaking then to him, says, Haec illo dicente etc. The Devil speaking
thus to me, I burst forth all on sweat, and my heart began to tremble and leap
(voce forti and gravi utitur) the Devil has a base and strong voice etc. And
then I learned how it came to pass that sometimes early in the morning, men
were found dead in their beds: which words the rather to give color to Mr.
Clerks pretended only Spiritual temptation, and no bodily conference, are
shamefully falsified, as being quite omitted by the Divines of wittemberg in
their later edition of Luthers Works, but nevertheless are yet still and extant
in the more ancient edition of Luthers Works tom: 6. Jen. Germ fol. 28. and to
the eternal discredit of the said Divines of Wittemberg (who in many other
things have likewise most shamefully falsified Luther) are yet also
acknowledged and verbatim recited by the Protestant Writer Hospinianus in Hist:
Sacra mentar. par. 2. fol. 131, a. post med. and by him alleged there out of
Luther tom. 6. Jen. fol. 81.
then spoke to him in a base and great voice, so fearfully, as made Luther to
sweat, and his heart to tremble? Does he not also report (as before) that the
Devil spoke to him, calling him (according to the humor of his Pride) Right
learned Doctor Luther? Does he not there also yet further affirm, how
Oecolampadius, Empser, and others, were slain with such horrible encounters,
saying, Luther tom. 7. Wittsmberg: fol. 230. a. post med. See also these words
confessed by Mr. Fulk against the defense of the Censure, page 237. circa
medium:
Ego plane persuasus sum Empserum and Oecolampadium, and similes, his ictibus
horribilibus and quassationibus subito extinctos esse? This answer being
therefore without all probability, and though supposed for true, yet wholly
impertinent; For in either case, the persuasions and arguments whereto Luther
here yields, came confessedly from the Devil, and what differrence is there,
whether the Devil made them to Luther by sensible conference, or by inward
suggestion? A Brereley in his conclusion to the Judges, Sect. 9. at (...).
second answer of Mr. Sutcliffe is, that Luther in his foresaid discourse of
this matter, only declared his Dream; for he in his Book de Vera Catholica
Christi Ecclesia pa: 258. post med: says, Per somnium tantum Diabolum se
colloqui visum dicit Lutherus, ut est in libro. what, but a dream Mr. Sutcliff?
Is there in Luthers whole discourse hereof so much as but mention of any dream?
Are not also Luthers foresaid words directly to the contrary, that he was first
suddenly awaked, and that then after, Satan began the disputation with him?
Again, does not his foresaid affirming of Empser and Oecolampadius to have been
slain with such horrible encounters, argue more than a dream? Are men I pray
you slain by dreaming? or rather was not your self deeply dreaming when you
made an answer so plainly untrue? But in what book of Luther (Mr. Sutcliff) is
this found? you should have done well to have alleged it. For Luthers words
are, that he was then first suddenly awaked. And, ibidem page 299. paulo ante
med: Mr. Sutcliff further says hereof, Lutherus autem nihil aliud peccavit,
quam quod ut homo Germanus, and non ita pridem Monachus, qui eas de Diabolorum
apparitionibus Monasticas fabulas e mente adhue non ejecerat, somnium narrat
crasso filo and Monachis familiari: quare si nullum aliud habeant hujusmodi
calumniae fundamentum praeter somnium, quod etiam ipsi male detorquent, nihil
est etc. But although we should suppose it for true, yet this Answer is no
less plainly impertinent: for what difference is it whether the Devil seduced
Luther sleeping or waking? In either case it confessedly proceeded from the
Devil. These foresaid answers of Mr. Fulk, Mr. Clark, and Mr. Sutcliff, being
so evidently untrue, Brereley ibidem sect. 9.
Mr. D. Morton (in Apolog: Catholica part: 1. l. 2. c. 21. page: 351. ante med.)
betaketh himself to a new evasion. And what is that? He takes no exceptions to
Satan's sensible conference had with Luther, nor to his persuading him against
the Mass, but in steed of answer, objecteth Where he says: Apud Surium liquet
Diabolum in specie Angelica appa^^isse, and statim Abbatem ut Missam celebratet
hortabatur, alleging there in his margent, Delrius Jes^. 4. de Magia. cap. 1.
q. 3.8.5.
Delrius (a Jesuit) affirming, that the Devil appeared to an Abbot in form of
an Angel, and persuaded him to say Mass: Supposing this for the truth, and the
whole truth of Delrius his report, how unapt yet is the example thereof? For
here is no long and labored disputation to prove the Mass good, nor did the
party here assent to the Devil, nor did the Mass thereupon first begin to
become public, as in the other example we charge the Devil with long framed
disputation and arguments against the Mass, and Luther as overcome therewith,
to have abandoned the Mass, then before generally received. And that in this
manner now in this last age began the new appearing doctrine of Luther, and so
many of his followers in impugning of Mass. Neither is this all, for Mr.
Morton has in his report hereof (besides his misnaming the Abbot for the Monk)
committed as yet further negligence, if not fraud, in omitting both, which is
there next precedent and following in his Author, as namely that The words of
Delri^^ (in the place cited be Mr. Morton, uttered upon occasion to show how
the Devil often goes about to deceive us, or by persuading us to do things of
themselves good, but in an evil manner, whereof he there gives many
examples,) ^e as follows: Item si (Demon) suadeat aliiqua contra Canones,
vel Constitutiones, vel regulas, vel alia praecepta Majorum: hoc indicio B.
Simeon Monaclus Trevirensis eum deprehendit: narratur historia ab Cuerwino
Abbate (apud Surium 1. Junii.) In verticem montis Sinai jussu Superiorum cum
missus fiuisset ibi habitaturus, nocturnis horis illi specie Angelcia Demon
apparuit, and ut Missam celebret hortatur: ipse nec plane dormiens, nec
perfect vigilans contradicrit, non debere fine praesbyterii ordine aliquem hoc
ministerium implere: contra inimicus instat: etc. Whereby it appears that the
Devil did not make this persuasion to the Abbott, (for the Abbot whom Surius
allegeth is but the reporter thereof) but to Simeon a Monk, who, as there
afterward yet more fully appears, being not as yet Priest, but Deacon,
refused to say Mass.
the Devil uses to persuade against the Canons, etc. and that accordingly
that the party whom the Devil here so persuaded to say Mass, was not yet
Priest: a persuasion I confess fitting for the Devil, and but answerable to
Luthers doctrine, who teaches (as is before said) that Laymen, and even Women,
are Priests, and may consecrat the Sacrament, and preach. Brereley in his
con^^^sion to the judges. Sect 9. nex as^er n.
The last of whom I sind any mention to offer help in relief of Luther from
this so known scandal, is Baldwinus. And what says he? First directly against
Mr. Clark, Mr. Fulk, and Mr. Sutcliff, he acknowledges the conference between
the Devil and Luther to have been not spiritual only, nor yet a dream, but
that it was a real truth, written by Luther not hyperbolically but seriously
and according to the truth of the history, for in his book de disputatione
Lutheri cum Diabolo, Printed Islebii 1605. c 4. fine, and page 83. fine, he
says thereof: Quapropter non est cur Monachus miretur, me fateri disputationem
illam esse veram, and neque joco neque hyperbolice, sed serio and historice,
scriptam. And again there page 75. post med. he says, Historiam illam tam
prolixe, tam considerate Lutherus conscripserit: quod enim eam scripserit and
quidem serio and historice, etiamnum and constanter fateor. Et vide ibidem page:
76 fine. How then would he evade? The substance of his long answer is, that
Luther had before, and then, quite abandonned the Mass: that therefore the
Devil intended no disputation against Luther, but only by way of strong
temptation, to put Luther in mind of his old errors, so thereby to drive him
to despair, urging to such purpose, such only known truths and reasons against
the Mass, as Luther then, and before knew to be most true, and wherein Luther
was allerady satisfied: in regard whereof (says he, ibidem page: 127. fine)
Semper in praeterito loquitur Satan etc. talis sacrificulus fuisti: the Devil
speaks always to Luther as in the time past, thou said Mass, thou have
done this, and that, etc. But how extremely false and impertinent is all this?
First, for the matter of despair it is a false Brer^ley in his Conclus. to the
judges, Sect. 7. at q. in the margent.
supposall; for there is not in all the passage of that disputation so much as
the least mention or signification of any persuasion to despair, whereas to the
contrary in the same disputation there, fol. 228. b. paulo ante med. the Devil
reproves Luther and the Papists, for thinking Christ unmercifull, saying: Nos
Spiritus rejecti non fidimus illius misericordiae, neque habemus eum pro
Mediatore aut Salvatore, sed exhorrescimus ut saevum Iudicem: ejusmodi fidem,
non aliam, and tu habebas, etc. and omnes alii etc. Ideo a Christo tanquam
crudeli Iudice confugiebatis ad S. Mariam and Sanctos, and illi erant
Mediatores inter vos and Christum, sic erepta est gloria Christo etc. Thus does
Satan quite against the pretense of despair, amplify the mercies of Christ,
urging the same as a special argument against Prayer to Saints. And whereas
Luther (which some urge) does there afterward, fol. 230. b. post medium,
answer to the Catholics, who (as he foresaw would object to him that the
Devil was a liar) labors to prevent the same, alleging there to that end the
example of Judas, whom the Devil tempted with urging to him, that he had
betrayed the innocent blood, and so brought him to despair; with like alleging
also the example of Cain: yet is this no part of the Conference between the
Devil and Luther, which is there before fully ended, but are only the words of
Luther himself, used by him upon the occasion aforesaid many years after, at
his writing of the said Conference. But though we should admit this supposall
for true, yet it is also Brereley ibid. Sect. 7. in the margent at r,
impertinent; for though he had withal persuaded Luther to despair, as having
sinned in his saying of Mass, yet this proves not (which is the only point
now questionable) that he did not also then dispute with Luther to persuade him
agaiust the Mass: For this is evident throughout the whole passage of that his
long disputation, against which the other pretense of despair (though admitted
to be mentioned in the same disputation, as it is not) makes for that nothing.
Secondly Brerele^ ibidem Sect. 9. in the text, versus finem.
as conceruing the Devils supposed speaking to Luther always in praeterito,
as of the time past, it is egregiously false: for as in regard of his then
former saying of Mass, the Devil sometimes speaks to him as in the Brereley
in the conclus. to the judges, Sect. 8. in the margent at v and x.
time past; So likewise in regard of Luthers present custom then continued in
saying Mass, he also speaks very often as in the time present, as appears
in Luther tom: 7. Wittemberg. An: 1558. fol. 229. a paulo post med. where the
Devil says, Tu solus in angulo tuo tacens and mutus comedis solus, et bibis
solus. Et ibidem fol. 229. a. post med, the Devil speaking to Luther, as of
his saying Mass in the time to come, says, Ponam similitudinem: Si quis
Baptismo uteretur ubi non est persona Baptizanda, etc. cujusmodi esset hic
Baptismus? etc. deest enim persona quae Baptismum accipiat: Quid si idem tibi
accideret in tua Missa? etc. Nam persona accipiens Ecclesia non esse ibi, etc.
Hic for san dices, etiam sialiis in Ecclesia non porrigam Sacramentum, tamen
ipse sumo, ipse mihi porrigo, etc. And ibidem fol: 229: b. Prope finem, the
Devil further says to Luther (as being then one with the Papists in this
point,) En audaciam vestram! in tenebris geritis haec, and abutimini nomine
Ecclesiae, ac deinde onmes abominationes vultis defensas n^mine Ecclesiae. And
again, ibidem fol: 230. a. prope initium: Quare ergo in Missa privata blaspheme
eontravenis claris verbis and Ordinationi Christi, and postea tuo mendacio,
tuae impietati praetexis nomen and intentionem Ecclesiae, and misero hoc fuco
tuum ornas commentnm? And ibidem fol: 229. b. ante med. going about to prove
that Luther may not deliver the Sacrament to himself alone, he allegeth the
example of the other Sacraments, which a man cannot use for himself, saying:
Non est absolutio, si quis absolveret seipsum; non est inunctio, si quis
inungeret seipsum; non est conjugium, si quis nuberet sibi ipsi etc. Haec enim
sunt vestra septem Sacramenta, (so plainly yet was Luther in these points then
Catholic) si nunc nullum ex Sacramentis vestris aliquis ipse pro se facere
potest, aut tractare, qui fit ut tibi soli hoc Summum Sacramentum facere velis?
And Brereley in his Omissions of page 737. says, And ibid: fol. 229. a. circa
med. The Devil yet further says to Luther, Stas ibi solus, and putas (so
evidently is Luthers then present opinion then signified) Christum propter te
instituisse Sacramentum, and protinus in tua privata Missa te conficere Corpus
and Sanguinem Domini. Thirdly Brerely ibidem Sect. 9. in the text prope sinem.
as to the supposall of Luthers then having abandoned the Mass, it is likewise
but supposed and false, as appears by the Devils foresaid often speaking to
him in the present B^ercley in his Conclus. to the judge, ^^^ct 8 (...) and z
in the margent.
tense, to whom Luther answers ibidem fol. 228 b. initio, as not disclaiming
from the Mass, or that he had then or before given it over, but as yet
standing in the defense thereof, justifies to the Devil his saying of Mass,
to that end alleging (says he) that I was an anointed Priest, Cui respondi,
sum unctus Sacerdos, accepi unctionem and consecrationem ab Episcopo, and haec
omnia feci ex mandato and obedientia Majorum: and (in regard of such his then
Catholic opinion in that point) using yet further (says he ibidem fol. 229.
b. post medium) those weapons whereto I was accoustomed in the Papacy,
objecting the intention and faith of the Church, and that I celebrated Mass in
the intention and faith of the Church, etc. And that the Chuch did righty
believe, and think. In his angustiis and agone contra Diabolum, volebam
retundere hostem armis, quibus assuetus eram sub Papatu, objiciebamque
intentionem and fidem Ecclesiae scilicet quod Missas privatas in fide and
intention Ecclesiae celebrassem: and si ego inquam non recte credidi aut
sensi; tamen in hoc recte credidit and sensit Ecclesia. But (says he) Satan
replied more vehemently; verum Satan e contrae fortius and vehementius
instans, etc. Hereby, and other the premises, it appears, that Luther yet
hitherto defended the Mass: in respect of which (his then opinion) the Devil
Brereley ibid. Sect. 9. in the text, fine.
begins his suggestion of doubt saying, What if such Masses were horrible
Idolatry? Which had been improper, if so Luther had then before thought the
Mass to be Idolary. Luther tom. 7. Wittemberg. Anno. 1558. in Libro de Missa
privata and unctione Sacerdotum fol. 228. a. fine. and tom. 9. Germ. Jenensi
fol. 28. in Libro de Missa Angulari, and see these words acknowledged and set
down by Mr. Fulk in his defense of the Censure page 234. and 235. and 236.
Fourthly as concerning the main point, which is, that the Devil intended
hereby no disputation against Luther, but only a temptation upon evident
truths, by Luther then and before known and confessed, it is of all other most
false, as appears by Luther himself, who expressly terms it a disputation.
Also by the Apud Brereley ibid. Sect. 7. at S.
Protestant like Arguments (as namely among other, the Priests not preaching,
but receiving alone, against the institution of Christ; his not communicating
to the people in both kinds; that of a Sacrament he made it a Sacrifice, and
made gain thereof, sicut tu facis in Missa tua, as thou (says the Devil to
Luther) do in thy Mass) at large there by the Devil begun and prosecuted,
purposely to give color against the Mass, and most evidently by example of the
sundry other points, whereto the Devil in like sort then endeavored to
persuade Luther, but could not prevail: For first it appears by Luther tom.
7. Wittemberg fol. 229. a. that the Devil persuaded Luther, that he could not
consecrate, because he was a wicked man, which error (peculiar to Wickliff and
some others) Luther ever abhorred, as appears by the Protestant Treatise
entitled, Orthodoxus consensus, etc. Printed in fol. 1578. in proleg. page 14
b. and in Brerely tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 7. at p. q. r. where
Luther holds that even Lay-persons, and the Devil himself, might Minister
Sacraments, observing the words of institution. Also Satan persuaded Luther
against the indifferency of Communion under one or both kinds, whereof see
here in the Margent at Luther tom. 7. Wittemberg. An. 1558. fol. 229. b.
initio. And fol. 228. b^circa med. the Devil further says, Sacerdos enim
ve^us, est Minister Ecclesiae constitutus ad praedicandum verbum, porrigenda
Sacramenta, sicut hoc habent verba Christi in Coena, and sicut Paulus 1 Cor.
11. de Coena Dom^ni loquitur: unde and a veteribus Communio appellata est, quod
non Solus Sacerdos debeat uti Sacramento, sed reliqui una cum ipso. Nunc annos
quindecim totos semper solus privatim pro te in Missa usus es Sacramento; and
non communicast ali^s, ade^que interdictum tibi erat, ne porrigeres totum
Sacramentum aliis, etc. coj^smod^ es tu Sacerdos, qui non pro Ecclesia, sed pro
te ipso ordinatus es? etc. Tu vero Missator privatus in omnibus Missis tuis, ne
semel quidem praedicasti, etc. Haeccine institutio Christi? etc. Institutio
Christi est, ut Sacramento communicent and alii Christiani, verum tu unctus es,
non ad distribuendum Sacramentum, sed ad Sacrificandum, and contra
institutionem Christi Missa usus es pro Sacrificio, etc. Et quod Christus
instituit ad edendum and. bibendum pro tota Ecclesia, and porrigendum a
Sacerdote una communicantibus, etc. ex hoc tu facis Sacrificium propitiatorium.
O abominatio super omnem abominationem, etc. And ibid. fol. 229. a. paulo post
med. he says, Solus bibis, etc. Nemini tecum communicas, and ut in more vobis
positum fuit, tanquam bonum opus pro pecunia vend^s. And ibidem fol. 228. b.
ante med. He further says to Luther, Confugiebatis ad S. Mariam, and Sanctos,
illi erant Mediatores inter vos and Christum, sic crepta est gloria Christo: Is
not all this (with much more there objected by the Devil) very Protestant like?
which indifferency (notwithstanding the Devils Arguments to the contrary)
Luther afterward held, as appears in Brerely tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 14. in
the margent at Luther ibidem fol. 229. b. pau^o post initium.
next after f. at Fourthly. Whereto diverse other like examples might be added
Brereley in his Conclusion to the Judges Sect. 10.
. Thus then the several and disagreeing answers of Protestant Writers to our
objection of the Devils disputation had with Luther against the Mass, being
discovered for vain and idle, I will now conclude this point with the further
evident testimony of Hospinianus a learned Calvinist, who though he acknowledge
Luther Hospinian: in Hist. Sacrament. part alter: in his Prolaegom: prope
finem, says of Zuinglius, Calvin and Luther: Hos enim tres viros nosco a Deo
ornatos fuisse multis donis and virtutibus, ingenio, luce doctrinae Caelestis,
etc. Zelo gloriae Dei etc. Divinitusque formatos and excitatos ad Ecclesiam
Christi his postremis temporibus, tyran nide ac tenebris Anti-Christi
horribiliter oppressam, in libertatem and lucem Evangelii vindicandam, etc.
for a man adorned with excellent gifts, with the light of Heavenly knowledge,
zeal of Gods glory, and as raised up to restore the Gospels light, etc. Yet, as
enforced, he confesses most plainly the thing in question in Hist. Sacrament.
part. alter. fol. 131. a. where he recites out of Luthers works, a part of the
disputation (written by Luther) between the Devil and him, and then in the end
of that side of the leaf adds, saying, De hac disputatione narrat Lutherus
plura, quorum summa est, se a Diabol^ edoctum esse, quod Missa privata imprimis
sit res mala, and rationibus Diaboli convictum abolevisse eam, Luther being
instructed by the Devil that the Mass was wicked, and being overcome with
Satan's Arguments, did (thereupon) abandon the Mass. Insomuch as Hospinian does
yet further in his first Index or Alphabetical Table set before his Book, under
the Letter C. and at the word Colloqium, among the many other Colloquies had
among Protestants by him there set down, place, among other, this Colloquie
between the Devil and Luther in these words: Colloquium Lutheri cum Diabolo in
quo instituitur de erroribus Missae, 131. As also Joannes Regius (another prime
Protestant) in his Book entitled, Liber Apologeticus, etc. under the title
Consideratio censurae page 123. circa med. forbeareth not to defend and
justify Luthers foresaid confessed instruction from the Devil, saying, Quid
hoc ad Mysterium seu doctrinam verbi Divini per Lutherum restauratum
evertendum, aut ad Missae etiam veritatem stabilendam? Et unde constat (Pu.
constat by the testimony of Luther himself, tom. 7. Wittember. An. 1558. in
lib. de Missa privata and unctione Sacerdotum fol. 228. a. fine, and tom. 9.
Germ. Jenen. fol. 28. in lib. de Missa angulari) tibi malum ipsum fuisse
Spiritum, qui (Luthero) hoc dixerit? Et posito licet malus Spiritus fuisset,
non sequitur tamen mox eum mentitum fuisse, quia and vera interdum Diaboli
loquuntur, quando dicunt id, cujus Scriptura testis est. So confessedly is that
true, which we object against Luther.

8. As concerning Brereley in his Book a part of the Lives of the late
pretended Reformers. Cap. 2. Sect. 1.
obedience to the Spiritual Pastors, in behalf of the people he says, The
Governors of Churches, and Pastors of Christ's Sheep, have power indeed to
teach, but the Sheep ought to give judgment, etc. Whereof let the Pope,
Bishops, and Councels decree what they please, we will not hinder it, but we
who are Christ's Sheep and hear his voice, are to judge whether those things be
true which they propound or no, and they ought to give place and subscribe to
our censure and judgment, etc. Qui volunt perhiberi rectores Ecclesiarum and
pastores ovium Christi, habent quidem potestatem docendi, sed oves debent far
judicium, utrum illi vocem Christi vel alienorum proponant; ordinent Papa,
Episcopi, Concilia, etc. quicquid velint, non impediemus, sed penes nos qui
oves Christi sumus, and vocem ejus audimus, erit judicium, utrum vera and
consentanea voci pastoris nostri, proponant vel non, ac ipsi nobis cedere,
nostrae censurae ac sententiae subscribere and obtemperare debent. Luther tom.
2. Wittemb. fol. 375. a. initio; and next before there, fol. 374. b. fine, he
says: Christus ademit Episcopis, Doctoribus and Conciliis, tum jus, tum
potestatem judicandi de doctrina, ac tradit illa omnibus Christianis in genere.
Is this the saying of a Sheep, or of a Wolf? Pu. Conformable to this Doctrine
is that, which Bellarmine in praefat. de Conciliis and Ecclesia militante,
says of Luther. Igitur Martinus Lutherus, cum fama accepisset, indictum esse
Concilium, continue arrepto ^alamo, librum confecit, atque inscripsit, De
Conciliis: credes, ut ageret Deo gratias, and Ecclesiae gratularetur, atque
omnes ad Concilium invitaret. Nihil minus; summa enim libri est, nihil esse
opus Conciliis, cum etiam vetera illa sanctissima and celeberrima erraverint,
and quilibet Parochi and Ludi-Magistri non minus possint in Ecclesia, quam
quaevis maxima and numerosissima Concilia. Orditur a Concilio illo sine
controversia antiquissimo and sanctissimo, quod Apostoli Hierosolymis
celebraverunt: and quanquam in ^o Concilio Apostoli decreverunt abstinendum
esse a sanguine and suffocato, ad has angustias nos redigit, ut vel ab his
cibis nos abstineamus, vel aperte fateamur liberum esse Concilio summo ac primo
non obedire. Deinde, graviter exponit quanta calamitas esset, non vesci
deinceps capreis, leporibus, cervis, cuniculis, anseribus, turdis, caeterisque
aviculis, and quod miserius est abstinere lucanicis, aliisque farciminibus, and
jusculis etiam quibusdam, quae non solum pipere condiuntur, sed etiam sanguine
(ut ipse loquitur, qui ista been norat) vel liquido tinguntur, vel crasso, and
coagulato infarciuntur. Quia vero tam gravis jactura nullo modo subeunda
Luthero esse videbatur, inde effecit, non esse Apostolico decreto
obtemperandum. Ex quo rursum ita conclusis; Ergo liberum est nobis omnia
concilia relinquere, and sic liberi sumus ab omnibus Concilliis. Praeclare
omnino, quasi vero quia non tenemur ea Concilii lege, quae solum ad tempus data
fuerat, jam nullis aliis Conciliorum legibus teneamur.

9 As concerning the (...) in his Book a^ ^art of the lives of the late
pretended Reformers etc. cap. 2. sect. 13. initio.
souls immortality, Luther was in the end so obstinately bent against Purgatory
and Prayer to Saints, that to prevent them he affirmed Luther tom. 4. Wittem.
1574. in Ecclesiasten c. 9. says, Solomon sentire videtur mortuos sic dormire
ut prorsus nihil sciant: and plane credo non esse in scriptura locum fortiorem
pro mortuis dormientibus etc. contra sanctorum invocationem and purgatorii
fictionem, fol. 36. b. c^rca med. And see Sleidan 's further report hereof
concerning. Luther lib. 9. Anno 1534. fol. 116. a. initio, after the English
Translation, but read the Latin.

Luther tom 4. Wittemb. fol. 37. b. ante med. says, Sensit ergo Solomon,
mortuos omnino dormire, and nihil prorsus sentire, jacent ibi mortui non
numerantes Dies vel Annos, etc. Anima abit in locum suum, ut intelligas
infernum dici ubi continentur animae, and quasi quoddam sepulchrum animae extra
hunc corporalem mundum, sicut terra est sepulchrum corporis.


the Soul to sleep, to this end saying, the dead sleep etc. they altogether
sleep and feel nothing, they lie there dead, neither numbering Days, nor Years
etc. with much more to this purpose.

10 As concerning even the most Brereley tract. 2 cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis.
13.
blessed and holy Trinity, Luther taught thus far to the contrary, as that the
Divinity is threefold, even as the three Persons be etc. And the same so
grossly, as he is therein specially confuted by Zuinglius, tom. 2. in resp. ad
confess. Lutheri fol. 474. b. fine. saying, Nec enim hunc Lutheri Sermonem
immodestius vel ferocius exagitabo, quo, sic inquit, Hic de sola and unica
Divinitate dicitur, quod illa triplex vel trium sit generum, quemadmodum and
tres personae etc. In quibus verbis gravissimi errores latitant etc. mihi certe
cum librum istum, Lutheri, lego, porcum quendam impurum in horto floribus
consito fragrantis simis, hinc inde grunnire videre videor, tam impure, tam
parum theologice, tam improprie de Deo and sacris omnibus disputat Lutherus
etc. And upon this ground perhaps it was, that where the Scripture says 1 John
5.7. There be three which give witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three be one, This being a most evident place in proof of
the Trinity, is nevertheless quite omitted by Luther in his Dutch Brereley
tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 14.
Bibles. As also he likewise put forth of the Vide Enchirid. prec: Anni 1543.
Letanies this verse, Holy Trinity one very God have mercy upon us, affirming
that the word Luther in postil: majore Basiliae apud Herruagium in enarrat:
Evang: Dominicae Trinitatis. And see further Examples of this kind mentioned by
Cnoglerus in his Symbola tria page 121 and 122. and by Ulembergius in his
Graves and justae causae etc. Printed 1589. page 534. Where he allegeth Luther
's foresaid words at large, out of the second part of his Postil. printed Anno
1537. fol. 158. b.
Trinity is but a humane invention, and sounds coldly, and concludes that
his Soul hates the word Homousion.

11 As concerning the Luther in lib. contra Jacobum La^omum tom. 2. Wittemb.
latin Edito An. 155^. says, Anima mea odit (...)and optime exegerunt Arriani,
ne vocem illam prophanam, and novam regulis sidei statui liceret. We know [
says Brereley here] Luther 's late Editions to be herein altered and corrupted
by his Scholars, whereof see the like in this present section 10. subdivis. 2.
and more subdivis. 14. at z. a, b, therefore we so specially cite the first
Edition.
Author of our Sins, Luther teaches thus dangerously, saying, in
assertionibus damnatis per Leonem Art. 36. Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2 sect. 10.
subdiv. 14.
Quomodo potest sese ad bonum praeparare, cum nec in potestate sit suas vias
malas facere. Nam and mala opera in impiis Deus operatur, ut prove. 16. dicitur,
omnia propter semetipsum operatus est Dominus, etiam impium, ad diem malum. How
can Man prepare himself to good, seeing it is not (so much as) in his power to
make his ways evil, for God works the wicked work in the wicked etc. Thus
stand Luthers words in the ancient Editions of his works at Wittemburg and
also at Basil 1521. and so recited by Roffensis in his Confutatio assertionis
Lutheranae etc. printed at Antwerp 1523. Art. 36. fol. 204. a. fine Whereas in
the latter corrupted editions of Wittemberg tom. 2. Anno 1592. fol. 112. a.
fine, his Scholars have instead of the word operatur, thrust in regit. And
again ( ubi supra art. 36.) he says, Nulli est in manu sua quippiam cogitare
mali aut boni, sed omnia (ut Wyccleffi articulus Constantiae damnatus recte
docet) de necessitate absoluta eveniunt, quod and Poeta voluit, quando dixit,
Certa stant omnia lege. It is in no man's power to think Good or Evil, but all
things ( as Wiccliffs article condemned at Constance does rightly teach)
proceed from absolute necessity etc. This saying thus extant in the Editions,
and in Roffensis before alleged, are corrupted and altered in the foresaid last
Edition of Wittemberg tom. 2, fol. 112. b. fine. Yet more ( de servo arbitrio
cap. 32) Luther says, Christiani non libero arbitrio, sed spiritu Dei aguntur.
Romans 8. Agi vere non est agere, sed rapi, quemadmodum serra aut securis a fabro
agitur: Et hic ne quis dubitet Lutherum tam absurda dicere, verba ejus recitat
Diatribe, quae sane agnosco. Fateor enim articulum illum Wyccleffi (omnia
necessitate fieri) esse falso damnatum in Constantiensi Conciliabulo etc. These
words of Luther being extant in the Editions of Luther's life time, and so
apparently his known words, that they are accordingly verbatim extant in this
very Treatise of Luther de servo arbitrio, set forth by that prime Calvinist
Jacobus Kimedoncius, and printed 1603 Neustadii in Palatinatu fol. 195. circa
med. are yet neverthe less altered and corrupted in Luthers Editions of
Wittemberg tom. 2. printed 1562. fol. 455. a. post med. And see Luther's like
Doctrine in the foresaid Book de servo arbitrio set forth by Kimedoncius page
3^. Much more might be alleged from Luther and his Scholars in this behalf.
Brereley in the Omissions of page 428. adds. Also Brentius, whom Mr. Jewel in
his defense etc. page 473. terms a grave and learned Father, in his
Commentary upon Amos, printed Hagonae 1530. with Luther's Preface thereto, in
cap. 3. says of Gods secret Will, Omnia a Deo potenti manu and efficaci fiunt,
sive mala culpae, sive mala poenae. Deus enim est qui obduravit Pharaonem etc.

And Luther himself de servo arbitrio says, Deus indignos coronat, immeritos
damnat, quomodo hoc justum sit incomprehensibile est modo, videbimus autem cum
illic venerimus. See these words of Luther alleged by the Calvinist writer
Matthias Martinius, in his doctrinae Christianae summa capita, etc. Printed
1603 page 288. post med. From whom and from their Principles of advancing only
Faith, extenuating good works, and other like doctrines, have sprung, as from a
Hydra, the late sect of the Libertines, who upon the very foresaid It appears
by Calvin 's report of their words in tract. Theolog. page 540. a. circa med,
their chief Reason to be, Cum Deus rerum omnium author sit, nullum jam boni and
mali discrimen esse ha^^dum, sed quicquid agitu^^ bonum esse.
grounds and colors (denying nevertheless verbally as Protestants do, God to
be the Author of sin, and verbally also requiring integrity of life and
manners) have set abroad to the world by their published writings (stored with
testimonies of Scriptures) all Epicurism and impure liberty of life. Which
point we shall repeat, and say somewhat more of it hereafter in the life of
Calvin.

12. Brereley, tract. 2. cap. 2 sect. 10. subdivis. 15.
Zuinglius tom. 2. in resp: ad conf: Lutheri, reproves in Luther his wilful
frowardness, or obstinacy, against that which himself conceived for true, or
even though it be proved to be against holy Scripture, saying, Lutherus
obstinato and devoto animo conceptam semel opinionem persequi and obtinere
conatur; nec multum curare solet, quodcunque de re quavis pronunciet, etiamsi
vel sibi ipsi, vel divini verbi oraculo contradicere deprehendatur. These words
of Zuinglius are also in Schlusselburg in Theologia Calvinistarum l. 2. fol.
122. a. fine. Thus Luther of Communion under both kinds says (de formula
Missae) If the Council should in any case decree this, least of all then would
we use both kinds, yea rather in despite of the Council and that Decree, we
would use either but one kind only, or neither, and in no case both. See
Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 274. And see this saying of Luther alleged and
rejected by Hospinian in hist: Sacramentar: part: altera, fol. 13. a. post med.
And whereas Mr. Jewel answers hereunto in his reply against Mr. Harding,
page 107. post med: that Luther only meant that Gods truth should not hang upon
the authority of man, to forbear that this is Mr. Jewels device or shift, and
no words in all that passage of Luther to explain his meaning for only such;
can yet this meaning, though admitted, enable Luther to teach that in despite
of the Council we should use either but one kind or neither, which last were
directly against Christ's institution? For which cause Hospinian as before,
rejects this saying of Luther. Of like nature is it where he teaches ( tom.
2. Germ. fol. 214.) that if the Council should grant the Churchmen liberty to
marry, he would think that man more in Gods grace, who during his life kept
three whores, then he who married according to the Councels decree, and that he
would command under pain of damnation, that no man should marry by the
permission of such a Council, but should either live chaste, or if it were
impossible, then not to despair, though he kept a whore. In like manner he
says in parva confessione touching Elevation of the Sacrament, I did know the
elevation of the Sarament to be Idolatricall (as making for Sacrifice) yet
nevertheless I did retain it in the Church at Wittemberg, to the end I might
despite the devil Carolostadius: Elevationem Sacramenti sciebam esse
idolatricam, sed tamen eam retinebam in Templo Wittemburgensi, ut aegre facerem
Diabolo Carolostadio. And see Luther tom. 3. Germ. fol. 55. and in Colloquiis
Mensalibus Germ. fol. 210. A Saying and Practice so gross, that Amandus
Polanus, Professor at Basil, specially mentions and reprooveth the same ( in
Syllogethes. Theolog. page 464. ante medium) saying further, ibidem, I will not
recite more of Luther 's absurd Sayings, which are many: Sed nolo plura absurd
dicta Lutheri recensere, quae multa sunt, quae tegenda potius quam exagitanda
etc. And Hospinian in Hist. Sacramentar. part. altera. fol. 14. a. initio,
recites this Saying of Luther, tearming it, minime profecto conveniens oration
Christiano Theologo, and magna infirmitas in Luthero: A speech unworthy of a
Christian Divine, and showing a great weakness in Luther. Pu. To this may be
added, that Luther in his Book of abrogating the private Mass, exhorts the
Augustine Friars of Wittemberg who first abrogated the Mass, that even against
their conscience accusing them, they should persist in what they had begun,
acknowledging that in some things he had Vide Tanner tom. 2. disput. 1. q. 2.
dub. 4. n. 108.
done the like. And Joannes Mathesius a Lutheran Preacher says, Antonius In
orat. Germ. 12. de Luthero.
Musa the Parish Priest of Rocklitz, recounted to me, that on a time he
heartily moaned himself to the Doctor he means Luther that he himself could not
believe what he preached to others: and that D. Luther answered; Praise and
thanks be to God, that this happens also unto others, for I had thought it had
happened only to me Pu. Who can believe him who believes not himself?
.

(Pu.) Pause here a little Protestant Reader, and if the salvation of thy Soul
be dear to thee in any least measure, consider uprightly with fear and
trembling, whether indeed it could be any scruple of conscience, which could
move Luther to forsake the whole Church of Christ dispersed over the whole
world, when he appeared, seeing he had a conscience large enough to swallow a
sin confessed by him To be Idolatry, and yet how in the mean time, I cannot say
whether more prodigiously or hypocritically to, etc.
to forsake us Catholics even upon pretense of Idolatry. If he could against
his conscience leave Carolostadius, one of his own Brethren, expressly and
formerly, upon the motive of vexing and despising him, who can wonder if he
forsook the Church and Pope of Rome upon passion, rage, and hatred, and not
because he found any thing taught by them, which his conscience could not have
disgested, if his passions had not been stronger than his reason and
conscience? So that his revolt was not upon judgment, but envy and passion
that John Tecel a Dominican Friar, and not he or some of his Order was
appointed to promulgate some Indulgences granted at that time, in so much that
we have seen above, how he would have submitted to the Pope, if confessed pride
had not hindered him Confessing further that he began to Preach against
Indulgencies, when (says he as witnesses Sleydan l. 16. fol. 232. b. fine) I
scarcely understood what the name of Indulgence meant, which are Luthers words
in Sleydan l. 13. fol. 177. b. paulo post medium Yea the Ar. etc.
. Yea the Arguments in favor of us Catholics against his new course were so
many, and of all kinds, and so evident and convincing, that notwithstanding his
strong passions, hard heart, and large conscience, (of which we have spoken
even now) they forced him to great trembling, perplexity, and remorse of
conscience, and to say as himself confesses ( tom. 2. Germ. Genesis fol. 9. b.
And tom. 2. Wittemberg: of Anno 1652. lib. de abroganda Missa privata fol. 244.
b. ante med.) How often did my trembling heart beat within me, and reprehending
me, object against me that most strong Argument, Art thou only wise? Do so many
worlds err? Were so many ages ignorant? What if thou errest and drawest so
many into error to be damned with thee eternally? See his like sayings tom. 5
Wittemberg, in Galatas cap. 1. fol. 290 a. versus sinem. And he further says
in an other place tom. 5. Annotat. breviss. Do thou O sole man, and of no
account, take upon thee so great matters? What if thou being but one,
offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all to err, why may he not permit
thee to err? Hitherto appertain those Arguments, the Church, the Church, the
Fathers, the Fathers, the Councils, the Customs, the multitudes and greatness
of wise men: whom do not these hills of Arguments, these Clouds, yea these Seas
of examples overwhelm? And now what trust can Protestants give to their own
learned Writers, as well English, as of other Nations, who with shameful
flattery, and inexcusable partiality call Luther, See Brereley tract. 2. cap.
2. sect. 10. subd. 15.
this very man (who was of so large, and yet so desperate and despairing a
conscience) Holy Saint Luther (as Gabriel Powel says of him in his
consideration of the Papists supplication page 70. prope initium) Jewel in his
Apology of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. sect. 2. and in his defense of
the Apology Printed 1571^ page 426. prope finem.
a man sent of God to lighten the world: See Acts and Monum. page 416. a.
initio.

Christus haber primas, habeas tibi Paul, sicundas: At loca post illos proxima
Luther habet.


the Helias, Conductor and Chariot of Israel: to be reverenced next after
Christ, and Paul: Andraeas Musculus in praefat. ^n libellum Germ. de Diaboli
ty^annide.
greater then whom lived not since the Apostles time; Schlusselburg Catalog.
haeretic. l. 13. and ult. page 314. 316. and 489. And Michael Leander in his
Theologia Christiana, etc. says, Lutherus vir Dei fuit, and vere ille A^ gelus
cum aeterno Evangelio volans per medium Cael, Apocal. 14.
the Angel and last trumpet of God. But woe be to them that call evil good,
and good evil, exalting Schismatical and Heretical sinners, and despising true
and Orthodox believers and Saints! Worthily therefore does Brereley end his 15.
subdivision in the place cited with this exclamation. O sin and most hateful
sin of former Catholic times, which (in Gods just Judgment) made the world
(for the time) subject to such efficacy of error (2 Thessal. 2.) and gross
illusion.

14. We have seen above Luthers shameless words and works concerning Chastity.
Let us now say something of his Charity. And (not to repeat that he would
rather offend God most grievously even by Idolatry, than not to vex and despite
Carolostadius, as Brerely tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 10.
concerning the implacable contentions between him and the Zuinglians or
Calvinists, to whom our English Divines adhere, and how they disclaimed each
one an other, Luther expresses, saying: ( contra Articulos Lovanienses these.
27. tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 503.) We censure in earnest the Zuinglians and all
the Sacramentaries for Heretics, and alienated from the Church of God. And in
Epistola ad Jacobum Presbyterum he says, Beatus vir, qui non abiit in Concilio
Sacramentariorum, nec stetit in via Zuinglianorum, nec sedit in Cathedra
Tigurinorum. Habes quid sentiam. Blessed is the man, who has not gone in the
Council of Sacramentaries, nor stood in the way of Zuinglians, nor sat in the
Chair of the Tigurines. And ( tom. 7. Wittemberg. fol. 381. b. and 382. b.) I
do protest before God and the world, that I do not agree with them, nor ever
will while the world stands, but will have my hands clear from the blood of
those Sheep, which these Heretics do drive from Christ, deceive, and kill. And
again in the same place, Cursed be the Charity and Concord of Sacramentaries
for ever and ever to all Eternity. And a little before his death he protests
saying: Luther de Caena Domini tom. 2. Germ. fol. 174. And see this also
reported by the Tigurine Divines in confess. Orthodox. Ecclesiae Tigur. tract.
3. fol. 108. And Luther com. 3. Germ. fol. 264. calls them persons condemned
in their own knowledge, with whom he will have no intercourse neither by
letters, writings, or words.
I have now one of my feet in the Grave, I will carry this testimony and glory
to the tribunal of God, that I will with all my heart condemn and eschew
Carolostadius, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and their Scholars, nor will have with
any of them familiarity, neither by letters or writings, neither by words nor
deeds, accordingly as the Lord has commanded: with infinite much more to the
same effect. To make this more evident as yet, by the like answerable
testimonies of the Zuinglians and Calvinists, the Tigurine Divines say hereof;
Tigurini tract. 3. contra-supremam Luthe^i confessionem page 61. And the Author
of the Treatise against the defense of the censure, does hereupon charge Luther
with breath of all Christian modesty, and immoderate zeal. page 155. circa med.
even far beyond the bounds of Charity and modesty page 101. ante med.
Nos condemnatam and execrabilem vocat sectam, etc. Luther calls us a
damnable and execrable sect, but let him look that he do not declare himself an
Arch-hereticke, seeing he will not, nor cannot have any society with those that
confess Christ: But how marvelously does Luther here bewray himself with his
Devils? what filthy words does he use, and such as are replenished with all the
Devils in hell? For be says, that the Devil dwells both now and ever in the
Zuinglians, and that they have a blasphemous breast, insathanized,
superthanized, and persathanized, and that they have besides a most vain mouth,
over which Satan bears rule, being infused, perfused, and transfused into
the same. Did ever man hear such speeches as these pass from a furious Devil
himself? In so much as Zuinglius (tom. 2. in resp. ad confessionem Lutheri fol.
478.) says, En ut totum istum hominem Satan occupare conetur! Behold how
Satan does endeavor wholly to possess this man. And Oecolampadius (in
responsione ad confess: Lutheri) accordingly forewarneth Luther, lest that
being puffed up by arrogance and pride he be seduced by Satan. And the Tigurine
Divines ( in confessione Germanica impressa Tiguri Anno 1544. in Octavo fol.
3.) say, Superioribus diebus edidit Martinus Lutherus librum, quem inscripsit
(Brevis confessio de Sacr amento) in quo non obscure pro Haereticis
Sacramentariis and sceleratissimis hominibus, habet and condemnat
Oecolampadium, Zuinglium, and omnes Tigurinos: liber plenus est daemoniis,
plenus impudicis dicteriis, scatet iracundia and furore, etc.

15. Concerning his Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subdivis. 2.
pride, wherewith he was so vainly conceited, that he imagined himself to be
the only one of mortal men whom Satan foresaw to be hurtful to him, saying, (
loc. com. class. 4. page 50. circa medium:) Videtur mihi Satanas a pueritia mea
aliquid in me praevidisse eorum, quae nunc patitur, ideo ad perdendum, ad
impediendumque me insanivit incredibilibus machinis, ut saepius fuerim
admiratus, egone solus essem inter mortales quem peteret: as if Religion had
been to begin and dye with him, and accordingly he says ( in Epist. ad
Argentinenses Anno 1525.) Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audemus gloriari, We
dare glory Christ to have been first made known by us: and (in loc. com. class.
2. page 83. post med.) he says, Nobis adhuc viventibus, etc. perpauci sunt
etiam inter illos, qui pii videri volunt, and nobiscum profitentur Evangelium,
qui ista reote teneant. Quid futurum putatis nobis ablatis? And ( class. 5.
page 40. initio) he further says, Timeo quod ista doctrina nobis extinctis
iterum obscur abitur. And ( ibidem class. 5. page 40. post med.) he further
says, Si nostra Ecclesia pulcherrime instituta, etc. sic subverteretur, ut me
amplius Doctorem suum agnoscere non vellet, id quod aliquando fiet, si non
viventibus nobis, tamen sublatis nobis, etc. And ibidem page 43. paulo post
med. Erit forte tempus, ut and mihi liceat dicere, Omnes vos scandalum
patiemini in ista nocte. And again a little after there, Quantum sectarnm
excitavit Satan nobis viventibus, etc? quid futurum est nobis mortuis? And
ibidem class. 2. page 53. post med. he says, Legis usus, ut timeo, post
tempora nostra iterum obscurabitur, and prorsus obruetur. The Reader will sind
more of Luthers intolerable pride and testimonies thereof out of Protestants
above in his contemning the holy Fathers, and all Antiquity; and in his
impugning Magistracy, and railing against Princes and States.

16. Concerning the Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 1.
success and preservation of Christian profession in general, he affirmed and
taught (to the great danger thereof) that to War against the Turk was to
resist God visiting our sins by them; (Luther tom. 2. Wittemberg. in
assertionib. damnatis per Leonem decimum Art. 34. fol. 110. which was,
Praeliari adversus Turcas est repugnare visitanti iniquitates nostras per
illos.) And in explicat. Articuli 34. fol. 111. a. he says among other
defensions thereof, Sicut Michaeas qui and ipse odiosus erat, quia non
prophetabat nisi malum, dicam and ipse meo Achab, ite, praeliamini contra
Turcas, ut resistatis virgae Dei, and cadatis sicut and Achab cecidit; which
saying of Luther argued so evidently the indisposition of his mind to the avail
of Christians against the Turk, That M. Harvey in his Theological discourse,
etc. p. 115. a. initio says thereof, The Gospel is dispersed in most parts of
the earth, as much and more then the Alcoran, howsoever Luther in a furious
imitation of Michaeas, has rapt out the contrary, as if he desired rather the
name of a Prophet among Infidels, than of a friend to Christians. And further
Luther in Epistola contra duo mandata Imperialia says, Oro cunctos pios
Christianos, ne ullo modo sequantur, vel in militiam ire velint, vel dare
aliquid contra Turcas, quandoquidem Turca decies prudentior probiorque est,
quam Principes nostri. See also tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 419. b. And Luther in
confut. determine. Doctorum Paris. impress. Noriberg. 1525. says, ut libere
animum meum aperiam, hoc aperte de me praedico, quod tam invitus Turcam gladio
impeterem, quam Christianum fratrem: the which said opinion (that to War
against the Turk was to resist God visiting our sins) he did also afterward
more at large defend, conclucluding and saying (in explicat. Art. 34. prope
finem:) He that ears to hear let him hear, and abstain from the Turkish Wars
whiles the Popes name prevails under Heaven: I have said. And hereof see the
Treatise against the defense of the censure page 230. ante med. and 231.
initi^. And Luther in his Book de bello contra Turcas affirms, that the Devil
by Gods permission did govern and hinder the Councels and Assemblies of the
Princes of Germany, for no other cause, but that his Article of not warring
against the Turk might remain in force and uncondemned. And whereas a
Protestant Writer (in his Apology of the Professors of the Gospel, etc. against
Peter Frareins page 31. initio) does excuse all this as meant of those
Christians which were under the Turks dominion: it is so directly against the
scope and circumstance of Luthers words (his former mention of resisting Gods
visiting us by the Turk, and likewise of the Princes of Germany, and the whole
passage of his Treatise made thereof at large, avoiding this answer, in so much
as the Author of the defense of the Censure page 231. labors to excuse
Luther otherwise) which also are in some places as sounding to dissuade us from
making fortifications against the Turk, that Roffensis in confut. Assert.
Luther. Printed 1523. art. 34.
Roffensis did therefore write specially against this his foresaid Doctrine, at
large reciting and confuting his reasons. The words of Luther are, Impia et
inanis fiducia est in munitionibus, vallis, bombardis, et si quande Deo ita
fuerit visum, ut Turca grassetur in Germaniam, non tuebuntur nos aggeres isti,
etc. quando genua flectimus et clamamus ad Creatorem nostrum, is poterit igneos
muros nobis circundare: ego odi molem istam vallorum et munitionum, quia nihil
aliud est quam perditio pecuniae, et ostentatio extremae stultitiae: id potius
agendum est, ut firmiter statuamus, nos esse in manu Creatoris, et non tantum
nos sed etiam hosts et Diabolos, etc. Thus advises he, that neglecting
ordinary means, we should, with out respect thereto, depend immediately upon
miraculous help from God: see these words in Luther, loc. com. class. 4. page
84. And ubi supra class. 5. page 142. circa med. it is said, Dissuadet
(Lutherus) bellum Turcicum, nec in veteri nec in novo Testamento ullum gestum
est bellum humanis viribus, nisi semper infelici eventu: si quid autem recte
cessit, de coelo fuit bellatum, etc. Which foresaid Doctrine of Luther was also
so known and See hereof Belforest: in Cosmogra. l. 2. cap. 7. col. 579
grateful to the Turk, that (as Luthers own Scholar reports) Manlius in loc.
com. page 636. fine.
the Turkish Emperor (to the great shame of Luther) hearing hereof, demanded
of our Christian Ambassador how old Luther was, and wished him younger,
promising to be his very good Lord. And the Duke of Saxony (a Professor of
Luthers Doctrine) was accordingly holden chargeable, as Hereof see Sleydan l.
18. fol. 277. ante medium.
being confederate with the Turk. In so much as Erasmus (whom our adversaries
think to have been Acts Mon. page 404. a. fine.
indifferently affected toward Luther) says hereof ( in Epistola ad Fratres
inferiores Germaniae page 39.) Many of the Saxons following that first Doctrine
of Luher, denied to Caesar and King Ferdinand aid against the Turks, etc. and
said they had rather fight for a Turk not Baptized, then for a Turk Baptized,
thereby meaning the Emperor. Whereunto might be added the further example of
the German Protestants See this in Sleydan l. 17. fol. 94. b. prope initium.
and fol. 95 a. post mediunt. and in Osiander centur. 16 page 193. circa medium.
denying their Emperor to give aid against the Turk, unelss their own
conditions were first agreed to.

17. Concerning the Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 2.
Canonical Scriptures, if it be true which M. Fulk says (in his confutation of
Purgatory page 214. circa med.) that whosoever denies the authority of holy
Scriptures, thereby bewraieth himself to be an Heretic, what is then to be
thought of Luther, who denied sundry confessed parts thereof? Concerning the
Apocalypse, Bullinger (upon the Apocalypse Englished c. 1. sermon. 1 fol. 2. a.
post med.) gives testimony saying, Doctor Martin Luther has as it were
sticked this Book by a sharp Preface set before his Edition of the New
Testament in Dutch, for which his judgment good and learned men were offended
with him. And concerning the Epistle of St. James, Luther not in the latter
edition of Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 2.
Wittemberg corrupted by the Zuinglians and others, (of which alteration made
in Luthers works the zealous Lutherans in a Synod holden at For Theodosius
Fabricius in his collections of Luthers sayings, entitled loci communes
Doctoris Martini, etc. Printed 1594. in his Preface circa med. set before the
book, professes there to follow the Edition of Jena, saying there further: Cur
ab iditione Wittembergensi discedam, causas habeo non comtemnendas. As in like
manner Master Bancroft in his Survey of the pretended holy Discipline, page
225. charge the Puritans with like corruption of other Protestants works.
Altemburg and Col^oqui Altemberg. in respon. ad excusa Cor. fol. 227. and vide
2. respons. ad Hypoth. ^ fol. 284. ad fol. 290. and fol. 353. and 355. and vide
ibidem Hypotheses de libero ar^trio fol. 574. b. and 575. a. And Conradus
Schlusseburg in his Theologia Calvi^istarum l. 2. fol. 56. b. charge the
Calvinists with alteration of Luthers Works.
Of the great contentions is Germany between the rigid and soft Lutherans
concerning the false and corrupt editions of Luthers works, See Walterus contra
Aurifabrum de corrupta editione Operum Lutheri Anno 1566. And see further proof
of Luthers works corrupted, in the defense of the censure page 55. And see
Brereley in the conclusion to the Judges sect. 9. and in the margent at d. Of
this corrupting Luthers Works see also above.
elsewhere, do greatly complain: as also Joachim Westphalus Apol. contra
Calvinist. c. 46. page 458. And Luther himself in Epist. ad Jo. Harvagium
Typographum Argentinensem ^hargeth Bucer with corrupting his works.
Westphalus a Lutheran does in like manner charge Calvin with most foul
mutations and corruptions made in certain of Luthers Works translated into
French, and Printed at Geneva) but in the more ancient edition of Jena (a City
in Religion Lutheran) utters these words, which some of our adversaries (to
speak the least) have no less then over boldly Over-boldly denied in the Tower
disputation with Edmund Campian the first days conference. c.iiii. Luther
praefat. in Epist. Jacobi in editione Jenensi fine.
denied: The Epistle of James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawy, and
unworthy an Apostolical Spirit. In so much as Illyricus (Luthers own Scholar)
whom Mr. Thomas Bell terms a Bell in his regiment of the Church page 28. See
Pomeran. in Epist. ad Romans c. 4. And Vitus Theodorus in Annot. in nov. Test.
page ult. And the Century writers of Magdeburg cent. ^. l. 2. c. 4 and cent. 2.
l. 3. c. 4. And Hafferefferus in loc. Theologic. l. 3. sta^. 3. loc. 7. page
292. And Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theol. page 488. says, Apoc^aphi libri
novi Testamenti, sunt Epistola ad Haebreos, Epistola Jacobi, secunda and tertia
Joannis, posterior Petri, Epistola Judae and Apocalyp.
very famous Writer and most worthy defender of the Christian truth, expresses
and defends Luthers foresaid judgment, saying, Luther in his Preface upon
St. James Epistle, gives great reasons why this Epistle ought in no case to be
accounted for a writing of Apostolical authority; to which reasons I think
every godly man ought to yield. Which foresaid judgment of Luther concerning
this and other parts of the new Testament is yet to this day so continued and
defended by Luthers other Scholars that (to omit sundry of them) Chemnitius
(Luthers greatest Scholar) affirms that Chem^itius in Enchyrid, etc. page 63.
And see Chemnitius in his examen. Council. Trident. part. 1. page 55.
the second Epistle of Peter, the second and third of John, the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of John
are Apocryphal, Chemnitius exam. part. 1. page 56. b. initio.
as not having sufficient testimony of their authority: and therefore
Chemnitius ibidem p. 57. a.
that nothing in controversy may be proved out of these Books. Moreover Luther
lib de servo arbitrio contra Erasmum tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 471.) says, The
Jews place the Book of Esther in the Canon, which yet, if I might be Judge,
does rather deserve to be put out of the Canon. Protestants, when they will
exclude from the Canon Books received by Catholics, they allege, that they are
not in Hebrew; and yet Luther likes not Esther, though he confesses the
Hebrews admit it. And of Ecclesiastes he says ( in latinis sermonibus
convivalibus Francofurt. in Octavo impres. Anno 1571.) This Book is not full;
there are in it many abrupt things: he wants Boots and Spurs, that is, he has
no perfect sentence, he rides upon a long reed like me when I was in the
Monastery. And much more is to be read in him: who ( in Germ. Colloq. ab
Aurifabro editis Francofurti tit. de libris veteris and Novi Test. fol. 379.)
says further, that the said Book was not written by Solomon, but by Syrach in
the time of the Macchabees, and that it is like to the Talmud (the Jews Bible)
out of many Books heaped into one Work, perhaps out of the Library of King
Prolomaeus. And further he says ibidem tit. de Patriarchis and Prophet. fol
28^. that he does not believe all to have been done as there is set down. And
teaches tit. de lib. vet. and Novi Test. The Book of Job to be as it were an
argument for a fable (or Comedy) to set before us an example of Patience. And
he ( fol. 380.) delivers this general censure of the Prophets Books: The
Sermons of no Prophet, were written whole, and perfect, but their Disciples,
and Auditors, snatched, now one sentence, and then another, and so put them all
into one Book, and by this means the Bible was conserved. If this were so, the
Books of the Prophets, being not written by themselves, but promiscuously, and
casually, by their Disciples, will soon be called in question. Concerning now
the other Books of Scripture, although Luther acknowledged many of them for
Canonical, how far yet he was chargeable otherwise in mistranslating them, we
will refer to the credit of Zuinglius his testimony, who ( tom. 2. ad Luther.
l. de Sacrament. page 412. b. 413. a.) says hereof to Luther: Thou do
corrupt (Luther) the word of God, thou art seen to be a manifest and common
corrupter and perverter of the holy Scriptures, how much are we ashamed of
thee, who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee to
be such a man. And see the like testimony of Keckermannus in Brereley tract. 1.
sect. 10. subdivis. 4. initio at b. saying ( in System. S. Theolog. l. 1. p.
188. circa medium) Lutheri versio Germanic. in vet. Test. praesertim in Job and
Prophetis, naevos suos habet non exiguos. Omitting many other particulars, we
will here observe, that whereas it is said 1 Joan. 5.7. There are three which
give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one, This being a most evident place in proof of the Trinity, is
omitted by Luther in his Dutch Bibles. In like manner where it is said Romans
3.28. We account a man to be justified by faith, without the works of the Law,
Luther, to color his doctrine of only faith, translateth here justified by
faith alone; and being admonished of his thus adding here to the text the word
alone, he persisteth wilful, saying tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. and 144. Sic volo,
sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas etc. Lutherus ita vult, and ait se esse
Doctorem super omnes Doctores in toto Papatu. And concludes lastly, Propterea
debet (vox sola) in meo novo Testamento manner, etiamsi omnes Papismi ad
insaniam reducantur, tamen non eam inde tollent: paenitet me quod non addiderim
and illas duas voces, omnibus and omnium viz. Sine omnibus operibus omnium
legum. ( Pu. Mark his boldness to addo even to the text of holy Scripture.) In
like manner Luther doubts not to argue the Aposties themselves of error in
doctrine, which is to the great prejudice and danger of their writings (for if
they did or might err in Doctrine, how then can we be sure that they were the
Scribes of the holy Ghost, and that their writings be Canonical and void of
error? To this end Luther says ( in Epist. ad Galat. Cap. 1. after the
English translation fol. 33. b. paulo post med. and 34. a. initio, and tom. 5.
Wittemberg. of An. 1554. fol. 290. b.) Be it that the Church, Austine, and
other Doctors, also Peter, Apollo, yea an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise,
yet is my Doctrine such, as sets forth Gods only Glory, etc. Peter the chief
of the Apostles did live and teach (extra verbum Dei) besides the word of God.
And in the same place fol. 290. a. fine, he further says, Sive S. Cyprianus,
Ambrosius, Augustinus, five S. Petrus, Paulus, imo Angelus e Coelo aliter
doceat, tamen hoc certe scio, quod humana non suadeo, sed Divina. Yet further
against St. James his mentioning of extreme Unction he says de captivit.
Babylon. ( de extrema Unctione in tom. 2. Wittemberg. fol. 86. h. ante med.)
Ego autemdico, si uspi am deliratum est, etc. tamen si etiam esses Epistola
Jacobi dicerem non licere Apostolum sua authoritate Sacramentum instituere.
etc. Hoc enim ad Christum solum pertinebat. I further say, that if in any place
it be erred (Pu^or be done like a man doting or raving) in this place
especially it is erred, etc. (or done like one doting or raving) but though
this were the Epistle of James I would answer, that it is not lawful for an
Apostle by his authority to institute a Sacrament. For this appertained to
Christ alone. As though that blessed Apostle would publish a Sacrament without
warrant from Christ. In like manner concerning Moses he says ( tom. 3.
Wittemberg. in Psalmum 45 fol. 423. a. and vide ibidem fol. 422. and tom. 3.
Germ. fol. 40.41. and in Colloq. Men's. Germ. fol. 152.153.) Habuit Moses labia,
sed profunda, infacunda, impedita, irata, in quibus non est verbum gratiae sed
irae, mortis and peccati: colligite omnes sapientias Moysis, Gentium and
Philosophorum, and invenietis eas coram Deo esse vel dolatriam, vel sapientiam
hypocriticam, vel si est politica sapientiam irae, etc. Ha^et enim Moses labia
diffusa fell and ira, etc. Moses has his lips unpleasant, stop^ed, and angry,
etc. Do you collect together all the wisdoms of Moses and of the Heathen
Philosophers, and you shall find them to be before God either idolatry, or
hypocritical wisdom, or if it be politic (yet but) the wisdom of wrath, etc.
Moses has his lips full of Gall and anger, etc. away therefore with Moses,
etc.

18. As concerning Brerely tract. 2 cap. 2. s^ct. 10. subdivis. 3.
faith, Luther reproves as well such Protestants as say, Luther upon the
Galathians Englished, in cap. 2. fol. 67. u. post med.
Neither can faith be true faith without charity, as also those others who
teach, Luther ibidem fol. 67. circa med.
though my faith be never so perfect, yet if this faith be without charity, I
am not justified, calling it Luther ibid. fol. 68. b. prope finem, and fol.
126. b. And see Luther in his Sermons Englished, etc. page 204. circa. med.
impiety to affirm, that faith except it be adorned with charity, justifyeth
not. Nay he proceeded so far, as he doubted not to say: Luther tom. 1. prop. 3.
Fides nisi sit sine, etc. Faith unless it be without even the least good
works, does not justify, nay it is no faith. Which saying of his D. Covell
specially acknowledges and recites, tearming it Covell in his defense of
Hookers five Books of Ecclesiastical Policy page 42. ante med.
harsh, and justly called in question by the Church of Rome. He also further
taught, that Luther tom. 2. Wittemberg. de captivit. Babylon. fol. 74. and see
further hereof in the Treatise against the defense of the censure. p. 198.
a Christian or Baptized person is so rich, that although he would he cannot
lose his salvation by any sin how great soever, unless he will not believe.
Whereof he gives this reason elsewhere, saying, As nothing justifyeth but
faith, so nothing sins but unbelief. ( Luther in loc. com. etc. class. 5. c.
27. page 68. initio, and in 2. part. Postill. Germ. Printed Argentorati Anno
1537. fol. 140. b.) he says, No sin is so great which can condemn a man: for
only infidelity condemns all men that are condemned, and on the contrary only
faith makes all men blessed.

19. As concerning Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 4.
good Works, Luther teaches (in his Sermons Englished, etc. page 147.
antemed.) that works take their goodness of the worker, and ( page 278.) that
no work is disallowed of God, unless the Author thereof be disallowed before,
saying thereof further, such a one works nothing but good works, neither can
it be but good, which he being good before shall do. And as concerning the
necessity of good works affirmed against him by English Protestants, (as
Willet, Whitaker, etc. whereof see Brereley page 392. 1.) it is so far
disclaimed in by him and his followers, that they deny Illyricus in praefat. ad
Romans and vide Schlusselburg in Catalog. Haereticorum l. 13. and ult. page: 819.
circa med.
good works to be so much as (causa sine qua non) of salvation, affirming the
controversy with the Illyricus in praefat. ad Romans And see Colloquium
Altembergense fol. 210. a. b. and 231.324.382. and 352.
Papists to be (not only) whether good works do justify, but also whether they
be in any respect necessary to salvation. Which last position, they call
Illyricus ubi supra.
a Papistical error, terming it the Illyricus ibidem.
Doctrine of the new Papists, as pernicious as the old, to say (as English
Protestants do) that the Apostle meant to exclude good works from
justification, not simply and as due, but only as meritorious and causes
efficient. They will not in the point of our justification grant Schlusselburg
in Catalog: H^ereticorum l. 13. in Epist. dedicatoria page 22. paulo post med.
good works to be necessary (necessitate praesentiae) so much as with necessity
of presence, condemning their Brethrens contrary Doctrine for Illyricus de
originali just tia ac injustitia in appendice page 163.
worse then is the Papists Doctrine: and they fortify themselves herein with
the testimony of See Luthers sayings alleged in Actis Colloquii Aldeburgensis
page 8. circa. med and in Illyricus in praefat. ad Romans
Luther, and have proceeded so far against all necessity of good works, that
some of them (as namely Amsdorphius a Protestant Divine of great Dresserus in
Millenario Sexto Printed 1598. page 187. post med. says, Nicholaus Amsdorphius
Wittemb^rgae primum cum Luthero and Phil^ppo Theolog^ae stadia coluit, postea
Episcopatui Numburgico a Frederico Electore praefectus est, and a Luthero
inauguratus: ( Pu. Consecrated Bishop by Luther who was no Bishop.) And Luther
com. 2. Wittemberg: writes to him, specially tearming him, Optime Vir, fol.
487. initio. And in libro Concordiae bound in quatto, Lipsiae, 1581. page 72.
ante med it is said, is inter caetera fecit mentionem Nicholai Amsdorphii, de
quo Lutherus d^xisser Spiritus meus requiescet in Amsdorphio, and Wellerus,
Nemo tantum hausit de Spiritu Lutheri ac Ams^orphius. And see yet the very same
affirmed of Luther and Wellerus concerning Amsdorphius, by Chemnitius, alleged
by Hospinian in his Concord. discor. Printed 1607. fol. 102. b. fine.
note, and by Luther much esteemed) doubt not to affirm, that Hereof see Acta
Colloquii Aldeburgensis page 120. Sect. 11. initio; and page 443. paulo post
initium, and page 293. paulo ante medium. And see Nicholaus Amsdorphius
special Book of this argument, in^ituled: Quod bona opera sint perniciosa ad
salutem.
good works are not only not necessary to salvation, but also hurtful to it;
Vide Acta Colloq. Aldeburg: page 205. post med. fi^e.
alleging Luther in proof of this opinion, Ibidem page 293. paulo ante med. it
is said, Scripsit Amsdorphius, and post eum, vel per eum Flaccius, non solum
non necessaria, sed and perniciosa esse opera ad salutem, and page 120. sect.
11 it is said: Hanc detestandam propositionem Amsdorphii, quam and Flaccius
approbat, and editis scriptis propugnat, quod bona opera non solum non sunt
necessaria, sed etiam perniciosa ad salutem, etc. Amsdorphius in suo libro ^.
4. Flaccius in Annotatione super repet. Major.
the which Illyricus (whom Mr. Bell in his Regiment of the Church page 25. fine
terms a very famous Writer, and most worthy defender of the Christian truth)
does allow and defend by public writing: And all this so grossly and
intolerably, that sundry other Protestant Writers, who acknowledge Amsdorphius
Amsdorphius plae memoriae, so called ibidem page 206. circa medium.
for a man (otherwise) of godly memory, do yet nevertheless in this profess
Ibid. page 205. fine, and 206. nitio, it is said hereof, Nos quidem ipsos
(Lutherum and Amidorphium) inter se committimus, hanc proposit^onem non
usurpaturi. And Osiander in Epitom. Hist. Eccles. centur. 16. page 609. says,
Nicholaus Amsdorphius, Theologus Lutheranus, dum falsam D. Maioris
propositionem de necessitate bonorum operum ad salutem evertere conatur, in
alterum extremum impegit, and defendere conatus est hanc absurdam
propositionem; Bona opera ad salutem esse perniciosa.
to leave both him and Luther to themselves. Which foresaid extenuating of good
works, is yet nevertheless so grateful to some of the Calvinists, that their
blessed So is he termed by D. Bulkley in his Apology for Religion, etc. page
46. initio.
man of God, and constant Martyr of Jesus Christ, Master Tindall, so greatly by
them yet otherwise Commended Acts Mon. page 514. b. fine and 515. a. 519.
initio and 521. b. initio.
commended, was so careful to prevent all merit of good works, that in his Book
entitled the wicked That Tindal was the Author of this Book; see Act. mon.
page 573. b. prope finem, and 486. a. initio and b. post med.
Mammon, he doubts not to affirm, that Act. Mon: page 486. b. fine.
Christ with all his works did not deserve Heaven. Which sentence their Martyr
John Teuxbury defends for Act mon. ibidem.
plain enough and Act Mon. page 487. b. pau^o post med.
true as it lies to omit that Calvin himself condemns this Doctrine of
Christ's meriting to himself, though expressed in Scripture, Calvin. Institut.
l. 2. c. 17. sect. 6. says, Quaerere an sibi meruerit Christus, non minus
stulta est curiositas, quam teme^a^ a definitio. And a little after: Quibus
enim meritis affequi po^uit homo, ut j^dex esset ^^undi, caput Angelorum? And
see further Calvin in Epistolas Pauli in Philip. 2 ver. 9. page 466. b and 467.
a. in so much that in his Books of Institutions l. 2. c. 17. sect. 1. He says
against Christ's meriting for us: Equidem fateor, si quis simpliciter, and per
se Christum apponere vellet judicio Dei, non fore merito locum, quia non
reperietur in hom^ne dignitas, quae possit Deum promereri.
for a foolish curiosity, and rash opinion) the said Tindall was so much bent
against all opinion of Good Works, that he affirmed and taught, that as
concerning Acts Monu. page 488. a. initio.
the preaching of the Work, and washing of dishes, there is no difference as
touching to please God. Which saying (as their foresaid Martyr Teuxbury
affirms) is a Acts Mon. page 488. a. initio.
plain Text, as needing no further explication, and that as for pleasing God
(says he) all is one; for, says Tindall, Acts Mon. page 1336. a. ante med.
there is no work better than other as touching to please God; to make water,
to wash dishes, to be a Sowter or an Apostle, all is one to please God.

20 Having at length written out what Brereley delivers concerning Luther's
Doctrine and Manners, Finally we may conclude the life of Luther with the words
of Erasmus [a man highly esteemed by Protestants] writing to Luther Anno 1526
11. Aprilis in these words: Optarem tibi meliorem mentem, nisi tua tibi tam
valde placeret. Mihi optabis quod voles, modo ne tuam mentem, nisi tibi Dominus
istam mutaverit.
taking his proofs from witnesses above all exception, that is, from his own
words, and the writings of Protestants themselves, as I could not without a
deep sense of grief reflect how many have been, and are yet deceived in that
unhappy man, whom they conceive to have been sent by God to the World, for
Reformation thereof, so now in order to the help of persons so seduced, I must
beg of them to ponder well these ensuing Reflections.

First, as for his Doctrine, whether they can acknowledge him for their Father,
or Brother, or a Protestant in any degree, who taught Doctrines so wicked,
Carnal, Absurd, Temporizing, Inconstant, Seditious and Blasphemous, as both
Protestants and Catholics, and all Christians, yea and all men of common
Reason and human Civility must abhor and detest; whether I say, this man can
be said to have been of the Protestant Religion, and consequently that their
Church remained without any being no less after than before Luther appeared.

Secondly, For his Life and Manners, by his own Confession, and the Testimony
of Protestants (after he undertook to reform the whole Church of God) they grew
to be so abominable and shameless, as we may well judge that God Almighty out
of his Wildome, Goodness, and Justice, permitted him to fall so openly and
shamefully, that whosover did follow his Doctrine should become inexcusable, it
being a thing very evident, that men chosen by the Holy Ghost to enlighten and
reform others, are first to be freed from intolerable Errors in their
Understanding, and Viciousnes in their Will, and not to fail notoriously in
both, even upon their very beginning that pretended great work, having before
led a commendable life as Luther did, which cannot but manifest to the World,
that his pretended Reformation could not proceed from God, but from that Enemy,
who perpetually seeks whom he may devour. And although all the followers of
Luther were inexcusable in adhering to such a man, against the whole Church of
God united in Peace and Union, for as much as concerned Faith and Religion; yet
they who persevere still to embrace and pursue such a Reformation are less
excusable, than they who followed him in the beginning, when men came to the
knowledge of his Vices and abominable Errors in Faith, not all at once but by
degrees, as he day by day profited to the worse; whereas now every one may at
one view see his Vices and Heresies put together, published and acknowledged by
his own confession, and the confession of Protestants themselves. When the Holy
Ghost moves us to some work, he does it suaviter and fortiter, with Sweetness
and Efficacy, inspiring Constancy, Perseverance, Meekness, Humility, and
Satisfaction to the Soul, according to that of the Apostle, The Gifts of God
are without Repentance; Whereas we have seen that Luther confessed himself to
have opposed Indulgences, when he knew not what the name meant, and would have
renounced his reforming the World, if for sooth he might have done it with his
credit, and wished that he never had begun that business (in Coll. mensal.)
affirming futher, that he fell Into those troubles casually, and against his
will; Casu non voluntate in has turbas incidi Deum ipsum testor; not so much as
dreaming or suspecting any change, which might happen. Act. Mon. page 404.
whereby it appears that Luther was moved by Ambition, Pride, Lust and Envy, and
not led by any true desire of Reformation, which if he judged to be aecessary,
what a huge wickedness was it in him to promise silence if his Adversaries would
do the like? or to submit himself to the Pope, so that he might not be
compelled to Recant? or if the Reformation were not necessary (as certainly the
Church can never need Reformation for matters of Faith) how can he, and they
who follow him, be excused from damnable Schism and Heresy? And accordingly it
is no wonder if he fell into that deep sense of remorse and perplexity of Soul,
so far as to wish his Books were all abolished, as we have seen above. It is
also reported, Oecolampadium a Landgravio privatim admonitum de perspicuitate
ac certitudine verborum Christi, cum gemitu respondisse, optare se dextram sibi
fuisse praecisam, antequam de hac Controversia scribere quicquam ordiretur. But
let us now with Brereley go on to other chief Protestants.

Of Jacobus Andreas.
21 AS concerning Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. sudivis. 2.
Jacobus Andreas (the prime Lutheran of this age, and the greatest enlarger of
Luther's Doctrine, and Chancellor of the Universitie of Iubinge) no less honored
and famous in Germany, than ever was Calvin or Beza at Geneva, The Protestant
writer Hospinianus discoursing briefly of his life from testimony of the
learned Lutherans, allegeth them charging him, that he had no God except Mammon
and Bacchus; that he never prayed neither going to Bed nor rising from thence;
that in the residue of his life he showed no spark of Godliness, but great
lightness in his words, deeds and Counsels. Thus Hospinian in Hist. Sacrament.
part. 2. fol. 389. b. initio, says, Nicolaus Seluecerus de ipso saepe coram
multis bonis sideque dignis viris dixisse fertur, quod nullum omnino habeat
Deum, si Mammonem and Bacchum excipias. Nam se nunquam audivisse vel conjectura
aliqua saltem animadvertere potuisse (toto illo tempore quo venalem ubiquitatem
circumvexerunt) quod vel cubitum iturus, vel de lectu surrecturus, aut or
ationem Dominicam recitaverit, aut ullum Dei mentionem fecerit, In reliqua vero
vita, dictis, factis, Consiliis, nullam pietatis scintillam, summam vero
levitatem semper deprehendisse. And Hospinian, ibidem fol. 389. b. versus
finem, allegeth further Sturmius a Calvinist, charging him with the crim of
Covetousness, Adultery, robbing of the Poor, and Sacrilege. For he allegeth the
words of Sturmius to be of Jacobus Andreas as follows. Virgae furibus
inventae sunt contra avaritiae crimen, and lapidationes adulteris, si ab his
duobus criminibus Jacobus Andreas solutus est, non est quod metuat: ego facile
fero quod celatum est occultum esse, neque ipsum scrutor etc. quid secum
divitiarum e Saxonia and Misnia abstulit, scio id pauperum esse debere, and ad
pauperum fiscum redigi, and illorum esse debitam mercedem, quos e suis
muneribus una cum uxoribus ejecit, and tam magnum esse ipsius Sacrilegium etc.
And ibidem fol. 389. b. paulo post initium, he allegeth Seluecerus and the
other Lutheran Writer Andreas Musculus, tearming him, erronem, levissimum
scurram, qui ut ex dictis and factis ejus cognoscatur, neque Religionem, neque
Conscientiam ullam habeat etc. And yet further there fol. 389. a. Apud Bre^eley
in his book a part of the late pretended Reformers cap. 3. sect. 7. fine.
Insomuch as Lavather, a learned Adversary, confesses and writes for news
unto Zanchius, how that this In Zanchius his Epistles printed: 609. lib. 2.
page 340. Lavather writes to Zanchius saying, Schmidelinum (alias Jacobum
Andream) fertur apud nos in adulterio cum Ancilla deprehensum, magnum odium
etc. incur^isse etc.
Andreas was taken in public Adultery, reciting withal, Ibidem paulo post.
certain Verses thereupon then made thereof, by the Calvinists.

Of Zuinglius.
22 NOt to repeat what we said above of Luther's opinion concerning Brereley
tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subdivis. 3.
Zuinglius; To give some taste both of his carnal Disposition and Doctrine,
and the same from no other testimony than taken from his own alleged writings,
it is thereby manifest, that The direction or title of this writing is, Pietate
and Prudentia insigni Helvetiorum Reipub: Huldericus Zuinglius aliique
Evangelicae doctrinae Ministri gratiam and pacem a Deo etc. in tom. 1. fol.
110. a. in itio.
Zuinglius and certain other Ministers of the Evangelicall Doctrine, who joined
with him in the Admonition to the Helvetian Commonwealth, after some
undertaking, Zuinglius ibidem fol. 113. post med.
to impart to it the Evangelical Doctrine, for which they take it grievously to
be called Cum od^osis and penes omnes invisis nominibus, eos infames reddunt,
qui Evan^elicam veritatem bona fide praedicant, Lutheranos, Hussitas and
Hereticos illos nominando. Zuinglius ibidem fol. 113. b. initio.
Lutherans and Heretics, do first make petition for wives, saying, We
earnestly request that the use of Marriage be not denied to us, who feeling the
infirmity of our Flesh, perceive that the love of Chastity is not given us by
God: For if we consider the words of Paul, we shall find with him no other
cause of marriage, a carnal saying, than for, to satisfy, the lustful desires
of the Flesh, which to burn in us we may not deny, seeing that by means thereof
we are made infamous before the Congregations. Their words are, Hoc vero summis
precibus contendimus, ne Matrimonii usus nobis denegetur, qui carnis nostrae
infirmitatem experti, castitatis studium nobis a Deo non concessum esse
sentimus: si enim Pauli verba consideremus, non aliam apud hunc Matrimoniorum
causam, quam carnis ad libidinem calentem aestum reperire licet, quem in nobis
fervere negare non possumus, cum hujus ipsius opera nos coram Ecclesiis infames
rediderunt. tom. 1. fol. 115. a. ante med. And to set forth his carnality as
yet more plainly, by his own explaining that wherewith he as before professes
himself, and his said Brethren, to have been so greatly troubled; he
expresses the same in these plain words there next after, saying, By the
burning desires of the flesh, we understand those desires of the flesh,
wherewith a man being almost inflamed, tosseth in his mind the studies of the
lustful flesh; in these only he spends all his thoughts, upon these he
meditateth, and is wholly busied in this, that he may satisfy the fury of his
flesh. Aestum vero libidinis eas carnis cupiditates and affectus intelligimus,
quibus homo tantum non accensus carnis libidinosae studia animo suo versat, ut
carnis furori satisfaciat. Zuinglius ibidem. This being then the confessed
carnal disposition of Zuinglius and his foresaid brethren, he signifies yet
further, their answerable forepassed behavior during their remaining so
unmarried, saying, If we respected the liberty of the flesh, who sees not how
much more commodious it were for us, that we should forbear the laws of
marriage, as hitherto we have done, etc. For we have known how easily in this
free and loose state, being glutted with saciety (of one) we might change.
Wherefore for the love, not of lust, but of Chastity, and the Souls to us
committed, we desire Marriage; lest that the Souls committed to our charge by
example of our lust should be any longer offended. Si carnis licentiam quaerere
animus esset, quis non videt, quam commodius foret, si ut hactenus, a
Matrimoniorum legibus abstineremus? etc. Novimus quam facilis in hoc statu
nostro soluto and libero, mulierum quarum cum nos capit satietas, permutatio
fieri possit. Quare non carnis libidine, sed chastitatis et animarum nobis
commissarum amore permoti, hoc petimus, ne hoc exemplo nostrae libidinis
diutius offendantur. Zuinglius ibidem fol. 119. a. ante medium. And, We have
proved that the weakness of our flesh has been (o for grief!) cause of our
often shameful falling. Quare cum carnis insirmitatem nobis non semel (proh
dolor) pudendi lapsus causam fuisse experti simus, etc. ( Zuinglius ibidem fol.
119. a. panlo post med.) And in another Epistle to the Bishop of Constance
written and Subscribed tom. 1. fol. 123. b.
subscribed unto by Zuinglius, Leo, Jude, Erasmus, Fabricius, and eight other
Ministers there named, who all cry out for Wives, after some intimation made of
the Tom. 1. fol. 120. post medium.
heavenly Doctrine so long (before) hidden, and then (lately) restored he
further confesses and says: Hactenus experti hoc donum nobis esse negatum.
fol. 121. a. fine.
Hitherto we have tried that this gift of Chastity has been denied to us,
etc. We have Arsimus (proh pudor!) tantopere, ut multa indecore gefferimus.
fol. 122. a. prope finem.
burned (O for shame!) so greatly, that we have committed many things
unseemingly. To speak freely without boasting, we are not otherwise of such
uncivil manners, that we should be ill spoken of among the people to us
committed, for any wickedness, this one point only excepted. Non usque adeo
incivilibus moribus sumus, ut ullum ob flagitium male audiamus apud gregem
nobis creditum, hoc uno excepto. Was this the Spirit of the Apostles and
ancient Fathers? Or was this Doctrine fit or safe to be by him thus divulged to
the modest thoughts of innocent young men and damsels, who wanting means of
marriage, were in danger hence to suck poison?

23. Having thus laid down this foresaid groundwork of liberty, thereupon
withal he undertook to impugn the Mass by instruction (as his own Brethren
report) from a Spirit, whether black or white he remembers not, as appears
by Zuinglius his words set down by him tom. 2. in libro de subsid. Euchar fol.
294. a. And also in Mr. Fulks Treatise against the defense of the Censure page
249, 250. that Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. subdivis. 2. fine. in the
margent at 1.
Zuiuglius having labored the abolishing of the Mass at Zurick against a
certain Scribe that had opposed himself (in argument) against Zuinglius,
Zuinglius was in that disputation provoked to bring forth examples which were
joined with no parable; Therefore we began (says he) to think of all that we
could, but yet no other example came to mind, etc. but when the 13. day of
April drew near (I tell the truth, and my conscience compels me to utter
what the Lord bestowed upon me) me thought (as I was a sleep^ that I was again
disputing with the Scribe, and my mouth so stopped, that I was not able to
speak, etc. and suddenly there seemed an admonisher to be present with me
(ater fuerit an albus nihil memini) whether he were black or white I remember
not, etc. which said, why do thou not answer him that which is written Exodus
12. For it is the Paschal which is the Sea Bellarmin. tom. 3. de Eucharistia l.
1. c. 11. Quaedam citantur, where he answers this weak objection.
Passover of the Lord, etc. Whereupon (says he) I (afterward) considered the
place, and thereof before the whole Congregation Preached, which Sermon, when
it was heard, drove away all mist. Thus were Zuinglius his foresaid proceedings
against the Mass furthered with nightly instruction in his dream, by an
admonisher, whether black or white he remembers not, whereof though he made
serious and great account, affirming it to be no light matter which (says he)
I learned by this dream, thanks be to God, etc. In so much as Hospinianus in
Hist. Sacrament. part. altera fol. 26. ante medium termed it a Divine
Revelation, yet is the same derided as a mere illusion by his other Brethren,
as namely by Jacobus Andraeas in confut. disput. Joan. Jacobi Grinaei page
120.254. fine, and 304. and by Schlusselburg (in Theolog. Calvinist. l. 1. in
prooem. fol. 3. a.b.) and by Gerardus Giesekenius de veritate Corporis Christi
in S. Coena page 64. By Benedict Morgensterne in tract. de Ecclesia page 68.
and by Jacobus Heilbrunerus in Swenkfeldio-Calvinismo, etc. in praefat. ante
med. And this kind of persuasion or apparition reported by Protestants
themselves as happening likewise to In the Book intiuled Conspiracy for the
pretended Reformation page 83. initio it is said, Among others, Carolostadius a
Preacher professing the Gospel, etc. attributed much to Cabinet teachers in
private conventicles, and unto visions, and pretended conference with God. And
see O siander Epitom. Centur. 16. page 86. and Chemnitius in repetit. de Euchar.
Art. 31. and Slevdan Hist. l. 5. fol. 65 a. post. med.
Carolostadius, Luther alleged ubi supra, says concerning these apparitions:
Plane p^rsuasus sum Empserum and Oecolampadium, etc. his ^ctibus horribilibus
subito extinctos fuisse. So plainly was he persuaded, that Oecolampadius was in
one of these apparitions slain by the Devil.
and Oecolampadius, was confessedly the first that dissuaded Luther from
further saying Mass. In like manner Mr. Fox in Apocalyp. page 364 fine, and
365. initio, and in his Acts and Mon. Printed 1596. page 90. b. circa med.
reports the very like pretended wonderful revelation happened to him (as it did
to Zuinglius) whereby he was instructed, that by the 42. months, mentioned in
the Apocalys, was understood the 294. years of the Primitive Churches first
persecution. And yet is this understanding of them sithence rejected, and in
steed thereof is thereby understood the last 1260. years before Luther by Mr.
Napier upon the Revelations proposition 15. page 22, 23, 24. by Mr. Brocard
upon the Revelations fol. 110. a. and by Mr. Gifford upon the Revelations page
890. post med.

24. Zuinglius Brerely tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subdivis. 3.
after this impugning the Mass, proceeded withal after a strange confessed
course of temporizing liberty, whereof he himself tom. 2. de vera and falsa
religione fol. 202. b. initio says, Retractamus igitur hic quae illic diximus,
tali lege, ut quae hic damus anno atatis nostrae quadragesimo secundo,
propendeant eis, quae quadragesimo dederamus quando ut diximus tempori potius
scripsimus quam rei (we had regard rather of the times, than of the matter) sic
jubente Domino, Pu. O blasphemy! as if in matter of Christian Doctrine our
Savior did command men to temporize, dissemble, and utter falsehood by
delivering contradictories. Luther as we have seen above is taxed by Zuinglius
for his temporizing and contradicting himself, and now Zuinglius confesses of
himself the same sault; who then can believe either of them, and what goodly
guides have Protestants?
ut tali ratione aedificemus, ne inter initia canes and porci nos rumpant.
Insomuch as in the Alphabetical Table there under the Letter Z. it is said: (
Zuinglius docendo servivit tempori;) and this even in the great point
concerning the Sacrament (whereof see Bellarm. de Eucharist. l. 1. c. 1..
Decimus patronus:) he proceeded, I say, further to deliver Paradoxes strange
and before unheard of, all tending to liberty of life or Doctrine. As first,
the discouragement which his Doctrine affords against all good works in
general, saying tom. 1. de Providentia Dei fol. 371. a. versus finem: Sed
contra, ista sunt hyperochae atque hyperbolae, Si vis ad vitam ingredi serva
mandata, etc. and quaecunque alia promissa nostris operibus facta sunt. What
can more discourage us to good works, than thus to affirm with Zuinglius, that
the promise of reward made to us, is but hyperbolical?

25. Secondly concerning Original sin, he taught that it is but a Zuing. tom.
2. l. de Baptismo fol. 89. b. circa med. saying, Peccatum ergo originale
damnationem non meretur, si modo quis Parents fideles nactus fuerit. And 90.
a. post med. he says of Original sin: Qui enim fieri potest, ut quod morbus
and contagio est, peccati nomen mereatur, vel peccatum revera sit, etc. Morbus
enim hic damnationem nobis afferre n^quit. And page 90. b. ante med. Ea quoque
Pauli verba considerabimus, quibus Theologi nostri abusi Originalem illum
morbum peccatum esse dixerunt, etc. sed toto caelo errant. And tom. 2. fol.
115. a. paulo post med. and in Epist. Zuinglii, and Occolampadii l. 1. page
252. paulo ante med. he says, Quid enim brevius dici potuit, quam Originale
peccatum non esse peccatum, sed morbum, etc?
disease which of it self is not culpable, neither can bring the pain of
damnation, that, Zuing. tom. 2. de peccato orig. declar. fol. 116. a. post med.
says, Hoc ipsum volo, culpam Originalem non vere, sed metonimice a primi
Parentis admisso culpam vocari. And in Epist. Zuinglii and Oecolampadii l. 1.
page 258. fine, he says, Est ergo ista ad peccandum amore sui propensio
peccatum originale, quae quidem propensio non est proprie peccatum, sed fons,
etc. And tom. a. ad Cardum Imp. fidei rat. fol. 539. b. initio, he says,
Patrem igitur nostrum (Adam) peccavisse fateor peccatum, quod vere peccatum
est, etc. At qui ex isto prognati sunt, hoc morbo non peccaverunt, etc. Velimus
igitur nolimus admittere cogimur peccatum originale, ut est in filiis Adae, non
proprie peccatum esse, quomodo jam exposuimus. Non enim est facinus contra
legem, morbus est proprie, etc.
it is not truly called sin (sed metonimice) but figuratively: concluding, See
Zuinglius his words hereof alleged by Schlusselburg in Theologia Calvinistarum
l. 1. fol. 65. a. fine and b. initio.
the offense and fault of Adam cannot condemn Infants and young Children,
thinking Tom. 2. l. de Baptismo fol. 90. a. post med. he says, Ubi legis
cognitio nulla est, ibi nec peccati cognitio esse potest: ubi vero p^ccati
cognitio non est, ibi nec praevaricatio est, adeoque nec damnatio, etc. sic
igitur jacet Theologorum sententia, and omnibus constat, fidelium liberos
propter originalem illum and haereditarium morbum damnationem subire nullam,
quoad legem and legis sententiam ignorant. De iis autem loquor, qui per aetatem
legis cognitionem habere non possunt, non de iis, qui vel scire nolunt, vel
etiam scientes nesciunt. And see the l^ke tom. 2. fol. 118. a. paulo post med.
and tom. 1. fol 372. b. initio. In so much as (in Epist. Zuinglii and
Oecolampadii page 505. paulo ante med.) he thinks that the Children of the
Gentiles and Infidels are free from all guilt hereof, because (says he) lex
nulla cos damnat, etc. And see him there page 969. circa med. and tom. 2. fol.
540. ante med. where he says, Verum quomodocunque de Gentilium infantibus
statuendum sit, hoc certe adseveramus, propter virtutem salutis per Christum
praestitae, praeter rem pronuntiare qui eos aeternae maledictioni addicunt,
etc. non debent igitur temere a nobis damnari qui fidem per aetatem non habent,
etc.
original sin only damnable in those that be of years and discretion, when in
them it bursteth forth into action. And all this so grossly, as his own Brethren
do. therefore Reprehended by Schlusselburg in Theol. Calvinist. l. 1. fol. 65.
a. fine, and b. initio, and by Hunnius in Papism. Calvinistarum, etc. Papism.
21. sect. 132.133. And Zuinglius tom. 2. de peccat. or^g. declar. initio, and
fol. 115. b. paulo post initium says thereof to Urbanus Regius, Nec enim solus
insolite nos putas de humanae generationis contagione tum sentire tum scribere:
sunt enim and alia magna nomina qui idem existimant, etc.
reprehend him, Amicis cavent ne in ruinam se a. nobis trahi patiantur. Ibidem
fol. 115. circa med.
giving warning to their friends, lest they suffer themselves to be drawn into
ruin by this his damnable opinion.

26. Thirdly, concerning salvation, and the way to Heaven, he makes it so easy
and open, that he affirms even the salvation of the Zuinglius in Epist
Zuinglii and Oecolampadii, l. 1. page 39. a. circa med. says, Ethnicus si piam
mentem domi foveat, Christianus est, etiamsi Christum ignoret. And see
Zuinglius tom. 2. de pec. orig. fol. 118. a. circa med. Also tom. 2. in
exposit. fidei Christianae fol. 159. b. circa med. he affirms the being in
Heaven of Adam, Abel, Enoch, etc. Hercules, Theseus, Aristides, etc.
Heathen who never believed in Christ, (as) Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, See
next heretofore k.
attributing also salvation to the young dying Children of the Heathen, etc. In
which his opinion (defended nevertheless by Gualter in Apologia pro Zuinglio,
and operibus ejus praesix. tom. operum Zuinglii fol. 27. a. b. and fol. 28, 29.
a. b.
Gualter, and See Simlerus in vita Bullingeri: and see Bullingers allowance of
Zuinglius his foresaid Treatise in Zuinglius tom. 2. fol. 550. b. initio.
Bullinger) he is so unworthy, that sundry other Protestant Writers do
therefore Reproved by Hunnius in Papismis Calvinianorum part. 1. Papism. 18.
numer. 115, 117. and by Benedict Morgensterne tract. de Ecclesia p. 72. And by
Lobechius Indisput. Theolog. page 163. initio. And by Luther, who tom. 6. in
Cap. 47. Genes fol. 633. a. fine, terms it a most pernicious error.
reprove him.

27. Fourthly, concerning the Apostles assured authority in their writings, let
his judgment of them all appear in the only examples of St. Paul, of whom he
affirms, that though he for his part would not but that St. Paul's writings
should be now holden for Canonical, yet we ought not to think that Paul did
then attribute so much to his Epistles, that whatsoever was contained in them,
was sacred, lest that in thinking so, we should says he) impute immoderate
arrogance to the Apostles. His words are ( tom. 2. contra Catabaptistas fol 10.
b. circa med.) Ignorantia vestra est, quod putatis cum Paulus haec scriberet,
Evangelistarum commentarios, and Apostolorum Epistolas, jam in manibus
Apostolorum atque authoritate fuisse: quasi vero Paulus Epistolis suis jam tum
tribuerit, ut quicquid in iis contineretur, sacrosanctum esset, non quod ipse
velim non esse sacrosancta, quae illius sunt, sed quod nolim Apostolis imputari
immoderatam arrogantiam. In so much that where the Evangelists say, This is my
Body, Zuinglius to supply their supposed defect, alters the text with
incredible boldness, translating and saying instead thereof, This signifies my
Body. Whereof Schlusselburg a learned Protestant in Theologia Calvinistarum l.
2. art. 6. fol. 33. b. fine says, Nec potest hoc scelus Zuinglii ullo color
excusari, res est manifestissima, in graeco textu non habetur significat, sed,
est, etc. And fol. 44. a. he speaks to the Zuinglians saying, Nec potestis
rem inficiari aut occultare, quia exemplaria Francisco Regi Galliarum a
Zuinglio dedicata sunt in plurimorum hominum manibus, excusa Tiguri Anno 1525.
in mense Martio, in octavo, etc. And yet more of the Dutch Bible of the
Zuinglians, he says there, Ego in Saxoniae oppido Mundera An. 60. apud Scholae
Rectorem Humbertum, vidi exemplar Germanicorum Bibliorum quae Tiguri erant
impressa, ubi non sine admiratione and animi perturbatione, verba Filii Dei ad
imitationem Zuinglii somniatoris depravata esse deprehend. Nam in omnibus illis
quatuor locis Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. and 1. Cor. 11. ubi verba
institutionis Testamenti Filii recensentur, Hoc est Corpus meum, hic est
sanguis meus, inhunc modum textus erat falsatus, hoc significat Corpus meum,
hoc significat sanguinem meu^. And see further Zuinglius himself tom. 2. l. de
vera and falsa Religione fol. 210. a. ante med. where he says, Sic ergo habet
Lucas, and accepto pane gratias egit, fregit, and dedit eis dicens: Hoc
significat Corpus meum.

28. (Pu.) Be pleased Reader to reflect here, that as above we heard Zuinglius
deeply taxing Luther, saying to him, Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou
art seen to be a manifest and common corrupter of the holy Scriptures; so here
we see, how the Lutherans cry shame on Zuinglians for the same crime of
falsifying the word of God, by turning This is, into, This signifies my Body,
etc. teaching every one who desires not to betray his own Soul, not to trust
either of these two, or any other Protestant in their Translations, seeing
there is not a Translation among them, which is not condemned by other
Protestants, as we shall declare after I have noted some very particular
corruptions of our English Protestants. Zuinglius is condemned by other
Protestants for changing [This is] into (this signifies.) But was he alone
guilty of this impiety? No. The Communion Book of the Church of England,
together with the Articles and Book of Ordination were composed Anno 1547. by
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Rochester, Ely, Hereford,
Worcester, Linclon, Chichester, Dr. Redman, Dr. Robinson, Dr. Cox, the Deans of
Paul's, of Exeter, and of Lincoln, who at the Kings charges, partly at Windsor,
partly elsewhere, contrived them: all which were ratified and confirmed by the
Parliament in the year 1548. In this Common Book (to say these few things by
the way) there was Invocation of Saints, and Prayer for the dead (which are the
Doctrines commonly objected by modern Protestants against Catholics) as is yet
to be seen, many Copies being yet extant. And in the Statute of King Edward the
sixth it is resolved, that those that are abstemious (that is, cannot drink
Wine) may receive under one kind only. Afterward the then Lord Protector, at
Calvin's instigation, as appears by his Epistles to the Duke of Summerset, put
out the Invocation of Saints, and Prayer for the dead; so variable is the
Religion of Protestants! But to come to our purpose of proving that not
Zuinglius alone was guilty of that foul falsification of the Scripture by
translating (signifies) for (is:) In the first Edition of the said Communion
Book, the words cited out of Scripture were rendered thus, This is my Body, etc.
A year after, it was altered thus, This signifies my Body, etc. A little after
(is) and (signifies) were both expunged, and a blank Paper put in the place of
the Verb, thus, this my Body, etc. which without the Verb signifies nothing,
or rather may be applied to any thing, as it may please the Painter or
changeable Protestant; And lastly (is) was put in again. Of this incertainty in
Protestant Religion (in a matter of greatest moment) Nicholas Heath Archbishop
of York, and Lord Chancellor of England minded the Kingdom, 1. Elizabethae, in
his Speech against the bringing in of the uncertain, and unsettled new
Religions, which Speech (says a man of great learning and credit, under whose
hand I received it) I have read, and have seen diverse of King Edward the sixth
Service Books, some with (is) some with (signifies) and some with a blank in
the place. Now, Reader, look above and apply to English Protestants, that which
Lutherans justly object to Zuinglius for his translating (signified,) for (is.)

29. Moreover, it is to be observed, that the Bible in King Edward the sixth
days, was translated into English by the Bishops of St. David's, Hereford, Ely,
Norwich and Rochester, and therefore it is called the Bishops Bible. In it the
whole Book of the Canticles, (which they profanely why may not I say
blasphemously translate the Ballad of Ballads) and many other Chapters and
verses in the Bible, were particularly noted as not fit to be read to the
common people, or by them. But in the latter Bibles all things are equally
permitted to all, from which liberty what could be expected, then (that which
we find by lamentable experience) an endless multiplication of new Heresies,
without any possible means of remedy, as long as men are resolved not to
acknowledge an infallible Judge of Controversies, but to leave every man to
read Scripture, which they must interpret according to their own mind or fancy,
not having any other infallible Rule or Guide to follow? I know that a learned
Catholic in a familiar discourse with Dr. Collins, chief Reader of Divinity in
Cambridge, told him, that Protestants themselves were the true cause of so many
Heresies, by permitting the promiscuous reading of Scripture to every Body, and
the Doctor answered plainly, That for his part he did not approve such liberty:
and this is the thing which the Church dislikes; but it is a mere calumny to
say, that she universally forbids the reading of Scripture to all sorts of
persons.

30. The new Translation which King James caused to be made, was over-seen,
corrected, and altered by the Archbishop Abbats, and Smith of Gloucester, as Sir
Henry Savill told Mr. Richard Montague, afterward Bishop of Chichester, and
then of Norwich. For Mr. Montague wondering that Sir Henry (to whose care was
committed the translating of S. Peter's Epistles) would pervert the sense of the
Apostle 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. about Christ's descent into Hell, reading it; Quickened
by the Spirit, by which also he went and Preached unto the Spirits in prison,
etc. When the Greek is, Quickened or alive in his Spirit or Soul, in which
Spirit or Soul, he coming, Preached to them also that were in Prison. And it
is to be observed, that this last Translation of the v. 18. is not only against
Catholics, but also against former Translations of Protestants, which says not
(quickened by the Spirit) but quickened in the Spirit. Sir Henry I say being thus
questioned, answered as above, that the forenamed Bishops corrupted and altered
the said Translation made by K. James his order; whereby it appears of how
small authority or account it ought to be. Again, in this same Translation they
have translated Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so that ye
cannot do the things yea would; whereas the Greek and Latin is, yea do not (de
facto) the things ye would.

31. Not unlike to the said salsification of Zuinglius concerning the
Eucharist, is that of Protestant English Bibles touching the same Sacrament, to
prove their Heresy, that there is a Divine precept for all persons to receive
both kinds, saying 1 Cor. 11. v. 27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, (and)
drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, etc. Whereas in the Greek it is,
Whosoever shall eat this Bread, (or) drink this Chalice, etc. which disjunctive
(or) cannot infer the necessity of both kinds, as the Conjunctive (and) might
seem to do, and for which end they falsify this Text, strangely standing for
both species of Bread and Wine, while indeed they deprive men of the real
substance of our Saviors Body and Blood for both species, by bringing all to a
mere sign, or some fantastical presence by Faith, or some such imaginary way.

32. What I am now to say, though it may seem to deserve only laughter, yet it
shows in good earnest the inconvenience of translating the holy Scripture into
vulgar languages, with a promiscuous freedom of all sorts of persons to read
them. Thus then Genesis 3. v. 7. Diverse Protestant English Bibles say thus: They
(Adam and Eve) sewed fig tree leaves together, and made themselves Breeches.
How ridiculously does this sound to an English ear, that the woman should were
Breeches? And yet this is the Translation of the Bible Printed at London by the
Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent Majesty
Anno 1593. Cum Privilegio, And Anno 1596. by the same Printer (of which I have
two Copies) it is translated in the same manner; As also Anno 1586. Printed by
the same Printer, and likewise Anno 1602.
by Robert Barker Printer to the Queen. All which Editions I have at hand ready
to be exhibited. If I did take pleasure to jest in serious matters, I could
say, That a Protestant whom I could name, being much troubled with this
Translation, a Catholic (from whose mouth I received this story) bid the
Protestant be not troubled at those Editions, seeing they were published under
Queen Elizabeth, who being held by English Protestants for Head of their
Church, no wonder it was, that under a Woman-Head, women did were the Breeches:
which conceit, though it did not much comfort that Protestant, yet we may in
good earnest by this occasion detest those parasites and flattering Ministers,
who were not ashamed to make any temporal Prince, merely in virtue of his
temporal power, Head of Gods Church, and of all Clergymen, even in spiritual
matters; and we are to adore Gods just judgments, in permitting the
temporizing Protestant Clergy of England to be degraded by Temporal Power, in
just punishment of their absurd Heresy that temporal Princes are upon earth
Supreme Heads of Gods Church: neither ought we to wonder, that they come to
suffer in their temporal power, who would needs, against all reason and
principles of Christian Religion, usurp that Supreme spiritual Authority, which
by our Savior Christ was granted only to St. Peter and his Successors: Where I
cannot omit what one of the most learned among the Protestant English Bishops
(we discoursing of the Universal Wars of these times) said, (and he spoke a
certain and evident truth) that these Wars and troubles of Christendom began
upon the year 1517. when Luther first revolted from the obedience of all
Churches before his time.

33. But, why do I specify some few particular mis-translations of the
Protestant Bibles, seeing they themselves do mutually reprove, impugn, and
condemn their own translations? As appears out of Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10.
subdivis. 4. joined with tract. 2 cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 2. To omit (says
he) particulars, whose recital would be infinite, and to touch this point but
generally only, the Translation of the New Testament by Luther is condemned by
Andreas Osiander, Keckermannus, and Zuinglius, who says hereof to Luther, thou
do corrupt the word of God; thou art seen to be a manifest and common
corrupter of the holy Scriptures: how much are we ashamed of thee, who hitherto
esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee to be such a man? And in
like manner does Luther reject the Translation of the Zuinglians, tearming them
in matter of Divinity fools, Asses, Antichrists, Deceivers, and of Asse-like
understanding. Insomuch that when Proscheverus the Zuinglian Printer of Zurick
sent him a Bible translated by the Divines there, Luther would not receive the
same, but sending it back rejected it, as the Protestant Writers Hospinianus
and Lavatherus witness. The Translation set forth by Oecolampadius, and the
Divines of Basil, is reproved by Beza, who affirms that the Basil Translation
is in many places wicked, and altogether differing from the mind of the holy
Ghost. The Translation of Castalio is condemned by Beza, as being Beza resp. ad
def. and respon. Castal.
sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnical. As concerning Calvin's Translation, that
learned Protestant Writer Carolus Molinaeus says thereof, Moli. in sua transl.
Testa. Novi part. 12. fol. 110.
Calvin in his Harmony makes the Text of the Gospel to leap up and down; he
uses violence to the Letter of the Gospel, and besides this adds to the
Text. As touching Beza's Translation (to omit the dislike had thereof by
Seluecerus the German Protestant of the University of Jena) the foresaid
Molinaeus says of him, Molin. in Testa. part. 20.30, etc.
de facto mutat textum, he actually changes the text; and gives further
sundry instances of his corruptions: as also Castalio in defen. trans. page 170.
Castalio that learned Calvinist, and most learned in the tongues, reprehendeth
Beza in a whole Book of this matter, and says; that to note all his errors in
Translation, would require a great volume. And Mr. Parkes says Parks in his
Apology for three testimonies of Scripture, etc
As for the Geneva Bibles, it is to be wished that either they may be purged
from those manifold errors, which are both in the text, and in the margent, or
else utterly prohibited. All which confirms King James his grave and learned
Censure, in his In the Conference before his Majesty page 46.
thinking the Geneva Translation to be worst of all; and that Ibid. fol. 47.
in the marginal notes annexed to the Geneva Translation, some are very
partial, untrue, seditious, etc. Lastly concerning the English Translations,
the Puritans say, Master Christopher Carlisle in his Book that Christ descended
not into Hell page 116. a. 117, etc.
Our Translation of the Psalms comprised in our Book of Common Prayer, does in
addition, subtraction and alteration, differ from the truth of the Hebrew in
two hundred places at the least. In so much as Purita. Petiti: to his Majesty
page 76. initio.
they do therefore profess to rest doubtful, whether a man with a safe
conscience may subscribe thereto. And Master Carlisle says of the English
Translators, that they have Carlisle page 118.
depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived the ignorant; that in
many places they do detort the Scriptures from their right sense; And that,
they show themselves to love darkness more than light, falsehood more than
truth. And the Mininisters of Lincoln, In their Book delivered to King James
16. of December. page 11.
Diocese give their public testimony, tearming the English Translation, a
Translation that takes away from the text, that adds to the text, and that,
sometime to the changing, or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost. Not
without cause therefore did his Majesty affirm, In the confer. before his
Majesty fol. 46.
that he could never yet see a Bible well translated into English. Thus far
Brereley.

34. Pu. Now let Protestants consider duly these points First, Salvation cannot
be hoped for without true Faith; Faith according to them relyes upon Scripture
alone; Scripture must be delivered to most of them by the Translations;
Translations depend on the skill and honesty of men, in whom nothing is more
certain than a most certain possibility to err, and no greater evidence of
truth, than that it is evident, that some of them embrace falsehood, by reason
of their contrary translations. What then remains, but that truth, faith,
salvation, and all, must in them rely upon a fallible, and uncertain ground?
How many poor souls are lamentably seduced, while from Preaching Ministers,
they admire a multitude of texts of Divine Scripture, but are indeed the false
translations and corruptions of erring men? Let them therefore, if they will be
assured of true Scriptures, fly to the always visible, infallible St. Aug. l.
4. de Trinit. c. 6. says, Contra rationem nemo sobrius, Contra Scripturas nemo
Christianus, Contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit.
Catholic Church, against which the gates of Hell can never so far prevail, as
that she shall be permitted to deceive the Christian world with false
Scriptures, Translations, or Interpretations; wherein there is a main and clear
difference between us Catholics, who rely upon an infallible and living Guide
(the Church,) and Protestants, who believe not only every private man, but the
whole Catholic Church to be fallible, and subject to error; and if it were but
for this cause alone we ought to believe the Catholic Church to be infallible,
without the belief whereof we can have no absolute certainty what Books be
Canonical, nor what is the certain interpretation of them, and the end of all
will be, that we cannot believe Christian Faith to be infallible, and certainly
true: in so much as Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at length
forced to confess thus much, saying, In lib. cont. Zuingl. de ver ta: Corporis
Christi in Eucha.
If the world last longer, it will be again necessary to receive the decrees of
Councels, and to have recourse to them; by reason of diverse interpretations of
Scripture, which now reign. On the contrary side, Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10.
subdivis. 4. page 259.
as our learned adversaries do thus agree to disagree in their own
translations, mutually condemning (as before) each other; so also have they
upon a second and more advised consideration, afforded honorable testimony of
our vulgar Latin translation had from Rome, (which Master Witaker otherwise in
spleen and spirit of contradiction terms Whitaker in his answer to Mr.
Reynolds Preface page 2. fine and 26. initio.
an old rotten translation, etc. full of faults, errors, and corruptions of all
sorts, Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura quaest. 5. c. 11. page 543. initio.
then which nothing can be more faulty or desteined; and Whitaker in his answer
to Mr. Reynolds page 223. fine, and vide page 218. fine.
of all others most corrupt.) To this purpose Beza says, Beza. Annot. in Cap.
1. Lucae ver. 1.
The old Interpreter seems to have interpreted the holy Books with mervyllous
sincerity and Religion, Vetus Interpres videtur summa Religione sacros Libros
interpretatus; which Religious observation of the old Interpreter is
acknowledged in like sort by D. Humfrey de ratione interpret. l. 1. page 74.
where he says, Proprietati verborum satis videtur addictus vetus Interpres,
and quidem nimis anxie, quod tamen interpretor Religione quadam fecisse, non
ignorantia. Also Beza further says in praefat. novi Testam. Anni 1556.
Vulgatam editionem maxima ex part amplector, and caeteris omnibus antepono,
the vulgar Edition I do for the most part embrace, and prefer before all
others. Carolus Molinaeus in nov. Testam. part. 30. signifies his no less
answerable liking thereof, saying, aegerrime a vulgari consuetaque lectione
recedo, quam etiam enixe defendere soleo, I can very hardly depart from the
vulgar and accustomed reading, which also I am accustomed earnestly to defend:
In so much as he professes See Molinaeus in Luc. 17.
to prefer the vulgar Edition, before Erasmus, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius, the
Tigurine translation, also before John Calvin (etiam Joannis Calvini, and
omnibus aliis) and all others. Whereto might be added the like further
answerable commendation thereof given by that famous Protestant Writer Conradus
Pelicanus, who ( in praefat. in Psalterium Anni 1534.) says, Tanta
dexteritate, eruditione, and fide, Hebraica quoad sensum, concordare
deprehendimus vulgatam editionem Psalterii, ut eruditissimum pariterque
piissimum, and vere Prophetali Spiritu fuisse interpretem Graecum and Latinum
non dubitem. And whereas we affirm that St. Hierom St. Hierom. in his Preface
before the new Testament ded cated to Pope Damasus says hereof, Novum opus me
f^cere cogis ex veteri, etc. You constrain me to make a new work of an old,
that I after so many copies of Scriptures dispersed through the world, should
sit as a certain Judge, and determine which of them agree with the true Greek.
Also H^erom. in Catal. fine, says, Novum Testamentum Graecae fidei reddidi,
vetus juxta Haebraicum transtuli. And see further hereof Bellarmine de Verbo
Dei l. 3. c. 9.
at the request of Pope Damasus was Author or reviewer of our common Edition,
which the Fathers St. Hierom. in praefat. Psalterii ad Sophronia^, quae est
Epistola 134. says, Certe confidenter dicam and multos hujus operis testes
citabo, me nihil duntaxat sententiae de Hebraica veritate mutasse, etc.
interroga quemlibet Hebraeorum, and liquido perfidebis, etc. and see him
further in prologo in libros Regum. And St. Austine de Civ. Dei l. 18. c. 43.
initio says, Non defuit nostris temporibus Praesbyter Hieronymus, homo
doctissimus, and omnium trium linguarum peritissimus, qui non ex Graeco, sed ex
Hebaero in Latinum eloquium easdem Scripturas converterit. Cujus tamen
literatum laborem Judaei fatentur esse veracem. And see St. Austine Epist. ad
Hieronym. c. 3. And see Aurelius Cassiodorus l. 2. Institut. c. 12. and 21. and
Gregorius Magnus l. 20. Moral. c. 23. and Isidor. l. 6. Etymol. c. 5. and 7.
and de divinis Officiis l. 1. c. 12. and Beda in Martyrologio.
do so greatly commend, Master Whitaker answering thereto, does (upon a more
sober and stayed judgment) alter the former vehemence of his style, saying,
(in his answer to M. Reynolds page 241. paulo ante med.) St. Hierom I
reverence, Damasus I commend, and the work I confess to be godly and profitable
to the Church. As also D. Covell in his answer unto Master John Burges, etc.
page 94. ante medium acknowledges the antiquity of the vulgar translation,
saying, It was used in the Church a thousand three hundred years ago, not
doubting (ibidem) to prefer that translation before others. Insomuch as that
whereas the English translations be many and among themselves disagreeing, he
concludes ( ibidem page 91. prope finem,) that of all those, the approved
translation authorized by the Church of England, is that which comes nearest
to the vulgar; and is commonly called the Bishops Bible. O truth, most strong,
sacred, and inviolable! more forcible (as St. Austine contra Donatistas post
collat. cap. 24. observes) to wring out Confession, than is any rack or
torment. Pu. Since the truth of that Translation which we use, must be the rule
to judge of the goodness of their Bibles; they are obliged to maintain our
vulgar Translation, if it were but for their own sake; yea D. Done (says
Brereley here page 257.) in his persuasion to English Recusants, etc. page 16.
circa med. says likewise of the vulgar Translation, We grant it fit, that for
uniformity in quotation of places in Schools and Pulpits one Latin text should
be used: And we can be contented for the antiquity thereof to prefer that
before all other Latin Books. But let us proceed with our former discourse of
Zuinglius.

35. Fifthly, Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subd. 3. at fifthly.
concerning our committing of sin, Zuinglius lays the same upon God as the
Author thereof, affirming of God, that he moves the thief to kill, (Zuinglius
de Providentia Dei fol. 366. a. ante med. movet ergo (Deus) Latronem ad
occidendum) that the thief kills, God procuring him, (Deo impulsore occidit.
ibid. paulo post) that God moves and inforceth till the party be slain (Movet
and impellit Deus usque dum ille occisus est. ibid. fol. 366. a. circa med. and
a little after there, impulit Deus ut occideret) that the thief is enforced to
sin, (At inquies, coactus est ad peccandum: permitto, inquam, coactum esse.
fol. 366. paulo ante medium.) In so much that in our sinning against the Law we
are not (says he) Authors (of the sin) but as (Gods) instruments: In legem
enim peccarunt, non quasi authors, sed quasi instrumenta quibus Deus liberius
pro sua voluntate uti potest. Ibidem fol. 366. a. initi^.) That even one and
the same fact, which has God for the Author and impulsor, is in God
honorable, and in man sin, (Ergo factum quod Deo authore and impulsore fit,
illi honorificum est, ^t homini crimen acnefas,) that David's adultery perteined
to God as author thereof, (Adulterium David ad Deum authorem pertinet, etc.
ibid. fol. 365. b. fine) that though adultery and murder be not sin in God,
because he is bound by no Law, yet says he, they be, the works of God (as) the
author, the mover, and inforcer. (Unum igitur atque idem facinus, puta
adulterium, aut homicidium, quantum Dei est authoris, motoris, ac impulsoris
opus est, crimen non est: quantum autem hominis est, crimen ac scelus est: ille
enim lege non tenetur, hic autem lege damnatur.) So evidently does he make God
the Author, though not of sin in himself, because he is subject to no Law; yet
of sin in us. An opinion most dreadful, odious, and execrable.

36. Sixthly, concerning our obedience to the Civil Magistrate, in case he
impugn Zuinglius his Religion, his Doctrine was, that in such case even Kings
are to be deposed. See Brereley tract. 3. sect. 2. ante med. at. g.
Zuinglius l. 4. Epistolarum Zuinglii and Oecolampadii, Epist. Conhardo, Somio,
and Simperto, etc. page 868. post med. and page 869. says, Promittendum est
Caesari officium debitum, si modo fidem nobis permittat illibatam, etc. Romanum
Imperium, imo quodcunque Imperium, ubi Religionem sinceram opprimere caeperit,
and nos illud negligentes patimur, jam negatae aut contemptae Religionis, non
minus rei erimus, quam illi ipsi oppressores. Exemplnm est apud Hierem. 15. ubi
exterminium comminatur Deus Israeli, quod Manassem permisissent impune esse
pessimum. Due loyalty is to be promised to Caesar, if so that he permit to us
our Religion inviolable, etc. If the Roman Empire, or what other Sovereign
soever should oppress the sincere Religion, and we negligently suffer the same,
we shall be charged with contempt, no less than the oppressors thereof
themselves: whereof (says he abusing therein the Scriptures most grossly) we
have an example in the 15. of Jeremy, where the destruction of the people is
prophesied, for that they suffered their King Manasses, being ungodly, to be
unpunished. And see Zuinglius his words, tom. 1. in explanatione articuli 42.
fol. 84. a. where he teaches that Quando perfide and extra regulam Christi
egerint, possunt cum Deo deponi. And ibid. fol. 84. b. he allegeth to this the
foresaid example of Manasses. And upon his reported disorderly proceedings in
this kind (says Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subdivis. 3. at sixthly) it
was, that certain Protestants, who acknowledge of Zuinglius, that he taught
some things well, and that he repurged the Church of Christ from the excess and
filth of Popish superstition, do yet withal say, that he performed the same,
not by just and lawful Preaching of the word, but rashly, making havoc of all
things by a tumultuary and fanatical Spirit, etc. Violently assuming arms and
the sword prohibited by Christ, that so he might by force compel his
adversaries to his opinion. Gualter in his Apologia pro Zuinglio and operibus
ejus, placed in the beginning of the first tome of Zuinglius his works, Printed
Tiguri 1581. fol. 18. a. ante med. allegeth them saying, Zuinglius licet
quaedam been docuerit, in multis tamen aliis erravisse contendunt. And on the
b. side of that folio prope initium, it is further alleged, Christi (inquiunt)
dilectam Sponsam Ecclesiam a Pontificiae superstitionis luxu and sordibus, non
justa and legitima verbi praedicatione repurgavit, sed tumultuario and fanatico
Spiritu per omnia temere grassatus est, etc. Violenter and arma, and a Christo
prohibitum gladium corripuit, nimirum in suam sententiam sibi contradicentes
compulsurus. In so much as he is charged to have stirred up his Countrymen the
Zwitzers to Civil Wars, by reason whereof those of Tigure and Berna, who
followed his Doctrine, are reported to have made War upon their Neighbors, the
other five Towns, exacting of them upon proffered conditions of peace, O siander
in Epitom. Hist. Eccles. centur. 16. page 203. initio.
that they should receive again those whom they had banished for the (other)
Religion, and should not forbid the reading of the Scriptures, Pu. Of
promiscuous reading Scripture see heretofore.
etc. To which the said five Towns disdaining to be so compelled, and being
also thereupon Osiander ibid. and in Gualter, Apol. fol. 30. a. circa^med it
appears that they termed Zuinglius, Iniquissimum belli authorem, qui
superb^a and crudelitate impulsus, Tigurinis novi and exquissti facinoris
contra socios audendi author fuit, ut victus inopia, and famis necessitate, eos
in suas parts concedere cogeret.
brought to so great famine, as being forestalled of victuals, by those of
Tigure and Berna, the War was renewed, and Zuinglius himself was thereupon O
siander ibid.
slain, not as a Preacher, but as a Warrior, Gualter in Apologia, etc. fol.
31. b. fine, says, Obiit in bello Zuinglius, and armatus obiit.
armed in the field. Whereupon those foresaid Gualter ibid. fol. 31. b. prope
finem, terms them, Nostri illi perquam egregii Censores ipsum (Zuinglium) in
peccatis mortuum, and proinde Gehennae filium esse, pronuntiare non verentur.
Censurers mentioned by Gualter, who as before liked Zuinglius his pretended
repurging of the Popish Superstition, but misliked his means thereof, and whom
Gualter terms Gualter in Apologia fol. 30. a. prope finem, says hereof: Non
ignoro contra quos and quantos viros, hic nobis quaedam dicenda sunt, etc. sunt
quidam inter hos magni nominis Theologi, qui in hac re animi sui impotentiam
produnt.
Divines of great esteem, were not afraid to pronounce him dead in sin, and so
consequently to have been the Son of Hell. Carrion himself (as Gualter
confesses) hereupon not forbearing to Gualter in Apolog. fol. 30. a. fine.
charge the Tigurines (as) seditious (herein) against Rodulph King of the
Romans.

Hitherto briefly and modestly concerning both Luther and Zuinglius, humbly
withal referring to the equity the readers learned judgment, whether that in
regard of so plain and confessed premises, we may safely join with the Apology
of the Church of England in acknowledging them two for Hereof see Mr. Jewels
defense of the Apology Printed 1571. page 426. prope finem; and see the apology
of the Church of England part. 4. c. 4. divisione 2.
most excellent men, even sent of God, to give light to the whole world in the
midst of darkness, when the truth was unknown and unheard of?

Of Calvin.
37. AS Brereley in his Book a part of the lives of the late pretended
Reformers cap. 6. sect. 1. initio.
concerning John Calvin Born In the answer for the time to the defense of the
Censure, Printed 1583. fol. 85. a. prope finem.
at Noyon in Picardy. Anno 1509. against whom is objected (how truly or
untruly, I do now for some reasons purposely forbear hereby to affirm) that he
forged Letters under the names of Galasius and others, as by them written in
his praise, and his then sending them to Petrus Viretus Minister of Lausanna to
be dispersed: his reported further See this in Bolseke in vita Calvini cap. 13.
Where he reports that Calvin attempted to restore to life this Brule
(comitatus magna caterva amicorum) in the presence of a great number of his
friends; see also in Dialog. Alani Copi l. 6. c. 29. like report of a
Protestant Preacher in Poland, who Anno 1558. practiced the like upon one
Matthew publicly in the open Church at Biethage a Town near Cracovia, at what
time the said Matthew being found dead indeed, the Confederacy was thereupon
there openly discovered by his wife. In like manner does Gregorius Turonensis
in Hist. l. 2. c. 3. report how that Cirola an Arian Heretic practiced in like
fort with one to counter feit blindness, and to request miraculous help from
this Cirola, which being accordingly so done, the party was indeed stricken
blind, whereupon he exclaimed and revealed the practice: in which like respect
Tertullian, in libro de praescript, not unhappily says of Heretick^, Agnosco
maximam virtutem eorum, qua Apostolos in perversum aemulantur: illi enim de
mortuis suscitabant, isti de vivis mortuos faciunt.
practice with one called Brule and his Wife, that he should feign himself
dead, whereupon Calvin should in Confirmation of his Doctrine, undertake in the
presence of many to revive him, which when Calvin did, Brule was in Gods
judgment found dead indeed, whereupon his wife exclamed publicly against
Calvin, and discovered the practice; his like reported incontinency with the
Gentlewoman of Mongis, who stealing from her Husband at Lausanna, made abode at
Geneva with Calvin; his like reported adulterous attempting at Geneva of the
Lady Jollande of Bredrode, wife to a sickly Noble man called James Borgongue
Lord of Fallaise, in so much as she persuaded her Husband to leave Geneva, and
go to Lausanna, where she revealed the whole matter Brereley tract. 2. c. 3.
sect. 9. subd. 4.
; also his extraordinary curious and exquisit diet, such, and so publicly, and
precisely observed, says Bolseke in his Book of the life of Calvin, reports
how that Calvin's wine was choice, and carried abroad with him in a silver pot,
when he dyned abroad; that also special bread was made purposely for Calvin
only, and the same made of fine flower wet in rosewater, mingled with Sugar,
Synamon and Anizeseeds, besides a singular kind of biscuit made for Calvin
alone; and be affirms this as a matter known all Geneva over.
Bolseke, as the Lords of Berna were thereat greatly offended. In report of all
which, though Bolseke make solemn and great In the beginning of his said book
dedicated to Monsieur of Epinac Archbishop and Earl of Lions, he has this
Protestation, I am here for the love of the truth to refute Theodore Beza his
false and shameless lies in the praise of Calvin, protesting before God and all
the holy Court of Heaven, before all the world, and the Holy Ghost it self,
that neither anger, nor envy, nor evil will has made me speak or write any
one thing against the truth, and my conscience.
protestation of his truth; for so much yet as being scandalized with Calvin's
life, he afterward became Catholic, and so was at the writing hereof, we will
therefore in regard of our former undertaken method, be sparing to urge the
same. Only we cannot forbear the public testimony of that learned Lutheran
Conradus Schlusselburg, a man of principal estimation in the Protestants
Church, being as appears by the title of his Book Dioceseos Raceburgensis
Superintendens, and conjunctarum Megapolensium Ecclesiarum Generalis Inspector,
and no less learned, and enemy to the Pope, than was Calvin himself, who See
this apud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subd. 11. fine, at 3.
in Theologia Calvinistarum l. 2. fol. 72. a. circa and post med. reported of
Calvin, saying, God in the rod of his fury visiting Calvin, did horribly punish
him before the fearful hour of his unhappy Death: For he struck this Heretic
(so he terms him in regard of his conceived Doctrine concerning the
Sacrament, and Gods being the Author of sin) with his mighty hand, that being
in despair, and calling upon the Devil, he gave up his wicked Soul, swearing,
cursing, and blaspheming, he dyed upon the disease of lice and worms (a kind of
death wherewith God often strikes the wicked, with which God did strike
Antiochus 2 Machab. 9.5.9.10. and Herod Act. 12.23.) increasing in a most
louthsome ulter about his privy parts, so as none could endure the stench.
These things are objected to Calvin by public writing, in which also horrible
things are declared concerning his lasciviousness, his sundry abominable vices
and sodomitical lusts, for which (last) he was by the Magistrate ( at Noyon)
under whom he lived branded on the shoulder with a hot burning iron, unto which
I yet see not any sound and clear refutation made, etc. Deus man^ sua potenti
adeo hunc haereticum percussit, ut desperata salute, daemonibus invocatis,
jurans, execrans, and blasphemans miserrime animam malignam exhalarit, obiit
autem Calvinus morbo pediculari, vermibus circa pudenda in apostemate seu
ulcere faetentissimo crescentibus, ita ut nullus assistentium faetorem amplius
far posset. Haec publicis Scriptis Calvino objiciuntur (in quibus etiam de
ipsius Aselgia, variis flagitiis, and sodomiticis libidinibus ob quas stigma
ferro candenti dor so Calvini impressum fuerit a Magistratu, sub quo vixit,
horrenda narrantur) ad quae non video solidam and luculentam aliquam
refutationem, etc. scio and lego Bezam aliter de vita, moribus, and obitu
Calvini scribere: cum vero Beza eadem haeresi and eodem ferme peccato
nobilitatus sit, ut Historia de Candida ejus meritricuba testatur, nemo ipsi in
hac part fidem habere potest. And see further there concerning Beza l. 1. in
prooemio page 4. b. and ibid. page 92. a. post med. and b. and 93. a. initio.
Hierom Bolseke further affirms in his said Book, that the City of Noyon in
Picardy in which Calvin lived, and from which (says Bolseke) Calvin upon his
foresaid punishment of branding fled, did testify this foresaid offense and
punishment of Calvin, unto Monsieur Bertelier Secretary of the Counsel of
Geneva, under the hand of a public and sworn Notary, which testimony (says
Bolseke) is yet extant, and has been seen to himself and many others. Now
whether this Author would lie so egregiously, and with setting down in Print
such pretended known circumstances, wherein he was so notably disproveable, and
to be discredited even in the knowledge of the whole City of Noyon (a place not
remote, but in the same Kingdom) we will not affirm, nor determine, but leave
to all indifferency of judgment. Only we add, that whereas F. Campian ( in
rat. 3.) does object this against Calvin, as a matter known and public,
tearming him therefore (stigmaticus perfuga) a branded fugitive, M. Whitaker in
his answer thereto page 50. initio says, Si stigmaticus fuit (Calvinus) fuit
etiam Paulus, fuerunt alii. And being told by Duraeus contra Whitakerum Printed
1582. fol. 73. b. that he was profane in so comparing Calvin's brands for
wickedness, with Paul's brands for Christ, he does ( in respons. contra Duraeum
page 280. answering to that very fol. 73. of Duraeus) pass over all this matter
in silence, forbearing so thereby all further mention or defense thereof. Apud
Brereley in his Book a part of the lives of the late pretended Reformers cap.
6. sect. 1. fine.
To the former testimonies affirming Calvin's filthy despairing death, (upon the
disease of Lice and Worms increasing in an Ulcer about his privy parts)
assenteth the Protestant Writer Johannes Herennius, who being himself an
earnest Calvinist Preacher, and then continuing student at Geneva, affirms
(in his published Book de vita Calvini) himself to have been present and
eyewitness thereof, saying, Calvinus in desperatione finiens vitam, obiit
turpissimo and foetidissimo morbo, quem Deus rebellibus and maledictis
comminatus est, prius excruciatus and consumptus, quod ego verissime attestari
audeo, qui funest^m and tragicum illius exitum, his meis oculis praesens aspexi.

38. He Brereley in the Prefac. to the Reader n. 11. and tract. 3. sect. 2.
paulo post med. at. f. and n.
teaches ( in Dan. c. 6. v. 22.25.) that earthly Princes do bereave themselves
of authority, when they erect themselves against God, yea that they are
unworthy to be accounted in the number of men, and we must rather spit upon
their faces, thn obey them, etc. Abdicant se potestate terreni Principes dum
insurgunt contra Deum, imo indigni sunt, qui censeantur in hominum numero;
potius ergo conspuere oportet in illorum capita, quam illis parere, etc. And
see further this saying specially mentioned and objected to the Puritans for
seditious by D. Wilts in his odedience or Ecclesiastical union page 6. prope
initium. And Knox alleged in proof of his own seditious opinion, Calvin and
certain other Ministers then residing at Geneva, teaching, that it is lawful
for Subjects to reform Religion, when Princes will not, yea rather than fail,
even by force of Arms: and accordingly our adversaries themselves acknowledge,
that-the Protestants of Geneva did depose their liege Lord and Prince, from his
temporal right there, from which yet to this present he is kept, by strong
force debarred: albeit he was by right of Succession, the temporal Lord and
owner of that City and territory.

39. His intolerable contempt of the Ancient Holy Fathers will appear many
ways, when we shall come to prove, that Protestants confess the Fathers to
stand for us, and for that cause they reject them. Here we will only set down
his taxing the Fathers for believing and teaching the Sacrifice of the Mass
Brereley tract. 3. sect. 1. under the Letter t.
(a point most opposed by Protestants, and most dear to us Catholics) in these
words, lib. de vera Ecclesiae reformatione (extant in tract. Theologic.
Calvini, etc. page 389. a. fine and b. initio) Solemn est nebulonibus istis
(meaning us Catholics) quiequid vitiosum in Patribus legitur, corradere, etc.
cum ergo objiciunt locum Malachiae de Missae sacrificio ab Irenao exponi,
oblationem Melchisedech, sic tractari ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino,
Arnobio, breviter responsum sit, eosdem illos Scriptores alibi quoque panem
interpretari Corpus Christi, sed ita ridicule, ut dissentire nos cogat ratio
and veritas, etc. And in his Book of Institutions Printed Argentorati 1539.
page 350. ante medium, and after the other Edition lib. 4. Instit. cap. 18.
sect. 11. he says, Veteres quoque illos video hanc memoriam alio detorsisse,
quam institutioni Domini conveniebat, quod nescio quam repetitae aut saltem
renovatae imolationis faciem eorum coena prae se ferehat, etc. Imitati sunt
enim propius Judaicum sacrificandi morem, quam aut ordinaverat Christus, aut
Evangelii ratio ferebat. And see Brereley ( tract. 1. sect. 3. subdivis. 3.
post. 12.) where he expressly charge the Fathers with forging a Sacrifice in
the Lords Supper without his Commandment, and adulterating the Supper with
adding of Sacrifice. Thus Calvin in omnes Pauli Epist. in Hebr. c. 7. ver. 9.
page 924. says, Quo magis tot veteres Ecclesiae Doctores hac opinione
occupatos fuisse miror, etc. certe ut error errorem trahere solet, cum ipsi
Sacrificium in Christi coena, nullo ejus mandato finxissent, adeoque coenam
adulterassent, addito Sacrificio, colores postea hinc inde accersere
conatisunt, quibus errorem suum fucarent. And in his Book de vera Ecclesiae
reformatione (extant in tract. theologic. Calvini) page 389. b. fine, he
further says, Veteres excusandi non sunt, quatenus scilicet ipsos apparet a
puro and gennino Christi instituto deflexisse; nam cum in hunc finem celebranda
sit coena, ut Sacrificio Christi communicemus, eo non contenti, oblationem
quoque addiderunt: hoc auctarium vitiosum esse dico, etc.

40. The Doctrines and sayings of Calvin, and Calvinists, whereby he
unavoydably makes God the Author of sin in us, are so known, and so strongly
impugned by Protestants themselves, as I need not be long in alleging them
particularly and at large, but refer the Reader to Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2.
sect. 10. subd. 14. Where he will find exactly cited these, (and other like)
Doctrines: Calvin Instit. l. 3, cap. 23. sect. 6.
That God does ordain by his Counsel and Decree, that among men some be born
destined to certain damnation from their Mothers womb, and that the decree of
God in this behalf, is only because it so pleases him, without any respect had
to their works either good or ill. That, God exciteth the wicked will of one
thief to kill another, guides his hand and weapon, justly enforcing the will
of the thief. That God not only permitmitteth, but leads into temptation,
even with an active power, and not permissive only; and does truly, and by his
determinate purpose harden, make blind, and incline the heart to evil: that
God hardened Pharao, not speaking hyperbolically but truly, and hardened him that
so he might resist: that God would that Pharao should not obey his
Commandment, yea he wrought in him, that he should resist it, nor could he do
otherwise. That God works effectally in our sins, that the falling of the ten
tribes he calls his work; that David's adultery was the proper work of God, as
was the conversion of Paul; that God pronounces Absolons incestuous pollution
of his Fathers Bed to be his own work; and that in our sinning, neither Satan
nor we are Authors, but as the instruments of God. That whatsoever thing God
does foresee (and he foreseeth all sins) the same he does will, decree, and
ordain to be done, that therefore he is the Author of all those things which
the (Popish) Censurers think that he idely permits. Which Doctrines are so
absurd, that even Calvin confesses it for Calvin. Instit. l. 1. cap. 18. sect.
3.
inexplicable how God may be said to will sin, which he himself forbids to
be done, and sundry Protestants of great estimation do thereupon reject and
condemn them, expressly also for that cause charging their Authors with teaching
that God is the Author of Sin. From whence and from their other foresaid
principle of advancing of only Faith, extenuating good works, and their other
like Doctrines, have sprung, as from a hydra, the sect of the Libertines: who
upon the very foresaid grounds, and colors Calvin ubi supra page 540. b. paulo
ante med. says of their said principal man, contestatur sibi long aliam esse
mentem, seque D^um m^li authorem facere nolle affirmat.
(denying nevertheless verbally, as Calvin does God to be Author of sin, and
verbally also requiring Calvin ibid page 548. a. prope finem, says of their
contesting in this case (as Catholics say of Calvin himself) Contestetur
quantum vol. t, se licentiam peccand, praebere nolle, hoc enim nihil al ud est,
quam inane nimisque ridiculum simolationis velum obtendere, quoniam ipsi nihil
est, cum Deus omnia facere putatur. Might not th^se very words of Calvin
against them, be returned aptly against Calvin himself.
integrity of life and manners) have set abroad to the world by their published
Concerning their sundry published writings, See Calvin tract. Theologic. page
510. a. ante med. and page 532. a. fine.
writings (stored See their frequent allegation of Scripture in Calvin ubi
supra. 533, 534, 535, 536, etc. And see in Calvin their allegation of these
very Scriptures, which Calvin and other Protestants usually allege in defense
of their foresaid Doctrine. For they allege Amos 3.6. and Esaias 45.7. (apud
Calvinum ubi supra, page 542. b. ante med.) 1 Reg. 22.21. (p. 346. a. ante
med.) and Hieremie 10.32. (apud Calvinum ubi supra page 541. b. post med) ad
Epist. ad Romans c 7. (ubi supra page 542. a. initio) and 1 Joan. 3.9. (ubi)
supra page 547. b. post med.)
with testimonies of Scriptures) all Calvin ubi supra page 527. b. post med.
and page 543. a. ante med.
Epicurism, and impure liberty of life. I said (upon the very foresaid
grounds.) For it appears by Calvin's report of their words in tract.
Theologic. page 540. a. circa med. their chief reason to be ( cum Deus rerum
omnium author sit, nullum jam boni and mali discrimen esse habendum, sed
quicquid agitur bonum esse: because whatsoever God does is good. And Calvin
ibidem page 518. a. ante med. says of the same Libertines: Temulenti isti a
Deo fieri omnia perstrepentes, eum mali Authorem constituunt. Deinde quasi
immutetur mali natura, cum sub hoc nominis velo tegitur, bonum esse affirmant,
etc. And Calvin also ubi supra page 542. b. paulo post medium, says
furthermore of one of their chief men: Persuadet nihil esse mali in stupris and
adulteriis, cum a Deo fieri omnia cognoscimus. And again ibidem page 543. a.
paulo ante medium, he says yet further of him. In summa huc tantum spectat ut
discrimen tollat boni and mali, ut nemini quidvis facere aut perpetrare Religio
sit, cum omnia Deo tribuat. And like as Calvin excuses the absurdity of his
like Doctrine, pretending it to be inexplicable, and above understanding,
requiring therefore our humble belief thereto, saying, Instit. l. 1. c. 18
sect. 3. Ubi non capimus quomodo fieri velit Deus, quod facere vetat, veniat
nobis in memoriam nostra imbecillitas, and simul reputemus lucem quam inhabitat
non frustra vo ari inaccessam, quia caligine obducta est: so they in like
excuse of their Doctrine, say as Calvin ubi supra page 540. a. prope finem
reports their words) Omnes nostri sensus Deo subjiciendi sunt, nec quicquam
de sapientia nostra persuasum habere debemus: men's nostra subigenda, ut veluti
captiva Christo morem gerat. So agreeable verbatim almost are they with the
foresaid reason delivered by Calvin, that Calvin immediately upon his foresaid
recital of their said words, adds, saying thereof: Quod and ipsi fatemur, imo
nullo utitur apparatu hic impostor, quem ex Doctrina nostra furatus non sit. So
confessedly does their Doctrine jump and agree with Calvin in the very first
grounds and reasons thereof.

41. Although See Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 13. initio.
the Nycene Council, and Athanasius his received Creed be, that Christ is very
God of very God, Yet says Whitaker ( contra Camp. 208. page 121. circa med.)
of Calvin's opinion to the contrary, which condemns this for barbarous:
Howsoever the Fathers of the Nycene Council affirm Christ to be God of God,
Calvin nevertheless affirms that we are strongly to believe, that Christ is
God himself. Utcunque Patres illi (Niceni) Christum esse dixerint Deum de Deo,
tamen firmissime tenendum esse confirmat Calvinus Christum ex se habere ut Deus
sit, nisi volumus Christum sua Divinitate spoliare. And Danaeus contra
Bellarminum part. 1. ad Controvers. 2. and cap. 19. page 121. says, Hanc
phrasin, Deus de Deo, vere sensit and scripsit Calvinus impropriam esse, ac
barbariem redolere. And which is most fearful, that, if the Father have his
essence of himself, the Son his of the Father, and the Spirit from them both,
do not then three Essences hereupon arise? Si Pater (says Calvin in
admonitione ad Polonos extant in tract. Theologic. page 793. b. fine) suum esse
habet a seipso, Filius suum esse a Patre, Spiritus ab utroque, annon tres
Essentiae emergent?) All which (to forbear the Fathers) is contrary to the
testimony both of Scripture, (Christ, saying, as the Father has life in
himself, so likewise has he given to the Son to have life in himself. John.
5.26. And again, As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father.
John. 6.57.) and to the other more sober learned Protestants. For Szegedinus (
in loc. com. page 634. paulo post med.) says directly, Dicendum est Filium eam
ipsam Deitatem quae est Patris habere, non ex sese, sed ex Patre. Also Mr.
Hooker (in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. page 113. initio) says, The Father
alone is originally that Deity, which Christ is not. And see him further page
106. fine, and 113. ante medium. Which his assertion D. Covell in his defense
of Mr. Hooker page 16.17. specially defends, affirming further page 17.
initio, that Christ has received his substance by the gift of eternal
generation, and page 18. ante med. that Christ is God by being of God, light by
issuing out of light, and more plainly yet ibid. page 121. Also Mr. Fox Apoc.
page 474. initio, says, Christus Deus ex Deo. And Lobecius in disput. 30.
Theolog. page 49. says, Filius non solum id quo Filius dicitur habet a Patre,
verum etiam suam Essentiam. Solus enim Pater vitam seu Essentiam habet a
seipso. And D. Dove in his Confutation of Atheism page 37. fine, says, God the
Father from everlasting understanding himself, begat his Son, coeternal with
himself, etc. And the confession of Belgia in the Harmony, etc. page 34. initio
says, We believe that Christ in respect of his Divine Nature is the only Son
of God. And Melancthon ( in loc. com. of An. 1561. page 24. fine) says, Pater
aeternus sese intuens, gignit cogitationem sui, quae est imago ipsius, dicitur
(...), quia cogitatione generatur, and ibid. page 25. initio) he says, Secunda
Persona filius dicitur, quia de substantia Patris natus est: Moreover Calvin (
Epist. 2. ad Polonos, extant in his tract. Theolog. etc. page 396. a. paulo
ante medium) says, Precatio vulgo trita est; Sancta Trinitas, unus Deus
miserere nostri, mihi non placet, ac omnino barbariem sapit. Calvin also
affirms, that the Son has his substance distinct from the Father ( in Act.
Serveti page 872. and passim.) Hereof see also Cnoglerus in his tria symbola
page 34. and he (Calvin) also says, that according to his Divinity he makes
intercession to God the Father (in Ep. ad Polones) and see also his words in
respons. ad Polonos, extant in tract. Theolog. etc. page 791. b. fine, and that
the name of God is properly attributed to the Father by way of excellency ( in
tract. Theolog. etc. in explicat. perfid. Gentilis page 784. a. initio) Ingenue
tradimus (...), Dei nomen, Patri proprie ascribi, insinuating so thereby, that
the name of God is attributed to the Son and the Holy Ghost, but improperly,
and as it were after a secondary respect. And ibid. page 773. b. post med.
Absurdum negamus (...), Dei nomen, interdum Patri ascribi, quia ut alibi dictum
est, fons est, ac principium Divinitatis. In like manner he forbeareth not to
call Christ the Vicar of God, occupying the second degree of honor, saying in
Harmon. in Matthew. 26. v. 64.) Dicitur autem Christus sedere ad dextram Patris,
quia summus Rex constitutus, quasi secundam ab eo honor is and imperii sedem
obtinet, sedet ergo ad Patris dexteram, quia ejus est vicarius, etc. And in
admonit. ad Polenos (extant in tract. Theolog. etc. page 794. b. initio) he
says, Sententia Christi, Pater major me est, restricta fuit ad humanam ejus
naturam; ego vero non dubito ad totum complexum extendere. And see there page
792, a. initio. And in Matthew. 22. v. 44. and in 1 Cor. 15. v. 27. As also
Amlungus (a prime Calvinist did let fall, that Christ was inferior to his
Father according to his Divinity. Osiander in Epitom. etc. cent. 16. page 965.
initio, reporting the conference at Hertzburg Anno 1585. between the Divines of
Saxony, and the Calvinists of Hennalt (and in his praecipuus An^l^^ngus) of
whom Amlungus (says he) was the chief, says, Inter caetera Amlungo haec impia
vox excidit, Christum etiam secundum Divinitatem esse minorem Patre. There are
also other sayings of our Adversaries which seem to sound dangerously against
the equality and consubstantiality with God the Father. Master Jewel and Master
Fulk affirm, that Of this confessed opinion of Mr. Jewel and Mr. Fulks
retentive page 89. paulo ante med. and see his confutation of the Papists
quarrels Printed 1583. page 64, 65.
Christ was according to his Deity his Fathers Priest, and See Fulk against the
Remish Testament in Hebr. 5. in sexto, sect. 4. fol. 399. b. paulo post m^d.
offered Sacrifice, (not only) according to his Manhood, but (also) according
to his Godhead. An error confuted by St. Austine in Psalm 109. saying,
According to that he is born of God the Father, God with God, etc. all with him
who begets him, he is not a Priest, but a Priest for his flesh assumpted.
And Theodoret in Psalm 109. says accordingly, Christ exercises Priesthood as
man, and receives Sacrifice as God. In respect of sundry which premises,
Stancarus, in most other things a Calvinist, doubted not to affirm ( contra
Ministros Genevenses and Tigurinos fol. 94.95. and fol. 118.123.) that the
reformed Churches professing the Faith of Geneva, and Tigure, be Arian. And he
further says, Conclusum est o Calvine, Doctrinam tuam de Filio Dei esse plane
Arianam, a qua resilias quam primum te oro atque obtestor. It is concluded o
Calvin, that thy Doctrine concerning the Son of God, is wholly Arian, which I
earnestly beseech thee to abandon with all speed.

42. To which further purpose is no less apt and memorable the further
confessed testimony of Adam Neuserus (a learned Calvinist, and The Protestant
Writer Osiander in Epitom. etc. centur. 16. page 818. fine says, Adam Neuserus
Pastor Heydelbergensis ex Calvinismo prolapsus est in Arianismum. And Conradus
Schlusselburg Theolog. Calvinist. l: 1. art. 2. fol. 9. b. terms him, Ad^m
Neuseru^ olim Heydelbergensis Ecclesiae primarius Pastor. etc.
chief pastor at Heydelberg) who after his revolt unto Arianism, and from
thence again unto Mahometism, See this thus reported by Osiander in Epitom,
etc. cent. 16. page 208. fine, and Osiander there page 209. initio, affirms,
that D. Gerlachius has at Tubinga the original writing (or letter it self) so
written to him by Neuserus.
did write to Doctor Gerlachius (a Protestant Preacher) from Constantinople 2.
Junii Anno 1574. saying, None is known in our time to be made an Atian, who was
not first a Calvinist (as) Servetus, Blandrata, Paulus, Alciatus, Franciscus
David, Gentilis, Grebaldus, Silvanus, and others (all of them Calvinists
revolted to Arianism) Therefore who so fears to fall into Arianism, let him
take heed of Calvinism. Thus far Neuserus. Neither may it suffice here for our
adversaries to answer, that Calvin, and the fore-alleged Protestant Writers do,
notwithstanding their foresaid sayings, all of them acknowledge the Doctrine of
the three Persons, and one God; for in vain, or, at least not well but coldly
is that acknowledged in general, which is either reputed for matter of Fulk in
answer to a countersect Catholic page 15. prope finem affirms, that the true
Church under the Emperors Constantine, Constans, and Valens, was greatly
infected with the Heresy of the Arians, as though the Church with Arianism
could be a true Church, What else is this, but to repute Arianism for a matter
of ^ndifferency? Also Mr. Thomas Morton in his treatise of the kingdom of
Israel, and of the Church, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, page 94. fine,
affirms, that the Churches of Arians are to be accounted the Churches of God,
because they do hold the foundation of the Gospel, which is, faith in Jesus
Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the world. And ibid. p. 91. ante med. be
further says, Whenever a company of men do jointly and publicly by
worshipping the true God in Christ profess the substance of Christian Religion,
which is faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the world (which,
as before, in his opinion the Arians do) that there is a true Church,
notwithstanding any corruption whatsoever, etc. So evidently does he affirm the
Arians Church to be the Church of God, and a true Church.
indifferency, or else again impugned by other contrary inferring particulars,
which are as before so many and diverse in the forenamed Protestants, that
sundry of their own The learned Lutheran Pelragus in admonitione de Arianis,
having page 41.42.43. excused in what be can Melancthons dangerous sayings,
does yet page 45. say, Non hic Calvinianos in praecipuis de Divinitate Christi
locis (...) laboriose ostendam, non Adami Neuseri, non Blandratae, non Pauli
Alciati, Francisci Davidis, Gentilis, Grebaldi, Silvani and aliorum facilem e
Calvini Schola ad Arianos lapsum and progressum commemorabo. And Jacobus
Andraeas in praefat. refutationis Apologiae Danaei page 54. says, Minime
mirandum est ex Calvinianis in Polonia, Transylvania, and Hungaria, aliisque in
locis quam plurimos ad Arianismum, quosdam etiam ad Mahometismum accessisse,
quorum impietati haec Calviniana doctrina iter parat. And see the like affirmed
by Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinist. l. 1. Art. 2. fol. 9.2. post med. And
Hunnius in his Antiparaeus page 97. initio, says, Tot celebres Antitrinitarii
ex Calvinianorum Scholis and Ecclesiis prodierunt.
Writers do therefore affirm them to have been the true and next occasion of
these so late new uprising and many daily increasing Arians in Beza in Epist.
Theolog. Ep. 81. page 303. paulo post med. says hereof, Hinc illud incendium,
quod tota jam vastata Polonia, in Transilvaniam quoque pervasit. And Ep. 16.
page 122. post med. be says hereof, Poloniam totam and Transilvaniam in hunc
miserrimum statum redactam vides.
Polonia, Hungary, and Transylvania; A thing as yet more probable, in that the
principal Heads or beginners of these late Arians were, as Neuserus confesses,
all of them at first Calvinists, and so to this present in most other points do
these Arian Churches yet continue, thinking themselves hereby more reformed
than others, of whom Mr. Hooker therefore says in his Ecclesiastical Policy,
l. 4. page 183. fine, The Arians in the Reformed Churches of Poland, think the
very belief of the Trinity to be a part of Antichristian corruption, and that
the Popes triple Crown is a sensible mark, whereby the world might know him to
be that mystical Beast spoken of in the Revelation, in no respect so much as in
his Doctrine of the Trinity.

43. And the Protestant Writer Luc. Osiander in Epitom. etc. centur. 16. page
269. fine, says of these Reformed Arians, Asserunt Deum unum in Essentia,
trinum in Personis, esse commentum Anti-Christi, esse triplicem Cerberum, esse
Deum Baal, Moloch, etc. Symbolum Athanasii vocant fidem and doctrinam
Satanasii, vanissime insuper jactitant Lutherum vix tectum Babylonicae turris
detexisse, se vero ex imis fundamentis eam exscindere; thinking the vulgar
Protestant to be over Popish, and as far short of Reformation in respect of the
Trinity, as do the Puritans think him to be in regard of Bishops and
Ceremonies. In defense of which their horrible Heresy they do daily Print and
publish their many Gratianus Prosper a principal Arian publ^shed in defense of
Arianism a Book of this title, Instrumentum doctrinarum Aristo elicum in usum
Christianarum Scholarum, exemplis Theologicis illustratum per Gratianum
Prosperum, Losci Anno 86. Wherein are reduced into form of argument all or most
of the Scriptures usually alleged in proof of Christ's Divinity, and by him
undertaken there to be answered, As also he propounds very many other
Scriptures and reasons reduced into like form of argument against the Divinity
of Christ. As also Socinus another Arian published lately his Book thereof
against Volanus. And the other published writings of Gentilis, Servetus,
Blandrata, and many other late Arians, are known and many.
Books, taking advantage to follow Calvin's example in their like perverting of
the Scriptures, etc. proudly See this in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10. subd. 2.
at i. k. And whereas the Calvinists in Polonia did dispute against the
Antitrinitaries there, and charged them with arguments taken out of the
Fathers, the Antitrinitaries answered the Calvinists from themselves saying, Hi
sunt vetusti panni, quos^vos ipsi primi lacerastis in aliis fidei articulis,
etc. and lacerata jamdudum calceamenta. See this in Nullus and nemo H. 9.
rejecting the produced testimonies of the Fathers, and in Symlerus de aeterno
Dei Filio l. 1. c. 2. says of the Arians, Hienim nos ad Scripturas provocant,
and quia omnem antiquitatem sibi adversari non ignorant, omnes sine exceptione
rejiciunt. And see Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10. subdivis 2. at i. k. the like
appeal of other Arians to only Scripture, expressly pretending the same by like
examples of the Calvinists.
appealing from them, with show of great confidence, to only Scripture. In
their allegations whereof, they are, as were the old Arians, St. Austine (apud
Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10. at^g.) contra Maximinum Ar^a^um Episc. l. 1.
initio, induces the Heretics saying then to Catholics (as Protestants do
now:) Si quid de Divinis Scripturis protuleris quod commune est cum omnibus,
necesse est ut audiamus: Hae vero voces quae extra Scripturam sunt, nullo casu
a nobis susc piuntur: Cum ipse Dominus moneat nos and dicat, Sine causa colunt
me, docentes mandata and praecepta hominum. And again ibid. versus finem libri,
the Heretic further says, Oro and opto Discipulus esse Divinarum
Scripturarum, etc. Si affirmaveris de Divinis Scripturis, si alicubi Scripti
lectionem protuleris, nos Divinarum Scripturarum optamus inveniri Discipuli.
See the very many Scriptures alleged only by the Arian Gratianus Prosper in his
Book entitled, Instrumentum doctrinarum, etc.
very frequent and plentiful; as also no less prompt in making answer, as
Calvin does, and by imitation of his example, unto sundry those very texts of
greatest importance which were heretofore by the Fathers, and are now by us
urged in proof of Christ's Divinity. In so much as many (and some of them very
learned Protestants) and of great reputation in their Churches, (quite contrary
to M. D. M. D. Field of the Church l. 3. c. 29. initio, page 138. ante med.
says, The tenth imputation is of Arianism, which Heresy we accurse to the pit
of Hell, with all the vile calumniations of damned slanderers that charge us
with it. Neither did any of our men incline to it.
Fields untrue and bold denial) are fully persuaded that Arianism (or further
infidelity) is as it were the Materia prima, or very last end or center,
whereto the poyse or Bias, in this behalf, of Calvinism, is by the proper
direction of its genius, daily more and more moving and inclining. In most
other points the Antitrinitarians and Arians continue yet Protestants, as
appears by Gratianus Prosper the Arian, in his Book entitled, Instrumentum
Doctrinarum, etc. Printed Losci Anno 86. wherein he sets down their several
opinions to be, The inequality of Christ with God the Father; That Children are
not to be Baptized, till they be of discretion to answer for themselves (which
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius think to be but a matter of indifferency, as is
declared in Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subd. 3. at e. f. And that the
Roman Church may not (in any sense) be called the Church of Christ.

44. Pu. Mark here who be they, who are most opposite to the Roman Church,
namely they, who deny the Blessed Trinity and our Saviors Divinity, in respect
whereof they term themselves the Reformed Church, condemning the other
Protestants for Popish and superstitious. And as to Puritans common Protestants
were esteemed Popish, so Puritans who believe the Trinity and the
Consubstantiality of our Savior with his Father, are also termed Popish, and
now even they who deny the Trinity, etc. will be judged Popish by other Sects,
who will pretend to be more Reformed, for example, by Independents,
Anti-Presbyterians, etc. So that indeed Protestants are nothing but an
heterogenious Body, consisting of persons, whereof every part or member must
think themselves obliged not to communicate with the rest, that is their
Community must be an aggregate of Schisms and Schismatics.

45. Concerning the known Texts of Scripture usually alleged in proof of the
Trinity, and misapplyed otherwise by Calvin; to allege some few examples
instead of many; First, concerning this known text, I and the Father are (unum)
one ( thing Joan. 10.30. Calvin avoydeth it saying, Abusi Pu. Mark how Calvin
contemns Antiquity in a matter of greatest moment, and in favor of wicked
Arianism.
sunt hoc loco veteres, ut probarent Christum esse Patri (...). Neque enim
Christus de unitate substantiae disputat, sed de consensu. Calvin in Joan. c.
10. v. 30. Which exposition of Calvin being the old condemned answer of Arius
is defended by Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8. page 123. fine. Secondly
concerning the word Eloim Genesis 1. v. 1. Mr. Willet upon Genesis in cap. 1. page
19. fine, and 20. initio, confesses and urges saying, Against the Jews that
deny the Trinity we have evident proof in this Chapter ver. 1. Where the word
Eloim, etc. And in like manner it is thus urged by Zanchius in Hunnius his
Antiparaeus, etc. page 16.17. And by Peter Martyr ibidem page 14. and by very
many other Protestant Writers alleged in that tract. Yet is this so common and
known place avoided by Calvin in Genesis c. 1. saying, Ex verbo Eloim colligere
solent hic notari in Deo tres Personas, sed quia mihi parum solida videtur
tantae rei probatio, ego in voce non insistam, quin potius monendi sunt
lectores, ut sibi a violentis hujusmodi glossis caveant. Thirdly, concerning
Genesis c. 19. v. 24. it is said, The Lord rained upon Sodom fire from the Lord,
etc. Upon which place Mr. Willet upon Genes. c. 19. v. 24. page 214. paulo ante
med. says, This place is well urged by the Fathers to prove the Eternity of
Christ. Yet Calvin in Genesis c. 19. says to the contrary, and against the
Fathers, quod veteres Christi Divinitatem hoc testimonio probare conati sunt,
minime firmum est, etc. And see Calvin in tract. theolog. etc. page 793. b.
ante medium. Fourthly, concerning Psalm 2. v. 7. where it is said, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee: although not only the Fathers, but the
Apostle also Hebrae. 1.5. do allege this in proof of Christ's Divinity, yet
Calvin in Psalm 2. says to the contrary thereof, Scio hunc locum de aeterna
Christi generatione a multis fuisse expositum, qui and in verbo (hodie) argute
Philosophati sunt, sed, etc. And again Hebr. c. 1. v. 5. he further says, Pu.
See what respect Calvin bears to St. Austine, whom even Protestants do so much
esteem.
frivola enim Augustini argutia est, qui (hodie) aeternum and continuum fingit.
Christus certe aeternusest, etc. Sed hoc nihil ad praesentem locum, etc.
Fifthly, concerning Psalm 33. v. 6. where it is said, By the word of the Lord,
the Heavens were made, and all the host of them by the spirit of his mouth,
Calvin rejected the exposition herein of the Fathers in behalf of the Trinity,
saying ( Instit. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 15.) Sciens and volens supersedeo a multis
testimoniis, quibus usi sunt Veteres. Plausibile illis visum est citare ex
Davidis Psalm 33. etc. ut probarent Spiritus Sancti Divinitatem, sed illa ratio
infirma fuit. See further concerning this place Hunnius in his Antiparaeus page
59.60. etc. Sixthly, concerning that known place 1 Joan. 5.7. where it is said,
There be three that give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and Holy
Ghost, and these three be one, Calvin upon this place says, Quod dicit tres
esse unum ad Essentiam non refertur, sed ad consensum potius. Thereof see
further Hunnius in his Antiparaeus page 112.113. etc. The further examples of
Calvin's expositions in this kind are so exceeding many, as would grow to a
great volume, and are for such accordingly collected and digested into special
volumes, not by us, but by that famous and learned Protestant Preacher Aegidius
Hunnius in his three special volumes of this argument, one of them entitled,
Calvinus Judaizans, hoc est judaicae glossoe and corruptelae, quibus Joannes
Calvinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca and testimonia de gloriosa
Trinitate, etc. detestandum in modum corrumpere non exhorruit, etc. per
Aegidium Hunnium S. Theol. Doctorem and professorem in Academia Wittembergensi
Anno 1595. Another of them entitled, Antiparaeus, etc. Printed Wittembergae
1603. And the third entitled, Antiparaeus alter, Printed ut supra. And see
like observation and collection made of sundry Scriptures (depraved as before
by Calvin) in sundry other Protestant Writers of great note, as in Conradus
Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinist. l. 2. fol. 38.39.40.41. and 42. a. And in
the Book (there alleged) of D. Joannis Matthaeus l. de Cavendo Calvinistaru^
fermento. And in Pelargus his admonitio de Arianis p. 50.51. etc. And if our
adversaries hereto answer, that Calvin, all this notwithstanding, professed to
believe the Doctrine of the Trinity; yet seems this but verbal, seeing he
really evadeth so very many of those chiefest places usually alleged in behalf
of the Trinity, and by such his evasion directed the Arians how to avoid the
rest: For the very same kind of evasion or answer is as strong against the
other, as against these. To forbear as over-infinite the particular examples of
those very same evasions or answers made by sundry Arians, which Calvin makes
to the alleged Scriptures, concerning the Trinity, and to speak thereof only
but in general; Hunnius in his Calvinus Judaizans page 44. says hereof: Hanc
glossam, etc. (...) excipiunt, amplexantur, and exosculantur Franciscus
Davidis, Blandrata, caeterique juratissimi, perfidissimique hosts adorandae
Trinitatis. And Pelargus an other Protestant Writer of great note, in his
admonitio de Arianis, etc. page 45. ante med. says, Non hic Calvinum in
plurimis Scripturae expositionibus (...) non Calvinianos in praecipuis de
Divinitate Christi locis (...), laboriose estendam, etc. ex ipsis Arianorum
libris ubi sua posuerint latibula, ubi parata sibi cognoscunt receptacula,
paucis referam. And see there page 50. the Arians words avoiding under the
express alleged authority of Calvin's name and exposition, certain of the
fore-alleged Scriptures. And see there further page 51. and 52.

46. See Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subd. 8.
Concerning Calvin's Doctrine concerning our Savior Christ, he teaches, that
Christ at and before his Passion, suffered in soul the horrible torments of a
damned and wicked man; Diros in anima cruciatus damnati ac perditi hominis
pertulit (Calvinus l. 2. Instit. cap. 16. sect. 10.) that he not only offered
his body in price, but also suffered in soul the pains due to us: (Calvinus ubi
supra; in Harmonia in Matthew. 27. v. 46.) Even that death which is inflicted
upon the wicked by God in his anger (Calvinus institut. l. 2. cap. 16. sect.
10.) eam mortem pertulit, quae sceleratis ab irato Deo infligitur. And, all the
pains for which the damned stand answerable, only excepted, that he could not
be detained therein (Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 10. qui dependeret ac
persolveret omnes, quae ab illis sceleratis expectendae erunt, paenas, hoc uno
duntaxat excepto, quod doloribus mortis non poterat detineri.) From whence also
follows the sequel of that despair, wherewith God inflicteth the damned. To
which purpose certain Calvinists affirm accordingly of our Savior, See M.
Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page 556. cir^a medium; and Master Nowels
Catechism Greek and Latin page 281. And see Mr. Bilsons survey, etc. page 377.
fine and 445. post med. and Calvin in Harmonia in Mat. c. 26. ver. 39 versus
finem, and Marloret in Mat. 26.
that he was in great horror with the feeling of eternal damnation: that Calvin
Instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 10.
he did strive with the horror of eternal damnation, Calvin in Harmonia in
Matthew. 27. ver. 37. and 39. And see in M. Bilsons survey page 387. ante med.
feared more than his bodily death, even See in M. Bilsons survey page 392.
prope initium.
the other death far more dreadful, namely See in M. Bilsons survey page 503.
circa and post med.
the death of the soul, or second death, and was for the time in despair.
Brentius in Luc. part. 2. hom 65. and in Joan. hom. 54. and Marloret in Matthew.
26. and Calvin in Matthew. cap. 27. v. 46. says, Sed absurdum videtur, Christo
elapsam desperationis vocem. Respondeo, facilem esse solutionem, hanc
desperationem ex sensu carnis profectam. And ibidem in ver. 47. Sic videmus
omni ex part fuisse vexatum, ut desperatione obrutus, ab invocando Deo
obsisteret, quod erat saluti renuntiare. And Beza ad Haebr. 5. v. 7. affirms,
that, Christo divinae maledictionis horrore percusso, elapsa est vox
desperationis. In so much, as they affirm him to have been thereupon
distempered or unadvised in his prayer; Calvin in Harmonia in Matthew. 26. v. 39.
says, Haec ratio est, cur mortem deprecatus mox sibi fraenum injiciat,
Patrisque imperio se subjiciens, votum illud subito elapsum castiget and
revocet. And after, Non fuit igitur haec meditata Christi oration, sed vis and
impetus doloris subitam ei vocem extorsit, cui statim addita fuit correctio,
eadem veheme^tia praesentem caelestis decreti memoriam illi abstulit, ut non
reputaret in ipso momento se hac lege missum esse, etc. Certe in primo voto
Christi non apparet placida illa moderatio quam dixi, quia Mediatoris officio
defungi quantum in se est, renuit, ac detrectat. Pu. O blasphemies of Calvin!
If Christ did despair, and did refuse to redeem mankind (as his Father had
decreed and commanded he should be our Redeemer) how can he be a Redeemer of
sinners if he himself did commit so great and grievous sins as Despair and
Disobedience are?

47. Pu. As we concluded the life of Luther with a saying of Erasmus, so now we
may well end the life of Calvin with the words of Hugo Grotius esteemed one of
the most learned, and eloquent, and moderate Protestants of this age, who in
his Votum pro pace Ecclesiastica ad Articulum page 17. says thus of Calvin,
Qua vero humanitate solitus fuerit Calvinus excipere a se dissentientes, ex
scriptis liquet. Castalionem, quia illam, quam Calvinus docebat,
praedestinationem oppugnabat, nebulonem and Satanam vocat: Cornhertium and
nebulonem and canem: Scriptorem de officio pii viri in hoc Religionis dissidio,
qui erat Cassander, ipsi autem putabatur esse Balduinus, appellat frontis
ferreae hominem, pietatis expertem, prophanum, impudentem, impostorem, (...),
petulantiae deditum. Ei Scripto cum se opposuisset Balduinus, vocat eum hominem
nihili, obscaenum canem, improbum falsarium, multa sceleste ac nequiter
cogitantem, and conspirantem cum improbis nebulonibus, Cynicum, scurram,
perfidum, fatuum, belluina rabie, Satanae addictum. Cassandrum (...), m^rosum,
lamiam, larvam, serpentem, pestem, carnificem. Quid quod Bucerum ita vexavit,
ut virum mitem coegerit haec scribere long verissima: Judicas prout amas, vel
odisti: amas autem vel odisti prout libet. Imo and ob atrocia dicta Bucerus ei
nomen dedit fratricidae.

Of Beza.
48. NOw Apud Brereley in his Book a part of the lives of the late pretended
Reformers cap. 7. sect. 1.
as concerning Theodore Beza, whose life was in like manner written by Hierom
Bolseck, and by him published, Anno 1582. wherein he objecteth against Beza
many great and heinous imputations set down in particular, with special naming
of times, places and persons, as for example (among other) the selling of his
Priory for ready money in hand, and further letting it to others in farm for
five years upon money before hand received, whereupon the abused parties (upon
his secret stealing away) fell at public suit, which depended of record in the
Court at Paris; Also his then stealing away (at the time of his said flight)
the Tailors wife dwelling in Calender street at Paris; furthermore the getting
of his maid with Child at Geneva, and his then feigning both himself and the
Maid to be sick of the Plague, whereby none should dare to come to them,
whereupon he requested that they might be lodged in two Chambers of Petrus
Viretus in an outer Gardin; which obtained, he caused a Barber Surgion to let
the woman blood, and to give a strong Purgation, after which she was delivered
of a dead Child, which they Buried in that Garden, as the said Barber after
confessed to Bolseck himself; during which mean time Beza (to cover the matter)
composed certain spiritual Songs of the great pains he suffered by vehemence of
the Plague, and Printed them at Geneva; whereto are further added, his Printed
seditious Books for stirring up of Civil Wars in France, whereof one was
entitled, the French furies, an other Truth, an other the Watch, an other the
waking Bell, with others. Besides many other like grievous imputations, and the
same delivered as being so particular and public, that the untruth of them (if
any were,) could not but become discoverable to all men's knowledge: Although
that all these were in Beza's life time published by Hierom Bolseck, and with
With great show of confidence, for it is by (...) dedicated even to the
honorable, Magistrates, Counselors, and other Governors of Geneva, for that
(says he) they could best tell whether most of those reports were true or not,
and of such as they knew not, could best learn and inquire; And he professes
to have written Beza's life purposely in Beza 's time, to the end Beza then
living might answer for himself.
great show of confidence, by him dedicated to the Governors of Geneva, and not
without earnest Protestation of his truth and fidelity therein, yet in regard
of my See heretofore in this Consideration number. 24. prope initium.
former alleged reason concerning Bolseck, and the other method, whereto I have
restrained my self, I will purposely forbear, either to affirm, and make good,
or otherwise to disable Bolsecks foresaid report of them, as contenting my self
with such only other testimony, as is delivered by learned Protestants
themselves. In which course is not unworthy of observation, how much Beza
differed from the Apostolical zeal and Spirit, in his uncharitable and profane
disclame of all care of Beza in his words extant in Saravia, defensio tract. de
diversis Ministrorum gradibus, Printed Londini M. D. XCIII. cap. 1^. page 309.
circa med. says, N^que vero nobis hic curiose inquirendum puto number ad omnes
gentes pervenerint A postoli, nec etiam magnopere nobis de legatione ad
remotissimas aliquas gentes laborandum, quum nobis domi and in propinquo sit
satis superque, quod nos and posteros exerceat, has igitur potius tam
longinquas peregrinationes locustis illis, etc. Jesu nomen ementientibus
relinquamus, etc.
converting Heathen Nations to the faith of Christ, leaving that (professedly)
to the Jesuits: a resolution in him so unchristian, that D. Saravia (a learned
Calvin^st) for such Saravia ibid. page 309. post med.
condemns it, saying, Responsionem hujusmodi a Domino Beza non expectabam,
nec a quoquam Theologo, cui Evangelii praedicatio cordi sit ut esse debet, etc.
adserere judico impium, and ab omni Christiana charitate alienum. Apud Brereley
tract. 2. cap 3. sect. 9. subd. 5.
First then among Antony Faius l. de vita and obitu Clarissimi Viri D. Theodori
Beza ( Printed) Genevae 1606. page 9. paulo post med. confesses and
mentions, Poemata illa quae (Wolmario) praeceptor^ suo inscripsit; in quibus
non mores, sed stylum Catulli and Nasonis ad imitandum sibi proponens,
Epigrammata quaedam licentiosius quam postea voluisset, Scripta effudit.
those (confessed many) licentious Poems of Beza, wherein he imitated the style
of (the most wanton) Catullns and Naso, occurreth that known scandalous
Epigram, made of his inordinate liking to his Ganimede, in which he debateth
whether sin he may prefer; and in the end he concludes with preferring the
Boy, before his Candida. Beza's Epigrams Printed at Paris 1548. is extant among
other his Epigrams of Andebertus and Candida, beginning thus: Abest Candida,
Beza quid moraris?
Andebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisii tuos amores,
Habent Aurelii tuos lepores.
Et tu Vezeliis manner pergis,
Procul Candidula amoribusque:
Immo Vezelii procul valete,
Et vale Pater, and valete fratres:
Nam Vezeliis carere possum,
Et carere Parente, and his and illis,
Ac non Candidula, Andebertoque, etc.


Next there follows; Sed utrum, rogo, praeferam duorum?
Utrum invisere me decet priorem?
An quenquam tibi Candida antepona^?
An quenqua^ antefera^ tibi Andeberte?
Quid si me in geminas sece^ ipse parts?
Harum ut altera Candidam revisat,
Currat altera versus Andebertum.
At est Candida sic avara novi,
Ut totum cupiat tenere Bezam:
Sic Bezae est cupidus sui Andebertus,
Beza ut gestiat integro potiri,
Amplector quoque sic hunc, and illam,
Ut totus cupiam videre utrumque
Integris frui integer duobus.


Then next after follows, Praeferre attamen alterum necesse est,
O duram nimium necessitatem!
Sed postquam tamen alteru^ necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Andeberte,
Quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
Quid tum? basiolo tacebit uno.


We confess that Master Fulk in his Treatise against the Defense of the Censure
does in his there answer hereto wholly rest in denial thereof; for whereas the
Defense of the Censure page 86. does in particular charge Beza with this matter
of Andebertus and Candida, Master Fulk in his foresaid Treatise against the
Defense, etc. Printed at Cambridge by Thomas Thomas, page 246. coming to
answer these particulars, takes no notice of them in particular, but only
answers with a denial in general of all imputations objected against Beza.
But in vain. For the matter is not only affirmed by the foresaid Protestant
Writer Conradus Schlusselburg in his Theologia Calvinistarum l. 2. fol. 72. a.
circa med. and post med. saying, Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis.
11. fine in the margent at 3.
Scio and lego Bezam aliter de vita, moribus, and obitu Calvini scribere: cum
vero Beza eadem haeresi and eodem f^rme peccato nobilitatus sit, ut historia de
Candida ejus meretricula testatur, nemo ipsi in hac part fidem habere potest.
And see further there concerning Beza l. 1. in prooemio page 4. b. and ibid.
page 92. a. post med. and b. and 93. a. initio. And Theol. Calvinist. l. 1.
fol. 93. a. initio, saying, Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subd. 5.
Constat and hoc, Bezam obscaenissimos versus scripsisse ad Germanum
Andebertum, Aureliae electum, and ^undem tanquam Adonidem a Beza factum esse:
as also affirmed by Tilmanus Heshusius another Protestant Writer of great fame
and reputation, in his Book entitled, Verae and sanae confessionis, etc.
saying, Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subd. 11.
Spurcissimis suis moribus dedecori fuit ipsius Disciplinis honestis, quique
nefandos amores, illicitos conc^bitus, scortationes, faeda adulteria sacrilego
carmine decantavit orbi, non contentus eo quod ipse more porci in coeno
flagitiosarum libidinum sese volutaret, nisi etiam aures studiosae inventutis
sua illuvie contaminaret: Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 9. subd. 5.
further in the same Book affirming, that Beza was accustomed to sing to the
instrument his sacrilegious rythms: but also it is yet further confessed by our
English Writers, Mr. D. Spark, and Mr. D. Morton, who both do, for their best
answer thereto, affirm that Beza indeed did this, but before his calling to the
Gospel, even when he was Popish: Mr. D. Spark in his answer to Mr. John d'
Albines (this foresaid matter being there objected page 397. he in his answer
thereto page 400.) says thereof: All this was before he was of our Religion,
even whiles he was one of yours, and he was yours when he made them. And Mr. D.
Morton in his Apologia Catholica part. 1. l. 2. c. 21 page 355. circa med.
recites the objection, Orbi notum est, quam salax fuit Beza, qui publicatis
poematibm paidastrias suas celebrare non erubuit, Galliae probrum, Symoniacus,
Sodomita, omnibus vitiis coopertus; whereto, he in his words there, and next,
and immediately following, answers, confessing and saying, Erat, erat, sed dum
in volutabro vestro miser haeserat, etc. Ille Beza igitur dum Papista, hircus
fuit. Which their answer, is impertinent; for though we deny not, but many
grievous sinners have repented and become afterward very holy men; yet that
any one ever since Christ's time, offending so inhumanely and unnaturally (as is
here confessed of Beza) should be called extraordinarily by God to restore and
publish to the world true Religion then formerly decayed (as Beza in the
conference had at Ratisbone affirmed his calling to be extraordinary: whereof
see Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. fine at the margent at f.) is the point
now only urged, and whereof we affirm all example to be wanting. For as to that
which Master Morton ( in Apolog. Catholica page 355.) allegeth of Saul made
Paul, is unapt (if not injurious to the Apostle) seeing his error was only his
persecuting of the Church grounded upon preposterous zeal toward God ( Acts
22.3, 4.) and not in other wickedness of life, to the contrary whereof himself
says, As touching my life from my Childhood, and what it was, all the Jews
know, that after the most strait sect of our Religion I lived a Pharisy. But
besides that this their answer is impertinent, it appears also to be most
untrue, even by the testimony of Antony Faius ( Beza's dearest Antony Faius l.
de ob^u and vita Bezae page 46. fine.
Colleague and Successor at Geneva) who affirms that Beza being but Antony
Faius ubi supra page 8. fine and 9. ante med. and see page 11. ante med.
twelve years old was brought up in learning under VVolmarius, and by him then
instructed out of the pure fountain of Gods word, in the ready knowledge of
true Christian piety: In so much also as Beza himself does in his last Will
and Testament give (special) thanks to the immortal God, for that at the ^6.
year of his age, he was enlightened with the knowledge of true Christian
Religion, as witnesses Antony Faius in his Book de obitu and vita Bezae, page
73. initio, where he makes recital of Beza's will, in which (says he) Beza
gratias agit Deo immortali, quod anno aetatis suae 16. verae Christianae
Religionis cognitione ac luce donatus sit. Which time of his supposed
inlightning (computation being had of his Birth Antony Faius ubi supra page 8.
post med.
24. Junii anno 1519. and of his foresaid Epigrams Printed at Paris under his
name, by Robertus Stephanus anno 1548.) appears evidently to have been many
years before his publishing of the foresaid Epigrams, the which also as may
seem by Antony Faius (before cited at a.) he dedicated even to his foresaid Mr.
Wolmarius, by whom he was (as before) first instructed in Religion. Hitherto of
Beza's unchaste Epigrams: In further proof whereof much more as yet is affirmed
by Schlusselburg (in his Theologia Calvinist. l. 1. fol. 92. a. post med. and
b.) from recital out of Beza's other writings. Only we add hereto a
remembrance of that Poetical vein, which Beza afterward waxing old continued
and used, when turning the Psalms of David into Latin verse (a work greatly
commended by Antony Faius l. de vita and obitu Bezae page 80. saying, that
Psalmos vario Latinorum carminum genere elegantissime and suavissime expressos
orbi Christiano dedit: And see this Treatise of Beza further mentioned page 78.
fine) he did among other Paraphrase the 50. Psalm, which being wholly
penitential, and comprehending in it nothing but matter of grief and tears, let
it be indifferently weighed, upon perusal but of part thereof here alleged (we
will not say how lasciviously, but) how unanswerable to David's contrition the
same is by Beza penned. He therefore says of David, -- Rex David amore
Correptus, vertit Bersabae ad limina vultus;
Bersabae, qua non formosior altera cunctas
Isacidum populos inter numerata puellas.
Sed co^juncta viro, and matter ja^ digna videri
Et mox tam raras mortali in corpore dotes
Miratus, patulae radiantem frontis honore^,
Purpureasque genas, pulchri and discrimina nasi,
Os roseu^, and flavos per eburnea colla capillos,
Marmoreumq, sinum, porrectaque brachia long,
Et teretes digitos, me vero ludere in istis
Fas oculis, inquit, etc. --


And a little after he describes Bersabe. Omnibus arridet pulchrae sibi
co^scia formae,
Nunc sinit extrema crispa^tes fro^te capillos
Ludere, nunc varia discriminat art vagantes:
Iam caelare sinu^ simulat, ma^masque coercet,
Et super objectat tenuit velamina tele:
Iam cunct as ostentat opes, colloque superba
Nudato, pulchra mentitur imagine Divam;
Interdum excultis illi qui stabat in hortis
Marmor^o insignis labro atque perennibus undis
Font lavat, celeresque oculis jaculatur amores:


Was this the Spirit of David's repentance, or rather of Beza's yet hitherto
continued vein of Naso and Catullus, whom he is mentioned to have imitated
heretofore? These wanton verses were such an open scandal, that now in the
other late Editions they are for very shame quite omitted, and left forth, but
yet still extant, and to be seen in Beza's tractat. Theologic. Printed Genevae
in fol. anno 1570. page 661. a. circa med. But to proceed on with Beza's life,
that learned Lutheran Conradus Schlusselburg (in Theol. Calvinist. l. 1. fol.
92. b. fine) reports further saying, This also is manifest, that Beza
espoused his Candida, without her Parents assent, and for four years space
before he married her, kept her as is Concubine. Constat and hoc Bezam fibi
despondisse suam Candidam insciis Parentibus, and cum ea quatuor annos
consuevisse, ea concubina utendo antequam Candidam uxorem duxerit. And whereas
it is also reported, that his secret flight in Company of the said Woman, for
preventing of troubles hereupon to him intended, was the first occasion which
brought him with her to Geneva, where (says the reporter) he was forced to
marry her in prevention of open scandal of their then conceived incontinency;
it is not altogether without scruple, that Antony Faius not ignorant of this so
common report, and undertaking to make mention of Beza's marriage, does no
better prevent or clear it, but rather (as some conceive) give color thereto,
telling how that Beza being entangled with the inticement of voluptuousness,
ambitious sweetness of glory gotten upon the Edition of his Epigrams, and with
hope of preferment, did (least he should be overcome by those youthful desires)
promise himself in marriage, but (yet) secretly, one or two of his godly
friends made privy thereto. (Faius de vita and obitu Bezae fol. 11. initio.)
Nam and voluptatum illecebris and ambitiosula gloriae dulcedine quam ex
Epigrammatum suorum editione erat adeptus, honorumque amplissimorum spe
irretitus, aliquandiu detinebatur, etc. ac primum, ne a juvenilibus illis
desideriis superaretur, uxorem sibi despondit, sed clam, conscio uno and altero
ex piis amicis. And that continuing with the party in this state a long time
together, at last (says Faius ibidem page 12. fine) betaking himself into
voluntary exile, he with his (foresaid) Spouse came to Geneva, and there first
openly in the Church celebrated the marriage according to the solemn rite of
Christians: Seque in voluntarium exilium cum sua conjuge recipit Genevam, Anno
1548. ibi primum palam in Ecclesia solemni inter Christianos ritu matrimonium
celebravit. If Beza did not at first marry her, and yet as is confessed
accompany with her, for the overcoming of his youthful desires, then is he upon
the matter guilty of the accusation; and if he did then marry her though but
secretly, and did also afterward (as is here confessed) marry her over again
openly in the Church at Geneva, how is he then free from Sacrilege? And how
this may be thought but to color the matter of his foresaid accusation, or (as
some perhaps will urge) rather to agree with every circumstance thereof, we
will not determine, but refer to indifferency of judgment, as also we commend
to like judgment, what sign of mortification beseeming Beza's pretended See
this in Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 6. fine in the margent at f
extraordinary vocation, was by him showed, when after Antony Faius de vita and
obitu Bezae page 54. ante med. says, Anno 1588. mense Aprili e vivis excessit
Claud a de Nossa Bezae conjux, cum qua conjunctissime vixerat annos
quadringinta.
the death of his said wife called indeed Claudia, though in the foresaid
Epigrams veiled under the name of Candida, himself being then sole without
Children, Antony Faius ubi supra page 74. ante med. says of Beza, Liberos
nullos unquam habuit.
and at the time of her said death Antony Faius ubi supra page 8. fine,
affirming Beza to be born 24. Junii Anno 1519. which compared to her foresaid
death in April 1588. it follows by computation, that he was then aged 69.
years wanting but one Month.
aged threescore nine years, he yet afterward in more than ordinary have, even
within the compass but of some few It appears by Antony Faius ubi supra page
96. fine, and 67. initio, that Beza dyed 13. Octo. 160^. aged 86. years, 3.
Months, And it appears further page 74. ante med. that his second wife had
been then married to him during the space of 17. years, which number of 17.
years, being deducted from the foresaid years of 1588. in which his first Wife
as before dyed. And this perhaps was the cause why Antony Faius being c^rious
in setting down precis^ly the very year and certain time of Beza 's other
proceedings, as nom ly of his Birth (page 8.) his death (page 66.) his first
marriage at Geneva (page 12.) the death of his first Wife, and many other like;
forbeareth yet to observe this course in like setting down the certain time of
his second marriage, though yet nevertheless the observant Reader may otherwise
collect the same from him, in that upon his foresaid mention of Beza 's first
wives death, set down page 54. he does say page 55. that Beza made his second
marriage, aliquanto post tempore, a small time after, and the same there set
down as in order precedent to Beza 's actions of anno 1589. mentioned page 56.
initio:
Months Antony Faius ibidem page 55. paulo post medium.
married, not without great note thereof, both at home and abroad, Katherine,
the (young) Widow of Franciscus Taruffus. As likewise (forbearing his
confessed) See his insolency noted by Master Bancroft ( now sithence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury) in his Survey of the pretended holy Discipline page
54. initio.
insolency, Master Bancroft ibidem.
pride, Ibidem page 59. post med.
lewd saying, and Ibidem page 219. fine, and 220. initio.
discrediting himself in being crank with the ancient Fathers; we commend to
all equity of Judgment, the many See Master Bancrofts Survey of the pretended
holy Discipline page 42. post med. where it is said, He that shall read Master
Calvin's, and Master Beza 's Epistles, and the Commentaries of France, with
diverse other discourses, and some of them known Protestants, would certainly
mervail to understand, into what actions they thrust themselves, of war, of
Peace, of subjection, how far it extends, of Reformation without staying for
the Magistrates, of ^eagues, of Impositions, and what not? They write their
Letters to this State and that State, etc. And D. Bolseke in his Book of Beza
's life, and the defense of the Censure page 88. and 89. charge Beza with many
odious Conspiracies, and with publishing of many seditious Books there named in
particular. And Master Bancroft in his Survey page 48. makes mention of diverse
Books of deposing Princes Printed at Geneva.
accusations of those sundry complotted seditions and conspiracies, wherewith
he is, (how truly or untruly we will not say) charged to have troubled foreign
Nations, together also with those his confessed unworthy Master Barcroft in his
Survey, etc. page 127. post med.
disordered writings, wherein he is by our English Protestants said to See this
in Brereley tract. 3. sect. 2. subd. 2. at k.
arm the Subjects against the Prince, and to See ibidem at l.
overthrow in effect all the authority of Christian Kings and Magistrates.

49. To Brereley in the Preface to the Read^ sect. 13 page 21.
allege briefly some few particulars of Beza's seditious practices: does not he
allow and highly commend the Wars in France for Religion against the Laws and
lawful King of that Country, saying (in his Epistle Dedicatory of his new
Testament to the Queen of England, in Edition Anno 1564.) That the Nobility of
France ( under the noble Prince of Condy) laid the foundation of restoring true
Christian Religion in France, by consecrating most happily their blood to God
in the battle of Dreux? Did he not write a seditious Book of this Argument,
entitled de jure Magistratuum in subditos? so known and evident, that Master
Sutcliff in his answer to a certain Libel supplicatory page 75. paulo post med.
(and see page 71. paulo post medium) says thereof, their Doctrine does wholly
tend unto trouble and rebellion: Beza in his Book of the power of Magistrates,
does arm the subjects against the Prince in these causes. A Book (says he yet
further ibid. page 192. post med.) which overthrows in effect all the
authority of Christian Kings and Magistrates. And again (ubi supra page 98.
initio) he allegeth Beza his judgment concerning excommunicated Princes,
saying, Beza roundly teaches, what reason have Christians to obey him that is
Satan's slave? And the like is yet further confessed in this kind against Beza
by Mr. Bancroft in his Survey of the holy pretended Discipline page 48. prope
initium. And in his Book entitled dangerous Positions. page 21. and 18.

As also that temperate Protestant Writer D. Saravia argues sufficiently Beza
his seditious Doctrine in this his overmodest or rather excusing reprehension
and answer thereto, saying, Quid his verbis, etc. Some rest doubtful what Mr.
Beza intends by these words, where he thinks it not right, that the godly
should stay till the Wolves be expelled by public authority, and that he may
seem secretly to insinuate that those Wolves may be expelled by private
authority, as was done in the Low Countries, and other places, etc. ( Saravia
in defens. tract. de diversis gradibus Ministrorum, contra responsionem
Clarissimi viri D. Theodori Bezae c. 2. page 74. paulo ante med.) And see
Beza's own words there. And see him also in his Epist. Theolog. Epist. 68. page
318. ante med. where he says, Habeo alia nonnulla majoris momenti, quae tamen
per liter as satis commode significare non possum, perplacet autem mihi quod de
conventu absque ulla Principum aut civitatem authoritate privatim instituendo
scribis. And then thrusts in this Bodge: Quamvis nullis prorsus conselis
Principibus id fieri minime velim. And so likewise in the words reprehended as
before by Saravia, he says expressly, Si piis semper expectandum putas, dum
lupi ultro cedant, vel publica authoritate expulsi, tibi minime assentior. But
yet says he with a like Bodge, Nihil seditiose movendum extra controversiam
est, sed pie and constanter amplectendas affirmo omnes Divinitus oblatas very
cultus Divini restituendi occasiones, etc. Et ni ita factum esset, quas tandem
Ecclesias body haberemus? What hypocrisic is this, to teach Reformation
against the Magistrates mind? And yet forsooth not seditiously, as though it
could be so performed without sedition. These are in words smooth pretenses,
but indeed no other than plain seditions and treasons, whereby himself in his
foresaid words signifies his Church to have enlarged her self.

Hereto may be added Mr. Bancrofts saying (in his Survey of the pretended holy
Discipline page 42. circa med.) He that shall read Mr. Calvin's and Mr. Beza 's
two Books of Epistles, and likewise the Commentaries of France, with diverse
other discourses about those affairs, and should withal give any credit,
either to Heshusius, Balduinus, Carpentarins, or others, men learned all of
them, and some of them known Protestaents, would certainly mervail to
understand, into what actions and dealings they thrust themselves, of War, of
Peace, of subjection, how far is enter ded, of Reformation without staying for
the Magistrates, etc. Besides Br^^^ky in the Presa^^ (...) (...) page ^4.
See a was present in the Batta^^ of Dre^^ defended by him present. as (...)
Fasus de vita and ob^^^ Be^^ page 45. prope (...) says. Post mense^ (...)
conten^^sun^ (...) (...). etc. side (...) (...) Chr^st^ (...) (...) bor are
(...). etc. And the Protestants of Mea^^ (as is recorded in the general
inventory of the History of France, page 593.) transported with indiscreet zeal
grounded upon their numbers, did ^ly to the Churches, be at down Images, and
make the Priests retire: Whereto is but agreeable their like confessed
insolency at Greuoble, Charti^^s, and Orle^nce, ^e^^ Preaching there^^ with his
Sword and Pistol, and exhorted the people to show their manhood, rather in
killing the Papists, than in breaking Images. Re^^ Apud li^^ley in his (...) of
the (...) of the late (...) cap. (...). sect 4 (...) page 18^, 184.
is also charged with Pultr^^s known murder of the old Duke of Guise, who
being thereupon (...) Pul^^^ ^^(...) (...) all might (...) hi^ P^stol (...) the
(...), and of his (...) being sound and taken (...) the (...) after, at the
(...) be did the deed: the Protestant Author of se^und^^ (...), etc. says,
(...) pesta no^^ in eum prope locum unde (...) etc. (...) (...). page 345.
(...).
very strangely (if not miraculously) apprehended, did at the time of his
execution, publicly The Protestant Author of the Treatise intiuled Secundae
partis Commentariorum de statu Religionis and reip. in Regno Galliae libri
tres, Carolo nono Rege, Printed 1571. page 357. post med. says of Poltrots
execution, illud interfecti Guisii supplicium ded^^, quaestionis habitae edito
quodam se ipto, Pol^rot us Amiral^um facinoris illius authorem and hortatorem
appellabat, and Theodo um Bezam cum alio mimme nominato Ministro illi
accusation^ involvebat ut ad eam rem impulsorem, etc. Also Pultrots confession
at his death yet extant in P^int, charge Beza as persuader and procurer
thereof, in answer whereto Mr. Whitaker in his answer to F. Camp an (rat. 8.
and after the English Edition page 223.) does surmise that Pultrot was induced
to accuse noble and innocent men, through hope of impunity, or sear of
punishment: By which pretext all accusations made by the confessions of
offenders at their deaths, are most improbably taken away.
charge Beza, as being the first Author, and perswader thereof.

50. As Brereley tract. 1. sect. 3. subd. 14. in the text and margent at 15.
concerning his unworthy opinion of the Apostolical times he doubted not (if
not most arrogantly read and judge) to prefer in knowledge of the truth, the
now Protestant Writers, even before those other that flourished immediately, and
next after the Apostles times. For in Epist. Theolog. Epist. 1. page 5. initio,
he says, Itaque dicere nec immerito quidem, ut opinor, consuevi, dum illa
tempora, Apostolicis etiam proxima, cum nostris comparo, plus illos
conscientiae, scientiae minus habuisse: nos contra, scientiae plus,
conscientiae minus habere, haec mea sententia est.

51. Whereas Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subd. 15. sect. 2.
the Catholic Faith holds one substance or unity of Essence in three
Persons, Beza says to the contrary, (in his Confession in English Printed
1585. page 1. and see Confess. Genev. c. 1.) the word of God teaches plainly
that the Divine substance is (not wholly in three Persons, but) distinct really
and truly from everlasting into three Persons.

52. Concerning Brereley tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 10. subd. 8. at 15.
our Blessed Savior, Beza (ad Haebr. 5. ver. 7.) affirms, that he was for
time in despair: Christo Divinae maledictionis horrore percusso, elapsae est
vox desperationis.

53. As Brereley in his Book a part of the lives of the late pretended
R^formers, etc. cap. 7. sect. 3.
concerning Beza's notable dissembling and temporising in matter of Religion, I
will only allege one example thereof mentioned by the Protestant Writer
Osiander, who reports See this in Osiander centur. 16. l. 3. cap. 28. page
657. post med.
that certain Protestants being cast into Prison at Paris, the French
Calvinists sent, as Legates into Germany, Beza and Farellus, that they might
obtain from the Protestant Princes, their intercession to the French King for
the (foresaid) Captives. These Legates, Beza and Farellus going first to Worms
unto the Lutheran Divines, Melancthon, Brentius, Marpachius, and Jacobus
Andreas, offered unto them a Confession of their Faith, in which they did
profess (among other things,) the very substance of Christ's flesh to be
exhibited in the Sacred Supper, and that the difference among the (Protestant
Divines, was not of the thing it self, but only of the manner of the presence,
which was known only to God: Pleraque in illa confessione sic posita erant, ut
videre^ur non Calvinistica sed Lutherana: hujus Confessionis autographon ego
vidi, and legi manu Theodori Bezae and Farelli subsignatum etc. Tigurini
Theologi hanc Bezae and Farelli confessionem ut nimis Lutheranam
reprehenderunt, quibus responderant Beza and Farellus; opus sibi fuisse bono
dolo ad liberandos fratres: ^tem se in illa confessione clam apud se in scrinio
pectoris sui, duas voces (per fidem and spiritualiter) retinuisse.
Osianderabidem page 65. ante med. Also the Lutheran writer Holderus in his Book
inti^^eled. Asinus, Printed Tubingae. 1587. cap. 29. page 49. circa med. says
hereof. Tigurini ubi de re tota certiores ^unt, tanta hominis impostura acriter
dolent, and eam contessionem magna contentione impugnant, Bezamque falsi reum
peragunt: quid vero interim Beza, number se deserit? minime: Audi artem tali
artifice dignam: vult persuadere Tigurinis, dolum aliquando bonum esse, and
aliud agere, aliudque simulare, etc.
and many things were so put in that Confession, as they seemed not
Calvinistical, but Lutheran: the original Copy of this confession I my self
(says Osiander) both saw and read, it being subscribed with the hand writing
of Beza, and Farellus: hereupon they had recourse to the Duke of Witemberg, by
whom they also obtained from other Princes intercession to the French King: (at
their return) the Tigurine Divines reprehended this Confession of Beza and
Farellus as over Lutheran; to whom Beza and Farellus answered, that they stood
in need of some good deceit, whereby to deliver their Brethren. Also that in
the foresaid Confession, they privately retained with themselves in the secret
of their breast, these two words, viz. by Faith, and spiritually; thus far the
Protestant writer Ofiander concerning the said Confession, which (as himself
says) he both saw and read over, with his own eyes: And is it now so hateful
and reproveable in some Catholics to equivocate though verbally, and in case
of safety of their own or Brethrens lives, and yet lawful for Beza to
equivocate, not verbally, but by subscribed writing, neither as in case of
safety of life, but of profession of Faith? A course so peculiar in Osiander's
opinion to the Calvinists, that he doubts not to say of them, Osiander
centur. 16. lib. 3. c. 61. page 796. paulo post med. says, Hanc enim Maximam
seu regulam habent Calvinistae, licere pro gloria Christi mentiri.
They hold this for a ground or principle, that it is lawful to lie for the
glory of Christ.

54. Let us end the life of Beza with the words of Hugo Grotius (in Voto Pacis,
etc. page 18.) saying, Beza fatetur per quindecim annorum spatium, quo alios
docuit justitiae viam, nec sobrium se factum, nec liberalem, nec veracem, sed
haerere in luto.

To the foresaid lives I have thought it not amiss to add somewhat of
Melancthon, Luther's dearest friend, and one of the most famous Protestants in
those beginnings, of whom Luther (apud Brereley tract. 2. sect. 3. subd. 14.)
in the margent at 4.) says, that the Apology of Melancthon does far excel all
the Doctors of the Church, and exceeds even Austine himself: as also of Bucer,
a famous Protestant, and called into England to teach Divinity in the
University of Cambridge; and lastly I will say a word of that furious Heretic
John Knox, a seditious botifeu and incendiary, and pestilent Preacher of
Heresy in Scotland.

Of Melancthon.
55 COncerning Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 13. sect. 2. (...)
Melanthon; First he is charged to affirm, that there be three Divinities, as
there be three persons. Melancthon. in locis Communibus Anno 1545. cap. de
Christo. Insomuch as he is for this Doctrine reprehended by Stancharus l. 4. de
Trinitate. See his words alleged in the Treatise entitled Nullus and nemo
fol. 3. b. And by Cnoglerus in his Tria Simbola page 34. and 124.

56 Moreover Brereley in his Omissions page 396.
Melancthon in Consil. Theolog. page 134. prope initium, advises in behalf of
King Henry the 8th. (whose Divorce from his first wife he thought unlawful)
saying, Respondeo si vult Rex successione prospicere, quanto satius est id
facere sine infamia prioris conjugii. Ac potest id fieri fine ullo periculo
Conscientiae cujusquam aut famae per. Poligamia^ etc. Quia Poligamia non est
res omnino inusitata: Habuerunt multas conjuges Abraham, David, and allii
Sancti viri, unde apparet poligamiam non esse contra Jus Divinum. This advice
was thus given by Melancthon Anno 1531. as appears there page 128. paulo post
med. And, apud Brerely tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 5. marg. e.
Melancthon Consil. Theolog. part 1. page 648. affirms, that in case of
divorce and dismission upon Adultery; the offending party, whether Man or Woman
may marry again. Affirming there further this to be the Doctrine of Luther and
Pomerane. And see also there further page 550.

57 Concerning Brereley tract. 3. sect. 7 in the margent at.
Melancthon's inconstancy touching the Real Presence, see in l. Epist.
Zuinglii and Oecolampadii l. 3. page 603. post med. where Melancthon in his
Epistle there to Oecola^padius says most confidently in behalf of the Real
Presence: Non modo cogitavi ipse quid in utram partem dici possit, sed
inquisivi etiam veterum ea de re sententias etc. Cum omnia quae in utraque
part firmissima videntur, expendi, dicam pace tua, non tamen eo in sententiam
tuam: nullam enim firmam rationem invenio, quae conscientiae discedenti a
proprietate verborum (Christi) satisfaciat etc. And see Melancthon's words more
vehement, full and at large, ibidem in his Epistle to Fredericus Miconius
alleged there page 618. and 644. post med. and 645. And see Hospinian in
historia Sacramentar. part. altera fol. 68 b. And yet of Melancthon's change
afterward unto Calvinisme, see the same confessed by Hospinian in Hist.
Sacrament. part. altera fol. 115. a. initio. and circa med. and fol. 141. b.
initio. And by Osiander in Epitom. etc. Centur. 16. page 615. initio, where
Osiander does expressly charge Melancthon with inconstantia Viro Theologo
indigna. And see no less there page 667. Hence it is that though the
Protestants in Colloq. Attembergensi printed in quarto Jenae ad Salam. 1570.
fol. 510. b. paulo post medium do there commend and term Melancthon to be
optimum and Sanctissimum Virum etc. Yet in regard of such his noted and known
inconstancy in Doctrine, it is also there fol. 337. b. circa medium said of him
illud saltem de locis Phillippi paucis et modeste addimus. Primum constare
Philippum toties fere eos mutasse, and rebus and verbis, ut quibus sit fides
adhibenda, in dubio est. Lutherum istam crebram mutationem improbasse, ex fide
dignis accepimus. And see further of Melancthon's inconstancy, the Protestant
Writer Schlusselburg. in Theolog. Calvinist. l. 2. fol. 91. a. post med. and b.
and fol. 92 a, b. and fol. 94 and 95. And see Osiander in Epitom etc. Centur.
16, page 809. circa and post medium. and page 703. paulo post medium where it
is said of him: Hujus viri eruditioni si constantia in vera religione
respondisset, plane incomparabilis vir extitisset etc. Wherefore I may conclude
with the words of Gasper Ulenbergius, in libro cui titulus, Granes and just
cause cur Catholicis in communione veteris, ejusque very Christianismi
permanendum sit etc. Causa 15 c. 15. page 315. Edit. Collon. 1589 in octavo.
Where he says, Quamobrem non est usque adco a veritate alienum, quod
Melancthonem nobili cuidam Johanni Bartholomeo a Velberg, consuluisse aiunt, ut
a Catholico communicandi atque orandi ritu non discederet, ac inter cetera, hoc
ejus quoque verba, ad eundem nobilem dicta referunt. Nullum habeo digitum
(inquit) in manu mea, cujus jactur a non optarim, me nunquam ad scribendum de
rebus Theologicis accessisse, sed vocasse Philosophiae meae quemadmodum feci a
principio, verum longius nunc progressus sum quam ut regredi passim, hactenus
Melancthon, ex cujus verbis promptum est Estimare quomodo ipsius Conscientia,
propter grave hoc in Religione dissidium, cui suscitando ipse quoque manum
admovit, constituta fuerit, Scribit hoc Wolfangus, Agricola, Becanus and Pastor
Paltensis in Concione de Matrimonio.

Of Bucer.
58 COncerning Bucer's Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subd. 5.
Doctrine, among his many other gross absurdities, wherewith Mr. Cartwright
allegeth in Mr. Whitgift's defense page 522. prope initium. Charge him ( apud
Brerely hic at l.) he was so inclining to the Lybell of Divorce permitted by
Moses, that he doubted not to teach, that as there is at this day, like
hardness of Hearts, so the distressed Wives ought to be releived no less now
than in time past; For (says he) the Magistrate now, has no less Authority in
this matter than Moses had, and at this day ought to use the same. Bucer, in
sacra quatuor Evangel. etc. In Mat. 19. fol. 147. paulo post med. And see the
Index or table to that book under the letter R. at the word Repudium. And see
the other Edition of his Book Anno 1536. page 390 prope finem, and 391 ante
med. In Matthew. c. 19. he says ( apud Brereley hic at d. in the margent) Sive
just sive injuste repudiata aliqua fuerit, si nulla ei sit spes ad primum
virum redeundi, cupiat autem pie vivere, maritoque opus habeat, ducens eam
nequaqam peccabit. And in further proof of the continuance thereof to this
time, he yet further says, Neither is it to be believed that Christ would
forbid any thing of that which his Father commanded, but he commanded to the
hard of heart, that if they would not entreat their wives with Nuptial equity,
they should then procure liberty by a Libell of divorce to marry again. Bucer
ibidem paulo post. ( apud Brereley hic at 5.) And Bucer in his Scripta
Anglicana de Regno Christi l. 2. c. 26 and 27. page 99 and 100. affirms
further most plainly the same Doctrine, and ibidem c. 28. page 101. in which
places he doubts not to teach, that Quicunque nolit etc. Whosoever will not
induce his mind to love his Wife, and to entreat her with all conjugall
Charity, that man is commanded by God to put her away and marry another: And
that this being commanded in the old Law, pertains also to Christians. See
this ibidem page 100 In like sort also does he allow and defend liberty of
Divorce and Marriage again, in case of the ones departure from the other (
Bucer in script. Anglican. de Regno Christi, l. 2. c. 26. page 114. and. c. 41.
page 122) In case also of Homicide ( ibidem, l. 2. c. 37. post med and. c. 40
initio) or but repairing to the company or banquet, of imm^dest persons (
ibidem, l. 2. c. 37. page 115. ante med. and. c. 40. page 120 post med.)
likewise in case of incurable infirmity of the Woman by Childbirth, or of the
man by Lunacy or otherwise, whereby either party is become unable to render
marriage right ( Bucer ibidem, c. 42. page 123 prope finem and 124 circa med)
In these and many other such like cases, he yet further generally concludes
the lawfullness of Divorce and Marriage again. ibidem. page 124 prope finem,
and see also the marginal note there, where is set down, Conclusio, quod aliis
de causis quam fornicationis concedenda sint legitima divortia novaque inire
connubia. And in the Text there, it is said: Haec adferenda putavi ad eam
explicandam questionem, number concedi a Christianis Principibus and Rerumpub.
moderatoribus possit divertium facere and ad alteras transire nuptias, aliis
quam fornicationis et stupri de causis. Ex quibus, siomnia rite et ex verbo Dei
ponderentur, satis liquebit neminem, nec virum, nec mulierum, cui opus sit ad
been casteque vivendum conjuge, ac conjuge cohabitate, aut conjugii necessaria
officia faciente, prohibere debere, quin vir talem quaer at uxorem et habeat,
et mulier talem virum, si depreheasum and evictum sit, vel virum cui pia mulier
nupta fuit, vel mulierem quam vir pius uxorem duxit, praestare necessaria
conjugii officia, aut abstinate nolle, aut hujusmodi comisisse scelera, ut
propter turpitudinem suam non possit: aut denique incurabili impediri
impotentia, quo minus per corporis vires illa valeat conjugii officia
persolvere. Moreover Bucer concludes the lawfulnes of Divorce and marriage
again to be Verbo Dei consentienter, Agreeable to the word of God: ibidem page
124. versus finem, and see page 120 prope finem. And all this in that very book
of his de Regno Christi, which is by our learned Adversaries highly magnifyed:
of which book Nicholas Car ( in epist. de obitu Buceri ad Joannem Checum,
extant in Bucer's Scripta Anglicana page 873. fine) says, Liber Buceri de
Regno Christi editus continebat absolutissimam and perfectissimam totius
Doctrinae Christianae effigiem. In like manner also in case of the Husbands one
years voluntary absence, the Opinion of Bucer ( in Script. Anglic. page 122
ante medium) is, that it is lawful for the Wife to marry again. An Error so
manifest and confessed, that it being objected to Mr. Whittaker by Dureus (
contra Whittakerum printed at Paris 1581. fol. 287. b. fine) Mr. Whittaker in
his Reply to that Book and very folio, forbeareth all mention and defense
thereof.

59 As concerning diverse Brereley tract. 3. sect. 7. in the margent at.
notable Inconstancies (for which Luther in Ep. ad Joan. Har. Typ. Arg. calls
Bucer a very Monster, charging him further with Perfidia, in Lutheri Locis
Comm. quinta Class. fol. 50. antemed.) See further Osiander in Epitom. etc.
Centur. 16. page 249 initio. That after his first Apostasy from our Religion,
he defended with Luther the Reall-Presence, is in it self evident and confessed
by Peter Martyr in his Treatise of the Lords Supper, annexed to his Common
Places in English 138. ae. fine. after which he became a Zuinglian, as
appears by Bucer himself in Epist. ad Norimb. and ad esseingenses. After
which he revoked that Opinion, and joined again with Luther, as appears by
the Acts of the Synod holden at Luther's House in Wittemberg Anno 1536. And is
further confessed by Osiander in Epit. etc. Centur. 16. page 246 post med. and
by Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvanist. l. 2. fol. 17. b. ante med. and by
Lavaterus in Hist. Sacrament. page 31. alleged also by Schlusselburg ubi supra.
Insomuch as Lavaterus in Hist. Sacrament. allegeth by Schlusselburg l. 2. fol.
129. a. post medium says of Bucer, non parum abalienatus a Tigurinis esse
visus est, quos ante and amarat plurimum, and singular quadam pietate
coluerat. And see there also fol. 129. b. circa med., where it is further said,
Bucerus a Tygurinis Zuinglianis omnino abalienatus est. And see Bucer's first
Edition of his Commentaries upon the sixth of John and the 26 of Matthew, where
he asks Pardon of God and the Church, for that he deceived so many with the
Error of Zuinglius. And see further also Functius in Chronic. And for his
fourth change after all this into Zuinglianism again, at his coming to
Cambridge, it is to all men evident, and he therefore noted by the Protestant
Writer Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvin. l. 2. fol. 70. b. fine, where he
says, Idem tamen Bucerus Anno 1551 Cantabrigiae in Anglia, iterum ad
Zuinglianorum haeresim deficit. And ibidem fol. 17. b. circa med. it is further
said, Bucerus Anno 1551 Cantabrigiae in Anglia rursus parva cum honestate ad
Calvanistas defecit. So evidently he did change his Doctrine, First to
Lutheranism, and from thence afterward to Calvinism, from thence back again to
Lutheranism, and from thence lasty again to Calvinism. And all this thus done
both by Melancthon and Bucer, with solemn Profession and show, at every such
change, of all full confidence and resolution of opinion, and the same with
great vehemence pretended evermore, as plain and evident from the Scriptures.
Pu. Which shows that Scripture alone cannot be a perfect Rule of Faith, but
that we must have recourse to a living infallible Judge of Controversies.

Of Knox.
60 THE most turbulent and seditious Doctrines and Deeds of John Knox, the
pretended Reformer of Religion in Scotland, are so notorious and known and
exorbitant, that I have no mind to set them down in particular, nor can any man
of a quiet spirit take pleasure in recital of them. Yet if any desire to be
further informed, he may read Brerely in his Preface to the Reader,
particularly (besides other places) sect. 14. Here therefore I will only set
down that which a person of honor, of worth, and truth relates; namely, that
when King James came first into England, being received and entertained by a
person of eminent rank at that time, took occasion one day at dinner (where at
least a hundred persons attended to see and serve him) to inveigh in earnest
manner against some kind of disobedient, seditious, and mutinous persons, upon
which subject he was large: and as for Knox in particular, I remember well
(says the foresaid most worthy person, the Relator hereof, who then was
present) and so well that I am able to depose it, that the King said in
particular of him, that God thought fit to set a visible mark of Reprobation
upon him even in this life before he went to the Devil; which was, that being
sick in his Bed with a good fire of coals by him and a candle light upon the
table, a woman or maid of his sitting by him, he told her that he was extremely
thirsty, and therefore willed her to fetch him some drink. She went, and
returned quickly, but found the Room all in darkness; For not only the Candle,
but the Cole-fire also was utterly extinct, and she by that light which her
self brought in imediatly after, saw the body of Knox lying dead in the middle
of the floor, and with a most ghastly and horrid countenance, as if his body
were to show the condition of his Soul.

61 Pu. Holy Scripture saying, Prove. 17. v. 6 The Glory of Children their
Fathers; I beseech the Protestant Reader to weigh unpartially what Fathers the
Protestant pretend Religion has by reflecting upon what we have demonstrated,
even out of learned Protestants concerning the Doctrins and Lives of their
first Reformers; and if they find them to be such as indeed they were, they
ought to resolve speedily to forsake such infamous Fathers, and return to that
Religion from which those Sectaries departed: to which end these ensuing
Reflections may help, if they be pondered, not cursarily, nor with prejudice,
or a Resolution to find out some kind of answer to all that may be objected;
but uprightly and with a hearty desire to find the Truth, for attayning the
salvation of their Souls. Consider then and collect from what we have said

First, that as I said heretofore, seeing they taught Doctrines which
Protestants themselves do not only reject, but detest and abhor, they cannot
be said to have been of the Protestant Religion, and so Protestants must find
some other beginning or beginners of Protestancy, than those whom hitherto they
have taken for their glorious Fathers, and persons qualified with such gifts
and endowments as make them fit to reform the whole Christian world: and these
being once removed from the rank of their Forefathers, how will they answer
this question: Who in particular were the first beginners of their Protestant
Church? at what time and in what place did they live? To which demand, I am
sure they cannot answer with satisfaction, but perforce they must be content to
be like the Donatists of whom St. Optatus said, that they were Filii sine
Patre, Sonns without Father; and every one must be to himself a beginning of his
Faith and Religion. A dreadful point in the business of an Eternity, and
necessary subject to that weighty saying of St. Bernard; Qui se sibi magistrum
constituit, stulto se discipulum subdit. He who will be his own Master, shall
be Scholar to a Fool.

Secondly, For Manners, who can imagine that God being Truth, Purity, and Peace
it self; would choose for Reformation of the World) such men, as confessedly
have shamefully erred against Truth for Doctrine, and against not only Purity,
but common honesty and morality: and against Peace by being, both for their
Doctrines and Practices, Authors of Tumults, Seditions, and Rebellions.

Thirdly, it ought to be considered with deepest grief and Tears, what a
lamentable thing it was, that people should have been seduced from that ancient
Religion which the World professed, with the specious names of Dr. Luther etc.
and with a fair but false and lying title of Reformation, by men, who indeed
were such as has been declared and proved from their own Writings, and the
express and direct Assertions of their own brethren.

Fourthly, since we have found them to be most inconstant in their Doctrine, in
matters of highest concernment, expressly professing to have temporized, and
accommodated themselves to the times, and not to that which even themselves
judged true, who can rely on them, unless he first resolve not to be settled in
any truth, but to be ranked among those who circumferuntur omni vento
doctrinae? which in effect is no better than to have no true Faith at all.

Fifthly, seeing they cannot, nor ever could agree with those whom they style
Brethren; and (which is the main point) have no possble means of agreement; no
men in wisdom can join themselves to the common general name of Protestants,
not knowing which of them in particular hold the Truth; nor who are or are not
Protestants; nor why they should believe one sect of them more than another;
neither is it possible to join with them all, they believing and professing to
believe contradictory Tenants, some of which must needs be false.

Sixthly, Seeing those first Reformers are confessed to hold Doctrines in
themselves damnable, and detested even by Protestants, how can they be excused
from Heresy? And seeing they left the whole Catholic Church extant before
Luther, upon pretense of Errous in Doctrine of less moment than those wherein
they thus differ among themselves, and yet forsake not one another, but will
needs be Brethren and of one Communion, how can they be excused from Schism by
their division from the Communion of all Churches?

But now having declared what kind of men the Progenitots of Protestants were,
let us in the next place examine of what Fathers we Catholics may deservedly
glory, even by the Confession of our Adversaries, who by evidence of Truth are
forced to confess, that the Ancient Holy Fathers taught the same Doctrines,
and practiced the same things, which Protestants disprove in us, and for the
Reformation whereof they pretend to have forsaken our Church. This then,
according to the order prescribed in the Preface, must be the subject of the
next Consideration.

THE SECOND. CONSIDERATION
By the Confession of Protestants, the Ancient Holy Fathers believed and
practiced the same things which we believe and practice against Protestants.
1. FIrst (says Brereley tract. 1. sect. 3. subdivis. 1.) concerning Vows, it
is confessed, that the Fathers did allow Vows of perpetual Chastity, affirming
them to be obligatory. Non ignoramus (says Chemnitius exam. part. 3. page 14.
ante med.) quod Patres vota perpetui caelibatus probent, quodque illa
obligatoria etiam agnoscant. In so much as he (Chemnitius) does thereupon
specially recite and reject in this behalf, the several sayings of Basil,
Chemnitius ibid. page 40. a. ante med.
Ambrose, and Chrysostom. Also of Ibid. page 42. a.
Epiphanins, Austine, and Ibid. page 42. b. ante med.
Innocentius. And it is likewise yet further affirmed, that the Peter Martyr de
Votis page 490. says, Erant ergo Clementis aetate professiones and vota,
fateor. I am tune incaeperant homines deflectere a Verbo Dei, etc. With whom
agrees Mr. Parkins in Problem, etc. page 191. initio, saying, In antedictis
saeculis, stipulationes de continentia public in Ecclesia fieri solebant: nam
Anno Christi 170. Clemens Alex. l. 3* stromat. ait, etc.
profession and Vows of Chastity were extant among Christians in the time of
Clement Bishop of Alexandria, who by Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 11. paul^ante med.
says, Clemens de se ipso loquitur, quod prope ad Apostolorum tempo^a
successerit.
his own testimony lived near to the Apostles times: that Peter Martyr ibid.
page 524 fine says, Scio Epiphanium cum multis aliis ex Patribus in eo errare,
quod peccatum esse dicunt votum hujusmodi violare, cum onufuerit, and male
illum id refer in traditiones Apostolicas.
Epiphanius and many other Fathers erred therein: that Cent. 3. c. 6. col. 140.
linea 27. and cent. 3. c. 7. col. 176. l^ea 39.
Tertullian and Cyprian taught Vows of Chastity: that the famous ancient Iustus
Molitor de Ecclesia militante, etc. page 80. fine says, Chalcedonense
Concilium contra Spiritus Sancti oracula, Monachis, and Virginibus monialibus
usum conjugii interdixit.
Council of Chalcedon did (hereupon) forbid Marriage to Monks and Nuns: that
St. Augustine and all the Fathers assembled with him in the Carthage Council So
says Danaeus contra Bellarm. primae partis altera part page 1011. initio. And
see Council. 4. Carthag. can. 104. and 1 Timothy 5.9, 10, 11, 12.
abused manifestly the word of God, saying upon the Apostles words: If any
Widow how young soever, etc. has vowed her self to God, left her secular
habit, and under the testimony of the Bishop and Church appeared in a religious
weed, if afterward she go to secular Marriage, she shall according to the
Apostle have damnation, because she dared to make void the vow of Chastity,
which she made to God: that Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in 1 Timothy 5.
fol. 381. b. sect. 10. initio. And see Danaeus contra Belar. 1. partis altera
part page 1011. To make good what here is granted by Mr. Fulk and Danaeus, see
the first Faith mentioned by the Apostle, expounded in like manner of the Vow
of Chastity by the Greek Fathers, namely Epiphanius haer. 48. Basil. lib. de
Virginitate parum ultra medium. And by Theodoret, Chrysostom, Occomenius, and
Theophilact, in their several commentaries in 1 Timothy 5. and also by the Fathers
of the Latin Church, namely by Augustine de Sancta Virginitate cap. 23. and de
bono viduitatis cap. 8. and 9. and in Psa. 75. by Innocentius Epist. 2. ad
Vict. cap. 13. by Gelasius Epist. 1. cap. 23. by Tertul. de Monogamia. By
Hierom. l. 1. contra Jovin. c. 7. and in Ezech. c. 24. prope finem. By
Fulgentius Epist. 3. and by Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius, and Beda in their
several commentaries in 1 Timothy c. 5.
likewise by the first Faith (mentioned in the Apostles foresaid saying, 1 Timothy
5.11.12.) most of the ancient Fathers do expound the vow or promise of
continency: that also vows of Chastity have been used Calvin Instit. l. 4. c.
13. sect. 17. says, Hoc inquiunt ab ultima memoria fuit observatum, ut se
alligarent continentiae voto, qui totos se Domino dicare vellent: fateor certe
antiquitus quoque receptum fuisse hunc morem, sed eam aetatem sic ab omni vitio
liberam fuisse non concedo. And Master Wotton in defense of Master Parkins,
etc. page 491. paulo post med. confesses the general received doctrine of the
Fathers in this matter, saying thereof, But the Fathers are not for us, what
then? Is nothing true which cannot be confirmed by their testimony, etc. Indeed
it is one of the blemishes of the ancient Writers, that they were so highly
conceited of single life, etc. Therefore it is not to be looked for that
antiquity should afford us any testimony herein, against the practice and
judgment of those days.
ab ultima memoria, and antiquitus receptum; that Peter Martyr de Caelibatu and
Votis page 477. ante med. says, Statim ab Apostolorum temporibus nimium tribui
caeptum est caelibatui, etc. And Hermannus Hamelmannus l. de Traditionibus
Apostolicis, etc. col. 460. linea 58. says, Post mortem ^oannis Apostoli
statim caeperunt defectiones a fide, etc. prohibitiones nuptiarum, and ciborum,
vota, caelibatus, etc. And see also there col. 254. linea 30. And see Johannes
Bugchagius in Jonam cap. 3. edit. Wittembergae Anno 1550.
immediately after the Apostles times too much was attributed to vows: that
Ignatius himself (though their Scholar) signifies in his Epistles his too
Centur. 2. c. 3. col. 64. fine l. 40. it is said, Ex Epistolis Ignatii apparet,
h^mines jam tum paulo impensius caepisse amare and venerari Virginitatis
studium. Nam in Epist. ad Antioch. ait, Virgins videant, cui se consecrarint.
And see Ignatius his like phrase of professed widows in Epist. ad Tarsenses,
prope finem, where he says, eas quae in Virginitate sunt honorate, sicut
sacras Christi, viduas pudicas ut Sacrarium Dei veneremini. And Polycarpus the
Apostles Scholar in his Epistle ad Philippenses ( specially mentioned and
alleged by Eusebius l. 4. c. 13. fine, and l. 3. c. 30. fine, and by Irenaeus
l. 3. c. 3. fine) says in like manner, Viduae vero pudicae circa fidem Dei
interpellent incessanter pro omnibus, etc. cognoscentes seipsas quia sunt
sacrarium Dei.
much liking of the profession of Virginity: and Centur. 2. c. 10. col. 167.
linea 24. de virginitate minus commode loquitur.
speaks incommodiously of Virginity, Abraham Schultetus in his Medulla
Theologiae Patrum page 450. circa med. allegeth Ignatius saying ad Philip.
Saluto Collegium Virginum. Whereupon he immediately infers: Ergone in illo
Ecclesiae flore fuerunt, quae castitatem and continentiam perpetuam
profiterentur Virgins? Fuerunt omnino, etc. In like manner the Century Writers
cent. 4. c. 6. col. 467. linea 28.36. and col. 476. ^in. 32. And Osiander in
his Epi^om, etc. cent. 4. l. 4. c. 20. page 507. initio, and 503. fine do
affirm, and allege Monasteries of professed Virgins in that Century or age in
which Constantine lived.
saluting, and affirming Colleges of Virgins: and so plainly, that certain of
our learned Adversaries, even those who will not acknowledge the
evidently-mentioned Vows of those times, are yet nevertheless enforced to
confess, even of that first age, how that Schuletus ut supra.
in that flower of the Church there were Virgins, that professed perpetual
Chastity. That lastly St. Ambrose and Epiphanius derive Peter Martyr de
caelibatu and Votis page 543. paulo post med. and page 525. initio. And St.
Augustine tom. 6. contra Faustum Manich. l. 30. c. 4. answers accordingly to
Faustus the Manichee, who objected St. Paul to prove (with our adversaries)
vowed Chastity to be the Doctrine of Devils, saying to him, Ipsi jam timeo
Apostolo, ne daemonio^um doctrinam intulisse tunc lconio videatur, cum Theclam
oppignoratam jam thalamo, in amorem, sermon suo, perpetuae Virginitatis
incendit.
professed chastity from the institution of St. Paul.

In like manner concerning the marriage of Priests, to omit all other testimony
thereof hereafter alleged (see Brereley tract. 1. sect. 7. examp. 3. at f. g.
h. i. and tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. at o. and 98. sundry, and yet more ancient
examples alleged against Priests marriage) it is confessed that even So says
Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 330. circa med.
that notable and famous Council of Nyce (which says Mr. Whitgift Whitgift
ibid.
is of all wise and learned men reverenced, esteemed and embraced next unto the
Scriptures themselves) did (as Mr. Cartwright acknowledges) affirm and teach,
Mr. Cartwright in his 2. Reply part. 1. page 485. circa med. and see this yet
further confessed by Mr. Bancroft in his Survey of the pretended holy discipline
page 486. And by the Century Writers cent. 4. col. 656. lin. 44. And by Mr.
Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in Matthew. 8. sect. 3. fol. 14. a. post med.
And see also Socrates hist. l. 1. c. 8. ante med. and Zozom. hist. l. 1. c. 22.
that unto those that were chosen unto the Ministry unmarryed, it was not
lawful to take any Wife afterward: only being married before entrance into the
Ministry, it was lawful for them to use the benefit of that (precedent)
marriage? And Paphnutius, one of the Council, shows concerning Priests
unlawfulness to marry after Priesthood undertaken, that not only this was
before that Council, but was also yet further an ancient tradition of the
Church, in which both himself and the rest of the Council rested. Thus far Mr.
Cartwright. In so much as the Council of Carthage (whereat St. Austin was
present) doubted not to refer this to the Council. 2. Carthag. can. 2. says,
Omnibus placet, ut Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi, etc. ab uxoribus se
abstineant, ut, quod Apostoli docuerant, and ipsa servavit antiquitas, nos
custodiamus.
Apostles doctrine. And Mr. Jewel accordingly confesses concerning the Fathers
opinion against marriage of Priests, saying thereof: Mr. Jewel in his defense
of the Apology page 164. and after the Edition of Anno 1571. page 195. f. fine.
To make further good Mr. Jewels confession, the studious Reader may yet further
read the prohibition of Priests marriage, for the Greek Church in Origin (in
Number. homil. 23.) in Epiphanius (haer. 59. ante med.) in Eusebius (de demonstr.
Evang. l. 1. c. 9.) Nyssenus (de virginitate c. ult.) Basil (ad Amphilochium
can. 3. and 6. and in cap. 3. Esaiae) Chrysostom (hom. 2. in Job) Justinian (c.
l. 1. tit. 3. de Episcopis and Clericis n. 45. and in Nomocanon. tit. 9. c. 29.
and authent. col. 1. Quomodo Episcopos, etc. tit. 6. c. 1. and 5. and Novella
123. de Episcopis and Clericis c. 14. and 29.) and in Concilio Neocaesariensi
can. 1. and Synod. Trullana can. 6. and 12. and 48. And for the Latin Church in
Innocentius Ep. 1. c. 9. Leo Ep. 84. ad Anastasium Thessal. and 92. ad
Rusticum, and Hierom. contra Vigilantium cap. 1. and in Ep. ad Titum. c. 1. and
Ambrose Ep. 82. and in 1 Timothy c. 3. And to omit many particular Fathers in
Council. 2. Arelatensi can. 2. and 3. and in Concilio Elibertino can. 33. and
Council. Roman. can. 8. and Council. 5. Carthag. can. 3. and Council. 1. Toletan.
can. 1. and Council. 1. Arausican. can. 22. and 23. and Council. 1. Turonensi
can. 1. and 2. and Council. Agathense can. 9. A doctrine so evident in the
ancient Fathers, that our learned adversaries do accordingly confess the same.
See to this end the doctrine hereof acknowledged by Hospinianus (hist.
Sacramentar. part. 1. page 132.) in Syricius, Innocentius, Calixtus, the 2.
Council of Arles, the Council of Neocaesaria, etc. acknowledged in like manner
by Chemnitius ( in his examen. etc. part. 3. page 50. a. b. and 52. a. and 62.
a.) in Origin, Hierom, Ambrose, Innocentius, Syricius, and Epiphanius,
acknowledged likewise by Osiander in his Epitom. etc. centur. 4. in the Council
of Neocaesarea (page 46. in can. 1.) in the 2. Council of Arles (ibid. page
195. in can. 2.) in the council of Eliberis (ibid. page 167. in can. 33.) in
the first Toletan Council (centuria 5. page 45. in can. 1.) in the Council of
Ag^tha (ibid. ^^ntur. 5. page 122. in can. 9.) in Syricius (ibid. page 176. in
can. 9.) in the fifth Council of Carthage (ibid. page 156. in can. 3.) in the
first Arausican Council (ibid. page 298. in can. 22. and 23.) in the Council
called Turonense (ibid. page 395. in can. 1. and 2.) and in the Synod called
Venetica (ibid. page 406. in can. 11.) And see yet further the ancient Fathers
confessed, and thereupon reproved herein by the Century Writers of Magdeburg in
centur. 3. col. 148. line 48. and centur. 4. col. 303. throughout.
Here I grant Mr. Harding is like to find some good advantage, as having
undoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his side. In like manner
concerning Monks, it is confessed, that the more ancient Fathers, namely Mr.
Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 344. post med.
Ruffine, Theodoret, Zozomen, Socrates, etc. do mention Monks almost in every
page. And that in the same Century or age in which Constantine our first
Christian Emperor lived, Centur. 4. c. 10. col. 1294. line 50.51.
there were Monks throughout Syria, Palestine, Bithynia, and other places of
Asia. Also throughout Centur. 4. col. 1306. line 19.20.
Africa and Ibi col. 1331. lin. 53. Ibid. c. 6. col. 471. lin. 24. and col.
474. lin. 14. and col. 475. lin. 42. and col. 476. lin. 17. See further mention
of their wonderful austere life in Epiphanius haer. ultim. versus finem, and in
Socrates hist. l. 4. c. 18. prope initium. and in Zozom. hist. l. 3. c. 13. and
l. 6. c. 29. paulo post initium, and in Evagrius hist. l. 1. c. 21. and l. 6.
c. 22. and see throughout in Palladius his Historia Lausaica, and in Theodorets
(...); and see hereafter in this considerat. number. 23. at 50.
Europe; with like further confessed mention, as well of their Ibid. col. 472.
lin. 21.22.50. and of their peculiar habit, see Ambrose sermon. 94 and Zozom. l.
3. c. 13. paulo post initium, and Hierom. Ep. 4. ad Rusticum Monachum, and
Greg. l. 3. dial. c. 1. and Cassianus l. 1. de institut. caenob. And see
hereafter in this Consideration Number. 23. at 51, 52, 53.
austere life and Religious See the Century Writers centur. 4. c. 6. col. 464.
lin. 56. and col. 466. lin. 31. and col. 474. lin. 38.
habit; as also of their Centur. 4. c. 6. col. 464. 464. lin. 59.
monasteries, their voluntary professed Council. Chalcedonense can. 15. decreed
that, Si qua Virgo se dedicaverit Deo, similiter Monachus, non licet eis
nupt^is jungi: for which it is reprehended by Mr. Whitaker contra Camp rat. 4.
page 62. fine, and by Osiander in Epitom. cent. 5. l. 3. c. 13. page 356. in
can. 7. and page 359. in can. 15. and 16. and by Iustus Molitor de Eccles.
militante page 80. fine. And of the vowed Chastity of Monks, See further
Chrysostom. Ep. 6. ad Theodorum Monachum ante med. and Council. Chalcedonense can.
16* and Council. 6. Constantinop. can. 41, and 44. and Basil regula 14. and and
sermon. 1. de institutione Monachorum, and in Ep. priori ad Monachum lapsu^, and
Council. Antisiodorense can 24, and in Dionysius Areopagita de Ecclesiastica
Hierarchia c. 6. Thus much of the Greek Church. And for the Latin Church in
Europe, see Leo Ep. 92. ad Rusticum Narbonensem Episcopum c. 13. and Syricius
Ep. l. c. 6. and Council. 2. Turonense can. 11. and 16. and Council. 4. Tolet.
can. 51. And for the Church of Africa, See St. Austin in Psalm 75. and Socrates
hist. l. 4. c. 18. initio.
poverty and [z] chastity. In so much as Mr. Cartwright affirms, that Mr.
Cartwright in his first Reply part. 1. page 502. circa med.
Monks are Antichristian, notwithstanding their antiency: and that Mr.
Cartwright ibid. page 510. ante med.
Hieroms Monks, Hermits and Anchorets were at that time very gross. As also
Calvin professes himself to dislike Calvin institut. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 16.
says, Interim non dissimulo, vel in illa, quam Augustinus commendat, prisca
forma (Monachisimi) esse nonnihil quod mihi parum placeat.
the Monachism which Austine commends, and yet are the undoubted miracles of
the Monks of those said times, as namely of Austin, Antony, Paul, Hilarion, the
Monks of Egypt and others, undoubtedly reported for certain, by the ancient See
Brereley tract. (...). cap. 3. sect. 7. at 1.
Fathers, and confessed for true by the Sea hereafter in this Consideration
number. 23. at 54.
Protestant Divines of Magdeburg.

2. Secondly, concerning the Blessed Sacrament, as namely concerning the form
thereof, the Consecration thereof, the Real Presence, the reservation thereof,
the great reserved care (had more thereof, than of the water of Baptism) least
any part thereof should fall down to the ground; the mixture of water with Wine
in the Chalice, and the receiving thereof fasting and chaste. As concerning the
form thereof, it is confessed upon the testimony of Epiphanius in Anchorat.
ante med. says, Accepit hoc and ubi gratias egisset, dixit: Hoc meum est, hoc
and hoc, and videmus, quod non aequale est, neque simile, non imagini in carne,
etc. hoc enim est rotundae formae, etc.
Epiphanius, that the Sacrament was (as the Lord Bishop of Winchester
translateth his words) Mr. Bilson in his true difference, etc. part. 4. page
566. Also Gesnerus in his compend^um doctrinae caelestis, Printed Wittemb^^g
1606. loc. 33. page 263. circa med. says, Quod ^utem panem rotunda forma
usurpamus, nonne e Papistic^s superstitionibus reliqu^um est? Minime, quandoqu^
them Epiphanius antiquissimus Scriptor, suo tempore illas rotulas usitatas
fulsse in Anchorat. commemorat, etc.
round in figure; or as Master Cartwright confesses a round Mr. Cartwright in
Mr. Whitg^fts desence, etc. page 593. post med. and see Pretorius de
Sacramentis page 287. ante med.
Wafer cake brought in by Pope Alexander, who lived Osiander centur. 2. page
10. circa med. and Mr. Whitgift ubi supra page 594 initio, say he lived An. 111.
about 1500. years since. An usage so further ancient, that, as our Adversaries
confess, Hospinion in hist. Sa cramentar, etc. l. 4. page 370. post med. says
hereof, Quando primum caeperint, vel domi vel in Templis parare, ex farinae
spuma, vel panis minutas and rotundas, instar denariorum, host olas and
buccellas, cert^ sciri non potest, etc. mentionem faci^ Epiphanius panis
rotundi in Caenae, etc.
the beginning thereof cannot be found. As touching the consecration thereof,
whereas our learned Adversaries hold, that Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish
Testament in Mat, 26. sect. 7. fol. 53. b. paulo ante med, and in 1 Cor. 10..
4. fol. 227. b. paulo ante med. and M. Willet in his Synopsis p. 464.
consecration does consist not (only) in the words (pronounced) but in the
whole action, etc. Whereto are required the taking, eating, drinking, etc. The
Fathers to the contrary refer this consecration, not to our taking, drinking,
eating, etc. but to the words of Christ, not Greg. Nyssen in sermon, Cate, de
divino Sacramento.
because it is eaten (says St. Gregory Nyssene) does it become the body of the
Word, but forthwith by the word it is changed into the body, as it is said by
the word, This is my body. A testimony so plain with us, that the Centurists do
therefore recite, and place it under their title of the Cen. 4. c. 4. col. 287,
lin. 18. and col. 295. lin. 27. and 40.
hurtful opinions and errors of the Doctors. This point being made yet
further plain by the Fathers confessed practice of See this next hereafter.
reserving the Sacrament unreceived (which had been vain and defective, had not
consecration been perfect without receiving:) and no less plain by the many
other like Chrysostom in homil, de proditione Judae versus finem says,
Sacerdotis ore verba proferuntur, and Dei virtute consecrantur. Hoc est, ait,
corpus meum, hoc verbo proposita consecrantu^: and ad Pop. hom. 60. post med.
he says, Qui namque dixit, Hoc est corpus meum, and verbum facto confirmavit.
St. Ambrose de Sacramentis l. 4. c. 4. says, Quomodo potest qui panis est,
corpus esse Christi? Consecratione. Consecratio igitur quibus verbis fit?
Domini Jesus, etc. ergo sermo Christi hoc conficit Sacramentum, etc. vides ergo
quam operatorius est sermo Christi. And again l. 4. c. 5. he further says,
Ante verba Christi, calix est vini and aquae plenus, ubi verba Christi operata
fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur, qui redemit plebem. And Eusebius Emissenus,
hom. 5. Pasch. versus finem says, Antequam invocatione summi nominis
consecrentur, substantia illi^ est panis and vini, post verba autem Christi,
corpus and sanguis est Christi. In respect hereof St. Hierom says of Priests,
that, Corpus Christi sacro ore conficiunt (Hierom in Epist. 1. ad Heliodorum c.
7.) And see the Centurists cent. 3. cap. 7. col. 184. lin. 33. Where holy
Pontianus is by them reproved for his like saying. And St. Cyprian de caena
Domini paulo post initium, says of the Sacrament: Omnipotentia verbi factus
est caro. And before them all Holy Irenaeus l. 5. c. 1. post initium says,
Quando mixtus calix and fractus panis percepit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia, etc.
sayings of the Fathers, concerning consecration, whereof some do also further
concern the Priests St. Austin sermon. 19. de sanctis says, Crucis charactere,
etc. altaris Sacramenta cum interpositione Dominicorum verborum conficiuntur:
and sermon. 181. de tempore he further says, Hoe enim signo Crucis, consecratur
corpus Dominicum. And in Evang. Joan. tract. 118. he says, Quod signum
(Crucis) nisi adhibeatur, five frontibus credentium, five ipsi aquae qua
regenerantur, five oleo quo chrismate unguntur, five sacrificio quo aluntur,
nihil eorum rite perficitur. And see the very like saying in Chrysostom in
homil. quod Christus sit Deus, circa med. And in Matthew. hom. 55. circa med. And
see what is confessed hereof by the Centurists centur. 3. c. 6. col. 141. lin.
34. and by Mr. Burges hereafter in this Consideration number. 23. at 82.
signing of the Sacrament with the sign of the Cross: We will now next speak of
the Real Presence, concerning which it is confessed, that Gregory the Great
Humfred Iesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. page 626, post medium.
taught transubstantiation; that The Century writers cent. 5. col. 517. l. 23.
say, Chrysostomus transubstantiationem videtur confirmare: nam ita scribit,
etc. And see Musculus in loc. com. page 336. circa med. reciting and reproving
a saying of Chrysostom concerning the Sacrament.
Chrysostom is thought to confirm Transubstantiation; that Centur. 4. c. 10.
col. 985. lin. 30.
Eusebius Emissenus did speak unprofitably of Transubstantiation; that Antony
de Adamo in his Anatomy of the Mass fol. 221. a. fine, and see as much
confessed by the Century Writers cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295. lin. 3. And by
Oecolampadius in libro Ep^stolarum Oecolampadii and Zuingli^ lib. 3. page 756.
and by V^dian. de Eucharist. Aphorism. l. 5. page 150. and 151.
the Books of Sacraments ascribed to Ambrose, affirm the opinion of Christ's
bodily presence in the Sacrament. Wherein Peter Martyr likewise professes to
Peter Martyr in defens. object. Gardlner. part. 4. page 724. And see also Peter
Martyrs further dislike of Cyrils sayings in his Epistles, annexed to his
common places in English, in his Epistle there to Beza page 106. b. ante med.
Where he says, I will not so easily subscribe to Cyril, who affirmed such a
communion, as thereby even the substance of the flesh and blood of Christ,
first is joined to the blessing (for so he calls the holy bread) etc. In so
much as in his second Alphabetical table (there) of the additions under the
letter H. at the word Heresy, is set down there, Heresy of Cyril touching our
Communion with Christ 106. b. And in his Epistle to Calvin ibid. page 98. a.
ante med. he reproves further for this opinion Cyril and some other Fathers.
dislike the judgment of Cyril: that In the treatise attributed to Vrsinus,
entitled Commonefactio cujusdem Theologi de S. Caena, and ejusdem
commonefactionis consideratio. page 211. and 218.
in Cyprian are many sayings, which seem to affirm Transubstantiation; In so
much as they do Unworthily, For the Book of Sermons entitled, de operibus
Cardinalibus Christi, commonly attributed to Cyprian, ( wherein among others
are contained the several Sermons de Baptismo Christi, de Caena Dom. de
ablutione pedum, etc. which Sermon de Caena Dom. contains the sayings now
intended) is dedicated to Cornelius, who was Bishop of Rome when Cyprian lived,
and to whom Cyprian himself l. 1. Epist. 1. and Epist. 3. did write, in so much
that Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament, in 1 Cor. c. 11. fol. 282. a.
circa med. allegeth testimony from thence, affirming, that the Author de Caena
Domini was not in time much inferior to Cyprian. And Erasmus in his Annotations
annexed to Cyprians works, Printed at Basil 1558. upon the folio 287. affirms
it to be the work of some learned man of that age.
unworthily affirm, that Sermon of his in which those sayings are extant to be
counterfeit. That lastly Ignatius Mr. Whitgift in his defense against
Cartwrights reply page 408. ante med.
who was St. John's Scholar, and lived in Christ's time, did (as Theodoret 1200.
years since, and themselves now do Theodoret. dial. 3. and Hamelmannus de
traditionibus Apostolicis, etc. col. 746. lin. 18.19.22.23. etc. allegeth not
only Theodoret, but also one Wydefortus, alleging Anno 1396. this saying of
Ignatius out of an ancient copy of that time. And so likewise does Chemnitius
in his examen part. 1. page 94. a. fine.
affirm, and as the Lutherans do object in Vide Recitationes de Concilio
scripti libri Concordiae, etc. (Printed at Lipsia 1581) nona recitat. page 177.
ante med.
proof of their real presence) say of the Heretics in his time, they do not
admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be
the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins. And
one of our Adversaries Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theologica page 256.
says, Commentum Papistarum de transubstantiatione matu^e in Ecclesiam irrepsit.
confesses accordingly, that Transubstantiation entered early into the Church.
And another Antony de Adamo in his Anatomy of the Mass page 236. a. ante med.
says, I have not yet hitherto been able to know, when this opinion of the
Real and bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin. As concerning
reservation of the Sacrament whereas according to our Adversaries Doctrine, Mr.
Willet in his Synopsis page 460. ante med.
it is no Sacrament unless it be received; The contrary was so plainly taught
and practiced even in the more ancient times of Chrysostom. in Ep. 1. ad
Innocentium.
St. Chrysostom, Cypr. in sermon. de lapsis post med.
Cyprian, Irenaeus apud Eusebium hist. l. 5. c. 24.
Irenaeus, Iustine in Apolog. 2. prope finem. This testimony of Justin is so
plain, that Mr. Cartwright in his 2. reply part. 1. page 77. circa med. says
thereof, Iustine (his saying) of the Deacons carrying the Bread of the holy
Supper of the Lord to those which were not present at the action of the Supper,
is contrary to the institution. And see M^. Cartwrights like judgment in Mr.
Whitgifts defense, etc. page 585. paulo post med.
Justin, etc. that Mr. Fulk confesses hereof saying, Fulk against Heskines,
Sanders, etc. page 77. prop^ finem.
that the Sacrament (of some) was reserved in the elder days of the Church, is
not so great a Controversy, as whether it ought to be reserved: and Calvin
acknowledges Calvin instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 39.
the reservation of the Sacrament (to be) veteris Ecclesiae exemplum, See Peter
Martyr lib. contra Gardinerum, object. 88.
the example of the ancient Church. And (to omit others) Chemnitius does
likewise acknowledge, that Chemnitius examen part. 2. page 102. a. paulo post
medium.
witnesses of this custom of private reservation of the Eucharist are
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Basil, etc. And that Chemnitius ibidem.
certain of the ancient Fathers greatly commended the same, as Nazianzen,
Ambrose, etc. And that it was Chemnitius ibid.
antiqua consuetudo late patens, and diu propagata. In so much as See this
hereafter in this Consideration number. 19. in the margent at k.
Peter Martyr cannot but acknowledge, that (by the testimony of St. Cyril) the
Anthropomorphites were specially condemned for their impugning of the
Sacraments reservation. As concerning the great observed care had more of this
Sacrament, than of the water of Baptism, that no part thereof should fall to
the ground, to avoid tedious repetitions, we refer to that which is (in
Brereley tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 3. in the margent at 16.) alleged in that
behalf, from the known and evident testimonies, of St. Austine, and Cyril (who
lived above 1200. years since) and of Tertullian and Origin who lived almost
fourteen hundred years since.

As concerning the necessity of mingling water with Wine in the Chalice, before
consecration of the Sacrament, it is so abundantly testified by the Fathers
Justin Apolog. 2. fine, and Irenaeus l. 5. c. 1. Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 3. Ambrose l.
5. de Sacramentis c. 1. and l. 4. c. 5. Hierom. in Marc. c. 14. Augustim.
tract. 120. in Joan. and de Eccles. dogmat. c. 75. and de doctrina Christiana
l. 4. c. 21. Eusebius. Emissen. Sermo 5. de Paschate. Council. 3. Carthag. can. 24.
and Council. Arausican can 17. and Council. 3. Brach. can. 1. and Council. Trib.
can. 21. and Council. African. can. 4. and ex capitulis Graec. Syn. c. 55. and
Council. 6. Constantinop. can. 32.
of all ages, and Countries, that Mr. Whitgift says Mr. Whitgift in his
defense, etc. page 473. prope initium.
Cyprian was greatly overseen in making it a matter so necessary in Celebration
of the Lords Supper, to have water mingled with wine, which was at that time,
no doubt, common to more than to him. Mr. Cartwright likewise acknowledges,
that Mr. Cartwright alleged in Mr. Whitgifts foresaid defense page 525. fine.
in the mingling of water with Wine, a necessity and great mystery was placed,
as may appear (says he) both by Justin Martyr and Cyprian. And Mr. Jewel
speaking of this mixture, confesses in like manner, saying, Mr. Jewel. in his
reply page 34. paulo ante med.
indeed St. Cyprian and certain old Fathers spoke of it, and force it much.
Add but now hereto, that the Armenians, being the first we read of that denied
this mixture, affirming (with our Adversaries) that only Wine was to be used,
were therefore specially condemned of error, as witness Theoph lact in Joan.
cap. 19. m^n^ioning the water and blood which issued from Christ's side, says,
Confundantur Armeni qui non admiscent in mysterris aquam vino; non enim
credunt, ut videtur, quod aqua ex latere egressa sit.
Theophilact, and the Fathers of the sixth Council Council. 6. Constantinop. can.
32. says, Novimus quod in Armenianorum Regione, vinum tantum in sacra mensa
offerunt, aquam illi non miscentes, qui Sacrificium incruentum peragunt, which
their usage that Council there condemns, saying there further against it, Nam
and Iacobus Domini nostri Jesus Christi frater, etc. and Basilius Coesariae
Archiepiscopus, etc. mystico, nobis in scripto tradito, Sacrificio, ita
peragendum, in Sacro Mysterio, ex aqua and vino, sacrum poculum, ediderunt.
of Constantinople, who about a thousand years since alleged against them,
Ibid. ut supra.
St. James his Liturgy in proof of the soresaid mixture. As concerning the
receiving of the Sacrament fasting, St. Austine says, Aug. in Ep. 118. c. 6.
and vide Council. 3. Carthag. can. 29. and 48. And Brereley in his omissions of
page 85. says, See this confessed by Hospinian in hist. Sacram. part. 1. l. 2.
page 48. ante med. where having alleged this saying of Austin he says thereof,
Non obscure innuit Augustinus jejunium hoc traditionem Apostolicam esse.
It pleased the Holy Ghost, and was universally observed, that our Lords Body
should enter into the mouth of a Christian, before other meats, as Tertullian
says thereof, Tertul. l. 2. ad Vx^rem and see this in the Centurists cent. 3.
col. 132. line 10.
ante omnem cibum, before all meat, the reason whereof St. Austin affirms to
be Aug. in Ep. 118. c. 6. and see Hospinian in hist. Sacram. part. 1. page 48.
and 25.
(in honorem tanti Sacramenti) in honor of so great a Sacrament.

As concerning enjoined Chastity upon receiving of the Sacrament, the words of
St. Hierom. adv. Iovin. Apol. says, I appeal to their conscience, who the same
day after carnal copulation do communicate, and as Persius says, purge the
night with water, why dare they not go to the Martyrs. and vide Council.
Elibertinum, apud Osiandium in Epitom. cent. 4. page 181. fine.
Hierom do so plainly testify observed Chastity by the Laity before the time of
their Communion, that Mr. Fulk in this case acknowledges Mr. Fulk against
Heskines, Sanders, etc. page 458. paulo post med.
Hieroms admonition given to married Persons, to abstain from company with
their wives, etc. which he there terms Mr. Fulk. ibid. paulo post.
unworthy, and Mr. Fulk ibid.
Popish Divinity. Which said Popishness, was yet by the other Fathers
religiously observed, as is confessed further by Hospinianus in historia
Sacramentaria l. 2. page 46. circa med. says, In primitiva Ecclesia
Eucharistia sumpta fuerat cast. And he does there demonstrate this particulary
in sundry ancient Fathers.
Hospinianus. And as the Laity at their certain times of receiving, were thus
enjoined; so likewise to Priests, in regard of their daily celebration, was the
observation of their chastity daily enjoined. Brereley tract. 1. s^ct. 7. subd.
3.
And whereas Mr. Whitaker gives example in Pope Siricius saying, Mr. Whitaker
contra Duraeum l. 7. page 480. ante med. And whereas Mr. Morton in Apolog.
Cathol. c. 73. page 219. allegeth testimony to prove that Siricius did make the
first decree thereof: this (though admitted) only argues some then late
precedent negligence in not observing the then before observed rule of
Chastity: but it argues no more the Doctrine thereof, to be then first begun,
than did the Fathers of the Nycene Council in their Decree of homousion argue
thereby the Doctrine thereof to be first as then begun.
Siricius was the first that annexed perpetual chastity to the Ministers of the
word; whereto we answer, first, that Mr. Whitaker allegeth no proof that
Siricius was the first: neither does he, or can he name any one Catholic
writer of that time so reporting. Secondly we allege most plainly to the
contrary, how that Optatus, who lived in the same time with Siricius,
affirms, that Optatus l. 2. contra Donatistas says, Cum Siricio totus Orbis
in una communionis societate concordat.
all the world joined in Communion with Sircius, so far was he from being then
reputed an Innovator. St. Hierom also, who lived in the time of Damasus
Predecessor to Siricius, says of the very point now in question, Hieron. in
Apolog. ad Pamach. c. 3. and the same Doctrine does he affirm in cap. 1. ad
Titum, and l. 1. c. 19. adversus lovin.
if married men like not this, let them not be angry with me, but with the holy
Scriptures, with all Bishops, Priests and Deacons, who know they cannot offer
Sacrifice, if they use the act of marriage. And this opinion was then not first
begun, but (to the contrary) so universal, that St. Hierom affirms it to be
the general Doctrine and practice of the Churches in Asia, Africa, Europ. As
namely of Hieron. contra Vigilantium c. 1. says, Quid faciunt Orientis
Ecclesiae? quid Egypti and sedis Apostolicae? quae aut Virgins clericos
accipiunt, aut continentes, aut si uxores habuerint, mariti esse desinunt.
the Churches in the East, of Egypt, and the Sea Apostolic. And in like manner
was the marriage of Priests long before these times so plainly impugned for
unlawful, even in the Greek Church by Epiphanius haer. 59. after other plain
words had hereof, says, At dices mihi, in quibusdam locis adhuc liberos
gignere Praesbyteros, Diaconos and Hypodiaconos: at haec non est juxta Canonem,
etc. So plainly does he acknowledge thereby a former canon.
Epiphanius, the most ancient Origin. in Number. hom. 23. says, Certum est, quia
impeditur Sacrificium indesinens iis qui conjugalibus necessitatibus serviunt,
unde videtur mihi quod illius est solius offerre Sacrificium indesinens, qui
indesinenti and perpetuae se devoverit castiati. See this saying of Origin
confessed and rejected, as being against Priests marriage, by Chemnit us in his
examen. part. 3. page 50. a. initio. and vide ibid. page 58. b. post med. and
vide Origin in Levit. hom. 4. and l. 8. contra Celsum.
Origin, and also even by that Misapplyed, For that many learned Protestants do
urge it in proof of Priests marriage, whereas it proves the contrary.
misapplyed if not untrue example of Paphnutius, whereof many probabilities are
appearing. As first, there is not so much as any mention made of this matter by
any who wrote of the Nycene Council before Socrates time, as neither by
Eusebius, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Theodoret, nor yet so much as by Ruffinus,
who hist. l. 1. wrote many things of Paphnutius, and of the Nycene Council: and
could then all these be silent of so great a matter, and so earnestly debated
in the Nycene Council? Secondly, it seems to be against the 3. Canon of the
Nycene Council, which altogether forbids Priests to have dwelling with them
any woman, other than their Mother, Sister, their Fathers Sister, their Mothers
Sister, etc. Whereas if as Socrates reports in the example of Paphnutius, the
Council had left liberty for married laymen afterward made Priests to have
kept still their former wives, why then was not the wife first placed here in
the exception, but altogether omitted? If answer be made, that there was no
such cause of suspicion with the wife; it is replied thereto, that if the
Council had retained any such employed consideration, why yet was there not
exception also for the wives woman-servants, as well, or rather than for the
other? or indeed why was there any such exception at all of Mother, Sister, or
Aunt? Could there be conceived any such danger of suspicion with these against
him that might lawfully keep his wife? This Canon therefore of the Nycene
Council is so direct therein, that our learned adversary Osiander in his
Epitom, etc. cent. 4. page 123. in can. 3. has no other evasion, but to
answer, that this prohibition was made to such of the Clergy, as did
voluntarily live chaste. And what else is this, but implicatio in adjecto? for
if this chastity was in them but voluntary, how then were they according to the
words of this Council altogether prohibited? It is no less than plain
contradiction. For which cause Martin Luther tom. 2. Germ. Jenae fol. 97. says
hereof, I do not acknowledge the holy Ghost in this Nycene Council, because it
forbids him, who has gelded himself, to be made Priest, and also commands
the Clergy to have none dwelling with them, but their Mother, Sister, etc. Had
the holy Ghost no other thing to do in Councils, but to bind his Ministers to
such imposed, dangerous, and not necessary Laws? Thirdly, the 2. Council of
Arles celebrated soon after the Nycene Council, giving mention and allowance
thereof can. 10. and making most of its Canons in imitation of the Nycene
Council, decrees can. 2. and 3. most plainly against such Priests accompanying
of their wives (as is acknowledged by Osiander in Epitom. etc. centur. 4. page
195. in can. 3.) which it would never have done, if so the Nycene Council, but
so lately before had left the matter at liberty. And the like may be said of
the no less ancient Council called Elibertinum. can. 27. and 33. and of
Concilium Telense can. 9. and Concilium 2. Carthaginense, can. 2. and Council.
5. Carthag. can. 3. and Council. 1. Tolet. can. 1. Also of Epiphanius who as
before at h. affirms it to be against the Canon. And St. Hierom who advers.
vigilant. c. 1. affirms the practices of the Churches of the East, of Egypt,
and the Sea Apostolic (to be) that if their Priests were before their
Priesthood formerly married (mariti esse desinunt) they give over their wives:
affirming as before, that all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, know they may not
offer Sacrifice, if they use the act of Marriage. Upon all which premises it is
now referred to the judgment of the indifferent Reader, whether it be more
reasonable to think that so many Fathers and Councils living before Socrates
(the first Author of this report concerning Paphnutius) and varying from him in
this point, erred; or rather that Socrates living after them all, should err
in his singular and contrary report hereof, especially considering as well that
the foresaid 3. Canon of the Nycene Council it self, directly as before,
confuteth his said report, as also for that he is as yet otherwise discovered
for a suspected Writer, and of no credit in his report of those matters,
wherein he is found dissenting from the other more ancient Writers, and is in
such respect holden chargeable by the ancient Father Evagrius hist. l. 1. c. 5.
And more fully by Mr. Whitgift late Lord Archbishop in his defense, etc. page
350. post med. And is also yet further (by Nicephorus l. 6. c. 13. and l. 6. c.
37. and by Mr. Whitgift ubi supra page 350. post med.) noted to have been a
Novatian, whose error (as appears by Socrates himself l. 5. c. 20.) was that
the obser vation of Easter was but a matter of indifferency: in behalf whereof
Socrates l. 5. c. 21. affirmed that there was no Law of the Church to force men
otherwise, most falsely and directly against Council. Antiochen. can. 1. and many
other no less ancient testimonies of the Nycene Council, and of Epiphanius,
Austin, and Theodoret, confessed by Mr. D. Covel in his Examination, etc.
against the plea of the Innocent page 65. ante med. As also in like untrue
manner, and to give color to his supposed indifferency of things, he in the
same place affirms the like indifferency of fasting-days, abstinence from
certain meats, and sundry other points, most clearly against the confessed
testimonies of all Antiquity. Among which this his report of like pretended
indifferency Fathered by him upon Paphnutius in the case of married Priests
accompanying their wives, is thought most probably to be one. As for Zozomenus
like report of Paphnutius, he living after Socrates, and (as the Protestant
Writer Gauvinus in his Palma Christiana page 103. affirms) but following
Socrates in his report hereof (being also a Writer otherwise reproved by St.
Gregory, quoniam multa mentitur, l. 6. Ep. 31.) his testimony is sufficiently
confuted by that which is said in answer to the testimony of Socrates. For this
cause It does appear by Socrates hist. l. 1. c. 8. ante med. and Zozo, hist. l.
1. c. 22. and by the Century Writers cent. 4. c. 9. col. 656. lin. 44 and by
Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in Matthew. 8. sect. 3. fol. 14. a. post
med. that Paphnutius, though he thought that Priesthood did not dissolve
marriage contracted before Orders given, yet he affirmed to the Nycene Council,
that those who were made Priests before they were married, should not
afterward marry: alleging for this (veterem Ecclesiae traditionem) the ancient
tradition of the Church. So plainly does Paphnutius hereby acknowledge, that
this Doctrine was then holden for the Churches ancient Doctrine.
our learned Adversaries doubt not therefore to So Chemnitius in his examen
Council. Trid. part. 3. reprehendeth Hierom, Ambrose and Origin, page 50. a.
ante med. And Epiphanius page 62. a. initio. and Trigivillaeus Gauvius in his
Palma Christiana page 103. reprehendeth Socrates and Zozomene for their report
of Paphnutius, saying thereof, Socrates hoc a ^o temere adjecit, etc. Socrates
added this report rashly of his own devising, etc. with like falsehood did he
wrest the saying of Paphnutius in the Nycene Council, etc. And Z^zomen
following after Socrates, follows his explication in maintenance of the
Doctrine of D^^^^s condemned by Paul 1 Timothy 4.
reprehend the said Fathers. And as Epiphanius and Paphnutius in their cited
testimonies hereof, do in plain terms rest upon the Churches Doctrine before
their times: so likewise the Fathers of the Council. 2. Carthag. can. 2. says,
Om^^bus placet, ut Episcopi, Prae^byteri, and Diaconi, etc. ab uxoribus se
abstin^^. (and for this reason there set down) ut quod Apostoli docuerant and
ipsa servav tantiquitas, nos custodiamus.
Carthage Council, whereat St. Austin was present, doubt not in like manner to
ground this point upon antiquity, and the Apostles Doctrine. So evident thereby
it is, that Siricius in his foresaid Doctrine hereof brought in no innovation or
change.

3. Thirdly, Brereley tract. 1. sect. 3. subd. 3.
as concerning Antichrist, and also Altars, and Sacrifices, which he is
foretold to Daniel 12.11.
take away, Mr. Whitaker confesses touching Antichrist saying: Whitaker l. de
Antichristo page 21. And M. Cartwright in his 2. Reply part. 1. page 508. post
med. says, Diverse of the ancient and the chiefest of them imagined fondly of
Antichrist, as of one singular person.
The Fathers for the most part thought that Antichrist should be but one man,
but in that, as in many other things they erred. Concerning the short time of
his persecution or reign gathered from the Scriptures, Mr. Fox confesses, that
Fox in Apocal. c. 12. page 345. fine post med.
almost all the holy and learned Interpreters, do by a time, times, and half a
time, understand only three years and a half, affirming further this to be Fox
in Apocal. c. 13. page 392. fine.
the consent and opinion of almost all the holy Fathers. As concerning Altras
and Sacrifice, which (as Dr. Reynolds grants) are Dr. Reynolds in his
conference with Mr. Heart. page 552. fine.
linked by nature in relation and mutual dependence one of other, so as the one
being proved, the other is thereby established; and first concerning Altars (in
respect whereof the other was termed See hereafter in this consideration number.
23. in the margent at * next before 13. See also the Sacrament termed the
Sacrifice of the Altar, by St. Austin in Enchirid. cap. 110. and de cura pro
mortu^s cap. 18. and by Greg. in Lucam hom. 37. and by Hierom Ep. 59. ad
Paulinum in solut. 5. quaestionis. And by Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, in his
words alleged hereafter in this Consideration number. 17. in the margent under t.
at Anno 320.
the Sacrifice of the Altar) Peter Martyr reproves the ancient Fathers,
saying, Peter Martyr in his Common places in English part. 4. page 225. b. post
med.
Petrus Alexandrinus attributes more to the outward Altar, than to the lively
Temples of Christ. And yet further against Peter martyr ibid. page 226. a
initio.
Optatus: Optatus l. 6. against Permenianus says, What is the Altar? even the
seat of the Body and Blood of Christ; Ibid.
such sayings as these (says Peter Martyr) edified not the people, etc. And in
no less plain manner is Optatus foresaid saying mentioned and reproved Centur.
4. cap. 6. col. 409. l. 25.
by the Century Writers. As also Peter Martyr reproves the Fathers in general,
saying, Peter Martyr in his Common places part. 4. page 225. b. ante med. And
Mr. Cartwright in his second Reply, the last part page 264. circa med. says,
The ancient Writers abuse herein may easily appear, in that, in this too great
liberty of speech, they used to call the holy Supper of the Lord a Sacrifice,
and the Communion table an Altar. And see Praetorius de Sacramentis page 287.
post med. where he says, Anno 262. Sixtus secundus abrogavit mensas hactenus
usitatas, and constituit Altaria, quae magis repraesentant Judaismum quam
Christianismum.
The Fathers should not with so much liberty have seemed here and there to have
abused the name Altar: A word nevertheless so frequent with the ancient
Fathers, that Ignatius the Apostles undoubted Scholar is by Master Cartwright
and Mr. Jacob Mr. Cartwright in his 2. Reply part. 1. page 517. prope finem
says, Ignatius calls the Communion Table unproperly an Altar; Mr. Cartwright
placing in his margent there (...). And see the like mention of this word in
Ignatius confessed by Mr. Jacob in his reasons taken out of Gods word, etc.
page 58. post med. And see the same word accordingly used by Ignatius in Epist.
ad Philadelph.
confessed to have used the same accordingly.

Now as concerning Sacrifice (in respect whereof the Ecclesiastical Minister,
was by the Fathers See hereafter in this Consideration number. 17. initio at 5.
called properly a Priest) it is affirmed by our learned Adversaries, that the
more ancient Fathers, namely See this affirmed by Calvin hereafter in this
Consideration number. 17. in the margent under the letter t. And M. D. Field l. 3.
of the Church, c. 19. page 107. post med. says in excuse of Calvin, The reason
doubtless that moved the Fathers so much to urge that mystical Sacrifice of
Christ in the blessed Sacrament, was, for that they lived in the midst of Jews
and Gentiles, both whose Religion consisted principally in Sacrifice, the
Fathers therefore to show that Christian Keligion is not without Sacrifice, and
that of a more excellent nature than theirs were, did much urge, that Christ
once offered for the sins of the world upon the Altar of the Cross, is daily in
mystery offered, stain, and his blood powered out on the holy Table, and that
this Sacrifice of Christ, stain for the sins of the world, thus continually
represented, and living in our memories, is the Sacrifice of Christians. Thus
confesses he the plain Doctrine of the Fathers, pretending only them to have
thus urged Sacrifice against the Jews and Gentiles: whereas it is evident that
their frequent assertions of Sacrifice are in their Commentaries upon the
Scripture, and such other their writings, as concern nothing at all, either Jew
or Gentil, but merely and only the instruction of Christians. In respect
whereof Mr. Fulk affirms, that the Fathers received their confessed Doctrine
of Sacrifice from the Jews and Gentiles, saying in his rejoinder to Bristowes
reply, etc. page 28. ante med. The name of Sacrifice, which the Fathers used
commonly for celebration of the Lords Supper, they took of the Gentiles, and
Jews: but how prove you they had it from the Scriptures?
Athanasius, Ambrose, Austin, Arnobius, etc. erred herein; and so fully, that
their Supper (is therefore said to have) carried the face of a renewed
oblation, imitating over verily the Jewish manner of Sacrificing, etc. and that
they Calvin in omnes Pauli Epist. in Haebr. c. 7. ver. 9. page 924. b. says,
Quo magis tot veteres Ecclesiae Doctores hac opinione occupatos fuisse miror,
etc. certe ut error errorem trahere solet, cum ipsi Sacrificium in Christi
caena nullo ejus mandato finxissent, adeoque caenam adulterassent, addito
Sacrificio, colores postea hinc inde accersere conati sunt, quibus errorem suum
fucassent. And in his Book de vera Ecclesiae reformat ( extant in tract.
Theologic. Calvini) page 389. b. fine, he further says, Veteres excusandi non
sunt, quatenus scilicet ipsos apparet a puro and genuino Christi instituto
deflexisse: nam cum in hunc finem celebranda fit caena, ut Sacrificio Christi
communicemus, eo non contenti, oblationem quoque addiderunt: hoc auctarium
vitiosum fuisse dico, etc.
forged a Sacrifice in the Lords Supper, without his Commandment, and so
adulterated the Supper, with adding of Sacrifice. That Cyprians judgment
(herein) is The Century Writers in their third Century col. 83. lin. 34.
reprove Cyprian saying, Sacerdotem inquit (Cyprianus) vice Christi fungi, and
Deo Patri Sacrificium offerri. And in their Alphabetical Table of that Century,
at the Letter S. they say hereof, Sacerdotem vice Christi fungi in Caena Domini
superstitiose asserit Cyprianus, 83.34.
superstitious. That also the writings of Irenaeus and Ignatius (who are most
ancient) are herein The Centurists cent. 2. c. 4. coll. 55. lin. 43.
undertaking to set down the declining, peculiar incommodious opinions, and
errors of the Doctors of those times, do in their said tract of this matter
col. 63. prope initium say, Et si Doctores hujus saeculi de Sacrificio
incruento in Eucharistia Deo faciendo, nihil habeant: tamen quaedam ambigue and
incommode dicta in quibusdam occurrunt, ut in Epist. Ignatii ad Smyrnenses: Non
licet (inquit Ignatius) sine Episcopo, neque offerre, neque Sacrificium
immolare, neque (...). Which words they do afterward col. 167. lin. 17. affirm
to he periculosa and quasi errorum semina, And col. 63. lin. 20. they say in
like manner of Irenaeus, De oblatione porro, and Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. etc.
satis videtur loqui incommode, cum ait, Novi Testamenti novam docuit (Christus)
oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in universo mundo offert Deo.
In so much as they have no other color to excuse Irenaeus foresaid saying, but
to think that he hereby only meant the oblation of bread offered by the people
to the use of the Lords Supper, and afterward the remainder thereof to the use
of the Priests and the poor, as though Christ, in his oblation made in his
institution of the Sacrament, whereof Irenaeus expressly here professes for to
speak, did (to use Irenaeus his words) teach or prescribe this foresaid
offering to the use of the poor to be the new oblation of the new Testament:
this being no less than open violence to Irenaeus word, and meaning; the
Centurists do therefore (col. 113. lin. 23.) plainly charge him to have been
neghigent and improper in his speaking, etc. often calling the Eucharist an
oblation. Lastly these foresaid sayings of Ignatius and Irenaeus are so plain
in the Centurists, that although they be accordingly extant in all Copies and
Libraries, the Centurists yet blush not to say of Ignatius his saying, that
they do partly suspect it, as inserted (col. 113. lin. 9.) and of Irenaeus his
foresaid saying, they say, Si tamen locus fraud and mendo vacat. col. 63. lin.
22. Which extremest shift, they would never have thus undergone, had not the
said sayings appeared plain and manifest with us, and against them, in this
question of Sacrifice. For which cause they do, as before, place them in their
foresaid special tract or recital of the Doctors errors, of those times;
affirming withal, as before, Ignatius his foresaid words to be incommode
dicta, and periculosa, and quasi errorum semina. And of Irenaeus, that, satis
videtur loqui incommode, etc. Which said reprehension made by the Centurists,
is in them so evident and not to be excused, that Mr. Sutcliff does accordingly
confess the same, in his subversion of the three conversions page 32. circa med.
incommodious and dangerous, and that Sebastianus Francus in his Epist. de
abrogandis, in universum, omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis.
presently after the Apostles times, the Supper of our Lord was turned into a
Sacrifice. In so much as some of our Adversaries doubt not to charge the most
ancient Fathers, even with Andraeas Chrastonius ^. de Opificio. Missae, page
167. initio, reciting the Fathers opinion hereof says, Dicta autem Patrum non
solum impetrationem, sed etiam intrinsecam quandam vim placandi innuunt.
Origines hom. 13. in Leviticum ait: Ista est Commemoratio sola, quae propitium
facit Deum hominibus. Athana sius in sermon de defunctis apud Damascenum, ait:
Incruentae host^ae oblatio propitiatio est. To which end he allegeth likewise
further the particular sayings of Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, Gregory,
Bid, and of the third Council of Brach. And concerning the Fathers further
testimonies for Mass, see more hereafter in this consideration number. 17. in the
margent at the Letter t.
propitiatory Sacrifice, and Sacrifice for the dead. And with further
acknowledgement that Sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles:
which point of Sacrifice is so confessedly ancient, that our learned Adversary
Mr. Ascham is enforced to acknowledge that Ascham in Apolog. pro Caena Domini,
etc. page 31. post med. says, Quibus temporibus, and per quos homines, Caena
Dominica de possessione sua per Missam deturbata sit, verissime sciri non
potest, etc. puto tamen originem Missae partim ex Sacrificils illis dimanasse,
quae impii Sacerdotes Iudaei supra modum auxerunt, etc. existimo etiam magnam
partem Missae, ex Gentibus, in nostram Religionem profluxisse, etc. Thus
wandreth he upon surmise without all proof.
no first beginning thereof (since the Apostles times) can be showed. So
chargeable were the Fathers, no less than we now are, in that great question of
See Bullingers Decades in English page 1082. a post med.
Sacrifice.

4. Fourthly, concerning prayer for the dead, it is affirmed that Mr. Fulk in
his retentive, and page 106. initio, and see Bucer in sacra quatuor Evangelia
of 1536. page 31^. ante med.
it prevailed within three hundred years after Christ: that Mr. Fulk in his
confutation of Purgatory page 78. fine, and 320. ante med. and 326. initio.
Ambrose allowed prayer for the dead, and that it was the common error of his
time: that Mr. Fulk ibid. page 194. ante med.
Chrysostom and Hierom allowed prayer for the dead: that See Mr. Fulk ibid.
page 349. post med.
Austin blindly defended it: that it was likewise taught by Chemnitius examen.
part. 3. page 93. b. 94. a.b.
Origin, Ambrose, Prudentius, and Hierom, also by Chemnitius ibid. page 107. b.
ante med.
Austin, Epiphanius, and Chrysostom: that Mr. George Gifford in his
demonstration that our Brownists be full Donatists, page 38. and see hereafter
in this consideration number. 18.
it was general in the Church long before the days of St. Austin, as appears
in Cyprian and Tertullian: that also Mr. Fulk acknowledges Mr. Fulk in
confutation of Purgatory, page 362. ante med. and vide ibid. page 303. circa
med. and 393. paulo ante med. And Brereley in his Omissions of page 90. says,
And see Calvin de vera Ecclesiae reformat. rat. extant in Calvin. tract.
Theolog. page 394. b. ante med.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Hierom, and a great many more do witness, that
Sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles: that And Bucer in his
enarrat: in sacra quatuor Evangelia Printed Basiliae 1537. in Matthew. c. 12.
page 311. paulo ante med. says, Ex eo quidem quod ab initio prope Ecclesiae,
preces and Eleemosynae fiunt pro desunctis, sensim irrepsit ea sententia, quam
D. Augustinus ponit in Euchiridio cap. 110. n^que negandum est defunctorum
animas pietate suorum viventium relevari cum pro illis Sacrificium mediatoris
offertur, etc. Hinc itaque non dubitarim exortum hoc in defunctos officium pro
illis orandi and sacrificandi, etc.
prayer and alms were made for the dead almost from the very beginning of the
Church. That likewise prayer for the dead is taught in the writings Mr. Fulk in
his confutation of Purgatory page 353. And Chemnitius in his examen. part. 3.
page 110. a. circa med. says, Apud Dionysium oration pro defuncto fit in
Templo; And see further there page 100. b. post med. and 101. a. initio, and
vide Dionys. de Eccles. Hierarchi. c. 7. part. 3.
now extant under the name of Dionysius Areopagita, who is mentioned in the
Act. 17.14.
Acts, and those writings, as well Mr. Fulk against the Remish Testament in 2 Thessalonians. 2. sect. 19. fol. 361. b. paulo ante med. thinks that Dionysius lived
in the time of Origin. And Hermannus Pacificus in his Theses etc. page 139.
fine, makes this Dionysius much ancient to Chrysostom saying, Quae mysteriorum
explicatio consentit cum iis quae multo ante (Chrysostomum) Dionysius de hac re
scripsit, cum ait in lib. de Eccles. Hierarchia, etc. And Mr. D. Bridges Lord
Bishop of Oxford, in his defense of the Government, etc. page 917. prope finem,
says, I take this Dionysius to have been before Basil.
acknowledged by Mr. Fulk to have been written above 1300. years since (which
was long before the objected Whereas it is usually objected against this Book,
that if it had been the writing of Dionysius, then Eusebius or Hierom would
have mentioned it, this confessed antiquity thereof before their times avoydeth
that objection, which is also no less plainly avoided by Eusebius hist. l. 5.
c. 26. and H^erom (in Catal. prope initium) who signify that the Books of
sundry Writers were unknown to them.
times to the contrary of Eusebius and Hierom) as also alleged specially by Mr.
Sutcliff, as being Sutcliff de Praesbyterio c. 13. page 91. prope finem says,
Dionysius antiquitatis optimus sane testis: videtur enim esse antiquissimus,
etc. And Mr. Oliver Ormerode in his picture of a Puritan Printed 1605. fol. G.
3. a. ante med, says, I refer you to Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Cyprian,
etc. but what do I cite these Fathers? Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the
Apostles time, makes mention of the Cross in Baptism, de Ecclesiast.
Hierarchia cap. de Baptismo, And see further there fol. G. 2. b. fine. Also the
Protestant treatise, entitled Consensus Orthodoxus Printed in folio Tiguri
Anno 1578. fol. 198. b. initio, allegeth, and affirms Dionysius, who wrote de
Ecclesiastica Hierarchia to have lived Anno Christi. 96. And the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury in his answer to the admonition page 105. sect. ult.
allegeth Dionysius saying, Dionysius Areopagita in his Book de Caelesti
Hierarchia, and 7. chapter speaks thus, etc. And see Mr. Cooper in his
Dictionarium historicum, etc. annexed to ^is Thesaurus, etc. Printed 1578. at
the word Dionysius Areopagita. And Humfred. in Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. page
513. fine, and 514. initio says, Hunc Areopagitam, Suidas, Michael Singelus,
Gregorius Turonensis, and alii, Pauli Auditorem credunt fuisse illum Scriptorem
Ca^estis and Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae.
most ancient, and the best witness of antiquity.

In like manner concerning Lymbus Patrum, whereas Bellarmine allegeth in proof
thereof the plain testimonies of the Greek Fathers, as namely of Bellarm. tom.
1. lib. 4. de Christi anima cap. 14.
Justin, Irenaeus, Clemens, Origin, Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, etc. And of the Latin Fathers, Bellarm. ibid.
Tertullian, Hyppolitus, Cyprian, Hilary, Gaudentius, Prudentius, Ambrose,
Hierom, Ruffinus, Austin, Leo, Fulgentius, etc. our Adversary Danaeus answers
to their testimonies saying, Danaeus ad Roberti Bellarmini disput. part. 1.
page 176. paulo post med.
As concerning them, they were not instructed out of Gods Word, neither do they
confirm their opinion from it, but only from their own conjectures, etc. In
like plain manner does Mr. Jacob make his acknowledgement saying, See this in
Mr. Bilsons Book of the full redemption of mankind page 188. fine. And see Mr.
Jacob further in his defense of the treatise of Christ's sufferings page 199.
paulo post med. and 100. ante med. And see Mr. Bilsons like acknowledgement in
his Book of the full redemption, etc. page 189. post med. and in his survey,
etc. page 656. post med.
. All the Fathers with one consent affirm, that Christ delivered the souls of
the Patriarchs and Prophets out of Hell at his coming thither, and so spoiled
Satan of those that were in his present possession. Whereunto might be added
the like liberal and plain M. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page 567. fine,
answers to Duraeus his testimonies from the Fathers, concerning Lymbus
Patrum, saying, Quod Scripturis evincere minus potuisti, id Patrum testimoniis
proculdubio conficies; de quibus, ut tibi, quod sentio, libere, breviterque
respondeam, apud me una Scripturae vocula plus habet ponderis, quam mill
Patrum, sine Scripturis, pronuntiata: itaque non expectabis, dum singulatim hos
Patrum errores diluo: And see further Mr. Whitaker ibid. page 773. initio, And
D. Barlow in his defense of the Articles of the Protestant Religion page 173.
post med. says hereof, This passes most rife among the Fathers, who taking
Inferi for Abraham's bosom, expound it, that christ went thither, ad liberandum
liberandos, to convey the Fathers deceased, before his resurrection, into the
place, where now they are.
confession of Mr. Whitaker and Mr. D. Barlow. In so much as Joannes Lascicius
a learned Protestant of Polonia, doubts not to affirm Joannes Lascicius in
his Book entitled, De Ruscorum, Muscovitarum, and Tartarorum Religione page
122. initio, and 123.
and derive the Doctrine thereof from manifest See the testimony of Ignatius in
his Epistle ad Trallianos paulo post med. It is acknowledged by Mr. D. Hill in
his defense of the Article, That Christ descended into Hell, fol. 22. a. circa
med. and by Mr. Bilson in his Survey of Christ's sufferings, etc. page 657. and
658. And see the like testimony of Thaddaeus apud Eusebius. hist. l. 1. c. ult. It
is also alleged and defended by Mr. Bilson in his Survey, etc. page 657. and
658. and 660.
testimonies of Ignatius, Mr. Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 408. ante med.
who was Scholar to St. John, as also of Thaddaeus, who was one of the Matthew.
10.3.
twelve. The authority and credit of which last testimony, Frigevillaeus
Gauvius in his Palma Christiana page 74. post. med.
Frigevillaeus Gauvius (an other Protestant Writer) undertaketh specally to
defend.

5. Fifthly as concerning Freewill, it is affirmed, that the most ancient
Centur. 2. c. 10. col. 221. lin. 51. and vide ibid. col. 58. lin. 49. and col.
43. lin. 58. and see D. Humfrey in Jesuitismi part. 2. ^at. 5. page 527. fine,
and Osiander Centur. 2. l. 4. c. 4. page 84. fine.
Irenaeus admits Freewill (even) in spiritual actions; that Justin Osiander
centur. 2. page 56. paulo post med. and the Century Writers centur. 2. col.
207. lin. 49.
extolled too much the liberty of man's will in observing the Commandments of
God. And yet further of Freewill, that Protestants So say the Puritans in their
brief discovery of untruths, etc. contained in D. Bancrosts Sermon page 203.
fine. And the Contury Writers cent. 2. c. 4. col. 58. lin. 30. speaking of the
times next after the Apostles, say, Nullus fere doctrinae locus est, qui tam
cito obscurari caeperit, atque hic de libero arbitrio: and ibid. col. 59. lin.
11. they further say of those times. Eodem modo Clemens liberum arbitrium
ubique asserit, ut appareat in ejusmodi tenebris non tantum fuisse omnes ejus
seculi Doctores verum etiam in posterioribus cas subinde crevisse, etc.
know that ever since the Apostles time, in a manner, it flourished every
where, until Martin Luther took the sword in hand against it. And that
accordingly the most ancient Fathers, namely Hereof see Abraham Schultetus in
medulla Theologiae Patrum page 39. post med. and 304. post med. and 466. fine,
and 151. paulo ante med. and 105. circa med. and 98. circa med. and 48. prope
initium and fine, and 66. fine, and 73. initio, and 40. ante med. And see the
Century Writers cent. 2. c. 4. col. 58. lin. 30. and col. 59. lin. 11. and
cent. 3. c. 4. col. 77. and 78. and col. 48. lin. 15.
Cyprian, Theophilus, Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin,
Irenaeus, Athenagor as, Tatianus, etc. erred therein.

6. Sixthly, as concerning freewil and merit of works, Humfred. Iesuitismi part.
2. page 530. ante med. And concerning the confessed Doctrine of merit of works
in Clemens Alexandrinus, Theophilus, Cyprian, Justin Martyr, etc. See Abraham
Schultetus ubi supra page 48. ante med. and 132. post med. and 151. post med.
and the Century Writers cent. 2. c. 4. and cent. 3. c. 4.
M. D. Humfrey says, It may not be denied, but that Irenaeus, Clement and
others (quos vocant Apostolicos) called Apostolical (in respect of the time in
which they lived) have in their writings the opinions of Freewill, and merit of
works. And in like manner do our learned Adversaries affirm, that Austin taught
See Brentius in confess. Wittemberg. And Osiander cent. 4. page 520. post med.
and the Divines of Wittemberg in the English Harmony of Confessions page 509.
post med, and the Century Vriters cent. 5. col. 507. lin. 40. and col. 1133.
lin. 26. and Melancthon l. 1. Epist. page 290. a. initio and b. initio.
affiance in man's merits toward remission of sins; The Centurists cent. 3.
col. 265. lin. 54. and col. 266. initio.
that Origin made good works the cause of justification; that Cent. 5. col.
1178.
Chrysostom handles impurely the Doctrine of justification, and attributes
merit to works; that not Mr. Whitaker in respons. ad rat. Camp. rat. 5. page
78. and see him in Mr. Fulks defense of the English translations page 368. ante
med.
Cyprian only, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in that
error, as thinking so to pay the pain due to sin, and to satisfy Gods Justice.
In so much as Luther does therefore call Luther in Gal. c. 4. and after the
English translation fol. 220. a. post. med. and b. ante and post med. Where for
the Latin word Iustitiarios the English translateth Meritmongers.
Hierom, Ambrose, Austin and others, Justice-workers of the old Papacy. And
Bullinger does also acknowledge, that Bullinger upon the Apoc. sermon. 87. fol.
217. b. prope initium.
the Doctrine of merits, satisfaction and justification of works did
incontinently after the Astles time lay their first foundations. And Mr. Wotton
forbeareth not to tax for this very point See Ignatius his saying concerning
merit, extant in his Epistle to the Romans, alleged in Mr. Wottons defense of
Perkins, etc. page 339. fine.
of merit Irenaeus who lived almost 1500. years since, does l. 5. adv. haer.
versus finem, and apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 30. versus finem, allege a saying of
Ignatius yet to be found in his said Epistle to the Romans, And Hierom in
C^tal. and Euseb^us l. 3. c. 30. do mention Ignatius his Epistle to the Romans,
alleging likewise a great part thereof, answerably found in the said Epistle,
now extant. And like mention and recital do they make of sundry his other
Epistles.
the undoubted Mr. Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 408. circa med.
acknowledges and urges these Epistles of Ignatius, alleging in proof of them
Hierom and Eusebius. And Mr. Cartwright in his answer thereto, does not so much
as deny the said Epistles.
and confessed writings of Ignatius the Apostles known Scholar, answering Mr.
Whitgift ubi supra, says Ignatius was St. John's Scholar, and lived in Christ's
time, and see page 343, prope finem.
to his objected testimony, Mr. Wotton in his defense of Mr. Perkins page 340.
And whereas Mr. Wotto^ in the same place to prove these Epistles counterfeit
allegeth this saying of Ignatius: whosoever does not fast every Lords Day or
Sabbath, except Easter day only, is a murderer of Christ, which says M. Wotton
is absurd: to forbear Mr. Wottons misalleging of Ignatius his words, woich are
directly to the contrary of that be allegeth, condemning indeed fasting upon
the Lords Day: whereof see M. Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 99.
fine, who allegeth this intended sentence as the undoubted saying of Ignatius.
As concerning the matter, the Lords Day being the Day of our Saviors
Resurrection, and so to us a day of joy, it was ever in regard thereof,
prohibited to fast thereupon. As concerning the phrase of killing Christ, it is
to be taken, as spoken of murdering or killing only by way of signification, or
in a like sober sense, as when the Apostle affirms us to be buried with
Christ in Baptism. Romans 6.4. and Coloss. 2.12. Or as when he affirms of
sinners, that they crucify again to themselves the Son of God. Hebr. 6.6. In so
much as Mr. Whitgift in his defense page 102. ante med. and Mr. Hooker l. 5.
sect. 72. page 209. circa med. do both of them specially mention, and answer
this very objection urged by Mr. Wotton. And Brereley in his Omissions, etc. of
page 94. says. And so likewise does Mr. Buddle in his discourse of Evangelical
Fasts, page 13. post med.
I say plainly this man's testimony is nothing worth, because he was of little
judgment in Divinity.

7. Seaventhly concerning Freewill, merit of works, invocation of Saints, and
such other like, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, discoursing of Mr. Whitgift
in his defense, etc. against the reply of Cartwright page 472. fine, and 473.
initio.
Doctrine taught in any age since the Apostles time, affirms without any other
exception, of age or Father, that (to use his own words) Mr. Whitgift ubi supra
page 473. paulo post initium, and see Mr. D. Covel, in his examination, etc.
page 120. post med. affirming in like manner, and saying, Diverse both of the
Greek and Latin Church, were spotted with errors about freewil, Merits,
invocation of Saints, etc.
almost all the Bishops and writers of the Greek Church and Latin also, for the
most part, were spotted with Doctrines of Freewil, of Merit, of invocation of
Saints and such like. And so accordingly, concerning invocacation of Saints,
Mr. Fulk says, Fulk in his rejoinder to Bristow page 5. fine.
I confess that Ambrose, Austin and Hierom held invocation of Saints to be
lawful. And it is in like manner yet further confessed and affirmed of the
Fathers in particular, that Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in 2 Pet. c.
1. sect. 3. fol. 443. paulo post med.
in Nazianzen, Basil and Chrysostom is mention of invocation of Saints: that
Ibid paulo post med.
Theodoret also speaks of prayers unto Martyrs; that Ibid paulo ante med.
Leo ascribes much to the prayers of St. Peter for him; that Ibid. paulo ante
med.
many of the ancient Fathers held, that the Saints departed pray for us.

And to omit like further confession concerning Mr. Fulk against Purgatory page
310.
Ambrose, Chemnitius examen. part. 3. page 200. a. fine, says, Invocatio
Sanctorum tandem circa Annum Domini 370. per Basilium, Nyssenum and Naz anzenum
in publicos Ecclesiae conventus invehi caepit.
Basil, Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Chemnitius ibid. page 211. a. ante med. And
see further concerning Hierom, Bullinger in Apoc. Sermon. 87. fol. 270. b. ante
med.
Theodoret, Hierom, and concerning also even Chemnitius ibid. page 211. a.
initio allegeth St. Austin invocating St. Cyprian, and concludes saying
thereof, Haec Augustious: sine Scriptura, temporibus and consuetudim cedens.
St. Augustine himself; St. Cyprian who was much their ancient, is charged The
Centurists cent. 3. col. 84. lin. 23. say, Certe in fine prioris Epistolae
libri primi non obscure sentit Cyprianus, Martyrs and Sanctos desuncto^ pro
viventibus orare.
to affirm, that Martyrs, and dead Saints did pray for the living. And the
Centurists charge Origin (who was ancient to Cyprian) with Centur. 3. col. 83.
lin. 49. they allege Origin saying, O beat Job, ora pro nobis miseris.
prayer for himself to holy Job, and Cent. 3. col. 75. lin. 29. it is said,
Angelos etiam Origin invocandos putavit, hom. 1. in Ezekiel.
invocation of Angels, affirming further, that Centur. 3. c. 4. col. 83. lin.
47. it is said, Videas in Doctorum hujus seculi scriptis non obscura vestigia
invocationis Sanctorum.
there are manifest steps of Invocation of Saints in the Doctors of that
ancient age.

8. Eighthly concerning Baptism, and grace conferred by it, and other
Sacraments; it is confessed that the most ancient Fathers (who succeeded next
to the Apostles Scholars) namely Justin, Clement, etc. Centur. 2. c. 4. col.
47. lin. 43. and in cent. 3. c. 4. col. 82. lin. 55. it is said, Affirmare
audet Cyprianus quod persona Baptizans Spiritum Sanctum conferat, and
Baptizatum intus sanctificet, etc.
thought regeneration (not to be signified but) wrought by Baptism and the
word, unto which (two) joined together, they attribute efficacy, that is to
say, remission of sins; that Zuinglius tom. 2. de Baptismo fol. 70.
it was a great error of the old Doctors, in that they supposed the external
water of Baptism, to be of any value, toward the purging of sin; that Musculus
loc. com. page 299. post med. says thereof, Inconsiderate dictum est ab
Augustino, etc.
Austin did inconsiderately affirm the Sacraments of the New Testament to give
salvation; that also Centur. 3. c. 6. col. 125. lin. 16.
Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian mention how that the Baptized persons were
accustomed to be signed with the sign of the Cross. That there were likewise
then used in Baptism, sundry other Ceremonies* Cent. 3. col. 82. lin. 50. and
col. 148. l. 4. And see Cyprian l. 1. Epist. ult. ante med. where he says,
Oportet vero mundari and sanctificari aquam prius a Sacerdote. And see Cent. 4.
col. 415. lin. 44.
as the Priests consecration of the water of Baptism, Cent. 3. col. 124. lin.
53. and col. 126. lin. 20.
Abrenuntiation, Cent. 3. col. 125. lin. 1. and 124. lin. 57.
triple immersion, Centur. 3. col. 125. lin. 9.
unction, etc. that (by Beza's judgment) such Beza in Epist. Theolog. Epist.
8. says, Totum illum apparatum quo vetustistimi etiam illi Baptismum and
Caenam Domini se exornare posse putarunt, non satis mirari possum, etc. page
79. initio. And having recited sundry of those Ceremonics he calls them,
histrionicas ineptias page 80. prope initium, saying there further, Certe qui
Apostolos faciunt istarum ineptiarum authors, ne refutatione quidem digni
sunt, quantumeunque sunt verusti Scriptores, etc. And a little afterward,
Plerique tamen ex vertastistimis illis Christianorum Sacra non aliter quam
Cereris mysteria quaedam occultanda censuerunt, etc. Et totam illam actionem,
etc. in (...) quaedam, and ne ipsis quidem mystis plerisque intellecta, Sacra
transforma^unt.
Fathers (as were) most ancient adorned their Sacraments with excess of
Ceremonies; Su^ says Cartwright in Mr. Wh^tgifts defense, etc. page 522. fine,
he charge Austin with absicedity herein, and ibid, page 516. And Bullinger in
his Decades in English, decad. 5. sermon. 8. page 1049. a. circa med.
that Austin was of mind, that Children could not be saved without Baptism:
that Musculus loc. com. de Baptismo page 308. post med.
Austin and many Fathers were of the same opinion. In so much, that as Calvin
confesses, the Fathers have hereupon doubted not, Calvin. instit. l. 4. c. 15.
sect. 20.
almost from the very beginning of the Church, to use the Baptism of lay
persons in danger of death. In like manner concerning Chrism or Confirmation,
to omit the plain sayings of Aug. contra lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 104. tom. 7.
says, Sacramentum Chrismatis in genere visibilium signorum, Sacrosanctum est,
sicut ipse Baptismus. And tom. 9. in Epist. Joan. tract. 3. he says, Vnctio
Spiritalis ipse spiritus sanctus est, cujus Sacramentum est in unctione
visibili. And ibid. tract. 6. he preventeth an objection saying, Numquid modo
qu bus imponitur manus, ut accipiant Spiritum Sanctum, hoc expectatur, ut
linguis loquantur? aur quando imposumus manus istis infantibus, attendit unusqu
sque vestiu^, utrum linguis loquerentur, and cum videret eos linguis non loqui,
ita perverso cord aliquis vestrum suit, ut diceret, non acceperunt Spiritum
Sauctum? And a little after. Si vis nosse quia accepisti Spiritum sanctum,
interroga cor tuum, ne forte cum Sacramentum habes, virtutem Sacramenti non
habeas.
St. Austin and other Fathers, as also the like evident confession of Calvin.
institut. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 43. says, Si quis vetustate tueri hujusmodi
inventiones velit, nec ipse ignoro, quam verustus sit Chrismatis and
exufflationes in Baptismo usus, quam non long ab Apostolorum aeta te Caena
Domini tacta rubigine fuerit.
Calvin, Chemnitius reprehendeth herein sundry of the most ancient Fathers,
namely St. Cyprian, the Laodicene Council, Melchiades, Cornelius and
Tertullian. And the Ministers of Lincoln-Diocess charge The Ministers of
Lincoln- Diocese in their abridgement, etc. page 42. ante med.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with error of using the Cross, in confirming
those that were Baptized, etc.

9. Ninthly, concerning Confession, Absolution, Penance and satisfaction, it is
confessed, that even Centur. 3. c. 6. col. 127. lin. 28. where the Century
Writers say, Absolutionem deinde a peccatis i^a confercbant, si qui
poenitentiam agebant, peccatum prius confessi essent. Sic enim confessionem
magnopere Tertullianus urget in libro de poenitentia; and usit atam fuisse
privatam confessionem, qua delicta and cog^tata quoque parva confessi sunt, ex
allquot Cypriani loc^s apparet, ut ex S^^mone quinto de lapsis, and l. 3.
Epistolarum Epistola 14. and 16. ubi deserte a^t, In minoribus etiam peccatis,
quae quidem non in Deum committuntur, necesse est ad exomoleg sin venire, inque
frequenter fieri jub^t, l. 1. Epist. 3. etc.
in those (former) times of Cyprian and Tertullian was used private confession
(even) of thoughts and lesser sins; and that the same was Vide ibid.
then commanded and thought necessary; that also as then Centur. 3. col. 127.
sin. 40.
Penance (or) satisfaction was enjoined according to the offense; that the same
Fathers Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 5. page 78. And see him also alleged in Mr.
Fulks defense of the English Translations cap. 13. page 368. ante med.
thought by (such) their external Discipline of life, to pay the pains due Vide
Chemnitium examen. part. 2. page 58. a. post med. and 64. b. ante med. and 65.
a. post med.
for sins, and to satisfy Gods justice. That Whitaker in resp. ad Camp. rat. 5.
page 78. paulo ante med. And see Calvin institut. l. 3. c. 4. sect. 38. initio.
not Cyprian only, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in
that error: and that the Priest when confession was (as before) made, and
penance enjoined, Centur. 3. col. 127. lin. 44.
did afterward absolve the penitent (even) Vide ibid. and see this Ceremony of
imposing the Priests hand in absolution, mentioned by Cyprian in sermon. de
lapsis, paulo ante med. and l. 3. Epist. 17. and 18. and in Council. 4. Carthag.
Can. 76. and 78. and Chrysostom. in John 20. hom. 85. fine.
with the now like used Ceremony of imposing his hand.

10. Tenthly concerning the Primacy of Peter above the other Apostles
(acknowledged by Calvin alleged in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 173. says, The
twelve Apostles had one among them to govern the rest: and see further page
496. ante med.
Calvin, Musculus alleged there page 66. post med. says, The Celestial Spirits
are not equal; the Apostles themselves were not equal; Peter is found in many
places to have been chief among the rest, which we deny not.
Musculus, and sundry other M. Whitgift ubi supra page 375 initio says, Among
the Apostles themselves there was one chief etc. that had chief authoraty over
the rest, etc. that Schisms might be compounded; and vide ibid. post med. And
see him further there page 395. In so much as he doubts not to answer there
page 62, 63, 65, 68, 70. certain places of Scripture sbjected by our other
Adversaries against Peter's Primacy.
learned Protestants) the anriquity of this opinion is fully confessed by Mr.
Fulk, who speaking of Leo and Gregory Bishops of Rome, the first of them about
Anno Domini 440. and the other about 59^. says, Mr. Fulk in his Retentive
against Bristows mo^tives, etc. page 248. fine.
the mystery of iniquity having wrought in that seat (of Rome) near five or six
hundred years before them (so anciently before them did the Roman Sea in his
opinion begin to be Papal) and then greatly increased, they were so deceived
with long continuance of error, that they thought the dignity of Peter was much
more over the rest of his fellow-Apostles than the holy Scriptures of God do
allow. So confessedly ancient, and of long continuance was this opinion of
Peter's Primacy, even in those elder times of Leo and Gregory. A thing so
evident, that our other learned Adversaries reprehend sundry of the other much
more ancient Fathers, for their affirming the Church to be built upon Peter,
namely Conturists cent. 4. col. 1250. l. 2.
Hierom, Cent. 4. col. 555. lin. 30.
Hilary, Cent. 4. col. 558. l. 54.
Nazianzen, Cent. 3. col. 84. lin. 73. it is said, Tertullianus non sine errore
sentire videtur, Claves soli Petro commissas, and Ecclesiam super ipsum
extructam esse.
Tertullian, Centur. 3. col. 84. lin. 59. says, Passim dicit Cyprianus super
Petrum Ecclesiam fundatam esse: ut l. 1. Epist. 3. l. 4. Ep. 9. etc.
Cyprian, Cent. 3. col. 85. lin. 3. it is said, Origines tract. 5. in Matthew.
dicit, Petrus per promissionem meruit fieri Ecclesiae fundamentum. Idem hom.
17. in Lucam Petrum vocat Apostolorum Principem.
Origin, and in general Calvin. institut. l. 4. c. 6. sect. 6. says, In Petro
fundatam esse Ecclesiam, quia dictum sit, super hanc Petram, etc. At nonnulli
ex Patribus sic exposuerunt, sed reclamat tota Scriptura, etc. And Danaeus in
respons. ad Bellarmin. disput. part. 1. page 277. post med. says of the
Fathers, Dictum en im Christi Matthew. 16. Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram,
etc. pessime de persona Petri sunt interpretati, etc.
many Fathers: reproving also others for their entituling Peter the Cent. 4.
col. 556. lin. 17. they allege Optatus calling Peter, Apostolorum Caput, unde
and Cephas appellatur, and see next heretofore at 10. where they allege Origin
calling Peter Apostorum Principem. And Mr. Fulk in his Retentive, etc. page
248. charge Optatus with absurdity, for saying of Peter, praeferri omnibus
Apostolis moruit, etc. he deserved to be preferred before all the Apostles, and
he alone received the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, to be communicated to the
rest, and vide ibid. fine; in like manner is Peter called Prince of the
Apostles by Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. 2. Prince and Head of the rest, by
Cyril of Alexandria l. 12. in Joan. c. 64. The Pastor and Head of the Church,
placed by Christ over the whole earth, by Chrysostom in Matthew. hom. 55. ante
med. and Apostolorum vertex in the same homily circa med. The Master of the
whole world, by Chrysostom in Joan. hom. 87. paulo ante med. and ad Pop. hom.
80. ante med. The rock and top of the Catholic Church (in the Council of
Chalcedonact. 3)
Head of the Apostles, and Cent. 4. col. 554. lin. 32. and col. 1074. lin. 13.
Arnobius is reprehended for tearming him Episcoporum Episcopus: in respect
whereof the Centurists do there further say, de Petro minus commode loquitur.
the Bishop of Bishops. In so much that whereas the Fathers doubted not
publicly to celebrate a yearly Council. 2. Turonense can. 16. says, Sunt etiam
qui in festivitate Cathedrae Domini Petri Apostoli, etc. See this confessed
Centur. 6. col. 580. lin. 2. And S. Austine sermon. 15. de Sanctis, says,
Institutio solemnitatis hodiernae a Senioribus nostris Cathedrae nomen accepit,
etc. recte ergo Ecclesiae natalem illius sedis colunt, quam Apostolus pro
Ecclesiarum salute suscepit, dicente Domino, Tu es Petrus, etc. ideo digne
fundamentum hoc Ecclesia coli^. And see further mention hereof in Beda in
Martyrologio.
festival day in honor of Peter's Sea (which respect had thereto is more than
we find had to any other Sea of any other Apostle) Danaeus answering hereunto,
affirms the Fathers assertion hereof to be, Danaeus in resp. ad Bellar.
disput. part. 1. page 275. fine and 276. initio.
the judgments and testimonies of the Church then corrupted and bewitched, or
made blind with this error. And thus much concerning Peter's Primacy
confessedly, as before, taught by the Fathers, and acknowledged by Mr.
Whitgift, and sundry other Protestants, Mr. D. Covel not only further Mr. Covel
in his examination, etc. against the plea of the innocent, Printed 1604. having
spoken page 106. post med. of one above the rest to suppress the seeds of
dissension, says further thereof page 107. prope initium: If this were the
principal means to prevent Schisms and dissentions in the Primitive Church,
when the graces of God were far more abundant and eminent than now they are:
Nay if the twelve were not like to agree, except there had been one chief among
them; for says Hierom, among the twelve, one was therefore chosen, that a
chief being appointed, occasion of dissension might be prevented, etc.
affirming it in particular, but also as laying down the general received
reason thereof, says to the Puritans: Ibid in the words there next following.
How can they think that equality would keep all the Pastors in the world in
peace and unity etc. for in all Societies, authority (which cannot be where all
are equal) must procure unity and obedience. And that this authority of
Church Government by him affirmed in the Apostles times, was not then so
personally tied to any one as to die with him, but was to survive, and continue
to the Churches good, himself further signifies, saying expressly of the
Apostolic Church Government in general, That it was not to Mr. Covel. ibid.
page 106. circa med. says, If it concern all persons and ages in the Church of
Christ (as surely it does) the Government must not cease with the Apostles; but
so much of that authority must remain to them, who from time to time are to
supply that charge.
cease with the Apostles: most evidently so by these premises implying an
eminent authority continued in the Church of God, and residing in one, whereby
to prove unity and obedience, and to keep all the (obedient) Pastors of the
world in peace: whereto also See Martin Luthers saying most pertinent to this
purpose, and alleged next hereafter in the margent under * and next before 18.
Martin Luther agrees: for otherwise says, M. D. Covel Mr. Covel ubi supra
page 107. paulo post med.

By what course of authority enforcing obedience can the Churches divided
members, dispersed in other several Kingdoms and Nations, be governed, unless
according to these principles laid down by Mr. Covel, some one have authority
over them all? If it rest in the several other Princes of those other several
Kingdoms, who then shall have authority to command those Princes severally
absolute in Government, disagreeing also perhaps in Religion, and some of them
(as in the times of the Primitive Church) not yet Christian? And if no assured
means be in this case left, how then is that av^yded, which Mr. Covel here
says of the Church being in far worse case than the meanest Commonwealth? For
howsever the said several Kingdoms of such said several Princes, make each of
them on absolute and several Commonwealth, yet the several Congregations,
dispersed throughout those several Kingdoms, do all of them make but one
spiritual Commonwealth and Church so Christ, obliged in duty to the belief and
profession of one and the same faith. See further hereof in the next
Consideration number. 68. and in Brereley tract. 3. sect. 7. after o. at the
figure 7.


the Church (which though dispersed in several Kingdoms under several Christian
Magistrates makes yet but one Church) should be in a far worse case than the
meanest Commonwealth, nay almost than a den of Thieves, if it were left
destitute of means, either to convince Heresies or suppress them: yea (says he
further, which is much to be noted) though there were neither help nor
assistance of the Christian Magistrate, etc. Hitherto of Peter's Primacy.

Now as concerning that only pre-eminence or Primacy which Jacobus Andraeas
thought necessary Hospinianus in his Historia Sacramentaria, part altera, fol.
389. a. circa med. reports of Iacobus Andraeas a prime Lutheran, Demonstrare
conatur Ecclesiarum tranquillum statum tueri difficile esse, nisi ad aliquem
tanquam ad summum Administratorem and Pontificem rerum summa deferatur.
to establish the Church quiet, which also our learned and so greatly See
Melancthon greatly commended for a man raised up of God, by Luther in praefat.
primi tomi, oper. Melancth. And also in Act. Colloquii Altembergensis page 94.
paulo ante med. and page 230. paulo post med.
commended Adversary Melancthon, Melancthon in the Book entitled, Centuria
Epistolatum Theologicarum, etc. Epist. 74. quae est Melancthonis page 244.
paulo post med. says from the opinion of himself and other his Brethren,
Quemadmodum sunt aliqui Episcopi qui praesunt pluribus Ecciesiis, etc. As
certain Bishops are president over many Churches: (so) the Bishop of Rome is
President over all Bishops, and this Canonical Policy no wise man, as I think
does, or ought to disallow, etc. For the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is in
my opinion profitable to this end, that consent of Doctrine may be retained:
wherefore an agreement may easily be established in this article of the Popes
Primacy, if other articles could be agreed upon. And see Melancthons other like
saying set down by Conradus Schlusselburg in Catalog. Haereticorum l. 13. and
ult. page 633.
acknowledged as due, and appertaining to the Roman Sea, and which (as the
learned Puritans freely confess) does by way of proportion necessarily arise
and follow upon the Protestants acknowledgement, either of a Catholic visible
Mr. Jacob in his reasons taken out of Gods word, etc. page 24. says, By
acknowledging a Catholic visible Church, it follows necessarily, that there
is and ought to be on earth an universal Government Ecclesiastical, etc. for if
there be properly one visible Church, and Government Ecclesiastical throughout
the world, then this must be in some one place eminently, for some whither must
we go, when Christ bids us tell the Church: now there is no place in all the
world so likely as Rome is to be the visible and springhead of universal
Government of the Catholic Church. And see more evidently in subdivis. 13. at
2.3. Brereley tract. 1. sect. 4. Also Martin Luther in loc. com. class. 1. cap.
37. page 107. post med. says, Cum Deus voluerit habere unam Ecclesiam
Catholicam per totum Orbem, necesse fu^t unum aliquem populum, imo unum aliquem
Patrem istius unius populi eligi, and quem and su^s posteros, spectaret totus
Orbis, and fieret unum ovile: and fic ex omnibus gentibus in infinitum variatis
moribus; tamen unica fieret Ecclesia.
Church, or else but of Bishops M. Cartwright in M. Whitgifts defense, etc.
page 380. ante med. says, if it be necessary for keeping of un^ty in the
Church that one Archbishop should be Primate over all; why not as meet, that
for the keeping of the whole universal Church, there should be one Archbishop
over all? And in his 2. reply part. 1. page 582. paulo post med. he further
says, This point of keeping peace in the Church, is one of those which
requires as well a Pope over all Archbishops, as one Archbishop over all
Bishops in a Realm. And the very same is more fully as yet affirmed by Beza:
see his words at large in Sarav a de diversis Ministrorum gradibus, etc. page
491. fine and 492. initio.
Government, confessedly Of the confessed Government of Bishops and
Archbishops in all ages since the Apostles, see Mr. Whitgifts defense page
470, 471.
testified and practiced in all succeeding ages, since the Apostles, and
without which foresaid Papal Primacy, as is inferred by Mr. Cartwright and
others, Mr. Cartwright in his 2. reply part. 1. page 582. med. says, If an
Archbishop be necessary for calling a Provincial council, when the Bishops are
divided; it is necessary there be also a Pope, which may call the general
Council when division is between the Archbishops, for when the Churches of one
Province be divided from other, as you ask me, so I ask you who shall assemble
them together? Who shall admonish them of their duties when they are assembled?
If you can find a way how this may be done, without a Pope, the way is also
found whereby the Church is disburdened of the Archbishop. See also this point
more plainly confessed by Conradus Schlusselburg. Sir Edwin Sands, and others
alleged hereafter in the third Consideration.
cannot be assembled any general Council, which is yet nevertheless the
confessed, only hope remaining ever to assuage Protestants contentions. In
respect whereof Melancthon did as before, assent to acknowledge the Popes
foresaid Primacy.

As touching this only Primacy we allege, that Mr. Fulk affirms in general,
that not some few, but Mr. Fulk in confirmation of Papists quarrels, etc.
Printed Anno 1583. page 4. initio.
many of the ancient Fathers were deceived to think something more of Peter's
Prerogative, and the Bishop of Romes dignity, than by the word of God was given
to either of them. And as concerning particulars (to forbear what is generally
That Boniface the third claimed to be Head of the Universal Church Anno 607. is
confessed by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis Papismi page 160. ante med. by M. Fulk
in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 36. initio, by Mr. Perkins in his
exposition of the Creed page 307. by Mr. Downham in his Book of Antichrist l.
1. page 4. post med. And by Mr. Whitaker de Ecclesia, contra Bellarminum, etc.
page 144. post med. where he affirms, this Boniface and all his Successors to
be Antichrists. And the very same is affirmed by Mr. Fulk in his answer to a
counterfeit Catholic page 27. circa med. by M. Powel de Antichristo in
Praesat. page 1. fine.
confessed of the 1000. years last past) the Century Writers of Magdeburg in
their fifth Century (the last part or end whereof was one hundred, and the
beginning thereof two hundred years, within the compass of Mr. Jewels own
challenge) do confess and say concerning even those ancient times, that Cent.
5. col. 774. lin. 31.
in this fifth age the Roman Bishops applied themselves to get and establish
Dominion over other Churches: that to this end Cent. 5. col. 777. lin. 55. and
in example thereof say further there, Sic Celestinus Cyrillo Alexandrino (cui
suas parts, videlicet, ut Synodo Ephesinae praesideret, delegavit) privilegium
dedit usurpandi titulum Papae, and mitram.
they usurped to themselves right of granting privileges and ornaments to other
Archbishops. That also Cent. 5. col 778 lin. 16. and in example thereof say
further there, Nam Leo Max mum Ant ochenum confirmavit in Episcopa^u; ac
Proter^o Alexandrino Episcopo jura ant qua ejus Sedis juxta Canones and
Privilegia confirmasse, and ^atur Epist. 68 Leonis, and 69. and ibid. lin. 37.
it is further said, Vsurpabant sib pot starem mandandi al^is Episcopis, ut quem
spsi velient and proponerent in dissit^s Ecclesiis, Episcopum ordinarent, aut
quem ipsi nollent, deponerent: sic C^l^stinus in Ep^stola ad Cyrillum
Alexandrinum, and Joannem Antiochenum, and Rufum Th^ssalonicensem, mandat (...)
ut Proclum Constantinopoli designarent Episcopum, etc.
they confirmed Archbishops in their Seas, See this next heretofore at 25. and
see further cent 5 col. 778. lin. 46. and see next hereafter at 67. in the
margent: and of Anthimus of Constantinople deposed by Agapitus, see cent. 6.
col. 55. lin. 20. and Liberatus in B^eviar. cap. 21. of Dioscorus in like
manner deposed, and see Gelasius in Epist. ad Episcopos Dardaniae.
deposed, Cent. 5. col. 779. lin. 31. it is said, Sum^bant sibi facultatem
excommunicandi alios Archiepiscopos, and Ecclesias, sic Leo excommunicavit
Orientales, and Felix Ocaclum, Gelasius damnavit Acatium and Petrum, miffis
literis in Orientem.
excommunicatd, and Cent. 5. col. 779. lin. 38. And in example thereof say
further there. Nam Gelasius in tomo Anathematum, Petrum Alexandrinum secundae
Sedis Antistitem negat absolvi a quoquam pose se, quam ab Episcopo primae
sedis, scilicet Romano.
absolved others; Cent. 5. col. 779. lin. 8. it is said, Arrogant sibi
potestatem citandi alios ad dicendam coram sese causam: sic
Constantinopolitanus (Episcopus) Romam citatur, and Maximum citaturum sese
promittet Bonifacius.
arrogating (also) power to themselves of citing other (Archbishops) to
declare their cause before them: and that Centur. 5. col. 778. lin. 5^. it is
said, Constituerunt and postularunt, ut in Episcoporum causis liceat ad sese
appellari, ut patet ex Actis sextae Carthaginensis Synodi, and Epistola ad
Bonifacium, and Sixtus Epist. 3. ad Orientales cap. 5. decernit, ut contra
Episcopum ad sedem Apostol came appellantem nihil aliud statuatur quam Romanus
Episcopus censuerit. Gelasius in Epistola ad Faustum Magistrum, impudenter
mentitur, in Canon bus sancitum esse, ut Appellationes totius Ecclesiae ad
examen Romanae sedis deferantur, and abipsa nusquam appelletur.
against a Bishop appealing to the Apostolic Sea, nothing should be
determined, but what the Bishop of Rome censured: that also Cent. 5. col. 780.
lin. 8. it is said, Conati sunt eam sibi super Archiepiscopos vendicare
authoritatem, ut si quid illi agerent, ex authoritate Romani Episcopi eg sse
viderentur, quasi servi ejus and mancipia essent: sic Leo Epist. 84. indicat
Antiftites Thessalonicenses semper vicem Apostolicae sedis implevisse, ac monet
Anasta sium ( who was then Bishop of Thessalonica) ut in longinquis Provinciis,
quodam modo, praesentiam su^ Visitationis impendat, and nihil decernat, nisi
quod fibi probari agnoscat. Sic Gelasius in Epistola ad Dardanos, dicit, se
curam Alexandrinae Ecclesiae delegasse Acacio Constantinopolitano, ideoque cum
debuisse ad ipsum refer omnia. And see further col. 778. lin. 26. and col.
779. lin. 17. example is given of Legates sent into remote Provinces (as)
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Africa. Cent. 5. col. 779. lin. 43. it is said:
Ausi sunt ab Archi-Episcopis postulare, ut si quid suo judicio non possent
determinare, ad sese referrent: sic Leo Ep. 84. c. 7. Thessalonicensi hanc
legem dictitat, etc. And see col. 1230. lin. 26. and col. 780. lin. 45. And see
further hereof Stephanus Mauritaniae Episcopus in Epistola ad Damasum. And
Anastasius Hierosolymitanus in Epist. ad Felicem.
they appointed their Legates in remote Provinces, challenging Authority to
hear and determine all uprising controversies, especially See their testimony
and examples hereof given col. 781. lin. 9.
in Questions of Faith: that likewise, Col. 781. lin. 20. Generalia Concilia
indicendi potestatem sib^ sumpserunt, ut patet Epist. 93. cap. 7. Leonis, etc.
Ac Synodos sine sua authoritate convocatas, ut illegitimas rejecerunt.
they took upon them power of appointing general Councils, and Col. 781. lin.
36. Jus p^^dendi Synodis universalibus sibi adscripserunt, etc. Sic Celestinus
Cyrillo Alexandrino in Ephesina Synodo Praesidendi potestatem suo nomine
concessisse videri vult. Ac Leo Paschasinum Siciliae Episcopum, ut
Chalcedonensi praesideret, misit. And see the subscription of Paschasinus in
Council. Chalcid. act. 3.
to be Presidents in general Councils. And when themselves were absent, even by
Vt supra: and see this heretofore in the margent at 24. and see Centur. 5. col.
781. lin. 52. And see Danaeus in resp. ad Bellarm, part. 1. page 323.
their Deputies: which were oftentimes no meaner than some one or other
Patriarch, See next before at 34. also col. 781. lin. 57. In Synodis perp^ram
acta retractarunt, Apostolicam jactantes authoritatem, etc. Postea ex eo sibi
jus de Synodis judicandi arrog^runt, and Decreta retractandi, etc. And see
Council. Chalced. Act. 1. where it was said, Synodum ausus est facere sine
authoritate sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam licuit, nunquam factum est.
rejecting for unlawful those Synods that were called without their authority.
And as these are confessed to be the known practice of those ancient Roman
Bishops; so also is the like answerable respect and acknowledgement then had to
that Sea, by other Fathers of those times, no less plainly testified by the
said Century writers.

To this like end they say concerning the Roman Bishops, Centur. 5. col. 744.
lin. 53.
that they had flatterers (in those times) who affirmed, that without
permission of the Roman Bishop, none might undertake the person of a Judge, who
then likewise Cent. 5. col. 775. 16. Ex errore quodam affirmant, antiquitatem
ei super omnes, Principatum Sacerdotii contuliss^. Concerning this assertion of
antiquity, etc. see further Anastasius Hierosolymitanus in Epist. ad Felicem,
and Innocentius Epist. 2. ad Vict. And see him in Epist. ad Council. Milevitanum
cited cent. 5. col. 781. lin. 4. and 5. and Leo Epist. 88. ad Anastalium
Thessalonicensem cap 1. and Epist. 93. ad Episcopos per Viennam cap. 2.
averred that antiquity (therefore it was not then first begun had attributed
the principality of Priesthood to the Roman Bishop above all: that accordingly
Cent. 5. col. 774. lin. 57.
Victor called the Roman Church, the Head of all Churches: that Col. 775. lin.
4.
Turbius Asturiensis flattered Pope Leo and acknowleged his Superiority: that
Col. 778. lin. 51. and Leo Epist. 24. and 25. says of his Legates in the
Ephesme Council, Nostri fideliter reclamarunt, and eisdem libellum
appellationis Flavianus obtulit: and hereof see further the letter of
Valentinian to Theodosius in Praeamb. Con. Chal. where it is said,
Constantinopolitanus Episcopus (Flavianus) Episcopum Romanae Civitatis per
libellos appellavit. And again, Libellum ad Apostolicam sedem miss^rit. And
Liberatus cap. cap. 18. says of John Talida (Patriarch of Alexandria deposed
by the Emperor Zeno, and Petrus Moggus intruded into his place) Romanum
Pontificem Simplicium appellavit, sicut and beatus fecit Athanasius.
sometimes Bishops condemned in Synods appealed to the Sea of Rome, as did (say
they) Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople in the Council of Ephesus, and that
Councils Col. 782. lin. 36. Patres saepe honoris ergo pretebant ab iis Decreta
confirmari. Sic Chalcedonensis Synodus ad Leonem scribit: Rogamus in tuis
D^creris nostrum honora judicium, and sicut nos cupidi in bonis, adjecimus
consonantiam: sic and summitas tua, filiis quod decet, adimpleat: And the
Council of Carthage Epist. ad Innocentium desires Innocentius in like terms;
Vt Statutis nostrae mediocritatis etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur
authoritas; alleged cent. 5. col. 823. And see the Council of Ephesus in Epist.
ad Celestinum Papam.
requested to have their Acts confirmed by the Bishop of Rome: In so much as
they conclude and say of St. Leo (who was one of those Fathers of this fifth
age, to whom Mr. Jewel did namely appeal) Centur. 5. col. 1262. lin. 30. And
that Peter's Primacy was thought to descend or come to the Bishop of Rome, is
likewise affirmed by Vigilius in Epist. ad Euterium cap. 7. by Anastasius in
Epist. ad Anastasium Augustum: by the Emperor Justinian in his Epistle to John
the second cod. de sum. Trinitate and fide Cathol. tit. 1. by the said John in
his Epistle to the said Emperor, cited ibid. by Pelagius the second in Epist.
ad omnes Episcopos: by Gelasius in Epist. ad Faustum, and in Epist. ad
Episcopos per Lucaniam, etc. c. 11. And see Decret. Gelasii cum 70. Episcopis
initio. And by Innocentius the first in Epist. 1. ad Decentium, and in Epist.
ad Victoricum initio, etc. Thirdly and most especially, in Rescrip. ad Conc.
Carth. which Rescript. is acknowledged and commended by St. Austin (one of the
Fathers of that Council) in Epist. 106. where he says thereof, Pope
Innocentius did write answer to the Bishops in all things as became the Bishop
of the Apostolic Sea. And see more hereof hereafter in this Consideration number.
23. at 104. in the margent.
Leo very painfully goes about to prove, that singular pre-eminence was given
to Peter above the other Apostles; and that thence rose the Primacy of the
Roman Church. To allege other writers, Beza further says, Confess. Genev. cap.
7. sect. 12. and Mr. Whitaker de Conciliis contra Bellarminum page 37. paulo
ante med. says, de Leone prime parum laboro, magnus ille fuit Antichristiani
Regni Architectus. And yet bid. page 34. circa med. he says of Leo, Fuit ille
quidem doctus and pius Episcopus, sed fuit tamen magis ambitiosus, etc.
It is manifest that Leo in his Epistles does clearly breath forth the
arrogance of the Anti christian Roman Sea. In like manner says the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury of these times: Mr. Whitgift in his defense, etc.
page 342. post med.
It is certain that then, (viz. in the time of the Carthage and African
Councils) the Bishop of Rome began at least to claim Superiority over all
Churches. And it is in like sort confessed of Celestinus (who is termed by Mr.
Whitgift So does Mr. Whitgift term him in his defense page 588. fine.
a godly Bishop, and by the ancient Father Vincentius Lyrinensis Vicentius Lyr.
in libro adver. haer. prope finem.
Pope Celestine of blessed memory) See this confessed in M. Cartwrights second
reply part. 1. page 500. paulo post med. and see M. Cartwrights defense page
342. post med.
that he claimed the hearing of matters in the African Churches, and See this
in Mr. Cartwrights second reply part. 1. page 512. ante med.
claimed Superiority over all Churches, taking upon him as it were the name of
universal Bishop. That also Centur. 5. col. 1274. lin. 38. and 47. and Mr.
Symonds upon the Revelations cap. 5. page 58. fine.
Gelasius held, that Councils are subject to the Pope, and that all should
appeal to him, but none from him: with the like whereof Pope Mr. Symonds ibid.
page 57. circa med.
Xistus is also charged: that likewise the Council of Chalcedon, whose
Authority is to our Adversaries establish^d by special Anno 1. Elizabeth c. 1.
versus finem is established the authority of the four first general Councils.
Act of Parliament, See this in Mr. Cartwrights second reply part. 1. page 510.
circa med. And see Mr. Whitgifts defense, etc. page 344. initio. And see
Saravia de diversis gradibus Ministrorum page 403. post med.
did offer the name of universal Bishop, to the Bishop of Rome.

Hitherto concerning those only Fathers, that lived in the age or Century next
ensuing the four hundred years after Christ, and their not doubtful, but
confessed testimomonies of the Jurisdiction, really executed and extended by
the Popes of those times, not only over their Neighbor Churches and Bishops in
Italy, but over remote Provinces, and the other greatest Archbishops, and
Patriarchs of the world; as namely, of Antioch, Jerusalem, Alexandria, and
Constantinople, etc. And by them then accordingly acknowledged.

As concerning now the like testimony from the more ancient Fathers that lived
in the age next precedent, which is the time wherein Constantine the great
lived, although the Church began as then, but as it were, to take breath from
her former long endured persecutions, whereby neither, her writers were so
many, nor her face of outward Government so known as in the times succeeding:
yet is there not wanting even for that time sufficient testimony in this kind.
In regard whereof the Centurists affirm, that Centur. 4. col. 549. lin. 42.
In this age the mystery of iniquity was not idle. To this end they further
allege, that Centur. 4. col. 550. lin. 28.
the Bishops of Rome challenged by Ecclesiastical Canon, the disallowing of
those Synods whereat they were absent. And Mr. Cartwright says accordingly of
Damasus (whom St. Hierom and Protestants themselves term Apud Brereley tract.
2. cap. 1. sect. 3. at 106. page 296. Hieron. Ep. 57. to Pope Damasus says,
Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens Beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedrae
Petri, communione consocior: super illam petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio,
quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est, ( etc.) Quicunque
tecum non colligit, spargit. And Optatus l. 2. contra Donatistas says,
Negar^non potest scire te in urbe Roma, Petro primo Cathedram Episcopalem
collatam esse, in qua sederit omn um Apostolorum caput Petrus, unde and Cephas
appellatus est, in qua una Cathedra unitas ab omnibus servaretur, ne caeteri
Apostoli singulas sibi quisqu defende^ent, ut jam schismaticus and peccator
esset, qui contra singularem Cathedram alteram collocaret, ergo Cathedra unica
est, etc. And again; De dotibus suprad^ct^ Cathedra est prima, quam probavimus
per Petrum nostram esse. And St. Austin Epist. 102. prope initium says, In
Ecclesia Romana semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit Principatus. And (apud
Brereley page 106.107. at 5^. margent) in Bullingers decades in English on the
page next before the first decad, is set down the Creed of Blessed Damasus
Bishop of Rome, etc. and in the end of that page is also set down the Imperial
Decree of the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius to embrace the
Religion taught by Damasus and Peter of Alexandria, whereof see Brereley tract.
1. sect. 8. subd. 1. fine in the margent at 6.
blessed) that Mr. Cartwright in his reply part. 1. page 502. paulo post
initium. And in proof thereof he allegeth there in his margent Zozomen hist.
lib. 6. c. 23. post med.
he spoke in the Dragons voice, when he shameth not to write, that the bishops
of Romes sentence was alove all other to be attended for in a Synod. And Mr.
Whitaker confesses the Ecclesiastical Whitaker de Conciliis, etc. q. 2. page
42. fine 43. initio.
Canon (of those times, whereby it was decreed,) That no Council should be
celebrated without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome: And that Ibid. page 44.
pauio ante med. says bereof, Fatemur Julium sibi talem authoritatem
vendicasse. And Mr. Cartwright in his 2. reply part. 1. page 510. paulo post
med. says, Julius Bishop of Rome says, it was decreed by the Laws of the
Church, and immediately after the Nicene Council, that the Bishop of Rome must
be called to the Synod, and that, that was void which was done there besides
his sentence. And see part. 2. page 110. circa med. This appears more plainly
in Socrates and the Tripartite History. For whereas the Arians had affembled a
Council at Antioch whereat Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, and Julius Bishop of
Rome were both of them absent. Yet is the only absence of Julius specially fet
down, as the only cause of disanulling the said Council. And so accordingly it
is said, Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem was absent from thence, etc. Neither was
Julius Bishop of the greatest Rome present thereat, neither did he appoint any
in his place; whereas yet the Eccelesiastical Canon does command, that no
Council ought to be celebrated without the sentence of the Bishop of Rome.
Hist. Tripartit. l. 4. c 9. and Socrates l. 2. c. 5. and see Histor. Tripart.
l. 4. c. 19. and see l. 5. c. 29. also in Socrates l. 2. c. 13. Julius does
accordingly allege this Canon.
Julius made challenge thereby: For which And whereas Bellarmine does object
this example of Julius, and other Bishops of Rome, alleging this Canon: Danaeus
his only answer is, That this objection, nullius est momenti: nam ab ipsius
Romani Pontificis, id est, partis in sua causa testimonio profertur (in resp.
ad Bellarm. part. 1. p. 595. circa med. at quarta ratio, etc.)
Danaeus reproves him and certain other Bishops of Rome. Also it is confessed,
that M. Symonds upon the Revelations cap. 5. page 45. post med. See also Cent.
4. col. 550. lin. 32. And Innocentius Epist. ad Victoricum cap. 2.
Damasus wrote to the Councils of Africa, that the judgment of the causes of
Bishops, and all other matters of great importance, may not be determined, but
by the authority of the Apostolic Sea. And that accordingly See this in Mr.
Cartwrights 2. reply part. 1. page 501. initio. And the Conturists cent. 4.
col. 529. lin. 19. say, Romani Episcopi regulam fecerunt, ut ad se omnia
praescribi primum mandarent, ut patet ex Epistola lulii apud Athanasium
Apologia secunda. Inquit enim (Julius) an ignari estis hanc consuetudinem esse,
ut primum nobis scribatur? etc.
Julius Bishop of Rome at the Council of Antioch outreached in claiming the
hearing of causes, that appertained not to him. In like manner concerning
appeals made to Rome, it is testified, that Mr. Symonds upon the Revelations
cap. 5. page 53. fine. And see the like in Damasus Epist. 2. ad Stephanum and
ad Concilia Africae.
Julius decreed, that whosoever suspected his Judge, might appeal to the Sea of
Rome. That also Theodoret (a Greek Father who lived in the latter end of this
Century, and was deposed by the second Council of Eph^sus) See Cent. 5. col.
1013, lin. 12. it is said of Theodoret: Appellat ad judiciu^ leonis, eique
supplicat, etc. And Theodoret himself, in his Ep^stle to Leo placed before his
Commentaries upon Paul's Epistle says, Behold after all this travail and sweat,
I am condemned, being not so much as accused: But I look for the sentence of
your Apostolic Sea, and I humbly beseech and require your Holiness in this
case to aid me (justum vestrum and rectum appellanti judicium) appealing to
your right and just judgment, and command me to come before you, etc. And in
his Epistle ad Renatum Praesbyterum he further says. Nudarunt me Sacerdotio,
etc. D^p^ecor teut sanctissimo Archiepiscopi (Leoni) sundeas, ut Apostolica
authoritate utatur, jubeatque ad vestrum adire Council um: tenet enim sancta
ista seeds gubernacula regendarum cuncti Orbis Ecclesiarum, etc.
did accordingly make his appeal to Pope Leo, and was thereupon by him Cent. 5.
col. 1013. lin. 26. it is said, Restituit Theodoreto Episcopatum* Sanctissimus
Leo. And see the same in Concilio Chalcedonensi act. 1.
restored to his Bishopric: that Chrysostom in Ep. ad Innocentium says, I
beseech you write that these things so wrongfully done in my absence, and I not
refusing judgment, may not be of force, as of their own nature, they are not,
and that those who have done wrong may be subject to the penalty of the
Ecclestastical Laws, etc. and command us to be restored to our Church, etc. See
this in Palladius in vita Chrysostomi, extat in Aloysio Lipomanno tom. 2. l. 3.
part. 2. And Chrysostom. Ep. 2. ad Innocentium desires that (his enemies) if
they will repent, may not be excommunicated.
Chrysostom did the like to Innocentius, who thereupon See in Cent. 5. col.
663. lin. 36. Pope Innocentius his Epistle to Arcadius the Emperor and his
wife, who were adverse to Chrysostom, and took part with Theophilus, where he
says, I the least of all and a sinner, having yet the Throne of the great
Apostle Peter committed to me, do separate and remove thee and her, from
receiving the immaculate mysteries of Christ our God: and every Bishop or any
other of the Clergy which shall presume to Minister or give to you those holy
mysteries, after the time that you have read the present letters of my bond, I
pronounce them void of their dignity, etc. Arsacius whom you placed in the
Bishoplicke Throne in Chrysostoms room, though he be dead, we depose, and
command that his name be not written in theroll of Bishops. In like manner we
depose all other Bishops which of purposed advise have communicated with him,
etc. To the deposing of Theophilus ( Bishop of Alexandria) we add
excommunication, etc.
decreed Chrysostomus adversary, Theophilus, to be excommunicated and deposed:
that lastly, the famous and So it is termed by Mr. Thomas Bell in his regiment
of the Church page 158. initio.
ancient Council of Sardis consisting of See Socrates history l. 2. cap. 16.
initio, and Zozomen l. 2. cap. 11.
300. Bishops and above, assembled from See Cent. 4. col. 747. lin. 50. and
Theodoret hist. l. 2. cap. 8.
Spain, France, Italy, Sardinia, Greece, Egypt, Thebais, Libia, Palestine,
Arabia, etc. and most other parts of the Christian world, and whereat sundry
Fathers of the Nicene Council were Of this presence thereat, see Theodoret
hist. l. 2. cap. 7. and Socrates hist. l. 2. cap. 16. and Carrion in Chro ni.
page 282. post med.
present, The seventh Canon of this Council acknowledged and recited by the
Centurists Cent. 4. col. 764. l. 6. And by Osiander in epitom, etc. page 294.
is, Placuit, ut si Episcopus, etc. It has sermed good to us, that if a Bishop
be accused, if the Bishops of the Province assembled together have judged the
matter, and have deprived him, if the party deprived do appeal and fly to the
Bishop of Rome, etc. If the party accused desiring his cause to be heard once
again do, entreat the Bishop of Rome, (ut e Latera suo Praesbyteros mittat) to
send Legates from his side; it shall be in the power of the Bishop to do as he
shall think good, etc. And see also in those Authors the 4. and 5. Canons of
the said Council.
decreed appeals to the Bishop of Rome. And so confessedly, that the same is
accordingly granted, and the said Council therefore reproved, by Osiander in
Epitom. etc. page 294. circa med. (a pud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 3. at
104. margent) speaking of the Council of Sa^dis decreeing appeals to Rome,
professes to deliver the then common received opinion and reason thereof
saying, Inveteratus communis, and de manu traditus fuit error, quod Petrus
fuerit Romae primus Episcopus, ideo hunc honorem habendum censuit successori
Petri, juxta communionem opinionem, etc.
Osiander, Calvin, Of Calvin and Peter Martyr see in Brereley tract. 1. sect.
7. in the mrgent at d. subd. or exemple 2.
Peter Martyr, Frigevillaeus Gauvius in his Palma Christiana page 30. and 122.
and 124. circa med.
Trigevillaus Gauvius, and The Centurists do confess and recite this Canon ut
supra at 70.
the Century Writers. In so much that whereas the Arians had expelled
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and diverse
other Catholic Bishops of the East Church, it is testified that Julius (Bishop
of Rome) upon the Arians first accusation made to him against Athanasius,
Nicephorus l. 9. c. 6. and H^st. Tripartit. l. 4. c. 6. it is said, Ipsis Romam
v^nire praecepit, and venerab^lem Athanasium ad judic^um regulariter evocav^t,
ille continuo, evocatione suscepta, venit, etc. And see Theo^oret hist. l. 2.
c. 4.
summoned Athanasius the great (...) according to the Canons. And afterward
upon relation had from Athanasius of the truth of the matter, Hist. Tripart^t.
l. 4. c. 15. and see Zozom^n hist. l. 3. c. 7.
Julius hearing the accusations and complaint of each one, etc. Commanded
certain of the Bishops of the East to appear before him, at a certain day, etc.
And as the Centurists confess Cent. 4. col. 550. lin. 20. and see this further
in Socrates hist. l. 2. c. 11. prope initium. And Zozomen hist. l. 3. c. 7.
initio says of Julius, Accum propter sedis d^gnitatem cura omnium ad ipsum
spectaret, singulis suam Ecclesiam restituit.
restored every one of those (foresaid other wronged) Bishops to their own
place (or Bishopric) and that not by entreaty or arbitrably: but (as the
Centurists say) fretus Ecclesiae Romanae praerogativa, Cent. 4. col. 550. lin.
15. and Zozomen ut supra and see Socrates l. 2. c. 11. and Hist. Tripartit. l.
4. c. 15. Also D. Philippus Nicolai d^ Regno Christi l. 2. page 149. circa med.
says of this matter, Julius Pontifex, referent bus Socrate and Zozomeno
literas ad Orientales d^dit, in quibus, ut ipsae literae contestantur, non
semel indicat, sibi soli, qui sit primae sedis; ut ait, Praesul, singulari
quodam privilegio, ut ex praescripto divino, jus competere, Synodos generales
convocandi, nee minus ad se quoque solum, ejus Vrbis Antistitem pertinere
dicit, ut de causis Episcoporum, and id genus aliis gravioribus negotiis
cognoscat: Ad eundem modum and pari ambitione Damasus, etc. and postea
Innocentius, etc.
by Prerogative of the Roman Sea. Which premises are made as yet much more
evident, by Julius his undoubted Epistle extant in Athanasius his second
Apology, and alleged by the This Epistle is alleged cent. 4. col. 735. in which
is mentioned their citation col. 737. lin. 10. and 742. lin. 26. unto judgment
col. 737. lin. 58. and col. 742. lin. 23. and col. 745. lin. 9. at a certain
day (col. 739. lin. 19. and col. 740. lin. 11.) and col. 746. lin. 31. Julius
says to them, An ignari estis hanc consuetudinem esse, ut primum nobis
scribatur, ut hinc quod justum est definiri posset? etc. Quae enim accepimus a
beato Petro Apostolo, ca vobis significo. See this saying reprehended cent. 4.
col. 529. lin. 22.
Centurists.

As concerning the other precedent age or Century next ensuing the second
hundred years after Christ, in which, persecution so raged, as the Churches
Government was thereby the more obscured, as also of the written Monuments of
that time, little is at this day remaining; St. Cyprian moves Pope Stephen
Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 13. ante med. says, Dirigantur in Provinciam and ad
plebem Arelarae consistentem a te literae, quibus, abstento Martiano, alius in
locum ejus substituatur. And afterward in the same Epistle fine, he further
says, Significa plane nobis, quis in locum Martiani Arelatae suerit
substitutus, ut sciamus ad quem fratres nostros dirigere, and ^ui scribere
debeamus.
by his Letters to depose Martianus (from his Bishopric) and to appoint an
other in his place. And he also makes mention of Basilides, who Cyprian l. 1.
Epist. 4. circa med. says of Basilides: Romam pergens Stephanum collegam
nostrum long positum, and gestae rei ac veritatis ignarum fefellit, ut
exambiret reponi se injuste in Episcopatum de quo fuerat just depositus.
going to Rome thought to deceive (Pope) Stephen then ignorant of the matter,
so to procure himself injustly restored to the Bishopric, from whence he was
justly deposed. Which very examples, together with sundry other like before
mentioned, concerning the confirming, deposing, and restoring of Bishops, being
objected by Bellarmin, are in themselves furthermore so plain and confessed;
that Danaeus in his answer thereto cannot deny the same; but only answers and
says, Danaeus in resp* ad Bellarm. part. 1. page 317. post med.
It does not follow, that because the Bishop of Rome used this right, therefore
he had that right, certainly he had no right to do this, but only Tyranny and
Usurpation. So confessedly ancient is this supposed Tyranny and usurpation. In
like manner the Centurists do reprehend Pope Stephen for undertaking, Centur.
3. col. 168. lin. 31.
in this age to threaten excommunication to Helenus and Firmiltanus, and all
(others) throughout Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Galatia, for rebaptizing
Heretics. And in a special several Tract of their fourth Chapter, entitled
Cent. 34, col. 71. lin. 31.
Inclinatio Doctrinae, complectens peculiares and incommodas opiniones and
errores Doctorum, and in the same Tract under the title there Cent. 3. c. 4.
col. 84. lin. 35.
de Ecclesia and Primatu Romano, they do immediately next after, reprove
Tertullian, for that, say they, Col. 84. lin. 37.
he did erroneously think the Keys to be committed to Peter alone, and the
Church to be built on him. In like manner is St. Cyprian there charged for his
affirming, Col. 84. lin. 60.
the Church to have been built upon Peter, and Col. 84. lin. 44.
one Chair founded by our Lords voice upon the rock, and that Col. 84. lin. 49.
there ought to be one Bishop in the Catholic Church, and for his calling
Peter's Col. 84. lin. 56.
Chair the principal Church, from whence Priestly unity arises; And lastly for
his (say they) Col. 84. lin. 51.
teaching without any foundation of Scripture, that the Roman Church ought to
be acknowledged of all other for the Mother and root of the Catholic Church.

Lastly, as touching the very then precedent age or Century, which was next
after the Apostles, whereof as Mr. Hutton Mr. Hutton in his answer to the
second part of reasons of refusal to subscription page 195. post med.
observes, few monuments are but now remaining: Victor (as Mr. Whitgift
affirms) was Mr. Whitgist in his Defense, etc. page 510. prope sinem.
a godly Bishop and Martyr, and the Church at that time in great purity, (as)
not being long after the Apostles times: yet is he charged by Amandus Polanus
Professor at Basil Amandus Polonus in sil. Thesium Theolog. page 165.
to have showed a Papal mind and arrogance: and by Mr. Spark Mr. Spark against
Mr. John d'Albines in his answer to the Preface ante med. And see Osiander in
Epitom. etc. cent. 2. page 87. and 96.
somewhat Pope-like to have exceeded his bounds, when he took upon him to
excommunicate the Bishops of the East. Mr. Whitaker also not forbearing to
charge him with Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. page 480. initio.
exercising jurisdiction upon other Churches. In like manner holy Irenaeus, who
lived next after the Apostles, and (as is said of him) The Protestant writer
Hamelmannus l. de Traditionibus, col. 528. lin. 17. says, Sciendum est
Polycarpum, Irenaeum, ac alios qui his conteniporanei suere, memoria adhuc
tenere potuisse vivae vocis praedicationem Apostolorum. And see Mr. Bridges in
his desence, etc. page 309, initio.
might yet remember the Apostles own lively Preaching, is disliked for his
affirming, that The saying of Irenaeus is l. 3. c. 3. where he says, Ad hanc
enim Ecclesiam (Romanam) propter potentiorem principalitatem necesse est omnem
convenire Ecclesiam, etc. These words (necesse est) and (omnem convenire
Ecclesiam) and (propter potentiorem principalitatem) seem so forcible, that the
Centurists cent. 2. col. 64. lin. 10. do say thereof, Novitatem quandam
resipere quibusdam videri posset quod in examplaribus Irenaei, qualia nunc
habemus, extat, etc. So fortheir best answer, insinuating (without any proof,
and against all Copies new and old) that the place is forged.
all the Churches ought to accord to the Roman Church in regard of a more
powerable principality: wherein the Centurists charge him with a See this in
the Alphabetical Table of the second Century at the word Irenaeus.
corrupt saying, concerning the Primacy of the Roman Church. Which foresaid
gradation thus continued up to the Apostles age, is confessed so evident, that
the Protestant writer D. Philippus Nicolai refers the beginning hereof
Philippus N^colai in Comment. de regno Christi page 221. circa med. undertaking
to speak de origin and incremento Pontificiae dignitatis, affirms, that
Primatus affectatio, communis fuit infirmitas Apostolorum, ac etiam primorum
urbis Episcopo^u^, etc. ( And Brereley in his Omissions of page 112. says,) In
so much as the learned Protestants in their Catalogus Testium Veritatis tom. 1.
Printed 1597. doubt not to derive from St. Peter himself (as being the
prognosticon or type thereof) the confessed (in their opinion ambitious) claim
of his Successors the Bishops of Rome, saying to this purpose there, page 27.
fine. Ambitione ac cupiditate potentiae labor^sse aliquoties Petrum negari non
potest, etc. quia Petri imbecillitate proculdubio significatum est, eos
Episcopos qui de Petri successione gloriantur, consimili, imo vero infinitis
part bus majore ambitione laboraturos, etc. Quare haec tam perversa Petri
ambitio, and rerum divinatum ignorantia, tum negligentia, (etc.) haud dubie
significavit Romanum Episcopum, quod primus, ac Privilegiorum Petrihae^es
^ss^volet, mox futurum rerum Caelestium ignarum ac contemptorem, humanatumque
opum, potentiae ac voluptatum studiosum, etc.
to the infirmity of the Apostles, and of the first (next) succeeding Bishops
of Rome. In like further testimony whereof the other Protestant Writers Mr.
Middleton in his Papisto-mastix Printed 1606. page 200, circa med. says,
Papias was the first Father and Founder of Traditions and Peter's Primacy, or
Romish Episcopality. This Pap as ( as appears by testimony of Irenaeus
alleged by the C^nturists c^ntur. 4, col. 172. lin. 27.) lived in the Apostles
time, and was Scholar to St. John, as witnesses Mr. Fulk in his answer to a
counterfeit Catholic page 35. paulo post med. And Mr. Middleton makes no
other exception to his authority, but that be was a Chiliast, whose error ( as
the Centurists cent. 3. col. 231. lin. 54. do report) was, that after the
Resurrection, Christ would a well with us here upon earth for a thousand years,
whereto Cerinthus the Heretic in the Apostles time added an expectation of all
helly cheer and fleshly lust to be then accomplished ( whereof see St. Aug.
hae^. 8.) from which Papias was free, as but only mistaking literally that
which St. John says mystically of our reigning with Christ for a thousand
years. Apoc. 20.6. Into which mist-king also did holy Irenaeus and Justinus
Martyr both of them fall ( as is noted by the Centurists Centur. 2. col. 227.
lin. 32. and col. 212. lin. 57.) and yet their testimony in other matters not
contradicted, is, and ever was of great authority in the Church of God. Also
Bullinger de Scriptu^ae authoritate, etc. Printed T^guri Anno 1538. l. 2. c.
20. fol. 166. a. post med. says, Q^anquam dominandi cupido ab ipsis statim
Apostolorum temporibus, potissimum vero a Constantim M^gni imperio (sub quo
non^ulli a^unt primum venenum effusum esse in Ecclesiam) non semel se
exercuerit in quibusdam Romany Episcopis, etc. And Mr. D. Downham in his
treasise concerning Antichrist l. 2. c. 8. page 79. paulo post initium seems
likewise to acknowledge, though not the then open exercise of (the Popes)
universal Dominion: yet the private Doctrine thereof, saying, The (very same)
Antichrist, which is to be destroyed at the second coming of Christ, was come
even in the Apostles time, although he was not revealed by exercising openly a
Sovereign and universal Dominion. In like respect whereof Mr. Middleton in his
foresaid Papisto-mastix page 193. post med. says, We are sure that the mystery
of iniquity did work in Paul's time, and fell not asleep so soon as Paul was
dead, waking again 600. years after, when this mystery was disclosed, etc. and
therefore no marvail though perusing Councils, Fathers and stories from the
Apostles forward, we find the Print of the Popes feet, etc. And see Mr. Fulks
like full acknowledgement in his saying alleged heretofore in this number at 40.
are plentiful.

11. Eleventhly, as concerning the special forbearance or restraint to fast
upon Sunday; it is confessed that the contrary undertaken liberty to fast upon
that day Brereley in his Omissions, etc. of page 113. says, Mr. Welsh in his
reply against Gilbert Brown page 156. circa med: says, we think it no heresy
to fast on the Lords Day, more than other days, etc.
(renewed now by the Puritans) was reproved by the Apostles own Clemens l. 5.
Apostolic. Constitut. cap. ult. fine, says, Obnoxious peccato est qui die
dominico jejunat. And the like is affiemed by Ignatius in Epist. ad Philippens.
See this confessed by Mr. Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense, etc. page 99.
prope finem.
Scholars, and other Tertul. de Corona militis c. 3. says, Die dominico
jejunium nefas ducimus. And see this confessed by Mr. Cartwright ubi supra.
Also St. Austin Epist. 86. ad Casulanum, circa med. says, Quis non Deum
offendet, si velit cum scandalo totius, quae ub^que dilatata est, Ecclesiae,
die dominico jejunare? And Conc. 4. Carthag. can. 64. says, Qui dominico die
studiose jejunat, non credatur Catholicus.
Fathers, in so much as some of them doubted not specially to condemn the same
in Aerius Epiphan. haer. 75. ante med. reports and condemns the error of
the Aerians, saying of them, Apud ipsos stud^um est, ut pot us in die dominica
jejunent, quarta vero and prosabbato edant.
and the Aug. Ep. 86. ad Casulanu (...) post med. says, To fast on the Lords
Day is a great offense, especially since the detestable heresy of the
Manichees, etc. who appoint unto their hearers this day as lawful to be fasted
upon. And see this alleged by Mr. Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 102. circa
med.
Manichees. As concerning the appointed fast of Lent, St. Ambrose says,
Ambrose sermon. 25.34. and 36.
It is sin not to fast in Lent, For which Mr. Cartwright Mr. Cartwright alleged
in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 100. initio.
reproves him: and yet no less is affirmed by Aug. de tempore, sermon. 62. and
77.
St. Austin, Chrysostom. ad pop. hom. 6. prope finem.
Chrysostom and other Council. 8. Tolet. can. 9.
Fathers. In so much as Chemnitius confesses that Chemnitius examen Conc.
Trid. part. 1. page 89. b. ante med. says, Quadragesimam enim Ambrosius,
Maximus Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hieronymus, and alii affirmant esse
traditionem Apostolicam.
Ambrose, Maximus Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hierom, and others do affirm, the
fast of Lent to be an Apostolical tradition. In more undoubted proof whereof,
other Protestant Writers do not only affirm See this in Abraham Scultetus in
Medul. Theologiae Patrum, page 440. initio.
the superstition of Lent and fasting to have been allowed and commanded by
Ignatius Mr. Whitgist in his defense, etc. page 408. circa med.
who was Scholar to St. John; but do also defend See Abraham Scultetus ubi
supra: and the same Epistle of Ignatius ( being ad Philippens^s) is in like
manner cited and acknowledged by Mr. Whitgift in his defense page 102. ante
med. and by Mr. Cartwright alleged ibid. page 99. prope finem. And Mr. Hooker
in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. sect. 72. page 209. circa mod. answers our
Adversaries usual objection made against it. And so likewise does Mr. Whitgift
in his desence, etc. page 102.
that very Epistle of Ignatius, in which this Doctrine is extant, to be his true
Epistle and not counterfeit. Add but now hereunto, that our learned
adversaries do acknowledge how that in the Primitive Church Whereas Epiphanius
haer. 75. ante med. reporting the errors of Aerius, affirms of him that he
said, Neither shall fasting be appointed; for these things be Judaical and
under the law of bondage. If at all I will fast, I will choose any day of my
self, and I will fast for liberty. And see the like in St. Augustine haer. 53.
and confessed by Mr. Fulk and Pantaleon ( hereafter in this Consideration number.
21. in the margent at c.) This opinion of Aerius, though thus condemned, was
yet so agreeable, and the very same with the new doctrine of Protestants, that
Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 9. page 830. initio says, De jejunio nihil a
fide Catholica alienum docuit Aerius. And see this condemned opinion of Aerius
yet further defended by Mr. Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page
45. initio. And by Danaeus de haeresibus cap. 53. fol. 175. b. and 177. a. b.
though yet others, who distike our adversaries over-plain Novellism herein, do
specially condemn Acrius and his foresaid defended doctrine, as does namely Mr.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. sect. 72. page 210. paulo post med.
And the Protestant Author of the book entitled Querimonia Ecclesiae, Printed
Londini 1592. page 31. fine, and 94. ante med. and 103. fine. Hereof see
(hereafter in this Consideration in the place before cited) Aug. haer 53. and
Epiphamus haer. 75. ante med. And Mr. Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic page 44. fine and 45. initio confesses this, saying, I will not
dissemble that which you think the greatest matter, Aerius taught that prayer
for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both Epiphanius and Austin, which
they count for an error. Also he taught that fasting-days are not to be
observed. And Mr. Field of the Church l. 3. c. 29. page 138. prope finem says,
The eleventh is the heresy of Aerius: He condemned the custom of the Church in
naming the dead at the Altar, and offering the sacrifice of the Eucharist, that
is of thanksgiving for them. He disliked set fasts, and would not admit any
difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, etc. He was justly condemned, etc.
And see this confessed in like manner by Pantalcon in Chronographia page 28.
initio. And Osiander in Epitom. etc. cent. 4. page 434. recites the condemned
errors of Aerius saying, Item non oporrere orare vel offerre pro mortuis
oblationem, Jejunia ordinata non esse obiervanda, etc. jejunandum esse cum quis
voluerit propter libertatem.
Aerius was specially condemned for his then impugning of our Doctrine,
concerning the Churches appointed Fasts: and that also they themselves do in
our behalf give true and full answer to our other adversaries common and
misapplyed objecting of the mistaken example of Whereas Mr. Fulk against the
Rhemish Testament in Matthew. c. 15. fol. 28. a. versus finem, and in Act. Apost.
c. 13. sect. 5. fol. 208. a. fine, Arerius in loc. commun. page 272. versus
finem, and many others do commonly object, that Montanus the Heretic was the
first that appointed laws of fasting: Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastieal Policy
l. 5. sect. 72. page 209. fine, and 210. initio, answers with us, that the
Montanists were reprehended only, for that they brought in sundry unaccustomed
days of fasting, continued their fasts a great deal longer, and made them more
rigorons, etc. Whereupon Tertullian maintaining Montanism wrote a book in
defense of the new fast, etc. And the foresaid Protestant Author of Querimonia
Ecclesiae page 110. initio, answers in like manner saying, Euseb^um
(inquiunt) Montanum primas de jejuniis tuliffe leges, manifesto docet: sed
falluntur graviter in hac re ut in aliis, etc. Abrogatis Ecclesiae jejuniis
novum inducit (Montanus) jejunandi morem, etc. See this answer more at large in
the book it self.
Montanus, and wrested saying of Whereas Mr. Fulk against the Rhem. Test. in 1 Timothy 4.3. and commonly most Protestants do object the saying of St. Paul 1 Timothy
4.3. against our Catholic Doctrine of fasting from certain meats; Mr. H^oker in
his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. sect. 72. page 209. post med. says with us
hereof, Against those Heretics which have urged perpetual abstinence from
certain meats, as being in their very nature unclean; the Church has still
b^nt her self as an enemy, St. Paul giving charge to take heed of them, etc.
And the foresaid Author of Querimonia Ecclesiae page 106. and 107. gives the
same answer to the said saying of St. Paul ( as likewise does St. Austin contra
Faustum Manich. l. 30. cap. 4. and c. 6. and contra Adimant. Manic. c. 14.) An
answer so evidently true, that Mr. Jacob (the Puritan) in his defense of the
Church and Ministry of England page 59. initio, acknowledges, that the place
of Paul (1 Timothy 4.3.) is understood of Marcion and Tatianus, who did absolutely
condemn Marriage and certain meats; and so (says he) are in no comparison with
the Papists, if they erred in nothing else.
St. Paul 1 Timothy 4.3.

12. Twelfly concerning unwritten traditions, and Ceremonies, the Canonical
Scriptures, Images, Relics, and consecration or hallowing of Creatures. And
first concerning unwritten Traditions, it is confessed as follows. Whereas
St. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. hom. 4.
The Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things without,
and these be as worthy of credit as the other; Master Whitaker in answer
thereof says, Whitaker de sacra Scriptura page 678. paulo post med.
I answer, that this is an inconsiderat speech, and unworthy so great a Father.
And whereas Epiphanius says, Epiphanius haer. 61. circa med.
We must use Traditions, for the Scripture has not all things, and therefore
the Apostles delivered certain things by writing, and certain by Tradition;
with whom agrees St. Basil saying, Basil de Spir. Sanct. c. 27.
Some things we have from Scripture, other things from the Apostles Tradition,
etc. both which have like force unto godliness. Mr. Doctor Reynolds answering
to these foresaid sayings of Basil and Epiphanius says, D. Reynolds in his
conclusions annexed to his conference, the 1. Conclusion. page 689.
I take not upon me to control them; but let the Church judge, if they
considered with advice enough, etc. Whereunto might be added the like further
confessed Where Eusebius l. 1. Demonstr. Evang. cap. 8. is objected to say,
That the Apostles published their Doctrine, partly by writing, partly without
writing, as it were by a certain unwritten Law; Mr. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura
page 668. fine says thereto, I answer, that this testimony is plain enough,
but in no force to be received, because it is against the Scriptures. And
whereas D^onysius de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 1. versus finem says, That the
Apostles d^d deliver (their Doctrine) partly by writing, partly without writing,
etc. Mr. Whitaker ( hereafter alleged in this Consideration number. 13. a^ t.) de
Sacra Scriptura page 655. ante med. says, I do acknowledge that D^onysius is
in many places a great Patron of Traditions.
testimony from Eusebius and from Dyonysius Areopagita the Apostles Scholar.

And thus much briefly concerning the Fathers of the Greek Church. Now as
concerning the like confessed Doctrine in the Fathers of the Latin Church, to
avoid tediousness, St. Austin only (as being most Gomarus in speculo verae
Ecclesiae, etc. page 96. ante med. says, August^us Patrum omnium communi
sentent^a purissimus habetur. Also M. D. Field of the Church l. 3. page 170.
fine, terms Austin the greatest of all the Fathers, and worthiest Divine the
Church of God ever had since the Apostles times.
approved by our Adversaries) shall serve for all: who laboring to prove that
those who are Baptized by Heretics should not be rebaptized, says, Aug. de
Bap. contra Don. l. 5. c. 23.
The Apostles commanded nothing hereof, but that custom which was opposed
herein against Cyprian, is to be believed to proceed from their tradition, as
many things be, which the whole Church holds, and are therefore well believed
to be commanded of the Apostles, although they be not written. Wherein, and See
the like saying in St. Austin Epist. 118. ad Januarium.
other his like sayings, his meaning is so evident and confessed, that M.
Cartwright speaking thereof says, See Mr. Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense,
etc. page 103. ante med.
To allow St. Austins saying is to bring in Popery again. And that, See Mr.
Cartwrights words alleged ubi supra. And see his further assertion hereof in
his 2. Reply against Master Whitgift part 1. page 84. fine, and 85. and 86.
If St. Austins judgment be a good judgment, then there be some things
commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures, and thereupon no sufficient
Doctrine contained in the Scriptures: Add but now hereunto, that See Chemnitius
examen part. 1. page 87. 89 90.
Chemnitius reproves for their like testimony of unwritten traditions, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierom, Maximus, Theophilus, Basil,
Damascene, etc. That Mr. Fulk See Mr. Fulk against Purgatory page 362. ante
med. and 303. and 397. and against Martial page 170 178. and against Bristows
Motives page 35. and 36.
also confesses as much of Chrysostom, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Hierom,
etc. That lastly M. Whit. See Mr. Wh^taker de Sacra Scriptura page 678. 681.
683. 685. 690. 695. 696. 670. 668.
acknowledges the like of Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Augustine, Innocentius, Leo, Basil, Eusebius, Damascen, etc. Now as concerning
Ceremonies Mr. Calfehil (to omit others) affirms that See this saying of
Master Calfchil in Mr. Fulks rejoinder to Martials R^ply Printed 1580. page
131. fine, and 132. initio.
the Fathers declined all from the simplicity of the Gospel in Ceremonies. In
like manner concerning the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, Toby and other the Books
of the old Testament Unworthily so s^cluded by Mr. Whitaker in his answer to
Mr. Reynolds refutation page 22. and 23. for it is a rash assertion so to
measure the Scriptures by the ^ongue, wherein they are written, as to restrain
the Spirit of God to one only Language. The known vanity of which said
asser^ion is sufficiently further disproved by example of Daniel, a great part
whereof (viz. from cap. 2. ver. 4 u que ad finem cap. 7.) though not written in
Hebrew, is yet by our adversaries themselves acknowledged for Canonical.
Neither is it approved that God would direct by his holy Spirit no Authors in
their writings, but such as were known, and also further declared by certain
testimony, to be Prophets. For our adversaries cannot yet tell who were Authors
of the several Books of Judges; the third and fourth of Kings, the two of Chron
cles, and the Books of Ruth, and Job; even Mr. Wh^taker himself in disput. de
Sacra Scriptura page 603. post med. says hereof; Multo^um l^brorum authors
ignorantur, ut ^osuae, Ruth, Paral^ppomenon, Hester, etc. And Mr. Will^t in his
Synopsis page 4. post med. says, We receive many Books ^n the old Testament,
the A^thors whereof are not perfectly known. Also Calv^n, B^za, and the
publishers of the English B^bles of Anno 1584. and 1579. in the Preface or
Argument upon the Ep^stle to the H^brews, do all of them profess to rest
doubtful of the Author thereof, Calvin and Beza there affirming, that it is not
written by Paul; whereof see also Calvin further in cap. 2. Hebr. ver. 3. fine.
unworthily secluded by Mr. Whitaker, from the Canon, for tha^, says he, they
were written in Greek or some other foreign language, (and not in Hebrew) nor
had for their known Authors, those whom God had declared to be his Prophets;
that these Books were nevertheless holden for Sacred and Canonical by St.
Austin, the third Council of Carthage, and other Fathers, is made evident by
their manifest St. Austin de doctrina Christiana l. 2. c. 8. says, Totus Canon
Scripturarum his libris contin^tur: Q^nque Moylcos, etc. Job, Tobias, Hester,
Judith, and Machabaeo^um l^b^i duo, and Esdrae duo, etc. Illi duo libri, unus
qui Sapientia, and alius qui Ecclesiasticus inscribitur, de quadam
fimilitudine, Salomonis esse dicuntur: Nam Jesus filius Syracheos conscripsisse
constantissime perhibetur, qui tamen quoniam in authoritatem recipi meruerunt,
inter Propheticos numerandi sunt: reliqui sunt, etc. Also the third Council of
Carthage can. 47. says, Placuit, ut praeter Scripturas Canonicas nihil in
Ecclesia legatur sub nomine divinarum Scripturarum. Sunt autem Canonicae
Scripturae Genesis, E^odus, Levit^cus, etc. Salomonis libriquinque, etc.
Tobias, Judith, Hester, Esdrae libri duo, Machabaeorum libri duo, etc. And see
the like account made by Innocent us in Epist. ad Exuperium cap. 7. By Gelasius
tom. 1. Council. decret. cum 70. Episcopis. By Isidor. l. 6. Etymolog. cap. 1.
By Rabanus l. 2. Instit. Cler^corum; and by Cassiodorus l. 2. divin. lectionum.
sayings had thereof. And howsoever certain of our learned Adversaries were not
abashed in the Tower disputation publicly and seriously to evade and answer,
that St. Anstin in his sayings hereof used the word Canonical In the Tower
disputation with F. Campian Anno 1581. the first days conference.
improperly, the very contrary thereof is so evident, not only in St. Austin
and the third Council of Carthage (whereat St. Austin was present and In
Council. 3. Carthag. fine it is said, Augustinus Ep^scopus plebis Hipponae
subscripsi.
subscribed) but also in sundry other Fathers, that the same is plainly
confessed in diverse of the same Fathers, by Mr. Reynolds in his Conclusions
annexed to his conference, the second Conclusion page 699. post med. and 700.
initio, reproves herein the third Council of Carthage.
D. Reynolds, Zanchius de Sacra Scriptura page 32. and 33. acknowledges the
foresaid like Judgment of the Carthage Council, Innocentius, and Gelasius.
Zanchius, Hospinianus in Hist. Sacramentar. part. 1. page 160. paulo ante med.
rejects herein the Judgment of the Carthage Council. And ibid. post med. and
page 161. ante med. he likewise rejects Innocentius and Gelasius: and page
161. post med. he reproves St. Austin.
Hospinianus, Lubbertus d^ principiis Christian. dogm. l. 1. cap. 4. page 8.
prope finem says, Concedo quosdam ex his libris a Carthaginen^ibus admissos,
s^d nego eos propterea esse verbum Dei. Nulla enim Cono lia habent istam
author^^atem.
Lubbertus, Hiperius in Method. Theolog. l. 1. page 46. fine says, In Concilio
Carthag^ensi tertio adduntur ad Canonem, etc. Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus,
libri duo Machabaeorum, Tobias, Judith, etc. quos libros omnes eodem ordine
numerat Augustinus, Innocentius and Gelasius. And then afterward more at large
recites their Judgment.
Hipertus, D. Field of the Church, l. 4. c. 23. page 246. circa med. and 247.
circa med. acknowledges the like judgment herein of St. Austin, Innocentius,
and the third Council of Carthage.
D. Field, and See D. Covel against Burges, page 76. fine, and 77. most plainly
confessing St. Austins like judgment had of the Book of Wisdom; and ibid.
page 87. ante med. he further says of all these Books: If Ruffinus be not
deceived, they were approved as parts of the old Testament by the Apostles.
D. Covel. And whereas our Adversaries do object, that Origin in Psalm. 1. apud
Eusebium Hist. l. 6. c. 19.
Origin and Epiphanius de pond. and mensur. and also Haer. 8. Epicureorum circa
med.
Epiphanius do in their mentioning the Scriptures of the old Testament, seclude
these from the Canon; and that Hieron. praefat. in lib. Regum.
St. Hierom affirms them to be Apocryphal; it is answered thereto: First,
that the Fathers in those places do not speak of their own opinion, but do only
report what was the opinion of the Hebrews, and what Books they thought
Canonical. From which now defended opinion of the Hebrews, Origin was so far
from the Hebrews opinion hereof, that he doubted not to defend for sacred
against Julius Africanus (who doubted thereof) the History of Susanna, which
the Hebrews and Protestans reject; hereof see Origin in Epist. ad Julium
Africanum, and hom. 1. in Leviticum. He does likewise (in Epist. ad Julium
Africanum) affirm that part of Hester to be sacred and Canonical, which the
Protestants refuse, as not being in the Hebrews Canon.
Origin, Epiphanius haer. 76. ante med. numbreth Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus
among the divine Scriptures: and in libro de pond. and niensur. paulo post
init. he refers Sapientia unto Solomon as Author thereof.
Epiphanius, Hierom As concerning Hierom, whereas he (in praefat. Daniel.) unto
an unwary Reader may seem to seclude certain Chapters of Daniel rejected by
Protestants, as not being in the Hebrews Canon; In so much that Ruffinus
mistaking herein (as the Protestants do) Hieroms meaning, does reprehend and
charge Hierom, with refusal of these foresaid parts of Daniel ( accordingly
also as does Mr. Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 1. page 18. circa med. allege the
foresaid place of Hierom against those Chapters of Daniel) St. Hierom. Apol. 2.
adv. Ruffinum circa finem answers and explaineth himself saying, Non enim
quid ipse sentirem, etc. Truly I did not set down what my self thought, but
what the Hebrews are accustomed to say against us herein, calling there
fierther Ruffinus stultum Sycophantem, a foolish Sycophant, for mistaking and
charging him with the Hebrews opinion. See yet this point of St. Hierom thus
explaining himself confessed by Mr. D. Covel in his answer to Master John
Burges, etc. page 87. circa med. And see the conference of Hampton Court page
60. Also St. Hierom^n prolog. in Machab. most expressly places the Books of
Machabees (rejected by the Hebrews) among the stories of divine Scripture. And
Hier. in praefat. in Judith says of that Book. Apud Haebraeos liber Judith
inter Agiographa legitur, cujus authoritas ad roboranda illa quae in
contentionem veniunt (to will with the Jews) minus idonea judicatur, etc. Sed
quia hunc librum Synodus Nicena in numero Sanctarum Scripturarum legitur
computasse, acquievi, etc.
, and sundry other St. Austin de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 36. says, Among which
are the Books of Machabees, which not the Jews, but the Church accounts for
Canonical. And St. Isidore l. 6. Etymolog. c. 1. says of the Machabees: Though
the Hebrews do not receive them into their Canon, yet the Church of Christ does
honor them among the divine Books. So clearly did the ancient Fathers disclaim
from the Hebrews Catalogue which our adversaries profess to maintain and follow.
Fathers were most clearly dissenting, many of them to the contrary, usually
alleging and citing these Books, and (to prevent all evasion and Cavil) not
under the naked and only name of Scripture in general, but with such further
circumstance or Epithets So is the Book of Wisdom alleged by Cyprian. l. 4.
Ep. 1. and de habitu Virginum ante med. and de exhort. Martyrii cap. 12.
initio, and de mortalitate prope finem. By Fulgentius ad Trasimundum Regem l.
1. c. 5. and l. 2. c. 9. and ad Feram Diaconum resp. ad quaest. 1. prope
initium. by Cyril. l. 2. in Julianum ultra med. By Clemens Alexandrinus l. 4.
Strom. By D^onysius de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 2. By Egesippus apud Eusebium l. 4.
c. 22. By Mel to apud Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 26. fine. By St. Austin de
praedest. Sanctorum l. ^. c. 14. and see Synod. Alexandrin. in Epist. ad omnes
ubique Ecclesias. And it is yet further referred to Solomon, as Author thereof,
by Epiphanius haer. 76. Ambrose sermon. 8. in Psalm. 118. H^lary in Psalm. 127.
Tertul. de praescript. Melito apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 26. So likewise is the Book
of Ecclesiasticus alleged by Fulgentius, de remiss. pec. l. 1. c. 12. and 29.
and l. 2. c. 4. and de fide ad Petrum c. 3. and de Incarn. and Gra. Christi
cap. 28. Cyprian de mortalitate post initium, and sermon. de Eleemosyna initio,
and l. 3. Epist. 9. Austin de Doctrina Christiana l. 22. c. 8. and de Civit.
Dei l. 17. c. 20. Ambros. l. 4. de fide cap. 4. and sermon. 30. and l. de Nabath
Jezraelita cap. 12. fine, and lib. de Tobia c. 1. Hier. Ep. 33. Maximus
Taurinensis hom. 1. de Eleemosyna. Epiphanius haer. 76. ante med. Junilius de
part. divin. leg. c. 3. 5. 6. and (which further proves they thought it
Canonical) it it referred to Solomon as Author thereof, by Hilary in Matthew.
can. 7. Cyprian. l. 3. Epist. 9. and ad Guirinum c. 35.61.69. and Sermon. de
Eleemof. prope initium: Basil. l. 4. contra Eunomium; Ambr. in 1 Cor. c. 7.
Chrysostom. de decollat. Joannis Baptistae initio. and hom. 3. imperfect. in
Matthew. Innoc. Ep. ad Exuperium: Gregor. l. 10. Moral. c. 14. Clemens Alex. l.
7. Strom. and Council. 3. Carthag. can. 47. So also is the Book of To by alleged
by Cyprian Sermon. 1. de Eleemosyna, ^n^t^o, and de orat. dom. prope finem. Ambr.
l. de Tob^a c. 1. and l. 6. exam. c. 4. and l. 10. Ep. 82. Aust^n Ep. 120. c.
29. and Ep. 121. c. 9 and de diligendo Deo, c. 3. H^lary in Psalm. 129. circa
med. And Irenaeus l. 1. cap. 34. numbreth Toby among the other Prophets, of
whom the Heretics called Gnostioi did feign certa^n soolish devices. The like
might be further alleged of the other controverted Books, but this place is not
capable thereof.
of divine Scripture, wherein the Holy Ghost speaks, or such other like, as
are peculiar only to those Scriptures that be Canonical. Secondly though we
should suppose that these Fathers had omitted or denied all or some of these
Books in their Catalogue of the Scriptures, accordingly as the Protestants
object that the Council. Laodicen. can. ult.
Laodicen Council does in its Catalogue of the Scriptures omit all those Books,
as indeed the same Council does also there likewise omit the Apocalypse: yet is
the objection hereof (though supposed for true) of no force, because it is
evident that in the Primitive Church the Canonical Scriptures were not
generally received all at once, but in so great variety Of the great variety of
pretended Scriptures see in Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 7. subd. 6. in the
margent under the letter b. where he says: Of the very many writings forged
under the Apostles names, see Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 19. and l. 6. c. 10. and
St. Austin contra advers. Leg. and Prophet. l. 1. c. 20. and Gelasius in
decret. cum 70. Episcopis, and Zozomen. hist. l. 7. c. 19. post med. and see
also the Protestant Writer Ham^lmannus de traditionibus Apostolicis, etc.
primae partis l. 1. col. 251. and part. 3. l. 3. col. 841. lin. 15. and 22. In
which places mention is severally made of sundry writings forged under the
names of Paul, Peter, Barnabas, Thomas, Matthew, Andrew, John, and diverse
others, and St. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. insinuates the then forging of Epistles in
his name.
of pretended Scriptures, great care and search was requisite, whereby to
determine which Scriptures were Canonical and which not, whereby it came to
pass that sundry Books were for the time misdoubted, or by some Fathers or
Councils omitted or not received, which yet afterward upon greater search and
consideration generally acknowledged. A thing so evident, that our learned
Adversasaries themselves do accordingly confess and illustrate the same by many
confessed and known In the Tower disp. 1581. the first days conference, D. 1.
The Deans of Paul's and Windsor say, Euscbius affirms plainly the Epistle of
St. James to be a counterfeit or bas^ard Eorstle. Also Mr. Bilson in his Survey
of Christ's sufferings, etc. Printed 1604. page 664. paulo post initium says,
The Scriptures were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius time.
He says the Epistles of James, Jude, the second of Peter, the second and third
of John are contradicted, as not written by the Apostles, the Epistle to the
Hebrews was for a while contradicted, etc. the Churches of Syria did not
receive the second Epistle of Peter, nor the second and third of John, nor the
Epistle of Jud^, nor the Apocalys, etc. The like might be said for the Churches
of Arabia: will ^ou hence conclude that these parts of Scripture were not
Apostolic, or that we need not to receive them now, because they were formerly
doubted of? So fully does Mr. B^lson answer our Adversaries like usual
objection had against the Machab^es, and the other B^nks of the old Testament
now in question. More confessed examples her of alleged by Protestants Brereley
rec^teth, tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 7. subd. 6. in the margent at the Letter c.
saying, In the Tower d. sp. Anno 1581. had with Edm. Campian the first days
conference, D. 1. the Deans of Paul's and Wind^or do thus report of themselves:
for proof whereof we allege the testimony of Hierom in Catal. where he thus
writes: The Epistle of James is said to be published by some other under his
name, and of the 2. of Peter he says, that it is denied of many to he ^^s: we
also alleged Eusebius writing thus; these Books that be gainsaid, though they be
known to many, he these, the Epistle attributed to James, the Epistle of jude,
the later of Peter, the second and third of John. And in the fourth days
conference fol. 2. b. M. D. Walker says, Hierom says concerning that
(Epistle) which is written to the Hebrews, many have doubted of it. And also
concerning the 2. of Peter, he says it was doubt^d of by many, and so with
some were the two last Epistles of John, etc.
examples; Mr. Bilson thereupon Mr. Bilson in his saying alleged next
heretofore in the margent under g.
concluding, that this denial or omission made by certain Fathers of certain
Scriptures, is no argument against the said Scriptures. Whereupon it
necessarily follows, as well by Master Bilsons foresaid conclusion, as by
unavoydable sequel of the other premises, that the Canonical Scriptures are to
us at this day discerned and made known, not by that which certain Fathers do
omit, deny, or doubt of; for so should we upon this ground deny also with the
Lutherans, the Osiander a prime Lutheran speaking of the last Canon of the
Laodicen Council (commonly objected by our Adversaries) wherein are omitted the
Books now in question, and the Apocalypse, says ( in his Epitom, etc. cent. 4.
page 299. fine) Non recitantur libri Machabaeorum, and recte quidem: In eo
autem erratum est, quod Epistolam Jacobi and Judae, and posteriores duas
Joannis, inter Canonica Scripta numerant: quae Scripta non long post
Apostolorum tempora, non pro Scriptis Canonicis habita sunt, etc. Recte autem
omissa est Apocalypsis, ea enim non est Joannis Apostoli, etc. And see this
point more fully in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10. subdivis. 3. fine at a. and
tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 2. initio, in the text and margent there at
o. p. q. r. s t. u. And see at large in the Protestant Authors themselves the
places there cited, wherein they reject these Scriptures, under color, and
pretense, that they were denied or doubted of in the Primitive Church,
Epistles of James, Jude, the second of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse, no less than the other Books now in
question: but by that which many of the Fathers do constantly affirm. And
seeing the Churches assertion, as being in the judgment of our very Mr. Fulk
in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 5. initio says, the Church of
Christ has judgment to discern true writings from counterfeit, and the word
of God from the writings of men, and this judgment she has of the Holy Ghost.
And Mr. Jewel in his defense of the Apology page 201. and after the other
Edition of 1571. page 242. circa med. says, The Church of God has the spirit
of Wisdom, whereby to discern true Scripture from false. The Protestant Author
of the Scripture and the Church ( which Bullinger so greatly commends in his
Preface thereof to the Reader) does (cap. 15. fol. 71.72. and cap. 16. fol.
74.75.) affirm, that The Church is endued with the Spirit of God: (and that)
the diligence and authority of the Church is to be acknowledged herein, which
has partly given forth her testimony of the assured writings, and has partly
by her Spiritual judgment refused the writings which are unworthy: And
afterward he further says, We could not believe the Gospel, were it not that
the Church taught us and witnessed, that this doctrine was delivered by the
Apostles. To this end Mr. Hooker in his first Book of Ecclesiastical Policy
sect. 14. page 86. ante med. says (apud Brereley tract. 1. sect. 10. subd. 3.)
Of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know what Books we are bound to
esteem holy, which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to
teach, whereof he gives a very sensible demonstration (ibid. l. 2. sect. 4.
page 102. fine) saying, It is not the word of God, which does or possibly can
assure us that we do well to think it his word; for if any one Book of
Scripture did give testimony of all, yet still that Scripture which gives
credit to the rest, would require an other Scripture to give credit unto it;
Neither could we come to any pause wherein to rest, unless besides Scripture
there were some thing which might assure us, etc. Which he acknowledges to be
the authority of Gods Church l. 3. sect. 8. page 146. fine, and l. 2. sect. 7.
page 116. ante med. And Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect, 11. subd. 1. at s.
allegeth further the like judgment of Mr. D. Covel in his defense of Mr.
Hookers five Books art. 4. etc. page 31. ante med. saying, Doubtless it is a
tolerable opinion of the Church of Rome, if they go no further (as some of them
do not) to affirm that the Scriptures are holy and divine in themselves: but so
esteemed by us, for the authority of the Church. And after in the same page, It
is not the word of God which does, or possibly can assure us that we do well to
think it is the word of God: the first outward motion leading men so to esteem
of the Scripture is the authority of Gods Church, which teaches us to receive
Marks Gospel who was not an Apostle, and to refuse the Gospel of Thomas who was
an Apostle, and to retain Lukes Gospel, who saw not Christ, and to reject the
Gospel of Nicodemus that saw him.
Adversaries, an infallible and sure direction to us in this question of the
Canonical Scriptures, is as heretofore positively delivered and made plain to
us by no less testimony than of St. Isido^e, Innocentius, Gelasius, the Fathers
of the Carthage Council, (and to omit others) of St. Austin himself, who in our
Adversaries confessed judgment, was M. D. Covel in his answer to John Burges
page 3. fine says, Saint Austin, a man far beyond all that ever were before
him, or shall in likelihood follow after him, both for humane and divine
learning, those being excepted that were inspired. Also M. D. Field of the
Church l. 3. fol. 170. fine says, Austin, the greatest of all the Fathers, and
worthiest Divine the Church of God ever had since the Apostles times: And
Gomarus in speculo verae Ecclesiae, etc. page 96. ante med. says, Augustinus
Patrum omnium communi sententia purissimus habetur.
chief and best of all the Fathers; what can be more clear and convincing
herein for us and against our Adversaries, than that which is, as heretofore,
though but briefly, yet plainly thus delivered, from the not doubtful, but
confessed judgment of St. Austin and those other many ancient Fathers? Mr. D.
M. D. Covel in his answer to Mr. John Burges page 85. fine says of the
untruths or repugnances supposed to be in these Books now in question: We could
without violence have afforded them the reconcilement of other Scriptures, and
undoubtedly have proved them to be most true. And page 87. fine and 88, 89, 90.
^e makes special answer to certain such objected repugnances.
Covel (a prime man among our Adversaries) not forbearing in this case, to
undertake special defense and answer against such weak seeming repugnances or
contradictions (occuring Concerning the like seeming repugnancy of other
Scriptures Mr. Jewel in his defense, etc. page 361. fine, affirms, that St.
Mark alleged Abiathar for Abimelech: and that St. Matthew names Hieremias for
Zacharias: and in St. Matthew 27.9. are words alleged under the name of
Hieremy, which are not found in Hieremy but in Zachary 11.13. Also in Mark
15.25. our Savior is said to be crucified in the third hour, whereas in John
19.14. Pilate sat in judgment upon him, about the sixth hour. In like manner
Luke 3.35, 36. affirms Sale to be the son of Caynan, and Caynan the son of
Arphaxad, and so Arphaxad was Grandfather to Sale: whereas in Genesis 11.12. it
is said that Arphaxad lived 35. years, and begat Sale: upon which said last
appearing difficulty, though, Beza in Nov. Test. in his several Editions of An.
1556. and 1587. to reconcile Luke with Genesis, do in the said third Chapter of
Luke ver. 36. leave out these words, Who was the son of Caynan; and is therein
defended by Mr. Fulk in his defense of the English Translations against Mr.
Martin in the Preface sect. 18. page 41. yet the English translation of An.
1576. dare not follow Beza therein. To these few examples sundry other like
might be added, all which notwithstanding we are bound to acknowledge the said
Scriptures for true and sacred (and so likewise the other Books now in
question) though the occurring difficulties were greater than yet is urged.
likewise in the other confessed Canonical Scriptures) as are vulgarily
objected against the Books now in question.

As concerning Images, it is affirmed that Mr. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders,
etc. page 672. initio 47. and 675. circa med.
Paulinus caused images to be Painted on Church Walls: that Cent. 4. Magdeburg.
c. 10. col. 1080. lin. 50.
Lactantius affirms many superstitious things concerning the efficacy of
Christ's image; that Centur. 8. c. 10. col. 850.
Saint Bede erred in the worshipping of Images; that St. Bale in his pageant of
Popes fol. 33.
Gregory by his Indulgences Osiander in Epit. cent. 6. page 288. fine, and see
Peter Martyr in his Common places part. 2. page 343. fine, and Chemnitius in
his examen, part. 4. page 32. b. fine.
established Pilgrimage to Images, and defended worshipping of Images; that St.
Leo See Bale in his pageant of Popes page 24. and 27. and Mr. Symonds on the
Revelations page 57. fine says, Leo decreed that reverence should be given to
Images, etc.
allowed the worshipping of Images; that Functius a Protestant Writer (apud
Brereley tract. 1. sect. 8. subdivis. 2. at * before) in libro 7.
commentariorum in praecedent. chronologiam, at Anno Christi 494. confesses
saying, Porro is Xenayas primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excita vit.
And Nicephorus in hist. Eccles. l. 16. c. 27. says, Xenayas iste primus (O
audacem animam and os impudens!) vocem illam evomuit, Christi and eorum qui
illi placuere imagines venerandas non esse. And see also hereof Cedrenus in
compendio histor.
Xenayas was specially noted or condemned for being the first that stirred up
War against Images.

And in no less plain (if not more full) manner, are the Fathers likewise
charged with affirming the great See this hereafter in this Consideration number.
23. ante med. at u. x. y. and ibid. post med. at 80, and 81, and 82.
virtue of the sign of the Cross, with Ibid. and see Mr. Perkins problem, page
83
their worshipping of it: and also with confessed testimonies of undoubted See
hereafter in this Consideration number. 23. initio at u. and post med. at 83.
miracles showed by God in it.

As concerning Reliqus of Saints, it is affirmed that the ancient Fathers erred
See hereafter in this Consideration number. 23. prope initium at m. and * and
after at 35.
both in Translation, and Chemnit. in his exam. part. 4. page 10. a. post med.
says hereof, Ex Translationibus mox factae fuerunt circumgestationes
reliquiarum, ut apud Hieronymum and apud Augustinum, etc.
Circumgestation, or carrying about of Relics. Also in Chemnitius examen
part. 4. page 10. b. ante med.
Pilgrimage to Relics: that Osiander in Epit. cent. 4. page 506. ante med.
and see the other Century Writers of Magdeburg cent. 4. col. 1250. lin. 45.
St. Hierom did foolishly contend that the Relics of Saints were to be
worshipped: that Mr. Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 46.
alleged hereafter in this Consideration number. 21* at d.
Vigilantius was specially condemned for his contrary doctrine, and that many
great Hereof M. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 10. page 866. ante med. says, I do
not think those miracles vain, which are reported to have been done at the
Monuments of Saints. And Luther in purgatione quorundam Articulorum, says, Who
can gainsay those things which God to this day works miraculously and visibly
(ad Divorum Sepulchra) at the Monuments of the Saints. And see Mr. Fox act.
mon. Printed 1576. page 61. b. ante med. where he says, The Idol ceased to
give any more Oracles, saying, that for the Body of Babylas (the Martyr) he
could give no more answers. And see Mr. Fox in the margent there, and
Chrysostom contra Gentiles post med. And of many other miracles read only St.
Austin de civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. and see what is further confessed by
Chemnitius in his examen part. 4. page 10. ante med, as reported by the ancient
Fathers.
miracles are confessed to have been undoubtedly done at the Relics of Saints.

As concerning the consecration of Creatures, it is confessed that the Fathers
give testimony of Consecration See hereafter in this Consideration, number. 21.
initio at 1, and ibid. post med. at 100. And Brereley tract. 1. sect. 1. at d.
further says, In proof that our then Conversion was to every particular point
of our now professed Catholic Faith M. D. Humfrey in Jesutismi part 2. rat. 5.
page 5. and 627. says, In Ecclesiam vero quid invexerunt Gregorius and
Augustinus? Onus Ceremomoniarum, etc. intulerunt pallium Archiepiscopale ad
sola. Mistarum solemnia, Purgatorium, etc. Oblationem salutaris hostiae, and
preces pro demortuis, etc. Rel quias, etc. Transubstantiationem, etc. novas
Templorum consecrationes, etc. Ex quibus omnibus quid aliud quaesitum est, quam
ut Indulgentiae, Monachatus, Papatus, reliquumque Pontificiae superstitionis
chaos exstruatur? Haec autem Augustinus magnus Monachus, a Gregorio Monacho
edoctus, importavit Anglis, etc. And see the like description of Gregory's
doctrine made by Charion. in Chronic. lib. 4. page 567. ante med. and page 568.
ante med. saying, Gregorius publicum ritum Invocationis Divorum instituit, and
ossibus ac pulveribus Sanctorum templa dedicari jussit: Auxit plurimum salsam
persuasionem de Monachatu, and de operibus sine mandato Dei excogitatis, de
satisfactionibus, de votis, de caelibatu; opinionem etiam de oblatione corporis
and sanguinis facienda pro mortuis comprobavit, etc. cum tragice declamitet se
abhorrere ab Vniversalis Episcopi apellatione, id se tamen quod titulus
profitetur, vehementer cupivisse, reipsa declaravit, cum imperium in alienas
sibi Ecclesias sumpserit. And John Bale in Act. Romanorum Pontificum Printed at
Basile 1558. page 44. and 45, and 46, 47. says, Gregorius Magnus omnium
Patriarcharum Romanorum, vita and doctrina praestantissimus, etc. parentum
domus in Monasteria vertit (etc.) super Apostolorum mortua cadavera Missas
celebrari mandavit, etc. Imaginem Divae Virginis circumferri permisit (etc.)
peregrinationes ad statuas pro plebis devotione per indulgentias confirmavit:
Purificationis Mariae festum cereis illustratum, and Palmarum diem solemnem
processionibus bonoravit. Initium Quadragesimalis Iejunii cinerum aspergine
sacravit: usum carnis, lactis, casei, butyri atque ovorum jejunantibus
interdixit, etc. Templis lumina dedit, sex Monasteria condidit, mulieres
Monachorum caenobia subire vetuit, and Monachos Monialium tecta, etc. Ne
bigamus fiat Presbyter prohibuit, etc. Indulgentias certis diebus and templa
visitantibus primus concessit, etc. Dialogorum libros quatuor pro sulciendo
Purgatorio fecit, cinerum consecrationes (etc.) crucis adorationes, ac Missas
pro mortuis admisit (etc.) haec omnia ut Patriarcha Romanus fecit. And
elsewhere, namely centur. 1. fol. 3. he further affirms, that Augustine was
sent from Gregory to season the English Saxons with the Popish Faith: and that
King Ethelbert dyed one and twenty years, post susceptum Baptismum, after he
had received Popery. Also Luke Osiander in his Epitom. Historiae
Ecclesiasticae, cent. 6. page 289. fine, and 290. initio, describes it yet
more particularly saying, Augustinus Romanos ritus, and consuetudines
Anglicanis Ecclesiis obtrusit, nimirum Altaria, Vestes, Imagines, Missas,
Calices, Cruces, Candelabra, Thuribula, Vexilla, sacra Vasa, Lustrales aquas,
Romanarum Ceremoniarum Codices, etc. And ibidem page 288. prope finem, he says
of Gregory, In pluribus articulis turpiter and Pontificie hallucinatus est: nam
and libero arbitrio, and bonis operibus nimium tribuit, de paenitentia non
recte docet, caelibatum ministrorum Ecclesiae acriter ursit, Invocationem
Sanctorum, eorumque eultum, sed and imaginum idolatricam venerationem
approbavit, palliavit, and defend it. Also the Century Writers of Magdeburg, in
their sixth Century cap. 10. col. 748. circa med. make no less plain report as
yet of Augustines like doctrine to us English men, and collecting (elsewhere in
the same Book) out of Gregory's own writings by them cited, certain his
opinions, which they hold for erroneous, as being Popish, they do in their
Index or Alphabetical table of that six Century after the first Edition
thereof, at the word Gregory, specially set down (with figures of particular
reference, where every such said opinion is to be found) as follows: Ejusdem
error de bon^s operibus, de confessione, de conjugio, de Ecclesia, de Sanctorum
invocatione, de Inferno, de Justificatione, de libero arbitrio, de Purgatorio,
de P^nitentia, de satisfactione. Also they charge him yet further out of his
own writings with Consecration of (...) Chailces, and Corporals col. 369. fine,
with Oblation of Sacrifice for the dead. col. 373. post med. with exorcism col.
376. circa med. with translation of Reliqus col. 381. fine and 382. with
Monachism col. 383. initio and 384. with Pilgrimage col. 384. initio, with
Consecration of Churches, with Mass, R^liqus, and sprinckling of holywater col.
364. 365. with Consic^ation of the fo^t of Baptism, of Chrism, and Oil, col.
367. prope initium: with celebration of Mass col. 369. fine and 370. initio and
693. post med. and 694. and with claim and exercise of Jurisdiction and Primacy
over all Churches col. 425. 426. 427. 428. 429. 430. 431. 432. etc. With which
last point concerning Primacy, he is in like manner charged and reproved by Mr.
D. Fulk in his consutation of Purgatory page 310. ante med. and by Peter Martyr
in cap. 8. Judicum, and by Carrion in Chron. lib. 4. page 568. ante med. and by
Luke Osiander in his Epitom. centur. 6. page 242. and Mr. Powel de Antichristo
in praefat. page 1. fine, and 2. initio, signifies his opinion to be, that the
Pope has been Antichrist, semper post Greg. Magni tempora, at all times since
Gregory the great.
of Churches, See the Centurists cent. 5. col. 744. lin. 24. And Dionysius de
Eccles. Hierarchia c. 3. mentions the Consecration of Altars with infusion of
sacred Oil. And see Council. Agathense can. 14.
Altars, Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4. l. 3. c. 38. page 391. initio. And see
Council. Laodicen. can. 21. and Council. Agathense can. 66.
Church-vessels, of Consecration of See next hereafter number 13. at x.
Monks, and The Centurists cent. 4. col. 874. lin. 2^. And see Ambrose l. 3. de
Virginibus, and Council. 4. Carthag. can. 11. and 104. and Council. Agathense
can. 19. and Council. 2. Carth. can. 3.
Virgins, of hallowed The Centurists Centur. 3. col. 143. lin. 48. Chemnitius
part. 2. page 58. b. post med. And Cyprian l. 1. Epist. 12. circa med. says,
Ol^um in Altari sanctificatur: and see Council. Laodicen. can. 48. and Council.
2. Carth. can. 3. Basil de Spir. S. c. 27. Aug. l. 5. con. Don. c. 19. and 20.
Chrysm, See heretofore in this Consideration number. 8. at sect. next before 4.
And see Mr. Perkins problem. page 136. And Mr. Fulk against the Remish
Testament in 1. Ti. 4. sect. 13. fol: 378. a. prope initium. And see Beda hist.
l. 5. c. 4. post med. and Ambrose de myster. init. cap. 3. ad Basil. de Spiritu
Sancto cap. 27. And see Epiphanius haer. 30. ante med. And Theodoret. hist. l.
5. c. 21. and l. 3. c. 13.
water, Holy Bread is affirmed so plainly by St. Austin de pec. mer. and
remiss. l. 2. c. 26. that Mr. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders, etc. page 377.
circa med. does therefore term it a superstitious bread given in St. Austins
time to those that were Catechumens, instead of the Sacrament. And Sir Philip
Mornay in his Book of the Mass page 51. initio, charge Basils Liturgy with
holy bread distributed after service to such as had not communicated. And St.
Hier. in vita Hilarionis post. med. says, Concurrebant Episcopi, Praesbyteri,
Clericorum and Monachorum greges, etc. Et hinc inde ex urbibus and agris vulgus
ignobile, sed and potentes viri and Judices, ut benedictum ab eo panem vel
oleum acciperent.
bread, Centur. 5. col. 744. lin. 22. and see Council. 4. Tolet. can. 8. and
Gregory l. 9. Ep. 28. and Prudentius in Benedict. Cerei Pasch.
Candles, etc.

13. Thirteenthly it is confessed yet further in general concerning Dionysius
Areopagita and Hermes, who are holden most ancient and Of Dionysius mention is
made Act. 17.34. and of Hermes Romans 16.14.
Apostolic: namely, that Dionysius in his foresaid writings which were above a
thousand years since (as D. Humfrey Humfred in Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. page
513. fine and 514. initio says, Hunc Areopagitam, Suidas, Michael Singelus,
Gregorius Turonensis, and alii, Pauli auditorem credunt fuisse illum Scriptorem
caelestis and Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae.
confesses) publicly extant and alleged under his name, (does casually and
obiter among other things) make mention (over and besides the foresaid doctrine
of prayer for the dead) of Hamelmannus de Traditionibus Apostolicis col. 707.
lin. 27. and col. 736. lin. 56. And Mr. Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura page 655.
ante med. says, I do acknowledge that Dionysius is in many places a great
Patron of Traditions.
Apostolic unwritten Traditions of Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 707. l. 4. and
col. 737. l. 51.
Chrysm Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 707. l. 49. and col. 743. l. 4. And D.
Reynolds in his conference page 488. post med.
, Consecration of Monks: of Mr. Reynolds in his conference with Mr. Heart page
488. post med.
Chancels severed with sanctification from the rest of the Church, of
Hamelmannus de Traditionibus col. 741. post med.
Altars, places sanctified, and sundry Ceremoni^^: of the peoples Hamelmannus
ibid. col. 742. circa med.
mutual salutation upon the Pax pronounced: of Scultetus in his Medulla Patrum
page 484. circa med. says, In libro de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia multa scribit
de Templis, de Altaribus, de locis Sacris, de choro, de consecratione
Monachoru^, de Tonsura and rasione capitum.
the tonsure and rasure of Priests heads; of perfuming or Hospinianus in hist.
Sacramentaria lib. 1. page 104. post. med.
burning Incense at the Altar, and of Humfred. Jesuitismi part. 2. page 519.
circa med. and Luther tom. 2. Wittemberg. Anno 1562. de captiv. Babyl. fol. 84.
b. ante med. says, At dices, Quid ad-Dionysium dices, qui sex enumerat
Sacramenta? etc. Respondeo, scio hunc solum haberi ex antiquis pro septenario
Sacramentorum, licet Matrimonio omisso senarium tantum dederit. As concerning
the number of Sacraments mentioned by the Fathers, it is to be noted, that the
Fathers do speak of them but casually, and as occasion is ministered; So
sometimes they do in some places but mention one Sacrament, in other places
two, in others three, in some place Baptism only, in an other Order, in a third
Confirmation. In this sort St. Austin contra literas Petil. l. 2. c. 104.
affirms, The Sacrament of Chrism (or Confirmation) to be in the kind of
visible sings, and sacred even as Baptism it self. And in Epist. Joan. tract.
6. he mentions not only the Sacrament thereof, (but) also the virtue of the
Sacrament. In an other place, namely tom. 7. l. 2. contra Epist. Parmen. c. 13.
he mentions Baptism and Order. And to prove that Orders once received cannot
be lost, no more than Baptism, he says, S^ en^m utrumque Sacramentum est, quod
nemo dubitat, cur illud non amittitur, and illud amittitur? Neutri Sacramento
injuria facienda est. And again, Vtru^que enim Sacramentum. est, etc. In like
manner St. Cyprian inserm. de ablut. pedum initio says, Docetur quae sit
Baptismi and asiorum Sacramentorum stabil^tas, mentioning therewith all sundry
of them. And so plainly, that Chemnitius speaking thereof, in examen. part. 2.
page 7. b. post med. confesses, that quinque numerat, he there reckons up
five Sacraments; Only answering thereto for his refuge, that Cyprian was not
Author of that Treatise. The vanity of which his answer against that Treatise
of Sermons extant under Cyrians name is sufficiently refelled heretofore in
this Consideration number. 2. at 7. In like manner does Innocentius the
first-mention extreme Unction; in so much as Bale in his Pageant of Popes fol.
26. and Szegedine in speculo Pontificum page 33. ante med. reprehend
Innocentius, for that he affirmed, Annoyling of the sick to be a Sacrament.
Six of our Sacraments: that the Book of Hermes entitled Pastor, affords in*
like manner testimony or groundwork of Abraham Scultetus in medulla Theolog.
etc. page 467. post med.
Freewill, and Monastical solitude, of Hamelmannus de trad. Apost. col. 252.
fine and col. 253. initio and col. 254. lin. 38. and Abraham Scultetus ubi
supra page 467. post med.
Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, of Hamelmanus ubi supra col. 253. l. 54.
and col. 254. lin. 49. Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 251. lin. 48. and col. 254.
lin. 30.
merit and justification of works, of professed chastity in Ministers, of
fasting Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 254. lin. 36.
from certain meats, of Ibidem col. 253. lin. 46.
the Innocent parties remaining unmarried in case of adultery, of Chemnitius
examen. Council. Trid. part. 4. page 127. prope finem.
works of Supererogation, and of Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 254. lin. 53.
says, Fuit igitur borum Papismi ^nitium impurus ille liber Pastoris, vel
Hermetis.
Popery. And though in the Primitive Church some question Vide Eusebium hist.
lib. 3. c. 3. prope finem.
was made of this Book, as whether it were Canonical Scripture or not (many
Fathers It was thought to be sacred, and for such alleged by Origin l. 10. in
Epist. ad Romans Tertul. l. de oratione. Clemens Alex. l. 6. Strom. Athanasius in
libro de Decretis Nicen. Synod. Cassianus Collat. 13. etc. 12. by Iraeneus l.
4. c. 37.
thinking it was:) yet is it confessed to have been received at the least for
Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 254. lin. 24. says, illum pro Ecclesiastico
habuerunt quidem Patres: and col. 730. lin. 25. he says, Hermetis libellus qui
dicitur Pastor, est olim aliquando in numerum Ecclesiasticorun^ librorum
relatus. And see the same yet further confessed by Mr. Hooker l. 3. page 34.
prope initium. In so much as Eusebius hist. l. 5. c. 3. Rufinus in Symbolum,
and Hieron. in Catal. do commend this book for profitable, and so Mr. Whitaker
de Sacra Scriptura page 93. fine confesses of Hierom.
Ecclesiastical. And the authority thereof to have been by so many since
specially alleged, by Hamelmannus ubi supra col. 253. lin 10. says, Liber
Pastoris videtur receptus esse ab Irenaeo and Clemente. And col. 255. lin 42.
he says, Ostendit Euseblus a quibusdam librum Pastoris receptum esse, and
imprimis ab Irenaeo, sic and Origines l. 1. de Principiis c. 3. citat quaedam
ex libro Pastoris, ejusque libri lectionem commendat hom. 13. in Ezech.
Origin, Clement, and Irenaeus, who lived next to those Apostolic times.

14. Fourteenthly, this confessed continued current of Testimonies from the
Fathers, is so certain and evident, that sundry of our learned Adversaries
doubt not therefore to make general disclaim in the ancient Fathers. Hence it
is that Mr. Whitaker affirms, Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 6. page 243. fine
says, Ex Patrum erroribus vester ille Pontificiae religionis Cento consutus
est.
The Popish Religion to be a patched Coverlet of the Fathers errors sewed
together. And that also M. D. Humfrey did grievously reprehend Mr. Jewel for
his so bold appealing to the Fathers, affirming therefore of Mr. Jewel that
herein Humfredus in libel. de vita Jewel Printed Londini page 212. And see the
same also in Mr. Fulks retentive against Bristow page 55. circa med.
he gave the Papists too large a scope, was injurious to himself, (and) after a
manner spoiled himself and the Church; which like disclaim in the ancient
Fathers is no less plainly professed by Jacobus Acontius (in his treatise
Jacobus Acontius in Stratagematum Satanae l. 6. page 296. says of the
Protestants allegation of the Fathers, Quidam eo redierunt, ut Patrum
authoritatibus omnia denuo replerent, quod utinam tam secundo fecissent
successu, quam bona spe aggressi sunt, etc. Equidem perniciosissimam omninoque
fugiendam hanc offe abitror consuetudinem. And see the like in Peter Martyr de
Votis page 462. circa med.
dedicated to her late Majesty) and by sundry Lutherus tom. 2. Wittemberg. Anno
1551. lib. de servo arbitrio page 434. affirms the Fathers of so many ages to
have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the Scriptures; to have erred all
their life time, and that unless they were amended before their deaths, they
were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church. And see further Luthers Book
de servo arbitrio Printed in Octavo 1603. page 72.73, and 337. Also in
Colloquiis Mensalibus cap. de Patribus Ecclesiae, Luther says of sundry
Fathers in particular, In the writings of Hierom, there is not a word of true
faith in Christ and sound Religion. Tertullian is very superstitious. I have
holden Origin long since accursed. Of Chrysostom I make no account. Basil is of
no worth, he is wholly a Monk, I weigh him not of a hair. Cyprian is a weak
Divine, etc. affirming there yet further that the Church did degenerate in the
Apostles age, and that the Apology of Philip Melancthon does far excel all the
Doctors of the Church, and exceed even Austin himself; And Pomerane in Joannam.
says, Nostri Patres sive sancti, sive non sancti, nihil moror, excaecati sunt
Montanico Spiritu, per traditiones humanas and doctrinas Daemoniorum, etc. non
pure docent de Justicatione, etc. Nec solliciti quidem sunt ut Jesum Christum
per Evangelium suum vere doceant. And Beza in his Preface upon the new
Testament dedicated to the Prince of Condy Anno 1587. affirms, that, Even in
the best times, the ambition, ignorance, and lewdness of Bishops was such, that
the very blind may easily perceive how that Satan was President in their
assemblies or Councils.
other Protestant Writers, many of them not doubting specially to reprove even
those Fathers that lived next to the Apostles times; Mr. Whitaker and others to
such purpose Abusing: for where as Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26. fine allegeth Egesippus
saying, Till those times the Church remained a pure Virgin, and incorrupt: for
if any then were willing to deprave or corrupt the sincere rule of healthful
doctrine, they lay hid in the obscure corners of darkness; But after the
Apostles death, etc. then certainly the false and subtle conspiracy of wicked
errors took beginning through the fraud and craft of those who labored to
disperse false doctrine, etc. Mr. Whitaker in resp. ad rations Campian. rat.
7. page 102. and contra Duraeum l. 7. page 490. and 491. urges this to prove
that presently after the Apostles times the true Church was no longer a chaste
Virgin, but became adulterous and corrupt: An inference many ways most absurd.
For first Egesippus only means, that during the Apostles times the Church
remained a Virgin, that is, not so much as assaulted openly by Heretics, who
then lay secret and lurking, where as after the Apostles times they stepped
forth, and gave open and violent assaults, invading sometimes and usurping even
upon Bishops Seas, and corrupting or altering with their damnable heresies many
of the Churches revolted Children: which yet, no more made the visible true
Church to be as then heretical; or unchaste, than Luthers like late dispersion
of his doctrine, and infecting therewith of many, who were formerly Catholics,
makes our now Church to be Lutheran. Secondly if otherwise the Church so
presently after the Apostles times, ceased to be a Virgin, and so became
adulterous and corrupt, who sees not then the blasphemy thence ensuing? For in
what one age since the Apostles times to this present, may the Church then be
thought to be preserved chaste? Thirdly it is against manifest Scripture, as
where it is said of the Church, I will marry thee to me for ever, etc. I will
marry thee to me in saithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. Osee. 2.19, 20.
and I will make this my Covenant, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from
henceforth for evermore. Isa. 59.21. Very pertinenently therefore says St.
Cyprian to the contrary, Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorrupta est
and pudica, etc. l. de unitate Ecclesiae post initium.
abusing the mistaken testimony of Egesippus. To this end also does M. Napper
in his discourse hereof to his late Majesty not only condemn all the Fathers
that lived for Brereley tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. at q. r. s. t. says Mr. John
Napper in his treatise upon the Revelations page 43. versus finem affirms,
that the Popes Kingdom has bad power over all Christians from the time of Pope
Silvester and the Emperor Constantine, for these thousand two hundred and
sixty years, and that (ibid. page 145. col. 3. fine) from the time of
Constantine until these our days, even 1260. years, the Pope and his Clergy
has possessed the outward visible Church of Christians. That also (ibid. page
68. versus finem) between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian
and Papistical reign began, reigning universally, and without any debatable
contradiction 1260. years, Gods true Church most certainly abiding so long
latent, and invisible. Ibid. page 191. initio, and page 161. col. 3. circa med.
and page 156. ante med. and 237. paulo post med. and 23. fine, and page 188.
ante med.
1260. years last before Luther, but does also proceed yet further, affirming
that Mr. Napper upon the Revelations page 191. initio, and see the Century
Writers cent. 2. cap. ^ col 125. lin. 49.
During even the second and third ages (next after Christ) the trne temple of
God, and light of the Gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself. In
like manner does M. Fulk aver, Mr. Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic page 35. prope finem.
the true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times; and that Mr. Fulk
ubi supra prope initium.
immediately after the Apostles times, errors and abuses crept into the true
Church. With whom agrees Mr. Downham, affirming, that Mr. Downham in his
treatise of Antichrist. l. 2. c. 2. page 25. prope finem. This mystery of
iniquity, which St. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 7. affirms to be working in his
times, is more than boldly perverted by Mr. Downham, and our other Adversaries
to be as then working in the Church of Christ, directly against St. Paul
himself, who terms the Church, the pillar and stay of Truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.
The working therefore of this mystery of iniquity in the Apostles times, was
not in the Church, but in the Churches then persecutors and sundry heresies of
those first times: As also it is yet working in the heresies of this time, the
same being (as some Divines hold) the very next and ultima, or at least
penultima mist call working before the Revelation of Antichrist himself.
the general defection of the visible Church, (foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.) began to
work in the Apostles times. And Melancthon says accordingly, that Melancthon
in 2 Cor. cap. 3. and Hamelmannus de traditionibus col. 460. says, Post mortem
Joannis Apostoli caeperunt defectiones a fide, doctrinae daemoniorum sub specie
verbi Dei, prohibitiones nuptiarum and ciboruth, vota, caelibatus, etc.
presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the
doctrine, concerning the justice of faith, increased Ceremonies, and devised
peculiar worships. As also Peter Martyr affirms in like manner, that in the
Church Martyr de Votis page 477.
errors did begin immediately after the Apostles times; And that Martyr de Votis
page 490. fine.
presently after their Age, men began to decline from the word of God? and that
therefore Martyr de Votis page 476. paulo post med. says, Quamd^^ consist mus
in Conciliis and Patribus, versabimur semper in iisdem orroribus.
so long as we do insist upon Councils and Fathers, we shall be always
conversant in the same errors. In so much as Beza and others doubted not (if
not most arrogantly read and judge) to prefer in Beza in Epist. Theol. Ep. 1.
page 5. initio says, Itaque dicere nee immerito quidem, ut opinor, consuevi,
dum illa tempo^a, Apostolicis etian^, pro^ima cum nostris, comparo, plus illos
conscientiae, scientiae min^s h^buiffe: nos contra, scientiae plus,
conscientiae minus habere, haec mea sententia est, etc. And Mr. Whitgift in his
defense of the answer to the admonition page 472. fine, and page 473. ante med.
says to Mr. Cartwright, The doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at
this day, is more perfect and sounder than it commonly was in any age after the
Apostles, etc. how greatly were almost all the Bishops and learned writers of
the Greek Church, and Latins also for the most part, spotted with Doctrines of
Freewil, of Merits, of invocation of Saints, and such like (other points of
Popery?) surely you are not able to reekon in any age, since the Apostles
times, any company of Bishops that taught and held so sound and perfect
Doctrine in all points, as the Bishops of England do at this day.
knowledge of the truth, their now Protestant Writers, even before those other
that flourished immediately, and next after the Apostles times. Caelius Secundus
Curio (a principal Protestant writer) expressing further to that end Caelius
Secundus Curio in his Book de amplitudine regni Dei lib. 1. page 43. circa med.
( which said Book is greatly commended by Beza in Epist. Theolog. page 232.)
says, An ignoramus quantis in tenebris, quantaque caecitate and ignorantia
versatus sit mundus, ab Apostolorum fere aetate, usque ad haec tempora, in
quibus Dominus, praeter omnem expectationem, se ipse caepit apetire?
in how great darkness, blindess and ignorance the world has continued almost
from the Apostles age to these very times, in which above all expectation our
Lord began to manifest himself; And an other learned Protestant writer,
affirms accordingly, that The Author of the Book entitled. Antichristus,
sive Prognostica finis mundi, (apud Brereley tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 6. subd. 1.
at g.) page 12. fine says, Spiritus qui annunciat futura, non operatur nisi
eunte Evangelio, quod sub finem ex confesso Lutherus primus invexit. And page
13. post med. he further says, Non manifestatur autem Psuedo propherarum
surrectio, nisi Evangelio, quod inde primitivo Apostolorum Evangel^o ante
Lutherum, ut diximus, nunquam ivit. Ne quis autem Hussiticu^ Evangelium
pertinere hu^ put^t, id prohibet, ^uod Christus illud Evangelium edicit, quod
sub finem per universum forbem esse^ itu^um. Porro H^^^ticum Evangelium ^ohemis
tantum venit: signo orgo esse non potest. Na^ commune Orbis Evangelium signo
esse voluit, non illud unius gentis, Lutheri Evangelium per Orbem volat, tam
voce quam prelo.
from the Apostles times, till Luther, the Gospel had never open passage, not
(so much as) in Huss his time. In respect of which their so common received
opinion, Sebastianus Francus concluded for certain, that S^bastianus Francus in
Epistola de abrogandis in universum omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis. If our
Adversaries do hereunto answer, that this Sebastianus Francus denied the
Baptism of Infants, and being so an Anabaptist, his testimony is not to be
regarded; it is replied thereto; First, that being otherwise a learned writer,
and no less enemy to us than our Adversaries, his testimony as against himself
and them, is therewith of no less force than theirs. Secondly, that the denial
of Childrens Baptism, till they be of years of belief, is osspecially by our
adversaries (who deny the necessity of Baptism to infants) excepted against
unworthily, in comparison of their own far greater differences, concerning Real
presence, Christ's descent into Hell, his suffering in soul the pains of Hell,
Reprobation, and many more of like consequence, notwithstanding which, they yet
profess to be Brethren of one Church. Thirdly, that accordingly Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius do affirm the Baptism of Infants to be but a matter of
indifferency, and such at the Church may worthily omit, and rightly take away.
For Zuinglius (apud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 9. subd. 3. at e. f.) tom.
2. l. de Baptismo fol. 96. a circa med. says, Number enim tanti momenti res haec
est, ut tantas turbas and diffidia propter hane excit^re conveniat, etiamsi
parvulorum Baptismus nullis omnino Scripturarum testimoniis inniteretur?
Externum quiddam est and ceremonale, quo ut aliis rebus externis Ecclesia digne
and honest uti potest, vel idem hoc omittere, and rite tollere, etc. And in
Zuinglii and Oecolampadii Epistolarum libro secundo page 363. post med.
Oecolampadius says of Baptism of Infants, Cogitare illos decebat rem externam
effe quae charitatis lege dispensabilis est ad aedificationem proximi: fatemur
non esse legem Baptizandi pueros, sed etiam non est lex quae arceat pueros. And
see him further page 301. prope finem. And so accordingly Peter Martyr in his
Epistles annexed to his Common places in English Ep. 34. to Robert Cooch page
133. b. circa med. terms him his dear friend in the Lord, his dear friend in
Christ. Ibid. page 115. a. initio, and yet did the said Robert, as appears
there page 114. b. circa med. deny Baptism to Infants, as likewise
Oecolampadius (in libro Epistolarum Oecolampadii and Zuinglii page 300. prope
finem) writes of this very point to Baltazar Pacimontanus tearming him there,
Charissime Frater, and yet was he a chief Anabaptist. Fourthly this Sebastianus
Franeus was so far enemy to the other barbarous Anabaptists, that be specially
reprehendeth them (apud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 5. subd. 1. at x.)
Chron. part. 111. fol. 236. b. and seq.) where also he numbreth up seventy of
the Anabaptists different opinions, and concludes their further differences to
be so great, as no man can either know or number them, affirming further, that
scarce two of them are found to agree in all things.
Statim post Apostolos, omnia inversa sunt, etc. Presently after the Apostles
times, all things were turned upside down, etc. And that for certain through
the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together with the Faith and
Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure: and that for
these 1400. years, the Church has been no where external and visible.

15. Fifteenthly, to seal up (as it were) the premises, whereas Master
Whitgift does against Mr. Cartwright learnedly and truly urge, this general
rule or proof of Apostolic Doctrine, saying, Mr. Whitgift in his defense, page
351. post med. And see also further hereof D. Field of the Church l. 4. cap.
21. page 242. the title of that Chapter being, Of the Rul^s, whereby true
traditions may be known from counterfe^.
For so much as the Original and beginning of these names, Metropolitan,
Archbishop, etc. such is their antiquity, cannot be found so far as I have
read, is to be supposed they have their Original from the Apostles themselves,
for as I remember St. Austin has this rule in his 118. Epistle. In so much as
he yet further says in proof of this rule, Mr. Whitgift ubi supra page 352.
ante med. and sce Zuinglius his words hereof tom. 2. fol. 94. b. circa med.
it is of credit with the writers of our time, namely with Master Zuinglius,
Master Calvin, and Master Gualter, and surely I think no learned man does
dissent from them.

It is now by the premises and by manifest Mr. Whitaker in resp. ad Camp. rat.
7. page 101. initio confesses, that the time of the Roman churches change
cannot easily be told. And Master Gabriel Powel in his consideration of the
Papists supplication page 43. circa and post med. being provoked, that if our
(Catholic) Doctrine be error, then to tell us when it came in, who was the
Author of it? etc. answers thereto, acknowledging and saying, We cannot tell
by whom, or at what time the enemy did sow it, etc. Neither indeed do we know
who was the first Author of every one of your blasphemous opinions, etc.
confession of sundry learned Protestants made more than evident, that the
several Doctrines of our Faith, are according to this rule no less free from
all noted and known beginning, fince the Apostles times, then are the other
foresaid Doctrines of Metropolitans and Bishops; a thing so manifest, that
Master Cartwright (though our adversary) doubts not yet further to
acknowledge the same, saying therefore of this very rule in plain words: Mr.
Cartwright his words in Mr. Whitgifts foresaid Defense, etc. page 352. initio.
that thereby a window is open to bring in all Popery. And Mr. Cartwri^ht
alleged ibid. page 103. paulo ante med.
I appeal (says he) to the judgment of all men, if this be not to bring in
Popery again, to allow of St. Austins saying, etc. So evidently do our learned
adversaries, and the Apparent probability; For seeing Pastors and Doctors must
be in the Church till the end of the world (Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and Mr. Fulk
against the Rhemish Testament in Ephesians. 4. fol. 335. a. initio) and that they
shall not be silent (Esaias 62.6. and the marginal notes of the English Bible in
Esaias 62.6.) but shall always resist all false opinions with open reprehension
(Mr. Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 11. initio and 92. ante
med.) And that the Religion being of God, no fear of man shall keep them back
(Mr. Dearing in his Reading upon the Epistle to the Hebrews in c. 2. ver. 12.
lect. 10. cirea med.) and seeing also, that all new and strange Doctrine is at
its first beginning, against and contrary to the other then before general
received opinion, as being for the time but private and singular, in the first
teacher thereof: Yet it does therefore upon these premises most evidently
follow, as well, that all such new doctrine was ever at its first beginning
resisted and openly withstood; as also that by reason of such open and known
resistance, such said beginning is discovered and left known to posterity.
Which point as it is abundantly verified in the many examples of all such
confessed heresies, as are out of question between our adversaries and us,
whose resistance and secondary beginning since the Apostles times is yet to us
discovered and left known: So again to think that it should hold in all other,
and fail only in these matters, now in controversy between our adversaries and
us, may be thought no less than very partial, strange, and enforced. Upon all
which is necessarily deduced, that according to Master Whitgifts foresaid rule
and assertion, whatsoever opinion is not known to have begun since the Apostles
times, the same is not new or secondary, but received its Original from the
Apostles themselves.
apparent probability of this foresaid rule in it self, confirm and prove our
foresaid Catholic Religion, whereto we were so many ages since converted, to
be not new or secondary to the Apostles times, but only Primitive and
undoubtedly Apostolic.

16. As Brereley tract. 1. sect. 7. subd. 4.
concerning Transubstantiation, Master Whitaker gives example in Innocentius
the third saying, Whitaker l. 7. contra Duraeum page 480. circa ined. says,
Qui transubstantiationem primus excogitavit, is fuit Innocentius tertius in
Lateranesi Concilio. And Brereley in his Omissions of page 183. says, And Mr.
Sutcliff de M^ssa Papistica l. 2. c. 5. fol. 196. b. circa med. says,
Transubstantiationis nomen Incentius. 3. primum public recipendum decrevit,
nec rem, nec nomen ante illud tempus notum fuisse conseat.
He that first invented Transubstantiation was Innocent the third in the
Laterane Council; whereto we answer, first, that Mr. Whitaker barely affirms,
but proves not this assertion, neither does he allege so much as one Author of
those times, charging this Pope Innocent or that Council with any Innovation or
change of Doctrine in this matter. And we further say that Mr. Whitaker urges
this example, howsoever against his knowledge and learning: yet most clearly
against all evidence of truth. For this Council of Laterane was holden Anno
1215. and as appears by the said Council and further testimony of Crespinus
in his Book of the Estate of the Church: page 345. fine.
Protestants there were present thereat, the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and
Constantinople, 70. Metropolitans, 400. Bishops, and 800. Conventual Priors.
Now that so many learned men of so many several remote Nations of the Christian
world, as were here assembled, should all of them agree to decree
Transubstantiation, and yet the same to be an Innovation (as Mr. Whitaker
says) then first invented, is more then improbable. The truth hereof therefore
was most plainly to the contrary, that in the age before that Council, the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, was public and general, only Berengarius as
then impugned the same, and was therein publicly contradicted and specially
written against, by diverse There did in that age write purposely in proof of
the Real presence Anselmus, Lanfrancus, Guitmundus, Adelmannus, Algerus, Hugo
Lingonensis, and others. In so much that Papyr Masson. Annal. Francorum l. 3.
in Henrico Rege testifies, saying, Berengario, omnes illius temporis Theologi
bellum indixere. And Oecolampadius in lib. Epist. Oecolampadii and Zuinglii l.
3. page 712. fine says, Vivo Berengario multi contra ipsum scripserunt.
Fathers of several Nations in that age. In so much as the foresaid Council of
Lateran was at length then afterward assembled against that this new seeming
opinion. A thing so evident, that Master Fox act. mon. Printed 1576. page 1121.
b. circa med. And Joachim Camerarius in his Historiae narratio, etc. page 161.
paulo post med. says, Transubstationis dogma de evanescentia panis, post annum
Christi 850. tanquam in quieta possessione mansit, usque ad Berengarii tempora,
and annum Christi circiter 150. Nam etsi antea privatis scriptis quorundam
notata res fuit; publica tamen (...), a Berengario prima extitit.
Fox confesses and says thereof, About the year of our Lord 1660. the denying
of Transubstantiation began to be accounted heresy, and in that number was
first one Berengarius who lived about Anno 1060. So far was Transubstantiation
from being (as Mr. Whitaker pretends) first affirmed, or invented afterward
in the Council of Lateran Anno 1215. Secondly we say, that also the many
sayings (over tedious here to recite) of the other much more ancient Fathers,
who lived long before the Lateran Council, are so plain and pregnant for
Transubstantiation, that the learned Protestants themselves do in plain terms
accordingly acknowledge the same, and therefore reprehend the said Fathers. To
omit the plain testimony Osiander in Epitom. Hist. Eccles. cent. 9, 10, 11. and
page 95. fine says, Anno. 950. exorta est in Clero Cantuariensi acris
contentio de pane Eucharistico. Alii en^m asseverabant priorem panis
substantiam remanere, and nihilominus simul ibi verum Christi corpus porrigi.
Alii vero pugnabant, recitatis verbis Domini, priorem substantiam elementorum
prorsus evanescere, atque transire in corpus Domim, etc. And Crispinus in his
Book of the estate of the Church page 286. circa med. and page 289. initio and
323. post med. confesses that Paschasius ( who lived Anno Dom. 880.) taught
Transubstantiation.
herein of Osiander and some others, in this sort, it is confessed and
affirmed, that Affirmed by Mr. Carlisle in his book, that Christ descended not
into Hell fol. 58. and by Oecolampadius in libro Epistolarum Oecolampadii and
Zuinglii l. 3. page 661. And see Mr. Fulk against Heskins page 217. post med.
and 204. ante med. and 296. fine. And by Carrion in Chronic. page 451. initio.
Damascen taught Transubstantiation: that both See Vrsinus his
treatise^ntituled: Commonefact. cujusdam Theologi de Sacra Domini Coena, and
ejusdam commonefactionis consideratio page 211. post med. where it is said,
Theophilactus and Damascenus plane inclinant ad Transubstantiationem, and vide
Chemnicium examen. part. 2, page 83. a. paulo post med. and page 90. b. circa
med.
Damascen and Theophilact do evidently incline to Transubstantiation: that
Humfredus in Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 5. page 626. says, In Ecclesiam vero
quid invexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? Intulerunt, etc.
Transubstantiationem, etc.
Gregory the Great and Austin brought into England Transubstantiation: that The
Century Writers, cent. 4. c. 10. col. 985. lin. 30. say of Eu^^bius Emissenus,
that parum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit, etc.
Eusebius Emissenus did speak unprofitably of Transubstantiation: that The
Century Writers undertaking in their fifth Century c. 4. col. 496. lin. 4. to
set down, Errores Doctorum hujus Saeculi, do therein col. 517. lin. 23. say,
Chrysostomus Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare: ^am ita scribit in
sermon de Eucharistia. Number vides panem? number vinum^num sicut reliqui cibi in
secessum vadunt? Absit, ne sic cogites. Quemadmodum enim si^cera, igni adhibita
illi assimilatur, nihil substantiae remanet, nihil superfluit, sic and hic puta
mysteria consumi corporis substantia.
Chrysostom does seem to confirm Transubstantiation; whereto sundry other like
examples might be added. A thing so evident that Adamus Francisci (a Protestant
Writer) does therefore acknowledge how that Adamus Francisci in Margarita
Theologica page 256. post med. says, Commentum Papistarum de
Transubstantiatione mature in Ecclesiam irrepsit.
Transubstantiation entered early into the Church.

17. The Brereley tract 1. sect. 4. subd. 11. in the text and margent at 2. and
3.
ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church are likewise by our learned
adversaries confessed to have believed Melchisedechs offering of Bread and Wine
in Sacrifice to have been a prefiguration of our new Sacrifice of the new
Testament. For Mr. Fulk against Heskins, etc. page 99. post med. says, I
confess that diverse of the old Fathers were of opinion, that the Bread and Wine
which Melchisedech brought forth, was sacrificed by him, and that it was a
figure of the Sacrament, which they improperly call a Sacrifice. And see the
Fathers further reproved herein by Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in
Haebr. c. 7. sect. 8. fol. 405. b. fine, and by Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum
page 818. and 819. and Master Fulk against Heskins page 100. circa med.
confesses, how the Fathers thought that Melchisedech herein resembled the
Priesthood of Christ. And Calvin in omnes Pauli Epistolas in Haebr. c. 7. v. 9.
page 924. b. circa med. confesses likewise saying, Quo magis tot veteres
Ecclesiae Doctores hac opinione occupatos fuise miror, ut in oblatione panis
and vini insisterent, sic autem loquuntur: Christus Sacerdos est secundum
ordinem Melchisedech; atqui panem and vinum Melchisedech obtulit, ergo panis
and vini sacrificium Christi Sacerdotio convenit. And Andraeas Chrastovius de
opificio Missae contra Bellar. l. 1. page 28. sect. 66. doubts not, upon the
authority of the ancient Fathers in this point, with us to affirm and defend
the said sacrifice against his other Protestant Brethren, saying thereof,
Consensum and interpretationis harmoniam Christianis Pastoribus abjicere non
licet, idque cum propter Apostolici saeculi vicinitatem, tum propter singularem
omnium concordiam, quae in omnibus locis habetur, etc. omnium veluti
conspiratione oblatio Melchisedech Sacra proponitur, ut non tantum Abrahae
militibus, sed etiam Deo incruentum Sacrificium oblatum videatur, etc. Hence it
is that our Brereley tract. 3. sect. 1. at s. 2.3, 4, 5. t.
Spiritual Pastors by reason of their Catholic St. Chrysostm wrote a special
Book of this Priesthood.
Priesthood, are (as Saint Austin says) now (not improperly, but) Aug. de
Civit. Dei. l. 20. c. 10. post. med. says, Non utique de solis Episcopis and
Presbyteris dictum est, qui jam proprie vocantur in Ecclesia Sacerdotes. And
the most ancient Father Irenaeus l. 4. c. 20. affirms besides the spiritual
Priestly Order of all the just, an other peculiar Priesthood of the Apostles,
who are in respect thereof by him said to attend daly upon God and the Altar.
properly called Priests in the Church, to whom therefore, the words Presbyter
and Sacerdos are indifferently St. Austin ut supra. And the Greek word (...),
which signifies Sacerdos, is used and referred to Christian Priests by
Dionysius Areopagita de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 5. and Epist. 8. ad Demophilum
Monachum. And Ignatius in his undoubted Epistle ad Smyrnenses, now extant,
whereof diverse sentences are verbatim alleged under the name of Ignatius, and
title of this Epistle, by Hierom lib. de Viris Illustribus, and by Eusebius l.
3. c. 32. as is more at large urged and proved by Mr. Whitgift in his defense,
etc. page 408. circa med. and he ( not so much as therein gainsaid by Mr.
Cartwright) affirms the Bishop to be as the high Priest and Christ's Image, in
respect of his Priesthood: affirming further, that in the Church nothing is
greater than the Bishop, who sacrifices to God for the safety of the whole
world. And Nazianzen in Epist. 8. ad Simplicium haeret. affirms, the Priest
to be the mediator between God and man, and sacrificing together with Christ.
This point is so evident and common in the Greek and Latin Fathers, that Mr.
Whitaker l. 9. contra Duraeum page 813. initio acknowledges the same, and
answers only, that the said Fathers used the words (...) and Sacerdos, non
proprie sed (...), not properly ( directly against St. Austins foresaid
testimony) but by abuse of speech: and yet ( as Mr. Whitgift in his said
defense, etc. page 411. versus finem, confesses and says,) this name Priest
is usually applied to the Minister of the Gospel in all histories, Fathers, and
writers of Antiquity.
referred, in respect of the blessed Sacrament, which is by them offered up to
God, Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 17. cap. 17. circa med.
under Christ the (high) Priest, and Ambr. in 1 Timothy cap. 4. ver. 14.
in his stead, or Cyprian l. 2. Epist. 3. post medium.
place, as the Churches external and acceptable oblation, and acknowledged by
For these last thousand years Mr. Beacon ( whom the Ministers of Lincoinshire
in their abridgement, etc. page 65. ante med. affirm to be a Divine of chief
note in their Church) in his works set forth 1560. the third part in his
Treatise entitled, The Relics of Rome, fol. 344. a. post med. says, The
Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory the first, about Anno Domini 600. etc.
And from Charles the great unto Charles the fifth, the Mass reigned as a most
mighty Queen in all the Churches of the West part of the world. See the like
confessed by Danaeus de Antichristo page 101. initio. And Melancthon l. 4.
Chronic. in Henric. 4. fol. 186. and 187. says of Gregory, He allowed by
public authority the sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, not only for the
living, but also for the dead. And the like is affirmed of Gregory by Carrion in
Chronic. page 567. paulo ante med. Also Musculus loc. commun. de Coena Dom.
page 339. fine says of Pelagius Predecessor to Gregory, Pelagius
commemorationem mortuorum in secreta Canonis Missatici retulit, (etc.) ut
mortuis virtus and efficacia Missae communicaretur. And see this Pelagius
directly further charged with the opinion of Mass helping the dead by Master
Symonds, upon the Revelations page 81. ante med. Also Symmachus was Bishop of
Rome (Anno 501.) of whom the century writers cent. 6. cap. 10. col. 664. lin.
30. say, Notas Antichristi and hic habuit, Missam enim in formam redegit.
Before him was Saint Leo (Anno 440.) of whom Mr. Bale in his Pageant of Popes
fol. 27. says, Leo the first allowed the Sacrifice of the Mass, not without
great blasphemy to God. And see this in Bale in Act. Roman. Pontific. Printed
Basileae 1558. page 32. fine, and 33. initio. Before Leo was the Carthage
Council, whereat St. Austin was present, whereof Pelargus in his Schola fidei,
etc. prope finem in his tract there de Conciliis page 13. faith, Synodus
Carthaginensis quinta intercessionem and Misvam pro defunctis invexit. And
Osiander centur. 4. page 16. circa med. says of the 79. Canon of the 4.
Carthage Council. Hic Canon (si non fictitius est) ostendit eo etiam tempore
rations, and oblationes pro defunctis factas. Before these Councils was St.
Ambrose (Anno 370.) Whom the Century writers cent. 4. cap. 4. col. 295. lin. 3.
reprove and charge with not writing well de transubstantiatione and
applicatione pro mortuis. And ibid. lin. 23. they further say, Ambrosius
locutionibus utitur, quibus ante eum ex Patribus nemo usus est, ut Missam
facere, offerre Sacrificium, etc. Before him again was Gregory Nyssen of the
Greek Church (Anno 340.) of whom Andraeas Crastonius in his Book ( against
Bellarmine) de opificio Missae lib. 1. sect. 164. initio, and page 81. says,
An ignorant opinionem Nysseni per se absurdam esse (etc.) Ait ille (Nyssenus)
Cum itaque dedit (Christus) discipulis suis corpus suum ad comedendum, (etc.)
jam latenter (etc.) ineffabiliter and invisibiliter corpus immolatum erat,
(etc.) And see further hereof Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 4. page 320. fine.
Also Cyril of Jerusalem another Father of the Greek Church flourished (Anno
320.) whom Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria page 167. initio charge and
reproves saying, Quod ad Cyrillum Hierosolymitanum attinet, dicit ille quidem
prosui jam temporis recepta consuetudine, sacr ficium altaris maximum juvamen
esse animarum. And Calvin in libro de vera Ecclesiae reformatione, extant in
Tract. Theolog. Calvini, etc. page 389. a. fine and b. initio says of the
Fathers of this age, Solemn esse nebulonibus istis (meaning us Catholics)
quicquid vitiosum in Patribus legitur corradere, (etc.) cum ergo objiciunt
locum Malachiaede Missae Sacrificio ab Irenaeo exponi, oblationem Melchisedech,
sic tractari, ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, Arnobio, breviter responsum
sit, eosdem illos Scriptores alibi quoque panem interpretari corpus Christi,
sed ita ridicule, ut dissentire nos cogat ratio and veritas, (etc.) And in his
Book of Institutions Printed Argentorati 1539. page 350. ante med. and after
the other Edition l b. 4. Institut. cap. 18. sect. 11. he further says,
Veteres quoque illos video hanc memoriam alio detorsisse, quam institutioni
Domini conveniebat, quod nescio quam repetitae aut saltem renovatae imolationis
faciem eorum coena prae se ferebat, (etc.) Imitati enim sunt propius Judaicum
sacrificandi morem, quamaut ordinaverat Christus, aut Evangelii ratio ferebat.
And see heretofore in this Consideration number. 3. at sect. after 12. where he
expressly charge the Fathers with forging a Sacrifice in the Lords Supper
without his commandment, and of adulterating the Supper with a Sacrifice.
Before these times lived St. Cyprian (Anno 240.) whom the Century writers cent.
3. cap. 4. col. 83. lin. 34. reprove saying, Sacerdotum inquit (Cyprianus) vice
Christi fungi, and Deo Patri sacrificium offerri. In so much as that in their
Index or Alphabetical Table in the end of that 3. Century under the letter S.
it is said, Sacerdotem vice Christi fungi in Coena Domini superstitiose asserit
Cyprianus col. 83. lin. 34. And Mr. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders, etc. page
100. circa med. says, It is granted, that Cyprian thought the Bread and Wine
brought forth by Melchisedech to be a figure of the Sacrament, and that herein
also Melchisedech resembled the Priesthood of Christ: Also Tertuilian lived
(Anno 220.) him does Luc. Osiander centur. 3. lib. 1. cap. 5. page 10.
circa^med. reprove saying, Tertullianus approbavit oblationes pro defunctis
orationes annuas pro natalitiis. In like sort is here reproved by the Century
writers cent. 3. cap. 5. col. 138. lin. 56. and no less plainly by Mr. Fulk in
his confutation of purgatory page 265. circa and post med. Before Tertullian
lived Irenaeus (Anno 170.) him Calvin reproves as before, and the Century
Writers cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 63. lin 20. charge saying: De oblatione porro
Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 32. (etc.) satis videtur loqui incommode, cum ait novi
Testamenti novam docuit (Christus) oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens in universo mundo offert Deo. Before him lived Ignatius the Apostles
undoubted Scholar (Anno 90.) of whom the Century Writers in cent. 2. cap. 4.
col. 63. lin. 9. say, Quaedam ambigua and incommode dicta, in quibusdam
occurrunt, ut in Epistola Ignatii ad Smirnenses: Non licet (inquit Ignatius)
fine Episcopo, neque offerre, neque facrificium immolare. And cent. 2. cap. 10.
col. 167. lin. 17. the Century Writers affirm these words of Ignatius to be
perriculosa, and quasi errorum semina. Lastly Mr. Beacon in his foresaid
Treatise fol. 344. a. post med. says seriously, The Mass was begotten,
conceived, and born anon after the Apostles times, if all be true, that
Historiographers write. And Hospinianus in Historia Sacramentaria lib. 1. cap.
6. page 20. fine says, Jam tum primo illo saeculo viventibus adhuc Apostolis,
magis huic Sacramento quam Baptismo insidiari ausus sit (Demon) and homines a
prima illa forma sensim abduxerit, (etc.) and Sebastianus Francus in Epistola
de ebrogandis in universum omnibus statutis Ecclesiasticis, says most plainly,
Statim post Apostolos omnia inversa sunt (etc) coena Domini in sacrificium
transformata est. In so much as Mr. Ascham (a prime Protestant) in his Apolog.
pro Coena Dom. page 31. post med. acknowledges that no beginning thereof after
the Apostles time can be showed, saying, Quibus temporibus, and per quos
homines Coena Dominica de possessione sua per Missam deturbata sit, verissime
sciri non potest, etc. Vouchsafes now your Majesty but to add hereunto the
answerable Doctrine of the ancient Jews says Brereley (tract. 1. sect. 4. subd.
11. and 12.) that the words of Scripture are literally answerable also
hereunto, Matthew. 26.28. Marc. 14.24. Luc. 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24. saying, (not
which shall be given or offered, but) which is given, and (not to you, but) for
you: That also the Apostle calls our Table (...) an Altar for sacrifice,
Haebr. 13.10. A word confessedly likewise used by Ignatius heretofore ( in this
Consideration number. 3. at 11.) that the Prophet Esaias 66. ver. 21. foretelling
the Ecclesiastical Ministers of the New Testament, terms them Priests, (
hereof see the English Bible of 1576. in Esaias 66.21. and Master Hooker l. 5.
sect. 78. page 236. post med. And Mr. D. Reynolds in his conference with Mr.
Heart page 544. paulo post med.) that the holy Ghost also foretells Priestood
and Sacrifice, and the same, not the offering upon the Cross, which is now in
Act of sacrifice transitory and past, but to continue for ever, and not in a
bloody manner, but accordingly to the Order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110.4. that
likewise the Prophet Malachy cap. 1. ver. 10. and 11. foreshewing the rejecting
of the legal Priestood and Sacrifice, foretells the now Sacrifice of the
Christian Gentiles to succeed, which he terms a clean oblation: that the
Prophet Daniel foreshewing likewise the end of the world, and Antichrists then
coming, foretells in like manner, that as then, the daly Sacrifice shall be
taken away, cap. 12. ver. 11. which one sacrifice cannot be meant of the many
spiritual sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving, for that Antichrists
persecution shall rather increase, than take those away. As neither can
Malachies prediction of that one clean oblation be taken to signify those said
spiritual sacrifices, because they are many, and but improperly called
sacrifices, and were not new or peculiar only to the Gentiles, but were also
belonging to those of the old Testament, no less than now to us.
learned Protestants to have been for such accordingly offered, not only for
these thousand years last past, but also for so many other precedent ages, as
being (in our opinion) not any new redemption, but rather a continual
commemoration and application of the force and benefit of that one Sacrifice,
which was offered once for all, Hebr. 28.

18. To what has been said already concerning Purgatory and Prayer for the
dead, we may in this occasion about innovations, add that which Brereley has
tract. 1. sect. 7. subd. 6. of the same matter, where he says, Mr. Whitaker
gives example (to wit of innovation in Religion made by the Roman Church) in
Gregory the Great, saying, Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 7. page 480.
He that first delivered Purgatory for a certain doctrine, was Gregory the
Great. Whereto in Gregory's full discharge from all innovation in this point,
we answer, that long before Gregory, St. Austin (whom our adversaries do
unworthily Unworthily, for whereas Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament 1
Cor. 3. sect. 6. fol. 267. b. circa med. to prove that St. Austin doubted of
Purgatory, allegeth these words of St. Austin, It is not incredible that some
such thing is done after this life, and it may be inquired of, whether it be
so, and either be found or hid. Aug. Ench^rid. cap. 69. and 68. And ad
Dulcitium quaest. 1. And in like pretense that St. Austin denied Purg^tory,
Master Fulk does there further allege these other words of St. Austin, The
third place we are utterly ignorant of, etc. Aug. Hypognost. contra Pelag. l.
5. This we say is extremely abusively to urge the Fathers doubtful obscure
words against their other plainer sayings, and known meanings. Therefore in
answer or explanation of these saying of St. Austin, we say as to the first,
that St. Austin doubts not there of Purgatory, but only (which point is at
this day yet doubted of) whether that (to use St. Austins words in the very
same place) some of the faithful after this life be saved so much later or
sooner by a certain Purgatory fire, as they more or less loved their transitory
goods. So that his doubt there is not whether there be any Purgatory, which by
these his very words he presupposes, and in the very same Book says thereof,
as is here alleged in the text at g. it may not be denied, etc. but only as he
yet further explaneth himself, whether that (to use his own further words)
rerum saecularium quamvis licite concessarum tales cupiditates, etc. such
affection to worldly things lawfully enjoyed ( as to Wife, Children, etc.) that
without grief of mind he cannot part from them, be punished in Purgatory or
not? And of this point he says, as is before objected (and as we our elves yet
say) it may he inquired of, whether it be so, and either be found or hidden.
Thus much of his unworthily supposed doubt. Now concerning the second place of
his like supposed denial of Purgatory, we say that St. Austin uses that
alleged saying, not in denial of the temporal pains of Purgatory, but only upon
occasion, and by way of disputation against the Pelagians, who imagined, that
besides Heaven and Hell there was a third place of everlasting life prepared
for infants that dyed unbaptized. In respective confutation of which said
imaginary third everlasting place, he says, as is alleged, the third place we
are utterly ignorant of, etc. acknowledging no more places of ever histing
continuance, but Heaven and Hell: and affirming withal further to the
Pelagians, that such infants shall for ever remain, not in this pretended third
place, which they imagined, and he denied: but says he, (damnatione omnium
levissima) in a state of condemnation of all other most easy. Aug. contra
Julian. Pelag. l. 5. c. 8. Their punishment (as the Schoolmen hold) being not
paena sensus, any sensible torment, because they never committed actual sin,
but paena damni, the punishment of loss, or privation of Heaven: Into which, in
regard of their original sin, and want of actual faith, they could not enter
without Baptism, Joan. 3.3. Furthermore the other sayings of Austin most plain
for Purgatory are over-many and known to be here recited: in so much as he
himself foreseeth (as it were) and explaneth our adversaries other common and
unworthy objections out of him, concerning his sometimes mentioning Sacrifice
offered for Martyrs, and those that be in Heaven, declaring and explaning, that
for them it is offered as a thanksgiving, and for others, that are not as yet
in such persect estate, as a propitiation. Aug. Enchirid. cap. 110. and vide
Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 17. and in Joan. tract. 84. Our adversaries
therefore may do well more advisedly to consider of these and such other like
obscure seeming sayings of the Fathers, before they object them to us, and to
remember B^za' s direction in his answer to a like objected doubtful saying
from Calvn, where after exphcation made thereof he says, Comparanda sunt enim
inter s^ saepenumcro unius ejusdemque Scriptoris loca, ut quae fuerit ejus
sententia liquido perspiciatur, quum omnia omnibus locis, etiam de re una
quapiam dici nec possint, nec debeant. Hoc qui non faciunt, dici non potest
quam injuriam saepe bonis doctisque Scriptoribus faciant. B^za in Ep^st.
Theolog. Ep. 82. page 382. ante med. This admonition of B^za but duly observed
by our adversaries, would save them much labor of often alleging so many
unworthy frivolous and mistaken objections, as are by them in many
controversies no less tediously, than commonly urged from the obscure serming
sayings of the Fathers.
pretend to have been doubtful of Purgatory, and to have denied it, to that end
abusing his more obscure sayings accordingly, as the ancient Father Vincent
Lyr. advers. haer. ante med. says of the Heretics of his time: Captant
plerun. que veter is cujuspiam Viri scripta paulo involutius edita, quae pro
ipsa fui obscuritate, dogmati suo quafi congruant, ut illud nescio quid,
quodcunque proferunt, ^^que primi neque soli sentire videan^ur.
Vincentius Lyrinensis notes of the like practice of the Novellists of his
time) delivers the same for most certain, saying (amongst his many Aug. de
Civit. Dei l. 20. c. 25. paulo ante med. says, Ex his quae dicta sunt videtur
evidentius apparere in ^llo judicio quasdam quorundam purgatorias poenas
futuras, etc. And l. 21. c. 13. fine, he further says, Temporarias paemas al^i
in hac v^ra tantum, alii post mortem, alii and nunc and tunc, etc. patiuntur.
In so much as Mr. Fulk though fa^sly pretending St. Austins incercertainty
herein, is yet insorced to confess and say of this place, Austin de civit. Dei
l. 21. c. 13. concludes very clearly that some suffer temporal pains after
this life, this may not be denied. Mr. Fulk in (...) confutation of Purgatory
page 110. paulo ante med.
other plain testimonies of this kind: Aug. de verb^s Apost. Sermon. 34. says,
Orationibus vero Sanctae Ecclesiae and Sacrificio salutari and Elcemosyn^s quae
pro little spiritibus erogantur, non est dubitandum moriuos adjuvari, ut cum^eis
misericordius agatur a Domino, quam little peccata merucrunt, hoc enim a
Patribus traditum universa observat Ecclesia. And in his Book de cura pro
mortuis c. 1. he says of prayer for the dead; Non parva est universae
Ecclesiae quae in hac consuetudine claret authoritas.
It is not to be doubted, but the dead are helped by the prayers of the holy
Church, and the healthful Sacrifice, and alms which are employed for their
souls, that God will deal with them more mercifully then their sins deserved.
For this does the Universal Church observe as delivered from our Forefathers.
And else where he says no less certainly, Aug. in Enchirid. c. 10. says,
Neque negandum est defunctorum animas pictate suorum viventium relevari, cum
pro illis Sacrificium Mediatoris offertur.
It may not be denied, but that the souls of the deceased are relieved by the
piety of their living friends, when for them is offered the Sacrifice of the
Mediator, etc. In so much that he for the Latin Church doubted not to Aug.
haer. 35. says of Aerius, Fertur quoque propria dogmata addidiffe nonnulla,
dicens, Orare vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem non oportere.
censure Aerius for an Heretic, for his denial of this doctrine. As also
Epiphanius for the Greek Church condemns Aerius in like sort, saying against
him in defense of Prayer and oblation for the dead: Epiphanius haer. 75. and
ibid. versus finem he further says, Ecclesia necessario hoc perficit
traditione a Patribus accepta.
The Church has received (this) through the wide world: it was agreed upon
before Aerius was. Hence it is, that Mr. Fulk confesses and says, Mr. Fulk in
his answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 44. fine.
Aerius taught, that Prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both
Epiphanius and Austin, which they count for an error. Also he acknowledges
that Mr. Fulk in his confutation of Purgatory page 320. ante med. and page 326.
initio, and 349. circa and post med.
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Austin allowed Prayer for the dead: that Mr. Fulk ubi
supra page 320. ante med. and page 326. initio, and 349. post med. and page 78.
fine.
it was the common error of their times; that Mr. Fulk ubi supra page 161. ante
med. And he yet further affirms ibid. page 78. fine saying, Austin speaks
of the amending fire in the place by Mr. Allen alleged. He does so indeed, but
Austin had no ground of that fire, but in the common error of his time. So
confessedly was the amending fire of purgatory the common doctrine of St.
Austins time.
the error of Purgatory was somewhat ryfly budded in Austins time; that Mr.
Fulk ubi supra page 362. ante med. and vide ibid. page 303. circa med. and 303.
post med.
Tertullian, Austin, Cyprian, Hierom, and a great many more do witness, that
Sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles. In like manner Mr.
Gifford affirms, that even Mr. George Gifford in his plain demonstration,
that our Brownists be full Donatists, etc. page 38. initio. And Arnobius lib.
4. contra Gentes sub finem says, Cur immaniter, etc. Why deserved our Churches
to be pulled down barbarously in which the highest God is prayed unto, peace
and pardon is asked for all men, for Magistrates, for friends, for enemies, for
the living, and for the dead?
in the (Churches) public worship, to Pray for the souls of the dead, was
general in the Church long before the days of Austin, as appears in Cyprian,
and Tertullian which was before him and nearer to the time of the Apostles.
Whereunto might be added like testimony from Calvin. Institut. l. 3. c. 5.
sect. 10. acknowledges, that ante mill and trecentos annos usu receptum suit,
ut precationes fierent pro defunctis (and a little after) sed fateor in errorem
abrepti fuerunt, etc. And Brereley in Omissions of page 190. says, And Calvin
de vera Ecclesiae reformat, rat. extant in his Tract: Theolog. page 394. b.
ante med. further says, Superest alter ordo mortuorum, quorum mentionem in
Coena fieri volunt, ut detur illis locus refrigerii, lucis and pacis: non nego
hanc fuisse vetustissimam consuetudinem, and quoniam magna est vis
consuetudinis, aut potius regnum, ideo ejusmodi preces fateor Chrysostomo,
Epiphanio, Augustino, and similibus probatas suisse, quod a majoribus quasi per
manus tradita essent.
Calvin. So clearly is Gregory (who lived so many ages after these Fathers)
discharged from all innovation in this point.

19. Likewise beside what has been said before in this Consideration number. 9.
that Protestant writers acknowledge the Fathers to have held and taught
Confession even of Venial or lesser sins, Brereley says tract. 3. sect. 1. at
a. b. that Fathers and Protestants do acknowledge Confession of our sins. At a.
in the margent he says thus, To omit the plentiful testimonies of the Fathers,
St. Leo describes the usage of the Latin Church in Epist. 91. ad Theodorum
Foro-Julii Episcopum, saying, Christus hanc Ecclesiae Praepositis tradidit
potestatem, ut and confitentibus actionem poenitentiae darent, and eosdem
salubri satisfactione purgatos, ad communionem Sacramentorum per ja^uam
reconciliationis admitterent. And Epist. 80. ad Episcopos Campaniae he further
says, Cum reatus Conscientiarum sufficiat solis Sacerdotibus indicari
confessione secreta. And it is said in the ancient ripartite History lib. 9.
cap. 35. Ad hanc causam Presbyterum bonae conversationis servantemque secretum
ac sapientem virum statuerunt, ad quem accidents hi qui delinquebant, delicta
propria fatebantur. At ille secundum uniuscujusque culpam indicebat mulctam:
quod etiam hactenus diligenter in Occidentalibus servatur Ecclesi is, maxim
apud Romam, ubi etiam locus est certus Poenitentium. And St. Basile signifies
the like doctrine of the Greek Church in quaestionibus brevieribus int^rrogat.
288. saying, Necessario peccata iis aperiri debent, quibus credita est
dispensatio mysteriorum Dei, siquidem rationem hanc, in poenitentia etiam
veteres illos cernimus sequutos fuisse, etc. And the Century Writers cent. 3.
cap. 6. col. 127. lin. 29, 30, 31, etc. describe the like doctrine and usage of
the Church of Africa, out of the writings of Cyprian and Tertullian, and see
further hereof in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 7. subd. 7. in the margent there at
the letters r. s. t. u. x. y, etc. and in this Consideration number. 9. at 10.
Also here at b. Brereley says, Sarcerius in loc. commun. de confessione fol.
289. b. says, It is an error, adserere confessionem, quae coram Deo fit,
sufficere, ita ut contemnas claves and absolutionem per fratrem. Hic error
prorsus tollit usum clavium and absolutionis, (etc.) Falsum ergo est,
confessionem, quae coram Deo fit, tollere confessionem privatam, etc. In like
plain manner is private Confession defended most earnestly against our
Adversaries by sundry of their own other Brethren, as namely by Lobechius in
Disputat. Theolog. page 295. sect. 4. By Conradus Schlusselburg in Theolog.
Calvinistarum l. 2. fol. 147. a. By Melancthon l. 1. Epistolarum page 234. ante
med. By the Confessions of Saxony and Boheme, in the Harmony of Confessions
page 231. circa med. and page 357. and 358. initio, and by many others.

20. Finally we may conclude how far the ancient Fathers stand for us, out of
the ensuing words of Andraeas Duditius, (apud Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 5.
subd. 6. at m. n. o. p.) who is by Beza in Epistolis Theolog. Ep. 1. ad
Andraeum Duditium page 13. ante med. termed Clarissimus and Ornatissimus Vir,
a most eminent and adorned man, and ( ibid. page 23. circa med.) observantly
beloved of Beza for his piety, learning, and elegant wit, and by him ( ibidem.
page 2. initio, and 3. ante med.) saluted with Frater, the acknowledgement and
title of a Brother. This Andraeas Duditius confesses for all that of the Roman
Church; that it is not divided with so many dissentions, but has the plausible
appearance of venerable antiquity, ordinary Succession, and perpetual consent.
Beza in Epist. Theolog. page 13. paulo ante med. repeateth his words saying,
Etsi (inquis) multa eaque horrenda propugnantur in Romana Ecclesia, quae
infirmo and putrido fundamento nituntur; tamen non ita multis dissensionibus
scinditur, and habet vetustatis venerandae, successionis ordinariae, consensus
perpetui speciem plausibilem: and si veritas est quam veteres Patres mutuo
consensu sunt professi, ea Pontificiis tota stabit, etc. Haec tu de
Pontificiis: At Nostri quales tandem sunt? Palantes (inquis) omni doctrinae
vento agitati, and in altum sublati, modo ad hanc, modo ad illam partem
deferuntur: horum quae sit hodie de religione sententia scire fortasse possis,
sed quae cras de eadem futurae sit opinio, neque tu certo affirmare queas. In
quo tandem Religionis capite congruunt inter se Ecclesiae, quae Romano
Pontifici bellum indixerunt? A capite ad calcem si percurr as omnia, nihil
propemodum reperias ab uno affirmari, quod alter statim non impium esse
clamitet. Haec tu in nos, mi Duditi, totidem verbis, etc.

21. Besides, that diverse Protestants confess, and acknowledge, the doctrine,
and practice of the Church of Rome at this present, in the most principal
points of difference between them and us, to have been taught and practiced by
the most ancient Fathers; they confess moreover diverse points, which they teach
and practice, to have been condemned by the ancient Fathers for heretical, and
those who taught and practiced such points contrary to our now professed
Catholic Faith, who have been censured as Heretics. Brereley tract. 1. sect.
8. subd. 2. page 214. lin. 5. in the text.
The undoubted examples whereof, to be alleged not rackedly or impertinently,
as Mr. Willet in his tetrastylon Papismi p. 107, 108, 109, etc.
Mr. Willet most intollerably has done against us, but directly and plainly,
are many, and by our very Adversaries acknowledged: So in the first 440. years
next after Christ, was (as is confessed) the denial of prayer and offering
Sacrifice for the dead, and of our appointed fasts, condemned as singular
novelty in Hereof see Aug. haer. 53. And Epiphanius haer. 75. ante med. And Mr.
Fulk in his answer to a counterfe^t Catholic page 44. fine, and 45. initio,
confesses this, saying, I will not dissemble that which you think the greatest
matter, Aerius taught that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness,
both Epiphanius and Austin, which they count for an error. Also he taught that
fasting-days are not to be observed. And Mr. Field of the Church l. 3. c. 29.
page 138. prope finem says, The eleventh is the Heresy of Aerius, he condemned
the custom of the Church in naming the dead at the Altar, and offering the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist, that is of thank sgiving, for them. He disliked set
Fasts, and would not admit any difference between a Bishop und a Presbyter,
etc. And see this confessed in like manner by Pantaleon in Chronographia page
28. initio. And Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 4. page 434. recites the
condemned errors of Aerius saying, Item non oportere orare vel offerre pro
mortuis oblationem, Jejunia ordinata non esse observanda, etc. jejunandum esse
cum quis voluerit propter libertatem.
Aerius. So also was the denial of prayer to Saints, and worshipping of Saints
Relics, condemned likewise as then in Hieron. contra Vigilantium c. 2. and 3.
and Mr. Fulk confesses this likewise ubi supra page 46. paulo ante med.
saying, Last of all Vigilantius shall be brought in, who wrote against
invocation of Saints, superstition of Relics, and other ceremonies; him Hierom
reproves. Vide centur. 4. col. 1250. lin. 45. and Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4.
l. 4. page 506. ante med. And see thi^ further confessed by Crispinus in his
discourse of the estate of the Church page 131. post med. And Austin de Eccles.
dogm. c. 73. says accordingly, Sanctorum corpora and praecipue beatorum
Martyrum reliquias, ac si Christi membra sincerissime honoranda, (etc.)
credimus: si quis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed
Eunomianus and Vigilantianus creditur. Also Saravia in defens. tractat. de
diversis, etc. page 349. paulo post initium, and Beza ibidem page 346. circa
med. do both of them affirm, that Aerius was likewise charged and condemned by
the Fathers for his then affirming that the Saints departed are not to be
prayed unto.
Vigilantius. In the same times were condemned in like manner, the denial of
Images, in Functius (a Protestant Writer) in lib. 7. Commentariorum in
praecedent. Chronologiam, at Anno Christi 494. confesses saying, Porro is
Xenaias primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitavit. And Nicephorus in
hist: Eccles. l. 16. c. 27. says, Xenaias iste primus (o audacem animam and os
^mpudens!) vocemillam evomuit, Christi and ^orum qui alli placuere in agines
ven^^andas non esse. And see also hereof Codrenus in compendio histor.
Xenaias, and the denial of voluntary poverty and monastical profession, in
Hiero me contra Vigila^^^um prope finem says, Quod autem asseris eos melius
facer^ qui utuntur rebus suis, and paulatim fructus possessionum suarum
pauperibus dividunt, quam illos qui possessionibus venundatis semel omnia
largiuntur; non a me eis, sed a Domino respondebitur: Si vis esse perfectus,
vade and vende omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, and veni ^equere me. Ad ^um
loqui^u^, qui vult esse perfectus etc. iste quem tu laudas, secundus and tert
u^ gradus est, quem and nos recipimus, dummodo s^amus prima secund^^ and terths
praeferenda: nec a suo stud^o Monachi deterrendi sunt a te, lingua Viperca and
morsu saevissimo, de quibus argumentaris and dicis, si omnes se clauserint and
fuerint in solitudine, quis celebrabit Ecclesias? etc. And see this plainly
confessed by Crispinus in his Book of the Estate of the Church page 131 and 132.
Vigilantius, and others; The denial of the power In like manner is Januarius
for this like doctrine repreved by St. Austin sermon. 49. ex diversis cap. 1. And
Justus is for the same reproved by Gregory l. 4. dial. c. 55. And see further
hereof Leo Ep. 92. ad Rusticum. And Council. Chalcedon cap. 7. And Austin Ep.
89. ad Hilarium, and Chrysostom l. adversus Vituperatores vitae monasticae. And
Austin contra literas Petil. l. 3. c. 40. charge and reproves Petilianus,
saying of him, Deinceps perrexit ore maled^co in vituperationem Monachorum and
Monasteriorum, etc. And Austin in Psalm 132. charges also the Circumcellians,
for that, says he, dicere consueverunt, quid sibi vult nomen Monachorum? And
again, Quid ergo dicunt illi qu^^nobis de nomine Monachorum insultant? (etc.)
qui nobis dicunt, ostendite ubi scriptum sit nomen Monachorum?
of Priests to remit sins, in the Sea hereafter in this Consideration: number.
23. multo ante med. at d. And in Brereley tract. 3. sect. 1. at x. in the
margent is cited St. Ambrose lib. 1. de paenitentia cap. 2. saying of
Novatians, Sed aiunt se Domino defer reverentiam, cui soli remittendorum
criminum potestatem reservant. Immo nulli majo^em injuriam fac^unt, quam qui
ejus volunt mandata rescinde^e. Nam cum ipse in Evangelio suo dixerit Dominus,
Accipite Spi^itum Sanctum, quorum remis^ritis peccata remittentur eis (etc.)
quis est ergo qui magis honorat, utrum qui mandatis obtemperat, an qui
resistit? And cap. 7. he further says to them, Cur Baptizatis si peccata per
hominem dimitti non licet? In Baptismo utique remissio peccatorum omnium est,
quid interest u^rum per paenitentiam, an per lavacrum hoc jus sibi datum,
sacerdotes vendicent: unum in utroque ministerium est. Also Pacianus in Epist.
1. ad Sympronianum Novatianum, says, Nunquam Deus non paenitenti comminaretur,
nisi ignosceret paenitenti. Solus hoc (inquies) Deus poterit. Verum est. Sed,
and quod per Sacerdotes suos facit, ipsius potestas est. Nam quid est illud
quod Apostolis dicit, Quae ligaveritis in terris? (etc.) In like manner in
Socrates in hist. Tripart. l. 2. cap. 13. fine, is reproved Acesius the
Novatian, for that he taught, concerning such as fell in persecution, in
vitandos quidem ad paenitentiam; spem vero remissionis, non a Sacerdotibus, sed
a Deo solummodo sust^ere, qui potestatem habet peccata remittere. Haec cum
dix^ss^^ Acesius, Imperato^ ait, O Accsi pone scalam, and, si potes, ascend
solus in caelum. So strange and singular in those times was this opinion
deemed. and vide hist. Tripartit. l. 8. c. 9. prope initium.
Novatians; The denial of Freewill and of Remission of Sins, and Grace
conferred in B^ptism, in the Hieron. in prooemio librorum adversus Pelagianos
fine says, Manichaeorum est, hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre
arbitrium, and Dei adjutorium. and see Hieron. in explanatione Symbol. ad
Damasum. And St. Austin de fide contra Manich. c. 9. says, Adversus haec
solita caecitate Manichaei latrant, and cum convincuntur naturam non esse
malum, sed in potestate esse hominis facere been aut male, dicunt non esse
animae liberam voluntatem, and non vident caecitatem suam, etc. and vide ibid.
c. 10. and in actis cum Felice Manichaeo l. 2. c. 4. And Chrysostom. in Joan.
hom. 45. prope initium says, Christ said to them, no man can come to me except
the Father who sent me draw him. Hereat the Manichees do rise up contending by
testimony of this Scripture, that we can do nothing of our selves, etc. but
this takes not away our freewill, but shows that we need Gods help. And
concerning the other point touching Baptism, Mr. Whitaker l. 10. contra Duraeum
p. 883. confesses the same saying, Nos in Baptismo peccata remitti and gratiam
conferri credimus ac docemus, quod negari soliti sunt Manichaei, ergo nos a
Manichaeis alieni sumus, and vide Sarcerium loc. commun. tom. 1. de Baptismo
fol. 232. b. post med.
Manichees; The Sea this affirming in the first Consideration in Luther number.
11. in Zuinglius n. 35. in Calvin number. 40. and in other Protestants apud
Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subd. 14. throughout.
affirming of God to be the Author of our sin, in Simon Vincentius Lyr. lib.
adversus haeret. post med. says, Who before Simon Magus, etc. was bold to
affirm God the Creator to be Author of our wicked deeds, etc. and who before
Novatianus (taught) that God would rather the death of him that dies, than
that he should return and live? And St. Austin ad Art. sibi falso imposit. Art.
10. says, Detestanda, etc. it is a hateful and abominable opinion to believe
that God is the Author of any ill will or action. And of this condemned opinion
see further Eusebius hist. l. 5. c. 19. concerning Florinus his error. And see
Mr. Hanmer in his Chronograph. page 30.
Magus, and others; The denial of the necessity of Childrens Baptism, in the
Innocentius in rescripto ad Melivitanum Concilium post med. says of the
Pelagians, Illud vero quod vestra fraternitas eos asserit praedicare parvulos
eternae vitae praem^is absque Baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum est.
In like plain manner is this point condemned in the Pelagians by St. Austin
haer. 88. contra Jul. P^lag. l. 6. c. 7. and de pec. mer. and rem. l. 2. c. 9.
and 27. and by St. Leo Ep. 86. ad Episcopam Aquileinsem.
Pelagians; The denial of the Blessed Sacraments reservation, in the Cyril ad
Calosyrium says, I hear, they say, that the mystical blessing, if any remnants
thereof do remain till the next day following, is unprofitable to
Sanctification; but they are mad in so saying, for Christ is not made an other,
neither shall his body be changed, but the virtue of blessing and lively grace
do alwares remain in it. This point is so plain and confessed, that Peter
Martyr adversus Stephani Gardineri librum de Eucharistia, Printed Basileae Anno
1581. object. 213. col. 838. post med. says of this saying of Cyril, Quod
autem subjicitur Eucharistiae reliquias asservatas in crastinum diem a
sanctificatione non cessare, spectat opinor ad receptam quandam consuetudinem,
etc. Ea consuetudo etsi saperet nonnihil superstitionis, tamen illi Cyrillus,
aliique subscribebant. Statim enim a temporibus Apostolorum, paulatim caeptum
est degenerari ab illa veteri simplicitate divini cultus.
Anthropomorphites: The impugning of vowed Chastity, in Mr. Fulk in his answer
to a Counterfeit Catholic page 45. paulo ante med. acknowledges that Jovinian
was condemned, for that (among other things) he taught that such as could not
contain, though they had vowed Virginity, should nevertheless be married.
Jovinian; The denial of the single and unmarried life of Priests, in Hierom
contra Vigilantium c. 1. cendemneth this Doctrine in Vigilantius, saying hereof
against him, Quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae? quid Egypti and sedis
Apostolicae? quae aut Virgins Clericos accipiunt, aut continentes, aut si
uxores habuerint, mariti esse desinunt?
Vigilantius, See Hierom l. 1. contra Jovin. c. 19. and 14. and ad Pamachium
Apolog. c. 8.
Jovinian, and Epiphanius haer. 59. ante med. says, At dices mihi, omnino in
quibusdam locis adhuc liberos gignere and Presbyteros and Diaconos and
Hypodiaconos? Whereto he answers, At hoc non est juxta canonem, sed juxta
hominum mentem, etc. And see Syricius in Epist. ad Himerium Taraconensem c. 6.
and 7.
others; The denial of enjoined times of penance, in the Heretics called
Theodoret l. 4. haer. fab. de Audianis, reproves them saying, Demde confessis,
etc. they give remission to such as are confessed, without prescribing time for
penance, as the Laws of the Church command.
Audiani; The denial of the diversity of Merits, in Aug. de tempore sermon. 191.
says, Joviniani damnamus errorem, qui dicit, nullam in futuro meritorum
distantiam. And Hieron. l. 1. adversus Jovin. c. 2. reproves Jovinian for that
he taught that Marriage and Virginity were (ejusdem meriti) of equal merit,
confessed by Pantaleon in Chronographia page 32. And by the Centurists cent. 5.
col. 518. fine, and by Wotton who in his defense of Mr. Perkins, etc. page 500.
circa med. says, that herein the Fathers dealt unchristian-like with Jovinian.
And this error of Jovinian is exceeded rather than equalled by Luther and Mr.
Whitaker. (Apud Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 8. subd. 5. in the marg. at
g.) Luther tom. 5. Wittemberg. in exeg. ad cap. 7. 1 Cor. fol. 107. b. post
med. says of marriage and single life: De usu vel abusu, etc. Of the use or
abuse of the States at this present we will say nothing, but of the condition
and nature (of life) in themselves, and do conclude, that Matrimony is as gold,
and the spiritual state (of single life) is as dung. And in Assert. Art. he
further says, Matrimony is much more excellent than Virginity. Christ and his
Apostles did dissuade Christians from Virginity. See this saying acknowledged
and defended by Mr. Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8. page 151. ante med. where he
says of Virginity, it is not simply good, but after a certain manner. It is
never better than marriage (nisi (...)) but in regard of the circumstance,
whereas marriage is often times simply better than it: it is to be desired, not
always, but in respect of the troubles which accompany marriage; directly
against St. Austins particular confutation of this very reason I. de
Virginitat. cap. 13. alleged and acknowledged in Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish
Testament in 1 Cor. 7. sect. 13. fol. 273. b. post med. And Mr. Whitaker ubi
supra concludes in defense of Luthers foresaid words, saying, Haec certe
Lutheri propria non sunt; ea enim omnes boni agnoscunt and defendunt. In so
much that whereas St. Paul 1 Cor. 7.38. says, He that joyneth his virgin in
marriage, does well, he that joyneth her not, does better, Mr. Whitaker contra
Duraeum l. 8. page 693. post med. answering hereto says, Melius hoc loco vocat
Paulus, quod est commodius, etc. And St. Ambrose and others say against
Jovinian: Agrestis ululatus est, etc. promiscue velle omnia confundere, etc.
diversorumque gradus abrogare meritorum. Hereof see further Council. Telense and
rescriptum Ambrosii (ibid.) and aliorum ad Syricium, prope initium.
Jovinian; The denial of the commandments being possible, in certain other
Hieron. in explanat. Symb. ad Damasum says, Execramur blasphemiam eorum, qui
dicunt, impossible aliquid homini a Deo praeceptum est, etc. And the same
words has St. Austin de tempore sermon. 191. and vide Hieron. ad Cleantium, and
Council. 2. Arausicanum can. 25. In so much as the Protestant writer Christopher
Hoffman in his Commentaries de paenitentia Printed Hallae Suevorum ex offi^^na
Petri Brubaclii, Anno Domini 1540. and greatly commended by Melancthon in his
preface thereto, l. 1. fol. 55. b. initio says, Hieronymus scripsit, anathema
esto qui dixerit, Deum impossiblia praecepisse: sed cur non anathema potius
Hieronymus, qui tam audacter sentit contra Deum, etc. And see this saying of
St. Hierom yet further alleged under his name, and rejected by Luther tom. 2.
Wittemberg. fol. 216. b. ante med. where he terms it, Decretellum humanum e
Hieronymo sumptum.
Heretics of those times: The denial of Exorcism and Exufflation used in
Baptism, was condemned likewise in Aug. de nuptiis and concup^scentia l. 2. c.
29. says, ^ulianus antiquissimam Ecclesiae traditionem nefario crimine
aspergit, qua exorcizantur, and ^ut dixi exufflantur parvuli, and vide Aug.
ibid. l. 2. c. 17. and contra Julian. Pelag. l. 6. c. 2.
Julianus the Pelagian: The affirming of concupiscence to be in the Baptized
truly sin, and not taken away by Baptism, but (as it were) cast asleep by
faith, was condemned in Vivente adhuc corpore antequam moriatur necesse est
simul vivere peccatum intus in nobis, radices suas abscondens, etc. quare
constat contrahi quidem ac sopiri per fidem nunc peccatum, ut ne fructus noxios
producat, non tamen radicitus tolli, apud Epiph. haer. 64. ante med. and see
the like doctrine renewed by Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 15. sect. 10. and by
Melancthon in loc. com. Printed Basileae 1561. page 121. initio, and post med.
and by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 558. and generally by most Protestants,
who deny original sin to be truly remitted in Baptism.
Proclus: The overthrowing of Optatus l. 6. contra Donatistas charge the
Donatists saying, Quid enim est tam sacrilegum, quam altaria Dei (in quibus and
vos aliquando obtulistis) frangere, radere, removere? etc. Quid enim est
altar, nisi seeds and corporis and sanguinis Christi? haec omnia furor vester
aut rasit, aut fregit, aut removit, etc. Quid vos offenderat Christus cujus
illic per certa momenta corpus and sanguis habitabat? Quid vos offendistis,
etiam vos ipsi, ut illa altaria frangeretis?
Altars, and casting away of sacred Brereley tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 7. ^ubd.
2. in the margent at y says, Optatus l. 2. contra Donatistas reports, how
the heretics caused the (reserved) Eucharist to be thrown to dogs, which dogs
thereupon all raging, rent in pieces their Masters, as guilty of the holy body:
they also ( says Optatus) threw out of the window (ampullam chrismatis) a vial
(or little bottle) of Chrism (or holy Oil) to the intent to break it, the which
being stayed by an Angels hand, God preserving it, light safe among the stones.
In like manner of later times does St. Bernard remember how Malachias cured a
lunatic child in confirming him ( says Bernard) with sacred unction: A
miracle ( says Holinsh^ad) seen and confessed by many hundreds of people, (and
thereupon) blown through the world. Hereof see Holinshead his Chronicle of
Ireland, the Edition of 1577. in the history thereof next after the description
page 13 a. lin. ult. and page 13. b. lin. 1. and after the last Edition page
55. a. lin. 56. and see also St. Bernard in vita Malachiae.
Chrism, was specially condemned in the Donatists: The affirming of Adam to
have lost the Image of God after which he was created Renewed by Illyricus in
lib. de orig. pecc. and so confessed by Mr. Whitaker in respons. ad Camp. rat.
8. page 131. ante med. renewed also by Calvin, who l. 1. Institut. c. 16. sect.
4. affirms the remain thereof to be nothing but horrenda deformitas, which
said horrenda deformitas cannot be the Image of God. And l. 2. Institut. c. 1.
sect. 1. he affirms expressly of Adam, that obliterata fuit in eo caelestis
Imago, Renewed also by Szegedine loc. commun. page 12. ante med. and by Luther
in loc. commun. class. 2. page 21. post med. where he says, Similitudinem Dei
amisimus; as also Szegedine in his forecited places says of the Image of God
in man, that it was obliterata and amissa.
(renewed sithence by Illyricus and others) was condemned in the At vero quod
secundum imaginem est, Adam perdidisse dicit (Epiphanius haer. 64. paulo post
initium.) And again: Et vide quod corruit sermo eorum, qui dicunt Adam id quod
secundum Imaginem perdidisse (Epiphan. haer. 70. ante med.)
Originists and others: The denial of Chrism or Confirmation to the Baptized by
a Bishop, was condemned in the In Eusebius hist. lib. 6. c. 35. post med. it is
said of Novatus his being Baptiz^d, Neque caetera, quibus post baptismum
secundum Ecclesiae canonem imbui opo^tuerat, acquisivit, neque Domini sigillo
ab Episcopo obsignatus suerit, quo quidem neut quam potitus, quomodo quaeso
Spiritum sanctum adeptus est? And Theodoret lib. 3. haeret. fab. says of the
Novatians: Iis qui ab ipsis tinguntur sacrum Chrisma non praeb^nt, etc.
Novatians: And lastly (to omit sundry others) the denial of the Churches
continuing visible, was condemned in the Augustine. de unitat. Eccles. cap. 12.
reproves the Donatists as being haeretical; for that (says he) they used to
collect certain places of Scriptures, and ea deto^quere in Ecclesiam Dei, ut
tanquam defecisse ac periisse de to^o orb v^deatur. And allegech yet further
the Donatists words to have then been of the Church (as the Protestants words
now are of the Church before Luthers time) Apostatavit and peri^t Ecclesia de
omnibus Gentibus (Aug. in Psalm. 101. con. 2.) whereof St. Austin there says,
Hoc dicunt qui in illa non sunt, O impudentem vocem! And Aug. Epist. 170. ad
Severin: says, Facile tibi est attendere, and videre Civitatem supra montem
constitutam, de qua Dominus alt in Evangelio, quod abscondi non possit. Ipsa
est enim Ecclesia Catholica, unde (...) graece appellatur, quod per totum orbem
terrarum diffunditur: Hanc g^^^ar^ nulli licet, ideo secundum verbum Domin.
abscondi non potest, and vide Aug. de unit. Ecclesiae c. 12. and 13. and Epist.
48. ad Vincentium Rogatianum. And de Symbolo l. 4. c. 10. he further says,
Ecclesia totum possidet quod a vi^o suo accepit in dote, quaecunque congregatio
cujuslibet ^aeresis in angul^s sedet, concubina est, non matrona, etc.
Donatists and Hieron. dial. advers. Luciferanos paulo post medium, and cap. 6.
prosecuteth this point at large saying (among much other matter:) Ubi sunt isti
nimium prophani, qui plures Synagogas asserunt quam Ecclesias? etc. Si
Ecclesiam non habet Christus, aut si in Sardinia tantum habet, nimium pauper
factus est, etc. (And then he answers their objections, saying, (Q^od si de
illa quae in Evangelio Scripta est sententia, sibi blandiuntur, putasne cum
venerit Filius hominis inveniet fidem super terram? Sciant illam fidem
nominari, de qua Dominus aiebat, Fides tua te salvum fecit.
Luciferans. And all this done by the sundry Writers who lived in the first
600. years after Christ.

22. All Brereley tract. 1. sect. 3. subdivis. 16. paulo post initium.
which being as heretofore abundantly proved, not from the Fathers obscure
sayings (for that course is in regard of our adversaries bold and endless
tergiversation purposely forborne:) but (for their more full convincing) from
the only frequent confession of learned Protestants themselves, and those not
few, but in number many; neither vulgar, or of mean esteem, but such as be
prime and eminent men amongst them: we cannot but with amazement wonder, that
any should have a conscience so cauterized, or stand so convict in their own
judgment, as with exceeding boldness, and without all forehead, to publish to
the world, with no less than solemn Protestation, both in Print and Pulpit, a
full and resolute denial of whatsoever is, as heretofore by themselves, so
frequently and abundantly confessed, concerning the undoubted antiquity of our
Catholic Religion. Alas! what meant Mr. Jewel (a man undoubtedly learned) with
such public and solemn acclamation to protest and say, Mr. Jewel in his
public Sermon at Paul's Cross. And see this also in D. Humfrey, in his Johannis
Juelli Angli vita and mors, Printed 1573. page 123. post med.
O Gregory! O Austin! O Hierom! O Chrysostom! O Leo! O Dyonyse! O Anacletus! O
Calixtus! O Paul! O Christ! if we be deceived, you have deceived us; this you
taught us, etc. And again, concerning no fewer than twenty and seven several
articles by him specially repeated, to insist, and further say, Mr. Jewel in
his public Sermon. And see his words alleged by D. Humfrey ubi supra page 125.
circa med. And in his reply to Mr. Harding fol. 1.
As I said before, so say I now again, I am content to yield and subscribe, if
(so) any of our learned adversaries, or if all the learned men that be alive^,
be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor or
Father, or out of any old general Council, etc. for the space of six hundred
years after Christ, etc. protesting withal, that he affirms thus much, not
See this in D. Humfrey in his foresaid Treatise page 123. fine.
as carried away by the heat of zeal, but as moved with the simple truth:
whereas Brereley tract. 1. sect. 3. subdivis. 16. paulo ante sinem in the
margent at k.
concerning this his pretended appealing to the Fathers, M. D. Humfrey says of
him, that therein, he was injurious to himself, and after a manner spoiled
himself, and the Church. And the learned Protestant writer Jacobus Acontius in
a special Treatise dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, terms it, a most pernicious
course, and altogether to be avoided. Also Peter Martyr de Caelibatu and votis
page 462. circa med. signifies his answerable dislike, saying, Quod ad alterum
attinet, de Patrum judicio, quoniam adversarii nostri and in hac causa and in
aliis controversiis semper provocare solent ad eos, pronuntio mihi non videri
esse hominis Christiani, ad hominum judicia provocare a Scripturis Dei. And
page 476. post med he says, Quamdiu consistimus in Conciliis and Patribus,
versabimur semper in iisdem erroribus. What also meant Mr. D. Whitaker thus
confidently likewise to say thereof to us? Whitaker in respons. ad rations
Campiani rat. 5. fine page 90. ante med. says, Audi Campiane, quam ea die
Juellus vocem verissimam ac constantissimam emisit, quando ad sexcentorum
annorum antiquitatem provocavit, vobisque obtulit, ut si vel unicam, ex aliquo
Patre aut Concilio, claram and dilucidam sententiam asterretis, non recusaret
quin vobis palmam concederet; ea est nostrum omnium professio; idem omnes
pollicemur; fidem non fallemus.
The speech of Mr. Jewel was most true and constant, when provoking you to the
antiquity of the (first) six hundred years, he offered, that if you could show
but any one clear and plain saying out of any Father or Council, he would grant
you the victory: it is the offer of us all: the same do we all promise, and we
will perform it. To which public testimonies thus confidently delivered by
Master Jewel, and Mr. Whitaker (men of chief Concerning Mr. Jewel, Mr. Hooker
in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 2. sect. 6. page 112. prope finem, terms
him, the worthiest Divine that Christendom bred for some hundred of years.
Also Lubbertus de principiis Christian. dogmat. l. 1. c. 5. page 48. circa med.
says of Mr. Whitaker, Q^od and ante me observavit illud decus Angliae
Whitakerus. And concerning them both, they were such eminent men, that their
lives were specially written, Mr. Jewels as before by Mr. D. Humfrey, and Mr.
Whitakers by Mr. Abdy Ashton in Latin, and Printed at Cambridge 1599.
rank and place in our Adversaries Church) might be further added sundry like
bold assertions of diverse other learned Protestants, who with like pretended
vehemence of asseveration have claimed Mr. Sutcliff in his examination of Mr.
D. Kellisons Survey page 17. ante med. says, The Fathers in all points of
Faith are for us and not for the Pope. Master Willet in Antilog. etc. page 163.
says, I take God to witness, before whom I must render account, etc. that the
same Faith and Religion which I defend, is taught and confirmed in the more
substantial points by those Histories, Councils, Fathers, that lived within
five or six hundred years after Christ. And page 264. he blusheth not to say,
It is most notoriously evident, that for the grossest Points of Popery, a
Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass, worshipping of Images, Justification
by works, the Supremacy of the Pope, prohibition of Marriage, and such other,
they (Papists) have no show at all, of any evidence from the Fathers within
five hundred years of Christ.
the ancient Fathers to be on their part, not forbearing also to charge us with
the unworthy and hateful note of Novellism and Innovation. In which their bold
demeanor with the Fathers (whereof some few See heretofore in this
Consideration number. 18. initio in the margent at * their pretending of St.
Austin to have denied or rested doubtful of Purgatory. And see Brereley tract.
1. sect. 7. subd. 9. throughout, their like pretending of St. Gregory against
the Bishop of Romes then claymed Primacy.
examples are in this Treatise casually mentioned) they have so far proceeded,
that they have not doubted to enforce their many testimonies, not only against
us, but also (which is exceeding gross) even against the Fathers themselves,
and which is most, even one and the same Father against himself. So but in the
only question of Traditions (omitting in this have all examples of other kind)
Mr. Whitaker says of Basil: Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura page 670. post med.
Secum ipse pugnat, he is contrary to himself. And Lubbertuus says
accordingly, Lubbertus de Principiis Christian. dogmat. l. 2. cap. 10. page
675. ante med. says, Oppono Basilium controversum Basilio non controverso;
That the Book and the very saying there controverted was most clearly St.
Basils, St. Damascen so many ages since in orat. 1. pro imaginibus sufficiently
proves, specially there reciting the very said Book 27. Chapter and particular
controverted saying, and all of them under the name of Basil. In so much as
almost no Protestant Writer does deny the said saying to be Basils.
I oppose Basil against Basil; and of Damascen he says Lubbertus de Principiis
Christian. dogmat. page 678. fine.
sibi non constat, he is contrary to himself; and of Chrysostom, Lubbertus ubi
supra page 676. paulo post med.
Ego Chrysostomum Chrysostomo oppono, I oppose Chrysostom against Chrysostom.
And Mr. Whitaker says of him, Whitaker de Sacra Scriptura page 678. circa med.
secum ipse pugnat, he does vary from himself. Also Mr. Whitaker says of
Cyprian, Whitaker ubi supra page 686. circa med.
Let us not attend what Cyprian said, but let us examine him by his own Law. And
of St. Austin, Whitaker ubi supra page 690. post med.
although in this place he may be thought to favor Tradition; yet in other
places he defends earnestly the perfection of the Scriptures. Thus much of
certain plain examples given but in this one only question of Traditions: which
their incredible boldness toward the ancient Fathers, is to be less marvailed
at, seeing they are not abashed to entreat also no less boldly their own
Protestant Authors of these very times, inforcedly urging and alleging them
against their confessed and known meanings. As in the example of the Lutherans,
who are known and confessed to defend the Real being of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, Hereof see Mr. D. Covel in his defense of Mr. Hooker, etc. page 118.
prope finem.
before participation, and present also Affirmed by the fifteen Lutheran
Divines, as appears by their words in the answer made to them, entitled
Apolog. modest. ad Acta Conventus quindecim Theologorum Torgae nuper habit.
page 35. fine, and 48. fine. And see Luther there alleged, affirming the same
page: 36. paulo post med.
to the bodily mouth even That the wicked receive truly Christ's body, is
affirmed by Jacobus Andraeas in confut. disput. Joan. Jacobi Grinaei page 110.
circa med. and 115. and 244. initio. And by Chemnitius in his Enchiridion page
345. And by Adamus Francisci in Margarita Theologica page 260. and 261. and by
Marpachius in Peter Martyrs Epistles annexed to his Common places in English
page 96. a. post med. And see Luther alleged by Peter Martyr in his collections
annexed to his Common places in English, and his Treatise there of the Lords
Supper page 138. a. fine, and b. initio.
of the unworthy receiver. In so much as they That the Lutherans do adore the
Sacrament during the use thereof, see Chemnitius in his examen. part. 2. page
91. b. circa med. and Benedict. Morgenstern tract. de Ecclesia page 147. and
149. and 135. and Apolog. modest. ad Acta Conventus quindecim Theologorum
Torgae nuper habit. page 40. circa med. And Luther tom. 7. Wittemberg. fol.
335. a. ante med. and Schlusselburg in Catal. haeret. l. 3. page 867.
adore it* Mr. Fulk is not abashed most boldly and untruly to affirm, that Mr.
Fulk in his answer to a counterfeit Catholic art. 17. page 61. fine.
the Lutherans and Zuinglians do both consent in this, that the body of Christ
is received spiritually, not corporally, with the heart, not with the mouth.
And to pass over the no less incredible boldness herein of M. D. Field of the
Church l. 3. c. 42. page 170. ante med. says, Yea I dare confidently
pronounce, that after due and full examination of each others meaning, there
shall be no difference found touching the matter of the Sacrament, the
Vbiquitary Presence, or the like, between the Churches reformed by Luthers
Ministry in Germany and other places, and those whom some men's malice called
Sacramentaries.
M. D. Field, Peter Martyr affirms upon report Peter Martyr, in his Common
places, part. 4. page 188. fine.
of credit, that Luther judged not so grossly of this matter, etc. and Peter
Martyr ibid. page 195. b. ante med.
that he in very deed put no other conjunction, but Sacramental, between the
body of Christ and the signs. As though the hot tragical Of the great
contentions concerning the Real presence had between the Lutherans and
Zuinglians, see Luc. Osiander in Epitom. cent. Eccles. cent. 16. see l. 2. c.
10. page 133, 134, 135, etc. And Peter Martyr in his Epistles annexed to his
Common places page 137. b. and 139. a. And Mr. Cowper in his Chronicle fol.
284. b. 290. b. and 370. b. and Mr. Whitaker de Ecclesia page 322. and they are
yet further notified by the very many writings by them published to the world
one against an other, mentioned in Brereley in the last Catalogue of
Protestants Books.
contentions had, and yet to this day continued, about the Sacrament, between
the Lutherans and Zuinglians, were to the world unknown, or but only a dream or
an imaginary fiction. And hence it is, that the Lutherans do grievously
complain against our adversaries, Gerhardus Giesekenius a Lutheran, in his Book
De veritate corpor is Christi in Caena, contra Pezelium page 93. so charge
the Calvinists.
because (say they) that you allege Luthers words against his meaning. Which
thing as Luther did in his life time perceive by experience, and grievously
thereof Lutherus in praefat. in Smalcaldicos articulos extant in Luc. Osiander
Epitom. cent. Eccles. cent. 16. page 253. says there page 254. citca med. Quid
dicam? quomodo querelam instituam? adhuc superstes sum, scribo, conciones
habeo, and praelego public, and quotidie, and tamen virulenti homines non
tantum ex Adversariis, sed etiam falsi fratres, qui nobiscum sentire se aiunt,
mea scripta and doctrinam meam simpliciter contra me adferre, and allegare
audent, me vivente, vidente and audiente, eriamsi sciant me aliter docere, and
volunt virus suum meo labor exornare, etc. Q^id ergo, bone Deus, post obitum
meum siet?
complain; so also did he specially foresee, and a little before his death
Ibid. next after he says, Deberem quidem ad omnia respondere, dum adhuc vivo,
etc. And the Tigurine Divines in Confess. Orthodox. Eccles. Tigur. tract. 3.
fol. 108. allege Luthers Confession made a little before his death, wherein
Luther says, Ego quidem sepulchro vicinus, etc. I that walk now nigh to my
grave, will carry this testimony and glory to the Tribunal seat of Christ my
Savior, that I have with all carefulness condemned and avoided those fanatical
men and enemies of the Sacrament, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Swinckfeldius and
their Scholars, whether they be at Zurick, or in what other place soever, under
the Sun.
forewarn against the same. In like manner do the Lutherans charge our
Adversaries, for that with like extreme boldness, Gerhardus Giesekenius l. de
veritate corporis Christi in caena page 76. fine says, Zuinglianam Augustanam
Confessionem reddere conantur, sed tam manifestis mendaciis and conspicua
falsitate, etc. And see there further page 118. ante med. And see in Luc.
Osiander in centur. 16. page 146. post med. the like or worse complaint against
the Zuinglians, concerning the Confession of Augusta. In like manner whereas
the Confession of Ausburg was exhibited by the same Divines, and in the same
year, and to the same Emperor Charles the V. as was the Confession of Augusta,
as appears by comparing of Luc. Osiander cent. 16. page 144. and 145. with
the Catalogue of Confessions initio set before the Harmony of Confessions in
English, and their doctrine of the Real Presence is delivered in the very same
words, as in the Confession of Augusta; Yet Mr. Chatterton, or who else soever
was Author of the Observations upon the Harmony of Confessions in English, is
not abashed in his observations upon the Confession of Ausburg, to endeavor by
his explication, to make it agreeable in sense to Calvinism. And so likewise as
is there testified, did the Neustadians in their late admonition, c. 5.
they endeavored to make the confession of Augusta (which teaches the Real
Presence) to be Zuinglian, that is, against the Real Presence, exclaiming
thereat, and saying thereof, Gerhardus Giesekenius ubi supra page 77. prope
initium.
Si haec res, etc. If this thing had been done in Arabia, America, Sardinia, or
such like remote Countries, and of former times, this usurpation of fraud and
historical falsehood were more tolerable: But seeing (say they) the Question is
of such things as be done in our own times, and in the sight of all men, who
with a quiet mind can endure such lies? And as thus with the Lutherans; so
likewise with our Catholic Writers of this age is our Adversaries like
practice no less notorious. To forbear their exceeding boldness in alleging See
Erasmus and Picus alleged for Protestants in Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 2.
in the margent at * after o.
Erasmus and Picus Mirandula as Members of their Protestant Church, it is
beyond belief, and a very wonderment that M. D. Field (a man otherwise grave
and learned) should not be abashed by his public writing so confidently to
aver of our so many Christian Catholic Churches dispersed through the world
at Luthers first appearing; that they were all of them (says he) D. Field of
the Church l. 3. page 76. post med. and 72. ante med.
the true (Protestant) Churches of God, and that they which (then) believed
those damnable errors which the Romanists now defend, were a particular faction
only; most directly against that which so many learned Protestants have as from
common knowledge most plainly, and fully Confessed to the contrary in Brereley
tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. subd. 3. at i e. * f. and so forwards, to the end
of that subdivision.
confessed to the contrary. By which examples thus given of our Adversaries
boldness with their own Protestant and our Catholic writers of this present
age, your most excellent Majesty may the more easily conjecture the like
boldness in Mr. Jewel, Mr. Whitaker, and others, in their provoking, as before
said, to the ancient Fathers.

Pu. This infamy of Protestants falsifying Authors is acknowledged and
confessed by Mr. William Chillingworth, who amongst all the Protestant Divines
of England was picked out to defend their cause. This man in his ninth Motive to
be a Catholic speaks in this manner: Because the Protestant cause is now, and
has been from the beginning, maintained with gross falsifications and
calumnies, whereof their prime Controversy-writers are notoriously, and in a
high degree guilty. And what do you think does he answer to this his own
Motive, after he was turned Protestant. Take it in his own words. Iliacos intra
muros peccatur and extra. Papists are more guilty of this fault than
Protestants. To which I answer, that we Catholics for our part may be well
content to leave Protestant-writers with the just imputation of gross
falsifyers and Calumniators, of which vices he accuses them. But we can give
him no commission to utter against us more than he can ever prove, or can have
any shadow of truth. For my part, if any Catholic should in matters of Faith
and Religion, defend his cause, though in it self good, with falsifications and
calumnies, both his book and he would deserve to be purged by fire.
Nevertheless I must add, that there is a main difference between Catholics
and Protestants in this particular, though our writers were supposed to be as
guilty of this crime as he confesses our Adversaries to be. My reason is
clear, because we do not rely either upon our own understanding, for
interpreting Scripture, or on the judgment and fidelity of any private person.
But Protestants, not believing any infallible public Judge of Controversies,
must depend very much on the fidelity of their prime Controversy writers, whom
this man first as we have heard affirmed, and now again in his answer to his
Motives and after he was turned Protestant confirms, to be notoriously and in a
high degree guilty of gross falsifications and calumnies.

23. Besides all that has been said, the antiquity of Catholic Religion is
proved by the confessed belief and practice of the Primitive Church in the time
of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor Brereley tract. 2. cap.
1. sect. 3.
For it is evident that Constantine Civitatem multis templis in honorem
Martyrum illustrissimisque aedibus sacris adornavit. Eusebius. de vita Constantini
l. 3. c. 47.
erected Temples in memory of Martyrs, Apostolorum templum ad perpetuam illorum
memoriam conservandam aedificare caepit. Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 58.
and ibidem cap. 59. it is said, Haec omnia dedicavit Imperator, ut Servatoris
nostri Apostolorum memoriam apud omnes gentes aeternitatem compararet. And
Bullinger in his Treatise De origin erroris, Printed Tiguri 1539. fol. 102. b.
ante med. says, Constantini Magni tempore Iuxus and nimius templorum ornatus
initia accepit.
dedicated a most sumptuous Church in memory of the Apostles, Eusebius. de vit.
Constantini lib. 4. cap. 60. says, In opportunum venturae mortis diem hic
locum sibi provida dispensatione designavit, etc. ut detunctus quoque
precationum quae ibidem essent ad Apostolorum gloriam offerendae, particeps
efficeretur.
provided his Sepulcher there, to the end that after his death he might be
partaker of the prayers there offered: The Centurists cent. 4. col. 452. line
29. say, Constantinus etiam diem festum admodum solemnem ad celebrandam
dedicationem Templi indixit, etc.
he celebrated the dedication of the Temple with an yearly festival day: Ibidem
cent. 4. col. 497. lin. 50. it is said of Constantine: Templorum recens
extructorum consecrationes, exornationes superbas, alia que superstitiosa,
quorum maximam partem Constantinus excogitavit, and in multis Ecclesias
propagavit. This consecration of Churches was anciently done with the sign of
the Cross, as St. Augustine sermon. 19. de Sanctis testifyeth, saying, Crucis
charactere Bafilicae dedicantur, altar a consecrantur. And also with sprinkling
of holy water: whereof see Beda hist. l. 5. c. 4. and St. Gregory apud Bedam
hist. li. 1. c. 30. ante med. and confessed by Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish
Testament in 1 Timothy 4. sect. 13. fol. 378. a. prope initium.
He caused Churches new builded to be consecrated, for service therein to be
celebrated, it being then usual for The Centur. cent. 4. col. 408. lin. 54.
say, Christianos in templis nondum consecratis non convenisse clare indicat
Athanasius in Apologia ad Constantium. Of this Conseccation of Churches, see
further Council. 5. Carthag. can. 6. And Gelasius Epist 1. ad Episcopos Lucan^ae
can. 27. and Leo Epist. 88. ad Episcopos Germ. and Galbae. ad Council. 2.
Brachar. can. 6. and Council. 1. Brach. can. 37. and Council. 2. Spalense can. 7.
Christians to have their assemblies (for public prayers) only in places
consecrated. In so much as in avoydance of profane places, Tabernaculum
Ecclesiae figuram exprimens, cum contra hosts praelio contenderet, secum
circumferre consuevit, ad eum finem, uti neque sibi in solitudine vitam agenti,
neque exercicui deesset aedes sacra, etc. Nam^ Sace^^otes and Diaconi (etc.)
tabernaculum assidue secuti sunt, etc. Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 8. versus finem.
he carried about with him a portable tabernacle (or Church,) and Priests and
Deacons attending it, for celebration of the divine mysteries: The Centurists
cent. 4. col. 497. lin. 48. s^y, Accensiones candelarum interdiu in templis
Constantinus instituit. And col. 410. lin. 7. it is said, Cereas candelas and
lampades in locis Conventuum a Constantion ipso accensas interdiu fuisse
Eusebius retulit. Of lights in the Church, see further Council. 4. Carthag. can.
6. and Eusebius hist. l. 6. c. 8. ante med. And Eusebius de vita Constantini^.
4. c. 66. and Hierom contra Vigilantium cap. 3. And Paulinus natal. 3. Felicis
says hereof, Clara coronantur densis altariadychnis (etc.) nocte dieque micant.
He had lights in the Church in the day time; H^erom contra Vigilantium ante
med. says, Constantinus Imperator sanctas reliquias, Andraeae, Lucae, and
Timothei, transtulit Constantinopolim, apud quas daemones rugiunt. And
Bullinger de orig. erroris Printed Tiguri 1539. fol. 67. b. circa med. says
hereof, Nimius est in eo St. Hieron^mus, quod ait ad sanctas Andreae reliquias
rugiunt daemones. And ibidem fine Bullinger allegeth and reprehendeth Hierom
further saying, Dicit Hieronymus, quod si reliquias Sanctorum transfer and in
aureos loculos recondere non licet, saci ilegus fuit cum Constantino Arcadius,
omnes Episcopi non solum sacrilegi sed and fatui judicandi, qui rem vilissimam
and cineres dissolutos in serico and vase aureo portaverunt, etc. whereupon
Bullinger infers saying, Nolumus sanctis Dei hominibus, Constantino divo,
Arcadio sancto, etc. nominis gloriam illustrem obscurare, etc. testimonium
illis perhibeo, quod studium Dei habent non secundum scientiam, etc.
He translated to Constantinople the holy Relics of St. Andrew, Luke, and
Timothy, at which the Devils did roar; The Centurists cent. 4. col. 1529. lin.
28. say, Plane simili superstitione Constantinus reliquias quasdam de Cruce ab
Helena reperta Constantinopolim dicitur transtu^sse, ut effet ejus Vrbis
conservatrix.
He did also (as the Centurists say) superstitiously translate to
Constantinople in conservation of that City, certain Relics of the Cross found
by Helen; The Centurists cent. 4. col. 457. lin. 56. say, De pereg^nation. bus
ad loca sacra caeperunt hoc saeculo primum suo Constantino, loca Terrae sanctae
(etc.) in pretio haberi, etc. Helena matter Imperatoris mulier superstitiosa
illuc profecta adorand^ causa, etc. And Eusebius hist. l. 6. c. 9. says of one
Alexander, who lived 100. years before Constantine. Alexander Hierosolymam tum
voti tum Iocorum visendorum causa properavit. And see Herom de viris
Illustribus in Alexandro. And of like Pilgrimage to Hicrusa^em, even upon Vow,
see Palladius in Historia Lausaica c. 113. of Philoromus c. 118. and Hierom Ep.
46. ad Rusticum. And see further mention of yearly pilgrimage to Jerusalem in
Zozomen. hist. l. 2. c. 25.
under him in that age were pilgrimages to Jerusalem: The Centurists cent. 4.
col. 704. lin. 10. say, Secunda Synodus apud Arelatum celebrata est Constantin^
Imperator is and Silvestritempore circa annum Domini 326. And lin. 21. they
repeat the second Canon of that Council to be, Assu^ aliquem ad Sacerdotium non
posse in vinculo conjug^ constitutum, nisi fuerit promissa conversio, non
oportet. And see many other like testimonies hereof hereafter in this
Consideration v^^sus finem at 98. and see heretofore in the beginning of this
Consideration at h. i. k. the doctrine in this behalf of the Fathers of the
Nycene Council, whereat Constantine was present.
In his time it was decreed by Council, that Priests might not marry: The
Centurists cent. 4. col. 467. lin. 8. say, Fuisse ante Constantinum etiam
Virgins seu mulieres continentes, and castitatem perpetuam professas, ex libro
4. Eusebii de vita Constantin. apparet, ubi magnopere approbasse disciplinam
ejusmodi Imperatorem Constantinum affirmat; adeo ut, and frequenter eorum
contubernium adierit. Helenam vero etiam Constantini matrem Hierosolymis
Virgins Deo sacras reperisse Socrates testatur l. 1. c. 17. quarum
professionem usque adeo probarit, ut ministram illis sese praebuerit, etc. And
Eusebius us de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 28. says, Sanctissimum perpetuarum
virginum caetum constanter colebat Constantinus, etc. And see Zozomen. hist. l.
1. c. 9.
He honored sacred Virgins professng perpetual Chastity: The Centurists cent.
4. col. 1294. lin. 53. begin a special Tract, the title whereof is, Monachi per
Syriam, Palestinam, Bithyniam, and reliqua Asiae loca sub Constantino magno,
whereof they give there many examples.
Under him were Monks throughout Syria, Palestine, Bithyma, and the other
places of Asia, also Centur. 4. col. 1306. line 18. they begin another like
Tract, whereof the title is; Africani Monachi per Aegyptum sub Constantino
magno.
throughout Africa. And See the Centurists cent. 4. col. 470. line 40. and in
Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 13. initio it is said, Antonium magnum illum monachum
in solitudinibus Aegypti-magna cum nominis and famae celebritate vitam
degentem, Constantinus Imperator propter ejus virtutis splendorem sibi amicum
fecit, literas honorifice scriptas ad eum missit.
he greatly reverenced Antony the Monk, whose most religious and austere
Zozomen, hist. l. 1. c. 13. prope initium says of Antony, Erat ei cibus panis
solum and fall: potus autem aqua, tempus prandii solis occasus, saepenumero ad
biduum and amplius cibo abstinuit, vigilabat semper fere integras noctes, and
usque dum lucesceret precari non destitit; quod si quando somnum capiebat,
illam super parvam stoream cepit; non raro autem humi jacens, ipsa terra pro
cubili usus est. And see all this confessed by Osiander in epitom. and cent. 4.
page 100. Whereto he further adds, Vestimentum ejus (ut alii referunt)
interius erat cilicium, exterius vero animalis pellis, etc. ad montem sublimem
habitaculum suum constituit, etc. erat autem cellula in qua habitabat Antonius,
non plus mensurae per quadram tenens, quam homo dormiens extendi poterat, etc.
life Protestants term Osiander in Epitom: cent. 4. c. 2. page 100. paulo post
med. says, Vita Antonii non caret multiplici superstitione. And see further
there page 102. post med. and see the Centurists cent. 4. col. 1313. line 45.
See his monastical strict life reported by the Centurists cent. 4. col. 1315.
line 44. and his confessed miracles ibid. col. 493. line. 20. Which his
miracles were so many, that Athanasius wrote a special Book of his life (test
Socrate hist. l. 1. c. 17. initio.)
superstitious: Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 2. c. 14. versus finem says
hereof, Ab omni licentia and vitae ratione luxu diffluente sese vocavit, inedia
and corporis afflictione se^psum coercuit, etc.
He chastised his body with fasting and other bodily affliction; Chrysostom. in
Ep. 2 Cor. hom. 26. versus finem says hereof, Nam and ipse, qui purpuram
indutus est, accedit illa amplexus sepulchra, and lastu deposito stat Sanctis
supplicaturus, ut pro se ad Deum intercedant. And see the same also in
Chrysostom ad pop. hom. 66. versus finem.
He went to embrace the Sepulcher of Peter and Paul, humbly praying to those
Saints that they would be intercessors for him to God; Eusebius de vita
Constantini l. 3. c. 2. says of Constantine. A que interdum vultum salutari
illa passionis signavit nota. And see the same confessed and so translated by
D. Abbots in his answer to D. Bishop page 168. initio.
He signed his face with the sign of the cross; Eusebius in orat. de laudibus
Constantini ante med. says, Imperator (Constantinus) triumphale signum
honorat. And Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 8. fine says of Constantine: Sanctae
cruci plurimum tribuit honoris, tum propter subsidia in bello contra hosts
gerendo ex ejus virtute sibi illata, tum propter divinam sibi de ea oblatam
visionem; And see there cap. 4. And Prudentius in Apotheosi does accordingly
affirm this usage of the ancient Emperors, saying thereof, Vexillumque Crucis
summus dominator adorat. In so much as Szegedinus in his Speculum Pontificum
page 229. says, Crux honorari caepit tempore Constantini. And see the like
practice hereof in Conwal King of Scotland reported by Holinshead in his
Chronicle of Scotland, after the first Edition Printed 1577. page 136. and
after the later Edition page 107. a. line 69.
Honored the same sign; Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 8. as next before at x. And
Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 2. c. 7. says, Jam in qua part istud Crucis
vexillum visum fuit, hosts fugam capere, victores persequi: qua re intellecta
Imperator sicubi partem aliquam sui exercitus languentem cernebat, ibi salutare
illud vexillum tanquam quoddam subsidium ad victoriam obtinendam locari
mandavit, cujus adjumentis extemplo parta est victoria, quippe dimicantium
vires divina quadam potentia fuere admodum confirmatae.
Had affyance and success of victory in the virtue thereof, and Hereof see
Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 1. c. 25. and l. 2. c. 3. and l. 3. c. 48.
erected it publicly; He Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 9. post med. says, Jussit
Constantinus, etc. ut Conciliorum decisiones firmae and immutabiles existerent.
ordained that the Decrees of Councils should be kept firm and inviolable;
Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 10. fine says, Cum parva quaedam sella
ex auto fabricata illi esset loco posita, non prius consedit quam Episcopi ad
id innuissent. And Theodoret l. 1. hist. c. 7. circa med. says, Illo ipse
Imperator postremus cum paucis se comitantibus ingressus est (etc.) deinde
sella in medio posita (istud enim sibi permitti ab Episcopis postulaverat)
consedit. And the Century writers cent. 4. col. 460. line 31. say, Ac notum est
quam reverentiam and observantiam Episcopis habuerit in Synodo Nicena ^^^bi nec
confidere prius quam Episcopi annuissent, voluit. And Carrion in Chro^^^^. page
274. post med. says hereof, Assedit Constantinus inter Episcopos sede non
altiore.
He would not sit down at the Council of Nyce, till the Bishops had thereto
given him there assent: Crispin us in his Book of the State of the Church page
99. prope finem says hereof, Constantine said, God has ordained you Bishops,
and has given you power to judge of your selves; by means whereof we yield our
selves to your judgment. Men may not judge you, but God alone. And in Zozomen.
hist. l. 1. c. 16. post med. Constantine says, Mihi vero non est fas, cum homo
sim, ejusmodi causarum cognitionem arrogare, etc. And see further hereof
Ruffinus hist. l. 10. c. 2. And St. Austin tom. 2. Ep. 166. circa med.
He would not undertake the Judgment of Church causes, but committed the same
over to Bishops; The Century writers, cent. 4. col. 702. line 18.
he procured the Synod at Arles, in which the Roman Bishops authority is so far
forth acknowedged, as that Osiander in Epitom. etc. centur. 4. page 182. fine.
for the uniform observation of Easter day Council. 1. Arelatense can. 1. apud
Osiandrum ubi supra, where it is said, De observatione Paschae Domini
(constitutum est in hac Synodo) ut uno die and tempore per omnem orbem
observetur, and juxta consuetudinem literas ad omnes tu dirigas. This was the
Councils Petition to Pope. Silvester.
throughout the whole world, he should direct forth his letters, and that
according to the former custom; so far was such his authority from being then
first begun. In so much as it is yet further said of Constantine, that he Mr.
Napper in his Treatise upon the Revelations dedicated to King James, for the
supposed worthiness thereof reprinted at London Anno 1594. page 145. fine
says, After the year of God 300. the Emperor Constantine subdued all Christian
Churches to Pope Silvester, from which time till these our days the Pope and
his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible Church. And see further there
43. versus finem. And see next hereafter in this Consideration at 111. in the
margent.
subdued all Christian Churches to the Pope, Frigevillaeus Gauvius in his palma
Christiana ad Serenissimam Reginam Angliae page 35. post med. says, Per quod
nomen designatus fu^t Episcopus Romanus and Constantinopolitanus, quos
Constantinus magnus prae caeteris praeferebat, tribuens Romano Primatum ante
omnes.
attributed Primacy to the Roman Bishop before all: being therefore charged
Ibid. page 34. fine he further says, Ex eo apparet fatale suisse ut
Constanti^^s daret potestatem Bessiae, quam statim Julius exercuit: nam etiam
Conrtantinus magnus ferebat arma draconis in insigniis suis, (etc.) ita ut ipse
sit Draco qui dedit potestatem best^ae, and typus Draconis serpentis antiqui,
qui Bestiae potestatem dedit Apoc. 13.2.
fatally to have given power to the beast. The Centurists cent. 4. col. 653.
line 26. report this opinion of Acesius signisied to the Emperor to be: ad
paenitentiam quidem admoneri (homines) spem vero remissionis non a
sacerdotibus, sed ab ipso Deo expectare, qui possit and potestatem habeat
remittere peccata. Cum haec Acesius dixisset, subjunxit Imperator, pone scalam
o Acesi, and solus ascend in caelum. Socrates l. 1. c. 7. And see this error
of the Novatians further confuted by Ambrose. And Pacianus alleged heretofore
in this Consideration number. 21. in the margent at g.
He reproved Acesius the Novatian for denying the power given Priests to remit
sin, under pretense Vbi supra.
that God only remitteth sin. Of Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 45.
his Priests (or Clergy by him assembled to the Dedication of the Temple, not
only) some of them did preach and interpret the holy Scriptures (but also)
others of them who could not so do, appeased the Deity with unbloody Alii qui
etc. horum nihil poterant officere, incruentis consecrationibus divinum Numen
placabant, and supplices Deo preces offerebant pro communi pace, pro Ecclesia
Dei, ipsoque Imperatore, etc. By these Unbloody Sacrifices and mystical
consecrations thus particularly distinguished, as several from the foresaid
Preaching and prayer, cannot be understood other than the said Priests
celebration of the blessed. Sacrament, as is plainly acknowledged by D. Abbots
in his answer to D. Bishops Epistle to the King page 183. ante med. and 184.
paulo post med. Which in regard of the then external oblation thereof by those
sundry Priests, Eusebius terms Unbloody Sacrifices, so thereby
distinguishing the same, in manner of Oblation, from Christ's other bloody
oblation upon the Cross; according to which sense it is often by the other
Fathers termed the Unbloody Sacrifice, as by Chrysostom in Psalm. 95.
Athanasius alleged heretofore in this Consideration Number. 3. at * next after h.
in the margent. Cyril: Alexand: in interpretatione Anathemat: 11. Nazianzen
orat. funeb. in Basilium, and orat. 1. in Iulianum. In so much as they are
therefore reproved by Calvin in Epist. ad Haebr. c. 9. verse. 26. page 946. b.
fine. and 947. a initio. So that if unto these Unbloody Sacrifices thus
mentioned by Euschius, we do add the foresaid appeasing of God thereby (by him
also mentioned) we do then hereby find, not only Sacrifice, but also
propitiatory Sacrifice.
Sacrifices, and mystical Consecrations, and prayed for the health of the
Emperor. At Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 61.
the time of his last sickness he intended to expiate his sins by efficacy of
the holy mysteries, and the imtiation of the healthful lavar (of regeneration
at those times purposely) Osiander in epitom: etc. cent. 4. page 248. ante med.
says: Veteres Baptismum distulisse videntur, etc. ut deinde Baptisma
suscipiendo universa delicta simul abluerent.
deferred; and so Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 4. c. 61. it is said: Humi
procumbens genibus in ipsa Martyrum aede errata sua confessus, etc. And of
Confession made to the Priest long before these times, see heretofore in this
Consideration number. 9. at 10.
prostrating himself upon his knees, confessed his sins in the house of of the
Martyrs; and thereupon received Eusebius vbi supra.
imposition of hands. Centur. 4. col. 454. line 26. it is said: Turba frequens
preces cum fletu pro anima imperatoris fudit^ And see Eusebius de vita
Constant: l. 4. c. 71.
After his death prayer was made for his soul, and the mystical Eusebius vbi
supra says: Adhuc quidem licet contemplari ter beatae animae tumulum (etc.)
divinis ceremoniis and mystico sacrificio sanctarumque precationum societate
perfrui.
Sacrifice offered

And In the brief discourse of the Churches Estate etc. annexed to Crispinus
his book of the Estate of the Church, it is affirmed, how that about the end of
this period ( which continued until Constantine) the love of solitude and
monkery, the abstinence from marriage and from certain meats on particular
days, many seasts and other seeds of superstition after succeeding, took a
marvailous root: so the commencement of Prayer for the dead, and Sacrifice of
the Mass did discover themselves, etc.
as concerning the Churches doctrine of that age, it was in like manner so
evidently our now professed Catholic faith, that to forbear much other
particular proof, and what is by certain our other adversaries confessed in
this behalf, the Century-writers of Magdeburge, whose writings are by our
English Protestants affirmed to be So says M. Willet in his Tetrastylon
Papismi page 21. fine.
An excellent work, and So says M. D. Hill in his defense of the article that
Christ descended into Hell fol. 23. b. post. med.
worthy of immortal memory, in their fourth Century by them dedicated to Queen
Elizabeth (in which they specially undertake to deliver to her Highness The
Centurists cent. 4. in Epist. dedicatoria Serenissimae Reginae ac Dominae
Elizabethae etc. prope finem, say to the Queen concerning that fourth Century:
Redit hic Constantinus jam ad te adferens statum ejus Ecclesiae quae suo
tempore totum Orbem suo splendore illustravit, etc. And there again: Non
dubitavimus Constantini Britannici Ecclesiasticas res tuae Majestati
jucundissimas atque acceptissimas fore.
that state of the Church which in Constantines time illustrated the whole
world) do profess to Centur: 4. col. 287. line 16. the title there of that
special Tract is, Inclinatio Doctrinae complectens peculiares and incommodas
opiniones, ^^ipulas and errores Doctorum.
set down the peculiar (supposed) errors of the Doctors of those times, and do
join with others in charging sundry of them severally and respectively with
some or other particular opinions by collection from their own writings, which
in general are as follows, namely with Centur. 4. col. 291. line 7. it is
said, Patres omnes fere hujus aetatis de libero arbitrio consuse loquuntur. And
immediately after they do there recite and reject the particular sayings of
Lactantius, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Hierom, etc.
Freewil, Cent. 4. col. 292. and 293. there under the titles de Justificatione,
and de bonis operibus.
Justification by works, Ibid. col. 293. throughout, and there line 59. where
they conclude, saying, Jam cogiter pius Lector quam procul haec aetas in hoc
articulo de Apostolorum doctrina desciverit. And see Osiander cent. 4. page
102. post med. and 506. ante med. and page 520. circa med. and 430. ante med.
and page 70. prope finem.
Merit of works, Centur. 4. col. 425. line 54. it is said, Ad hoc Praesbyterium
aliquem, etc. deputarunt, ad quem qui deliquerunt accedentes quae gessissent
confiterentur, etc. ea lege confitentes absolvebat, ut a se ipsi paenas
commissorum exigerent. And see there col. 426. line 10. And see next heretofore
at 9.
Confession of sins to a Priest, and Concerning enjoined Penance ut supra: and
see further Centur. 4. col. 834. line 14. and col. 868. line 56.
enjoined Penance, Centur. 4. col. 425. ut supra, and col. 834. lin. 60.
mentions Reconciliationem per manus impositionem: and see col. 878. line 5.
and line 16.
Absolution of such as had confessed (given) with imposition of the hand: also
with affirming Centur. 4. col. 1245. line 33. and see Calvin institut. l. 4. c.
19. sect. 17.
Penance to be the second table after shipwreck, and error Centur. 4. col.
294. line 1. it is said, Paenitentiam haec aetas ut fere and superiores neque
recte definiit, neque parts ejus satis explicavit, etc. And col. 231. line 12.
it is said, Doctrinam paenitentiae (etc.) satis tenuiter and frigide (etc.)
quemadmodum and in superioribus saeculis tractatam videas ab hac aetate.
in the doctrine of penance: with See centur. 4. col. 299. line 55. and see
this further more plainly confessed in sundry Fathers of this age, and the age
before, alleged heretofore in this Consideration number. 12. at 3, 6, 7, 11, 12,
13, 14.
unwritten traditions, Centur. 4. col. 295. under the title there de
Invocatione Sanctorum, and col. 296, 297. are recited and rejected the
particular sayings of Basil, Ambrose, Prudent^us, Ephrem, Athanasius. And see
the sundry Fathers of this age and other precedent ages confessed and rejected
heretofore in this Consideration number. 7.
Invocation of Saints, Centur. 4 col. 304. under the title there de Purgatorio,
where are recited and rejected the sayings of Lactantius, and Hierom, and see
heretofore in this Consideration number. 18. throughout.
Purgatory, Centur. 4. col. 409. line 15. it is said, Aras in templis suisse id
quoque hujus saeculi Historia testan^ur etc. verum haec etiam consuetudo a
Judaica in Ecclesiam Christi permanavit, etc. And see heretofore in this
Consideration n. 3. at 6, 7, 10, 11.
Altars Nazianzen in Julianum mentions altaria a purissmo and incruento
Sacr^ficio nomen habentia. And St. Austin de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 10. Erigimus
altaria in quibus sacrificemus uni Deo, etc. And Gildas de excidio Britan. c.
26. calls the Altar, Sacrificii caelestis sedem. And see heretofore in this
Consideration number. 3.
so called of Sacrifice thereon offered, and Aug. sermon. 19. de Sanctis says,
Crucis charactere Basilicae dedicantur, altaria conscerantur. Of Consecration
of Altars, see Gregory Nyssen de S. Baptism. And Council. 2. Spalense can. 7.
and Council. 1. Bracharense can. 37. and Council. 1. Hipponense can. 5. did. 1.
c. altaria, and Council. 3. Aurelianese can. 15. And Aug. de tempore sermon. 255.
Consecrated with the sign of the Cross, and Council. Agathense can. 14. says,
Altar placuit, non solum unctione chrismatis, sed etiam sacerdotah
benedictione sacrar^, in quo nobis divina sacrificia consecrantur. And before
all these, Dionysius Arcopagita de Eccles. Hieratch c. 4. says, Divini Altaris
consecrationem sanct^ssimorum mysterium lex sanctissimi unguenti castissimis
infusionibus perficit.
Chrism, and called also The Centurists cent. 4. col. 409. line 26. and Peter
Martyr in his Common places part. 4. page 226. a. initio, reprehend Optatus for
saying, Quid est altar, nisi seeds corporis and sanguinis Christi, etc. cujus
illic per certa momenta corpus and sanguis habitabat? And Gildas de excidio
Britan. c. 26. calls the Altar, Sacrificii caelestis sedem, and Ambrose l. 5.
de sacram. c. 2. says, Quid est enim altar, nisi forma corporis Christi? and
l. 4. c. 2. fine he says, Forma corporis altar est, and corpus Christi est in
altari. And Hesichius in Leviticum l. 2. c. 8. says, Est autom locus sanctus
altar, ibi enim Sanctus Sanctorum requiescit.
the seat of the body and blood of Christ, with See this point of real presence
confessed in the writings of Ambrose and in Cyril, heretofore in this
Consideration n. 2. at 4.5.
real presence, and See confessed testimonies for Transubstantiation alleged by
the Centurists cent. 4. col. 109. line 3. and line 40. and col. 985. line 30.
and see heretofore in this Consideration number. 2. at 1, 2, 3, 6, 11.
transubstantiation, with Cyril. Hierosolym it: (who lived in this age) Catech.
5. prope finem says hereof, Take heed lest any thing of it fall from thee, and
Mr. Fulk in his rejoinder to Bristow and answer to Sanders, in answer hereto
terms it a mere superstitious precept, page 687. post med. And Austin l. 50.
homiliarum hom. 26. says, Quanta follicitudine observamus, quando nobis corpus
ministratur, ut nihil de ipso in terram cadat. Tertullian in libro de corona
militis says, calicis aut panis etiam nostri aliquid decuti in terram anxie
patimur. And Origin hom. 13. in Exodum says, You that are accustomed to be
present at the divine mysteries, do know that when you receive the body of our
Lord, you do with all wariness and reverence take heed that no little thereof
fall down.
care (more than was then had concerning the water of Baptism) that no part of
the Sacrament should fall down to the ground, with Of reservation see centur.
4. col. 427. line 45. and col. 430. line 2. And see ^^re^osore in tins
Consideration number. 2. at 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
reservation of the Sacrament with Chemnitius in his examen. part. 2. page 92.
allegeth the several sayings of Austin, Ambrose and Nazianzen ( all of them
living in this Century) affirming in his opinion, the adoration of the
Sacrament, and he reprehendeth there for their denial thereof the Calvinists,
by the express term of Sacramentaries. And whereas Nazianzen orat. 11. quae est
de Gorgonia sorore, tells how his diseased Sister prostrated her self before
the Altar, and calling upon him who is worshipped on it, o miracle (says he)
she departed presently receiving health; M. Fulk in respons. ad Stapletonium de
successione Ecclesiastica page 230. circa med. trifleth in his answer hereinto,
being enforced to say, Eucharistia in altarinon fuit ab ea adorata quamvis in
magna reverentia, and fortasse non sine superstitione habita. And Ambros. in
orat. praepar. ad Missam is so plain in this point, that the Centurists centur:
4. col. 430. line 52. do therefore reprove those prayers of Ambrose, saying,
Continent adorationem panis in Sacramento. And so likewise says M. Perkins in
his probiem. etc. page 21. initio, and Crispinus in his book of the Church page
87. fine, and yet are those prayers acknowledged and alleged for the writings
of Ambrose by M. Bilson in his true difference, etc. part. 4. page 622. circa
med.
worshipping of it, and special words of invocation praescribed when the
Sacrament was S. Basil de spiritu Sancto c. 27. alleging unwritten traditions,
says, Invocationis verba dum ostenditur panis Eucharistiae and poculum
benedictionis, quis scripto reliquit? See this saying acknowledged and but
weakly put off by M. Fulk in his rejoinder to Bristow, etc. page 685. post.
med.
showed: with receiving it See this heretofore in this Consideration number. 2. in
the margent at 32. and 33.
fasting and See this heretofore in this Consideration number. 2. in the margent
at 35. and 36. And see also the same further confessed in Osianders Epitom.
etc. centur: 4. page 180. fine.
chaste; with See the sundry Fathers who lived some of them in Constantines
times, others next after his time, others before his time, confessedly in this
question of Sacrifice heretofore in this Consideration number. 3 next after 12. at
*... g. h. and heretofore in this Consideration number. 17. in the margent at t.
offering of it in sacrifice to God, as being propitiatory, not only See this
heretofore in this Consideration number. 3. fine at * next after h. confessed in
sundry Fathers of this age and the age before, by Andraeas Crastovius a learned
Calvinist. Also Basil in Liturgia prays, ut digni simus offerre tibi
rationabile istud and incruentum Sacrificium pro nostris peccatis and populi
ignorantia. And Cyprian de Caena Dom: prope initium says, Quotiescunque his
verbis and hac fide actum est, panis iste substantialis and calix solemni
benedictione sacratus, ad totius hominis vitam salutemque proficit, simul
medicamentum and holoc^ustum existens ad sanandas infirmitates, and purgandas
iniquitates.
for the living, but also Hospinianus in historia Sacramentaria lib. 2. page
167. initio says of Cyrill of Jerusalem, who lived in the beginning of this
Century: Dicit Cyrillus pro sui jam temporis recepta consuetudine sacrificium
altaris maximum Juvamen esse animarum. So common was this doctrine in Cyrills
time; See Cyrills saying hereof in Catech. 5. Mystagog: And see the saying of
Ambrose therein rejected Centur: 4. col. 295. line 3. and also Cyprian and
Tertullian cent. 3. col. 138. line 56. and 139. line 6. and Osiander of
Tertullian cent. 3. page 10. Also S. Austine l 9. Confess: c. 12. affirms
that the Sacrifice of our price was offered for his Mother Monica, being dead.
And in Enchirid c. 110. he says, Neque negandum est defunctorum animas pietate
suorum viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium Mediatoris offertur:
affirming there further, that the sacrifices of the Altar or of alms which be
offered for the dead, are thanksgiving for those that be very good (or in
heaven) and propitiations for those that be not very evil (or not in hell)
affirming ( else where de verbis Apost: sermon. 34.) that the universal Church
does observe as delivered from our forefathers, that for those who are dead in
the communion of Christ's body and blood, when in time of sacrifice they be
remembered in their places, prayer is made for them (ac pro illis id quoque
offerri commemoretur) and (besides this prayer) for them also it is remembered
that the Sacrifice be ostered: In so much as S. Austine is herein rejected by
Hutterus l. de Sacrificio Missatico page 525. fine. See also this point
confessed in Austine and many other Fathers heretofore in this Consideration
number. 4. at k. and heretofore in this Consideration number. 17. in the margent
under t. And see also Bullinger in his decades in English page 1082. a. post.
med.
for the dead; with affirming it to be So it is affirmed to be by Cyprian l. 2.
Epist. 3. and by S. Austine de Civitate Dei l. 16. c. 22. and lib. 17. c. 5.
fine, etc. 20. and l. 18. c. 35. circa med. and in Psalm. 33. con. 2. and see
this point accordingly confessed by Andraeas Crastovius l. 1. de opificio
Missae page 28. and page 58. and 102. and 171. And see M. Fulk against Heskins
page 100. circa med. And see heretofore in this Consideration number. 17. in the
text.
a Sacrifice, according to the Order of Melchisedech, with special See the
Century-writers Cent. 4. col. 662. line 2. and col. 703. line 36. and col. 705.
line 31.
liberty for Deacons to distribute it, but not to offer it (so distinct then
was distribution from the offering thereof;) with terming it Centur. 4. col.
878. line 12, and 13.
the viaticum for such as were sick, with Hieron: in Epist. ad Theophilum
Alexand^inum ante libros paschales mentions sacros calices, sanctaque
velamina ex consortio corporis and sanguinis Domini, eadem qua corpus eju and
sanguis majestate veneranda.
holy coverings (or corporals) holden venerable by reason of their accompanying
(or touching) the Body and Blood of our Lord, and The Centurists cent. 4. col.
835. line 46^ and Osiander in Epitom: cent. 4. page 391. initio, and see Council
Agathense Can. 66. and Council. Laodicen. Can. 21. and Council. 1. Bracharense
can. 18. And Greg. Nyss^n in orat. de Baptismo, where he says, Altate hoc
sanctum cui assistimus, etc. quoniam Dei cultui consecratum atque dedicatum
est, ac benedictionem accepit (etc.) non amplius ab omnibus, sed a solis
sacerdotibus contrectatur. And see Nazianzen in orat. de seipso contra Arianos
initio.
holy vessels, which Subdeacons (and lay persons) might not touch: with
careful committing Centur. 4. col. 490. line 57.
of the holy Chalice to the Priests custody; with Centur. 4. col. 835. line 45.
the Laodicen Council is alleged saying, can. 21. Non oportet subdiaconos
licentiam habere in sacrarium ingredi and contingere vasa Dominica. And see
surther mention of this Vestry in Council. 4 Ca^thag. can. 36. and in Concilio
Agathensi can. 66. And in Ambrose l. 1. Offic. c. 50. alleged by the Centurists
centur. 4. col. 409. line 40. and see Osiander in Epitom. cent. 5. page 391.
initio, reproving this.
a Vestry (or place wherein Holy things were laid) into which Subdeacons might
not enter; with Cent. 4. col. 480. line 35. and col. 428. lin. 40. and col.
429. line 3. and col. 868. line 32. and col. 871. line 48. And see heretofore
in this Consideration number. 2. at 26, 27, 28.
mixture of Water with Wine in the Chalice, in time of Consecration: Also with
the Centur. 4. col. 421. line 46. And see this more plainly also heretofore in
this Consideration number. 8. at 3.
sign of the Cross in Baptism, with See these at large expressed in Cent. 4.
col. 417, 418, and 419.
Abrenuntiation, Exorcism, Anneyling, threefold immersion, and sundry other
like Ceremonies used in Baptism; with holding That Cent. 4. col. 239. and see
heretofore in this Consideration number. 8. at 7, 8.
Infants dying unbaptized are not saved; with Centur. 4. col. 415. line 25. and
heretofore in this Consideration number. 8. at 9.
Baptism of Lay-persons in case of necessity; with Cent. 4 col. 1160. line 53.
and col. 1161. line 2. and col. 1243. line 39. and col. 934. line 29. and
heretofore in this Consideration number. 8. at 2. *.
Remission of Sins (not signified but truly) given in Baptism; with Cent. 4.
col. 415. line 44. and heretofore in this Consideration number. 8. at. next after
3. Also St. Ambrose de mysteri^s initiat. c. 3. post med. says, Aqua cum
fuerit mysterio crucis consecrata, etc. And St. Austin de Sanctis sermon. 19.
says, Crucis mysterio fons regenerationis consecratur. And the like
consecration of the water of Baptism with the sign of the Cross he affirms in
Evan. Joan. tract. 118.
Consecration of the water of Baptism; with Centur. 4. col. 423. line 4. and
col. 837. l. 20. and col. 478. line 17. where it is aid, Baptizatiab Episcopis
signabantur and chrismate inungebantur. And see here line 27. and see
heretofore in this Consideration n. 8. at t. u. x.
The Bishops firming of the baptized with Chrism; with reservation or See cent.
4. col. 420. line 10. where it is said, Chrisma in ampulla conservari solitum
indicat Optatus.
keeping of Chrism in a Box; with Cent. 4. col. 865. line 43. and col. 503.
line 8. and col. 1274. line 44. and col. 869. line 14. Os Consecration of
Chrism by a Bishop, see further Council. 1. Bracharense Can. 37. and Council.
Romanum sub Silvestro can. 5. and Council. 2. Carthag. can. 3. and Council. 3.
Carthag. can. 36. and Council. 4. Carchag. can. 36. and Council. Vasense can. 3.
and Council. 1. Toletan. can. 20. and Council. 2. Hispalense can. 7. and Damasus
Ep. 4. de Corep scopis, and Leo Ep. 88. ad Episcopos Germaniae and Galliae, and
Innocentius Ep. 1. ad Decentium cap. 3. and before all these Dionysius
Areopagita de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 4. not far from the end.
Consecration of Chrism by a Bishop only; with Centur. 4. col. 456. line 33.
and col. 457. throughout, and 482. line 44. and col. 1446. line 17. and see
heretofore in this Consideration in the beginning of number. 23. at m. and see
Chemnitius his examen. part. 4. page 10. a.
Solemn Translation of Saints Relics, and their Centur. 4. col. 602. line 54.
and 1250. line 45. and col. 457. line 49. and Chemnitius ubi supra. And St.
Hierom. contra Vigilant. c. 3. affirms this estimation of Relics to be in
his time the received doctrine (says he) non unius Urbis sed totius Orbis.
worship; with reverent See this in Zozomen. hist. l. 5. c. 8. Ambrose Ep. 85.
ad sororem. Hierom. contra Vigilant. c. 3. Austin de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8.
and sermon. 11. de Sanctis, and Council. 5. Caithag. can. 14, and Council. African.
can. 50.
placing of Saints Relics under the Altar; with Chemnitius examen. part. 4.
page 10. b. ante med. says, Suscipiebant etiam peregrinationes ad loca ubi
reliquias miraculis celebres and claras audiebant. And see Osiander in Epirom.
etc. cent. 4. page 393. post med. And centur. 4. col. 457. line 57.
Pilgrimage to them, and to such like other holy places, oftentimes made by
Chemnitius examen. part. 4. page 10. a post med. says, Apud Augustinum in
translatione reliquiarum Stephani, mulier caeca illuminata est: and aliquando
quaedam miracula ad reliquias edebantur. etc. And the Centurists cent. 4. col.
457. line 47. say, Si Ambrosio credimus, aegri enim qui vestes Sanctorum manu
contigissent, sanabantur, obsessi liberabantur, etc. And see many examples
hereof in St. Augustine de Civit Dei l. 22. c. 8.
diseased persons, who were thereupon (miraculously) cured: and the same so
credibly reported, as Master Whitaker dare not rest in denial thereof; with In
cent. 4. col. 409. line 42. are alleged many examples hereof.
images in the Church, Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 10. page 866. ante med. says
hereof, Nec illa miracula vana fuisse puto, quae in Martyrum monumentis facta
narrantur.
with Cent. 4. col. 410. line 11. And see heretofore in this Consideration in
the beginning of this number. 23. at l.
lights in the Church in day time, with Anchorets, Cent. 4. col. 470. line 20.
under the title there de Eremitis. And Anchorets col. 474. line 50. of whom it
is said, Anachoretae soli habitabant per deserta, and ab eo quod procul ab
hominibus recesserunt nuncupantur.
Eremites, Cent. 4. col. 488. line 27. And see Council. Agathense can. 38.
Abbots and Cent. 4. col. 300. line 39. and col. 301. line 46. and col. 464
line 9. under the title de Monach. and 465.
Monks; their vowed Centur. 4. col. 300. line 52. and col. 301. line 48. and
col. 466. line 19. And in the Council of Chalcedon can. 16. it is said, Si qua
Virgo se dedicaverit Deo, similiter Monachus, non licere eis jungi nuptiis,
etc. in so much as this Council is therefore reproved by Mr. Whitaker contra
Camp. page 62. And by Osiander cent. 5. page 359. in can. 15. and 16.
Chastity, Centur. 4. col. 301. line 29. and 39. and col. 464. line 58. where
it is said, Apparet monasticen professuros facultates suas prius distribuisse,
oportet (inquit Basilius) monachum ante omnia id vitae genus amplecti, ut nihil
possideat. And see St. Austin Ep. 89. ad Hilarium 4. quaest. And see heretofore
in this Censideration number. 21. at e. f.
voluntary poverty, Centur. 4. col. 471. line 23. where it is said of them, Nec
pane, nec obsoniis vescentes, neque vinum bibentes. And col. 474. line 15.
where it is said, Alii a volucribus abstinent, utuntur ovis and piscibus: alii
etiam a pi^ cibus abstinent, caseo vero vescuntur; alii autem neque caseum
sumunt; jam vero adhuc alii etiam a pane abstinent, etc. And col. 475. line 42.
it is said, Vivitur pane, leguminibus, and oleribus, que sale solo condiuntur.
And see Socrates hist. l. 4. c. 18. prope initium, and Evagrius hist. l. 1. c.
21. and Epiphanius haer. ult. prope finem.
great abstinence from Wine, Flesh, and certain other meats; their enclosing or
muring up of themselves Hereof see Osiander in Epitom. cent. 4. page 100. fine,
and page 440. post med. and Evagrius hist. l. 1. c. 21. paulo post initium
says, Se separatim in aediculas concludunt, quae tantum habent latitudinis
altitudinisque, ut in illis, neque corpore erecto consistere, neque s^ libere
inclinare possint. And see the like in Zozomen. hist. l. 3. c. 13. circa med.
and see like mention of Monks cells in Concilio Agathensi can. 38. in Zozomen.
hist. l. 6. c. 31. initio, in Palladius in hist. Lausaica cap. 21. and 36. and
43. and 69. and 109. and in Theodoret in his Theophil. cap. 2, 3, 4, 9, 15. and
Evagrius hist. l. 5. c. 21. and l. 6. c. 22. makes mention of one Simeon
dwelling in a pillar, and see centur. 4. col. 465. line 19. alleging it out of
Nazianzen.
in Cells, their other wonderful austerity of life, Centur. 4. col. 474. line
22. it is said, Multi vero etiam humi dormiunt, alii neque calceamenta induunt,
alii saccum gestant occultum, and see the same in Epiphanius haer. ult. fine.
And see centur. 4. col. 465. line 19. of their going barefoot, out of Nazianzen.
in going barefoot, lying upon the ground, wearing sackcloath, etc. their See
this Cowl mentioned cent. 4. col. 472. line 20. where is mentioned tegumentum
quoddam capitis, quod cuculium dixerint. And see further mention hereof in
Zozomen. l. 3. c. 13. ante med. and in Ambrose sermon. 94. who mentions their
cowl and leather girdle.
cowl, Ambrose ut supra, and in the Centurists cent. 4. col. 472. is mentioned
out of Zozomen, Zona praeterea circa lumbos.
girdle, and other religious In the Centurists cent. 4. col. 472. line 49. it
is said, Tiaris laneis capita tegunt, quas purpureis maculis veluti punctis
obsignari praecepit. and in Zozomen. hist. l. 3. c. 13. ante med. is mentioned
their humerale. And see further Hierom Ep. 4. ad Rust cum monachum. Cassianus
l. 1. de institut. Caenoblorum, and Gregory l. 2. dialog. c. 1.
habit; their undoubted and great Centur. 4. col. 493. line 18. it is thus
confessed, Fuerunt inter Monachos seu Eremitas hac aetate, Viri donis
miraculorum celebres, ut Antonius, ejusque discipuli Macharius, Isidorus,
Heraclides, etc. And see centur. 4. col. 1445. line 3. and col. 493. line 18.
And see hereafter an the fourth Consideration number. 2. at 1. in the margent.
miracles, the Cent. 4. col. 467. line 27. it is said, Basilium in Ponti
Vrbibus Monasteria construere, and Virgins castitatem vovere instituisse
Ruffinus narrat l. 2. cap. 9. and ibidem line 48. it is said concerning the
Virgins of Europe, Virginitatis votum apud eum sexum commune fuisse Ambrosius
indicat. And see yet further mention of vowed Virgins ibidem line 8. And col.
706. line 57. and col. 483. line 25. and col. 487. line 49. and col. 301. line
1. and 54. and for former times see Centur. 3. col. 140. line 27. and see
heretofore in this Consideration number. 23. initio. at p. and also see heretofore
in the beginning of this Consideration number. 1.
vowed chastity of Virgins, See centur. 4. col. 467. i^e 7. under the title
there, De Monasteriis Virginum at line 28, and 36. and col. 476. line 34 and
col. 1335. line 58. and col. 1337. line 11. and Osiander in his epitom. cent.
4. page 507. initio, and page 503. fine.
Monasteries of Virgins, Osiander in epitom. cent. 4. page 503. fine says,
Trium (Monasteriorum) quae Virginum erant Paula fuit Gubernatrix; and hereof
see the Centurists cent. 4. col. 1335. line 38. Also the Centurists cent. 4.
col. 125. line 30. give like instance in Publia saying, Erat in eadem urbe
Publia nobilissima faemina caetus Virginum quae castitatem profitebantur
magistra. And see Theodoret l. 3. c. 17. prope initium.
a woman Governess of professed Virgins, their Centur. 4. col. 468. line 18.
says, Potest ex codem libro animadverti quae ratio tum fuerit velandi
Virgins, primum enim velabantur in templo ad altar in die Paschae solemni
conventu candelis accensis, etc. and see there line 27. and col. 867. line 2.
Before these times Tertullian wrote a treatise de velandis Virginibus.
Veil, Of women's religious habit see centur. 4. col. 874. line 28. and col.
879. line 37. and see Palladius in historia Lausaica cap. 41. Hieron. Epist.
15. ad Marcellam, and Ep. 22. ad Eustochium de Virginit. and in vita
Hilarionis, and Council. 4. Carth. can. 11. and 104.
religious habit, and specially Consecration of Virgins is in plain terms
mentioned centur. 4. col. 865. line 44. and col. 869. line 15. and col. 874.
line 27. And Ambrose l. 3. de Virginibus says, dicite quantas Alexandrina
totiusque Orientis and Africanae Ecclesiae quotannis consecrare consueverint,
pauciores hic homines prodeunt, quam illic Virgins consecrantur.
consecration. The like Centur. 4. col. 466. line 42. under the title there, De
consecratione Monachi.
consecration of Monks, and Council. Chalcedon can. 24. says, Quae semel
consecrata fuerint monasteria cum judicio sui Episcopi, maneant perpetua, etc.
nec ulterius posse ea fieri saecularia habitacula decrevimus. See this Council
mentioned and commended Cent. 4. col. 855. line 1. and col. 667. line 18. and
col. 515. line 1.
Monanasteries: also with the Centur. 4. col. 453. line 29. it is said, Nuptias
celebrari in Quadragesima Concilium Laodicenum interdixit, can. 52. and see
col. 837. line 33.
forbidding of marriage in Lent, with Centur. 4. col. 441. under the title de
Quadragesima line 55. it is said, Jejunatum esse a carnibus and vino indicat
Nyssenus, and see col. 837. line 25. and see heretofore in this Consideration
number 11.
the fast of Lent from flesh, and with Centur. 4. col. 440. line 26. it is
said, Jejunia observasse, ac religiosius quidem seu superstitiosius quam
superioribus saeculis hujus aetatis Christianos, historiae testantur.
superstitious fasting, even Cent. 4. col. 440. line 39. it is said, Epiphanius
haer. 75. Jejunium feriae quartae and sextae seu prosabbato in omnium Orbis
terrarum regionibus in Ecclesia constitutum esse asserit usque ad horam nonam,
ejusque constitutionis authoritatem ad Apostolos refert.
in all Nations upon Wednesday and Friday; with exception nevertheless to be
exempted then, as now, Cent. 4. col. 440. line 51. it is said, Diem Natalis
Domini a jejunio liberum haberi, etiam si in quartum aut prosabbatum incidat.
if they light upon Chrismas day; with Centur. 4. col. 453. line 33. and col.
874. line 37. and col. 482. line 28. and see Council. 4. Carth. can. 13.
the Priests blessing of the Bride and Bridegroom after marriage; with Cent. 4.
col. 453. line 48. it is said, Ritus and ceremoniae funebres hoc saeculo
(superstitione crescente) rum ex Ethnicismo, tum Judaismo cumulatae sunt.
superstitious funer alrites and ceremonies, as Centur. 4. col. 454. line 13.
and line 23. and line 28. it is said, Sole bant and caerei praeferri suneri
inter deducendum, etc. And Sacerdotes lampades caereosque praetulerunt suneri.
lighted tapers, Cent. 4. col. 455. line 14.
covering the grave with flowers, Col. 455. line 26. it is said, Celebris ob
desuncti memoriam suit dies quadregesimus post obitum; and the Centurists Cent.
3. col. 138. line 57. do out of the age before allege Tertullian saying,
Oblationes pro desunctis pro Natalitiis annua die facimus, we make oblations
for the dead and for the birth (of Martyrs) upon their years day: And see
Centur. 3. col. 139. line 4. and hereof see Bristows reply to Fulk Printed
1580. page 54.
myning days, Centurists cent. 4. col. 454. line 26. it is said, Turba frequens
omnis generis hominum secuta est, ac preces cum fletu pro anima Imperatoris
fudit. And see the like col. 456. line 24. and heretofore in this Consideration
number. 4. at 2, 3, 4, 5. etc.
Prayer for the Soul of the dead party, affirmed in those times [74] See this
confessed heretofore in this Consideration number. 4. at k.
from Apostolic tradition. Also with special appointment of (75) Centur. 4.
col. 432. line 13. it is said, vultu converso ad Orientem Christianos orasse
author est Basilius de Spik. Sancto c. 27. See many other testimonies thereof
there alleged.
prayer toward the East; and to (76) Cent. 4. col. 432. line 58. and col. 433.
line 8. and col. 663. line 8. and see centur. 3. col. 135. line 4. and see
Osiander in Epitom. Cent. 4. page 131. circa med.
pray standing upon the Lords day, at Pentecost, and Easter, with (77) Centur.
4. col. 433. line 28. and see these Canonical howrs consessed also for the age
before cent. 3. col. 134. line 45.
Canonical howrs, Centur. 4. col. 459. line 18. it is said, Quin and de nocte
ad preces surrexerunt. And see col. 411. line 52. and col. 434. line 24.
Rising in the night to prayer; with Hereof see centur. 4. col. 433. line 42.
and 53.
set form of prayer, and See Litanies mentioned cent. 4. col. 433. line 43. and
col. 414. line 1. and col. 411. line 39.
Litanies; whereunto might be added example also even of saying or Cent. 4.
col. 1329. line 24. and O siander in Epitom. cent. 4. page 454. and Zozomen
hist. l. 6. c. 29. post med. reports the matter, saying of Paul the Monk; In
dies singulos trecentas orationes Deo, velut tributum quoddam reddidit, ac, ne
per imprudentiam in numero erraret, trocentis lapillis in sinum conjectis, ad
singulas preces, singulos inde ejecit lapillos: consumptis igitur lapillis,
constabat sibi orationes lapillis numero pares abs se expletas esse. And see
other like examples of saying prayers by account or numbering of them in
Palladius his historia Lausaica cap. 24. and cap. 51.
numbering prayers upon little stones (or Beads;) also with Master Fulk against
Hoskins, Sanders, etc. page 657. circa med. affirms, that by report of
Paulinus, the Cross was by the Bishop of Jerusalem brought forth at Easter
(yourly) to be worshipped of the people. See this report of Paulinus further
confessed by Master Perkins in his problem, etc. page 83. post med. And see
Evagrius hist. l. 4. c. 25. Also Danaeus in primae partis altera part ad
Bellarminum 5. Controvers. responsione page 1415. initio affirms, that Cyril
and sundry other Fathers were plainly superstitious and blinded with this
enchantment of the Crosses adoration. And see in the beginning of this number. 23.
at x.
worshipping of the Cross, with Ambrosius multa commemorat superstitiosa de
Cruce inventa. Centur. 4. col. 302. line 1 and 13. it is said, Ephrem crucis
signationi nimium videtur tribuere. And Mr. Fulk against Heskins, Sanders, etc.
page 657. circa med. affirms that Ruffinus and Cyril had a superstitious
estimation of the sign of the Cross. and Cent. 4. col. 459. line 31. it is
said, Ad omnem incessum crucis sig no frontem confignarunt. And concerning the
Century or age before, the Centurists cent. 3. col. 121. line 52. say, Crucis
imaginem seu in locis publicorum congressuum, s^u domi privatim Christianos
habuisse, indicare videtur Tertullianus. And see col. 240. line 57.
superstitious estimation of the sign of the Cross, with Osiander in Epitom.
cent. 4. etc. 326. ante med. says, Julianus metu percussus ilico ex
consuetudine Christianismi, frontem cruce signat, ibi daemones subito disparent.
signing the forehead therewith, with attributing to it Master Burges in his
words extant in Mr. Covels brief answer to the said Burges page 130. ante med.
says of the Fathers opinion of the Cross (with exception only to the point of
adoration touched next heretofore at 80.) that there is nothing ascribed to the
Cross in or out of Baptism by the rankest Papists, but the Fathers are as
deeply engaged in the same; so as if we will use it as the Fathers did, etc. we
take the Soul to be fenced by crossing of the body, and the Cross to have
virtue of consecrating the Sacrament, driving away Devils, witchcraft, etc. In
proof whereof he does allege there in his margent diverse Fathers no less or
more ancient than the compass of this fourth Century; and see further there
page 136. post med. And the Puritans in their short Treatise of the sign of the
Cross, etc. Printed in 8. at Amsterdam by J. H. 1604. page 21. fine say, The
Fathers delivered to us the sign of the Cross with an opinion of virtue and
officacy; not only in the act of blessing our selves, and in the expelling of
devils, but even in the consecration of the most blessed Sacraments, to which
purpose they do there allege the special sayings of Tertullian, Hierom,
Lactantius, Cyprian, and Austin. And see also the Centurists cent. 4. col. 302.
line 11. and 27. and col. 1493. line 19. and Tertullian ad Vxorem l. 2. c. 5.
Chrysostom in Matthew. hom. 55. paulo post med. Austin de Sanctis sermon. 19. and
in Joan. tract. 118. fine, Lactantius l. 4. c. 27. Athanasius de incarnatione
Verb^, and de vita Antomii. Origin. hom. 6. in Exodum c. 15. Ignatius Epist. ad
Philippenses.
virtue of consecrating the Sacrament, driving away Devils, witchcraft, etc.
and with undoubted M. D. Covel in his answer to Mr. Burges page 138. paulo post
med. says concerning the ancient times, No man can deny, but that God after
the death of his Son manifested his power to the amazement of the world, in
this contemptible sign, as being the instrument of many miracles. And see
heretofore in this Consideration in the beginning of this number. at p. and see
examples of such miracles in Theodoret hist. l. 5. c. 21. post med. And
Epiphanius haer. 30. ante med. Hierom in vita Hilarionis versus finem; and
Palladius in hist. Lausaica cap. 1. fine. And Theodoret in his Theophil. c. 13.
etc. 9. etc. 2. and Eusebius in orat. de laudibus Constantini ante med. after
Christophersons translation, Printed Coloniae 1581. page 299. post med. and
300. post med.
great miracles, which God has wrought by it. In like manner with Cent. 4.
col. 873. fine and col. 874. initio. and see these inferior Orders mentioned
as yet much more anciently by Cornelius apud Eusebium hist. l. 6. cap. 35. and
after Hanmers English translation c. 42. and by Ignatius Scholar to St. John
Ep. ad Antiochenses prope finem.
Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, Readers, Door-keepers, and the
special Centur. 4. col. 873. fine and 874. initio. and see Con. 4. Carth. can.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
rites used in ordaining of them; with mention also of the Centur. 4. col. 435.
line 2. say, Constitutiones Concilii Laodiceni Ordinationes judicio
multitudinis fieri prohibuerunt. And after, Ac pro iis apud eum Episcopum,
penes quem jus esset Ordinandi, precacabantur, quemadmodum ex Epistola quarta
Basilii ad Gregorium, ejusdemque ad Caesariensis trigesima apparet. And cent.
4. col. 489. line 60. it is said, Ordinatio Ministrorum propria erat Episcopi,
etc.
ordaining of Priests not by popular election (as the Puritans See Mr.
Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 192. post med. and 225. ante med. and
196. ante med. And see the use of the Kirk of Scotland Printed at Rochel. 1596.
pretend) but by ordination from a Bishop, then, as now, given Hereof see Leo
Ep. 87. ad Epis. Africanos ante med. and Ep. 81. ad Dioscorum Alexand.
fasting, with the external sign of Cent. 4. col. 435. it is said, Recitat
Theodoretus rursus and alios ritus, etc. ut genibus flexis ad sacram mensam
assistere, and in frequenti populi conventu manus imponere, qui ritus inde
usque ab Apostolis ipsis in omnium locorum Ecclesiis diutissime haesit.
imposition of hands, conferring inward Touching the Doctors of this age,
Gregory Nyssen one of them (in orat. de S. Baptismate) says of the party
ordained, that in regard of outward form, he is the fame he was, having his
invisible soul changed into better by an invisible power and grace. And Ambrose
in 1 Cor. c. 12. says, In loco Ordinis officii Ecclesiastici pofitus gratiam
habet, qualisvis sit, non utique propriam, sed ordinis per efficaciam Spiritus
Sancti. And see further Ambrose (...) dignitate sacerdotali c. 4. and Austin in
quaest. vet. and nov. Test. quaest. 93. See this grace given in Orders
confessed by Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy lib. 5. sect. 77. page
230. prope finem, and by Mr. Bilson in his perpetual government of Christ's
Church page 109.
grace. In respect whereof it was reputed for S. Austin tom. 7. contra Epist.
Parmen. l. 2. c. 13. says of Baptism and Orders, Si enim utrumque Sacramentum
est, quod nemo dubitat (etc.) neutri Sacramento injuria facienda est. And
again, V^^umque enim Sacramentum est, and quadam consecratione utrumque homini
datur, illud cum Baptizatur, istud cum ordinatur. This thus comparing it with
Baptism, and referring the name of Sacrament to them both a like, argues that
St. Austin used the word Sacrament properly. And see further Austin de Baptismo
contra Don. l. 1. c. 1. Also St. Cyprian (who lived before this fourth century)
in sermon. de ablut. pedum, initio, making mention (Baptismi and aliorum
Sacramentorum, of Baptism and other Sacraments) reckons up withal in that
account, sacros Ordines, holy Orders. In so much as Chemnitius in his examen.
part. 2. page 7. b. post med. confesses this authors answerable judgment
thereof, and only evadeth in affirming this Sermon to be forged; an evasion
confuted heretofore in this Consideration number. 2. at 7.
a Sacrament, with further mention of In Pacianus Ep. 3. ad Simpronianum, the
Priest is termed Vnctus Sacerdos. See this Unction further mentioned in
Dionysius Areopagita de Eccles. Hierarch. c. 4. Eusebius hist. l. 10. c. 4.
initio, after Christophersons version. And in Cyprian sermon. de chrismate
initio, contemned therefore by Chemnitius examen. part. 2. page 247. a. ante
med. and in Gregory l. 4. in libros Regum cap. 5.
the Priests unction; with like mention also in general of Centur. 4. col. 504.
line 7. it is said, Meminit Athanasius Vestimentorum Ecclesiasticorum,
ornamentorumque and utensilium.
Ecclesiastical vestments, and in particular of The Albe is mentioned in cent.
4. col. 876. line 16. and in Chrysostom. ad Pop. hom. 60. and in Liturgia, and
in Matthew. hom. 83. And in Council. 4 Carth. can. 41. and in Hierom. l. 1. adv.
Pelag. c. 9.
the Albe, Cent. 4. Col. 835 line 48. and 51. and see this Stole further
mentioned in Concilio Aurelianensi can. 16. and in Council. Laodicen. can. 22.
and 23. and in Ambrose in orat. funebri de obitu fratris Satyri.
the stole, (called Orarium) the Vestment called That this Dalmatica was in
Cyprians time, see Mr. Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 269. post med. and
page 270. he allegeth Peter Martyr to be of the same mind; and see the same
Vestment mentioned by the Author Quaestionum veteris ac novi Testam. quaest.
46. extant in St. Augustins works tom. 4. ( that this Author lived before St.
Austin see there quaest. 44.)
Dalmatica, See Mr. Cartwright in Mr. Whitgifts defense page 268. and Mr.
Whitgift ibid. page 269. initio, alleging Theodoret hist. l. 2. c. 27. paulo
post initium.
the golden Cope, and the Bishops See this in Peter Martyr in his Epistles
annexed to his common places in English page 119. a. prope finem, and in Mr.
Whitgift his defense, etc. page 264. paulo ante med. and 268. circa med. and
page 269. paulo post med. he proves Cyprian to have also worn the same.
Pontifical plate or Myter, worn by St. John the Apostle. M. D. Reynolds
confessing further, that D. Reynolds in his conference page 598. post med, and
concerning Ecclesiastical Vestments see further Eusebius hist. l. 10. c. 4.
initio.
in the Liturgies which bear the names of Basil and Chrysostom, are (likewise)
mentioned the amice, the girdle, the chisible, and the fannel: with teaching
that Centur. 4. col. 616. line 1. it is alleged out of the Council of
Neocaesarea can. 1. Praesbyter si uxorem duxerit ab ordine suo illum deponi
debere. And see the same further confessed cent. 4. col. 486. line. 58. and
col. 303. line 18. and col. 704. line 21. and col. 1293. line 5. and 17. and
see heretofore in the beginning of this Consideration number. 1. at g. h. etc. and
heretofore in this Consideration number. 2. in the margent at f. g. h. i.
Priests might not marry after Orders taken; that Cent. 4. col. 847. line 47.
says, it was decreed, bigamis ordinationem ad sacerdotium non esse
conferendam, and see the like in Centur. 4. col. 303. line 10. and col. 877.
line 40. and col. 1293. line 25. also Master Fulk in his Retentive against
Bristow, and discovery of Sanders rock page 164. initio grants that he which
had had two Wives could not be a Priest in Hieroms time; and see this confessed
also for the Century or age before in cent. 3. col. 85. line 60. and col. 86.
line 7. and by Mr. Cartwright in his 2. reply part. 1. page 509. post med.
Bigamus (or he that has been twice married) may not be Priest, with Centur.
4. col. 497. line 50.
sumptuous Churches consecrated, and superstitious insolency in celebrating of
Mass, appointed to be said in no places but such as were hallowed by a Bishop;
with denial of Cent. 4. col. 549. line 28. it is said, Intempestive etiam sibi
Imperatores interdum judicium de causis fidei sumebant, quod Athanasius in
Constantio reprehendit, and Ambrosius in Valentiniano, etc. and Athanasius in
Epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes allegeth Osius saying to Constantius the
Emperor; desine quaeso and memineris te mortalem esse, reformida diem judicii,
serva te in illam diem purum, ne te mis^^as Ecclesiasticis, neque nobis in hoc
genere praecipe, sed potius ea a nobis disce: tibi Deus imperium, quae sunt
Ecclesiae nobis concredidit, etc. cave ne, quae sunt Ecclesiae ad te trahens,
magno crimini obnoxious fias, etc. And again in the same place; Quis enim videns
eum in decernendo principem se facere Episcoporum, and praesidere judiciis
Ecclesiasticis, non merito dicat illam eam ipsam abominationem desolationis
effe, quae a Daniele praedicta est. And see the like judgment of Ambrose
Epist. 32. post med. and 33. circa med. And Master Cartwright to this purpose
alleging the same in Mr. Whitgifts defense, etc. page 700. initio, and see the
like further in Zozomen hist. l. 6. c. 7. initio, and in Council. 3. Carth. can.
9.
authority to the Emperor in Ecclesiastical causes; with affirming Centur. 4.
col. 515. line 30. says, Hilarious minus commode de Petro Apostolo loquitur,
quod aedificationi Ecclesiae subjacet, and sit ejus fundamentum; and col. 557.
line 45. says, Hieronymus minus commode loquitur de Petro, quod Dominus super
cum fundaverit Ecclesiam. And see the like out of Nazianzen Cent. 4. col. 558.
line 54. and see further col. 1250. line 2. And see this more evidently as yet
in the much more ancient Fathers, namely Tertullian, Cyprian and Origin
heretofore confessed in this Consideration number. 10. initio, at 8, 9, 10.
the Church to be built upon Peter; and further teaching of See the assertion
of Peter's Primacy confessed in sundry Fathers of this age cent. 4. col. 556.
line 15. and col. 551. line 31. and col. 1074 line 13. and the same more fully
heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at 5, 6, 7, 12.
Peter's Primacy, and with deducing the same The Centurists Cent. 5. col. 1274.
line 32. charge Gelasius who lived anno 480. saying, Romanam Ecclesiam jure
divino contendit (Gelasius) ^ffe omnium primam, in Ep. ad Brut. etc. cap. 11.
And Gelasius in decret. cum 70. Episcopis initio says, Romana Ecclesia nullis
Synodicis constitutis caeteris Ecclesiis praelata est, sed Evangelica voce
Domini Primatum obtinuit, Tu es Petrus, inquiens, and super hanc petram, etc.
jure divino from Peter to his Brereley in his Omissions (etc.) of page 295.
says, Bucer in praeparatoriisad Concilium says, We plainly confess, that
among the ancient Fathers of the Church, the Roman Church obtained the Primacy
above others, as that which has the Chair of Peter, and whose Bishops almost
always have been accounted the Successors of Peter. And Osiander cent. 4.
page 294. circa med. speaking of the Council of Sardis decreeing appeals to
Rome, professes to deliver the then common received opinion and reason
thereof, saying, Inveteratus, communis, and de manu traditus fuit error, quod
Petrus fuerit Romae primus Episcopus, ideo hunc honorem habendum censuit
successori Petri, juxta communem opinionem, etc. And St. Chrysostom l. 2. de
Sacerdotio cap. 1. affirms, that Peter was the head of the Apostles, and
preferred before the other Apostles, saying further in the same place; why did
Christ shed his own blood, but to purchase those sheep, the charge whereof he
committed to Peter and his Successors? In like manner concerning St. Leo (being
one of those Fathers to whom Mr. Jewel in his public challenge appealed) the
Century writers Cent. 5. col. 1262. line 30. confess of him saying, Leo very
painfully goes about to prove that singular praeeminence was given to Peter
above the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacy of the Roman Church;
and see no less confessed of Leo by Master Reynolds in his conference page 42.
and 43. And see Mr. Fulk his testimony of the other Fathers like judgment
heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at 22. Also that Peter's Primacy was
thought to descend or come to the Bishop of Rome, is in like-manner yet further
affirmed by sundry other Fathers cited heretofore in this Consideration number.
16. in the margent at 45. in so much as from this Primacy thus attributed to
the Apostle, Damasus ( alleged by Theodoret hist. l. 5. cap. 10.) did ( as the
Censurists cent. 4. col. 351. line 37. do confess and reprove) commend his
Children the Bishops of the East for their due reverence done to the Apostolic
Sea; And Council. Melinitanum in Epist. ad Innocentium Papam (apud Aug. Ep. 92.)
says to Innocentius; Quia te Dominus gratiae suae praecipuo munere in Sede
Apostolica collocavit, etc. arbitramur authoritati Sanctitatis tuae de
sanctarum Scripturarum authoritate depromptae, facilius cos esse cessuros. And
see also the Centurists cent. 5. col. 775. line 13. where it is said, Galla
Placidia in Epist. ad Pulcheriam, and Valentinianus in Epist. ad Theodosium
nimium Romano Episcopo propter beatum Petrum and Vrbis amplitudinem tribuunt.
And see Mr. Fulks retentive, etc. page 285. fine.
successor the Bishop of Rome, whose Episcopal Sea the ancient Fathers
therefore termed Prosper de ingratis cap. 2. says, Seeds Roma Petri quae
Pastoralis honoris facta caput mundo. A saying so plain that Danaeus therefore
terms Prosper the Popes Parasite, and this his saying false, in respons. ad
Bellarm. part. 1. page 594. circa med. And Mr. Fulk in his retentive, etc. page
278. paulo ante med. terms Prosper (over partial to the Sea of Rome,) and S.
Austin in Psalm. contra partem Donati says, Numerate Sacerdotes ab ipsa Petri
sede, etc. ipsa est Petra quam non vincunt superbae inferorum portae. And see
the words of Leo heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at 45. and Petrus
Chrysologus in Epistola ad Eutichem says, Hortamur te, frater honorabilis, ut
his quae a beatissimo Papa Romanae Civitatis praescripta sunt, obedienter
attendas, quoniam beatus Petrus qui in propria sede vivit and praesidet,
praestat quaerentibus fidei veritatem.
Peter's Sea, and See the Centurists herein charging and reprehending the
ancient Father St. Cyprian heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at 87. and
Hierom. Ep. 57. to Pope Damasus says, Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens
Beatitudini tuae, in est, Cathedrae Petri, commune consocior; super illam
Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio, quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit,
profanus est, (etc.) Quicunque tecum non colligit, spargit. And Optatus lib. 2.
contra Donatist. says, Negari non potest scire te in Vrbe Roma, Petro primo
Cathedram Episcopalem collatam esse, in qua sederit omnium Ayostolorum caput
Petrus, unde and Cephas appellatus est, in qua una Cathedra unitas ab omnibus
servaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli singulas sibi quisque defenderent, ut jam
schismaticus and peccator esset, qui contra singularem Cathedram alteram
collocaret, ergo Cathedra unica est, etc. And again, Igitur de dotibus
supradictis cathedra est prima, quam probavimus per Petium nostram esse. And
St. Austin Epist. 162. prope initium says, In Ecclesia Romana semper
Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit Principatus. And see the saying of Julius alleged
heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at next before 79.
Peter's Chair, honoring the same above other with a peculiar See this
heretofore in this Consideration number. 10. at 14.
festival day. And decreeing even public The Council called Vasense can. 6.
says, In omnibus Missis, etc. and hoc nobis justum visum est, ut nomen Domini
Papae quicunque sedi Apostolicae praefuerit, in nostris Ecclesiis reciter^r.
This is acknowledged and reproved by the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 775. line 7.
This Council was so ancient that the second Canon thereof is cited under the
name of this Council in the 2. Council of Arles can. 28. as it is recited by
the Centurists cent. 4. col. 706. line 34.
prayer to be made for the Pope in Mass time: And lastly with sundry noted
examples of confessed See these examples heretofore in this Consideration number.
10. at 56, 57, 58. and so foreward till 79.
Primacy in the Bishop of Rome. In so much as certain Protestant writers (being
ashamed over grossly to dissemble in such and so manifest evidence of
particulars) doubt not therefore to deal plainly with us herein, affirming that
Helen Mother to Constantine was Centur. 4. col. 458. line 5.
a superstitious woman, and the visible Church in his time Apud Brereley tract.
2. cap. 1. sect. 4. post med. at q. r. s. t. in the text and margent Mr. Napper
in his treatise upon the Revelations page 43. versus finem, affirms that the
Popes Kingdom has had power over all Christians from the time of Pope
Silvester and the Emperor Constantine, for these thousand two hundred and
sixty years: and page 145. col. 3. fine he affirms, that from the time of
Constantine, until these our days, even 1260. years, the Pope and his Clergy
has possessed the outward visible Church of Christians. And page 68. versus
finem he affirms, that also between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the
Antichristian and Papistical reign began, reigning universally, and without any
debatable contradiction 1260. years, saying page 191. initio, Gods true Church
most certainly abiding so long latent, and invisible. And see the further
confession of others heretofore in this Consideration number. 23. at 4, 5, 6. next
after c. and at * next after f. In so much as Mr. William Leigh the Princes
Chaplain, in his great Britains great delivery, etc. Printed 1606. B. 2.
affirms accordingly, that the Popes ever since the first 300. years after
Christ (which contains the time now in question) have been Devils. And
Szegedine in loc. Commun. page 397. circa med. says of Silvester, Marcus,
Julius, etc. who were Bishops of Rome living in Constantines time, that they
were mitrati Episcopi, qu^ etsi non pessimi fuerunt, traditionibus tamen suis
ac decretis, Antichristo magno sedem paraverunt. And Brerely in his Omissions
(etc.) of page 297. says, As also Mr. Fulk in his Rejoinder to Bristow page 2.
circa med. says, I never meant to acknowledge the Emperors Constantine,
Jovinian, Valentinian, etc. to be such as I would wish for: for both in their
Religion and manners diverse things are found which I would wish had been more
agreeable to the word of God.
Antichristian and Papistical; whereupon we doubt not in behalf of our whole
Religion, to say now to our Adversaries, as did your Majesty to the Puritans in
defense of the Cross in Baptism used in Constantines time: In the sum of the
Conference before his Majesty with the Bishops and other of his Clergy page
69, post med.
Is it now come to that pass, that we shall appeach Constantine of
superstition? If then it were used, I see no reason but that still we may
continue it. And to your most excellent Majesty we only crave humble leave to
say, as did the Centurists in this case to Queen Elizabeth; The Centurists in
their Epistle Dedicatory to Queen Elizabeth prope finem set before their fourth
Century.
To your Majesty this labor seems due, as describing that age wherein
Constantine the great deserved best of the universal Church of Christ; for
which he has received eternal memory, And whereas (according to histories) he
was born in Britain, and of British Progeny, and governed that Kingdom with
great piety and virtue, he now returns to your Highness, representing to you
that State of the Church which in his time illustrated the whole world with the
splendor thereof. That man must needs have an iron heart, which is not moved
with the godly, succesful, and laudable proceedings of his Ancestors. Seeing
therefore your Majesty is adorned with all good learning, we doubt not, but
that Constantines Ecclesiastical history shall be to your Highness most
pleasant and grateful, etc.

24. Pu. Now good Reader, out of the foresaid Premises, that the ancient holy
Fathers are even by Protestants themselves confessed to stand for us, thou
can not but conclude, First, That either our Doctrines do not exclude
Salvation, or else that all those whom even Prostestants style Holy, and
Ancient, and acknowledge them to be Saints in Heaven, were incapable of
Salvation, which to affirm is no less than most temerarious and cruel
blasphemy, implying that our Blessed Savior had no true Church on earth when
Luther appeared, and that Gentiles were converted to Christian Religion from
Paganism and worship of false Gods, with no better effect than to be damned.

25. Secondly, That no man who has care of his soul will not judge, that for
interpreting Scripture, and in matters of Faith, more credit is to be given to
the Fathers, who were so near, yea who were of the Primitive Church, and holy,
mortifyed, and induced with all dispositions making them capable of Gods holy
impressions and inspirations, than to Luther, and other Novellists appearing so
lately for time, and for doctrine and manners teaching and living so carnally
and wickedly, as Protestants cannot dissemble it (as has been proved in the
first Consideration) and consequently more open to receive the suggestions of
Satan, than the motions of the Ho-Ghost.

26. Thirdly, that if Luther and his followers could not have been excused from
Heresy and Schism, if they had lived in those ancient days, and had opposed
the Doctrine, and forsaken the Communion of those Fathers; so neither can they
avoid the just imputation of Heresy and Schism, in opposing the Doctrine, and
abandoning the Communion of us Catholics, who are confessed to agree with the
Fathers, and ancient Christians of those times.

27. Fourthly, that in a word, we cannot but be safe, since our very
Adversaries confess that we agree with those (holy Fathers) whom they confess
to be saved.

28. Fifthly, that this our agreement with Antiquity, and of Antiquity with
Truth, is so manifest and forcible, that among all the chief points wherein
Protestants do disagree from us, there is not any one of moment, wherein diverse
chief learned Protestants do not agree with us against their pretended
Brethren; so that by the confession of all sides, if either Ancient Fathers or
modern Sectaries cannot be saved, we are secure.

And that this agreement of Protestants with us is truly affirmed by me, the
Reader will find evidently proved in the next Consideration.

THE THIRD CONSIDERATION.
Chief Protestants stand for us in the most important points of Religion
against their Protestant Brethren.
BRereley tract. 3. sect. 7. says, The sundry Articles of our Catholic Faith,
defended, and that most earnestly, against the other opinions of our learned
Adversaries, by sundry of their own no less learned Brethren, and all this by
either party, upon pretended certainty from the Scriptures, are many, known and
evident, as may appear by the seventy, and above, examples thereof, here
particularly alleged.

1 First, as concerning the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament to
the bodily mouth, it is affirmed by Luther, and Lutherans; and contradicted for
Popish, by Calvin and his followers.

Secondly, the Real presence not only of the efficacy of Christ's body, but
also of the body it self, after a wonderful and incomprehensible manner, to
the mouth of Faith, is affirmed by Calvin Institut. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 7. and
10. and 32. by Mr. Rider in his friendly Caveat etc. the third leaf a. circa
med. And by Mr D. Whittaker contra Duraeum page 169. by the confession of
Belgia in the English Harmony page 431. By Bucer in Script: Anglican. page 548.
post med. and 549. And by Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. sect.
67. page 174. circa medium, and page 177 post med. and vide Apolog. modest. ad
acta conventus quindecim Theolog. Torgae nuper habit. etc. page 19. and page
13. initio and 23 and 47. And contradicted as inclining to Popery (to omit the
known Doctrine of Oecolampadius and Zuinglius) whereof see Mr. Hooker l. 5.
sect. 67. page 174. ante med. and Lavat. in Hist. Sacramentar. page 4. and
Calvin in libello de Coen. Dom. versus finem, extant in Calvin's tract.
Theolog. page 12. a. and Schlusselburg in Theol. Calvinist. l. 1. fol. 78. b.
and 82. b. by Peter Martyr in his Epistles annexed to his common-places in
English page 107. b. Ep. 25. and ibidem page 98. a. and page 108. a. for which
Bucer in his Scripta Anglicana page 548. post med. and 549, ante and post
medium reproves Peter Martyr. Also by Aretius Sermon. 3. de Coena, by Szegedine
in loc. commun. page 182. at 12. and 15. and by our English Puritans in their
Christian letter to M. R. Hooker page 35. paulo post medium, and by certain
French Protestants mentioned by Hospinian in hist. Sacramt. par. altera fol.
344. a. post. med. and b. initio. And by others mentioned by Mr. Rogers in his
Catholic Doctrine etc. page 176. circa med. And by Ludevicus Alemannus in
positionibus apud Lugdunenses editis Anno 1566. who said hereof, neque etiam
per fidem, seu incomprehensibili modo, ut vocant, quia hoc totum imaginarium,
and repugnat appertissime Dei Verbo: of whose opinion see further Beza Epist. 5.

Thirdly, that Sacraments do not only signify, but also confer Grace, is
affirmed by Osiander in Enchirid. Controversiarum quas Augustanae Confess.
Theol. habent cum Calvinianis page 272 post medium, and in Epitom. Histor.
Eccles. etc. centur. 16 page 527.529.531. and 538. by Jacob. Andraeas in Epit.
Colloquii Montisbelgar. page 58. prope initium, and page 42, initio, and by M.
D. Bilson in his true difference etc. part. 4. page 539. ante med. and 592.
post medium, and 368, post medium. by Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity
l. 5. sect. 57. page 127, and 128. and by M. D. Whittaker contra Duraeum l. 8.
page 662. paulo ante medium. and 664. post medium, and Melancthon in c. 4. Ep.
ad Romans after the first Edition says, Repudienda est Zuinglii opinio, qui
tantum civili modo judicat de signis, scilicet Sacramenta tantum notas esse
professionis etc. apud Ulembergium causa 20. page, 697. And contradicted for
Popish, by the Survey of the book of Common prayer, page 103 and 104. by Mr.
Willet in his Synopsis page 415 ante med. and he reproves some Protestants
herein in his meditation upon the 122 Psalm page 92 ante med. And by Mr. Fulk
against Purgatory page 35, and many others.

Fourthly, that the Church must continue visible, is affirmed by Melancthon and
sundry others, alleged in Brerely tract. 2, c. 2. sect. 1 post medium at d. e.
f. g. in the margent, where at d. Bartholomaeus Kekermannus in System. Theolog.
page 408. initio, says, Novi Testamenti Ecclesia ratione notarum et formae
externae, semper debet esse sensibilis seu conspicua, ut nimirum reliquae
Gentes, quae adhuc extra Ecclesiam sunt, scire possint cuinam Ecclesiae sese
debeant aggregare, id quod de Ecclesia Novi Testamenti Esaias c. 61. ab initio
magnific is verbis praedixit. And Hiperius in Method. Theolog. page 552. prope
finem says, Profecto nisi signa haec extarent, ac vera Ecclesia sensibus
deprehenderetur, qui scire possit homo cuinam coetui salutis consequendae ergo
adhaerendum sibi foret. And Peter Martyr in his Epistles annexed to his
Common-places in English page 153. a. circa medium, reporting certain points
wherein he professes to agree with us Catholics, says, We also do not
appoint an invisible Church, but do define Congregations, unto which the
faithful may know that they may safely adjoyn themselves: affirming further a
little there before, that this opinion is (says he) common with us to
Catholics. Ibid. at e. M. Henoch Clapham, in his sovereign remedy against
Schism page 18, after many proofs alleged by him from the Scriptures and
otherwise, concludes saying: Not only all Ancients ever hold the Churches ever
vifibility, but also all learned men of our age. Also Mr Field l. 1. of the
Church, c. 10. page 19. ante med. says: The persons of them of whom the Church
consists, are visible, their profession known, even to the profane and
wicked of the world, and in this sort the Church cannot be invisible etc. (with
much more very plainly in that behalf.) And page 21. circa medium, he further
says, It is true that Bellarmine labors in vain, in proving that there is
and allwaies has been, a visible Church, and that not consisting of some few
scattered Christians without order of Ministry, or use of Sacraments, for all
this we do most willingly yield unto, howsoever perhaps some few have been of
opinion, that etc. In like full manner is the Churches visibility affirmed from
the Scriptures, as well by Melancthon in locis commu. edit. 1561. c. de
Ecclesia, page 354. initio saying, Quotiescunque de Ecclesia cogitamus etc.
ibidem in Brereley at 6.
Whenever we think of the Church, let us behold the company of such men as
are gathered together, which is the visible Church: neither let us dream that
the Elect of God are to be found in any other place than in this visible
Society, etc. Neither let us imagine of any other visible Church etc. But let us
know that the Ministry of the Gospel must be public etc. And having then
alleged sundry Texts of Scripture in behalf of the Churches ever visibility, he
concludes saying, Hi and similes loci non de Idea Platonica, sed de visibili
Ecclesia loquuntur. And see there page 360. post med. And see Melancthon
further in Praefat. l. corp. Doctrinae Christianae in Ecclesi is Saxon. and
Misnisis Elector is Saxon. impress. Lip. Anno 1561. And in Council. Theolog.
part. 1. page 512. and part. 2. page 201. and 394. As also by D. Humfrey in
Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 240. where he says, Declaratum est, nos
Ecclesiam non in aere collocare, sed in terra, nos Ecclesiam confiteri esse
oppidum supra montem positum, quod abscondi non potest, Matthew. 5. montem
excelsum Domus Dei, cunctis collibus editiorem, ad quem omnes Gentes confluent,
Esaias 2. etc. cur ergo anxie and curiose probant, quod est a nobis nunquam
negatum etc? (And ibidem page 241. initio he says) visibilis est propter
exercitia pietatis, quae videntur ab omnibus in Ecclesia, nam dum ministri
docent, alii discunt, illi Sacramenta administrant, hi communicant etc. qui
ista non videt, talpa est caecior, visibilis est, quia notae sunt insignes and
conspicuae etc. and page 242. initio, he says, non enim clancularii secessus
etc. convocationes sunt Christianae. Secret aboads are not the Christian
convocation etc. because this communion of Saints is an open testification of
Christianity. ibid. in Brerely at b. And page 281. fine, affirms concerns
the Church militant (which is the only point in question) Oportere Ecclesiam
esse conspicuam, conclusionem esse clarissimam. And ibidem in Brerely under 6.
fine, Justus Molitor in his Treatise de Ecclesia militante etc. contra
Bellarmin. page 36. sect. 4. says, Haec invisibilis Ecclesia electorum in illa
nempe visibili Ecclesia latet, and extra^eam nec inveniri potest, sicut recte
dicitur extra Ecclesiam (nempe visibilem) non est salus etc. And see further
there, page 38. sect. 10. Ibidem in Brereley at 5. Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 1.
sect. 4 says, Verum quia nunc de visibili Ecclesia disserere propositum est,
discamus vel uno matris elogio, quam utilis sit nobis ejus cognitio, imo
necessaria, quando non alius est in vitam ingressus, nisi nos ipsa concipiat
utero, nisi pareat, nisi (etc.) denique sub custodia and gubernatione sua nos
tueatur, donec exuti carne mortali etc. Add quod extra ejus gremium nulla est
speranda peccatorum remissio. Ibidem in Brereley at f. Melancthon in concill.
Theol. part. 2 says, Necesse est fateri esse visibilem Ecclesiam etc. quo
spectat haec portentosa oration, quae negat esse ullam visibilem Ecclesiam? page
393. fine, and 394 initio. Lastly ibidem in Brereley at g. M. Henoch Clapham in
his Sovereign Remedy against Schism page 17. post medium, says: contrary to
all Scriptures they do affirm that there has been no visibility of the Church
for former hundred of years, which position is against Psalm 72.3.17 Esaias
59.21. Matt. 2.24.26. Whereupon M. Henoch Clapham in his Sovereign Remedy
against Schism page 23. post medium says, Our Savior forbids going out unto
such desert and corner-Gospells Mat. 24.23, 24, 26. and St. Augustine tom. 4.
quaest. Evang. l. 1 quaest. 38 says accordingly: Constituta ergo authoritate
Ecclesiae per orbem terrarum clara atque manifesta, consequenter Discipulos
admonet, and qui in eum credere voluerint, ne schismaticis atque haereticis
credant: unumquodque enim schisma and unaquaeque haeresis aut locum suum habet
in orb terrarum partem aliquam retinens, aut obscuris atque occultis
conventiculis curiositatem hominum decipit. Ad quod pertinet quod ait, Si quis
vobis dixerit, ecce hic est Christus aut illic, quod significat terrarum parts
and provinciarum, aut in penetralibus, aut in deserto, quod significat obscura
and occulta conventicula haereticorum etc. And see him further contra Faustum
Manich. l. 13. c. 13. Notwithstanding this Doctrine is contradicted for Popish
by M. D. Fulk in the Tower-Disputation with Edm. Camp. the second days
Conference, by M. Willet in his Synopsis page 48 circa medium, and many others.

Fifthly, as concerning the necessitity of good works to salvation it is
affirmed by M. Willet in his Tetrastylon Papismi page 90. fine, and by M. Fulk
against the Rhemish Testament in 2 Pet. 2. sect. 3. fol. 444. a. post med. and
by Mr. Whitaker against M. Reynolds page 350 post med. and contradicted for new
Papistry as pernicious as the old, by Illyricus in Praefat. ad Romans and many
others; Whereof see Colloquium Altembergense fol. 210. a. and 231. b. and 324.
a. and 382. b. fine. and Acta Colloquii Aldeburgensis page 5. and 7. and 151.
initio, and in Brereley tra. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subdivis. 4. at k, l, m, o, p.

6 Sixthly, concerning Evangelicall Counsels, viz. that a man may do more than
(de facto) he is commanded, is affirmed for most clear by M. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity l. 3. sect. 8. page 140. post med. and l. 2. page 103.
and 122. post medium, by D. Covell in his defense of M. Hooker art. 8. page 49,
50, 51, 52. by Luther in assertionibus art. 30. and others. And contradicted
for Popish by Mr. Willet (particularly reproving M. Hooker for this and other
like Catholic Opinions) in his meditations upon Psalm 122. page 91. post med.
By Mr. Perkins in his Reformed Catholic page 241. and many others.

7 Seventhly, as concerning the Doctrine of Universality of Grace, and that
Christ died for all, is affirmed by Zuinglius in l. Epistol. Oecolampadii and
Zuinglii l. 1. page 274. circa med. By Hemingius Enchirid. Class. 3. page 220,
221. and l. de universali Gratia, by Hiperius in Method. Theolog. l. 2. page
431, 435, 436. by Snecanus in Method. descrip. 430. by Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. page 104. by Bullinger upon the Apocalypse in
English fol. 79. b^initio. by Mr. Gibbons in his Questions upon Gensis page
108. circa med. by Mr. Smith in his Treatise of prayer in general for all
mankind etc. and (besides the Lutherans) by very many other learned Calvinists,
alleged by Huberus in his Theses etc. page 159, and 163, and 164, and 166, and
167, and 168. And contradicted for popish by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis of Anno
1600, page 789, circa medium, and 808, post initium. And by Beza, Calvin, Knox
etc. in whole Treatises.

8 Eighthly, that God does permit or suffer sin, and not will or decree the
same, is affirmed by the Book entitled Corpus Doctrinae etc. printed 1561, in
folio. page 618. fine, and by Jacobus Andraeas in epit. Colloquii Montisbelgar.
page 47, 49, and 53. By Hemingius l. de universali Gratia, and almost all the
Lutherans, and (of the Calvinists) by Amandus Polanus in partition. Theolog. l.
1. page 75, 76. and 10, 11, 12. by Snecanus in Method. descript. page 621, 622,
and 645, 650. by Bullinger in his Decads Englished, page 492, 493, 494. by
Castalio in l. ad Calvinum de Praedestinat. by Melancthon in loc. commun. de
causa peccati and contingent. and in libro de Consil. Theolog. part. 2. page
111, and 112. by M. Gibbons in his questions upon Genesis page 108. circa med.
And contradicted for Popish, by Calvin Institut. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 3, 4, and 5.
and l. 1. c. 18. sect. 1. and l. 3. c. 23. sect. 8. By D. Baro in his Treatise
of Gods Providence c. 4. paulo ante med. by Aretius loc. commun. loc. 40. de
induratione page 129. by M. Willet in his Synopsis page 562. fine, 563, ante
med. and many others.

9 Ninthly, that men are not certain of their election, and that he, who is
once in state of Grace, may finally fall, is affirmed by their public
confessions cited in the Harmony etc. page 224, post medium, and 80. paulo ante
med. and 230. post medium, and 233. fine, by Chemnitius Examen part. 2. page
193. a. post medium, and part. 1. page 190, b. initio, by Musculus loc. commun.
page 29. circa medium, by Lobechius in disput. Theolog. page 317, 318. by
Haffenrefferus in loc. Theolog. etc. page 184, 188, and 331. by Rungius in
disput. etc. ex Epist. ad Corinth. part. 1. these. 5. by Gesnerus in disput. pro
libro concord. page 150, 156, 157, 650. by Jacobus Andraeas in Epitom. Colloq.
Montisbelgar. page 47, 61. by M. D. Overell Dean of Paul's in his Speech set
down in the Conference before his Majesty, page 42. circa med. and
contradicted for Popish by M. Perkins in his Reformed Catholic page 39, and
55. by Calvin, Beza etc.

10 Tenthly, that in case of Divorce upon Adultery, the innocent party may not
marry again, was some few years since preached openly at Paul's Cross, by D.
Dove, and since defended publicly in the University by D. Howson in tertia
thesi, printed Anno 1602. and is the constant Doctrine of many others. And is
yet contradicted for Popish by M. Fulk against the Remish Testament, fol. 38.
a. circa med. and many others

11 Eleventhly, that to Children of the Faithful dying unbaptized, salvation
is not promised, is affirmed by Vrbanus Regius in 1. part. operum in Catech.
min. fol. 105. by Hoffmannus in Commentar. de poenitent. l. 3. c. 4. fol. 229.
a.b. by Sarcerius in loc. commun. fol. 238, 239, 240. by the Confession of
Ausberg in the Harmony page 403. fine. and by Mr. Bilson in his true
difference etc. part. 4. page 368. ante medium, and 369. ante med. and see the
Sum of the Conference before his Majesty page 16. And contradicted for Popish
particularly in the Protestants, by the Survey of the book of common prayer,
page 105. and by Mr. Willet in his meditation upon Psalm 122. page 92. ante
medium, and vulgarly by Beza, Calvin etc.

12 Twelfthly, Freewill is affirmed by sundry Protestants mentioned in M. Fox
his Acts and Monuments page 1533. b. paulo post medium, and page 1605. b. fine,
also by Snecanus and Hemingius, witness whereof M. Willet in his Synopsis
printed Anno 1600. page 808. post initium, and 810. post initium, and by sundry
others, Brereley in his Omissions of page 688 lin. 12.
whereof see Benedict Morgensterne in tract. de Eccles. page 6. and
Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinist. l. 2. fol. 86. b. And is contradicted for
Popish by Calvin, Beza etc.

13 Thirteenthly, that in regard of Christ's Passion and promise, our good works
proceeding from Faith, are meritorious or deserving, affirmed by their public
Confessions in the Harmony etc. page 495. ante medium, and page 273, circa
medium, by Spangeburge in Margarit. Theol. page 48, and 50. post medium, by
Melancthon in loc. commun. etc. de bonis operibus circa med. And see M. Hooker
l. 5. Eccles. polit. sect. 72. page 208. fine. Contradicted for Popish by
Calvin, Beza etc. Brereniely his Omissions of page 688. lin 19.
And M. Hooker herein is namely contradicted by certain English Protestants in
their Christian Letter to that reverend man Mr. Hooker, printed 1599, page 12.

14 Fourteenthly, temporal punishment reserved by God in Justice for sin
remitted, is affirmed by John Knox in his answer against the Adversaries of
Gods Predestination, page 215, 216, 217. by Gasper Olevianus in Symbolum page
8. ante med. and by the public confessions of Protestants in the Harmony etc.
page 229, paulo ante medium, and page 235. circa et post medium, and 508.
initio. Contradicted as inclinining to Purgatory, by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis
page 514. by Calvin, Beza etc.

15 Fifteenthly, (were this place capable thereof) we could likewise allege at
large diverse other points, defended in like manner from the Scriptures by
sundry of our learned Adversaries, as namely Peter's Primacy, by Mr. Whittgift
in his defense etc. page 373. initio and circa med. and 70. initio, and 394,
and 375. and by Calvin alleged by Mr. Whitgift ubi supra page 373, ante medium,
and 469, ante med. and by Musculus alleged ibidem page 66. post medium, and
page 68. and by Mr. Bridges Bishop of Oxford in his defense of the Government
etc. page 445, and 446.

16 Sixteenthly, the impugning of the Civil Magistrates headship, though but
of a particular Church, by the Century-Writers, Praefat. Centur. 7. page 11,
ante medium, where it is said of the Civil Magistrates, Non sunt Capita
Ecclesiae, quia ipsis non competit iste Primatus, and vide page 13. and by Mr.
Cartwright in Mr. Whitgift's defense page 650, and 181, and 301, and 694, and
695. and in his second Reply part. 1. page 414. where he allegeth Calvin to
that purpose. And see further there page 413, and 415, and 418. And by Calvin,
in the Survey of the Holy pretended Discipline etc. of Mr. Bancroft, page 251,
fine, and by Viretus alleged there, page 252, and 253, and 254. and by Martin
Chemnitius who in Epist. ad Electorem Brandenburg. says of our late Q.
Elizabeth; Foemineo and a saeculis inaudito fastu se Papissam and caput
Ecclesiae fecit.

17 Intercession of Angels, by Mr. D. Covell in his answer to Mr. John Burges,
page 90, circa medium, and by Peter Martyr alleged fully there page 91, ante
med. and by the Communion book in K. Edward's time printed 1549. fol. 117. a.
circa med. and by Mr. Hooker l. 5. sect. 23. page 52, and 53. and by Calvin
Institut. l. 1. c. 14. sect. 6 and 7. and l. 3. c. 20, sect. 23. and by
Melancthon in Apol. Confess. August. fol. 179. b. post med.

18 Intercession of Saints, by Latimer Acts and Monuments page 1312. a. initio,
art. 6. and page 1315. a. paulo ante med. and by Oecolampadius ad orat. 1.
Chrysostomi de Iuventio and Maximo Martyribus; and see this only point of
Intercession impugned by M. Whitaker contra Duraeum page 793, circa med.

19 Invocation of Saints, by Luther in Epist. ad Georgium Spalatinum, and also
in purgatione quorundam articulorum; where he says, De intercessione Divorum,
cum tota Ecclesia Christiana sentio, and judico Sanctos a nobis honorandos esse
atque invocandos; by Oecolampadius in orat. 1. Chrysostom. de Iuventio. and
Maximo, by Thomas Bilney a Protestant Martyr, Acts and Monuments page 462. b.
post med. art. 6. by Latimer, acts and Monuments page 1312. a. ante medium, and
b. paulo ante medium, and page 1315. a. paulo ante med. and by certain
Protestants in Polonia, whereof see Hafferenferus in his loc. Theolog. l. 3.
stat. 4. loc. 5. page 463. ante and circa med.

20 Vowed Chastity, by Augustine Marloret in 1. Tim. c. 5. verse 11. page 375.
a. fine, and Mr. R. Alison and others alleged in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 4.
subdivis. 9. in the Margent at 13 and 14. where at 14. it is said, The
Protestant Author of the book entitled, Antichristus, sive prognostica finis
Mundi, page 148. fine, and 149. says, Quod Lutherus hanc primam fidem de fide
justificante intelligit, and non de fide pudicitiae, id plane coactum est etc.
loquttur Apostolus de fide seu voto officii etc. quia autem Paulus vitio vertit
quod nubere postea voluerint, clarissimum est hanc conditionem in voto
intercessisse etc. and Mr. Alison in his Confutation of Brownism page 71.
affirms likewise of these Widows, that before God and his Church they had
vowed not to marry. And thus (says he) is this place expounded by Bullinger,
Claudius, Guilliam, and others, Brereley in his Omissions of page 689. lin. 27.
and by Mr. Buddle in his discourse of Evangelicall Fasts page 19, circa
medium, and 20, ante and post med.

21 Voluntary poverty, Chastity; and Obedience, by Mr. D. Covell, in his
defense of Mr. Hooker art 8. page 52. fine, and 51. paulo post med. and for
voluntary poverty, see Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity, l. 2. page
103, paulo post medium, alleged in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 4. subdivis. 9, at
11. where in the Text, Mr. Hooker in the place cited, acknowlegeth Ananias his
solemn Vow unto God, which strictly bound him to the giving of his Posessions
to the Churches use: And ibidem in Brereley in the margent at 11, it is said,
and Mr. Fenton in his Sermon of Simony printed 1604. page 46. fine, says,
Albeit we had liberty before to use Ecclesiastical Livings as mere Temporalls,
yet after these Vows our case is the very same with that of Ananias Acts 5.2.
etc. Brereley in his Omissions of page 689. lin. 31.
See also Mr. Buddle in his discourse of Evangelicall Fasts page 19. paulo post
med. and page 20. paulo ante med.

22 Prayer for the Dead, both by Luther and Urbanus Regius, Test Urbano Regio
in prima part operum in formula caute loquendi cap. de Sanctorum cultu. And
see Urbanus Regius in loc. commun. cap. 19. and 18. and by the Communion-book
in K. Edward's time, printed 1549. fol. 116. a. circa and post med. and 149. b.
post med. and by William Thorp Acts and Monum. page 149. a. paulo post initium,
and by Martin Bucer in his Scripta Anglicana page 450. circa med. Brereley in
his Om^ssions of page 690. lin. 3.
and by Zuinglius tom. 1. in explan. art. 90. fol. 53. a. ante med. and circa
med. and in explan. art. 60. fol. 104 post med. Brereley in his addition of
Errors and Omissions of page 690. lin. 3.
and by Melancthon in Apolog. Confess. August. fol. 216. b. and 217. a. initio.

23 Purgatory, by Luther tom. 1. Wittemberg. in resolut. de indulgentiis,
conclus. 15. fol. 112. a. prope finem. and in Disput. Lipsica cum Eckio, and by
Latimer Act. mon. page 1313. a. paulo ante med. and b. ante med. and. page
1315. b. paulo ante med.

24 Lymbus patrum, by John Lascicius in the book entitled, de Russorum,
Muscovitarum, and Tartarorum Religione page 122. and 123. and by Oecolampadius
in libro Epistolarum Zuinglii and Oecolampadii 1. page 19. and by Zuinglius
ibidem l. 3. page 560. and 561. and by Peter Martyr in his common places in
English, part. 2. c. 8. page 621. a. ante and circa med. and part. 3. c. 16.
page 377. a. versus finem, and page 378. b. circa med. and 379. a. initio, and
by Bullinger in his Decades, fol. 66. a. and also in Luc. 16. alleged in Mr.
Bilson's Survey of Christ's suffering, page 656. post med.

25 Images in the Church, though impugned by Mr. Fulk as against the
Commandments l. against the Rhemish Testament in 1. ep. Joan. c. 1. fol. 456.
b. ante med. and fine, and in his defense of the English Translations, c. 3.
page 119. initio: are yet defended by Luther and Brentius, test Beza in
respons. ad Acta Colloquii Montisbelgar. part. altera in praefat. page 12. post
med. and vide ibid. page 30. ante and post med. by Jacobus Andraeas in epitom.
Colloquii Montisbelgar. page 39. fine, by Chemnitius in his Examen part. 4.
page 14. a. circa med. and page 33. b. paulo post med. and by Bachmannus in
Centur. exercitat. Theolog. page 270. fine, and Centur. 1. page 53. post med.

26 Worshipping of Images, by Thomas Bilney a Protestant Martyr, Act. mon. 462.
b. art. 7. and 464. b. art. 5. and by certain Protestants of Germany, test
Beza in his respons. ad Acta Colloquii Montisbelga^^ part. altera page 23. post
med.

27 Reverence and bowing at the name of Jesus, (which is the same to the Ear,
that the Image is to the eye, and being lawful at, or to the said name,
proves the like lawfullness thereof at, or before his Image) is affirmed by
the late Queens Injunctions Art. 52. and by Mr. Leonard Wright, in his Summons
for Sleepers, page 30. by Musculus in loc. Commun. page 59. fine, by Zanchius
in Epist. Pauli ad Philip. Colloss. Thessal. in Phillip. c. 2. v. 10. fol. 123.
Col. 2. by Mr. Whitgift in his defense etc. page 742.

28 That the good works of one may help another, by Melancthon in loc. commun.
de Eucharistico Sacrificio ante medium, and in his Edition of Anno, 1561. page
425. initio, and by the Harmony of Confessions page 298. ante medium.

28 The power of Priests, not only to pronounce, but to give remission of
Sins, by sundry Protestants alleged in Brereley tract. 3. sect. 1. in the
margent at y. where it is said, Lobechius, Dr. and Professor in the University
of Rostock in disput. Theol. page 301. answers our Adversaries common
objection, saying, Est quidem solius Dei a peccatis absolvere, sed ita, ut hoc
faciat alias immediate (etc.) alias mediate per suos Mini^ros, condonando nobis
culpam, (etc.) Errant ergo Calviniani, qui, (etc.) absolutioni Ministri Verbi
illam efficaciam detrahunt (etc.) contendentes Ministrum absolvere tantum ut
internuntium, etc. In like plain manner is our Adversaries objection of God
only forgiving sin, and their denial thereupon of that power to
Ecclesiastical Ministers, no less plainly further answered and refelled by
sundry other Protestants, as namely by Andreas Althamerus in Conciliat. locorum
Scripturae pugnantium, etc. loc. 194. fol. 21. a. b. and by Jacobus Helbrunerus
in Swenckfeldio Calvinism. page 55. Insomuch as Absolution is (affirmed to be)
properly a Sacrament by Melancthon in Apolog. confess. August. Art. 13. de
numero and usu Sacramentorum fol. 161. b. initio, by Spangeburg (in his
Margarita Theologica page 116. and 117) by Andreas Althamerus in conciliat.
locorum Scripturae pugnam, (etc.) loc. 191. fol. 211. b. initio, and loc 195.
fol. 219. b. and by Sarcerius in loc commun. tom. 1. de potest. Ecclesiae fol.
305. b. post medium. Also the power of Priests to forgive sins is affirmed by
the English Communion-book in the visitation of the sick, where the Priest
says (And by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins
etc.) for which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in their Abridgement page 72.
fine, and the Survey of the book of Common prayer page 154 and 155. do expressly
reprove therein the said Communion-Book.

30 Confession of sins to a Priest, heretofore in the second Consideration number.
19. circa finem.

31 Distinction of Mortal and venial sin in one and the same person (and
therefore not from the diversity of persons, but from the disparity of the
sins) affirmed by Melancthon in Concill. Theol. page 546. initio, and in loc.
commun. de discrimine peccati mortalis, ac venialis. and see also his latter
Edition of 1561. page 346. initio, and 350. fine, and 345 circa med. and see
Corpus Doctrinae, etc. printed in folio 1561. page 525. post med. and page 488.
and by Adamus Francisci, in his Margarita Theologica page 469. and by
Bachmannus in Centur. Exercit. Theol. page 663. and 664. and by Mr. Jacob in
his defense of the Ministry and Church of England page 88. prope initium, by
Musculus in loc commun. page 29. circa med. also by the Protestants, alleged in
the Acts of the Disputation in the Council of the Empire holden at
Ragenspurge, etc. set forth by Martin Bucer and Melan^^hon, Englished and
printed 1542. page 165. circa med. by Hemingius in Enchirid. page 103. fine,
printed Londini 1577. by the Harmony of Confessions page 80. and 81. circa med.
and 290. post med. and 82. prope initium, and by Jacobus Andraeas alleged in
Beza's respons. ad Acta Colloquii Montisbelgar. page 68. fine, 69. initio, and
70. paulo ante med. Insomuch as he is therefore specially reprehended by Beza
in respons. ad Acta Colloquii Montisbelgar. part. 1. in praefat. page 23. fine.
and 24. paulo ante med.

32 The indifferency of Communion under one or both kinds, by Luther alleged in
Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 14. at next after f. in the margent at fourthly,
where it is said: Fourthly as concerning the receiving under one or both kinds,
Luther, in Epist. ad Bohemos, says thereof: Quamvis pulchrum quidem esset
utraque specie in Eucharistia uti, and Christus hac in re nihil tanquam
necessarium praecepit, praestaret tamen pacem (etc) sectari, quam de speciebus
contendere, and Luther, de utraque specie Sacramenti, says: Si veneris ad
locum ubi tantum una species ministratur; cum aliis una tantum specie utere
(etc) Brereley tract. 2. c. 2* sect. 5. initio in the margent at x.
And the like indifferency hereof is affirmed by Melancthon in Centur. Epist.
Theologic. page 252. initio, and see the Protestant Writers, affirming in plain
terms the indifferency of Communion under one or both kinds, alleged, and by
Mr. Jewel not denied in his Reply, page 110. and 106.

33 Sacrifice of the New Testament, according to the Order of Melchisedech, by
Andraeas Crastovius in libro de opificio Miss^e l. 1. page 28. paulo post
medium, and 119. paulo ante med. and 51. post med. and 58. paulo post med. and
122. ante med. and 171. and see Mr. Jewel in his Reply page 7. initio.

34 That the first motions of our Concupiscence without our consent thereto,
are not sin, by Zegedine in loc. commun. printed Basileae, 1588. page 229. post
med. where he says, Peccatum tribus gradibus exurgit, and absolvitur,
suggestione, delectatione, and consensione plena etc. qui non consentit, sed
delectationi repugnat, and tentationi, immo, delectationem respuit, peccati
impuritate non inficitur, etc. contradicted by Keckermannus in System.
Theologic. page 275. post medium.

35 That the Commandments are not impossible, by Sebastian Castalio de
perfect. obed. leg. Dei (and he therein namely contradicted by Mr. Reynolds in
his second conclusion annexed to his Conference page 697. ante medium,) also by
Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 2. page 101. prope finem, where he
says distributively, at the least all great and grievous actual offenses, as
they offer themselves one by one, both may and ought to be avoided (wherein he
is namely reprehended by certain English Protestants in their Christian Letter
to that Reverend man Mr. R. Hooker page 15. circa med. and by Mr. Willet in his
Meditation on Psalm. 122. printed 1603. page 91. post medium,) and see Mr.
Hooker's said Saying, yet affirmed by Mr. D. Covell in his defense of Mr.
Hooker art. 7. page 54. and see this like possibillity now in the time of the
Gospel, further affirmed by Mr. Perkins in his Reformed Catholic page 26.
fine, and page 51. prope finem and 52. ante med.

36 That no professed Widow might be such, as had before been Bigama, or twice
married, by Marloret in 1. Tim. c. 5. verse 9. page 374. post med. and by
Calvin in omnes Pauli Epistolas in 1. Tim. 5.9. page 778. circa med. and see
Calvin's words so understood by Mr. Bancroft in his Survey, etc. page 218.
circa and post med. who in the same place allegeth Beza, and Mr. Cartwright, as
herein contrary to Calvin.

37 Transubstantiation, affirmed by Luther after his revolt from our Church,
test Hospiniano in Histor. Sacramentar. part. alter a page 12. circa med. and
see Melancthon in Council. Theolog. part. 1. page 584. initio, affirmed also by
D. Barnes (one of Mr. Fox's Martyrs) who in his Protestation at his death said
expressly, that the Sacrament after the words spoken by the Priest does change
the substance of Bread and Wine into the very Body and Blood of Christ; which
his Protestation being then published by a professed Gospeller of that time,
and then also answered unto by D. Standish in his book then printed in octavo
in English, the said words are yet extant therein, though fraudelently since
omitted by Mr. Fox, who acts monument. page 610. 611, 612. following the said
Copy verbatim, and coming by course to those very words, does purposely
overpass them: See also Transubstantiation believed by the Lord Cobham, act.
mon. page 272. a. and by John Husse act monum. page 209. a. fine and b. initio,
and paulo post med. and page 197. b. fine.

38 That Christ is God of God, and has his substance of his Father, is
affirmed by Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. sub- 13. sect. 1. in the margent
at s.
Zegedine in loc. com. page 634. paulo post med. where he says directly
Dicendum est, Filium eam ipsum Deitatem quae est Patris habere, non ex sese,
sed ex Patre. Also Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy l. 5. page 113.
initio, says, The Father alone is originally that Diety which Christ orginally
is not. And see him further page 106. fine, and 113. ante med. which his
Assertion, Mr. D. Covell in his defense of Mr. Hooker page 16. and 17.
specially defends, affirming further page 17. initio, That Christ had
received his substance by the gift of eternal Generation, and page 18. ante
med. That Christ is God by being of God, light by issuing out of light: and
more plainly yet ibidem page 121. which his Doctrine is reproved by the
Puritans in their Christian Letter, etc. page 6 ante med. and by Mr. Willet in
his meditation upon Psalm 122. printed 1603. page 91. Also Mr. Fox in Apoc.
page 474. initio, says, Christus Deus ex Deo, and Lobehius in disput. 30.
Theolog page 49. says, Filius non solum id quo Filius dicitur habet a Patre,
veram etiam suam essentiam. Solus enim Pater vitam seu essentiam habet a
seipso, and Mr. D. Dove in his Confutation of Athism page 37. fine, says, God
the Father from everlasting understanding himself, begat his Son, coeternall
with himself, etc. and the Confession of Belgia in the Harmony, etc. page 34.
initio, says, We believe that Christ, in respect of his Divine nature, is the
only Son of God, and Melancthon in loc. commun. of Anno 1561. page 24. fine,
says, Pater aeternus sese intuens, gignit cogitationem sui quae est imago
ipsius, dicitur (...), quia cogitatione generatur, and ibidem page 25. initio,
he says, Secunda persona Filius dicitur, quia de substantia Patris natus est.
Brereley ibidem in the margent at n. o. p. q.
This Doctrine is impugned by M. Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8. page 121. circa
med. where he says, Utcunque patres illi (Niceni) Christum esse dixerunt Deum
de Deo, tamen firmissime tenendum esse confirmat Calvinus; Christum ex sese
habere ut Deus sit, nisi Christum volumus sua Divinitate spoliare, and see
Calvin. Institut. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 23. where he says, Quomodo autem Creator
qui omnibus esse dat, non erit ex seipso, sed essentiam aliunde mutuabitur? and
in his Explicat. perfid. Valent. Gentil. (extant in his tract. Theolog. etc.
page 774. a. circa med. he says, Hoc modo videmus precariam fieri ejus
Divinitatem, cui datum est esse. Impugned likewise by Mr. Willet Synopsis, page
610. fine, and Snecanus in his Method. descript. etc. page 107. ante med. he
says, Filius qua Deus non habet essentiam Deitatis a Patre. and Calvin in
explicat. perfid. valent. Gentil. extant in tract. Theolog. page 774. a. ante
med. says, Jam tibi responsum fuit non posse Deum esse Filii sui Patrem, nisi
personae respectu, quia alioqui vel partibilis esset Dei essentia, vel Filius
ipse Deus non esset. By Beza contra Heshusium, saying, Non est penitus de
essentia Patris, whereas Mela^cthon loc. commun. of Anno 1561 page 25. initio,
says to the contrary, De substantia Patris natus est, also by Calvin in his
Explicat. perfid. Valent. Gent. (extant in his tract. Theolog. etc.) page 771.
b. ante med. saying, Si essentiam communicavit Pater cum Filio, vel in solidum,
vel ex part communicavit: Si ex part, dimidium nobis Deum fabricas, etc. add
quod hoc modo nimis sceleste ac faede laceratur Dei essentia, and page 772. a.
ante med. he further says, Si ex part Pater suam Divinitatem in Filium
transfudit, jam lacera erit Divinitas: si in totum, ergo Divinitas quae ante
fuerat penes Patrem, in Filium conversa, in ipso Patre evanuit, and see the
like in Calvin Inst. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 23. fine and circa med.

39 That Christ, as Man, was from his Nativity freed from ignorance, and full
of knowledge; affirmed by Jacobus Andraeas, alleged by Beza in Respon. ad Acta
Colloquii Montisbelgar. part. 1. page 147. fine, and 148. initio, and page 134.
circa and paulo post med. and affirmed further by Andraeas in Epit. Coll.
Montisbelgar. page 33. circa and post med. by Osiander in Enchirid.
Controversiarum, printed Tubingae 1603. page 146, 147, etc. And affirmed also
further generally by the Lutheran Protestants, over-many to recite, yet
contradicted by Beza ubi supra, by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 599. and
page 600. paulo ante med. and many others, and namely by Mr. Sutcliffe who (in
his Review and Examination of Mr. Kellisons Survey, printed 1606. page 55. post
med.) will not attribute to the human nature of Christ, fullness of knowledge,
so much as but in respect of its personal union with the Godhead, but says to
the contrary, If Christ as man, by the union, be omniscient, why is he not also
omnipotent, and present in all places?

40 That Christ after his Passion descended in Soul into Hell, affirmed by D.
Hill in his Defense of the Article, that Christ descended into Hell, throughout
that book; by Mr. Bilson in his survey of Christ's suffering, etc. and of his
descent into Hell page 650, 651, 652, 653. etc. by the Lutherans generally, and
very many Calvinists, and impugned by Mr. Carliele in his special book, that
Christ descended not into Hell; by Mr. D. Willet in his like special book
entitled Lymbo-Mastix: also by Mr. D. Fulk alleged by Mr. Willet in his
Synopsis page 605. 606.

41 That Christ's corporal death was sufficient without his further suffering
in Soul the pains of Hell, affirmed by Mr. Bilson in his several Treatises of
that very Argument, viz. in his book of the Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10.
sub. 8. in the margent at 19.
full Redemption of mankind by the Death and Blood of Christ; and also in his
Survey of Christ's sufferings etc. and affirmed also by many others, and
contradicted by Brereley ibidem in the margent at 8.9.10.
Calvin Institut. l. 2. c. 19. sect. 10. and by Willet in his Synopsis, page
603. post med. and see Mr. Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8. page 129. initio, also
Mr. Willet in his Synopsis of Anno 1600. page 985. ante med. and vide page 987.
initio, where he says, That Christ suffering in his Flesh only, wrought not
our Redemption; by Calvin Institut. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 10. Dires in anima
cruciatus Damnati ac perditi hominis pertulit.

42 That the Sacraments of the old Testament were not, in working and effect,
equal with ours, affirmed generally for the most part by the Lutherans,
whereof see Schlussselburg in Theol. Calvinistarum l. 1. fol. 59. a. circa and
post med. and b. and Luther in loc. com. class. 1. page 88. circa med. and Luc.
Osiander in epitome etc. Centur. 16. page 411. prope finem, contradicted for
most part by the Calvinists, whereof see Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 418.
paulo post med.

43 The visible sign of Imposition of hands in confirmation, with the inward
Grace thereby conferred (which proves it a Sacrament) affirmed by the
Communion-Book turned into latin, and printed at London by Tho. Vautrollerius.
Anno 1574. in the tract of Confirmation, and by Mr. D. Covell in his modest
Examination etc. against the Plea of the Innocent, page 192. paulo ante med.
where he says, In Baptism we are regenerate to life, but in Confirmation we
are strengthed to battle, and by Mr. Hooker, in his Ecclesiastical Polity l.
5. sect. 66. page 69. fine, and 170 initio, and 173. post med. Impugned by the
Survey of the Book of Commonpraier, page 117. and 118. by Josias Nicolls in his
Plea of the Innocent, page 25. post med. where he reproves in this behalf the
foresaid Co^munion-book, as also does Mr. Cartwright in Mr. Whitgift's defense,
page 726. initio, and the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in their Abrigement,
page 76. ante med. say, The Communion-Book gives to Confirmation the
definition of a Sacrament; and most, or rather all the other Calvinists, who
use the same, deny yet the inward Grace given therewith, professing to use it
as but by way of instruction or catechizing,

44 The like visble sign, and invisible Grace given in Orders, affirmed by Mr.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. sect. 77. page 230. prope finem and
initium, by Mr. Bilson in his perpetual Government of Christ's Church, page
109. Insomuch as it is accounted a Sacrament by Melancthon in loc. com. Edit.
1536. de Sacramentorum numero, where he says, Maxim mihi placet Ordinem, ut
vocant, inter Sacramenta numerari, and see his Edition of 1561. page 383. fine,
and 384 initio, and see his other Edition of 1552, and 1558. accounted likewise
for a Sacrament, by Calvin Institut. l. 4. c. 19. sect. 28. alleged by Mr.
Bilson ubi supra: See all this impugned by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 545,
and 546. and generally by many others.

45 That Deaconship is a distinct order from Priesthood, and a step thereto,
affirmed by Mr. Whitgift in his Defense etc. page 586, and 587, and 582, 583,
584, 585, and 688. and so it is at this day used in the Church of England, as
an Ecclesiastical degree, distinct from the Ministry, and yet contradicted by
Mr. Cartwright ubi supr a page 519. initio, and 587. ante med.

46 That there is no extraordinary calling since the Apostles times, affirmed
by Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect 3. subd. 2. in the margent at ^.
Musculus loc. commun. page 394. where he says, Vocatio quae immediate est a
Christo jam in usu non est, ut erat olim, habebat sua signa, unde cognosci
potuit, de quibus meminit Marcus Evangelista cap. ult. dicens, Praedicaverunt
etc. sequentibus signis etc. and Brereley ibidem in the margent at a.
Lobechius in disput. Theolog. page 358. fine, and 359. initio says,
Immediatam porro vocationem cum mediata ab Apostolis permutatam esse Scriptura
testatur etc. credimus immediatae vocationis usum Deo in hoc mundo nullum
amplius futurum: nullam quippe de ea dedit promissionem, nullum mandatum; and
D. Saravia in his book of the diverse degrees of Ministers page 9. initio,
terms extraordinary Calling, an unknown Coast, out of which (the now
Defenders thereof) can no ways wind themselves: And see Mr. D. Covell in his
defense of Mr. Hooker page 86. fine, and 87. initio, and see Saravia in defen.
tract, etc. contra resp. Bezae, page 306, and 307. and ibidem page 37. circa
medium he says, Sed speciem illam extraordinariae vocationis ad Ecclesiae
ministerium etc. cum nullo testimonio Scripturarum, nec exemplo certo doceatur,
non admitto: est enim periculi plena, and novi malique exempli etc. ea sola
fretus nemo se ministerio Ecclesiastico ingerere debet, and see there page 35,
36, 38, etc. Insomuch that page 59. fine, and 60. post med. and 74. fine, he
reprehendeth Beza, for that in the Disputation had by him and other
Protestants, with Catholics, in the Conference at Poysy, being demanded of
their calling, Beza affirmed the same to be extraordinary. See hereof more in
Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. at y, z, a. and see the contrary affirmed by
others in Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. at f. and tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10.
prope finem, at r. and sect. 11. subd. 3. at *.

47 The indelible Character imprinted by certain Sacraments, affirmed in
express terms by Mr. D. Covell in his defense of Mr. Hooker. page 87. fine,
and 91. initio and circa med. where he allegeth St. Augustine for it: And for
the Doctrine thereof, see Mr. Hooker l. 5. page 228. circa and paulo post med.
yet impugned by other Protestants, whereof see Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page
419. and see him reproving Mr. Hooker herein in his meditation upon Psalm 122.
printed 1^03. page 91. fine.

48 The baptism of Women and Lay persons in case of necessity, affirmed by
Jacobus Andreas in epitom. Colloquii Montisbelgar. page 46. prope initium, and
58. circa med. by Mr. Hooker l. 5. sect. 61. page 137. circa med. and prope
finem, and sect. 62. initio, page 139. ante med. by Mr. D. Covell in his
defense of Mr. Hooker. page 91 fine, and 92. ante med. by Mr. Whitgift in his
defense etc. page 518. ante med. who also there allegeth Zuinglius; by
Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinistarum l. 1. fol. 68. b. and many others: yet
contradicted by Calvin, as appears in Schlusselburg in Theolog. Calvinist. l.
1. fol. 60. b. ante med. and 61. a. initio, and contradicted by Mr. Willet in
his Synopsis page 432. fine, and 433. and by many others.

49 The known intention of the Church, needful to the Administration of the
Sacraments, by Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. sect. 58. p. 126.
versus finem, and by D. Covell in his defense of Mr. Hooker page 103. ante med.
and more plainly 104. post med. and 106. post med. And yet impugned specially
in Mr. Hooker by certain English Protestants, in their Christian Letter to Mr.
R. Hooker page 29. fine, and 30. initio and post med. and promiscuously by
others.

50 Seven Sacraments, by the Protestant Divines assembled in the Conference at
Lipsia, test Illyrico inadhortatione ad Constantiam in agnita Christi
religione etc. printed in Octavo, Magdeburg. 1550. paulo post initium, and ante
med. and by the Protestant Divines assembled in the Conference at Ratisbon anno
1541. whereof Bucer in Actis Colloq. Ratisbon. says, Protestants non gravatim
admiserunt septem Sacramenta.

51 Implicit Faith, commonly termed, Fides implicita; affirmed by Dr. Field
of the Church, l. 3. c. 2. page 65. circa med. and in his Epistle Dedicatory to
the L. Archbishop, near the beginning of that Epistle he-saith, Alleged by
Brereley tract 2. c 3. sect. 11. subdi. 1. in the margent under 1.
For seeing the Controversies in Religion in our time are grown in number so
many, and in nature so intricat, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength
and understanding to examine them; what remains for men desirous of
satisfaction in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out which
among all the Societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of Holy
ones, that Household of Faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living
God, which is the Pillar and ground of Truth, that so they may embrace her
Communion, follow her Directions, and rest in her judgment? So that Implitite
Faith is here by Mr. D. Field implied, and allotted to those that want strength
of understanding to examine Controversies: In respect whereof he directs them
as before said, to rest in the Churches Judgment. Affirmed also by D. Baro l.
de Fide and ejus ortu page 40. initio, and page 91, 92. initio, 94. ante med.
97. initio, by Mr. Jacob in his Reasons taken out of Gods Word, page 55. ante
med. Insomuch as we are taught to rest in other judgments by the French
Confession, in the Harmony, page 319. prope finem, and by Jacobus Acontius
stratag. Satan. l. 4. page 203. paulo post initium, by Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity, in the Preface, sect. 6. page 28. paulo ante and circa
med. by Melancthon l. 1. Epist. ep. ad Regem Angeliae, page 49. fine: yet
impugned as Popish by certain Eng. protestants, in their christian letter to M.
Hooker page 30. post med. and generally by others.

52 Usury altogether unlawful, affirmed by D. Pie in his Treatise entitled
usuries sprite conjured, with his answer to a treatise written in defense of
Usury, printed 1604. and in his Epistle Dedicatory, he allegeth Mr. D. Powell,
and sundry others who have written herein against Usury; yet contradicted by
sundry Protestants mentioned there page 20. fine, and 32. initio, Contradicted
also by Bucer in script. Anglican. page 789, 790, 791. etc. and contradicted by
Geneva it self, witness whereof is Mr. Hutton in his second part of the answer
etc. In his Preface to his fellow Brethren etc. where he says, Two Ministers
at Geneva were deposed and banished for speaking against Usury, allowed in that
State; See all so Usury further defended by Matthew Virell in his principal
grounds of Religion, Englished and printed 1595. page 148. post med. and 149.
ante med.

53 That Antichist is yet to come, affirmed by Brereley tract. 1. sect. 9.
subdivis. 3. in the margent at 18. and in the margent and Text at
Franciscus Lambertus in his book entitled, Antichristus sive prognostica
finis Mundi, page 74. post med. 75, and 79. and see Franciscus Lambertus his
Commentary upon the Revelations. And by Zanchius in Epistolas Pauli ad Phil.
Colloss. and These. page 246. a. and in his Miscellaniorum libri tres etc.
printed Neapoli Palatinorum An. 1582. page 298, and 299. read the places. And
concerning the like judgment of others, Mr. Dove in his Sermon of the second
coming of Christ etc. versus finem confesses that some Protestants make a
doubt whether Antichrist be yet revealed or no. Insomuch as the Puritans, in
their mild defense of the silenced Ministers Supplication to the high Court of
Parliament, do therefore specially charge the Protestants with affirming that
the Pope is not Antichrist, saying concerning themselves and the Protestants:
Do we vary from the sincere Doctrine of the Scriptures? Nay rather many of
them do much more swarve from the same, touching general Grace, and the death
of Christ for every particular person, touching Images in the Church for
devotion, touching the manner of Christ's presence in the Eucharist, that the
Pope is not Antichrist, concerning the necessity of Baptism, touching Auricular
Confession etc. See also these words thus further alleged by Mr. Powell in his
Rejoinder to the mild defense, annexed to his book of things indifferent etc.
printed 1607. page 118. post med. and impugned generally by those other who
pretend the Pope to be Antichrist.

54 Certain distinct degrees and orders of Angels and Arch-Angells etc.
affirmed by Mr. Hutton in his second part of the answer to the Reasons etc.
page 168, and 169, and 170. throughout: and by Trigevillaeus Gauvius in his
Palma Christiana page 39. and by Kekermannus in System. Theolog. page 159.
fine, and 160. initio, and 163. ante med. by Piscator in volum. 1. These. page
93. ante med. and by Peter Martyr in his Common-places in English, part. 1.
page 120. b. paulo post med: and see Marloret his Enchirid. printed Londini
1591. page 20. post med. Yet contradicted by Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 14. sect.
5, and 6. where he makes the diversity to consist only in diversity of Names
or Callings given to them all in general, diversely according to the diversity
of their employment, and with him in opinion herein Hiperius in Method.
Theolog. page 287. initio, and paulo po^ medium, and 288. paulo ante and post
med. and many others do agree, insomuch as the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese,
in their Abridgment etc. page 74. post medium, will not grant that there are
Arch-Angells.

55 The Patronage and protection of certain Angels over certain Countries and
Kingdoms, affirmed by Calvin Instit. l. 1. c. 14. sect. 7. and by Hiperius in
Method. Theolog. page 291. initio, and by Peter Martyr in his Common-places in
English, part. page 120. a paulo post med. and in the margent there, and
contradicted by M. D. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament, in Revelat. 1.20.
sect. 9. fol. 464. a. paulo ante medium, and by M. D. Willet in his Synopsis,
page 294. paulo post initium, and many others.

56 That by Michael the Arch-Angell, is meant not Christ, but a very Angel,
affirmed by the English Communion-Book which appoints a peculiar Collect for
St. Michael, and by Marloret in his Enchiridion printed Londini 1591. p. 20.
post med. and by Wygandus and Matthaeus Judex in their Syntagma etc. ex Novo
Testament printed Basil. 1585. page 509. initio. Yet contradicted by M. D.
Willet in his Synopsis page 293. fine, and 294. initio, and by Mr. Fulk against
the Rhemish Testament in Revel. 1. sect. 9. fol. 464. a. ante med. and ibidem
in c. 12. sect. 3. fol. 477. a fine, and by the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese,
in their Abrigement etc. page 74. circa med. reprehending there, the
Communionbook, because, say they, it affirms that Michael mentioned Revelat.
12. is a created Angel.

57 That the observation of Sunday for our Sabath, is not alterab^e to any
other Day, affirmed by Mr. Whitgift in his Defense etc. page 89. fine, and by
Mr. Cartwright alleged ibidem page 89. paulo ante med. and by Mr. Willet in his
Synopsis page 382. ante med. and in his Edition of Anno 1600. page 431 circa
med. by M. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in Revelat. 1. sect. 6. fol. 463.
b. ante med. and by the Divines of Geneva in their Propositions and Principles
etc. cap. 33. page 80. sect. 12, and 13. Yet most clearly contradicted by
Calvin in his book of Institutions. And see his other Edition l. 2. c. 8. sect.
34. by Peter Martyr in 1 Cor. 16. and in his Common places in English part. 2.
page 375. b. circa med by Ursinus in his Doctrine. Christian. compend. page 775.
initio, and 777. circa med. and by Mr Thomas Bell in his Survey of Popery,
printed 1596. l. 3. part. 1. c. 5. page 117.

58 That the alteration of the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday, is not proved
by Scripture (but is therefore Apostolic tradition) affirmed by Bullinger in
his Decads etc. Englished, Decad. 2. and sermon. 4. page 140. b. initio, by Mr.
Whitgift in his defense etc. page 88. fine, and 89. post med. and most fully
and at large by Mr. Thomas Bell in his said Survey of Popery l. 3. part. 1. c.
5. p. 116. Insomuch as it is acknowledged for an Apostolic tradition to be
perpetually observed by the Divines of Geneva, in their said Propositions and
principles, etc. page ^o sect. 13. and see Mr. Fulk in Revelat. 1. sect. 6.
fol. 463. a. prope finem, and Ursinus in his Doctrine. Christianae compendium in
prolegom. page 36. says thereof, Hanc esse Apostolicam traditionem credimus:
Yet contradicted by Hieron. Zanchius de Sacra Scriptura, printed 1593 page 123,
and 124. and by many others.

59 Set time of fasting, and from certain meats, appointed not only for
politic Order, but for spiritual Considerations, affirmed by Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity l. 5. sect. 72. initio, page 204. fine, and 205. initio.
Insomuch as page 209. fine, he answers the vulgar objection of Montanns, and
ibidem post med. he likewise answers the common objection from St. Paul 1 Timothy 4.3. and page 210. paulo post med. he says, Aerius was worthily condemned
for his opposition against Fasting, with whom agrees the Protestant Author of
the Treatise entitled Querimonia Ecclesiae, printed Londini 1592. reproving in
like manner Aerius. page 31. fine, and 94. ante med. and 103. fine, answering
also the said objection of Montanus page 110. ante and post med. and answering
likewise the said objection from St. Paul page 106. circa med. Yet contradicted
by Mr. Fulk, who to the contrary objecteth Montanus (against the Rhemish
Testament in Matthew. 15. sect. 3. fol. 28. a. post med. and in Acta Apost. c.
13. sect. 5. fol. 208. a. fine) defends Aerius (in his Answer to a
counterfeit Catholic, page 45. initio, as also does Mr. Whitaker more fully
contra Duraeum l. 9. page 830. initio) and objecteth 1 Timothy 4.3. to prove this
fasting to be the Doctrine of Devils (in 1 Timothy 4. sect. 5. fol. 375. a.)

60 That making of Vows was not part of the old Law, now abrogated, but
continues yet in force, and to be performed; affirmed in diverse cases Brereley
tract. 1. sect. 4. subd. 9. in the margent at 10.
by Mr. Perkins in his Reformed Catholic page 156 post med. saying: And now
in the New Testament we have warrant in like manner to vow, etc. Of this kind,
are the Vows to keep set times of fasting, etc. By Musculus in loc commun. de
votis page 524. circa med and by Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 241. postmed.
and by Amandus Polanus in partitiouibus Theolog. l. 2. page 394. And Danaeus in
primae partis altera part contra Bellarminum page 987. affirms, Fas esse
Christianis hominibus vovere quae cum Dei voluntate consentiunt. Yet
contradicted by Brereley ibidem in the margent at 7.
Peter Martyr de caelibatu and votis page 302. fine, and 303. and ib. page 304.
post med. he further says, Votum ego cerimoneale antiquae legis praeseptum
fuisse affirmo, and page 52. ante med. he says, Consentaneum est quando
Christiana liberate fruimur, and sub Evangelii gratia and luce vivimus, ritum
ceremonia^que vivendi omittendam esse etc. Quare ut aliae ceremoniae quae vary
ac multipliciter ista and consimilia docebant, per Christum sublatae sunt, ita
and vovendi ratio debet facessere etc. and by Mr. Fulk answering to Psalm
76.11. who says, that Text pertains to the Old Testament, in his Retentive
against Bristow's Motives etc. page 153. fine, and by Bullinger in his Decads
in English page 380. ante med. saying, Vows belong to the Jews Ceremonies, and
by Zuinglius part. 1. in explanat. art. 30. fol. 69. b. initio, saying, de
votis universum hoc dico, quod per Christum sunt abolita.

61 That Fasting, Chastity, and the giving of ones Goods to the Poor for
Religious uses, embracing Poverty, is of greater perfection and acceptance
before God, than not fasting, marrying, or retaining of the said Goods:
Affirmed by Mr. Hooker l. 5. page 205 initio, and 208. fine, and l. 3. sect. 8
page 140 fine, and by M. D. Covell in his defense of Mr. Hooker art. 8. page
51. circa med. Yet directly contradicted in the Case of retaining Goods, by Mr.
Willet in his Synopsis page 245. post medium saying, Alleged by Brereley tract
2. c. 3. sect. 8. fine, at him the margent.
He is an enemy to the Glory of God, that changes his rich estate wherein he
may serve God, for a poor, and in the case of marriage most grossly, by Brereley
ibid. at g. in the margent.
Luther tom. 5. Wittemberg. in exeg. ad cap. 7.1 Cor. fol. 107. b. post med.
saying of marriage and single life, De usu vel abusu etc. of the use or abuse
of the States at this present we will say nothing, but of the condition or
nature (of life) in themselves, and do conclude that Matrimony is as Gold, and
the spiritual state (of single life) is as Dung. And in Assert. Art. he further
says, Matrimony is much more excellent than Virginity, Christ and his Apostles
did diswade Christians from Virginity. See this saying acknowledged and
defended by Mr. Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 8. page 151. ante med. where he
says of Virginity, it is not simply good, but after a certain manner. It is
never better than Marriage (nisi (...)) but in regard of the circumstance,
whereas marriage is often times simply better than it; It is to be desired, not
always, but in respect of the troubles which accompany marriage: directly
against St. Augustins particular Confutation of this very Reason l. de
Virginitat. c. 13. alleged and acknowledged in Mr. Fulk against the Rhemish
Testament in 1 Cor. 7. sect. 13. fol. 273. b. post med. and Mr. Whitaker ubi
supra, concludes in defense of Luther's foresaid words, saying, Haec certe
Lutheri propria non sunt; ea enim omnes boni agnoscunt and defendunt: Insomuch
that whereas St. Paul 1 Cor. 7.38. says, He that joyneth his Virgin in
marriage does well, he that joyneth her not does better, Mr. Whitaker contra
Duraeum l. 8. page 693. post medium, answering hereto says, Melius hoc loco
vocat Paulus, quod est commodius etc. and by Mr Wotton in his defense of Mr.
Perkins page 500. initio where he says, marriage is simply better, and paulo
ante med. where he defends Jovinian, condemned for but equalling marriage
with Virginity; and in the case of fasting, by Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect 8
subd. 5. at f^m the margent.
Mr. Willet in his Synopsis page 243. ante med. saying, Neither is God better
worshipped by eating or not eating, and by Mr. Perkins in his Reformed
Catholic page 220 fine, saying, Fasting is in it self a thing indifferent, as
is eating and drinking.

62 That he, who has the gift of Continency, may lawfully either marry, or
for the Kingdom of Heaven refrain from marriage. Affi^^^ed directly by Bucer in
sacra quatuor Evangelia in Matt. 19.10. fol. 150. b. circa med. and after the
other Edition at Basil 1536. page 400. paulo post initium, by Wygandus and
Matthaeus Judex in their Syntagma etc. ex Novo Testamento coll. 1011. paulo
ante and post med. by the Century-Writers Centur. 1. l. 2. c. 4. coll. 454.
lin. 39. by Chemnitius in Enchirid. c. de conjugio page 411. by Mr. Hooker l.
3. sect. 8. page 140. prope finem, by M. D. Covell in his defense etc. page 51.
circa med. and by the H^^mony of Confessions page 543. post med. and 545. prope
finem. Yet contradicted (because otherwise it proves evidently that a man may
supererrogate, or do more than he is commanded) by M. D. Willet in his Synopsis
page 236. circa and paulo post med. and fine, where he absolutely restrains
such from liberty of marriage, whereto many others do, for the same reason,
assent.

63 That sin against the holy Ghost is only final impenitence, and that all
sins, during this life, may be repented of, are remissible, and the parties may
be prayed for: affirmed by Mr. Smith in his Treatise of prayer in general for
all men, against those that preach, that all men are not to be prayed for; by
Urbanus Rhegius in loc. com. c. de peccato fol. 20. b. fine, and 21. a. initio,
by Wygandus and Matthaeus Judex in their Syntagma ex Novo Testament. coll. 580.
b. lin. 40. and 58^. lin. 34. and 584. lin. 28. and lin. 41. and lin. ult. and
585. initio, by Chemnitius in Enchirid. page 269. and 273. Yet impugned by Mr.
D. Fulk in his Confutation of Purgatory page 274. post med. and against the
Rhemish Test. in 1. ep. Joan. c. 5. sect. 4. fol. 455. b. circa and post med.
and by M. Willet in his Synopsis page 562. ante med.

64 That one Text of Scripture may have diverse understandings, and all of them
true (against our Adversaries practice, who, to make the same plain by one
example for many, if they can show that St. Augustine or some other Father, does
by Fire 1 Cor. 13.15. upon occasion of other application, understand the
tribulation of this life, do therefore urge this Exposi^ion thus given against
the other common received sense of Purgatory; though also given elsewhere by the
very same and other Fathers, which the said Fathers by their other foresaid
firster sense never meant to gainsay: This slight being usual by our
Adversaries is hereby once for all prevented) affirmed by the Translator of the
English Bible published 1576. in his Epistle to the Brethren of England,
Scotland and Ireland, circa med. by the Divines of Geneva in their Propositions
and Principles disputed in Geneva etc. cap. 52. page 149. post med. by Hierome
Zanchius de facra Scriptura page 422. fine, 424, 425. and by Aretius in loc.
com loc. 59. page 187. circa med. and page 177. circa med. (with whom herein
agrees St. Augustine de Civit. Dei l. 11. c. 19. initio, and l. 12. confess.
c. 31. and de Doct. Christ. l 3. c. 27. and lib. 1. c. 36. and de util. cred.
c. 3. and de Genesis ad lit. l. 1. c. 21) Yet contradaicted by Mr. Fulk in his
confutation of Purgatory page 151. and M. Willet in his Synopsis page 26 fine.

65 The distinction of Order and Jurisdiction (whereby the greatest Archbishop
and the meanest Bishop or Priest are said to be equal or unequal, the equality
being in respect of Order, and the inequality in respect of Jurisdiction, which
distinction serves to explain the seeming repugnant sayings, whether of
Scripture or Fathers, which otherwise might be thought to affirm sometimes a
superiority, at other times an equality between Peter and the other Apostles,
and so likewise between the Pope and other Bishops) Affirmed by Mr. Whitgift,
and Brereley tract. 2. c. 3 sect 10. subd. 2. sine in the margent at m.
Mr. Bridges in his defense etc. page 313. and 445.446. 1156. fine, and Mr.
Whitgift acknowledges this distinction, affirming in his defense of the Answer
to the Admonition page 303. post med. that Archbishops quoad ministerium do
not differ from other Pastors, but touching Government, affirming also page
386. ante med. and answering to a common objection out of Hierome, who
equalleth the meanest Bishop with the Pope, that they are equal quoad
Mnisterium, but not quoad politiam, And see him there further page 320. fine,
and 461. initio, and page 390. prope initium, and contradicted for Popish, by
Mr. Cartwright alleged in Mr. Whitgift's defense page 389. prope finem, and by
many others.

66 That the true visible Church cannot wholly err; affirmed by Mr. Fox in his
Martyrs, as by Philpot, Act. Mon. page 1401. a. prope finem, by Bilney Act.
Mon. 464. b. art. 4. by Ridley Act. Mon. page 1361. b. post med. and page 1286.
b. prope finem, by James Baynham Act. Mon. page 493. b. prope finem, also by
Mr. Fox himself Act. Mon. page 999. a. fine, at art. 36. by Mr. Bancroft in his
Sermon, and page mentioned next hereafter in number 67. by the Divines of
Geneva, in their Propositions and Principles disputed etc. page 141. sect. 12.
and 13. and most expressly by Bertrand de Loque, Minister of Delphinine, who in
his discourse of the Church c. 12. page 198. says of this very question, The
Controversy in my judgment is not of the Catholic (or universal) Church, for
we all agree herein that she cannot err touching Faith etc. wherefore this
question is touching (only) a particular Church: Impugned by Mr. Fulk, who in
his answer to a counterfeit Cathotholike page 8^. fine, says, The whole Church
militant consisting of men, which are all liars, may err altogether, as every
part thereof. And by the Puritans, who in their Brief Discovery of untruths, in
a Sermon preached 1588. by D. Bancroft, page 34. do expressly reprove Mr.
Bancroft for his teaching our Catholic Doctrine herein.

67 An external Judgment, or difinitive sentence (and not only Scripture)
appointed for the ending of Controversies; affirmed by Mr. D. Field in his
words alleged heretofore in this Consideration, number. 51. by M. Bilson in his
perpetual government etc. page 372. initio, by Mr. Bancroft in his Sermon
preached February 8. 1588. page 42, 43. (see his saying alleged and reprehended
in the Puritans foresaid Discovery etc. page 34.) by Mr. D. Covell in his
Modest Examination etc. page 108. paulo ante med. and 109. prope finem, by Mr.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity in the Preface sect. 6. initio, page 26.
circa med. and page 28. ante med. by Melancthon in Consil. Theolog. part. 2.
page 1. and 2. And in the end (after much winding in and out) by Mr. D.
Reynolds in his Conference with Mr. Heart page 99. post medium, and by the
Puritans, whereof see M. Bancroft's Survey etc. page 304. fine: Yet
contradicted vulgarly by over many (to be named) Sectaries of all sorts, who
(thereby to exempt themselves from all trial) do pretend that the Church may
err, and therefore that only Scripture is to be our Judge. See this at large
pretended by the Protestants throughout the late Conference at Ratisbon,
printed Lavingae Anno 1602.

68 Those that be learned know that the Government of the Church is neither
Popular, nor Aristocratical, but a Monarchy: affirmed in these words by Mr.
Whitgift in his defense etc. page 641. post medium, by M. D. Covell in his
Examination etc. against the Plea of the Innocent page 109. and 107. alleged
heretofore in the second Consideration number. 10. after 15. at a. b. c. e. by
Luther alleged there afterward in the margent under * next before 18. and
vulgarly by many other Protestants, who affirm the temporal Magistrate to be
the head of the Church. But yet many others (who discern the known difference
between the several Commonwealths of foreign Nations governed by several
Princes, and the particular Churches of those Nations: as namely that those
sundry Commonwealths be each of them of it self a several absolute politic
body, governed severally by distinct laws, whereas yet all those several
National Churches, professing all of them one Faith and Religion, make but one
Catholic Church, one Body, Ephesians 2.16. and 3.16. One visible Church of
Christ. Hooker l. 3. sect. 1. page 126. prope finem,) do therefore impugn Mr.
Whitgift's foresaid Assertion, foreseeing that by sequel thereof the several
Churches of Foreign Nations, making, as aforesaid, all of them but one visible
Church, one Body, should be accordingly governed by one visible Ecclesiastical
Head, or Monarch. And hence it is, that Mr. Jacob in his Reasons taken out of
Gods word, retorteth (how probably we refer to judgment) Mr. Hookers
Assertions, saying there page 24. paulo ante med. It follows from this
necessarily, that there ought to be a Catholic or universal government
Ecclesiastical. This is a Conclusion whereunto Mr. Hooker sets down both the
Proposition and Assumption, viz. Every visible Church, truly and properly so
called, ought to have a correspondent Ecclesiastical government; but there is a
Catholic or Universal visible Church on earth (to which premises every Child
can add the Conclusion) ergo there is, and ought to be on eartha Catholic or
Universal Ecclesiastical government. Thus far Mr. Jacob, upon supposall of a
Catholic visible Church and Monarchical government.

69 That Children have not actual Faith: affirmed by Brereley tract. 1. sect.
6. subd. 3. in the margent at r.
Mr. Cartwright in M. Whitgift's defense page 611. and by Beza in respons. ad
Acta Colloq. Montisbelgar. part. 2. page 124. initio, and in the propositions
and principles disputed in the Uuiversity of Geneva page 178. sect. 4. and by
Jacob Kymedoncius in his Redemption of mankind l. 2. c. 15. page 164. fine, and
by Mr. Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 8. page 682. initio. Yet impugned by Luther
in loc. commun. class. 2. page 12. fine, and generally in his Writings, and by
David Rungius in his disput. in Academia Wittemb. printed at Wittemb. 1606.
page 195. sect. 144, 145, 146. etc. by Jac. Andraeas, see his words in Beza's
Respons. ad Acta Coll. Montisbel. part. 2. page 124. ante med. and see there
part. 1. in praefat. page 21. fine, and 22. circa med. and impugned generally
by the Lutherans; see further of this confessed Controversy Musculus in loc.
commun. page 309. post medium, and Jacobus Kimedoncius in his Redemption of
Mankind l. 2. c. 15. page 164. post med. and 165, and 166.

70 That the Controversy of the Scriptures, as which be sacred, which not, is
not to us determined otherwise than by the Churches tradition; affirmed by Mr.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity l. 1. sect. 14. page 86. ante med. and lib.
2. sect. 4. page 102. fine, and 103. initio, and l. 3. sect. 8. page 147. circa
medium, and by M. Whitaker adversus Stapletonum l. 2. c. 6. page 370 prope
initium, and page 357. prope initium, and l. 2. c. 4 page 300. ante med. and p.
298. post med. and see Peter Martyr in his Common places part. 1. c. 6. sect.
8. initio, page 42. b. and Lubbertus de principiis Christian. dogmat. l. 1. c.
4. page 18. circa med. Pu. and Chillingworth also proves through his whole
book, that we receive the certainty of Scripture upon the Authority of the
Church: Yet impugned by certain English Protestants in their Christian Letter
to Mr. Hooker page 9 and 10. by Ursinus in his Doctrinae Christianae compendium
in prolegomen. page 13. circa med. by Calvin. Institut. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 4.
post med. and generally by diverse others, who to avoid the Churches Authority,
do refer the proof and knowledge of the Scriptures to the testimony of the
Spirit.

71 That the Church of Rome is part of the house of God, a Limb of the visible
Church of Christ etc. is affirmed by Brereley tract. 1. sect. 6. subd. 1. in
the Text and margent at e.f.g.h. 1. k.l.m.n.o.
Mr. D. Baro in his four Sermons and two Questions disputed ad clerum etc.
Sermon. 3. page 448. fine, saying, I dare not deny the name of Christians to the
Romanists, since the learneder Writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be
the Church of God; by Mr. Hooker in his fifth book of Ecclesiastical Polity
page 188. initio, saying, The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the
House of God, a limb of the visible Church of Christ; and Johannes Regius in
his liber Apologeticus etc. in Considerat. Censurae, etc. page 95. fine, says,
In Papatu autem cum fuerit Ecclesia vera etc. and Mr. Hooker ubisupra page 130.
ante med. says, We gladly acknowledge them to be of the Family of Jesus
Christ; by Mr. Bunny in his Treatise tending to Pacification, sect. 18. page
109. circa med. saying, Neither of us may justly account the other to be none
of the Church of God, and page 113. post med. saying of Catholics and
Protestants, We are no several Church from them, nor they from us, also by D.
Some in his defense against Penry, and Refutation of many absurdities etc. in
Mr. Penries Treatise page 164. ante med. saying, That the Papists are not
altogether Aliens from Gods Covenant, I have showed before; and ibidem page
182. initio, saying, In the judgment of all learned men, and all Reformed
Churches, there is in Popery a Church; a Ministry, a true Christ etc. and page
176. prope finem, saying, If you think that all the Popish sort which died in
the Popish Church are damned, you think absurdly, and dissent from the
judgment of the learned Protestants; Likewise by M.D. Covell in his defense of
Mr. Hooker his five books of Ecclesiastical Polity page 77. ante med. saying,
We affirm them of the Church of Rome to be parts of the Church of Christ, and
that those that live and die in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved:
Insomuch that he doubts not ( ibidem page 68. paulo post med.) to charge the
Puritans with Ignorance for their contrary opinion; Yet impugned so generally
by others, as to name any, is needless.

72 The Patriarchship or Primacy of one, over the Church, in several Nations
and Kingdoms, is acknowledged by Melancthon, alleged heretofore in the second
Consideration number. 10. paulo post initium, in the margent at 17. by Jacobus
Andraeas, alleged there in the Margent at * next before 16. by Luther alleged
ibidem in the Margent at * next be 18. and by Sir Edwin Sands, who more than
infinuateth the known want hereof in the Protestants Church, to be to them as
matter of defect and imputation, Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 5. subd. 3. in
the margent at l.
saying in his Relation etc. fol. S. 2. on the B. side: The Papists have the
Pope as a common Father, Adviser, and Conductor to reconcile their jarres, to
decide their differences, to draw their Religion by consent of Councils unto
Unity etc. whereas on the contrary side, Protestants are as severed or rather
scattered Troops, each drawing adverse way, without any means to pacify their
quarrels; no Patriarch, one or more to have a common superintendance or care
over their Churches for correspondency or Unity; no ordinary way to assemble a
general Council of their part, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their
Contentions, and by Brereley in his Omissions and Aditions of page 702. l. 19.
Andraeas Friccius de Ecclesia l. 2. c. 10. page 570.

73 Unwritten Traditions, necessary to be observed, are confessed even by such
Protestants as are professed Adversaries thereto: As namely Mr. D. Field in his
Treatise of the Church l. 4. c. 20. page 241. fine, where having impugned
unwritten Traditions, in the end yet, as enforced, confesses and concludes
saying, Let us come to those Traditions which concern the Manners and
Conversation of Men, that the Apostles delivered many things of this nature to
the Churches, some by way of Precept, some by way of Counsel only, some to
continue but for a time, some to continue for ever, we make no doubt: Of this
sort is the observation of the Lords-days; and sundry other things there are,
which doubtless the Apostles delivered by Tradition. And see the unwritten
Traditions of the Lords Day, and of the Canonical Scriptures further
acknowledged next heretofore under the several numbers of 57, and 58, and 60.
and see also in Mr. D. Field ubi supra page 239. circa med. the Tradition of
Lent-Fast; And Mr. D. Covell in his Answer to John Burges page 139. circa med.
affirms the moderate use of the Cross to be an Apostolical Constitution; as
also the said Mr. D. Covell in his Examination against the Plea of the Innocent
c. 9. page 104. paulo post med. refers expressly the terms of Archbishops
unto Apostolical ordination; and the then Bishop of London, and late of
Canterbury in the Conference before the King page 11. initio, refers
likewise Confirmation to Apostolical Institution, signified not, but
necessarily proved from Heb. 6.2. also Mr. Whitgift in his defense etc. page
539. fine, affirms and proves abundantly the Apostles Tradition of Easter;
and Oecolampadius does affirm the baptism of Infants not to be taught in the
Scriptures, in libro Epistolarum Zuinglii and Oecolampadii page 301. post med.
and 363. post medium; and so likewise does Zuinglius tom. 2. l. de Baptismo
fol. 96. a. circa med. and Mr. D. Field page 239. terms it a Pradition,
because (says he) it is not expressly delivered in Scripture (either) that the
Apostles did baptize Infants, nor any express precept there found, that they
should do so, only undertaking that Scripture delivers to us the ground
thereof, which is impertinent, unless he show that it withal delivers also
to us a necessary proof thereof, which his former words deny, for which cause,
he terms it, as before, a Tradition: and see lastly Mr. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Polity l. 2. sect. 7. page 118. post med. and 119. where he
makes special answer (as we do) to diverse Testimonies of the Fathers, as
namely of Irenaeus, Hierome, and Augustine alleged there by Mr. Cartwright, and
usually by other Protestants in behalf of only Scripture; and see there sect.
5. page 106.

74 Concerning Equivocation or doubtfullness of Answer, affirmed by some
Catholics, not in matter of Faith, (for it is evident to the contrary that we
refuse to go to Protestant Churches, or to make the least dissimulation of our
Faith) neither in Civil Contracts (for who confessedly more credible, or of
better performance therein than Catholics?) neither in the case of our Prince
or Country (for concerning either of these, we are bound in Conscience to make
our selves Transparent; insomuch as to conceal any thing prejudicial to these,
were in the sight of God, grievous and multiplied Iniquity:) but only as in
case of unlawful Demands, to betray the Professors of Religion to the
Persecuters thereof: or to reveal, to the hurt of others, that which the party
demanded is in Conscience bound to keep secret. For so much as the Doctrine
hereof is objected, as a special imputation to Catholics; we will (forbearing
the question thereof) only but briefly examine, whether any like (if not worse)
Equivocation or doubtfulness of speech be affirmed by our Adversaries. Peter
Martyr in his Common places part. 2. c. 13. sect. 39. page 547. a. post med.
after much discourse of this matter, concludes saying, In these cases I think
it is not forbidden, nay, I rather think it is most lawful to speak
doubtfully. Zuinglius tom. 3 fol. 45. a. initio, entreating of Abraham's speech
to his servants, when intending to sacrifice his Son, he said to them, abide
you here, and I and the Child will go yonder and worship, and come again to
you. Genesis 22.5. says of Abraham's reserved meaning, Mentitus non est, neque
enim mentitur, qui secretum aliquod celat, ne quid periculi inde nascatur. Mr.
Willet upon Genesis 27. page 290. ante med. teaches by many examples of
Scripture, that dissimulation in outward gesture is tolerable, and page, 292.
circa med. he says, It is one thing to conceal the Truth, an other to lie: As
Abraham did hide the Truth, when he said Sarah was his Sister, Genesis 26.7.
Melancthon in loc. commun. printed Basilliae 1562. page 763. paulo post
initium, says, Non enim nemino mendacia figuras quibus ex probabili causa
aliquid tegitur quod non necesse est dici, ut Raab negat speculatores domi suae
esse: tales figurae nominantur officiosa mendacia. Of these figurative
Locutions, or (as Melancthon terms them) Officiosa mendacia Luther tom. 6.
Wittemberg. fol. 352. b. prope finem, says, Simile est mendacium Raab Josuae,
Est igitur mendacium officiosum, quo saluti, famae corporis vel animae
consulitur etc. Igitur honestum and pium mendacium est, ac potius officium
Charitatis appellandum. Zegedine (a learned Calvinist) in loc. commun. page
422. initio, affirms, Mendacia licita and bona quae commendantur. In proof
whereof he there allegeth from Scripture the example of Raab, and of diverse
others. Wolfangus Musculus in loc. com. page 106. paulo post initium says,
Alius mentitur ex timore Dei, sic obstetrices Aegyptiae, Exodus 1. Alius ex
charitate, vel fide debita, sic Michol. 1. Sam. 19. Alius ex fide, sic Raab
Haeb. 11. etc. To come now to Adversaries known practice, Mr. Fox reports of
Wiccliff, saying, Wiccliff to avoid the rigor of things answered with
intricate words etc. To forbear the like known and confessed example of the
Waldensis (who for peace and tranquillity sake used to be present at Mass,
which they held and professed to be Idolatricall) alleged in Brereley tract. 2.
c. 2 sect. 3. subd. 4. in the Text and margent at 17. John Careless, Protestant
Martyr, being demanded by the Magistrate if he knew such a man, records his
own Answer thereto in these words: No forsooth I do not know any such, nor have
I not heard of him that I wot of. But yet (says he) I lied fasly, for I knew
him indeed: Act. Mon. page 1530. a. post med. As concerning the Equivocation or
doubtful speaking and writing, even in matter of Religion used by Martin
Bucer, it is reported in the example of the Sacrament, by the
Protestant-Writers Schlusselburg in Theol. Calvinist. l. 2. fol. 129. a. post
med. from the words of Lavater the Calvinist, and by Osiander in epitom. Hist.
Eccles. etc. Centur. 16. page 249. initio, and by Josias Symlerus (Bucer's
dearest friend) who (in his Oration of the Life and Death of Peter Martyr
annexed to the end of his Common-places in English fol. Q q. on the a. side
paulo post initium) reports that many learned Calvinists did, in explication
of the Sacrament, use a certain affected obscurity; that accordingly Bucer
often times exhorted Peter Martyr that in the question of the Lords Supper he
would use some certain obscure and doubtful kind of speaking. That also
thereupon Peter Martyr gave place to Bucer, and used the self same Forms of
doubtful speaking that Bucer did, see further hereof, Hospinianus in Hist.
Sacrament. part. 2. fol. 210. a. fine, and b. initio. And of the very same
doubtful writing of Melancthon in the same question of the Sacrament, Osiander
in epitom etc. Cent. 16. page 614. gives Testimony saying, Calvinus crebris
ad Melancthonem literis datis, hortatus est eum, ut aperte and perspicue
sententiam suam de Caena Domini profiteretur etc. Sed Philippus neque apertam,
and ab omnibus ambiguitatibus alienam confessionem sibi extorqueri persuaderi
passus est, etc. ita Philippus interdum cum Calvinistis collusit, interdum cum
Lutheranis facere videri vult, and Osiander ibidem page 826. initio, says of
the Calvinists Divines of Wittemberg. Wittembergenses Theologi edunt
confessionem de Caena Domini, non totam sinceram, sed ambiguitatibus involutam
etc. Theologi autem Jenenses admonent Ecclesiam Christi, etc. Wittembergensium
phrases in hoc negotio esse ambiguas, quae in utramque partem flecti queant,
and meros esse Cothurnus, and page 841. versus finem he mentions and
reproves occultissimos Calvinistas, qui sub ambiguitatibus and dissimulatione
veritatis latitare cupiebant, and see further there page 912. post med. and
913. initio. Insomuch as ibidem page 796. paulo post med. he reports for a
received Principle or R^le with the Calvinists, saying Hanc maximam, s^u
Regulam habent Calvinistae, licere pro gloria Christi mentiri. They have this
for a ground or principle, that it is lawful to lie for the glory of Christ.
And thus much briefly concerning Equivocation or worse than it) taught or
practiced by Luther, Zuinglus, Peter Martyr, Melancthon, Musculus, Szegedine,
Bucer, and many others before mentioned.

75 As concerning blessing of our Meat and Forehead, with the sign of the
Cross, and further use thereof in the public Liturgy, Joannes Creccelius in
his Discriptio and refutatio Ceremoniarum Missae etc. printed Magdeburgi Anno
1603. page 118. post medium, gives Testimony of the Lutherans Doctrine
saying: Nos autem non improbamus signum sanctae Crucis, si semel atque iterum
absque superstitione libere in divinis officiis adhibeatur atque usurpetur: imo
si privati cibi and potus libere signentur. Nam cum imus cabitum, sive surgimus
ex lecto, cruce nos juxta Lutheri and aliorum priorum institutionem signamus,
and Joannes Manlius (Luther's Scholar) in loc. commun. page 636. fine says,
Respondit Lutherus, signo Crucis facto, Deus me tueatur etc. As also the
Communion-Booke in the time of King Edward the Sixth (penned by advice and
approbation of Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and other Protestant Divines of that
time, and) printed Anno 1549. fol. 116. b. prescribes the Priests signing of
the Sacrament with the sign of the Cross. And fol. 131. a. it prescribes the
Priests like consecrating the Fountain of Baptism with the sign of the Cross:
All which is vulgarly contradicted by many others, as being in it self
superstitious and against Scripture.

76 To these Seventy and Five several points, we could add sundry other
Catholic Opinions, defended in like manner by our learned Adversaries: As the
guilt of original sin, and condemnation of the Heathen, against Zuinglius
(whereof see Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 9. subd. 3. from g. to q.) The
Divinity of Christ, against the Reformed protestant Churches of Polonia, and
Transylvania, (whereof see Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 10. subd. 13. sect.
3. at p. q.) The Authority of Bishops: and sundry other points against the
Puritans. And all these affirmed or denied on each part upon pretended
certainty from the Scriptures.

77 Pu. To this Consideration belong those many and learned Writers, who
expressly teach, that many of the chief points which we hold against
Protestants, are not necessary to Salvation, but indifferent, (which is
sufficient for us to be secure of Salvation for matters of Faith. Of this kind
Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 14. at next after f. in the margent, gives
diverse examples; As of Freewill, Prayer for the Dead, Honoring of Saints and
Relics, Invocation of Saints, Real presence, Transubstantiation, Receiving
one or both kinds, Our B. Ladies being preserved from Original sin,
Worshipping of Images, Granting Primacy to the Pope, and denying it to Kings,
Satisfaction and Merit of Works, Mass, Seven Sacraments, Auricular confession.
Of all which Brereley (ubi supra) cites exactly the Protestant Authors, and the
places of their Books, which we will put down in the fifth Consideration, where
we show that Protestants yield us Salvation. And it is to be observed that even
Puritan Writers grant this indifferency, as appears in Brereley.

78 Besides what has been said, that several Protestants hold with us in
diverse points of our Faith; Protestants when they pretend to make a Catalogue
of Professors of their Faith through all Ages, are wont to allege the
Waldenses, Wiccliff, and Husse; and yet it is certain, that these men, in most
points, held with us against Protestants.

79 Of Waldo, or Waldenses, Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. subd. 3. and 5.
shows out of Protestant Writers, That they held the Real presence in the
Sacrament, That the Doctrine of Justification by only Faith, was so unknown to
Waldo, and he so wholly affected to our Catholic Doctrine of Merits and Works,
that he did forsake all things, that being poor he might follow Christ, and the
Evangelicall perfection, which our Adversaries reject for Popish. Insomuch as
he and his followers, were a very Order or Profession of begging Friars, and
therefore called the poor men of Lions, professing) as D. Humfrey in Jesuitismi
part. 2. page 270. circa med. urges) a kind of Monastical life, wherein they
were so forward, that they afterward made means to Innocentius the third, then
Pope, to have their Order by him confirmed, but could not prevail, by reason
of certain supestitious things perceived in their Conversation, and it is
notorious that they maintained diverse absurd and gross Heresies, contrary both
to Catholics and Protestants, as Brereley shows ubi supra subd. 4. and 5.
They held also with Catholics in the number of Sacraments, in the Doctrine of
single life, Vows, Holy Scripture, good Works, justification, Baptism of
Infants, Purgatory, etc. as the protestant Writer Benedictus Morgenstern
witnesses in tract. de Ecclesiae page 79. paulo post medium.

80 Wiccliffe, says Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 4. with his Disciples, went
barefooted, and basely clothed in course russet Garments down to the heels,
and seemed to contemn all temporal Goods for the love of eternal Riches,
adjoined himself to the beging Friars, approving their poverty, and extolling
their perfection, retaining also his former Catholic opinion (as Brereley
proves out of Wiccliffs own writings) concerning Holy water, the worshipping of
Relics and Images, the intercession of our blessed L. St. Mary, (whereof he
says in Sermon. de assumptione Mariae: Videtur mihi quod impossible est nos
praemiare sine Mariae suffragio etc.) the apparel and Tonsure of Priests, the
Rights and Ceremonies of Mass, extreme Unction, and all the seven Sacraments,
and all those sundry other Points of our Catholic Faith, now in question, with
denial whereof he is not found so much as charged.

81 Husse (as Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 5. proves out of Protestant
Writers) believed seven Sacraments, Transubstantiation, the Popes Primacy, the
Mass it self, and being a Catholic Priest, he said Mass even to his dying
day, and observed the Vows of Priestly Chastity; in the Doctrine concerning
Free Will, Predestination, informed Faith, the cause of Justification, and
merit of good works, Images, he agreed with Catholics.

82 To the aforesaid learned Protestants, I may add two famous men, the one an
Englishman, the other a Stranger, I mean D. Andrews pretended Bishop of
Winchester, and Hugo Grotius a man of great estimation among Protestants.

83 As for D. Andrews, in his Stricturae, or A brief Answer to the 18. chapter
of the first book of Cardinal Perron's Reply etc. n. 1. he disclames from the
opinion of Zuinglius, and also says plainly, It cannot be denied but reserving
the Sacrament, was suffered a long time in the Primitive Church: From whence we
must infer, that Christ is present in the Sacrament permanently, and not only
in the Action or use. Yea he grants that in time of persecution Christians were
permitted to carry away how great a part they would, and to keep it by them,
and to take it at times to comfort them; that those that lived in remote desert
places, as Anchorets and Hermets, were permitted to carry with them how much
they thought good, because a long time together they were not to come back to
places where any Churches were; that they did carry it about with them in their
journey etc. Out of which Concessions, I infer by the way, that Christians
did not always receive the Sacrament under both kinds, seeing it is clear, that
Wine could not be so long conserved in hot countries, nor delivered to so many,
in different Vessels to be kept at home or carried up and down in journies etc.
n. 9. he says, For offering and praying for the dead, there is little to be
said against it; it cannot be denied but that it is ancient. n. 10.11. He
acknowledges the Fast of Lent, and that Protestants fast not on Christmas day,
though it fall upon a Friday or a Saturday. n. 12. He professes the restraint
of Priests from marrying not to be against either Jus Natural, or Divinum.
From which grant it follows, that the Arguments which Protestants are wont to
allege out of Scripture, or natural reason, to prove the unlawfulness of such
restraint, are of no force: For if they were of force, it should be against Jus
Natural or Divinum, and no positive Law could ordain it. n. 13. He grants,
that Vows of a single life, made orderly and duly, are to be kept, and cannot
be broken without offense. n. 14. He does not disallow the mingling of Water
with Wine in the Eucharist, as also n. 17. He does not reprove in the
Ceremonies of Baptism, the sign of the Cross, and the consecration or
hallowing of the Water, and confesses, that Crism indeed is very ancient. n.
18. He confesses the necessity of Baptism, via ordinaria. n. 20. He
confesses, that the ancient Church had the five Orders of Ostiarius, Lector,
Exorcist, Acolythus, Subdeacon, which we hold and keep, but Protestants reject.
n. 20. He says, the Church of England does hold, that there is a distinction
between Bishop and Priest, and that de jure divino. n. 23. He tells us, that
the Protestant Church of England holds Good works necessary to Salvation, and
that Faith without them saves not: that no man is predestinate to do evil:
nor that it is safe for any man peremptorily to presume himself predestinate.
From whence it follows, that men are not justified by an assured and certain
belief that they are just and predestinate: for with such a Faith it could not
be presumption, but certainty to believe himself predestinate. n. 25. He
grants, that in time of persecution, and after in the time of Peace, so long as
the Christians dwelt mingled with the Heathen, they showed plainly by making
and using the Cross, that they were not ashamed of that sign, wherewith the
Heathen men did use to deride them. What then shall we say of Protestants, who
deride us Catholics for not being ashamed of that sign, wherewith the Heathen
men did use to deride Christians? and much more, what shall we say of those who
sacrilegiously abuse and break down that holy sign? Ibidem he grants, that the
primitive Christians, in time of persecution, used Lights and Incense (though
voluntarily he faign to himself the reason for which they used them) and after
when Peace came, Christians retained both the Lights and the Incense, to show
themselves to be the Sons and Successors of those ancient Christians, which in
former times had used them, showing their Communion in the former Faith, by the
communion of the former Usages. What then shall we say of Protestants, who in
us deride those things as superstitious, but that they show themselves not to
be the Sons and Successors of those ancient Christians, nor to have communion
of that former Faith? In the Brief of the 26. Heads, he says, The Church of
England holds Feasts in Memory of the Saints and Martyrs, with other points,
which I omit. In his Sermon upon the 20. of St. John, n. 23. he says,
confession to a Priest is necessary, urging that of St. Augustine hom. 49. de
50. homil. Nemo tibi dicat occulte ago paenitentiam; apud Deum ago, ergo sine
causa dictum est: Quae solveritis in Terra, soluta erunt in Coelo, ergo sine
causa claves datae sunt Ecclesiae Dei: frustramus Evangelium Dei, frustramus
Verba Christi. Finally to join his deeds with his words, when the Bishop of
Spalata, by way of complaint, said to some (of Andrews:) iste Episcopus torue
me aspicit, this Bishop shows me a sour countenance; Andrews not denying the
thing, answered: This man could have no good meaning in coming to England from
a place, where he had in abundance all things for the salvation of his Soul.

84 Now to show how far Grotius stands for us against other Protestants, I will
cite only, and that briefly, what I find in two Books which he wrote in his
ripest age, after long study and mature consideration. The one book he calls
Votum pro pace Ecclesiastica, the other, Rivetiani Apologetici pro Schismate
contra votum pacis facti, discussio.

85 First then, he teaches that Good-Works are not only a way to, but also a
cause of reigning. vot. page 26. Secondly that there is true merit vot. page
27. Discuss. page 46.50.53. line 1. and 2. Thirdly, that we are not certain of
our salvation certitudine fidei. vot page 28. Discuss. page 55. and ibidem.
Fourthly, that with Gods Grace, we may observe the Covenant between God and
Man. Fifthly, that the Pope is constituted above all Bishops to take away the
occasion of Sciusm, vot. page 32. Sixthly, that ancient Churches and Fathers
were wont to have recourse to him in doubts concerning Faith, Discuss. page 23.
That the Popes power and primacy is necessary for deciding Controversies in
Religion, Discuss. page 63. and ibidem page 66. and sequentibus, he proves the
primacy and prerogative of the Pope, by diverse excellent proofs of the ancient
Fathers and times; and to conclude, he says, that there can on Union in
matters of Faith, and Religion be hoped for, except under the Pope. Discuss.
page 255. his words are these: Restitutionem Christianorum in unum idemque
corpus, semper optatam a Grotio, sciunt, qui eum norunt. Existimavit autem
aliquando (etc.) incipi posse a protestantium inter se conjunctione. Postea
vidit, id plane fieri nequire; quia praeterquam quod Calvinistarum ingenia
firm omnium ab omni pace sunt alienissima, Protestants nullo inter se communi
Ecclesiastico regimine sociantur: quae causae sunt, cur factae parts, in unum
Protestantium corpus colligi nequeant; imo and cur parts aliae atque aliae
sint exsurrecturae. Quare nunc plane ita sentit Grotius, and multi cum ipso,
non posse Protestants inter se jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum iis, qui Sedi
Romanae cohaerent; sine qua nullum sperari potest in Ecclesia commune regimen.
Ideo optat, ut ea divulsio, quae evenit, and causae divulsionis tollantur.
Inter eas causas non est primatus Episcopi Romani secundum canonas, fatente
Melancthone; qui eum primatum etiam necessarium putat ad retinendam unitatem.
Neque enim hoc est Ecclesiam subjicere pontificis libidini, sed reponere
ordinem, sapienter institutum, etc. Seventhly, that the Baptism of St. John
Baptist did not forgive sins, but was imperfect in comparison of Christian
Baptism, Discuss. page 76. vot. page 38. Eighthly, that Saints hear our prayers,
and that the ancient Writers did believe that Saints hear us. Vot. page 68. 69.
70. and 71. That the ancient Fathers defended and practiced Invocation of
Saints, he proves at large, Discuss. page 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107.
out of Chrisostom, Augustine, Hierom, Prudentius, Basil, Theodoret, Ambrose,
Origin, and concludes, that from so great consent of Fathers it appears, that
praying to Angels and Saints, was approved by the Churches of those times, and
that if it be Idolatry, there was no Church of God upon Earth. Yea he says
that K. James acknowledges that in the fourth Age there is to be found examples
of Invocation of Saints, and that it is free from Idolatry he proves it out of
Luther in Epistola ad Georgium Spalatinum, and ad Erfordienses, and out of
Oecolampadius in Annotationibus ad Chrisostomum, and that Bucer does not
condemn it. Ninthly, that Catholics are not (...), or Bread-adorers, or
Idolaters in worshipping Christ in the Sacrament. Tenthly, that Communion of the
Laity under both kinds is not necessary, nor any divine command. vot. page 81.
Discuss. page 249. Eleventhly, he says that anointing the sick was used in the
primative times, and lasted through all Churches without interruption till
Luthers time, vot. page 82. Discuss. page 128. Twelfthly, he defends learnedly
the authority, and certainty of Tradition, and answers what may be objected to
the contrary; vot. page 101. 102. 103. 104. Discuss. page 26. 179. 189.
Thirteenthly, that the vulgar Translation of the Scripture of all others is the
safest, Quae (says he) nullum habet malum dogma, sicut tot saeculorum and
gentium concensus judicavit, which contains no ill Doctrine, as the consent of
so many Ages and Nations have judged. Fourteenthly, he holds works of
supererogation. Vot. page 112. 15. Seven Sacraments Discuss. page 75. 76. 128.
16. Works of satisfaction. Discuss. page 84. 220. That they who teach
Justification by Faith alone run in a circle, and utter unintelligible things.
17. Prayer for the dead, and Purgatory, Discuss. page 144. 145. 146. 147. 148.
149. etc. 18. That Grace may be lost. 19. Distinction of Mortal and Venial
sins. Discuss. page 206. 207. etc. 20. He does not deny that God may be painted
ea forma, qua se patribus conspiciendum dedit, which he proves even from the
learned Jews, as also from Philosophers. Discuss. page 114.

86 But to show that we may in Favor of Catholics allege not one or many
particular men, but the whole Protestant Church of England, it is to be
observed, that their Communion book, together with the Articles and book of
Ordination, were composed in the year 1547 by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Bishops of Rochester, Ely, Hereford, Worcester, Lincoln, Chichester, wherein is
Invocation of Saints, and prayer for the dead, as has been said in the first
Consideration number. 28.

87 The further I proceed in this so important an Argument, and Consideration,
the more matter offers it self. We have showed diverse ways, how many learned
Protestants stand for us against their Brethren; There remains yet a
Demonstration of the same Truth, taken from a great pretended Protestant, who
proves and grants this to be true, even by denying it to be true. The case
stands thus, Mr. Chillingworth in his book (approved by three principal men of
Oxford) c. 5. n. 91. page 292. speaks thus to the Author of the book
entitled Charity maintained by Catholics. who, part. 1. c. 5. n. 31. page
196. says to D. Potter, You cannot be ignorant, but that many chief learned
Protestants are forced to confess the Antiquity of our Doctrine and practice,
and do in several, and many Controversies, acknowledge that the ancient Fathers
stand on our side. Now seeing we have in this third Consideration proved, that
many chief Protestants in the most important differences between us and them,
hold our Doctrine to be true, and consequently to be most ancient, I wonder how
Mr. Chillingworth will answer the now alleged words of Charity maintained. His
Answer consists in alleging some particular points, wherein he pretends that
our Doctrine is not confessed to be ancient, in which enumeration if we can
demonstrate his Instances to be either untrue or impertinent, this our third
Consideration will remain true; That chiefest Protestants in chiefest points,
hold with us against their pretended Brethren. For it is a true Axiom, Exceptio
firmat oppositam regulam; If he can show only some particulars wherein
Protestants agree not with us; he yields, ipso facto, that for the rest they
hold as we do, and so, as I said, his verbal denial is a real proof of our
Doctrine and Practice; Let us examine his particulars.

88 First, he specifies the Doctrine of the Communion in one kind: But of this
we have showed that the Doctrine of Catholics (which is, that the Communion of
the Laity in one kind, is neither commanded nor forbidden, but of it self
indifferent) is defended to be indifferent by many of the chiefest, and most
learned, and of greatest authority among Protestants.

89 Secondly, he names the lawfulness and expediency of the Latin service. I
wonder how he durst question the lawfulness of Latin service, it being
practiced in the Universities: And in Queen Elizabeth's time, in Wales the
service was read in English, where the people understand it not. Yea Nichol.
Harpsfield in Hist Wiccleffianorum c. 16. inter caetera says, Ex aliis
dogmatibus (quae Wiccliffianis communia erant) quae Licestriani isti
sectabantur fuit and illud, non licere Missas aut Horas Matutinas, sive
Vespertinas, sonore, and alta voce in Ecclesia and Templis recitare. Cardinal
Richilieu deservedly taxes heretical Ministers, for reading in certain
Countries the Service in a language not understood by the people of those
Countries, saying, (in his book called Defensio praecipuorum fidei Catholicae
Capitum, c. 4. sect. 2. page 121.) to the Ministers of Charanton: Populum
universum quae dicuntur intelligere pugnatis oportere, and tamen sectatores
vestri, qui in Bearnia, Gallia, Marbonensi, Provincia, Fasconia degunt, non
sunt Gallicae linguae peritiores, quam latinae populi, qui in Ecclesia
Catholica vivunt; and tamen illarum regionum Ministri Gallicam in officiis
linguam usurpant, non autem illarum Provinciarum linguam. The same Cardinal,
sect. 1. page 111. says, Habendum esse aliquem hominum delectum, neque omnia
omnibus passim proponenda, nemo dubitat (inquit Whitakerus l. contra Duraeum
sect. 15.) Evangelii doctrina multos reddit perversiores and improbiores; addit
idem Whitakerus Controvers. 1. q. 2. c. 17. The Reader may be pleased to see
what we have said above about promiscuous reading of Scripture in English, as
not permitted in K. Edwards time, and Consideration 1. number. 29.
disallowed by D. Collins. The greater the Authority of Scripture is, with
greater obstinacy men stick to their Errors, falsely pretended to be contained
in Scripture, read or heard. Besides, D. Potter page 62. 63. puts Latin
service among those points which are not fundamental, nor necessary to
constitute a Church; and in King Edward's time, Stow (Chron. page 594.)
reports, The French King being deceased etc. also the Church of St. Paul in
London being hanged with black, and a sumptuous Hearse set up in the Quire, a
Dirige was there sung; and on the next morrow, the Archbishop of Canterbury
(Cranmer) assisted of Eight Bishops all in rich Myters and other their
Pontificalls, did sing a Mass of Requiem etc. The Protestant Hospinianus in
Hist. Sacramentar. part. 2. fol 33. says, Docet (Lutherus) liberum esse sive
in vulgari, sive in peregrina lingua celebrare: Which is the very Doctrine of
Catholics, who teach, that there as no Divine Precept or prohibition to
celebrate public Offices in a learned or vulgar language, and therefore it
must be left to the power and Ordinance of the Church, which we are commanded
to hear, and of which we must learn what in particular circumstances is most
expedient for the Common good. Of this point I will allege, what Brereley has
in his Liturgy of the Mass, tract. 5. sect. 4. subd. 3. page 449. 450. 451.
452. 453. where he says; The more ancient proof and reason (of celebrating the
public Liturgy in Latin) is established and certain; for seeing it is heretofore
made plain, that in the other much more ancient times, the Chancell in which
the Priest did celebrate the public Liturgy, was so Apud Brereley in the
Liturgy etc. tract. 1. sect. 2. subd. 1. in the margent. at m. o. Council 6.
Constable. Can. 69. says, Nulli omnium, qui sit in laicorum numero, liceat intra
sacrum Altar ingredi etc. ex antiquissima traditione. Hist. Tripartit. l. 9.
c. 30. versus finem, It is reported concerning Chancels, how that Ambrosius non
quievit sed differentiam locorum edocuit. And that St. Ambrose said thereupon,
O Imperator, interiora loca tantum sacerdotibus sunt collata, quae caeteri nec
ingredi, nec contingere permittuntur: egredere igitur etc. And see further
concerning Chancells, Socrates Hist. l. 5. c. 17. versus finem. And Zozomen.
Hist. l. 7. c. 24. And Council. Laodicen. can. 19. and Council. Agathens. can 66.
And Germanus Constantinopolitanus in Theoria paulo post initium, says,
Cancelli locum orationis designant, quosque extrinsecus populus accedit:
intrinsecus autem sunt sancta sanctorum solis Sacerdotibus pervia. And apud
Brereley in the Preface sect. 7. initio at e. D. Reynolds in his Conference
etc. page 488. allegeth that Dionysius makes mention of Churches and Chancels
therein severed with such sanctification from the rest of the Church, that
Laymen might not enter thereinto. See more hereof in Brereley ubi supra tract.
1. sect. 2. subd. 1. in the margent at n.
several to the Clergy, as that the Lay people might not enter thereto; and
that also diverse parts of the public prayers usual there in Mass-time, were
Apud Brereley in the Liturgy etc. in the Preface, sect. 14. at the second h. In
Basil 's Liturgy fol. 38. at g. and fol. 41. b. Pontifex secret: and the same
yet further there, fol. 34. b. 38. a. b. 39. a. b. 41. b. 45. b. 43. b. And in
Chrysostom 's Liturgy fol. 56. a. fine, and fol. 50. b. it is said: and dicit
sacerdos remissa voce: and fol. 59. a. it is said: dicit orationem hanc
sacerdos sedatissima voce: and see there fol. 61. circa med. and apud Brereley
in the Liturgy etc. tract. 5. sect. 3. at e. in the margent it is said; In
Basil 's Liturgy it is said, tunc elevans manus Pontifex dicit secret. fol.
38. and vide ibidem fol. 36. 39. 40. 42. 43. etc. And this ceremony is further
mentioned in Chrysostom 's Liturgy fol. 56. and 61. and the ancient Laodicen
Council can. 19. says hereof, tres orationes fiant, prima per silentium,
secunda, and tertia, per vocis pronuntiationem, and tunc demum of culum pacis
dari debere. And see Innocentius Epist. 1. ad Decentium, c. 1. whose testimony
in this point ^s so plain, that Hutterus de Sacrificio M^ssatico, page 590.
answering thereto, says thereof: Innocentii primi authoritatem merito
explodimus, quippe ab host veritatis petitum; and before all these see St.
Clement (the Apastles Scholar) in constit. Apost. after the Antwerp print of
1604 l. 2. c. 61. fol. 56. Hereto also is not impertinent the Veil used of
ancient in the Greek Church, wherewith the Priest was for the time compassed
about, whereof S. Chrysostom (apud Brereley in the Liturgy etc. tract. 2.
sect. 7. initio at z.) ad pop. hom. 61. circa med. says: Dum hic profertur
sacrificium, and Christus immolatur, and ovis Dominica, cum audieris, oremus
omnes communiter, cum vela videris retrahi, tunc superne caelum aperiri cogita,
and Angelos descendere etc.
pronounced in secret, it is thereby made undoubted, that the public Liturgy
was not then made audible and common to the Lay people. Also there is not any
appearing necessity herein of the vulgar language, for seeing that the Priests
proper and principal end in his celebrating of Mass and Sacrisice, is thereby
not to instruct the people, but to worship God (as says St. Augustine thereof
Hereof Brereley in the Liturgy of the Mass, tract. 3. sect. 1. subd. 2. at f.
in the margent says, Aug. contra Faustum Manichaeum l. 20. c. 21. speaking of
the sacrifice which Christ commanded in his institution of the New Testament at
his last Supper, says, Non dixi sacrificare Deo in memoriis Martyrum quod
frequentissime facimus illo duntaxat ritu quo sibi sacrificari Novi Testamenti
manifestatione praecepit, quod pertinet ad illum cultum qui latria dicitur, and
uni Deo debetur. What can be more plainly spoken to prove that Christ in his
Institution of the Sacrament, ordained and commanded Sacrifice?
cultu latriae) and to make Hieron. in c. 1. ad Titum says, Quid de Episcopo
sentiendum est, qui quotidie pro suis populique peccatis illibatas Deo
oblaturus est victimas? and Ambrose in Psalm. 38. says, Vidimus principem
sacerdotum ad nos venientem, vidimus and audivimus offerentem pro nobis
sanguinem suum: sequamur ut possumus sacerdotes ut offeramus pro Populo
Sacrificium, etsi infirmi, tamen honorabiles sacerdotio; and Nazianzen Epist.
8. ad Simplicium haeret. terms the Priest The Mediator between God and Man;
and Ignatius in Epist. ad Smirnens. says, In the Church nothing is greater
than the Bishop, who sacrifices to God for the safety of the World; and
Chrysostom. de sacerdot. lib. 6. c. 4. initio, says: Nam eum qui pro omni
civitate (quid autem dico pro civitate?) Imo pro universo mundo legatione
fungitur, and deprecatur iniquitatibus omnium propitium Deum fieri, non solum
viventium sed etiam mortuorum, qualem putas esse debere? And apud Brereley in
the Liturgy etc. in the preface etc. sect. 14. at the first r. in the margent,
it is said, In Basils Liturgy fol. 40. a. post med. Suscipe nos appropinquantes
sanct^ Altari tuo, ut simus digni offerre tibi rationabile istud and absque
sanguine sacrificium pro nostris peccatis and populi ignorantia, etc. suscipe
servitutem nost^^m sicut suscepist^ Abel munera, Noe sacrificium, etc. And
Chrysostom. Liturgy fol. 53. a. fine says, Fac nos dignos offerendo tibi
preces, and hostiam incruentam pro universo populo tuo. And ibid. fol. 59. b.
Fac me dignum sacerdotii gratia indutu^^ assist^re sanctae ^uae mensae, ac
consecrare sanctum corpus tuum, and pretiosum sanguinem. And agam fol. 60. b.
Fac nos offerre tibi dona. and sacrificium spirituale pro nostris pecca^is, and
ignoranti^s populi. And the Apostle, Hebr. 5.1.3. teaches accordingly that
every Priest is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer
gifts and Sacrifices for sins, etc. as or the people, so also for himself.
Oblation and Prayers for himself and the people, it is sufficient that God
understands what is therein said and done by the Priest; as for the people,
the Priests act of celebrating of public service for them, depends not upon
the correspondence of their particular understanding, no more than does his
like confessedly practiced oblation Apud Brereley in the Liturgy etc. tract. 3.
sect. 1. subd. 3. in the margent at 4. See Bullinger 's Testimony hereof in his
Decades in English, page 1082. and Mr. Fulk against Purgatory, page 362. and
363. and Hospinian. hist. Sacram. (apud Brereley in the Liturgy etc. tract. 3.
sect. 2. subd 2. in the margent at g.) reproves the Fathers etc. namely
Ca^olus Magnus, Tharasius, Joannes Eleemosynarius, Damascen, and Isiodore,
charging them directly with Mass for the dead: For which he recites their
particular Sayings, l. 3. page 281. and see more hereof in Brereley ibid. sect.
1. subd. 3. in the margent at b. ibidem at 5. Aug. l. 9. Conf. c. 11. says,
Cum offeretur pro ea sacrificium pret^i nostri; and ibidem c. 13. he further
says of his sick Mother, Non ista mandavit (Monica) nobis, sed tantummodo
memoriam sui ad Altar tuum fieri desideravit etc. unde sciret dispensari
victimam sanctam qua deletum est chirographum quod erat contrarium nobis.
Ibidem also at t. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 110. faith, Neque negandum est
defunctorum animas pietate suorum viventium relevari, cum pro illis sacrificium
mediatoris offertur, Ibidem at u. Aug. de verbis Apost. sermon. 34. says, Hoc
enim a patribus traditum universa observat Ecclesia, ut pro eiis qui in
corporis and sanguinis Christi communione desuncti sunt, cum ad ipsum
sacrificium loco suo commemorantur, oretur, ac pro illis quoque id osterri
commemoretur. Ibidem at x. Aug. in Enchirid. c. 110. The sacrifice of the
Altar, or of Alms, which are offered for the dead, are thanksgiving for those
that be very good, (or in Heaven) and propitiations for those that be not very
evil, (or not in Hell) and vide Aug. de verbis Apost. sermon. 17. and in Joan.
tract. 84. Ibidem in Brereley at y. Cyprian. l. 1. Epist. 9. says,
Antecessores nostri etc. censuerunt ne quis frater excedens etc. Clericum
nominaret, ac si quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec pro dormitione
ejus sacrificium celebraretur, Ibidem also at z. Chrysostomus hom. 69. ad pop.
says, Non temere ab Apostolis haec suerunt sancita, ut in tremendis mysteriis
defunctorum agatur commemoratio, sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere
lucrum, utilitatem multam: and the very same he affirms in hom. 3. in Epist.
ad Philip. et vide Hom. 21. in Acta Apostolorum, and Hom. 41.1. Cor. Ibidem at
a. Tertull, de corona militis, says, Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis
Annua facimus; and Cirill. Hierosolymit. cateches. 5. says, Maximum esse
credimus animarum juvamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius and
tremendi quod in Altari positum est sacrificii: See further hereof Eusebius de
vita Constantini, l. 4. c. 17. and Ambrose l. 2. Epist. 8. ad Faustinum, and
Council. 2. Cabilonens. can. 39. and Council. 1. Brach. can. 34. 35. 39. and see
the Liturgies of St. James, fol. 28. a. of Basil, fol. 44. initio, and of
Chrysostom, fol. 62. b. fine: and Clemens l. 8. Apostol. Constitut. after the
Antwerp print of 1564. c. 18. See also more hereof in Brereley in the Liturgy
etc. ibidem at b. By all which it is sufficiently proved, that the Primitive
Church held the Priests celebration absolute in it self without any necessity
of the peoples particular understanding.
for the dead, depend upon correspondence held with them, but is in it self
accomplished and perfect, as was the Priests Sacrifice in the old law, for
himself and the whole Congregation, whereat the people And there shall be no
man in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when he goes in to make an
altonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement
for himself, and for his household, and for all the Congregation of Israel.
Leviticus 16.17.
might not be present. And so accordingly Apud Brereley in the Liturgy etc.
tract. 5. sect. 3. fine at * in the margent, Beza in Epist. Theolog. ep. 8.
page 73. says, Plerique tamen ex vetustissimis illis (Patribus) Christianorum
sacra non aliter quam Cereris mysteria quaedam occultanda censuerunt, adeo ut
ne Catechumenos quidem ad spectandum admiserint, and totam illam actionem, in
qua quicquid paucis and simplicibus symbolis figurabatur, verbo suo clare and
ea lingua quae ab omnibus intelligeretur explicato palam praedicari and
promulgari voluit ac praecepit Dominus, sicut and ipsemet factitavit, in
Aporreta quaedam and ne ipsis quidem mystis plerisque intellecta sacra
transformarunt; and page 82. He taxes herein both the ancient and new
Liturgies, as well of the East, as of the West; and page 83. he says,
Introducta sunt paulatim pro mensis Altaria etc. at qui primam hanc arripuit
occasionem Satan, sacram istam actionem non dandi sed accipiendi Christi causa
institutam in sacrificium ctiam ilasticon transformandi; non placuerunt
vulgares and simplices Hymni etc. non placuit simplex and communis apparatus,
idcirco conquiri marmora, inaurati parietes, vasa aurea and argentea comparari,
pretiosae etiam and pontificales atque adeo imperatoriae vestes Ministris
circundari caeperunt, honorandi scilicet Sacramenti causa, rotundi panes
singulis porrigi caepti and ritus a Domino institutus abrogatus; non placuit
vel sedentibus vel stantibus panem in manum porrigi ut olim fiebat, sed attolli
panem quasi venerandum etc. and page 79. he says, Totum illum apparatum quo
vetustissimi etiam illi Baptismum and Coenam Domini se exornare posse putarunt
non satis mirari possum etc.
Theodore Beza confesses of the public Liturgies celebration had in the times
of the most ancient Fathers. Moreover, the inconvenience of the vulgar language
seems great, as well in respect of the The change of the vulgar languages
appears by example of our own, so greatly altered from the first old English,
as that ours now used, is almost become another language, a thing so incident
to other Nations, that M. D. Morton in Apolog. Cath. part. 1. cap. 10. page 25.
says, Tu igitur tempus primum demonstra, quo vernacula Graeca, Romana,
Hebraea, primo caeperint a nativa sua integritate degenerate.
change and degenerating, daily incident to those languages; as also in regard
of the Communion of dispersed Churches in Foreign Nations, which is preserved by
Latin Service, so as in what Country soever of the Latin Church any stranger
sojourneth, he is yet, in regard of the Church service and public worship of
God, as though he were at home; and so accordingly the Italian Priest may
celebrate his public Liturgy as well in France, and Germany, as in Italy, and
the like may be said of other people and nations; the contrary whereof falls
out upon the variable and diverse celebration of the public Liturgy according
to the diversity of rites and vulgar languages variably observed in several
nations. Besides, the ancient presidents of public Liturgies within the first
600. years, are worthy of observation herein, for the Liturgies in those
ancient times used by the Oriential Churches are either Greek or Caldee, as
likewise all the like ancient Liturgies of the west Church are only Latin,
which argues that upon the first conversion of nations, the public Liturgy
was not diversely first taught and celebrated according to the diversity of
vulgar Languages.

And whereas our adversaries do no less vehemently than usually object to the
contrary that which the Apostle writes to the Corinthians, of 1. Cor. 14.15.
prayer with understanding. To forbear that longer discourse had in explication
thereof by our other See the Annotations of the Rhemish Testament upon this
place.
writers, I briefly answer: first, that though we should suppose it were meant
of our ordinary prayers, (as indeed it is only spoken of languages I would
that you all spoke strange languages, but rather that you prophesied, for
greater is he that prophesies, than he that speaks with Tongues, except he
explained it, that the Church may receive edification. verse 5. Even so you,
for so much as you covet spiritual gifts, seek that you may excel unto the
edifying of the Church. v. 12. Whereby, and yet further by the 13.26.27. and
28. verses, is made evident that the Apostles discourse is not of vulgar
languages, but only of such Tongues as then were given by Miracle, before which
he here prefers the gift of interpretation: As also the prayer in a strange
tongue here mentioned ver. 14. concerns likewise the spiritual prayers then
uttered in a strange tongue given by extraordinary and miraculous gift, and
therefore is impertinent to the point now properly issuable.
given in those first times by miracle) yet it is in such sort defective as
against us, as well for that our present question is only of Churches Liturgy
celebrated by the Priest, who understands the same, and not concerning the
primitive prayers of the Faithful, whom to understand their prayers, we do not
forbid: As also, for that concerning prayers though not understood, the Apostle
does not there forbid and condemn them, but to the contrary in the same place
expressly If I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my
understanding is without fruit. 1. Cor. 14.14. Wherein it is to be observed,
that the Apostle here says, that not the prayer but the understanding is
unfruitful, affirming plainly that nevertheles the devotion or spirit of the
party so praying is acceptable, or (as the marginall Notes of the English Bible
of 1576. upon this place at 1. are) does his part.
affirms that the spirit and affection of the party so praying, does pray
well toward God, although his understanding be not thereby instructed.
Secondly though we should for the time yet further suppose with our
Adversaries, that the Apostles saying did concern the prayers made in the
public Liturgy, yet so also it makes nothing for them; for thus much, though
supposed, at the most but proves, that the Clergy celebrating this Liturgy,
should understand the same: As for the other question of the Lay peoples actual
joining with the Priest in the celebration thereof, that is nothing at all
hereby inferred or proved, but at the most (the premises, though supposed,
notwithstanding) remains in question still as before; Nay the Apostle himself
(his saying being so understood) seems rather to signify the contrary, in his
affirming that not all the vulgar or unlearned, but If thou bless in the
Spirit, how hall he that supplyeth the place of the vulgar say Amen upon the
blessng, seeing he understands not what thou say? 1. Cor. 14.16.
one specially appointed to supply their place, must for them all answer Amen;
so as the Lay peoples joint action herein with the Priest, is by the Apostles
words (according to this supposed understanding of the place) rather excluded
than directly proved.

90 Thirdly, Mr. Chillingworth allegeth the present use of Indulgencies. But D.
Potter ( page 63.) whom Mr. Chillingworth undertook to defend, places this
matter as a thing not belonging to points fundamental, and necessary to
constitute a Church; so that although it were falsely and impiously supposed
that the Church erred in this particular (as it is impossible she should) yet
the error were not exclusive of Salvation. Nevertheless of the antiquity of
Indulgences, see the confession of Protestants in Brereley tract. 1. sect. 1.
page 62. and in the Tripple Cord Chap. 26. sect. 3. page 640. citing the
Centurists, Field, and Napper.

91 Fourthly, he talks of the Popes Power in Temporalities over Princes;
wherein he shows much malice, and no discretion, considering what we have
delivered in our first Consideration concerning the Doctrine of the greatest
Protestants, Calvin, Luther, Zuinglius, Beza, Knox, and others in order to
obedience of the civil Magistrate.

92 Fifthly, he objects the picturing of the Trinity. It were strange if he
did not know very well what may be answered to this point, but he was disposed
to cavil. Bellarmine tom. 2. de Reliquiis Sanctorum lib. 2. cap. 5. says, Non
est tam certum in Ecclesia, an sint faciendae Imagines Dei, five Trinitatis,
quam Christi and Sanctorum: hoc enim confitentur omnes Catholici, and ad fidem
pertinet, illud est in opinione; and accordingly he cites for that opinion of
not painting the Trinity, Abulensis, Durandus, and Perisius. Nevertheless
Bellarmine does answer clearly all that is objected against the said practice
of painting the Trinity; and indeed there can be no doubt made but that it is
very lawful and secure. See what has been said above out of Grotius, in so
much as D. Lawd in the Starr Chamber, to defend the practice, made a speech,
which is extant in print. But no man ought to wonder, that he excepts against
picturing the Trinity, seeing He and his Fellow-Socinians do not believe that
Mystery; and therefore in their wicked opinion, to picture the Trinity, were to
paint a nothing, or an Idol, as (de facto) they blasphemously affirm the
Blessed Trinity to be triplicem Cerberum, etc. as has been said in the first
Consideration number: 44. and accordingly they would wickedly paint this sacred
Mystery, if they were to make a picture thereof.

93. Sixthly, He specifies the worship of pictures. I answer; It has been
showed, both that Protestants confess the worship of Images to be ancient, and
also that some Protestants hold it: although indeed there needs no other proof
than the light of nature to make good, that respect and veneration is due to
pictures, if once it be granted that veneration is due to the Prototypons, or
those whom Images represent; nor can there be any doubt but that supernatural
veneration is due to Saints for their supernatural worth or Excellency, as
natural or civil respect is due to Magistrates, and the like, in regard of
their civil or natural perfection, dignity, or degree.

94. Seaventhly, he names Our Beads, Rosary, and our Ladies Psalter: and in a
word our whole worship of the B. Virgin. Answer. In the Beads, Rosarie, etc. We
may either speak of praying to, and worshipping of Saints, (which we have proved
heretofore) or of repeating in the Beads the same prayers, wherein there can be
no difficulty, if the former supposition of praying to Saints be granted as
lawful. For it it be lawful to do it once, why not often? How often are the
same words repeated in Scripture, and in particular Psalm. 135? and I wonder
what crime had it been for Mr. Chillingworth to have said a hundred times, God
give me his Holy Grace, first to know, and then to be constant in the true
Faith and Religion. If it be lawful to demand and beg often the same thing,
what imports it, whether we use the same or different words signifying the same
thing? or were it not superstition to put force in the mere difference, or
Identity of words, the thing or matter being confessedly the same? We
Catholics put not any force in the precise number (which were superstitious,
and heathenish) but in some mystery signified by that number. Is it not
recorded in the holy Gospel, Matthew. 26. v. 44. that our Blessed Savior in the
garden prayed thrice, saying the same words? A proof so pregnant in our behalf,
that D. Preston Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge speaking against
repeating the same prayer, when the said example of our Savior was alleged,
replied, it is true, but he was in an Agony, he knew not what he said. O
blasphemy! and yet none ought to wonder that this man speaks in this manner, if
he call to mind what we have related in the first Consideration, n. 46.
concerning Calvin, and ibid. n. 5. concerning Luther, and ibid. n. 52.
concerning Beza. Besides we have showed, Consideration 2. n. 23. at 79. that by
the confession of Protestants, numbering prayers upon little stones (or beads)
is very ancient.

95. Eighthly, He obtrudes, oblations by way of consumption, and therefore in
the quality of Sacrifices to the Virgin Mary and other Saints. My answer to
this must be, that neither I, nor any other, as I conceive, can riddle, what he
means by oblations by way of consumption, and therefore in the quality of
Sacrifies, etc. His conscience cannot but tell him, that he knows we offer
Sacrifice only to God. If he mean we use lights in the Church, and that
sometimes we place them before the Images of our Blessed Lady, and Saints, he
would do us a pleasure, if he could teach us to light candles or lamps without
their being consumed, but like that vision represented to Moses of a bush
burning and not consumed. So far are we from intending any oblation by way of
consumption, or in the quality of Sacrifice. I wonder he would make any such
objection as this, at that time when Protestants did much affect the use of
lights, Altars, and Pictures in their Churches. In the mean time who would not
(I know not whether to say) laugh, or conceive just indignation, to see so
great a Champion as M. Chillingworth was esteemed, to object such matters as
these, and, as causes sufficient to forsake Gods Church?

96. Ninthly, he specifyes our saying of Paternosters, and Creeds, to the hono^
of Saints, and of Ave-Maries to the honor of other Saints besides the Blessed
Virgin. This is not unlike to the former, neither can I imagine what difficulty
he can find that any good work, (as saying of Pater-nosters and Creeds is, even
in the account of Protestants, and the saying of Ave-Maries must be sapposed to
be in the opinion of these Protestants who allow prayers made to Saints) may be
offered in honor of Saints. What will he say to the known doctrine of S.
Augustine, that although Sacrifice be offered to God only, yet it may be
offered in honor of Saints? And much more why may not Pater-nosters and Creeds,
be offered in honor of Saints, and Ave-Maries in honor of other Saints, though
the words be directed only to the Blessed Virgin? In the mean time I return to
say; can such matters as these be alleged in the day of judgment, as
sufficient to excuse Luther and his followers, from the grievous sin of Schism,
in forsaking the Communion of all Churches then extant?

97. Tenthly, He names the infallibility of the Bishop or Church of Rome.
Answer. It cannot be expected that Protestants or any other divided from the
Church of Rome, will in express terms acknowledge her to be infallible under
that word of Infallible; but it has been showed, that if they will speak with
consequence to themselves, they cannot deny her to be infallible, while they
give her such titles, and grant her such Prerogatives, as we have seen
heretofore, and deny not but that the ancient Fathers yielded her a
pre-eminence before all other Churches, and took her Doctrine and Practice for
a Rule and proof of the Truth or falsehood of what was believed or practiced
through all Christian Churches; Yea and we have heard Protestants confessing
that the Popes Authority for conserving unity, and deciding Controversies in
matters of faith, is altogether necessary, and that there cannot be expected
any peace and union among Christians, except by submitting to the Pope.
Besides, Protestants commonly grant that the true Church is infallible in
fundamental points, and we must either say that the Roman Church was the true
Church, when Luther appeared, or that Christ had no true Church on earth at
that time, nor has any at this present, seeing even the chiefest Protestants
agree with us in many of those very points, for which the first Protestants
pretended to forsake all Churches extant when they appeared.

98. Eleaventhly, He objects our prohibiting the Scripture to be read
publickely in the Church in such languages as all may understand. Of this we
have spoken heretofore; Neither is it true, that there is any general
prohibition to read any Scripture in the Church in such a language as all may
understand; for some Preachers are wont to read in a vulgar language the
Gospel of which they are to preach; but our doctrine is, that there is no
Divine precept to use vulgar languages in the Liturgy or public Offices
recited in the name of the Church: But what would he say to the custom which I
have understood to have been used in Ireland, of forcing people of that Nation,
to be present even at Sermons made in English, of which they understand not one
word? which is a case far different from the use of an unknown tongue in the
Liturgy or public Offices ordained to the public worship of God by the
Church, and not referred immediately for a Catechism or Instruction of the
people, as Sermons are.

99. Twelfthly, He strangely mentions our doctrine of the Blessed Virgins
immunity from actual sin; and our doctrine and worship of her immaculate
Conception. Answer. It is a sign you want better matter, while you object these
points. Your conscience cannot but tell you, that you know we are so far from
making the immaculate Conception a point of Faith, that there is a severe
prohibition, that neither part censure the other of Heresy, Error, or the
like, so that this Instance is manifestly impertinent. The reader may be
pleased to read Bellarmine tom. 4. de amissione Gratiae and statu peccati lib.
4. cap. 15. where he says: Quod ad primum, (scilicet, non haberi apud
Catholicos pro re certa and explorata, ac fide Catholica tenenda, beatam
Virginem sine peccato fuisse conceptam) Joannes Pomeranus unus ex primis
Lutheri discipulis, in comment. cap. 1. and 44. Hierem. scribere ausus est, pro
articulo fidei, apud Catholicos haberi B. Virginem sine ullo peccato, immo
etiam de Spiritu Sancto fuisse conceptam. Sed hoc impudentissimum mendacium
satis aperte refellunt duae Pontificum constitutiones, and Concilii aecumenici
decretum, quibus constitutionibus, ac decretis Catholici omnes libenter
obediunt. Sixtus IV. Pontifex Max. in ea Constitutione quae incipit, Grave
nimis, de reliquiis and veneratione Sanctorum, desirtis verbis pronuntiat,
nondum esse quaestionem istam, de Conceptione B. Virginis, ab Ecclesia Romana
and Apostolica sede definitam, and ideo paenam excommunicationis statuit in
eos, qui alterutram sententiam ut haereticam damnare audent. Judicium Sixti
Pontificis sequutum est Concilium TRIDENTINUM ses. 5. ac demum nostro tempore
PIUS V. in constitutione quam edidit de conceptione Beatissimae Virginis
Mariae. Besides, Protestants themselves acknowledge this point to be a thing
indifferent, excusable, and not defined; as may be seen in the fifth
Consideration number. 4. at next after f. in the margent at Fifthly, and as
Brereley tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 14. in the margent at next after f. at Fifthly,
and tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 5. subd. 2. at f. in the margent proves saying,
Touching our B. Ladies being preserved from Original sin, and the worshipping
of Images, Mr. Bunny in his Treatise tending to pacification sect. 17. page
104. paulo ante med. and page 105. says, If any think it more honor able for
the Blessed Virgin (yea for Christ himself that took flesh of her) to have been
without sin, and thereuppon for his part do rather think that by special
praerogative she also was preserved from original corruption, etc. in these or
such like, whosoever will condemn all those that are not persuaded, as we are,
commits an uncharitable part toward those his brethren. And D. Field ibid.
apud Brereley page 499. in the margent at * expressly affirms ( lib. 3. of the
Church, c. 42. page 174. post med.) the point concerning the Conception of our
Blessed Lady to be a controversy not Not defined says M. D. Field cited in
the text. And in his said Treatise of the Church l. 2. c. 9. page 58. ante med.
he affirms of the contradictory opinions (for which says he) some were named
Thomists, other Scotists, that they consisted (to use his own words) in the
controversies of religion not yet determined by consent of the universal Church.
defined. Now if these Protestants speak thus of our B^essed Ladies immunity
from Original sin, much more will they hold that it is no damnable error (if it
were an error, as it is indeed a most certain Catholic truth) and so still we
are safe for matter of Doctrine. But here Chillingworth does much forget
himself, not to consider that He, his brethren the Socinians, and some other
Protestants deny all Original Sin, and consequently that our B. Lady neither
was, or could be conceived therein. So far is this doctrine from being an
error or heresy in the grounds of these men.

100. Thirteenthly, He exemplifies the necessity of Auricular Confession. But
we have showed that some learned Protestants hold the necessity of Confession,
and confess that the Fathers taught the necessity of confessing even thoughts.
Yea Chemnitius, than whom no Protestant was ever more famous, 2. part. Exam.
page 960. teaches, perfect sorrow or contrition not to be sufficient without
Absolution; as also I am informed by persons of worth and credit that Dr.
Jeremie Tailor is so much for the necessity of Confession and Absolution, that
he teaches Contrition without Absolution not to be sufficient for remission of
sins, which he endeavors to prove in a Book written purposly to that end,
though for ought I understand, it is not printed as yet. And M. Spar: a
Cambridge Man printed a Sermon to prove the necessity of Confession: as also in
this third Consideration, n. 82. fine, we have heard Dr. Andrews prove the same
out of St. Austine.

101. Fourteenthly, He allegeth the necessity of the Priests intention to
obtain benefit by any of the Sacraments. But this as we have seen out of
Brereley in this third Consideration, n. 49. is taught also by learned
Protestants, and the thing of it self is so reasonable, that no man can deny
it, who understands the terms.

102. Fifteenthly, He ends his enumeration with these words: And lastly, for
this very doctrine of licentiousness, That though a man live and dye without
the practice of Christian virtues, and with the habit of many damnable sins
immortifyed, yet if he in the last moment of life, have any sorrow for his
sins, and join Confession with it, certainly he shall be saved. In this
accusation are involved three points or propositions, First, that Attrition
with Absolution is not sufficient for the abolition of sin. Secondly, that true
Repentance requires the extirpation and mortification of all vicious habits.
Thirdly, that we teach any sorrow with Absolution to be sufficient for pardon
of sins. For the first we appose M. Chillingworth to himself, who page 32. n.
4. says: God has no where declared himself, but that wheresoever he will
accept of that Repentance, which you are pleased to call Contrition, he will
accept of that which you call Attrition; For though he like best the bright
Flaming holocaust of Love, yet he rejects not, he quenches not, the s^oaking
flax of that repentance (if it be true and effectual) which proceeds from hope
and fear; which is more than we grant, who teach only, that not Attrition
alone, but with Absolution is sufficient. The second is, for ought I know,
against the common Tenet of Protestants, and all Christians, who believe that a
sinner may be saved at the hour of his death, if he have true contrition for
his sins past, with a firm purpose to amend for time to come, though at that
instant he cannot extirpate all vicious habits, which as M. Chillingworth page
391. n. 8. confesses, being a work of difficulty and time, cannot be performed
in an instant: So that a poor sinner, though he be never so contrite for his
sins, must despair of remission and salvation. The third point, that we believe
any sorrow with Absolution to be sufficient for pardon of sins, is a mere
calumny; as will appear to any that reads the sacred Council of Trent,
declaring what sorrow is required to obtain pardon of our sins, or Catholic
divines writing on this subject. For, if the sorrow be conceived upon any
Reason merely of temporal Hope, or Fear, we teach that it is no wise
sufficient to make men capable of Absolution, or forgiveness of sins; but it
must proceed from some motive, known by supernatural Faith; for example, the
fear of Hell, or desire of Heaven. Secondly, it cannot be produced by the
natural forces of men, or Angels, as being the gift of God, and requiring the
special motion, inspiration, and grace of the holy Ghost: and contrarily all
the wit, pains, and industry of all men, that have been, are, or shall be, yea
or are possible to be created, cannot arrive to it, by all the natural forces
of them all, though they were assisted by the help of all Angels, created, or
creable, or of all other natural Creatures, contained in the Omnipotency of
Almightly God. Thirdly, Such sorrow must extend it self to all deadly sins, in
order to which it is to be so effectual, that it must exclude all affection to
them, and the Penitent must be resolved, rather to undergo a thousand deaths,
than once consent to the least mortal sin. And therefore, Fourthly, He must
resolve to avoid for time to come, all proximas occasiones, or imminent danger
of falling into any one mortal sin: As also, if he have injured any man, by
taking away his good name, or goods, or limb, or life, he must effectually, and
speedily, procure to give satisfaction, or make restitution, according as the
case shall require: Yea and sometime, if it be justly feared, that dealy will
cause a failing in his purpose, Absolution may prudently, or must, be deferred,
till he has actually satisfied all obligation, the neglect whereof would prove
a deadly sin. And in a word, that sorrow which we call Attrition, differs from
Contrition, in the motive only; because Contrition is conceived for sin, as it
is against the infinite goodness of God; Attrition as it is repugnant to our
e^ernal salvation; and therefore Contrition is an act of the Theological Virtue
of Charity, Attrition, of the Theological Virtue of Hope, which as it moves us
to desire and hope everlasting happiness, so does it incite us to fear the loss
thereof, and out of that holy fear, not to fear any other temporal loss, with
the prejudice of our Souls; according to those words of our blessed Savior,
do you not fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul, but rather
fear him, who can punish with Hell fire, both the body and soul. Which words
declare, that, as I said, a natural fear, merely of temporal loss, though it
be even of our life, is not a sufficient disposition for pardon of sins, as is
signified by (Do you not fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the
soul;) but it must be conceived, for some loss known by supernatural Faith, as
for the loss of heaven, or pains of Hell; as is signified by the second part
of our Saviors speech, and the adversative particle, sed; but fear him who can
etc.

103. Thus the Reader cannot but see, that upon examination, even this our
Adversary is forced to grant, that in the chief differences between us and
Protestants, many chief Protestants stand for us, and that all his Instances or
Examples to the contrary, are either manifestly untrue, or clearly impertinent.
But to omit more Instances or proofs, I may in this occasion make use of that
saying with which Chillingworth serves himself in his Book: Quid verba audiam
cum facta videam? M. Chillingworth showed himself in deeds so assured of our
salvation, that whereas his Mother had been converted from Protestancy to our
Catholic Religion, he, even after his fall from us, persuaded his Mother to
remain constant in our faith, and I hope he had no meaning to persuade his
Mother to her damnation.

104. Now for Conclusion I desire the Reader to consider the following
Corollaries, or deductions, which follow evidently out of the Premises
delivered and proved in this third Consideration.

105. First, that the Points wherein Protestants agree with us against their
pretended Brethren, for number or quantity, are very many, and for quality, of
highest moment and concernment; that they are taught not by a few, or
unlearned, but by many of the most learned Protestants; that they hold them
with us Catholics, whom they reckon among professed enemies, and against them,
whom they acknowledge to be their Brethren; and consequently, that this their
agreement with us, must be against their inclination and will, against all
humane reason or policy, since they can gain nothing by joining with us in
opposition to other Protestants, but dislike, hatred, and contempt from those
on whose good or bad opinions, their fortune depends. But no torture or rack is
so powerful to draw from the will and tongue a true confession, as evidence of
Truth forces the understanding not to dissent from what is presented to it: for
which and many other respects the judgment of those Protestants who agree with
us, ought, in reason, to weigh much more in our favor, than the verdits either
of these, or other Protestants, when they are against us.

106. Secondly, That in every one of the above specifyed examples we challenge
this great advantage; That they increase the number of those who hold our
doctrines by addition of our very Adversaries to us, for as much as concerns
those particulars, and thereby add strength to our Doctrines and Arguments or
Reasons, whereby we prove them against other Protestants, in a higher degree
than they could have advantaged their pretended brethren by still agreeing with
them, and not joining with us in those points; in regard that the confession of
an Adversary is a most convincing proof. Apud Brerely in the preface to the
Reader sect. 4. in the margent at * next after. 2.
Irenaeus advers. Haereses lib. 4. c. 14. versus finem, says to this purpose:
Illa est enim vera and sine contradictione probatio, quae etiam ab adversariis
ipsis singula testificationis profert, etc. For as Tertull: in Apologetico
says: Nemo ad suum dedecus mentitur, quin potius ad honorem: magis fides prona
est in adversus semetipsos confitentes, quam pro semetipsis negantes. Whereto
assenteth Tully in orat. P. Qu: saying: Testimonium tuum quod in alienare leve
est, hoc contrate grave, etc. Apud Brereley tract. 3. sect. 6. in the text and
margent at x y.
And our learned Adversaries do likewise affirm, that, it is a great piece of
work to convince the Adversary from himself: Academia Nemansis respons. ad
professorum Turnoriorum Societatis Jesu assertiones etc. page 84. says, Magnae
profecto industriae est, ex ipsius adver sarii verbis Adversarium convincere.
And M. D. Field in his treatise of the Church, l. 3. c. 47. initio, page 182.
circa med. says: The next note whereby Bellarmine indeavoureth to prove the
Romish Synagogue to be the true Church of God, is our own confession; Surely if
he can prove that we confess it to be the Church, he needs not to use any
other arguments. And M. D. Whitaker says accordingly (de Ecclesia controvers.
2. quaest. 5. cap. 14. initio page 366.) The argument must needs be strong,
which is taken from the confession of the Adversaries; For the confession of
the Adversaries against themselves is effectual. And truly, (says he) I do
acknowledge, that the truth inforceth testimony from her enemies. Decimam
tertiam notam statuit Bellarminus adversariorum confessionem, firmum certe sit
necesse est argumentum illud, quod hinc sumitur, etc. Efficax enim erit
Adversariorum ipsorum contra ipsos testimonium, etc. and quidem fateor
veritatem etiam and suis inimicis testimonium extorquere, etc. And Peter Martyr
in his common places part. 2. page 329. b. circa med. says, Doubtless, among
all testimonies, that testimony is of greatest account, which is testified by
the enemies.

107. Thirdly, I ask, whether those learned Protestant writers who agree with
us against Protestants, are to be esteemed and called Protestants, or no? If
not; seeing scarcely any one does not agree with us in some point against the
rest, the name of Protestant will come to nothing. If they may be esteemed
Protestants notwithstanding their disagreement from their brethren, the
denomination of Protestants will grow to be over large, and embrace what sects
soever, yea even those whom they most abhor, and by contempt call Papists,
with whom they pretend a necessity not to communicate; seeing so many learned
men may remain Protestants, and yet agree with us. In a word, by this occasion,
it will be obvious for every one to express a desire to know, how far
Protestancy extends it self.

108. Fourthly, I demand, whether those Protestants who agree with us against
their brethren, be heretics in regard of such their doctrines, and, without
repentance not capable of salvation. If they be heretics, and cannot be saved
without repentance, seeing it has been proved, that scarcely any of them does
not agree in some points with us against their brethren, it follows, that
scarcely, any Protestant can be judged free from Heresy, or capable of
salvation. Or if they be not Heretics, but capable of salvation, we Catholics
also (with whom they agree) by the confession of Protestants are no heretics,
nor excluded from salvation. And here I cannot omit this Reflection; That
whereas Protestants generally grant, that although our Forefathers might be
saved by reason of their ignorance, yet it follows not that we also may be
saved, because we may, forsooth, receive light from Luther and others, which
our Ancients could not. This evasion is so patently insufficient, that directly
it may be retorted, by saying, that although it were supposed (but in no wise
granted) that they who were first acquainted with the arguments of Luther
against us might be excused by ignorance, yet none can be excused at this time,
seeing not only we Catholics, but also the best learned Protestants, upon
further advice, better Consideration, long, accurate, strict, and even partial,
and passionate, examination of the doctrines and grounds of Luther and other
pretended Reformers, have finally forsaken them, and are come to us, and
therefore they who at this day oppose themselves to all Christian Churches
extant when Luther appeared, and to us of this time, and even to their own
learned Protestant brethren, cannot pretend ignorance, or any other lawful or
probable excuse.

109. Fifthly, The demand, which even now we made concerning Heresy, may be
with proportion applied to Schism, by asking whether the Communion of those
Protestants who hold with us against their pretended brethren ought to be
forsaken, or no, by those who entirely and constantly dissent from us in all
points controverted at this day (if there can be imagined any one such, as it
is not easy to believe there is, or morally speaking, can be any, considering
the great liberty which Protestants, for want of an infallible visible guide,
have to believe what they apprehend as true to day, with freedom to forsake it
to morrow.) If their Communion must be forsaken, Protestants will be divided
into nothing, by perpetually forsaking one another, yea the same man by
forsaking himself, at different times. If they need not be forsaken for such
doctrines, we infer, that the first pretended Reformers could not forsake our
Communion for the very same doctrines which now chiefest Protestants hold, and
yet are not forsaken by the rest; and therefore Luther could not be excused
from the grievous sin of Schism, in forsaking our Communion.

110. Sixthly, It is very carefully to be observed, that all the different
Sects of Protestants, and every single person of these Sects, whether they
agree with us against other Protestants, or disagree one from an other, and
also from us, or the same man at different times disagree from himself; It is I
say to be observed, that in all these differences, and contrarieties against
us, against their brethren, and against themselves, they still pretend evident
Texts of Scripture in favor of their opinions for the then present time;
wherein seeing it is clear they must be deceived (it being impossible that the
word of God can deliver contradictions) we must evidently conclude, that
Scripture alone cannot be to them a sufficient Rule of Faith, but that we must
finally acknowledge a living judge of Controversies, namely, the Church of God,
which therefore must be believed to be absolutely infallible in all her
Definitions concerning matters of faith; Otherwise we can have no certainty in
Articles of Religion.

111. Seaventhly, Considering what has been said in the next precedent second
Consideration; That many learned Protestants acknowledge the Ancient Fathers to
stand with us against Protestants, we may by the confession of our Adversaries,
with all truth and sincerity, use that exclamation and Protestation, which in
M. Jewel was false and hypocritical, and reprehended even by his greatest and
earned'st Protestant friend (as we have seen heretofore.) O Gregory! O Austine!
O Hierome! O Chrysostom! O Leo! O Dionyse! O Anacletus! O Calixtus! etc. If we
be deceived, you have deceived us; this our Adversaries confess you taught us,
etc. and further, considering what has been proved in this third
Consideration, That many of the most learned Protestants, in many of the most
important points of faith, agree with us against other Protestants, we may use
an other more strange and unexpected exclamation, and truly say: O Luther! O
Calvin! O you other most famous Protestants, if we were deceived, you are
deceived, this you teach with us, and you teach with us those very points,
which your brethren are wont to call Popish, and for which (a thing to be well
considered) the first Reformers took a pretense to divide themselves from all
Churches of Christ extant before Luthers time.

112. Eighthly, every one who has care of his eternal salvation is deeply to
consider, That this agreement of protestants with us, against their brethren,
demonstrates that they are not the Church, of which unity in matters of Faith
is a most inseparable, necessary, and essential note. Whereof Brereley tract.
2. cap. 3. sect. 5. subd. 1. says, As concerning unity (in doctrine) it is
said, 1. Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you, that you all speak one thing; be ye knit together in one mind
and one judgment; Ephesians. 4.3.
endeavoring to keep the unity of Spirit in the bond of peace; Philip. 1.27.
and. 1. Pet. 3.8.
continue in one spirit, and one mind, Philip. 2.2.
of one accord, and of one judgment. Thus in the first times Act. 4.32. and
1.14.
were the multitude of them that believed of one heart and one soul. Thus our
Savior in his special prayer, Hebr. 5.7.
heard (no doubt) for his reverence, instantly prays for the members of his
Church Joan. 17.11.
that they may be one. And thus the holy Ghost describes the Church of Christ,
saying, Cantic. 6.8
My Dove is one. As also on the contrary, it is said of dissension, 2 Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you brethren that there be no dissentions among you, Hebr. 10.25.
not for saking the fellowship that we have among our selves: Proverb. 6.16, 19.
God hates him that raises up contentions among Brethren. This want of Unity
is so improper to God, that he is therefore termed 1 Cor. 14 33.
the God, not of dissension, but of Peace; and it is so certainly the means to
dissolve continuance, that the holy Scriptures, which cannot lie, say thereof,
Galat. 5.15.
If you bite one another, take heed you be not consumed one of another; Luc.
11.17.
Every Kingdom divided in it self shall perish; Psalm. 55.9. and see Genesis
11.6, 7, 9.
Destroy O Lord and divide their Tongues; Osee 10.^.
Their heart is divided, they shall now perish, etc. By this Brand or mark of
want of Unity, did the ancient Fathers Irenaus l. 1. c. 5. initio says:
Videmus nunc and little inconstantem sententiam, cum sint d^o veltres quen
admodum de ^^dem cadem non dicant. And cap. 18. fine he says, Cum autem
discrepant ab invic^^^, and doctrina and traditione, and qui recentiores (...)
adnoscuntur, aff^ctant per singulos die^ norum aliquid invenire, etc. Darum est
enim omnium describere sententias
Irenaeus, Tertullian. de Praescrip. advers. haerer. c. 42. says: M^ntior si
non etiam a regulis su^^ variant inter se, dum unusquisque proinde modulatur
quae accep^t, qu^^nadmodum de suo arbitrio composu^t, etc. denique inspectae
haereses omnes, in multis cum authoribus su^s dissentientes deprehenduntur. And
see cap. 37.
Tertullian, Chrysostom. opur. imperfect. in Matthew. hom. 20. says, Omnes
infideles qui sub Diabolo sunt, non sunt uniti, n^c^unum sapiunt, sed sunt per
diversas opiniones dispersi: alius quidem sic dicit, alius sic (etc.) comodo
perfidia haereticorum qui nunquam sapiunt unum, sed quot sunt, tot sententias
habent.
Chrysostom, H^lar. l. 7. de Trinitate says: Haeretici igitur omnes contra
Ecclesiam veniunt, s^^d dum haeretici omnes se invicem vincut, nihil tamem sibi
vincunt: victoria enim eorum Ecclesiae triumphus ex omnibus est, dum in eo
haeresis contra alteram pugnat, etc.
Hilarie, and Athanasius orat. 1. contra Arianos says: Illud q^oque pror^us
admirabile, omnes quot sunt hae reses in fingendo diversa, pugnantiaque inter
se adferre, nee alib, nisi in falsitate sibi invicem consentire, etc. And see
in Decret's synod. N^caenae contra haeresim Arianam. See surther a notable
example hereof in Socrates hist. l. 5. cap. 10. etc. 22. And see the sayings of
Ambrose l. de^fi de ad Gratianum c. 4. Hicrom in Matthew. 24. Austine contra
Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 4. and de Baptismo contra Don. l. 11. c. 6.
others, discover the Heretics of their times. By the same mark also does
Luther himself make his like discovery saying, Luther tom. 3. Wittemberg. in
Psalm. 5. fol. 166. b. fine.
A Kingdom divided in it self shall not stand, neither have any Heretics at
any time been overcome by Force or subtilty, but by mutual dissension; neither
does Christ fight with them otherwise than with a spirit of giddiness and
disagreement. And again, Luther tom. 5. Wittemb. in Galat. cap. 5. fol. 416. a
post medium.
The Authors of Schisms are disagreeing among themselves etc. they bite and
devour one another etc. till at last they perish. This (to omit Scriptures) the
examples of all times do testify: After that Africa was overthrown by the
Manichees, presently followed them the Donatists, who disagreeing among
themselves, were divided into three Sects etc. In our time the Sacramentaries
first, and then after the Anabaptists divided themselves from us, neither of
them are in Unity among themselves: so always Sects bring forth Sects, and one
condemns another. And, the very same argument is yet further afforded against
the Anabaptists by Sebast. Francus Chronicorum part. 111. fol. 263. b. and seq.
numbreth up Seaventy of the Anabaptists different opinions, and concludes
their further differences to be so great, as no m^n can either know or number
them, affirming further, that scarce two of them are found to agree in all
things.
Sebastianus Francus, and the Divines of Theologi Heidelbergenses in protocoll.
Frankentalensi in praefat. ad Anabaptistas say; Si vobis Ecclesiae titulum
concedere vellemus, quaenam inter vos Secta pro Ecclesia Dei habenda offet, cum
tam in multas sectas divisi sitis?
Heidelberge: and also against the Sacramentaries by the Divines of Theologi
Mansfeldenses in confessione Mansfeldica latina fol. 120. say: Suspectam merito
habemus Sacramentariorum doctrinam, (etc.) quod non definite in eadem sententia
concordes, sed inter seipsos divisi sunt; ut alii sunt Caralostadiani, alii
Zuingliani, Oecolampadiam, Calvinistae, etc.
Mansfield.

113. But now although the Testimony of our Adversaries against themselves be
great and convincing, whether they confess that the Fathers stand for us, and
whether Protestants join with us, and thereby witness our Doctrines to be true;
yet there remains a greater testimony, that is, true Miracles, of which our
Blessed Savior says ( Joan. 5.36.) I have a greater testimony than John, the
very works which I do give testimony of me, that the Father has sent me.

And that our Doctrines have been confirmed by Miracles, shall be demonstrated
out of the very confession of Protestants in the next fourth Consideration.

THE FOURTH CONSIDERATION.
That the Doctrine of us Catholics has been approved by the omnipotent hand
of God, using for Instruments of working Miracles, those who were confessedly
of our Relgion, yea and in express confirmation of points believed by us, and
rejected by Protestants.
1 LIKE as in those Brereley tract. 1. sect. 5.
firster times of the Churches infancy, our Savior did make manifest the truth
of his Apostles doctrine, with undoubted miracles, to serve as 2 Cor. 11.12.
signs of their Apostleship, to that end Marc. 16.20.
confirming the word with signs following: so likewise this virtue or power of
Miracles not ceasing, but (as our Adversaries confess) Whereas our Savior
loan. 14.12. says, He that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall do,
and greater. In the marginal Notes of the English B^ble printed 1576. it is
thereupon said, This is referred to the whole Body of the Church, in whom this
Virtue does shine for ever.
shining in the Church for ever, the necessity thereof being one and the same
in all succeeding Ages, to the In Eusebius. Hist. l. 5 c. 7. Irenaeus is alleged
saying, Quidam Daemones pro certo and vere ejiciunt, etc. alii co qui gravibus
morbis afflictantur per manuum impositionem curant, etc. lam vero ut diximus
mortui suscitati sunt and multos annos post apud nos commorati, quid plura?
dona fane ne dicendo quidem numerari poterunt, quae Deus Ecclesiae per
universum mundum diffusae donaverit, quibusque illa in nomine Jesu Christi sub
Pontio Pilato Crucifixi, in dies singulos multa miracula ad Gentium utilitatem,
effic^t, etc. And see Irenaeus l. 2. c. 58. versus finem. And S. Austine de
civit: Dei l. 22. c. 8. initio says: Cur, inquiunt, nunc illa miracula quae
praedicatis facta esse, non fiunt? Possem quidem dicere, necessaria quidem
fu^sse priusquam crederet mundus, ad hoc ut crederet mundus. And a little
afterward: Nam etiam nunc fiunt in ejus nomine, etc. And Luther tom. 7.
Wittemberg. l. de Judaeis fol. 209. b. says: Nunc autem per hos 1500. annos
audierunt (Judaei) esse verbum De^, viderunt max^^a signa and mitabilia, and
contra fremuerunt. And ibid. fol. 210. b. ante med. he further says: A Deo did
c^mus and accepimus, ut aeternum verbum and veritatem Dei hactenus mill
quingentis ann^s miraculis and signis confessam ac confirmatam.
Conversion of the heathens, who contemn the Scriptures, are nothing moved with
the Miracles therein mentioned; our Savior did in like manner confirm our now
faith so then taught by Austine, with like manifestation of Miracles: not such
only as Antichrist or the Devil can, by the power of nature, or secondarie
causes, bring to pass, which may be These. 2.9.
lying signs, against which we are forewarned: but with Miracles exceeding the
power of nature, and done immediately by God: which by the Doctrine of learned
Protestants Visinus in commentar: Catech. page 21. fine says: Etsi Ethnicorum
nonnulla miracula commemorantur, ac de Antichristo and Pseudo-prophetis dictum
est edituros esse signa, etc. tamen ea, neque numero, neque magnitudine paria
sunt Miraculis Ecclesiae, etc. Primum enim ea miracula quae jactantur ab
hostibus Ecclesiae, sunt e^usmodi, quae (ordine naturae non mutato) hominum vel
diabolorum traudibus possunt effici, etc. miracula vero quibus Deus Ecclesiam
ornavit, opera sunt praeter aut contra naturae and causarum secundarum ordinem,
ac proinde non nisi divina potentia facta. And the like is affirmed by Zanchius
in D. Pauli Epistolas, ad Philippenses, Coloss. and Thessal. page 241. and 242:
By Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae part. 4. page 43. initio. 46. fine, and 47.
initio. By Piscator in Annal. Epistolarum Pauli page 470. paulo ante med. and
by many others.
are evermore true and infallible. Of which kind though some be some times don
(as the Scriptures Matthew. 7.22.
forewarn, and Danaeus in Isagoges Christianae part. 4. page 48. initio says:
Ad cos qui donum duntaxat miraculorum a Deo acceperunt, absque dono
regenerationis, pertinet, quod ait Christus, Multi dicent mihi in die illo,
Domine, nonne per nomen tuum prohetavimus, and daemonia ejecimus, etc. And see
the same further affirmed by Sigwartus in 23. disputat. theolog. etc. page 164.
sect. 12. and 13.
Danaeus confesses) by professors of wicked life, accordingly as our Savior
in like manner, Math. 10.1.
gave power over unclean Spirits, Matthew. 10.4.
and to cure all manner of diseases, to his twelve Disciples (whereof even the
wicked Judas was then one:) yet are the Miracles so wrought, though by such,
nevertheless certain and undoubted testimonies of Gods truth: and for such in
general are Miracles throughout the whole course of Scriptures most fully both
Acknowledged Exodus 8 19. and 3. Reg. 17.24. and 3. Reg. 18.39. and 4. Reg.
5.15. and Matthew. 27.54. and Matthew. 14.25.33. and Joh. 2.23. and 3.2. and 4.53.
and 9.30. and 11.45. Act. 4.14.16. and 9.35.
acknowledged and Urged Exodus 7.17. and 16.12. and Numb. 16.28. and Josue 3.10,
16. and 3. Regum 13.3, 5. and 18.24, 38. and 20.23, 28. and 4 Reg. 20.8, 9, 10.
and Matthew. 9.6. and Marc. 2.10. and Joan. 14.11. and 15.24. and 20.30, 31.
urged, as being even to our Savior himself, Joan. 5.36.
a greater testimony than John.

And hence it is that the credible Histories as well of all For former times,
Zozomen. Hist. l. 7. c. 26. post. med. says: Nec solus Petrus Apostolus
mortuum suscitavit, sed and Joannes Evangelista Ephesi, and Philippi filiae
Hierapoli, and eadem a multis tum veteribus tum nostri temporis piis viris esse
gesta reperies; and see Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 7. post med. alleged heretofore
at *; And S. Austine de Civit: Dei l. 22. c. 8. recites in particular many
like miracles of his time, and so likewise for their several times do the other
Fathers of every age.
former times, as also of this In the book entitled A report of the Kingdom of
Congo a region of Africa Printed 1597. published by M. Abraham Hartwell servant
to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and by him dedicated to his Lord, mention
is made l. 1. c. 1. initio, of the discovery of that Kingdom Anno 1587. by
Odoardo Lopez: and of the conversion thereof to the Christian faith l. 2. c. 2.
and of the great and undoubted miracles showed by God in the presence of a
whole Army l. 2. c. 3. In so much that M. Abraham Hartwell in his Epistle there
to the Reader post medium confesses, that this conversion of Congo was
accomplished (by massing Priests) and after the Romish manner, and this action
(says he) which tends to the glory of God shall it be concealed and not
committed to memory, because it was performed by Popish Priests and Popish
means? God forbid. In like manner M. John Pory lately of Gonvill and Caius
College in Cambridge, in his Geographical History of Africa by him published
Anno 1600. page 410. versus finem, acknowledges and mentions the said
Miracles, and page 413. imtio he commends M. Hartwell for publishing his
foresaid treatise. Also where as it appears in the book entitled Rerum in
Orient gestarum commentarius, fol. 2. that Francis Xaverius fet forward in his
journey from Lysbone to the East and a Anno 1541. to the Conversion of those
nations: and page 36. that the King of Portugal hearing of the great M^racles
as then there wrought, sent forth his Commission to his vice Roy there, dated
in April 1556. to take examination upon oath: upon execution whereof, and
certificate thereupon being accordingly made, it did appear (fol. 8. b.) that
Xaverius, in testimony and proof of the Christian says by him then preached
and taught, cured miraculously the dumb, the same, the deaf, and with his word
healed the sick; and (fol. 9. a.) raised sundry dead persons to life: and after
his death, which happened (fol. 14. a.) Anno 1552. the grave being opined,
wherein his dead body for a^ time had lain buried, to the end his naked bones
might be carried from thence to Goa (fol. 14. b.) they found his body not only
unconsumed, but also yielding forth fragrant smells: from whence they curryed
it to Goa, and placed it there in the Church of S. Paul, where yet to this day
(says the Commentary) it remains free from corruption: witness whereof
(says that treatise) are all the inhabitants of that City, and travailers that
repair thither, and the truth hereof for matter of fact is so probable, that M.
Whitaker lib. de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum page 353. dare not in his answer
thereto altogether rest in denial of the matter of fact, but says: Ne putet
(Bellarminus) me omnino haec miracula contemnere. Respondeo fieri posse ut in
regno Pontificio fuerint hujusmodi miracula and nunc sint; and page 354. post
med. he says: potuit diabolus Xaverii corpus ad tempus servare incorruptum and
suaviter olens. And so he not so much denies those Miracles, as over boldry
refers them to the Devils works: Whereas yet to the contrary M. Richard
Hacklu^te preacher in his book of principal navigations, etc. Printed 1599. in
the 2. part of the 2. volume page 88. initio, doubts not to offord
commendable mention of that holy man (Xaverius) his particular virtues and
wonderful works in that Kegion.
present age, are plentiful in like examples of true and undoubted miracles
showed by God at the Conversion of heathen nations. Among which our Countries
Bale in Catalog. Scriptorum Illustrium Majoris Britanniae cent. 14. page 117.
says of Augustine: Plebem per interpretes fidem Papisticam docuit. Apud.
Brereley tract. 1. sect. 1. at e. in the margent.
foresaid confessed conversion by Austine, to our now professed Catholic
faith, holds not the least place, as being in like manner greatly then
confirmed with undoubted miracles; not lately feigned, but so credibly
testified by the faithful writers of those times, that now sithence they are
acknowledged for certain and true by learned Protestants themselves. To this
end does S. Bid and our Chronicles witness, how that Austine Bed. Hist. l. 2.
c. 2. ante medium says Allatus est quidem de genere Anglorum o^ulorum luce
privatus, etc. tandem Augustinus justa necessitate compullus, flectit genua
sua, deprecans, ut visum caeco quem amiserat restitueret, and per
illuminationem unius hominis corporalem, in pl^^rimorum cordibus fidelium
spiritalis gratiae luccm accenderet: nec mora; illuminatur c^cus, ac verus
summae lucis praeco ab omnibus praedicatur Augustinus. Tum Britones confitentur
intellex^sse se, veram esse viam Just^tiae quam praedicaret Augustinus. And see
Holinsheads Chronicle, after the last edition vol. 1. l. 5 c. 21. page 102. b.
line 51.
to prove his opinion good, wrought a miracle in restoring sight to one that
was blind. Which kind of Miracle, as Hemingius Hemingius in his exposition of
the 84. Psalm. Englished part. 1. c. 6.
acknowledges for a true Miracle, so likewise the Christian Britans present
thereat, were specially Beda ubi supra, and Holinshead ub^ supra.
moved therewith.

In like manner is testified by S. Bid and Protestant writers, that Austine
persuaded the King to his Religion Beda Hist. l. 1. c. 26. circa med. says of
the King: Miraculorum multorum oftensione credens baptizatus est. And
Holinshead ubi supra page 100. b. line 60. and M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments
Printed 1576. page 117. a. prop finem.
by diverse miracles showed; which were at those times so certainly known, that
(as S. Bid reports) it was Beda Hist: l. 2. c. 3. fine. And see Stowes
Annalls dedicated to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Printed 1592. page 66.
fine.
written in the Epitaph upon his tomb, that he was suffultus a Deo miraculorum
operatione. And Beda Hist. l. 2. c. 1. versus finem, says: Quibus verbis
Beatus Gregorius declarat, quod sanctus Augustinus and socii ejus caerestium
ostensione signorum, Gentem Anglorum ad cognitionem veritatis perducebant; and
S. Gr gory himself l. 7. Epist. 30. indict: 1. reports hereof to Eulogius
Archbishop of Alexandria, saying: Know then that whereas the English nation
etc. remained hither to in infidelity, I did, by the help of your prayers, etc.
send unto that Nation (Austine) a Monk of my Monastery, to preach to them, etc.
and now letters are come to us, both of his health, and of his work that he
has in hand: and surely either he or they which were sent over with him work
so many Miracles in that Nation, as they may seem therein to imitate the power
and Miracles of the Apostles themselves.
Gregory himself not only affirms those miracles, but also by his Holinshead
ubi supra page 192. a. line 25.
letters dated Anno 602. did specially This letter of Gregory is extant in Bid
Hist. l. 1. c. 31. and mentioned by Holinshead ubi supra page 102. a. l. in
10.11. etc.
write to Austine touching the Miracles showed by him, advising him, not to
glory therein; but rather to consider, that God gave him the gift for the weal
of those to whom he was sent, etc. In so much that M. Fox and M. Godwin (both
of them learned Protestants) do accordingly mention and acknowledge M. Fox in
his Acts and Monuments Printed 1576. page 117. a. prop. finem. And M. Godwin in
his Catalogue of the Bishops of England page 4. fine.
the Miracles (then) wrought by Austine through Gods hand. As also S. Bid, M.
Fox and Holinshead do in like manner specially mention the Beda Hist. l. ^. c
12. post medium, and M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments printed 1576. page 121.
b. post. med. 122. a. and Holinshead in his great Chronicle the last edition
volum. 1. page 108. b. initio. and 109. a. line 29.30. etc.
miraculous conversion of Eawin King of the Northumbers, which happened some
26. years after Augustines foresaid coming into England, M. Fox not doubting
to place the same in his Catalogue of true M. Fox in the Alphabeticall table of
his Acts and Monuments printed 1576. at the word Miracle.
Miracles. Hereunto we could likewise add the undoubted many and great
Miracles As concerning the Miracles of Malachias, to omit particular mention of
them, no meaner a witness than S. Bernard (who lived in the same time with him,
and was to him so familiarly known) says of them in general in his book de
vita Malachiae, mentioned and acknowledged by the Centur^sts, Centur: 12. col.
1633. line 39. In what kind of old Miracles did not Malachias excel? he wanted
not Prophecy, not revelation, not the gist of healing: and to conclude, not
raising of the dead. And see further the Centurists, cent. 12. col. 1597. line
43. And no less undoubted Miracles are written of S. Bernard by his own
Scholar Godfridus and others of that time, who wrote his life. And the same so
certain, that Osiander in ep^tom. cent. 12. page 310. post. med. dare not rest
in denial of them, but says: partim permissione Dei praestigiis Satanicis
effecta existimo, non quod Sanctum Bernardum Magum fu^sse putem, sed quod
verisimile sit Satanam talia miracula effecisse, etc. ad confirmationem
Idololatriae and falsorum cultuum: So good a Protestant he makes S. Bernard.
Of Malachias his miracles see also the Century-writers, cent. 12. col. 1594.
line 30. And see S. Bernards Miracles further hereafter in this Consideration
number. 4. at p. q. r. etc.
wrought of later times (to omit sundry others) by holy Malachias, and S.
Bernard, both of them confessed and known As concerning Malachias his Religion,
Osiander cent. 12. page 315. post. med. says: Malachias Archiepiscopus in
Hibernia ab ineunte aetate literis and Religioni addictus, tandem invitus and
diu admodum coactus, Archiepiscopatum Hiberniae assumpsit, S. Bernardo admodum
familiaris fuit: ejus monachatum admiratus and imitatus est, superstitiones
Pontificias amplexus, Romanum Pontificem pro Deo coluit. Tribuuntur illi
admodum plurima Miracula, etc. and vide ibid. page 256. post med. And S.
Bernard in vita Malachiae affirms, that Malachias was Legate to the Pope. As
concerning S. Bernards Religion of whom M. Whitaker (in praelect. de Ecclesia
contra Bellarminum page 369. paulo post medium) says: Bernardum vere sanctum
suisse existimo. He was Abbot of Clairevaux ( as testifies Simon de Voyon upon
the Catalogue, etc. page 126.) and ho acknowledged so plainly the Popes Primacy
( whereof see S. Bernard l. 2. de consider. ad Eugenium, and l. 3. c. 8. and
Epist. 125. and 131. and 190. ad Innocentium) that he is therefore reproved by
D. Fulk ( against the Rhemish Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133. b. post
initium) and by M. Whitaker (lib. 2. contra Duraeum page 154. ante med.) and
was so evidently a professed Catholic, that Gomarus in speculo Ecclesiae page
23. versus finem allegeth him to us saying: Bernardus Sanctus vester, and M.
Whitaker in respons. ad rat. Camp. rat. 7. page 105. ante med. says: Bernardus
quem Ecclesia vestra multis annis unum tulit pium virum, etc. And the
Century-writers cont. 12. c. 10. say of S. Bernard, that coluit Deum Maozim ad
novissimum vitae iuae articulum, acerrimus fuit propugnator Sedis Antichristi,
etc. And the Lutherans in libro Germanico, quo causas recusati Concil^i
Tridentini reddunt, sol. 257. do term S. Bernard an impudent writer, heaving
the Pope up into an Idol, a corrupter of Gods honor, and preacher of
Antichrist. Lastly this point is made yet surther evident, both in Malachias
and Bernard, that it is manifest, that they both lived Anno Domini 1140. When
the profession of our new Catholic faith was most storishing. Which thing M.
Jewel in his defense of the Apology printed 1571. page 557. paulo ante med.
confesses saying: S. Bernard lived in the midst of the Popes rout and
Tyranny. Whereupon it follows, that for so much as neither of them is found
to have been troubled for any one point of Doctrine disagreeing from those
times, but were to the contrary both of them in high favor, as then with the
Roman Sea, the one of them being the Popes Legate, the other an Abbot, that
therefore they were agreeable in Religion to the professed Doctrine of those
times; so improbably do our adversaries pretend S. Bernard to have been a
member of their Church for his only then zealous reproving the corruption of
life and manners in the Clergy of that age.
members of our now professed Catholic faith.

2. This Brereley tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 7. per totam.
gift of Miracles is so necessary to the Conversion of the Heathen in all ages,
that the Apostles therefore made special Act. 4.29.30.
prayer for this gift, and our Savior says accordingly, Joan. 15.24.
If I had not done among them the works which no other man did, they had not
sinned. In so much as S. Austine places the same among those Aug. tom. 6.
contra Ep. Manich c. 4. and in his l. 22 de Civ. Dei c. 8. initio he oss^^met^,
that before the world believed, M^racles w^^e necessary to this end, that the
world should believe. Pu: If miracles be necessary to convert Nations, much
more necessary must they be to reverse what all Christ an Churches have once
embraced, and therefore it was inexcusable temerity to follow the first
pretended Resormers (who did not so much as pretend Mira cles) against the
whole Church extant before their time. Even amongst men Possession is a string
Plea.
many things which most justly held me in the Churches bosom. Thus did this
gift of Miracles accordingly continue (and that most wonderfully in the times
of See this heretofore in the precedent number. at *.
Irenaeus, and no less wonderfully afterward for four hundred years after
Christ, as appears by Zozom. hist. l. 7. c. 26. post med. see the words
alleged in the precedent number. of this Consideration at ^ next after m.
Zozomene, and also by St. Austine, who speaking of the Miracles of his time,
tells how Aug. l. 9. Confess. cap. 7. and S. Hierome in vita Hilarionis
tells, how the dead body of, Hilarion was after ten months found uncorrupted,
yielding forth a fragrant smell. And see the like miracle testified by S. Bid
of S. Cuthbert. l. 4. hist. c. 30.
the dead Bodies of Gervasius and Protasius were after many years found
uncorrupted, and that Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. inicio.
at their dead Bodies a blind man received his sight: A Miracle (says St.
Austine) done at Milan, (where the said Bodies lay) when I was there, a great
number of people being witness thereof. In like manner does he make mention of
sundry persons who being dead, were by God Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. post
med.
restored to life at the Monument of St. Stephen: and mentions further Aug.
ibidem versus finem.
another Miracle done (says he) with us, so known and manifest, as I think
there is none in Hippo (the City where it was done) who either had not seen or
learned it. This miracle by his report made thereof more at large, was, that
ten infirm persons were, in presence of himself and the whole people,
miraculously cured at the said Monument of St. Stephen. These miracles were so
evident in his time, and the number of them so many, that having already
mentioned diverse others, he yet says Aug. ibidem post medium says, Quid
faciam? Vrget hujus operis implendi promissio, ut non hic possim omnia
commemorare quae sc^o, and proculdubio plaerique nostrum cum haec legent,
dolebunt metam multa pretermisisse, quae utique mecum sciunt, ques jam nunc u^
ignoscant rogo, etc.
Quid faciam etc. What must I do, I am not able to remember all that I know,
and doubtless sundry of ours when they read these, will grieve that I have
omitted so many, which likewise they know as well as I, and concludes, that it
would require Aug. ibidem says: Si enim miracula sa^itatum ut alia taceam,
modo velim scribere, quae per liunc Martyrem, id est gloriosissimum Stephanum
facta sunt in colo^nia Calamensi, and in nostra, plurimi conficiendi sunt
libri, nec tamen omnia colligi poterunt, sed tantum de quibus libelli dat^ sunt
qui recitarentur in populis, etc.
many books to set down the miracles of healings (to omit others) done only at
the memory (or monument) of S. Stephen. Thus much briefly out of S. Austine
only. And like mention of other miracles in this kind is further made by sundry
other See Basil. orat. in Mamant. and Nazianzen orat. in Cyprianum and
Chrysostom. in lib. contra Gentiles fine; and Ambrose in sermon. de S Gervas. and
Protas. and Hierome contra Vigilantium, and in Epist. ad Eustoch^um de vita
Paulae, and in vita Hilarionis, and Sulpitius in vita Martini.
Fathers of that age, in so much as M. Whitaker says hereof to Duraeus,
Whitaker contra Duraeum l. 10. page 866. ante med.
I do not think those miracles vain which are reported to have been done at
the Monuments of Saints. This continuance of miracles in the true Church since
the Apostles times to this present, is so undoubted and certain, that our very
adversaries the The Century Writers of M. gdeburge, make this their report in
their 13. Chapter of every several Century.
Century writers, do for thirteen hundred years next after Christ, accordingly
report in particular, out of the credible writers of those several times, many
of the miracles done in every succeeding age, whereof a great number are
reported by the ancient Fathers to have been done by Of the wonderful miracles
done by Monks see Zozomen hist. lib. 3. c. 13. and l. 6. c. 28. and Evagrius
hist. l. 6. c. 22. and Socrates hist. l. 4. c. 18. fine, etc. 9. and Hierome in
vita Hilarionis, and Palladius in his historia Lausaci throughout, and
Theodoret in his Theophil. throughout; and Osiander cent. 4. page 369. and 370.
and the Century writers cent. 4. col. 493. line 18. sundry of those miracles
being many resuscitations or raisings up to life of the dead, curing of
diseases by word, prayer, or touching: commanding of the Sea to return or stay
its passage or course of inundations, and sundry other like, which could not
but proceed from God.
Monks whose confessed As concerning the great and almost incredible a^sterity
of sundry the Monks of those times, as namely in enclosing or muring up
themselves in Cells or Pillars of stone: in loading and chastizing their bodies
with weight of iron bands; their wearing privately of sackcloth: their lying on
the ground: their going barefooted; their abstinence from flesh, fish, cheese,
eggs, wine, etc. their cating of bread by weight, and drinking of water by
measure, with much more of like nature, see testimony thereof in general in
Epiphanius haer. ult. fine, Evagrius hist. l. 1. c. 21. and in Luc. Osiander in
epitom, etc. cent. 4. page 368. and 506. and in the Century writers cent. 4.
col. 471. line 23, and col. 473. and 474. and see particular examples hereof
testified by Socrates hist. l. 4. c. 18. Zozomen. hist. l. 6. c. 29. and l. 3.
c. 13. post med. Evagrius hist. l. 5. c. 21. and l. 6. c. 22. but most
specially by Theodoret in his Theoph. or historia Sanctorum Patium cap. 26. and
cap. 4. and also cap. 2. Which is the life of James, and cap. 3. in the life of
Julianus: his special mention of both which last persons in this very
Treatise, he remembers with reference thereto in his other history l. 1. c.
7. and l. 3. cap. 19. In like manner see the like particular examples in
Palladius in hist. Lausaica cap. 43. and 52. and 70. and thoughout, ( of this
Palladius and this his book, mention is made by Socrates hist. l. 4. cap. 18.
fine,) See also further testimony of like austere life, in Osiander in epitom.
etc. centur. 4. page 99. and 100. and 101. and 103. and see heretofore in the 2
Consideration number. 23. at 49. and 50.
austerity of life is by our adversaries condemned for Osiander in epitom.
cent. 4. page 99. circa med. and 100. paulo post med. and page 103.
superstitious, and many also are by the Fathers reported as directly done in
confirmation of some one or other Brereley in his Omissions and Additions of
page 527. adds, directly against M. D. Field, who in his book of the Church
page 185. says: We peremptority deny, that ever any miracle was done to
confirm any of the things controversed between the Papists and us.
particular point of our Catholic faith, as namely, to omit many other
particulars, of Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. prop. finem, tells how that
in the presence of him and others, a devout woman called Palladia, who being
before diseased, and repairing for health to the monument of S. Stephen, Ad
sanctum Martyrem (says S. Austine) orare perrexerat, quae mox ut cancellos
attigit, collapsa similiter velut ad somnum, sana surrexit, etc. And see a
little before in the same Chapter the like miraculous example of one Florentius
of Hippo, and of Eucharius a Priest of Spain.
Prayer to Saints, Nazianzen in Cyprianum says: Omnia potest pulvis Cypriani
cum side, ut sciunt hi qui ipsi experti sunt, and miraculum usque ad nos
transmiserunt. And Chrysostom. in libro contra Gentiles, speaking of the
Relics of the holy Martyr Babylas says: Sententiae nostrae abunde fidem
faciunt, quae quotidiana a Martyribus eduntur miracula. Insomuch as Mr. Fox,
act. mon. printed 1576. page 61. b. ante med. reports ( which thing
Chrysostom also, ubi supra, and Theodoret, l. 3. c. 9. affirm) how that after
the bringing of the (dead) body of (the said) Babylas into the Temple (of an
Idol) the Idol ceased to give any more Oracles, saying, That for the body of
Babylas he could give no more answers. Gee further examples of Miracles done at
the Relics of Saints in Palladius in his Historia Lausaica, cap. 62. in vita
Philemonis, in S. Austin de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. in Hierom contra
Vigilantium, in Basil. in orat. in Mamant. in Gregorius Turonensis l. de gloria
Martyrum throughout; and see what Mr. Whitaker confesses next heretofore at *
next after g.
Relics, Eusebius, hist. l. 7. c. 14. makes mention of (the Image of Christ)
erected by the woman whom he cured of her flux; and of an unusual herb growing
at the bottom thereof, which after that growing up, it had touched the garment
of the Image, it had power to cure all diseases. See further mention of
Miracles in confirm^tion of Christ's Image in Athanasius de passione imaginis
Christ^ in Berito, alleged in 2. Council. Nicen. act. 4. and in Gregorius
Turonensis de gloria Martyrum, l. 1. c. 22. in both which is mentioned, that
upon violence offered by the Jews upon Christ's Image, blood did miraculously
issue from thence.
the Image of Christ, S. Chrysostom. de sacerdotio, l. 6. c. 4. reports, that
Acertain venerable old man, to whom many mysteries were revealed by God, told
that in time of Sacrifice he once beheld a multitude of Angels, with shining
garments, compassing the Altar with bowed heads, as Souldurs do in presence of
their King. Which attendance of Angels Chrysostom in the words next before
affirms to have been performed, by Angels present (says he) at that
wonderful Table, and compassing it about with reverence, in honor of him that
lies thereon. And that it has pleased God, in satisfaction of the
incredulous, to have turned the outward Sacrament into visible flesh, is
testified by St. Gregory, whereof see Paulus Diaconus in vita S. Gregorii, and
^oannes Diaconus in vita S. Gregori^, l. 2. c. 4. and D. Humfrey in Jesuitismi,
p. 2. rat. 5. page 626. And of another like M^racle, Cyrus Theodorus Prodromus
( who lived Anno 440.) in Epigram. in D. B^sil. says: Intuitus panem and
nigrum in cratere Lyaeum,
Riserat Hebraeus sacra mystica Christicolarum;
Haec ubi Basilius persensera^, utraque edenda
Porrigit, illa statim cruor and caro versa resultant.
And see the Century Writers, cent. 4. col. 431. lin. 39. And of sundry other
like miraculous appearances, see Paschasius de corp. and sangu. Christi, cap.
14. where he says of the miracles before his time, Nemo, etc. None that read
the examples and lives of the Saints, can be ignorant, that these mystical
Sacraments of the body and blood of our Lord, either in respect of those that
were doubtful (in faith) or of them that more ardently loved Christ, have
often appeared in the visible form of a Lamb, or in the color of flesh and
blood, etc. that what was latent in Mystery, might to the doubtful appear
clear in Miracle.
Real Presence, S. Austin de Civit. Der, l. 22. c. 8. circa medium, reports
of his own time and Country, how that one Hesperius having his house infested
with wicked spirits, to the affliction of his beasts and servants, desired (
says S. Austin) ^n my absence, certain of our Priests, that some would go
thither (etc.) one went and offered (says he) there the Sacrifice of the body
of Christ, praying what he might, that the vexation might cease, and God being
thereupon merciful, it ceased. In like manner does S. Gregory, hom. 37. in
Evang. and S. Bid, hist. l. 4. c. 22. ante m^d. tell of two several persons
taken prisoners in the wars, for the pardon of whose souls, as supposing by
their friends they had been slain, Mass was said, at which very time of Mass so
said, their bands were loosed, and fell from them. S. Gregory also, and S.
Bid, report these things as particularly known to be done in their own times.
And in behalf of Sacrifice is also appertaining the foresaid other Miracle
recited by Chrysostom here next before at p. Also S. Gregory, l. 4. D^^^iog.
cap. 55. tells of a Mon^ called Justus, who (says he) was obsequious to me,
and watched with me in my daily sickness: this man being dead, I appointed (
says Gregory) the healthful host to he offered for his absolution, thirty
adies together, which done, the said Justus appeared to his brother by vision,
and said, I have been hitherto evil, but now am well, etc. And the brethren in
the Monastery counting the days, found that to be the day on which the
thirtieth oblation was offered for him. See certain of these Miracles reported
by the Century Writers, centur. 6. col. 819. lin. 51. and centur. 7. col. 577.
lin. 37.
Sacrifice of Christ's body, Purgatory, and These foresaid Miracles alleged next
before from Gregory and Beda are available also for Purgatory and prayer for
the dead.
prayer for the dead, the great The Miracles reported by the Fathers concerning
the sign of the Cross are almost infinite. Insomuch as M. Covell in his answer
to M. John Burges, page 138. paulo post medium, confess^th accordingly, saying,
Noman can deny but that God after the death of his Son manifested his power to
the amazement of the world in this contemptible sign (as) being the instrument
of many miracles. He that would desire to see certain of those Miracles in
particular, let him read Hierom in vita Hilarionis versus finem; Athanasius in
vita Antonii; Palladius in Historia, c. 1. in vita Isidori; Theodoret, in his
Theoph. c. 2. ante med. in vita Juliani; and Lactantius, l. 4. c. ^7. ^
virtue of the sign of the Cross, Epiphanius, haer. 30. ante med. makes report
of certain enchantments dissolved by Joseph his sprinkling of water signed with
the sign of the Cross, etc. and Theodoret. hist. l. 5. c. 21. tells, that
Marcellus dissolved the like enchantments by sprinkling of holy water, which
done ( says Theodoret) the Devil not enduring the virtue of the sprinkled
water, fled away. Read the place. See also the like report made of Macharius by
Palladius in Historia Lausaica, cap. 19. In like manner do the Fathers mention
miraculous cures wrought by the means of holy water, whereof see S. Gregory, l.
1. Dialog. cap. 10. and S. Bid histor. l. 5. c. 4. and Palladius, cap. 9. and
20. and Theodorer in his Theoph. c. 13.
Holy water, Of a memorable Miracle done concerning Church-lights, read
Eusebius hist. l. 6. c. 8.
Lights in the Church, Cyprian in sermon de lapsis, post med. reports
concerning a cortain woman, who (says he) when she would with unworthy hands
have opened her Coffer, wherein was (reserved) the holy thing of our Lord, fire
did spring up, whereby she was so terrified, that she durst not touch it. And
S. Ambrose in orat. Funebri de obitu fratris sui Satyri, cap. 7. reports how
that his brother Satyrus being by shipwreck thrown into the Sea, and having
tied the divine Sacrament in a stole, and fastened the stole about his neck, was
(thereby miraculously) saved from the water, etc. and being delivered, went to
the Church, that he might give thanks, and acknowledge the eternal Mysteries.
And see no less Miracles in Evagrius, hist. l. 4. c. 35. in Gregorius
Turonensis de gloria Martyrum, l. 1. c. 14. and also next hereafter at y.
reservation of the Sacrament, Optatus, l. 2. contra Donatistas, reports, how
the Heretics caused the (reserved) Eucharist to be thrown to Dogs, which Dogs
thereupon all raging, rent in pieces their Masters, as guilty of the holy body;
they also ( says Optatus) ihrew out of the Window (ampullam chrisma^is) a Vial
(or little Bottle) of Chrism (or holy Gil) to the intent to break it, the w^^ch
being staid by an Angels, hand, God preserving it, light safe among the siones.
In like manner of latter times does S. Bernard remember how Malachias cured a
lunatic Child in confirming him ( says Bernard) with sacred Unction: A
Miracle ( says Holinshead) seen and confessed by many hundreds of people, (and
thereupon) blown through the world. Hereof see Holinshead in his Chromcle of
Ireland, the edition of 1577. in the history thereof next after the
description, page 13. a. lin. ult. and page 13. b. lin. 1. and after the last
edition, page 55. a. lin. 56. and see also S. Bernard in vita Malachiae.
Holy Chrism, See in Evagrius, l. 4. c. 25. a Miracle reported upon his own
knowledge, and another like miracle in the Tripartite history, l. 2. c. 19.
post med.
Adoration of the Cross, Of the sundry miracl^s showed that confession of sins
to the Priest should be made entire without concealment of any, see Joannes
Climachus in libro qui dicitur, Climax, grad. 4. Petrus Damianus in epist. ad
Desiderium, Petius Cluniacensis, l. 1. de mirac. c. 3, 4, 5, and 6. And
concerning neglect of Confession, see Beda hist. l. 5. c. 14.
Confession of sins to a Priest, and S. Bernard. in vita Malachiae, reports,
that A Noble Man lived near the Monastery of Benohor, whose Wise being sick,
Malachias was requested to aneyl her, which was duferred till morning:
afterward a sudden outcry being made that she was dead, Malachias came, and
when he certainly found that she was dead, he was greatly troubled in mind,
imputing the fault to himself, that she died defrauded of the grace of the
Sacrament, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, said, I beseech thee, O Lord
(etc.) what more? she that was dead opened her eyes (etc.) and Malachias giving
thanks, praised God, and aneyled her, knowing sins to be remitted in this
Sacrament. Thus does S. Bernard write of his known, familiar and dear friend
Malachias.
Extreme Unction. Whereto, were this place capable thereof, many others might
be added.

3. The gift of Miracles being thus evidently proved not to cease (as is
pretended) after those firster times of the Primitive Church, but in all ages
to continue, though not as being common to all the Churches Pastors, as was the
gift thereof made common to all And having called the twelve, he gave them
power to cure all manner of diseases. Math. 10.1.
the twelve, but only as being now but peculiar to certain persons, and at
certain times, according to the more special dispensation of Gods good pleasure
in that behalf, (for as for any supposed necessity of the same to be ordinary
now as in the Apostles times, against which M. M. Morton in Apologia Catholica,
part. 1. l. 2. c. 25.
Morton urges certain needless testimonies, it is by us neither urged nor
affirmed) we will now only further examine, which Church it is, whether
Catholic, or the said foresaid Protestant Church, to which the said gift has
for the last thousand years been confessedly appertaining or wanting. First,
concerning the foresaid Protestant Church, it seems so evidently destitute of
this gift, that our learned Adversaries confess to the contrary, the said
Church to have been Apud Brereley, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 11. subd. 3. in the
margent at it is said, Joannes Regius being urged in this kind, does (in his
liber Apologeticus, etc. page 176. circa and post med.) answer thereto, saying,
Negas Lutherum suae fidei coetum invenisse, (etc.) Dico fuisse ante Lutherum
verae religion^s, and qui cum Luthero per omnia consentiret coetum
Ecclesiasticum. But coming to answer where this Congregation was then to be
found, be has no other refuge, but says there, that it was a Pontificiis non
agnitus, nec, propter tyrannidem Pontificiam visibiliter for tassis oftendi
potuerit: ideoque quando urgent Jesuitae ut Lutherus verae religionis asseclam
Ecclesiam ostendat, etc. volunt ut Lutherus oppositum in adjecto demonstret,
and invisibile visibile probet, etc. Interim tamen absurdum est ita
argumentari; Haec res ab aliis non agnoscitur, nec potest etiam videri aut
demonstrarl, ideoque non est in rerum natura, etc. So plainly does he (being
urged to particulars) acknowledge his pretended Congregation at Luther 's
coming to have been then invisible, and not able to the showed. Also Whitaker
(apud Brereley, tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 11. subd. 1. in the margent at next
before t.) de Ecclesia contra Bellarminum, controv. 2. quaeff. 5. page 262.
ante med. recites Bellarmine 's argument, saying, Secundum Bellarmini
argumentum est hujusmodi, etc. Ante Lutheri tempora non erat in mundo, etc.
Whereto he there answers, Nostra Ecclesia tum^suit. At non fuit visibilis
(inquit Bellarminus.) Quid ^um? Anideo non fuit? Nequaquam. Latebat enim tum in
solitudine; and names not (though thus urged) so much as but any one man of
his Church in being at Luther 's first appearing. See more hereof here in
Brereley, and in the place above cited, and tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 3. fine, at
e. f. g. h. i.
invisible (at the least for almost) one thousand years last before Luther,
which could not so be, had the same been made so gloriously known and apparent
as with the testimony of miracles. And as for the said Protestants Church since
Luther's time, whereas our learned Adversaries do affirm the calling of Luther,
Calvin, and others, to have been Beza, (apud Brereley, tract. 2. c. 2. sect.
11. subd. 3. at next before g.) in Ep. Theolog. ep. 5. Alemanno, paulo post
initium, page 49. says to Alemannus: Ordinariam certe vocationem praetexere
non potes: Quis enim te elegit? ergo de extraordinaria videamus. Hu^c vero tum
demum locum esse dicimus, cum vel nulla, vel paene nulla est ordinaria vocatio,
sicut nostris temporibus accidit in Papatu, cum expectari ordinaria vocatio,
quae nusquam erat, nee debuit, nec potuit. See more hereof in Brereley, tract.
2. c. 2. sect. 10. subd. 15. fine, at q. r. and tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. versus
finem, at f. and tract. 2. cap. 3. sect. 4. at q. *. s. t.
extraordinary, as being not by ordination from man, but immediately from God,
to which calling themselves annex Apud Brereley, tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3.
subd. 2. at z in the margent, it is said, Amandus Polanus, in Partition.
Theolog. l. 1. page 308. says, Ministrorum extraordinary vocatorum etiam dona
extraordinaria fuere, nempe Prophetiae, donum edendi miracula, etc. And
Musculus, loc. commun. page 394. says, Vocatio quae immediate est a Christo,
jam in usu non est, ut erat olim, habebat sua signa, unde cognosci potuit, de
quibus meminit Marcus Evangelista, cap. ult. dicens: Praedicaverunt, etc.
sequen^bus signis, etc. And M. Henoch Clapham in his sovereign remedy against
Schism, page 25. initio, does upon this ground reprehend Brown, for that he did
take upon him extraordinary calling, and wanted miracles. And Luther, in loc.
commun. class. 4. c. 20. initio, page 38. post med. admonished to this end,
saying, Hoc explores an vocationem suam possint probare: neque enim Deus unquam
aliquem misit, nisivel per hominem vocatum, vel per signa declaratum, ne ipsum
quidem fillum. And Luther, tom. 5. Jen. Germ. fol. 491. a. b. says, Unde
venis? Quis te misit? etc. Ubi sigilla quod ab hominibus missus sis? Ubi sunt
miracula quae te a Deo missum esse testantur? Also Luther admonished the Senate
of Milhouse against Munster the Anabaptist, saying, Si dicat se a Deo atque
ipsius Spiritu missum esse quemadmodum Apostoli, probet hoc signis and
miraculis editis, vel nolite far, ut concionetur: nam ubicunque Deus
ordinariam viam mutare vult, ibi semper miracula facit. Luther, tom. 3. Jen.
Germ. fol. 455. b. and 456. a. and hereof see Sleydan, lib. 3. An. 25. Also
Sigwartus in his 23. disputationes Theolog. etc. page 207. sect. 8. says, Haec
vocatio semper extraordinaria quaedam and divina dona comitantia habet, quae
sunt tanquam sigilla doctrinae, etc. cu^usmodi suerunt miracula, etc. And D.
Saravia in defens. tract. etc. contra respons. Bezae, c. 2. page 38. ante med.
says, Ea vero quae proxime a Deo est vocatio, nunquam sine aliquo externo and
visibili signo aut visione facta legitur. And see further hereof Saravia in his
English book of the diverse degrees of Ministers, c. 2. page 7. and M. Fenner in
his Sacra Theologia, page 119. b. Also Bullinger, adversus Anabaptist. l. 3. c.
7. says to the Anabaptists, Quod si dicitis vos instar Apostolorum peculiarem
vocationem habere, probate eam signis and miracul^s, etc. hoc autem nunquam
facietis; ideoque vocatio vestra nihili, imo pernitiosa est Ecciesiae Christi.
See this saying alleged to this end by M. Thomas Bell in his Regiment of the
Church, page 137. initio.
miracles as necessary to prove that it is from God: yet is the gift of
miracles (which is to them according to their own doctrine so needful in proof
of their said pretended extraordinary calling) so confessedly wanting and
defective in their Church, that M. Fulk thereof says, M. Fulk against the
Rh^msh Testament, in Apocalyp. cap. 13. sect. 3. fol. 478. a. post med.
It is known that Calvin and the rest, whom the Papists call Arch-hereticks, do
work no miracles. And M. Sutcliff says accordingly: M. Sutcliff in his
examination of Kellison 's Survey, printed 1606. page 8. post med.
Neither do we practice miracles, nor do we teach that the doctrine of truth is
to be confirmed with miracles. Insomuch as certain others (discerning the
necessity of miracles, and themselves unable to afford any true example thereof
in their Church) do lastly urge and name for miraculous, Fox act. mon. printed
1596. page 789. a. lin. 59. And Sigwartus in Disp. Theol. page 170. and
Sutcliff de vera Catholica Christi Ecclesia, page 313. and Philip Mornay in his
Treatise of the Church englished Anno 1581. cap. 11. page 351. and Justus
Molitor de Ecclesia militante, page 159.
Luther 's so large dispersion of his Doctrine, maugre the malice of the Pope
and all his Adherents: which as it is against the evident confession of their
own brethren, who disclaim as before in all miracles showed by Luther, Calvin,
etc. and (as the learned Theologi Casm^riani in admonit. sua de libro
Concordiae Bergensis, cap. 6. and after the edition of Neustadii, 1581. page
203. post med. say: Scimus istos Theologos (etc.) magnis clamo^ibus regerere,
Lutherum esse Prophetam, quia and ipse immediate and extra ordinem a Deo
excitatus, etc. quia miracula fuerint res ip^^us gestae and successus, and
multa futura praedixerit, etc. Whereto they answer among other things, saying,
Miraculum quod ediderit, nullum audivimus. Nam fortunatio and defensio
curriculi ipsius fuit beneficium Dei ordinarium secundum promissiones datas
ipsum timentibus, etc. quod autem praedicit de paenis ingrati udinis pro luce
Evangelii donata vel similia, non sunt nova oracula, sed veterum oraculorum
Scripturae ad nostra tempora accommodatio.
Calvinists confess) is withal The learned Protestants d^sin^ a miracle to be,
signum supra naturae ordinem effectum. So does Amandus Polanus in partition.
Theolog. page 228. And see others hereafter in this Consideration, number. 7. at *
next after k.
no miracle in it self, as not being against or above the power of nature and
secondary causes, so also by like instance might the proceeding of Arius and
Mahomet be much more probably said to be miraculous, for that their errors
were from no less small beginning, More generally dispersed: For whereas
Lutheranism holds only in the Northern parts of the world, and also but in a
corner of those said Northern parts, which are but a parcel of Europe, A^ianism
was far more universal, as extending it self into sundry parts of Asia, Africa,
and Europe. Hereof Daniel Camierus, in epist. Jesu^tic. part. altera page 49.
paulo post initium, says, Arianorum venenum non portiunculam quandam, sed
paene totum orbem contam^na verat. And see Joannes Pappus in epitom. histor.
Eccles. page 412, and 413. And the like enlargement in short time of
Mahometanism is evident and confessed by Melancthon, chronic. l. 3. a page 311.
ad page 317. by Illyricus, in Apoc. c. 9. a versu 13. ad finem.
more generally for the time dispersed, than ever was the doctrine of Luther.
And thus much concerning the confessed want of miracles in our Adversaries
Church.

4. As concerning now our Catholic Church, the M.D. Downham in his Treatise of
Antichrist, l. 1. c. 7. page 111. prope initium, says, Neither Turks, nor
Jews, nor any other Churches of Christians, but only the Pope and Church of
Rome, do vaunt of miracles.
which only confessedly challenges the gift of miracles, the known examples
of her true and undoubted Miracles are plentifully testified. As first, for the
thousand years last past, it is confessed that we Englishmen were so long since
See Brereley, tract. 1. sect. 1.
converted to our now professed Catholic Faith: Insomuch as they charge Austin
with his then converting us to See Brereley, tract. 1. sect. 1. at 9.
Popery, and to See ibid. at e.
the Papistical faith; for which, say they, See ibid. at 6.
he went undoubtedly to Hell after his death. And yet are the undoubted
miracles which God wrought by the same Austin in proof of his doctrine
sufficiently confirmed with the credible See heretofore in this Consideration,
number. 1. at r. s. t.
testimony of those very times, with like See heretofore, ibid. at n. q. *.
testimony also of S. Bid, who lived in the age next after, and are thereupon
reported and See ibid. at u. and see M. Fox act. mon. printed Anno 1576. page
117. a. prope finem, where he says of Austin and those that came with him to
the Conversion of England: The King was moved with the miracles wrought through
Gods hand by them.
acknowledged as true and undoubted by our very Adversaries themselves. In the
same age also lived Holy Oswald King of Northumberland, whose undoubted
miracles are by like credible Concerning Oswald, Beda, hist. l. 3. c. 2.
affirms, that the place where he with religious prayer obtained victory, was
after called Heavens field, in regard of the innumerable miracles there done.
That also, usque hodie, etc. even till Bede's time diseased persons were
thereby restored to health. Among whom was ( says Beda) one Bothelmus yet
living restored miraculously to health, ante paucos annos, but some sew years
(then) since. To omit Saint Bede 's further mention of Oswald's other miracles,
reported l. 3. c. 9, 10, and 12. done even in his own time; he relates also
yet further, l. 3 c. 11. initio, that after Oswald 's death, a heavenly miracle
was showed when his bones were found and translated to the Church in which they
are (says he) now remaining; namely, that from the Chariot in which his
Relics were carried, a Pillar of Light was continued up toward Heaven,
conspicuous almost to all the places of that Province; and that, says he,
Edilhild an Abbess yet living saw the same: insomuch as Holinshead ( in his
Chronicle of his last edition, volum. 1. page 115. a. lin. 27. and after the
first edition, page 170. 2. lin. 38. says of Oswald, that He was the first of
the English Nation that approved his virtue by miracles after his life.
testimony made to us known and confessed. In the age next after (which was the
seven hundredth year after Christ) lived Saint Bede himself, who affirms Bed^
hist. l. 5. c. 2. initio.
many miracles to have been (then) done by Bishop John, reported by diverse that
familiarly knew him, and specially by his Deacon, a most Reverend and true man,
now Abbot (says Bid) of the Monastery called Inderwood: sundry of which said
miracles he there specially Bed. ibid. mentions the miraculous curing of one
born dumb, that was never able to speak one word: he reports this (ut ferunt
qui praesentes fuere) from the report of them that were present thereat. And l.
5. c. 3. he reports from the words of one Berectus, who was present at the
miracle, the said Bishops wonderful curing a young Virgin, named Coenburg, of
an ulcerous painful tumor in her arm, by his praying over her, and blessing
her. And l. 5. c. 4. he reports from the same eyewitness the said Bishops
curing of a diseased woman with holy water. And see his greate^ curing of one
almost dead, ibid. c. 5. and of another like, c. 6. See these miracles
mentioned by the Centurists, cent. 7. c. 10. col. 533. and by Osiander, in
epit. cent. 7. p. 328. post med. where his chief answer thereto is, that inter
Antichristiana miracula sunt reverenda.
mentions. In like manner does he particularly mention the sundry great
miracles of holy Cuthbert, and namely his miraculous Beda hist. l. 4. c. 29.
foretelling the time of his own death, and obtaining of God by prayer, that
his faithful Companion, Herebert, might depart this life together with him:
Ibidem.
the finding of his body eleven years after its burial, whole and sound, as it
were living, with limbs, joints, and sinews, soft and pliaeble, more like a
body sleeping than dead, and the clothes about him without blemish, fresh and
fair, as when they were first made. Besides sundry other miracles of healths
done at his Ibidem, cap. 31. the title thereof being, Ut quidam ad tumbam ejus
sit a paralysi curatus. And cap. 32. the title thereof being, Ut quidam ad
reliquias ejus nuper fuerit ab oculi languore curatus. S. Bid says there,
That this Miracle was some three years past done at his Relics, and told to
him by the same man on whom it was done.
Monument, so many and so known, that even S. Bid himself did therefore write
a special Of this Treatise Beda makes special mention, ibidem 30. fine, etc.
31. fine.
Treatise thereof. In like sort does he mention Beda in hist. lib. 5. cap. 11.
says, Nec martyrio eorum coelestia de sucre miracula, nam cum, etc.
the heavenly miracles testifying the martyrdom of (the two English brethren
named) Edwaldi, who were so confessedly of our Catholic Religion, that John
Bale says of them, Bale in Scriptorum Illustrium majoris Britanniae Catalog.
cent. 14. page 145. says of them, Passi sunt pro Papismo Papistici martyrs,
Anno 693. And Osiander in epitom. etc. cent. 7. page 331. post med. says, Hi
vero Edualdi inter veros martyrs numerandi non sunt.
They were Popish Martyrs, and dyed for Popery, Anno 693. And thus much briefly
concerning the undoubted miracles, specially done in proof of that faith
whereto we Englishmen were so many ages since converted, and in which we have
accordingly ever since persisted. Now concerning the other succeeding ages; the
miracles of the eighth age, or hundred years after Christ, are mentioned by See
Osiander in epit. etc. cent. 8. page 47. and 92. post med. and page 24. ante
med. and page 25. post med.
Osiander and the Sea the Centurists, cent. 8. c. 13.
Centurists in their special Tracts of that Century, and so likewise are the
miracles of the ninth age, Osiander in his answer thereto referring them to See
the Centurists, cent. 9. cap. 13. And Osiander in his epitom. etc. cent. 9.
page 63. imtio, says, Miracula quae a superstitiosis scriptoribus in hac nona
centuria recitantur, vel ab hominibus ot^osis conficta, vel a Satanae
praestigiis estecta, ad Antichristi miracula, (etc.) referenda sunt. Ad
manifestam enim Idololatriam confirmandam, vel conficta, vel a Satana edita
sunt, videlicet ad statuendum imaginum impium cultum, ad venerationem rel
quiarum, ad invocationem and cultum Sanctorum, ad Miss^rum sacrificia
continuanda pro vivis and mortuis.
Antichrist. And like further mention is by them and other credible Writers
made of the undoubted miracles done in the Concerning the tenth age, see the
Centurists, cent. 10. c. 13. and Osiander in opitom. cent. 10. page 125. And
see the wonderful minacles of holy Dunstan reported by Osbertus in vita ojus,
whereof see also Holinsheads great Chronicle, the last edition, part. 7. in the
History of England, page 165. b. lin. 7. and see also Petrus Damianus
reporting the mirdeles of holy Romwald.
tenth and Concerning the eleventh ^ge, Osiander in epitom. cent. 9, 10, 11,
etc. page 213. initio, says, Hoc saeculum undecimum plenum est Antichristianis
miraculis, quorum alia ab otiofis Monachis excogitata, aliqua Satanae
praestigiis effecta sunt, ad confirmationem Idololatriae Pontificiae circa
Missam, invocationem Sanctorum, etc. And see the miracles of holy Anseln^
mentioned by Edinerus in vita ejus. And of Odilo Abbas Cluniacensis, reported
by Petrus Damianus in vita ejus.
eleventh ages. In the twelfth age flourished holy Malachias and S. Bernard,
both of them being Of their confessed Religion, see heretofore in this
Consideration, number. 1. fine, in the margent at 3.
confessed Roman Catholics. Concerning Malachias, his known miracles are
reported by no meaner a witness that by S. Bernard himself, who having known
Malachias most Of their familiarity, Osiander in epitom. cent. 12. page 315.
post med. says, Malachias Sancto Bernardo admodum familiaris fuit. And see M.
Holinsheads Chronicle, part. ^. after the last edition, in the sundry invasions
of Ireland, next after the description, and next before the Chronicle^ of
Ireland, page 55. a. lin. 43. Here Brereley in his Omissions and Additions of
page 535. adds. See also S. Bernard in praefat. in vita Malachiae, where he
signifies his familiarity and presence at the death of Malachias, saying, Me
inter speciales amicos Sanctus ille habebat, etc. Accurri ego, ut benedictio
morituri super me veniret, etc. elevatis sanctis manibus super caput meum,
benedixit mihi, and benedictionem haereditate possideo; affirming (after many
other stupendous miracles reported there in the end of that Treatise) that
after Malachias was newly dead, Stabat eminus puer cui emortuum pendebat e
latere brachium, magis ille impedimento quam usui, apprehensam manum aridam,
applicui ad manum Episcopi, vivificavit eam: nempe vivebat in mortuo gratia
sanitatum, etc. So present, and witness, was S. Bernard at this miracle. And
concerning the certainty of his report of Malachias his other miracles, he
says there, in praefat. fine, Narrationis veritas apud me secura est.
familiarly, says of him, Bernard. in vita Malachiae.
In what kind of old miracles did not Malachias excel? He wanted not prophecy,
not revelations, not the gift of healing, and, to conclude, not the raising of
the dead. Among which his so many undoubted miracles, there is none more known
and memorable, than his Bernard. in vita Malachiae. And Holinshead, ubi supra,
page 55. a. lin. 56.
curing of a lunatic Child in his confirming (or Bishoping) him: Holinshead
ubi supra.
A miracle (says Holinshead) seen and confessed by many hundreds of people,
and (thereupon) blown through the world. In like manner concerning S. Bernards
miracles, they be specially written by his own Scholar Godefridus in vita
Bernardi. And Wilhelmus Abbas S. Nicodorici Rhemensis, l. 1. c. 10. in vita
Bernardi. And Bernard the Abbot of Bonevallis ( who lived in the same time with
S. Bernard) in vita Bernardi, l. 2. c. 2, and 3.
Godefridus, and others of that time who wrote his life: among which his so
many miracles, we cannot pass over in silence that great dogmatical miracle by
him wrought against the Henricians, or Apostolici, who then did (as Protestants
now do) That the Henricians or Apostolici joined with Protestants in denial of
^hese several articles, see in Brereley, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 3. subd. 5. in
the margent at n.
deny the real presence, Sacrifice of the Mass, Chrism, Purgatory, prayer for
the Dead, prayer to Saints, etc. Insomuch as sundry Protestants See this in
Catal. Testium veritatis, printed 1597. tom. 2. page 561, and 562. and in M.
Symonds upon the Revelations, page 142, and 143.
claim them to have been brethren or members of their Church. These reigned as
then most in the Country of Tholosa in France: Into which Country S. Bernard
came to preach against them, whereof his Scholar Godefridus writes thus: Est
locus in regione, etc. There Godefridus in vita Bernardi, l. 3. c. 5.
is (says he) a place in the Country of Tholosa, called Sarlatum, where after
the Sermon was done, they offered to the Servant of God (as every where the use
was) many loaves to bless, which he by lifting up his hand, and making the sign
of the Cross, in Gods name blessing, said thus; In this you shall know that
these things are true, which we, and that those other are false, which the
Heretics labor to persuade you, etc. and whosoever they be (of your diseased
persons) that taste the loaves, they shall be healed, that you may know us to be
the true Minister of God: And so huge a multitude of diseased persons recovered
by tasting the same bread, that over all the Country this was divulged, etc.
Thus reports Godefridus, who lived in the same time with S. Bernard, was his
Scholar, and could not without known discovery and discredit have as then set
down a matter of this importance, and with such variety of other particular As
among other circumstances he affirms in the same place the number of persons
healed, was so divulged, that (says be) the holy man returning over the places
near thereto, was glad to go out of his way, for intolerable concourse of
people.
circumstances as are set down in the report hereof at large, had the same been
as then but feigned and untrue. From suspicion whereof S. Bernard himself does
also further free it, Like as the Apostle insinuates to the Thessalonians his
miracles wrought among them, together with his preaching, saying, Evangelium
nostrum non fuit ad vos in fermone tantum, sed in virtute. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. So S.
Bernard, in imitation thereof, upon the like occasion, says in his 241 Epistle
to the Tholosians, We thank God for that our coming to you was not in vain, our
tarriance indeed was short with you, but not unfruitful, the truth being by us
made manifest, (non solum in sermon, sed etiam in virtute) not only by
preaching, but also by power (of working miracles) the Wolves are deprehended
(or convinced, etc.) And S. Bernard himself is alleged, as giving further
testimony of his miracles, by the Centurists, cent. 12. col. 1634. lin. 60. and
col. 1635. lin. 1. and col. 1649. lin. 40.
insinuating in his Epistle to the same Tholosians, their remembrance thereof,
with imitation of such like modesty in speech, as did the Apostle in the like
case in his Epistle to the Thessalonians. To conclude this point, the miracles
of S. Bernard were so many and certain, that Osiander not daring to deny the
same, is not ashamed in answer thereof to affirm them to Osiander in epitom.
cent. 12. l. 4. c. 6. page 310. post med. says of S. Be^nard, Miracula ci
prope infinita a Pontificiis Scriptoribus affinguntur, quae ego partim ab
otiosis Monachis excogitata puto, part^m perm^ssione Dei praestigiis Satanicis
effecta existimo, non quod Sanctum Bernardum magum fuisse putem, sed quod
verisimile sit Satanam talia miracula effecisse, etc. tales suisse puto Sancti
Bernardi visiones, and post mortem suam apparitiones, praestigias videlicet
Diabolicas, quibus Satan and ipsi S. Bernardo (dum viveret) and aliis illusit.
have been done by the Devil. Hitherto concerning the miracles of St. Bernard,
whom our Adversaries acknowledge to have been a See this proved and confessed
heretofore in this Consideration, number. 1. fine, in the margent at 3.
Popish Catholic, and yet withal Whitaker de Ecclesia, page 369. paulo post
med. says, Ego quidem Bernardum vere fuisse Sanctum existimo.
a true Saint, Osiander, cent. 12. page 309. post med. says, S. Bernardus
Clarevallensis Abbas valde pius vir fuit, etc.
a very good man, See this in Pasquils return into England, page 8, and 13.
a good Father, (and) one of the Lamps of the Church of God.

5. In the thirteenth age (to omit many Many others, as namely, holy Peter,
Thomas, Antony, and Bonaventure, whereof see Antoninus, 3. part. hist. tit. 23,
and 24.
others that were famous for miracles) lived S. Francis, and S. Dominick,
preaching as then earnestly See Act. Mon. page 70. at An. 1215.
against the Albigenses, who See this in Brereley, tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3.
subd. 5. under n.
denying Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, Confession, extreme Unction, the Popes
Authority, Images, Pardons, Ceremonies, Traditions, are therefore by our
Adversaries See this in Brereley, tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 2. in the margent at
q. And tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. 3. subd. 5. in the margent at 3.
challenged for brethren and members of their Church. Among the many miracles
credibly reported of them, we will, to avoid tediousness, only allege that
great miracle which it pleased God so publicly and openly to show in the last
sickness of S. Francis, and the same commended to us, not upon the only credit
of any obscure or fabulous Legend, but upon the constant and credible report of
Matthew Paris in his History, published by our very Printed by them at T^gure,
1589. with title of Matthae^ Patis. etc. historia major, etc.
Adversaries themselves, who in respect thereof do commend him (to use their
own words) for In their Preface to the Reader (set before the beginning of the
Book) initio.
the great study, faithful diligence, and simple narration of truth, which the
Author thereof (say they) Matthew Paris used, affirming further his said Book
to be Opus laudatissimum, wherein, say they, he does Ibidem it is said, that he
does tam saepe, tam manifest, tam vehementer, and intrepide notare and simul
detestari arrogantem superbiam, Tyrannidem, and injustum imperium Romani
Pontificis.
so often, so manifestly, so vehemently, and so boldly note and detest the
great arrogant pride, Tyranny, and unjust government of the Roman Bishop,
Ibidem, in praefat. ad Lectorem.
that Illyricus does therefore place him in his In Catal. test. page 593. and
625.
Catalogue of Witnesses of the Truth, etc. And other Protestant Writers So
challenged by Mr. Welsh in his reply against M. Gilbert Brown, Priest. page
181. fine. And by M. Gifford upon the Revelations, page 194. paulo ante med.
challenge him as a member of their Church. Thus then does this so true,
credible, and indifferent reporter (who Matthew Paris lived Anno Domini 1250.
and S. Francis begua his Order, as M. Fox reports, Anno 1215. Act. Mon. page
70. at Anno 1215.
lived in the same age with S. Francis) report of this matter in his so greatly
commended Book before mentioned, saying, Matthew Paris in his foresaid
History, page 329. initio. And see S. Bonaventure in vita Francisci.
Quinta decima die, etc. The fifteenth day before his death, there appeared out
of his body wounds in his hands and feet freshly bleeding, such as appeared in
the Savior of the world, hanging upon the Cross, when he was crucified by the
Jews. Also, his right side appeared so open and bloody, that the inward parts
of his heart were to be discerned; whereupon there repaired to him great
concourse of people, wondering at so strange a thing, among whom the Cardinals
themselves demanded of him what this sight meant, to whom he said, This sight
in me is therefore showed, to whom I preached the mystery of the Cross, that
you may believe in him, who for the salvation of the world suffered upon the
Cross these wounds which you see, and that you may know me to be the Servant of
him whom I preached, etc. And to the end that without doubt you may persevere
in this constancy of faith, these wounds which you see in me so open and
bloody, shall immediately after I am dead be whole and coherent like to my other
flesh. Afterward he yielded up his soul to his Creator, without all anguish or
pain of his body, and being dead, there remained no marks of his foresaid
wounds. Thus much reports Matthew Paris of S. Francis, a confessed M.
Whitaker de Ecclesia, page 369. post med. says, Franciscus vero and Dominicus
homines superstitiosi fuerunt (etc.) de religione vero, quod sciam, idem illi
senserunt quod nunc vulgus Papistarum sencit. And see M. Fulk in his Retentive
against Bristow, page 101. ante med.
Popish Catholic, whose wonderful holy and austere life is Pantaleon in
Chron. page 95. fine, says, S. Franciscus sanctitate and eruditione illustris,
in Italia claret. And Fox Act. Mon. page 70. next after Anno 1216. going about
to disgrace him all he can, says of him, This Francis was superstitious in
casting all things from him, even also his girdle, gi^ding a cord about him,
and in outward chastisings of himself, was so strait to his flesh, that in
winter season he covered his body with ice and snow: he called Poverty his
Lady. So desirous he was of Martyrdom, that he went into Syria to the Souldan,
etc. And Melancthon in his Apologia Confessionis Augustanae, printed at
Wittemberg, 1573. fol. 221. b. ante med. says, Obedientia, Paupertas, and
Caelibatus exercitia sunt (...), ideoque Sancti uti eis sine impietate passunt,
sicut usi sunt Bernardus, Franciscus, and alii Sancti Viri. And Tindall in his
Treatise entitled, The revelation of Antichrist, says, I doubt not but S.
Bernard, Francis, Dominick, and many other holy men erred, as concerning Mass.
Act. Mon. page 1338. a. prope initium. That Tindall was Author of this
Treatise, see Act. Mon. page 573. b. fine. And see the religious austerity of
S. Francis yet further at large reported and confessed by the centurists, cent.
13. col. 1158. lin. 20. and 1162. lin. 33. and lin. 60. And especially col.
1164. l. 10, 11, etc. And in the Book entituted Corpus Doctrinae, written by
Melancthon, and printed Lipsiae, 1561. and subscribect unto by many learned
Protestant Divines, ibid. page 300, and 301. it is said, ibid. p. 95. fine,
Antonius, Bernardus, Dominicus, Franciscus, and alii Sanct^ Patres, elegerunt
certum vitae genus, vel propter studium, vel propter alia utilia exercit^a; etc.
acknowledged by our very Adversaries. Whereto might be added further report of
the same Author concerning many undoubted As for example, page 128, and 129.
Matthew Paris tells how that in those times the Martyr Alban appeared to one
Robert with great brightness, and showed to him the sepulcher and relics of
the blessed Martyr Amphibalus, the which he opened, and thereupon great
splendour and brightness thence issued, and that upon notice had thereof, great
concourse was had thereto of people, quos fervor devotionis adduxerat. And
ibid. Page 130. he sets down in particular sundry infirm persons
miraculously cured thereat. And page 131. he further says, In praesentia
Sanctarum Reliquiarum ipsius, nec non in loco sepulturae ejus, ad laudem Dei
and gloriam Martyris, a diversis infirmitatibus sanantur aegroti, membra
paralytica solidantur, multorum ora ad loquendum laxantur, coecis tribuitur
visus, surdis auditus, claudis firmatur gressus, and quod magis magnificum est,
arrepti a daemonio liberantur (etc.) and ad vitam mortui revocantur. And see
many other undoubted miracles by him reported, page 195. post med. and page
203. circa med. 207, 208, and 283. ante med. and 315. post med. and 389. fine,
and 390. initio, and 397. fine, and 398. initio, and 536. circa med. and 572.
post med.
miracles of those times. To overpass now the fourteenth age, in which are
famous the known and reported Of these, see Antoninus, 3. part. hist. tit. 23,
24. where he reports certain Refuscitations of the dead. And see also
Raymundus Capuanus in vita Catharinae Senensis. And Petrus Rauz in vita
Vincentii. And Joannes Capistranus in vita Bernardini.
miracles of holy Bernardine, of Vincentius, and of S. Katherine of Sienna; and
to conclude this point with some known examples of the fifteenth and last
expired age, we have already heretofore alleged the known and confessed
wonderful miracles of holy Xaverius in his conversion of the East-Indians, and
the like confessed miracles showed in this age by God in the conversion of the
Kingdom of Congo in Africa; and the same so credible, as are published to the
world by Protestants themselves. Whereunto might be added the example of
Joannes a S. Francisco, who in Conversion of the Mexican Nation, came to the
Hereof see Bozius, de sig. Eccles. lib. 12. cap. 21.
knowledge of the Mexican Language by only prayer, without study. As also of
Aloysius Bertrandus, who (not unlike to that which is mentioned in the Act.
2.6, 7.
Acts) preaching to the Indians in Spanish, was by them Bozius, l. 6. c. 2. and
l. 7. c. 1.
understood as See heretofore in this Consideration, number. 1. in the margent at
*. next after m.
See ibidem.
in their own language, besides sundry other Read the Book entitled Rerum in
Orient gestarum Commentarius, throughout. And the Book entitled, Avisdel
Giapone, de gli Anni 1582, 1583, and 1584 printed 1586. And the other Book
entitled, H^stor a dell^ Indie Orientali (printed) in Venetia, 1777. lib. 2.
cap. 53, 57, and 63. and l. 3. c. 3.
miracles showed by God in the late conversion of sundry Nations. And the same
so evident, as the Protestant writer, See this of Philippus Nicolai in
Brereley, tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 6. subd. 2. versus finem, after n. in the
margent at 10, and 11.
Dr. Philippus Nicolai, is enforced to acknowledge them: Forbearing all which,
I cannot but remember that memorable miracle, and not to be denied, which
happened See Nicolaus Basilius additione ad Chronicon Naucleri.
in February, Anno 1510. in a Town called Knobloch; (Whereas) one Paul Form, a
sacrilegious person, went secretly into the Church by night, brake the pix, and
stole from thence two consecrated hosts, one of which he sold to a Jew, who,
blinded with malice, said, If thou be the God of Christians, manifest thy self,
and that said, he pierced the Sacrament with his Dagger, whereupon Blood did
miraculously issue forth, etc. This miracle was not private, but so known and
evident, that Vide ibidem, and see next hereafter at b.
thirty eight Jews assenting thereto, were therefore apprehended, and publicly
burned the 19. of July, 1510. in the Marchy of Brandeburg, and all (other) Jews
were also thereupon (by public decree) banished out of the said Territories.
This being so certainly set down, with such foresaid known particularity of
circumstances, as the certainty of time and place, the known execution of so
many Offenders, the solemn banishment by public decree thereupon ensuing of
all Jews out of that Country, with many other particulars mentioned in the
story at large, is accordingly reported for credible, not only by For
Catholic writers read hereof Surius in Chronic. and Pontanus, l. 5. rerum
memorabilium, and Lintur^us Appendice ad sasciculum temporum.
Catholic Authors, but also by Joannes Manlius (Luthers Scholar) in loc.
commun. page 87. says hereof, Anno post natum Christum, 1510. die 19. Julii,
combusti sunt in Marchia Brandeburgensi 38. Judaei, qui sacramentalem hostiam a
sacrilego quodam emptam pugionibus and cultellis in ipsius Christi and
Ecclesiae Christianae ignominiam impie confoderant, adjectis blasphem is quod
Christianorum Deus nullum haberet sang^unem, qui tamen miraculose promanavit,
adeo ut celari nullo modo potuerit: Quare comprehensi scelerati omnes vivi sunt
exusti, etc. That Manlius who published this, is but the Collector of
Melancthons report, appears by the verses in the beginning of the Book, and
in the Book, page 89. the Reporter mentions his being at Ratisbone, and
disputing there with Eckius, which was meant of Melancthon.
Melancthon, and sundry other The Protestant writer, Michael Beuther, in his
Ephemeris Historica, printed at Basil, page 226. makes the very same report
hereof; And so likewise does Osiander, in epitom. etc. cent. 16. c. 14. fine,
page 28.
Protestant writers.

6. To forbear certain other Pontanus, l. 5. rer. mem. and Surius in Comm. rer.
in orb gestaru^, do report the like miraculous appearance of blood upon like
violent sacrilege done by Jews to the Blessed Sacrament, Anno 1556. in Polonia:
whereupon the Offenders, one Bisphem a Jew, and Dorothy his woman-servant, were
upon Friday after the Ascension day publicly burned. And Jansonius in his
Mercurio Gallobelg. l. 4. Anni 1591. makes mention of the like violence and
miracle thereupon ensuing at Presburg in Hungary, Anno 1591. where three Jews
being the Offenders, were publicly executed.
examples in in the same kind, we will remember that which is known and
evident, concerning Margaret Jesop, an Born at Longwick Parish in
Buckinghamshire. See the report thereof in Dr. Bristows Motives, the fifth
motive.
English woman, who serving in London in the Old Baily one Samuel Rogers a
Dutchman, Anno 1568. She went to seek after one John Masten a Dutchman, her
affianced Husband, who leaving her with Child in London, did, in regard of her
poverty, unkindly forsake her, returning into his own Country, and there
marrying another.
went to Bruxels, 1569. and there fell grievously She became upon her delivery
so lame, that she kept her bed for half a year, a deep hole remaining on her
right side, as if some of her ribs had been sunk far within her body.
lame, the one leg being shorter than the other by half a foot, being known to
continue in that estate of lameness, and to live upon common alms three years
and four months, at the end of which time, with help of her Crutch, she went to
the Church of S. Gudila, vulgarly called S. Trigules in Bruxels, to hear the
solemn Mass of the blessed miraculous Anno 1369. certain Jews at Bruxels having
with their knives transfixed the blessed Sacrament, blood miraculously issued,
(which being discovered) the Jews confessing the same, were thereupon publicly
condemned, and burned upon the Ascensiun Eve, Anno 1370. and the foresaid
sacred host was religiously placed in the Church of S. Gudila in Bruxels, where
it is yet, (most miraculously without all corruption) reserved. See the
history hereof more particularly and at large reported by Theodoricus Loer, in
his Book hereof taken from the Notaries public Records. See also a summary
report thereof in Tilman Bredenbachius, collat. sacr. l. 9. c. 25.
Sacrament, in which place many cures had been wrought, where (in the presence
of hundreds of eyewitnesses) she was miraculously Of the many miraculous cures
there before time done, see Theodoricus Loer de miraculis Bruxellis editis
circa Venerabilem Eucharistiam. And see a collection of them taken from the
said Author, and extant in Tilman Bredenbachius, l. 9. collat. sacr. cap. 25.
and see there in the end of that 9. book the subscription of the public
Notaries testifying the same.
restored to health, in memory whereof her Crutch was there left in the place
near to the blessed Sacrament, where it is yet to this day remaining, and the
foresaid miracle was proclaimed in Pulpits of the Cities round about, and the
woman her self, together with many eyewitnesses of her then cure, are yet
living to testify the same. And no less memorable is that which of late times
happened to Justus Lipsius in his book, entitled, Diva Sichamiensis five
Aspricollis, printed Antwerpiae, 1605. cap. 45. says hereof, Erat Bruxellae
Joannes Clemens fil^us Jacobi (etc.) a nativitate claudus, debilis, imo
monstrosa quadam facie corporis suit, tib^ae and pedes contracti antrorsum,
versi in pectus sic ut genua injungerentur and adhaerescerent, nec esset
digitum aut aliud immittere tanquam nativa concretione: Imo vero cavitas and
velu^ putei apparuerunt sub pectore, cum sanatus ille fuit, idem in utroque
femore and ventri imo jungebantur: globosum aliquod corpus diceres, nec stare,
jacere, ambulare idoncum: sedere tantum and sedendo proserpere, manuumal quo
nixu, quae sulcris etiam ^uvabantur; Haec deformitas patri dolor, matri etiam
exitio fuerat, quae in partu obiit ventre exsecto, caeso hic p^ociietristi
fato. And afterward: B^uxellam rediit, paternam pecuniolam consumpsit^,
benignita^e aliena deinceps sustentatus, etc. crebra fama motus capitu^ ad
Divam nostram veni^e, si forte and ipse opem ac solatium referret: vectus est
cu^^u, in sacellum repsit, culpas confessione and paenitentia expiavit, sacram
hostiam sumpfi^, and paulo post angi visus and animo collabi, item dolores in
omni corpore sentire, and dum conatur egredi atqu^ aere refici, magis increvit
mo^bus, mansitque volens nolens to^um diem in vesperam. Tunc solemnes Divae
lauds canebantur, and ipse ante Aram, sentitque palam a terra se attolli, and
pedes ante contortos and ligatos laxari, dejici, idque thorace qui velabat per
vim disrupto: and statim directus pedibus suis stetit: ipse attonitus, quid
alii? etc. haec turbis ibi visa. haec Lovanii cum rediit, haec Bruxellae, and
quis non occurrit? Audivi medicos primarios, and talium haud temere credulos
exclamantes, vere hanc vim and manum Dei esse. Hereunto Brereley in his
omissions and additions of page 543. adds, saying, If any curious Adversary
will deny this miracle to have been done by God, because it was not done in
instants, let that man remember, that upon our Saviors curing of the blind man
at Bethsaida, he did not at the first instant perfectly cure him, for it is
said that at first he (but) saw men walking like trees, Marc. 8.24. and S. Aug.
de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. mentioning the like miraculous cures done in his
own time, and knowledge, at the Monument of S. Stephen, of Paulus and Palladia,
he declares them both to have been cured not at the first instant, but says
of Paulus, Repen^e prostratus est, and dormienti simillimus jacuit. And
afterward of Palladia, Collapsa sim^lit^r velut ad somnum sana su^rexit. And
of an other there before mentioned, he likew^se says, Ecce dormitum est, and
ecce ante diluculum, etc. and yet more plainly and at large of an other young
man brought to the Memory (or Relics) of Gervasius and Portasius at Millan,
whose cure of his eyes were discerned post septein dies.
John Clement, whose mother being at her delivery of him cut, thereupon dyed,
leaving behind her (this) her son lame from his nativity, and of a monstrous
composition of body, his thighs and feet were contracted and turned toward the
forepart of his breast, so as his knees did grow and stick thereto, his body
was round (or spherical) unfit to stand, lie, or walk. Having from his birth
continued in this estate for 20. years, and so known to the Inhabitants of
Bruxels, and other places adjoining, he was moved in his mind to go to our
Ladies Chapel, in or near the Town in Brabant called Sichemium, where he had
heard of many miraculous Of the many miraculous cures there done, the foresaid
Treatise of Justus Lipsius consisting wholly thereof.
cures credibly Concerning the undoubted credit of these, Justus Lipsius, a
neighbor to the place, in his Preface of the said Book to the Reader, initio,
says thereof, Quid enim de hominibus dicam, si quis non abnuit, sed ambigit in
tam illustribus, nec homines esse, aut certe sponte oculos claudere ne solemn
hunc admittant tam clarae veritatis. Sunt enim in sensibus nostris pleraque
gesta. Quid etiam? Ne fraus and sucus imponant; publico mandato Mechliniensis
Antistitis explorata inquisita (etc.) lege igitur and cr. de. And in the
beginning of his first Chapter, he further says, Ecce in oculis atque auribus
omnium nostrum gesta, ecce concursu, plausu, fructu gentium celebrata. Quae
fides potest esse in rebus humanis, si haec non est? etc. And Brereley in his
Omissions (etc.) of page 544. adds. See also this reported of John Clements
cure done in July, Anno 1604. more particularly reported in the History of
Miracles at Mont-a^gue near unto Sichem, printed 1606. page 244, 245, etc. And
see also there, page 260, 261, 262, 263, etc. the sundry witnesses there
particularly named, together with their particular testimonies of this matter
solemnly taken by oath: and there page 267. initio, mentioned to be recorded by
Public Writings both of the City of Bruxels, subsigned (by) P. Numan,
Secretary: as also of Lovam, subsigned (by) R. de Prince, Secretary, dated
respectively 29. Jul^i, and 2. Augusti, 1604. and sealed with the Scals of the
said Cities.
published to have been there done: Being carried thither in a Wagon, and
having confessed his sins, and received the blessed Sacrament, he did (in the
end) feel his contracted and bound feet to be loosed, and stretched forth, so
as presently he stood on his feet, himself and the beholders being amazed
thereat. Will our Adversaries deny this? It is thus reported by that excellent
learned man, Justus Lipsius (dwelling thereby) as lately done in July, Anno
1603. in the presence of many eyewitnesses, and thereupon published both in
Print and Pulpit, sundry of the Gentlemen attending upon our late Ambassador
the Earl of Hereford, having received answerable satisfaction in that behalf,
as well by seeing and conferring with the party, as by other public and
credible testimony thereof given. Will they yet take exceptions to this John
Clement himself, as being but a counterfeit? His known foresaid more than
ordinary lameness continued till then, even from his own nativity and mothers
death, proclaims the contrary. What therefore remains, but that honoring
our Blessed Savior in due acknowledgement to his holy Mother, they should so
with all herein acknowledge Exodus 8.19. and Luc. 11.10.
the finger of God, Esaias 59.1. and 5.2. and Number. 11.23.
whose hand is not yet shortened. Hereunto might be added the many other
miracles there done in these times, and mentioned by Justus Lipsius in his
foresaid Treatise. The many more miracles likewise by him reported in his other
Book, entitled, Printed Antuerpiae, 1604.
Virgo Hallensis, together also with the miraculous cures confessed by the
Protestant writer Joannes Manlius from Melancthons report, as done at the
Memorials of the blessed Virgin at Manlius in his Book entitled, Locorum
communium collectanea ( mentioned before at b. and of whom it is said in the
verses before the Book, Haec partim scripsit magno dictante Philippo.)
undertaking, page 184. to set down examples of Idolatry, confesses the matter
of fact, saying there, page 187. paulo post medium, of infirm persons, Ad
Sanctam Miriam Ratisbonensem homines ultra viginti milliaria, nec bibentes nec
comedentes currebant: quo cum venissent, jacebant prostrati quatuor horas,
posteaque liberabantur. And the Protestant writer, Osiander, confesses the
same accordingly, centur. 16. page 69. circa med. saying, Viri and Mulieres,
Juvenes and Virgins, Ratisbonam currebant, ad Idolum beatae Virginis Mariae:
ibi enim credebantur miracula stupenda fieri, and quidem edita su^s^e quaedam
Antichristiana miracula praestigiis Satanicis credib^le est.
Ratisbone and Manlius, ubi supra, page 185. ante med. says, Novimus homines
cueurrisse ad Grimenthall qui amentes suerunt, and acuerunt ante Civitatem per
a liquot horas, postea redierunt ad se, haec dixerunt esse miracula Sanctae
Mariae. So clear and confessed herein is the matter of fact, that this Author
is not ashamed to allege these as examples of Idolatry.
Greementhall: the latter whereof is set down upon the Authors own knowledge.
Which foresaid course of these and many other miracles has been so assuredly
accomplished in this last age, that Martin Luther (not unlike herein to the
unclean Marc. 1.24. and Luc. 4.34.
spirit, who confessed Christ to be the Holy One of God, was in respect of so
evident truth enforced likewise to confess and say, Luther in purgatione
quorundam articulorum.
Quis enim potest contradicere his, etc. Who can gainsay the things, which God
to this day works miraculously and visibly (ad Divorum sepulchra) at the
Monuments of the Saints? In regard of which our foresatd so plentiful alleged
testimony from miracles, which are (as the Scriptures term them) God
testifying by signs and miracles ( Hebr. 2.4.) I have a greater testimony and
witness than John, the works that I do give testimony, etc. ( John 5.36.)
the testimonies of God, we may not unaptly say in behalf of our Catholic
Church, with a holy writer, Rich. de S. Victore, l. 1. de Trinit. c. 2.
Domine, si error est quod credimus, a te decepti sumus, etc. O Lord, if it be
error which we believe, we are deceived by thee, for thou have confirmed these
things to us with signs and wonders, which could not be done but by thee. Or
rather as said that blessed man Nicodemus of our Savior, Joan. 2.23.
We know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no man could do these
miracles thou do, except God were with him.

7. And let it not (most gracious Lord) seem tedious if here we do but touch
those idle tergiversations wherewith our Adversaries seek to obscure so great a
light. As first, under pretense or example of diverse dispersed fabulous
Legends, of things merely feigned, but never done, as also of sundry
counterfeit miracles, done indeed, but by confederacy and practice of
Impostors, to reject all other as being likewise untrue, or at least
counterfeit. But with how small equity is this? To touch the first, Must all
historical faith be abolished, because of some abuse or error in history? To
these it shall suffice only to oppose the grave answer of S. Aug. de Civit.
Dei, l. 10. c. 18. initio, says, An dicit aliquis ista falsa esse miracula,
nec su^sse facta, sed mendaciter scripta, quisquis hoc dicit, si de his rebus
negat omnino ullis literis esse credendum: potest etiam dicere nec etc.
Austin in like case of his time. As concerning the other part wherein they
give example of the blood of Hales, the aversion or moving of the Images face
by device of secret wyers, and such like; whereto (supposing them for true) we
may match the late sleeping Preacher, discovered by your Majesty. M. See at
large the Book entitled, A discourse of the fraudulent practices of John
Dorrel in his proceedings concerning the pretended possession and dispossession
of William Summers at Nottingham, of Thomas Darling the Boy of Burton, of
Caldwall, and of Katherine Wright at Mansfield, and of his dealings with one
Mary Cowper at Nottingham, written by M. Harsnet, and printed by John Wolf,
1599. And see another Treatise entitled, A summary answer to all the material
points in any of M. Dorrel's Books, more specially to that one Book of his,
entitled, The doctrine of the possession and disposs^ssion of Demoniacks, out
of the Word of God ( written by John Deacon and John Walker, Preachers) printed
1601.
Dorrel's like discovered confederacy with Will Summers, and others, and their
other confessed See this in Stow 's Annals, printed 1592. page 1058. post. med.
counterfeit spirit in the wall practiced against Queen Mary, with such like.
To omit, that deceits of this kind See example hereof in our Church reported by
our Adversary Osiander in epitom. etc. centur. 16. page 222. ante med. and 770,
and 771, And see the Treatise entitled, Two Treatises, the first of the lives
of Popes, etc. the second of Mass, etc. also of false miracles wherewith Marie
de la Visitation, Prioress de la Annunciada of Lisbone deceived very many, and
was discovered and condemned: Englished and printed 1600. Of our Churches
Inquisitors, severe inquiry, discovery and punishment of that hypocritical
woman, see there page 362. initio, and page 424, 425, and 427. And see there in
the addition, after the end of the Book, another like discovery and punishment
in Sevil of one Father Lion. And see the like discovery of false miracles in
Sir Thomas Moor's dialogue of veneration of Images, Relics, etc. lib. 1. c.
14. And see Osiander, epitom. etc. centur. 16. page 32. initio, an example of a
woman counterfeiting of her self to live without mea^ and sleep, etc.
discovered and punished by our Church.
are by our Church carefully enquired of, may the particular blemish of certain
such forged examples, suffice to discredit a general received truth? then much
more by this reason away with the true Scriptures of the New Testament, because
there were many more writings Of the very many writings forged under the
Apostles names, see Eusebius hist. l. 3. c. 19. and l. 6. c. 10. and S. Austin
contra advers. Leg. and Prophet. l. 1 c. 20. and Gelasius in decret. cum 70.
Episcopis, and Zozomen. hist. l. 7. c. 19. post med. and see also the
Protestant writer Hamelmannus de traditionibus Apostol^cis, etc. primae partis,
l. 1. col. 251. and part. 3. l. 3 col. 841. lin. 15, and 22. In which places
mention is made of sundry writings forged under the name of Paul, Peter,
Barnabas, Thomas, Matthew, Andrew, John, and diverse others; and S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. ^.2. insinuates the then forging of Epistles in his name.
counterfeited under the Apostles names, than are now remaining true and
undoubted: many also of those foresaid true writings now remaining, having
been, as the learned Protestants In the Tower disp. Anno 1581. had with Edm.
Campian, the first days conference, D. 1. the Deans of Paul's and Windsor do
thus report of themselves: for proof whereof we allege the testimony of Hierom.
in Catal. where he thus writes: The Epistle of James is said to be published
by some other under his name, and of the second of Peter he says, that it is
denied of many to be his: we also allege Eusebius writing thus; Those books
that be gain said, though they be known to many, be these, the Epistle
attributed to James, the Epistle of Jude, the latter of Peter, the second and
third of John. And in the fourth days conference, fol. 2. b. M.D. Walker
says, Hierom says concerning that (Epistle) which is written to the Hebrews,
many have doubted of it. And also concerning the second of Peter, he says it
was doubted of by many, and so with some were the two Epistles of John, etc.
affirm, greatly suspected and doubted of, even in the times of the Primitive
Church. This pretense therefore being most unreasonable to impugn the matter of
fact in our miracles, which is so evident, as is often times This appears in
sundry of the examples before mentioned and alleged from Protestant writers.
confessed by learned Protestants themselves. Their next or second refuge is
confessing the matter of fact, withal to affirm the same to be in many cases
but by the Devils counterfeiting, as in our anciently continued Catholic
Exorcist being one of the inferior Orders leading to Priesthood, is mentioned
as one of them by Ignatius in epist. ad Antiochenos, by Cornelius apud
Eusebium, l. 6. c. 35. and by Cyprian, l. 4. epist. 7. post med. where he
says, Quod hodie etiam geritur, ut per Exorcistas voce humana and potestate
divina flagelletur, and uratur, ut torqueatur Diabolus. And see further hereof
the Protestant writer Zepperus, l. de Sacramentis, printed 1606. page 362.
initio. And whereas Protestants usually answer, that this was not any peculiar
Order, but a miraculous gift, such as was the gift of healing, peculiar to
those beginning times of the Primitive Church, for planting and enlargement of
the Christian faith, and that it is now ceased; this answer appears many ways
frivolous, as first, in that the foresaid ancient Fathers placed and numbered it
with the other Ecclesiastical Orders conferred by the Church, among which they
forbear to mention or number any such peculiar Order of healing. Secondly, it
is in like sort numbered among the Ecclesiastical Orders long afterward, even
when and where the Christian faith was already greatly enlarged, as appears
in Council. Laodicen. can. 26. and in Council. Antioch. can. 10. Also in the
fourth Council of Carthage, can. 7. the Exorcist is specially named as one of
the Ecclesiastical Orders, together with the special rite of his ordination.
And in Sulpitius, in l. de vita Martini, cap. 4. it is most plainly mentioned
as a peculiar Order. Thirdly, whereas the possessing of men by unclean spirits
was likewise during the old Law ( whereof see Josephus, l. 8. antiq. c. 2.
paulo post initium, in remedy whereof there were Judaical Exorcists, at 19.13.)
it is strange that our Adversaries can affirm either the thing it self, or the
cure thereof, to be now ceased: but the reason is evident, in that they discern
the daily dispossessing powerfully practiced in our Catholic Church, whereof
see next hereafter at f. and the known defect or want thereof in theirs: for as
for their only example of M. Dorrel and Will Summers, their deceitful
confederacy is now at last by our Adversaries themselves discovered, and for
such published in print, as appears next heretofore in the margent at Z.
exorcisms, or casting forth of unclean spirits in persons possessed, whereof
many To forbear the known successful daily examples hereof in our Catholic
Church, which impudency it self dare not deny, we rem^t the Protestant Reader
to the report of D. Board the Physician, a report so indifferent, that in his
extravagantes annexed to his breviary of health, printed 1575. at the 11.
chapter, of a Demoniack, he makes mention of his travel to Rome, with
exceeding Protestantlike invectives against the Pope, City and Clergy there,
and yet with all does in the same chapter report himself to have been an
eyewitness of a Gentleman possessed with Devils brought from Germany to Rome,
to be made whole there, the course whereof was, says he, stupendous and above
all reason, if I should write it; and the cure so evident, as he there
attributes the same to the virtue of the holy words that the Priest did speak.
And see in Sir Thomas Moor's Dialogue of Images and Relics, l. 1. c. 16. his
constant and credible report of the stupendous dispossessing of M. Wentworth
's young Daughter, the circumstances whereof clear it from fiction.
examples are known and remaining, and in terrifying the Devil with the sign of
the Cross, and holy Relics: these, and such like, they They are not ab^shed
to affirm this of the approved examples in the Primitive Church: let the
example of Osiander serve for many, who in his fourth Century, page 326.
speaking of the Devils flying away at Julianus his signing his forehead with
the Cross, m^ntioned next hereafter at g. says hereof, Diaboli simulata sua
suga voluerunt valgi superstitionem confirmare, etc. And in the same Century,
page 377. post med. mentioning the memorable example of the buried corpse of
Babylas, and the Devils enforced confession, that he could not give answer (in
his Idol or Oracle) by reason of Babylas his being so near, they say hereof
(against Chrysostom and all antiquity mentioning the same) that this was
responsum hand dubie^ a Satana ideo datum, ut paulatim cultum idololatricum
reliquia^um in Ecclesiam inveheret. And the same answer thereto give the
Centurists, cent. 4. col. 1446. lin. 18.
affirm to be not truly exercised upon the Devil, but by his own assent, either
apparently voluntary, or otherwise dissembled, wherein they do overboldly
imitate the like unworthy evasion which was in like case heretofore of old So
Ambrose, sermon. 93. de inventione corporum SS. Gervasii and Protasii, says of
the Arians, Dicunt Daemones martyribus, venistis perdere nos, Ariani dicunt non
sunt Daemonum vera tormenta, sed ficta and composita Iudibria. So Hierom.
contra Vigilan. cap. 4. says to Vigilantius, In morem gentilium impiorumque
Porphyrii and Eunomii has praestigias Daemonum esse confingas, and non vere
clamare Daemones, sed sua simulare tormenta, etc. So in Theodoret, hist. l. 3.
c 3. initio, it is said, Daemonibus specie qua solent apparentibus metus coegit
Julianum signo cruc^frontem suam signare, Daemones igitur dominici trophaei
conspicati figuram, confestim evanuerunt, etc. Julianus se virtutem crucis
vehementer admirari dixit, and Daemones quoniam ejus figuram far non
poterant, aufugisse, cui praestigiator, nec (inqu t) amabo sic existimes,
siquidem non ob eam cau sam quam tu afters formidabant, sed tuum fastum
detestati, se ab o^ulis nost^is removerunt: whereupon suth Theodoret, Ita
miser, etc. And s^e Zozomen. hist. l. 5. c. 2. paulo post initium. And A
nobius, l. 10. contra Gentes, does in like manner reprove the Gentiles saying
of Christ, Whose name but heard, drives away wicked spirits (etc.) frustrateth
the actions of the arrogant Magicians, not as you say upon horror ( or hatred)
of the name, but by grant of greater power. And yet O siander, cent. 4. page
326. is not ashamed to justify this foresaid speech of the Magician to
Julianus, affirming of this example, Diaboli simulata sua suga voluerunt vulgi
superstitionem confirmare, quasi crucis signo Daemones abigantur.
condemned. A third kind of their refuge, from those other miracles which
implying in them apparent power of producing some miraculous external effect,
cannot stand with this foresaid answer, as curing of the diseased, and such
like, wherein the matter of fact is evident, and by themselves confessed, is to
affirm such miracles to be See examples hereof in Osiander, cent. 10, 11, 12,
etc. page 63, and 213. initio, and 298. fine, and 310.
Antichristian, and done by power of the Devil: so to our Savior the Pharisees
also said, Mat. 12.24. and Luc. 11.15.
This fellow casts not out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils: so
to the miraculous cures done at the Monument of holy Hilarion, the Centurists
say, Centur. 4. col. 1445. lin. 8. And see the like answer given to the
miracles which Theodoret reports to have been done at the Relics of h^ly
Simeon, by Junius in his Animadversiones ad controver. quintam, etc. de membris
Ecclesiae, etc. printed 1602. page 612. circa and post med. and 614. ante med.
These are lying signs whereby the Superstition and Idolatry of Antichrist were
to be confirmed: and the same answer do they give to the other confessed
miracles done in our Church, both of See the Centurists, cent. 5. col. 1489.
lin. 57. and col. 1486. lin. 54. and col. 1587. lin. 14. and cent. 6. col. 806.
is a special tract from thence continued, till col. 821. the title whereof is,
De miraculis superstitionem and idololatriam redolentibus, which he refers
to the Devil, saying, col. 807. lin. 47. Haec absque dubio Deo permittente a
Diabolo sunt facta, ut invocatio mortuorum constabiliretur: And see the like,
col. 809. lin. 39. and 47. And col. 817. lin. 12. they say of S. Gregory,
Gregorius magnus plurima recenset miracula in libris suis, praesertim vero in
dialogis, quae palam confirmant superstitionem, fiduciam in sanctos,
idololatriam, invocationem mortuorum, Miss^m impiam, etc. of all which they
conclude, col. 821. that they were praestigiae hominibus objectae a malis
spiritibus.
ancient and latter See Osiander, cent. 16. page 69, etc.
times. But when, as forbearing in this plenty of matter, we tell them, that
though the Pope were Antichrist (wherein they do but beg the thing in question)
yet the miracles done at Hilarion's Monument, and at Babylas Relics, and many
other before alleged, being done in the Primitive Church, before their supposed
time of Antichrists coming, cannot therefore be said to be Antichristian: we do
otherwise reply to them even from their Ursinus, and sundry their other most
learned writers, that See Ursinus his words alleged at large in Latin before in
this Consideration, number. 1. initio, in the margent at (...). and Hemingius in
his expofition of the 84 Psalm. part. 1. c. 6. page 68, 69, 70. says, that
miracles which exceed the power of nature, have God for their Author. Also Beza
and the Divines of Geneva in their Propositions and Principles disputed in the
University of Geneva, page 28. number. 12. say, We call those miracles which are
done against all order of nature; and the Devils can work none such: the
miracles wrought by Devils are wrought by the secret operation of nature.
Likewise Piscator in his Analysis Epistolarum Pauli in 2 Thessalonians. 2. page 470.
ante med. says, Miraculorum quaedam divina sunt, alia Satanica: divina sunt
quae per potentiam Dei ita fiunt, ut omnem facultatem creatae naturae superent,
ut excitatio mortuorum, sanatio aegrotorum subita, etc. Diabolica sunt quae a
diabolo per vires naturae occultas efficiuntur, etc. And Danaeus in Isag.
Christ. part. 4. l. 2. c. 8. page 46. says, Vera miracula sunt and fiunt a
Deo, and quidem solo; and ad ejusdem solius laudem (etc.) solus enim Deus id
potest proprie quod est supra naturam creatam. etc. 6. page 43. Miraculum
Christianum est opus Dei ipsius totius naturae creatae vires and facultates
superans, quod invocato Dei nomine ad verae fidei confirmationem fit. And see
the like affirmed by Amandus Polanus, in Partition. Theolog. l. 1. page 228,
and 229. And by Hierom Zanchius in D. Pauli Epistolas ad Philip. Colloss. and
Thessal. page 241, and 242. And by Zegedinus in loc. commun. page 188.
Antichrists miracles are (but) such as the order of nature observed, may be
brought to pass by the deceit of Men or Devils, etc. whereas the miracles
wherewith God garnished his Church, are works besides or against the order of
nature and secondary causes, and therefore done only by the Divine power: of
which kind are to cure diseases without means of physic, and many other such
like, whereof we have heretofore given plentiful examples. All this being to
them evident, and not to be denied, to what refuge now do they lastly betake
themselves? To name one prime man instead of many, M. Whitaker, (the matter
being reduced or straightened to this issue) rather than he will acknowledge our
Catholic Church (in which such true miracles are as before most plentifully
evident) doubts not to betake himself to this extremest despair, rather than
hopeful refuge, as seriously to affirm, that although it be indeed certain,
that Whitaker, de Ecclesia, page 348. circa med. says, Respondeo, me minime
ignorare, vera miracula nulla vi, nisi divina fieri posse.
true miracles cannot be done but by the Divine power, which to Antichrist or
Satan were to acknowledge them for God: yet (as it were to supply in this want
the Devils confessed defect or unableness to work such miracles) he is not
abashed against the Sigwartus in disput. Theologic. page 172. initio, says,
Pseudo-doctores, vel etiam ipsum Satanam ad stabiliendas haereses, prodigia
vere divina designare pos^e, pernegamu^. And that false Prophets can do no true
miracles, see further heretofore in this Consideration, number. 1. initio, in the
margent at e. And next heretofore in the margent at ** next before l. To which
Brereley in his Omissions (etc.) of page 551. lin. 25. adds: Also M. Anthony
Wotton in his trial of the Romish Clergies title, (etc.) page 115. ante med.
accordingly says, For my own part, under correction I speak it, I am not
persuaded that ever any true miracle was, or shall be wrought for confirmation
of false doctrine, etc. I see no sufficient cause to imagine that God will
employ his infinite power to the countenancing of any untruth.
doctrine of other Protestants to conclude and say (observe we beseech your
Majesty, for it is a Monster) that Whitaker, ubi supra, page 349. further
says, that true miracles are not of force to demonstrate true doctrine;
whereof be gives this reason, saying, Nam possunt vera miraracula etiam a
falsis Doctoribus and Pseudoprophetis fieri; sed tamen Dei, non illorum
virtute, etc. Constat enim Deum non modo veris, sed and falsis Doctoribus vim
tribuere hujusmodi faciendi miracula, non tamen quo confirmet illorum falsa
dogmata, sed quo tentet eos ad quos mittantur. And see the like in Danaeus in
his respons. ad Bella^mini disput. etc. part. 1. page 784.
God (himself) does give power of working such (true) miracles unto false
teachers, not to confirm their false opinions, but to tempt those, unto whom
they be sent. In color of which paradox he forbeareth not to Misapply. For
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. by him there alleged does not speak of Gods enabling false
Prophets, but of permitting them in trial of his people; neither does it
concern their foretelling of things simply future, by immediate revelation from
God, but only of such other future effects as are depending upon their
precedent known causes, and are also in them foreseen, or else of such other
future things, as depend but upon probability of conjecture, coll^cted from
circumstances of persons, time, and place, which do, though not ever certainly,
yet often times casually happen, and so accordingly it is but said with
condition: If there arise a Prophet, and give thee a sign, and the sign which
he has told thee come to pass, it is not said, shall come to pass, but, if it
do come to pass: and withal he says, Let us go after other Gods, thou shall
not hearken to his words. Secondly, though some of those who have true
Revelations from God, or of those who cast out Devils, or work true miracles,
be reprobates, whereof see heretofore in this Consideration, number. 1. initio, at
f. g. h. yet have they those gifts, not as false teachers, nor to the
confirmation of any false doctrine, but of Gods truth, themselves being
otherwise reprobates in regard of their wicked life. Which premises observed,
suffices to explain and prevent many impertinent objections commonly urged in
this behalf.
mis-apply the Scriptures, inferring thereupon, that Whitaker, ubi supra, page
349. ante med. having divided miracles into true and false, says, Dico ex
neutro genere miraculorum posse sufficiens testimonium sumi, aut certum
argumentum coll^gi, pro vera doctrina, etc.
no sufficient testimony can be taken, or certain argument collected for true
doctrine, from neither kind of miracles (true or false:) directly against the
Scriptures themselves, which affirm of true miracles, that they Our Lord
confirming the Word with signs following, Marc. 16.20.
do confirm and God withal testifying by signs and miracles, Hebr. 2.4.
witness the truth, tearming them also therefore The signs of my Apostleship
have been done among you in signs and wonders, 2 Cor. 12.12.
signs and I have a greater testimony than John, the very works which I do give
testimony of me, that the Father has sent me, Joan. 5.36.
testimonies thereof. And thus much but briefly (respecting the length of the
matter) concerning miracles, and to whether Church, Catholic, or the foresaid
Protestant Church; the same have been confessedly appertaining or wanting; and
consequently that our Church, (whose doctrines have been confirmed by
perpetual, great, and manifest miracles, before any Protestant appeared in the
world: and therefore could not be feigned, or recorded upon any particular
design against them, and their Heresies) cannot be false, but the only true
Church of Christ.

THE FIFTH CONSIDERATION.
By the Confession of Protestants, We Catholics may be saved, though we live
and dye in the belief and profession of those Articles, wherein Protestants
disagree from us.
ALL Brereley, tract. 1. sect: 6. paulo post initium.
the learned Protestants of sober judgment have afforded us Catholics the
promises of hopeful salvation, as appears most plainly, 1. By their own most
evident testimonies; 2. By their like confessed examples thereof given; And 3.
By their undoubted answerable practice. To give proof of every of these parts.

1. And first, concerning their testimonies in this kind, M. D. Baro says, M.
D. Baro in his four Sermons and two Questions disp^ted, ad Clerum, etc. Sermon.
3. page 448. fine.
I dare not deny the name of Christians to the Romanists, since the learneder
writers do acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God. And M.
Hooker also says, M. Hooker in his fist Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, page
188. initio, and Joannes Regius in his Libe^ Apologeticus, etc. in considerat.
Censurae, etc. page 95. says, In Papatu autem cum suerit Ecclesia vera, etc.
The Church of Rome is to be reputed a part of the House of God, a limb of the
visible Church of Christ; and M. Hooker, ubi supra, page 130. ante med.
We gladly acknowledge them to be of the Family of Jesus Christ. M. Bunny
likewise says of Catholics and Protestants, M. Bunny in his Treatise tending
to Pacification, sect. 18. page 109. circa med.
Neither of us may justly account the other to be none of the Church of God; M.
Bunny ubi supra, page 113. post med.
we are no several Church from them, nor they from us. In like sort does M. D.
Some, in defense thereof, (against Penry the Puritan) say, M. D. Some in his
defense against M. Penry, and refutation of many absurdities, etc. in M. Penry
's treatise, page 164. ante med.
That the Papists are not altogether aliens from Gods covenant, I have showed
before: for M. D. Some, ubi supra, page 182. i^icio.
in the judgment of all learned men, and all reformed Churches, there is in
Popery a Church, a Ministry, a true Christ, etc. M. D. Some, ubi supra, page
176. prope finem.
If you think that all the Popish sort which dyed in the Popish Church are
damned, you think absurdly, and dissent from the judgment of the learned
Protestants. Also M. D. Field says, M. D. Field, Of the Church, l. 3. cap. 46.
fine, and page 182. initio.
We doubt not but the Church in which the Bishop of Rome with more than
Luciferlike pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church of God,
that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ, and by force thereof
did convert many from error, etc. In like sort does M. Thomas Morton affirm in
express words, that M. Morton in his Treatise of the Kingdom of Israel, and of
the Church, page 94. fine.
Papists are to be accounted the Church of God, because (says he) they do hold
the foundation of the Gospel, which is faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God,
and Savior of the world. Lastly, to omit many Peter Martyr ( as it appears
by his Epistles annexed to his Common Places in English, page 153. a fine)
desired at the Conference had at Poisy between the Catholics Protestants, that
they should not for diversity of opinion break brotherly charity, nor call one
another Heretics. And see the same opinion yet further affirmed by the
Protestant writer against Nicholas Machiavel, printed at London, 1602. page 80.
post med. and 83. paulo post med. and 85. prope finem.
others, M. D. Covel in his late Treatise published by authority, and dedicated
to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, defends this opinion at large, and
concludes, saying, M. D. Covel in his defense of M. Hooker 's five Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy published by authority* page 77. ante med.
We affirm them of the Church of Rome to be parts of the Church of Christ, and
that those that live and dye in that Church, may notwithstanding be saved:
Insomuch as he doubts not to charge the Puritans with M. D. Covel, ubi supra,
page 68. paulo post med.
ignorance for their contrary opinion. Hitherto concerning their testimonies
before undertaken.

2. Secondly, as concerning now their like confessed examples, we will out of
very many allege only some few. It will not (we think) be denied, but that our
late Sovereign King Henry the eighth did, after his breach with Rome, believe
and maintain the whole frame and substance of our Catholic faith, the Article
of the Popes Primacy only excepted. To which end their own Author, Sleydan,
says of him, Sleydan in English, l. 13. fol. 174. a. initio.
He exiled the name of the Bishop of Rome, but kept still his doctrine: and M.
Fox says accordingly, Fox Act. Mon. page 1472. b. fine.
He set forth, and by full consent of Parliament established the Book of six
Articles, containing the sum of Popish Religion. And it is evident that he
himself in person, not only as then disputed, Act. Mon. page 530. a. (...) b.
initio.
but also Act. Mon. page 533. a. circa med.
commanded Act. Mon. page 533. a. circa med.
sentence to be pronounced against Lambert: as also the Lord Cromwell read and
Act. Mon. page 533. a.
pronounced that sentence, and at his own death protested himself Act. Mon.
page 598. b. circa med. and see Holinsheads Chronicle, page 591.
to dye in the Catholic faith, not doubting in any Article of faith, or
Sacrament of the Church, though (says he) many have slandered me to the
contrary. And yet he is commended by M. Fox to dye as Act. Mon. page 598. b.
post med.
a valiant Soldier and Captain of Christ. As also the Church under the reign
of King Henry the eighth, is by M. Fulk affirmed to be a true M. Fulk against
H^^kit^s, Sanders, etc. page 564. sect. 80, and 82.
Church, and the King himself acknowledged in like manner for Fulk ubi supra,
sect. 82. and se D. Humfrey in jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 304. circa med.
a member of the Catholic Church of Christ. In like sort Osiander, cent. 12.
page 309. post med.
S. Bernard lived (some 400 years since) as M. Jewel confesses, even Jewel in
his defense of the Apology, printed 1571. page 557. paulo ante med. and see
Whitaker contra Duraeum, l. 2. page 154. ante med.
in the midst of the Popes rout and tyranny; And as we find he was not
troubled or gainsaid so much as in any one Article different from the doctrine
of the Roman Church at that time: so we find confessed to the contrary, that he
acknowledged even the Bernard. l. 2. de considerat. 2d Eugenium, and vide
Epist. 125. and 131. and epist. 190. ad Innocentium; and see this confessed by
M. Fulk against the Rhemish Testament in Luc. 22. sect. 11. fol. 133. b. post
initium; and by M. Whitaker, l. 2. contra Duraeum, page 154 ante med.
Popes Supremacy, and was so conformable to the Doctrine of the Roman Church,
that he was made Osiander in epitom. etc. cent. 12. page 309. and Simon de
Voyon in his Catalog. etc.
Abbot of Clairevaux, being also Ofiander, abi supra, page 309. fine, says,
Centum and quadradraginta monafteriorum Author fulsse creditur: and Danaeus in
primae partis altera part contra Bellarminum, page 940. says, Hieronymus and
Bernardus suerunt monachi, and istius erroris Authors and Fautores.
Author of many Monasteries both in France and Flanders. Insomuch as our
Adversaries alleging him to us, do call him Sanctus vester, Gomarus in speculo
Ecclesiae, page 23. fine.
our Saint, and Whitaker in respons. ad rat. Campiani^, ^at. 7. page 105. ante
med. says, Bernardus quem Ecclesia ves^ia multis annis unum tulit piuni virum.
a man brought forth by our Church, who in regard of Christian communion, was
dearly Osiander, ^bid. See his words heretofore in the fourth Consideration,
number. 1. sine, in the marg^nt at the figure 3. initio.
familiar to Muiachias, whom our Adversaries reject for a confessed Catholic,
or Papist; As also the The C^rturists, c^rt. 12. col. 1637. l n. 45. ^o say
therefore of S. Bernard, Co^u^t Deum M^ozim, ad novissimum vitae suae
articulum; and col. 1638. lin. 16. they say farther of him, Acerrimus
propugnator Sedis Antichristi suir, etc.
Centurists do for such in most plain terms reject S. Bernard: and yet this
his known Religion notwithstanding, our Adversaries do acknowledge him for
Whitaker de Ecclesia, page 369. paulo post med. says, Ego quidem Bernardum
vere fuisse Sanctum ex stimo. And see the like in Whitaker against M. William
Reynolds, page 125, and 126.
a true Saint, Osiander, cent. 12. page 309. post med.
a very good man, See this in Pasquds return into England, page 8. and 13.
a good Father, and one of the Lamps of the Church of God. In like manner S.
Bid (who lived about 900 years since) was so evidently of our Religion, that
our Adversary, Osiander, therefore says of him, Osiander in epitom. etc. cent.
8. l. 2. c. 3. page 58. initio.
Beda was wrapped in all the Popish errors, wherein we at this day dissent
from the Pope: for he admired and embraced the worship of Images, the Popish
Mass, invocation of Saints, etc. Which thing appears also yet more
undoubtedly (to omit his evident writings) by his See M. Fox Act. Mon. printed
1576. page 128, and 129.
confessed credit and estimation had with the Popes of that age, whom M. Fulk
terms M. Fulk in his retentive against Bristow, etc. page 278. post med.
recites Bede' s authority, saying, The last testimony out of Beda, who lived
under the tyranny of Antichrist, I will not stand upon, M. Sanders may have
great store of such, etc.
Antichrists, and yet is he (all this notwithstanding) acknowledged by our
Adversaries to have been Osiander, cent. 8. page 58. ante med.
a good man, M. Cowper in his Chronicle at the year of our Lord 734. fol. 171.
b.
renowned in all the world for his learning and godly life: for which he was
also privileged with the surname of Of this title see Holinshead 's Chronicle
at the year 735. and M. Cowper in his Chronicle at the year 724. fol. 168. b.
and M. Fox Act. Mon. printed 1576. page 128. b. and vide 129. a. and
Oecolampadius in libro Epist. Zuinglii and Oecolampadii, page 654. post med.
Reverend, and by D. Humfrey specially registered among Hum fredus, in
Jesuitismi part. 2. rat. 3. page 326. initio.
the godly men raised up by the Holy Ghost. Hitherto also appertains the like
examples of Gregory and Austin, both of them acknowledged for Hereof see
Brereley, tract. 1. sect. 2. and. 2. 3. e.
confessed Popish Catholics, and yet is one of them called by our Adversaries,
M. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops, page 3. ante med.
that blessed and holy Fatner S. Gregory, and the other, M. Godwin, ubi supra,
page 7. initio, and ante med.
S. Austin our Apostle. Whereunto (to omit others) might be added the
forementioned example of your Highness dearest Mother, whose undoubted
Salvation (her known Religion notwithstanding) was (even in that opposition of
time) by the learned Adversary, as before, See Brereley in the beginning of
this 6. section of tract. 1. at z.
publicly acknowledged. What now can our Adversaries answer unto these
confessed examples? Is there James 1.17.
with God variableness? or Ephesians. 6.9. and Deuteronomy. 10.17. and To. 2.11. and 1
Pet. 1.17.
any acception of persons? or is he Number. 23.19.
as the Son of man that he should change; so as one and the same Religion,
which was before in them holy, should now be in us damnable? And thus much
briefly concerning certain undoubted examples of this kind.

3. Thirdly, to make this point more evident as yet by the like confessed
answerable practice of almost all the Protestant reformed Churches. Whereas
they hold that In the Propositions and Principles disputed in the university of
Geneva, page 166. 25.
the Sacraments are only to be administered to those that are taken for known
members of the Church, which no man can be without faith, because that Hebr.
11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God: for which cause they teach
concerning Infants, who in their opinion have not That Children have not faith,
is affirmed by M. Cartwright in M. Whitgifts defense, page 611. and by Beza in
respons. ad Acta Colloquii Montisbelgar. part. 2. page 124. initio; and in the
Propositions and Principles disputed in the university of Geneva, page 178.
sect. 4. and by Jacobus Kimedoncius in his redemption of mankind, l. 2. c. 15.
page 164. fine, and by M. Whitaker contra Duraeum, l. 8. page 682. initio.
faith, (which, as the Scriptures witness, R^m. 10.17.
comes by hearing, which Infants cannot accomplish) that So say the Divines of
Geneva in the foresaid Propositions and Principles disputed, page 178. sect. 4.
Also Oecolampadius in libro Epistolarum O^colampadii and Zuinglii, l. 2. page
301. circa med. says hereof, Parentum and compatrum fides pueros sanctificat.
And Praetorius l. de Sacramentis, page 108. says, Respectu fidelium parentum
infantes fideles habentur, etc. credunt igitur infantes sed in parentibus.
they are comprehended within the Covenant of eternal life, by means of the
faith of their Parents, and In the Propositions, etc. page 178. and Luther, l.
de praeparatione cordis pro suscipiendo Sacramento Eucharistiae, says,
Parvulus alienae fidei merito baptizatur and salvatur; and see him further,
tom. 2. de captiv. Babyl. fol. 77. a. fine. And M. Perkins in his works printed
1605. fol. 585. o. post med. affirms, that Parents believe for themselves and
their Children, (and that) the Child by the Parents faith has title to the
Covenant: and fol. 585. b. initio, it is said, that Infants are Gods children,
not by virtue of their birth, but by means of their Parents faith.
are for that cause to be baptized: and that therefore the Children of Jews,
Turks, and such like professed Infidels, In the Propositions and Principles,
etc. ubi supra, sect. 8. page 179. and M. Whitaker contra Duraeum, l. 8. page
679. fine, says, Infidelium liberos (ut Turcarum, Judaeorum, Ethnicorum)
Calvinus merito and vere negat esse baptizandos; and the like is taught by
Kimedoncius in his redemption of mankind, l. 2. cap. 15. page 167. fine, and
see M. D. Some in his defense against Penry, and resutation, etc. page 150.
are not to be baptized, as not being comprehended within the Covenant, by
reason that their Parents do not believe. All this yet notwithstanding they
profess Taught by M. Whitgift in his defense, etc. page 623. ante med. by M.
Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Policy, l. 3. sect. 1. page 131. by D. Some, ubi
supra, page 149, and 150. and in the foresaid Propositions and Principles, etc.
page 179. sect. 9. it is said by the Divines of Geneva, We are of mind that the
Children of Papists may be received into Baptism.
to teach and practice their baptizing of Infants born of Catholic (or as they
term) Popish Parents, not (says M. Hooker) in regard of M. Hooker, ubi supra.
Gods promise, which reaches unto a thousand generations, for by this reason
the Children of Turks, and (as M. Hooker says) M. Hooker, ibidem.
all the world may be baptized, insomuch as no man is a thousand descents from
Adam: but their said baptizing of them is (according to the other premises of
their Doctrine) by themselves practiced and holden good; though (as M. D. Some
affirms to M. Some in his foresaid defense, etc. cap. 22. page 165, and 167.
Penry) they were the Children of Popish West Indians, whose other former
Ancestors never knew the Christian faith. And though (says he) those
West-Indians M. Some, ibid. page 167
were baptized by Popish Shavelings, yet they received true Baptism, and were
ingrafted into Christ, and for this reason, because there is a Church in
Popery; For (says he) M. Some, ibid. page 149. post med. And Amandus Polanus
in partit. Theolog. page 305. post med. says, Hodierna Ecclesia Romana est
adhuc Ecclesia Christi, sed omnium impurissima, etc. alicquin ii qui in Papatu
sunt Baptizati, extra Ecclesiam Christi, ac proinde nec baptismo Christi
fuissent baptizati, etc.
if there were no Church at all in Popery, (then) the Infants of Papists were
not to be baptized in any reformed Church. By which premises of their
confessed practice, it appears, First, that the Children of Catholic (or
Popish) Parents, are to be baptized; Secondly, as being comprehended within the
Covenant of eternal life; Lastly, and that by reason of their Parents faith: So
evidently in their Doctrine and practice, is the faith of the Catholic (or
Popish) Parent holden for available to his Child. And shall it then be thought
damnable to himself? or holden worthy to be yet further persecuted by our so
implacable and unrelenting Adversaries?

4. This foresaid Truth is further proved by Brereley ( tract. 2. cap. 2. sect.
14.) saying, That the more sober and learned Protestants, whom headstrong and
inconsiderate zeal has not altogether blinded, for the preservation of Christ's
Church in Being (which according to M. Whitaker against M. Reynolds in his
answer to the Preface, page 33. says, We believe to the comfort of our souls,
that Christ's Church has continued, and never shall fail, so long as the world
endures: And we account it a profane heresy to teach otherwise. And the same
is yet further affirmed by Fulk in the Tower disput. with Edm. Camp. the 2.
days conference. And also by the Confessions of Belgia, in the Harmony of
Confessions, page 321. and by the Confession of Helvetia, ibid. page 306. by
the Confession of Saxony, ibid. page 324, 325. and 473. Insomuch as the Divines
of Wittemberg, in Colloquio Badensi apud Osiandrum in epitom. etc. cent. 16.
page 1064. ante med. say, Ecclesiam inde ab ascensione, usque ad haec tempora,
nunquam interruptam, sed perpetua successione in terris permansisse firmiter
credimus. And ibid. page 1065. post med. it is said, Contra omnes furores
Satanae, Ecclesia vera in terris usque adventum Christi ad extremum judicium
est mansura.
all opinions must evermore continue without failing or ceasing to be, not so
much as for any one moment of time) do acknowledge as well that their own
Succession, Calling, and Ministry, is, and has been for former times Apud
Brereley, tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 6. post med. in the margent at * next before d.
M. Bridges in his defense of the government, etc. page 1276. post med. rests
so wholly upon the calling conferred to their Protestant Ministers from and
under our Catholic Church, that says he of our Catholic Bishops, and their
calling, If our Brethren will make them but mere Laymen, then are neither they
nor we any Ministers at all, but mere Laymen also. For who ordained us
Ministers, but such Ministers as were either themselves of their Ministry, or
at least were made Ministers of those Ministers? except they will say the
people can make Ministers, etc. See hereof further in Brereley, ibid. at g. h.
preserved in, and by the only succession and calling continued in our
Catholic Church: as also that the true Church, immediately before Luthers time,
had its Luc. Osiander, in epitom. hist. Eccl. cent. 16. part. altera, page
1073. in fine, says, Ecclesia quae sub Papatu fuit eo tempore quo Lutherus
natus est, suit Ecclesia Christi, etc. Ideoque qui sub Papatu ad ministerium
Ecclesiasticum fuerunt ordinati, ut Lutherus and multi alii Evangelici
Doctores, revera habuerunt legitimam ordinationem.
being in our Catholic Church. To this end M. D. Field says, M. D. Field in
his Treatise of the Church, l. 3. c. 6. page 72. ante med.
Where some demand of us where our Church was before Luther began? We say it
was where now it is: if they ask us which Church? we answer, it was the known
and apparent Church in the world, wherein all our Ancestors lived and dyed,
wherein Luther and the rest were baptized, received their Ordinance and power
of Ministry. And our other learned Adversaries do accordingly teach, that like
as Luther himself before his preaching against the Pope, was an Sleydan, l. 1.
initio.
Augustine Friar, and (as himself says) Luther in his Commentary upon the
Epistle to the Galatians englished, fol. 35. circa med.
kept chastity, poverty, and obedience, was only given to fasting, watching
praying, saying of Mass, and such like, and Luther, ibid. fol. 35. a. circa med.
honored the Pope of mere conscience, etc. and was so thereby most undoubtedly
a professed member of our Catholic (or as they term it, Popish) Church: So
likewise upon his pretended reformation or preaching afterward against the
Pope, he did not (say they) thereby M. D. Covel in his defense of M. Hooker,
Art. 11. page 73. post med, says, As it is strange for any man to deny them of
Rome to be of the Church, so I cannot but wonder, that they (of Rome) will ask
where our Church was before Luther? as if any were of opinion, that Luther did
erect a new Church, etc. And see the like saying in M. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Policy, l. 3. page 129. post med.
erect a new Church, then before not in being (for that were most directly
against themselves) and therefore did not depart from the Church he was of
before, but continued still a member thereof. Which thing both M. Hooker and M.
D. Covel (speaking thereof) do very plainly M. Hooker, l. 3. page 130. and M.
D. Covel in his defense of M. Hooker, page 68. say, We gladly acknowledge them
of Rome to be of the Family of Jesus Christ, therefore we hope that to reform
our selves, is not to sever our selves from the Church we were of before: In
the Church we were, and are so still: as also we say that they of Rome
(notwithstanding their manifold defects) are to be held a part of the House of
God, a limb of the visible Church of Christ.
acknowledge, to the great In the Christian Letter of certain English
Protestants unto that Reverend man M. Hooker, page 18, and 19. they reprove at
large M. Hooker for this opinion of not severing themselves from the Church
they were of before.
dislike of the Puritans: as also M. Bunny prosecuteth the same more at large,
affirming therefore, M. Bunny in his Treatise tending to Pacification, sect.
18. page 108. paulo post med.
that of departing from the Church there ought to be no question at all among
us. Ibidem, page 113. post med.
We are (says he) no several Church from them, nor they from us, and therefore
there is no departing at all out of the Church, for any to depart from them to
us, nor from us to them: all the difference between us is concerning the truer
members, whether we or they may be found more worthy of that account: As for
the other we allow no such question. Insomuch as he doubts not to say,
Ibidem, page 109. circa med.
It was evil done of them who first urged such a separation; confessing further
our great Ibidem, sect. 15. page 92. circa med. he says of this separation,
Our Adversaries see themselves to have advantage, if they can win us to
acknowledge (it.)
advantage given thereby: which our advantage he afterward very plainly to
this purpose expresses to be, Ibid. page 96. circa med.
For that (says he) it is great probability with them, that so we make our
selves answerable for to find out a distinct and several Church from them,
which continued from the Apostles age to this present, else, that needs we must
acknowledge, that our Church is sprung up of late, or since theirs. And hence
perhaps it is, that their learned writers (to the better enabling of our Church
to be, howsoever, according to their opinion, in part erroneous, yet withal a
true Church) doubt not to affirm of the sundry points of our Catholic faith in
particular, that they are, though (in their opinion) errors, yet not To give
some few and chief examples hereof. First, M. Perkins in his exposition of the
Creed, page 402. says, A weakening error is that, the holding whereof does not
overturn any point in the foundation of salvation; as the error of Free will,
and sundry such like. M. Cartwright in his reply, page 14. sect. 1, 2, and in
M. Whitgists defense, page 82. post med. affirms the like indifferency of the
doctrines of Free Will, Prayer for the dead, and a number of other, as
necessary doctrines, wherein (says he) men being misled, have notwithstanding
been saved. And a little there before he further says, If you mean by matters
of faith and necessary to salvation, those without which a man cannot be saved,
then the doctrine which teaches there is no Free Will, or Prayer for the Dead,
is not within your compass. For I doubt not but diverse Fathers of the Greek
Church, who were great Patrons of Free Will, are saved. And the like is yet
further affirmed of Prayer for the Dead, by John Frith, Act. Mon. page 501. by
M. Fulk in his Confut. of Purgatory, page 336. ante med. and by M. Penry in his
Book entitled, M. Some laid open in his colors, page 99. Secondly, M. Spark
in his answer to M. John d'Abbines, page 382. ante med. discoursing of the
honoring of Saints Relics, and Prayer for the Dead, says thereof to his
Adversary, We are not so hasty to pronounce sentence of condemnation of any for
such errors: for you know well enough, that we make not these matters such, as
that either we think that all must be saved that hold the one way, or all
condemned that hold the other. As touching invocation of Saints, M. D. Goade
and Fulk do in the disputation had in the Tower with Edm. Campian, the 2. days
conference, Arg. 8. R. 11. and R. 111. affirm thereof, that it does not exclude
from being members of the Church, etc. Thirdly, concerning the Real Presence,
Jacobus Acontius in lib. 3. Stratagematum Satanae, page 135. paulo ante med.
says, It is evident concerning as well those, who hold the Real Presence of
Christ's body in the bread, as those others which deny it, that although of
necessity the one part do err, yet both are in way of salvation, if in other
things they be obedient to God. And M. D. Reynolds in his 5. Conclusion annexed
to his Conference, etc. page 722. affirms the Real Presence to be as it were
the grudging of a little ague, if otherwise the party hold the Christian faith.
And John Frith, Act. Mon. page 503. a. fine, says hereof, The matter touching
the substance of the Sacrament binds no man of necessity to salvation or
damnation, whether he believe it or not. And see Luthers like judgment of
Transubstantiation, in magna Confessione, cited by Amandus Polanus in his
Sylog. Thesium Theologicarum, page 464. initio, and in the Book entitled,
Orthodoxus consensus, printed Tiguri 1578. in folio, fol. 12. b. initio.
Fourthly, as concerning the receiving under one or both kinds, Luther in
epistola ad Bohemos, says thereof, Quamvis pulchrum quidem esset utraque
specie in Eucharistia uti, and Christus hac in re nihil tanquam neceslarium
praecepit, praestaret tamen pacem (etc.) sectari, quam de speciebus contendere.
And Luther de utraque specie Sacramenti, says, Si veneris ad locum ubi tantum
una species ministratur, cum aliis una tantum specie utere (etc.) And the like
indifferency hereof is yet further affirmed by Melancthon and others cited
heretofore in the third Consideration, number. 32. fine. Fifthly, touching our B.
Ladies being preserved from Original Sin, and the worshipping of Images, M.
Bunny in his Treatise tending to Pacification, sect. 17. page 104. paulo ante
med. and page 105. says in like manner of them: In these therefore, or such
like, whosoever will condemn all those to be none of the Church, that are not
fully persuaded herein, as we are (etc.) commits an uncharitable part
toward those his Brethren. Sixthly, concerning Primacy, M. Anthony Wotton in
his answer to a Popish Pamphlet, etc. page 68. fine, denies that Protestants
hold the Kings Supremacy to be an essential point of faith. And Luther in
assertionibus, art. 36. versus finem, speaking of the Popes Primacy, does
expressy number it among (says he) those unnecessary trifles wherein the Popes
levity and foolishness is to be born withal. And Melancthon in his Epistle
extant in the Book entitled, Centuria Epistolarum Theologicarum, ep. 74. page
245. fine, says, The Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is profitable to this end,
that consent may be retained: wherefore an agreement may easily be established
in this Article of the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon.
Seventhly, as concerning Satisfaction and Merit of Works, affirmed by the
ancient Fathers no less than now by us ( whereof see heretofore in the second
Consideration, number. 6. at q. and number. 7. at r. s. and number. 9. at 13, 14. and
number. 23. at k. l.) M. Whitaker contra rat. Campiani, page 78. and in his answer
to M. William Reynolds, c. 6. page 135. initio, and 136. fine, says, The
Fathers thought by their external discipline of life to pay the pains due for
sin, wherein they derogated not a little from Christ's death, etc. which though
it be an error, yet were they notwithstanding good men and holy Fathers.
Eighthly, as concerning Mass, Luther in Colloquiis Germanicis, c. de Missa,
says, Private Mass has deceived many Saints, and carried them away into
error, from the time of Gregory, for 800 years. And Tindall, Act. Mon. page
1338. a prope initium, says accordingly, I doubt not but S. Bernard, Francis,
and many other holy men erred as concerning Mass: So little did the Mass impugn
Holiness. Lastly, as touching Mass, and sundry other points of faith, M.
Francis Johnson in M. Jacobs defense of the Churches and Ministry of England,
etc. page 13. ante med. says, Did not John Huss that worthy Champion of
Christ, and other also of the Martyrs of fore-times say and hear Mass, even to
their dying day? etc. did not (also) diverse of them acknowledge, some the Popes
calling and Supremacy, some seven Sacraments, some auricular Confession? etc.
And Benedict Morgenstern, in tract. de Ecclesia, etc. page 41. circa med.
says, that in former times, Condonanda erant piis, etc. These things were
pardonable in the godly, who held the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and Head
of the Church, the Papacy for the Church, Saints for Mediators, and the Mass
for the Supper of our Lord. Aad see heretofore in this Consideration, number. 2.
throughout, sundry examples of acknowledged salvation in many confessed
Catholics.
such as are against the foundation or hope of salvation, but rather in respect
thereof, as only matters of indifferency. And hence it also comes, that in
general M. Hooker and M. Covel do acknowledge M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical
Policy, l. 3. sect. 1. page 130. ante med. and l. 5. page 188. initio, and M.
D. Covel in his defense of M. Hooker, page 68.
the Church of Rome to be of the Family of Jesus Christ, a part of the House of
God, a limb of the visible Church of Christ: that M. Barrow says, In his four
Sermons, and two Questions, etc. ser. 3. page 448. fine.
The learneder Writers acknowledge the Church of Rome to be the Church of God:
that M. D. Some says, M. D. Some in his defense against M. Penry (etc.) c. 23.
fine, page 182. initio.
In the judgment of all learned men, and all reformed Churches, there is in
Popery a Church: that another late English Protestant writer says, See the
discourse upon the means of well governing (etc.) against Nicholas Machiavel,
printed at London, 1602. page 80. post med.
The Catholic and Reformed make not two, but one same Religion, Ibidem, page
83. paulo post med. and 85. prope finem.
agreeing in all principal points of Religion necessary for salvation: That
also George Cassander, though disliking Cassander in libro de officio pii viri,
etc. page 14. ante med. and 15. initio, and page 27. post med.
the Pope, and acknowledged for David Pareus in his book de Symbolis
Sacramentalibus, etc. in praefat. ante med. says, Cassander eruditus Scriptor,
etc. And M. Morton in his full satisfaction concerning a double Romish Enquiry,
etc. page 55. circa med. terms him, that most grave and learned Cassander,
of singular learning and piety.
a most grave and learned writer, says, Cassander, ibidem, page 14. post med.
and in defense of his opinion, he allegeth Luther, ibidem, page 14. fine, and
page 21, and 22.
The Church of Rome is to be reverenced, as being the true Church and Temple of
God: and that a late disguised French Protestant writer affirms Examen
pacifique de la doctrine des Hugonotes, etc. imprime a Caen, 1590. en argum. du
liver, page 2.
Catholics and Hugonots to be of one faith and religion: with whom agrees
another like writer, tearming them in like manner, Apology Catholic, etc.
part. 2. page 26. 203, and 204.
Domestics of one faith, and Branches of one and the same Vine. And hence also
it comes, that the learned Protestants (as we before Heretofore in this
Consideration, number. 1, and 2.
have showed) do afford to our Catholic Professors the hopeful promises of
salvation, affirming this to be M. Doctor Some in his defense against Penry,
page 176. prope finem.
the judgment of all learned Protestants, and made M. Bunny in his Treatise
tending to Pacification, sect. 15. page 93. circa med.
clear by the whole course of their writings. Insomuch as they doubt not to
charge such of their other headstrong Brethren, as affirm the contrary, even
with M. D. Covel in his defense of M. Hooker, page 68. paulo post med.
ignorant zeal.

5. Hence lastly it is that M. Bunny (apud Brereley, tract. 1. sect. 9. subd.
6. fine) in his Treatise tending to Pacification, sect. 14. circa med. page 89.
acknowledges a particular blessing of God in the Church of Rome, and an
evident work of the Holy Ghost, saying, That the Church of Rome has ever
continued after a sort in profession of the faith, since the time that by the
Apostles it was delivered to them, etc. and has also in some manner preserved
and hitherto maintained both the Word and Sacraments that Christ himself did
leave unto us; which surely (says he) is a very special blessing of God, and
an evident work of the Holy Ghost, etc. To make good (says Brereley, ibidem,
in the margent at) M. Bunny's words of the evident work of the Holy Ghost in
preservation of the Roman Sea, the same has appeared many ways extraordinary
and admirable. As first, in that the other four Patriarchal Seas are noted and
known to have been pestered every one of them with confessed Archhereticks, or
Inventers of new doctrines, against some principal Article of our Christian
faith: As at Antioch, Paulus Samosetanus: at Jerusalem, Joannes and Arsenius:
at Alexandria, Dioscorus: at Constantinople, Macedonius and Nestorius: only
the Sea of Rome has been preserved free from all such known note or touch. For
howsoever our Adversaries do pretend some one or other Pope to have had his
private error, yet to charge any Pope with being an Arch heretic, as
before-said, they have not any color. Secondly, in that the Cities of all the
other Patriarchal Seas, and the Bishops belonging to them, now are, and of long
have been oppressed with Infidels, and their succession is either none, or but
inglorious; whereas God has yet hitherto disposed otherwise of the City and
Sea of Rome. Thirdly, in the example of so many great Christian Kingdoms and
Countries in Asia, Africa, and Europe, which forsaking the Communion of this
Sea, became not long afterward barbarous, and subject to Infidels, accordingly
as it is foretold of the true Churches prerogative, The Nation and Kingdom
that will not serve thee shall perish, and those Nations shall be utterly
destroyed, Esaias 60.12. Fourthly, in that this is the only Sea or Church which
is confessed by our Adversaries to have continued known and visible for these
last thousand or 1300 years: whereof see Brereley, tract. 1. sect. 2. at k. l.
and sect. 8. in the margent at c. and tract. 2. c. 2. sect. 7. fine, at 3, 4,
5, 6, etc. converting also to the Christian faith during all that time, by its
Legates and Preachers, so many confessed Nations and Kingdoms of the Gentiles,
agreeable to the predictions of the Prophets in that behalf (whereof see
Brereley, tract. 2. c. 1. sect. 4. initio, in the margent at*.) Fifthly, in
that this Sea has been persecuted by the contrary factions of so many
Christian Princes, by the very Citizens and Cardinals of Rome, by the Schisms,
Factions, and wicked lives of the Popes themselves, by the implacable hatred
and contradiction of so many confessed heresies and heretics of every age,
conspiring all of them (howsoever divided otherwise among themselves) to malign
and impugn this Sea, as the principal object of their daily continued malice:
So Hell gates may be said to have assaulted her, and yet not prevailed, Matthew.
16.18. Upon which consideration but duly had of all Heretics, though divided
among themselves, yet joining so together in malice against the Roman Sea, how
can that out-faced opinion of our Adversaries be possibly true, which M. D.
Downham in his treatise concerning Antichrist, l. 2. page 22. ante med.
delivers, saying: We hold Antichrist to be the whole body of Heretics in the
last age of the world, etc. The head of which body is the Papacy. The Pope to
be their Head, and yet he ever against them all, and they all ever against him;
is it possible?

6. Pu. Besides what has been said out of Brereley of this point, that
Protestants confess that the Roman Church wants nothing necessary to salvation,
I will show the same yet more at large. D. Potter in his Answer to Charity
mistaken, page 63. says; The most necessary and fundamental Truths, which
constitute a Church, are on both sides unquestioned: And for that reason,
learned Protestants yield them (Romanists, as he calls us) the name and
substance of a Christian Church. Where we see, that he says in general,
learned Protestants yield them, etc. In proof whereof, he cites in his margent,
Iunius, D. Reinolds, and says: See the judgment of many other writers, in the
advertisement annexed to the old Religion, by the Reverend Bishop of Exeter;
and adds, The very Anabaptists grant it. Fr. Johnson in his Christian Plea,
page 123. So that with this one Testimony of Potter, we have many other, even
of our greatest Adversaries. And page 62. he says: To those twelve Articles
which the Apostles in their Creed esteemed a sufficient Summary of wholesome
Doctrine, they (Catholics) have added many more. Such are for instance, their
Apocryphal Scriptures, and unwritten dogmaticall Traditions, their
Transubstantiation, and dry Communion, their Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
Worship of the Images, Latin service, traffic of Indulgences; and shortly,
the other new doctrines and decrees canonized in their late Synod of Trent.
Upon these and the like new Articles, is all the contestation between the
Romanists and Protestants. And then he adds the words which we have cited; The
most necessary and Fundamental truths which constitute a Church, are on both
sides unquestioned; and for that, etc. Where we see he grants, we believe the
twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed, which he teaches at large, to contain
all Fundamental Points of Faith; and that we hold all the most necessary and
Fundamental truths which constitute a Church. Therefore, those Points of our
Doctrine which he gives for instance, are no Fundamental errors, nor the
contrary Articles necessary and Fundamental truths; and yet he names all the
chiefest Points controverted between us and Protestants; even
Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind, and Latin Service, which are the
things they are wont most to oppose; Yea he comprises all the Doctrines and
Decrees of the Council of Trent. Therefore we are free from Fundamental
errors, by the confession of our Adversaries. page 59. he further says, The
Protestants never intended to erect a new Church, but to purge the old. The
reformation did not change the substance of Religion, but only cleansed it from
corrupt, and impure qualities. If the Protestants erected not a new Church,
then ours is still the old Church; and if it were only cleansed from corrupt
qualities, without change of the substance, the substance must be still the
same it was; and that which was, must be still the same with that which is.
page 61. The things which the Protestants believe on their part, and wherein
they judge the life and substance of Religion to be comprised, are most, if not
all of them, so evidently and indisputably true, that their Adversaries
themselves do avow and receive them as well as they. Therefore we Catholics
have the life and substance of Religion. page 60. In the prime grounds or
Principles, of Christian Religion, we have not forsaken the Church of Rome.
Therefore he grants that we have the prime grounds, or Fundamental Articles of
Religion. page 11. For those Catholic verities which she (the Roman Church)
retains, we yield her a member of the Catholic, though one of the most unsound
and corrupt members. In this sense the Romanists may be called Catholics.
Behold, we are members of the Catholic Church, which could not be, if we erred
in any one Fundamental Point. By the way; If the Romanists may be called
Catholics, why may not the Roman Church be termed Catholic? And yet this is
that Argument, which Protestants are wont to urge against us; and Potter in
particular, in this very place, not considering that he impugns himself, whiles
he speaks against us, not distinguishing between universal, as Logicians speak
of it, (which signifies, one common thing, abstracting, or abstracted, from all
particulars) and Catholic, as it is taken in true Divinity, for the Church
spread over the whole world, that is, all Churches which agree with the Roman;
and upon that vain conceit, telling his unlearned Reader, that universal and
particular, are terms repugnant, and consequently one cannot be affirmed of
the other; that is, say I; Catholic cannot be affirmed of D. Potter, nor D.
Potter said to be a Catholic, because a particular cannot be said to be
universal, or an universal. page 75. To depart from the Church of Rome, in
some doctrines and Practices, there might be just and necessary cause, though
the Church of Rome wanted nothing necessary to salvation. page 70. They (the
Roman Doctors) confess, that setting aside all matters controverted, the main
positive truths wherein all agree, are abundantly sufficient to every good
Christian, both for his knowledge, and for his practice, teaching him what to
believe, and how to live, so as he may be saved. His saying, that the Roman
Doctors confess, that setting aside all matters controverted, etc. is very
untrue: it being manifest, that Catholics believe Protestants to err
damnably, both in matters of faith, and practice; yet his words convince ad
hominem, that we have all that is necessary, yea and abundantly sufficient,
both for knowledge, and practice for us to be saved. And then he discoursing of
the Doctrines wherein we differ from Protestants, says, page 74. If the
Mistaker will suppose his Roman Church and Religion purged from these and the
like confessed excesses and novelties, he shall find in that which remains,
little difference of importance between us. Therefore de facto we believe all
things of importance which Protestants believe. After these words, without any
interruption he goes forward, and says, page 75. But by this discourse, the
Mistaker happily may believe his cause to be advantaged, and may reply; If Rome
want nothing essential to Religion, or to a Church, how then can the Reformers
justify their separation from that Church, or free themselves from damnable
Schism? Does not this discourse prove, and the Objection, which he raises from
it, suppose, that we want nothing essential to Religion? Otherwise, this
Objection which he makes to himself, were clearly impertinent, and foolish, if
he could have dispatched all, by saying we err in essential points, which had
been an evident, and more then a just cause, to justify their separation: which
yet appears further by his Answer to the said Objection: That to depart from a
particular Church, and namely from the Church of Rome, in some Doctrines and
practices, there might be just and necessary cause, though the Church, of Rome
wanted nothing necessary, to salvation. And afterward in the next, page 76.
speaking of the Church of Rome, he says expressly; Her Communion we forsake
not, no more than the Body of Christ, whereof we acknowledge the Church of Rome
to be a member, though corrupted. And this clears us from the imputation of
Schism, whose property it is to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope
of salvation, the Church from which it separates. But if she did err in any
one Fundamental point, by that very error she would cease to be a member of
the Body of Christ, and should be cut off from the hope of salvation; therefore
she does not err in any Fundamental point. p. 83. We were never disjoined from
her (the Church of Rome) in those main essential truths, which give her the
name and essence of a Church. You must then say, that she errs not in any
Fundamental Point. For, the essence of a Church cannot subsist with any such
error. And that it may appear how desirous he is that it should be believed,
Catholics and Protestants not to differ in the essence of Religion, he adds
these words immediately after those which we have last cited; Whereof if the
mistaker doubt, he may be better informed by some late Roman Catholic writers.
One of France, who has purposely in a large Treatise proved (as he believes)
the Hugonots and Catholics of that Kingdom to be all of the same Church and
Religion, because of truths agreed upon by both. And another of our Country (as
it is said) who has lately published a large Catalogue of learned Authors,
both Papists and Protestants, who are all of the same mind. Thus you see, he
ransacks all kind of proofs, to show that Catholics and Protestants differ not
in the substance, and essence of Faith, and to that end cites for Catholic
writers, those two who can be no Catholics; as Charity Maintained, part. 1.
chap. 3. page 104. Shows the former in particular to be a plain Heretic, or
rather Atheist, Lucian-like, jesting at all Religion. Page 78. he says: We
hope and think very well of all those holy and devout souls, which in former
Ages lived and dyed in the Church of Rome. Nay, our Charity reaches further to
all those at this day, who in simplicity of heart believe the Roman Religion,
and profess it. To these words of the Doctor, if we subsume; But it were
impossible, that any can be saved, even by Ignorance, or any simplicity of
heart, if he err in a Fundamental point (because as by every such error, a
Church ceases to be a Church, so every particular person ceases to be a member
of the true Church) the Conclusion will be, that we do not err in any
Fundamental point. Nay, page 79. he says further, We believe it (the Roman
Religion) safe, that is, by Gods great Mercy, not damnable to some, such as
believe what they profess: But we believe it not safe, but very dangerous, if
not certainly damnable, to such as profess it, when they believe (or if their
hearts were upright, and not perversely obstinate, might believe) the contrary.
Behold we are not only in a possibility to be saved; we are even safe, upon
condition, we believe that Faith to be true which we profess, and for which we
have suffered so long, so great, and so many losses, in all kinds; which if we
did undergo, for external profession of that Faith, which we do not inwardly
believe to be true, we should deserve rather to be begged for fools, then
persecuted for our Religion. In the mean time, every Catholic has this
comfort, that he is safe, (even by the confession of an Adversary) if he be not
a foolish dissembler, which would be cause of damnation in a Protestant, or any
other. Even the profession of a truth, believed to be false, is a sin. But I
return to say; it were impossible for any Roman Catholic to be safe, upon what
condition soever, if we err in any one Fundamental Article of Faith.

7. With D. Potter agrees M. William Chillingworth in his book entitled; The
Religion of Protestants a safe way to salvation. For whereas Charity Mantained,
part. 1. page 15. n. 13. says; Since D. Potter will be forced to grant that
there can be assigned no visible true Church of Christ, distinct from the
Church of Rome, and such Churches as agreed with her, when Luther first
appeared, I desire him to declare, whether it does not follow, that she has
not erred Fundamentally; because every such error destroys the nature and
being of a Church, and so our Savior Christ should have had no visibly Church
on earth. To these words (which he thought fit to set down very imperfectly) he
answers, page 16. n. 20. in this manner; I say, in our sense of the word
Fundamental, it does follow. For, if it be true, that there was then no Church
distinct from the Roman, then it must be, either because there was no Church at
all, which we deny; or because the Roman Church was the whole Church, which we
also deny: Or because she was part of the whole, which we grant. And if she
were a true part of the Church, then she retained those truths which were
simply necessary to salvation, and held no errors which were inevitably and
unpardonably destructive of it. For, this is precisely necessary to constitute
any man or any Church a member of the Church Catholic. In our sense therefore
of the word Fundamental, I hope she erred not Fundamentally: But in your sense
of the word, I fear she did. That is, she held some thing to be Divine
Revelation, which was not; something not to be, which was. He has spoken so
clearly and fully in favor of the Roman Church, and not only affirmed, but
proved that she did not err in any Fundamental Point, that I need not say one
word to ponder his words, or declare the force of them. Page 7. n. 3. He
expressly approves the saying of D. Potter. That both sides by the confession of
both sides, agree in more Points than are simply and indispensably necessary to
salvation, and differ only in such as are not precisely necessary. Therefore,
do we infer, Catholics believe all that is precisely necessary to salvation,
and more. But we never yield so much to you Protestants. Page 85. n. 89. He
confesses the Roman Church to be a part of the Catholic Church; and page 16.
n. 20. he says, If she were a true part of the Church, then she retained those
truths which were simply necessary to salvation, and held no errors which were
unevitably and unpardonably destructive of it. For, this is precisely necessary
to constitute any man or any Church, a member of the Church Catholic. Page
163. n. 56. He says, From Scripture we collect our hope, that the Truths she
(The Roman Church) retains, and the practice of them, may prove an Antidote to
her against the errors which she maintains in such persons as in simplicity
of heart follow this Absalon. These points of Christianity, which have in them
the nature of Antidotes against the poison of all sins and errors, the Church
of Rome, though otherwise much corrupted, still retains; therefore we hope she
erreth not Fundamentally, but still remains a part of the Church. But this can
be no warrant to us to think with her in all things: Seeing the very same
Scripture which puts us in hope she erres not Fundamentally, (mark how he
professes to learn out of Scripture, that we err not Fundamentally) assures
us, that in many things, and those of great moment, she errs very grievously.
And these errors though to them that believe them, we hope they will not be
pernicious, yet the professing of them against Conscience, could not but bring
us certain damnation! Therefore the Points in which we differ from Protestants,
being acknowledged not to be Fundamental, and in other Points professing
nothing against our conscience, we are safe by his own confession. If we did
not believe as we profess, we were no Roman Catholics. In the same place he
says expressly, De facto we hope the Roman Church does not err in
Fundamentalls; Yea he says, line 33. Perhaps she does not err damnably, the
contrary whereof he affirms so often. His example of Absalon, was very ill
applied to the Roman Church, which did not rebel from Protestants, but they
against the whole Church (the Mother of all Christians) more sacrilegiously
than Absalon behaved himself wickedly toward his Father. Page 404. n. 29. He
approves Dr. Potters saying ( page 79) which I cited above, that the Roman
Religion is safe, that is, not damnable to some, such as believe what they
profess. And in the same place he says, We may hope that she retains those
Truths which are simply, absolutely, and indispensably necessary to Salvation.
Page 401. n. 7. We approve those fundamental and simply necessary Truths which
you retain, by which, some good souls among you may be saved, but abhor your
many superstitions and Heresies. The Truths you retain, are good, and, as we
hope, sufficient to bring good ignorant souls among you, to salvation, yet are
not to be sought for in the Conventicle of Papists. If any Soul may be saved in
our Religion; It is clear we hold not any fundamental Error, with which no soul
can be saved. Page 277. n. 61. he says, The simple defect of some Truths
profitable only, and not simply necessary, may consist with salvation. Seeing
therefore he has so often confessed that we err not in fundamental points,
our Errors in some Truths profitable only, and not fundamental, may consist
with salvation. How then does he say to Catholics page 401. n. 27. As for our
freeing you from damnable Heresy, and yielding you salvation, neither he (Dr.
Potter) nor any other Protestant is guilty of it? Page 219. n. 50. Speaking of
Protestants, he says, They do not differ at all in matters of Faith, if you
take the word in the highest sense, and meanby matters of Faith, such Doctrines
as are necessary to salvation, to be believed or not to be believed. Now you
know well that in points of greatest moment, which Catholics believe against
some Protestants, other Protestants stand for us, against their pretended
Brethren: And therefore he must either say that we believe all such Doctrines
as are absolutely necessary to salvation; or that many learned Protestants do
not believe all such Doctrines, and consequently are not capable of Salvation.
Page 269. n. 45. A man may possibly leave some opinion or practice of a Church
formerly common to himself and others, and continue still a member of that
Church: Provided that what he forsakes be not one of those things wherein the
Essence of a Church consists. For this cause he says, That although
Protestants leave the external Communion of the Church, yet they left not the
Church, because they left her not in any thing essential to a Church, as
Fundamental points are: Therefore he supposes the Church before Luther, did not
err in any Fundamental Article: Otherwise Protestants had left her, that is,
they had disagreed from her in a Fundamental point. P. 272. n. 52 and page 283.
n. 73. He denies that Protestants divided themselves from the Church,
absolutely and simply in all things, that is, ceased to be a member of it;
which still supposes that the Church before Luther believed all essential and
fundamental Points, which Protestants also pretend to hold, and for that cause
say, they left not the Church. Page 272. n. 52. He says, In the reason of our
separation from the external Communion of your Church, you are mistaken: For it
was not so much because she, your Church, as because your Churches external
Communion was corrupted, and needed Reformation. But if we erred in Fundamental
points, Protestants must have forsaken us chiefly for that reason, that our
Church was corrupted with Fundamental errors of Faith. Therefore he grants,
that we erred not in any such necessary Points. Page 401. n. 26. He confesses,
that D. Potter says indeed, that our not cutting off your Church from the Body
of Christ, and hope of salvation, frees us from the imputation of Schism. Page
133. n. 12. He says expressly, By confession of both sides we agree in much
more than is simply and indispensably necessary to salvation. It is well he
makes so open a confession, that we believe much more than is simply necessary
to salvation. But as I said before, we will not, because we cannot, yield so
much to Protestants. And here I must ask again, how he could say, Page 401. n.
27. As for our freeing you from damnable Heresy, and yielding you salvation,
neither D. Potter, nor any other Protestant is guilty of it? Seeing he says,
that by the confession of both sides we agree in much more than is simply and
indispensably necessary to salvation. If we believe much more than is necessary
to salvation, by what Logic will he deduce, that we believe not as much as is
necessary?

8. These so many and so clear words of D. Potter and M. Chillingworth, may
justly make any man wonder, with what pretense of truth, or modesty, he could
say, Page 280. n. 95. As for your pretense that your errors are confessed not
to be Fundamental, it is an affected mistake, as I have often told you. And
Page 308. 108. As for your obtruding upon us, that we believe the Points of
difference not Fundamental or necessary, you have been often told it is a
calumny. The oftener the worse; it being a Saying void of all truth, and a
shameful calumny in him.

9. To these testimonies of Potter and Chillingworth, many other might be
alleged, out of other Protestants, as we have seen diverse other alleged by
Potter. D. Laud in his book against Fisher Page 299. says, I do acknowledge a
possibility of salvation in the Roman Church. But so, as that which I grant to
Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but as they are Christians, that is,
as they believe the Creed, and hold the foundation Christ himself. Behold, not
only a possibility of salvation, but also the reason thereof, because we
believe the Creed, etc. which is the very reason for which Protestants hold,
that they themselves may be saved, though they differ in many points from one
another. This, I say, is the reason of D. Laud, which other Protestants must
approve; though in true Divinity it be of no force at all; for, though one
believe the Creed, and hold the foundation Christ himself, that is, that he is
God, and Savior of the world, yet if he deny any point evidently delivered in
Scripture, or otherwise sufficiently propounded, as revealed by God, he cannot
be saved, even according to Protestants, who therefore do in this, as in many
other things speak inconsequently, and contradict themselves. Page 376. he
says: The Religion of the Protestants, and the Romanists Religion, is the
same: nor do the Church of Rome and the Protestants, set up a different
Religion (for the Christian Religion is the same to both) but they differ in
the same Religion. Therefore, say I, we hold no Fundamental errors, wherein
whosoever differ, cannot be of the same, but must be of a different Religion.
And Page 129. The Protestants have not left the Church of Rome in her Essence,
not in the things which constitute a Church. And Page 282. he says: The
possibility of salvation in the Roman Church, I think cannot be denied: and in
proof hereof Page 281. he alleges Luther, Field, Joseph Hall, Geor: Abbot,
Hooker, Mornaeus, Prideaux, Calvin. And D. Jeremie Tailor in his liberty of
Prophesying Page 251. sect. 20. teaches, that we keep the foundation, and
believe many more truths, than can be proved to be of simple and original
necessity to Salvation. And therefore all the wisest Personages of the adverse
party, allowed to them possibility of Salvation, whilst their errors are not
faults of their will, but weaknesses and deceptions of the understanding,
(which as I said, may easily be believed of us Catholics, who suffer so much
for our Religion,) so that there is nothing in the foundation of Faith, that
can reasonably hinder them to be permitted: The foundation of Faith stands
secure enough for all their vain and unhandsome superstructures. And in
particular he shows that Prayer for the dead, and the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, are not Fundamental errors; and also says, these two be
in stead of the rest. Yea he affirms Page 258, that there is employed as great
difficulty in the mystery of the B. Trinity, as in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; and shows that we are not in any danger of sinning by
Idolatry, in adoring the Sacrament.

10. Thus, good Reader, having proved out of the Confession of Protestants,
That the first Protestants, who pretended to reform all Churches extant when
they appeared, led such lives, and taught such Doctrines as no man of judgment
can think them to have been fit Instruments for that Work; That Protestants
confess the Ancient Holy Fathers to stand for us; That the chiefest Protestant
Writers join with Catholics against other Protestants in the most principal
Articles of Religion, Yea even in those very points, for which Luther and his
followers opposed our Doctrine, and forsook our Communion; (which deserves well
to be considered;) That our Doctrines have been confirmed by Miracles; and
finally That all Protestants of note and learning acknowledge that we may be
saved: These points, I say, having been evidently proved out of the confession
of Protestants, no man of conscience, or even of common judgment and reason,
can deny, but that we are safe; and seeing eternal Salvation depends upon
making choice of the true Religion, whosoever has a care of his soul, must
either embrace the Catholic Roman Religion, or else acknowledge himself to be
inexcusable in that last day or moment, upon which eternity and that second
death will depend, from which there can be no reprive, or hope to amend by a
second trial. I conclude as I began, O ETERNITY! ETERNITY.

FINIS
A TABLE Of the CONSIDERATIONS.
Consideration 1. Concerning the Lives of the first Protestant pretended
Reformers Page 1. Of LUTHER page 2. Of IACOBUS ANDREAS page 72. Of ZUINGLIUS
page 74. Of CALVIN page 105. Of BEZA page 134. Of MELANCTHON page 156. Of BUCER
page 159. Of KNOX page 165.
Consideration II. By the confession of Protestants, the ancient holy Fathers
believed and practiced the same things, which we believe and practice against
Protestants. page 171. Consideration III. Chief Protestants stand for us in the
most important points of Religion, against their protestant Brethren. page 301.
Consideration IV. That the Doctrine of us Catholics, has been approved by the
omnipotent hand of God, using for instruments of working Miracles, those, who
were confessedly of our Religion, yea, and in express confirmation of points
believed by us, and rejected by Protestants. page 395. Consideration V. By the
confession of Protestants, we Catholics may be saved, though we live and die
in the belief and profession of those Articles, wherein Protestants disagree
from us. page 437.
An Alphabetical Index of the chief things contained in this Treatise; in
which c: signifies the Consideration, n, the Number, p, the Page, t, the Text,
m, the Margent, If neither of the two last letters be put, the thing is only
in the Text
A
PErpetual Abstinence from certain meats was never commanded by the Church. Co.
2. n. 11. p. 230. 1. Alms for the dead, is an antieut use, n. 3. p. 198 Altars,
of great and acknowledged antiquity. p. 192. 3. t. m. St. Amphibalus his body
revealed by St. Albania, and many miracles wroughtat it. c. 4. n. 5. p. 420.
Amsdorphius (in whom Luther said, Spiritus meus requiescit) affirmed good Works
hurtful to salvation, c. 1. n. 19. p. 66. 7. t. m. Anabaptists infinitely
divided, c. 3. n. 112. p. 392. Andreas, Luther's famous Scholar, qualified by
Protestant Writers, c. 1. n. 21. p. 72. 3. Dr Andrews no Protestant. c. 3. n.
83. p. 356, 7, 8, 9. His judgment of Spalata. p. 359. Antichrist one single
person. c. 2. n. 3. p, 192. Arianism, the center of Calvinism. c. 3. n. 43. p.
123, 4, 5. t. m Armenians condemned, for denying the mixture of water with the
wine in consecrating the Chalice. c. 2. n. 2. p. 183 St Augustine the Monk,
brought Ceremonies into England c. 2. n. 12. p. 244, 5, 6. St Austine the Dr.
most clear for Miracles c. 4. n. 2. p. 402. 3. t. m. Also for Purgatory c. 2.
n. 18. p. 265. etc.
B
BAldwins interpretation of Luther's Conference with the Devil concerning
Mass refuted, c. 1. n. 7. p. 27. etc. Baptism (says Luther) in whatsoever
words, if taken, though not given in nomine Domine, truly saves m. 4. p. 15.
Beads lawfully used c, 3. n. 94. p. 174. St. Bernard refuted by miracle, points
then held by the Henricians or Apostolicks, and now by Protestants, who ascribe
the Miracles to the Devil, yet hold St. Bernard for a St. c. 4. n. 4. p.
414.15, 16, 17. and most conformable to the Church of Rome c. 5. n. 2. p. 440.
1. t. m. He was an eye witness of St. Malachias his miracles, and being present
at his death, received his blessing c. 4. n. 4. p. 414. t. m Of Beza, c. 1.
from the n. 48. to 54. from p. 134. to 155. inclusive. An abridgment of his
wicked life out of Hic. Bolseck n. 48. p. 134, 5, 6. His lascivious Poems with
Apologies for them of Dr. Morton, Mr. Spark and others, refuted p. 137. to 144.
Candida was his Concubine four years before he married her at Geneva p. 144.5.
She dying when he was 69 years old, he, to the scandal of his friends, within
few months, married a young Widow p. 147. He is charged with many odious
Conspiracies, and to have struck deadly at all Christian superiority with his
seditious spirit and writings p. 147.8.9. t. m. He confesses that had it not
been by these means, they had had no Church p. 150. His hypocrisy, ibid. His
encouraging Rebels to fight, kill, and commit sacrileges at the battle of
Dren. p. 151. He persuaded Poltrot to kill the Duke of Guise p. 152. t. m. He
prefers in knowledge these times to those of the Apostles ibid. t. He avers
three divine substances p. 153. That our Savior was for a time in despair
ibid. His mental reservation in matter of Faith p. 153. 4. t. m. His
confession, that whilst he taught others Goodness, himself was wicked, ibid.
t. Of Bucer, c. 1. n. 58.9. p. 159. to 65. inclusive. By his Doctrine any man
or woman may take occasion of Divorce, and marry another, p. 160.1, 2, 3. He
four times changed his Religion, and for every change vehemently pretended
evidence of Scripture p. 163.4.5.
C
OF Calvin, c. 1. from n. 37. to 47. from p. 105. to 134. inclusive. He was
excessively dainty in his diet n. 37. p. 106. t. m. An Adulterer, ibid. t.
Burnt on the shoulder at Noion, for a Sodomite, and fled for shame p. 108, 9.
He is said to have forged Letters in his own praise. p. 105. He agreed with
Braule to fain himself dead, who, when he should have risen at his call was
dead indeed. ibid. t. m. His seditious Doctrine caused the Prince of Geneva to
be deprived of his Inheritance by Arms, n. 38. p. 110, 11. It lays open the
way to all liberty, teaching that God is the author of sin, and predestinates
merely upon his pleasure, some determinatly to Heaven, others to Hell, n. 40.
p. 113, 14. yet he would seem to be against this Doctrine p. 114, 15, 16. t. m.
It leads to Mahometism, and has much increased Arianism in Polony, Hungary,
and Transylvania. n. 42. p. 121, 2, 3. And has it or infidelity, for its
Center, n. 43. p. 125. It has hatched the reformed Arrians, who allow only
Scripture interpreted by themselves, and hideously blaspheme the blessed
Trinity, n. 43. p. 123, 4. t. m. He uses the Arrians shifts, and teaches them
new, to avoid the testimonies for the blessed Trinity, and is by diverse
Protestants accused of Judaism, and Arrianism, n. 45. p. 126, 7, 8, 9, 30. He
terms it Barbarism to say Christ is God of God, or Sancta Trinitas unus Deus.
He affirms three Substances in the Trinity, and Christ to be improperly God,
who makes intercession to his Father, both according to his Humanity and
Divinity, n. 41. p. 117, 18, 19, 20, 1. That Christ suffered all the torments
due to the damned, and despaired for fear they should be eternal, yea, refused
to be obey his Father in Redeeming Man, n. 46. p. 131, 2, 3. He calls it a
foolish curiosity, to question whether Christ merited for himself; and a timer
arious definition to merit, n. 19. p. 67. t. m. He furiously railed (says
Grotius) at the opposer of his Doctrine, n. 47. p. 133, 4. He contemptibly
condemns the ancient Fathers for averring the sacrifice of the Mass, n. 39. p.
111, 12, 13. He died calling desperately upon the Devil; eaten up with Lice,
and other Vermin, n. 37. p. 107.110. Calvinists held it lawful to lie for the
Glory of God, n. 53. p. 155. t. m. Of Canonical Scriptures, the sense of the
holy Fathers, and the Protestants reprehending them for it, c. 2. n. 12. p.
234, to 242. inclusive t. m. Canonical Scripture only determined by the
Church, p. 240. t. m. etc. Carolostadius pretended Visions and Conference with
God for his Doctrine, c, 1. n. 23. p. 79. t. m. Of Catholic Religion, as
Protestants confess, no beginning can be assigned after the Apostles times, c.
2. n. 15. p. 255. t. m. It is by them judged safe, c. 5. per totam. showed by
their clear Testimonies, n. 1. p. 437.8, 9. Ceremonies practiced by the
Fathers, c. 2 n. 8. p. 205, 6. t. m. and n. 12. p. 234. Most of the now used,
acknowledged by Protestants to have been then used, n. 13. p. 247. t. m. The
Chancel prohibited to the Laity, c. 3. n. 89. p. 366. Chillingworth confutes
himself, n. 87. p. 363. With reason he excepts against painting the Irinity,
for he denies the Trinity, n. 92. p. 377. His ridiculous objection of an
Oblation by way of Consumption, n. 95. p. 375. Diverse other of his impertinent
objections, in the Numbers and pages precedent, and following particulars about
the immaculate conception of our blessed Lady, n. 99. p. 378.9. His many
testimonies that the Catholic Church is saving; and his contradicting himself,
c. 5. n. 7, 8. p. 459, 60, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chrisme, or Confirmation gives grace,
c. 2. n. 8. p. 205.6. Clement vide John Clement. Confession as now used, avowed
by the ancient Fathers, n. 9. p. 206, 7. and n. 19. p. 269. etc. Confirmed by
Miracles, c. 4. n. 2. p. 407. Consecrating of Creatures, c. 2. n. 12. p. 244,
5, 6. t. m. etc. Constantine the great, allwaies had with him a portable
consecrated Tabernacle or Church, with Priests and Deacons, not to be forced,
against the then practice of the Church, to celebrate Divine Mysteries in
profane, places, n. 23. p. 292. t. m. The Lord Cromwell professed at his
death, to believe in all with the Church of Rome, c. 5. n. 2. p. 439, 40. Use
of the Cross, c. 2. n. 8. p. 205, 6. m. In practice with the holy Fathers,
reprehended by Protestants, n. 12. p. 243. t. m. The virtue of it confirmed by
Miracles, c. 4. n. 2. p. 406. St. Cutbert's Miracles, and miraculous integrity
after his death, n. 4. p. 412, 13.
D
Alms, Prayer, Sacrifice for the Dead, c. 2. n. 3, 4. p. 196.7.8. t. m.
Delrius cleared from Morton's falsification, c. n. 7. p. 26. 7. t. m.
E
Equivocation beyond all limits held and taught by Protestants, c. 3. n. 72. p.
348, 9, 50, 1, 2. English, inconstant in Doctrine, c. 1. n. 28. p. 85, 6, 7.
Errors affirmed by Protestants to have crept into the Catholic Church, but no
beginning of them can be assigned since the Apostles time, c. 2. n. 15. p. 255.
etc. t. m. wherefore they impute them to the Apostles time, n. 14. p. 251. etc.
t. m. Eucharist consecrated by virtue of the words, n. 2. p. 179. t. m. In
round Wafers, of which use no beginning can be showed, p. 178. t. m.
Transubstantiation held by the ancient Fathers, p. 179, 80, 1, 2. t. m. 'twas
carefully conserved in the Church, p. 181, 2. in one kind only: so also
carried in long journies, c. 3. n. 83. p. 356. Water mingled with the Wine in
consecration, c. 2. n. 2. p. 182, 3. It must be received fasting, p. 183, 4.
And Chastely: wherefore Priests are not to marry, p. 184. etc. t. m.
F
In the ancient Fathers, the now Catholic Doctrines acknowledged, and
reprehended by Protestants. Vide Protestants. The Faith of Catholics judged
saving by Protestants, c. 5. per totam. Their clear testimonies of it, n. 1. p.
447, 8, 9. Fasts obligatory, c. 2. n. 12. p. 229, 30, 31. t. m. Held an Heresy
by many Fathers to fast on Sunday. ibid. Fathers so evident for all Catholic
Tenets, that Protestants rebuke one another for citing of them, and cry out
that if their Authority be acknowledged, the Protestant Church is undone, n.
14. p. 249. etc. t. m. Fox's Revelation concerning the 42 Months in the
Apocalypse rejected, c. 1. n. 23. p. 80. His fraud to cover Dr. Barnes his
acknowledgment of Transubstantiation, c. 3. n. 37. p. 320. St. Francis his
Miracles, Wounds, and austere life, c. 4. n. 5. p. 418, 19. t. m. Freewill, and
merit of Good Works, frequent in the holy Fathers, c. 2, n. 5, 6. p. 200. etc.
Fulke held Christ, according to his Deity, to be his fathers Priest, c. 1. n.
41. p. 120. and the Arrians to be a true Church of God, n. 42. p. 122. t. m.
G
GRegory the great, introduced by St. Austine, Rites and Ceremonies in England,
c. 2. n. 12. p. 244, 5, 6. Grotius his censure of Calvin's furious railing
against the Opposers of his Doctrine, c. 1. n. 47. p. 133, 4. He stands in most
points for Catholics, c. 3. n. 85. p. 359, 60, 1, 2.
H
KIng Henry the Eigth, kept to his death the Doctrine of Rome, c. 5. n. 2. p.
439. Heretics fraud in citing Authors, c. 2. n. 18. p. 267. They moulter away
by Divisions amongst themselves, c. 3. n. 112. p. 391, 2. t. m. Holy Water
confirmed by miracle, c. 4. n. 2. p. 417. Hus no Protestant, c. 3. n. 80. p.
355.
I
JAcobus Andreas, vide Andreas. King James his censure of John Knox, c. 1. n.
60. p. 166. And of the English translations of the Bible, n, 33. p. 95. Jewel
affirms Christ, according to his Deity, to be his Fathers Priest, n. 41. p.
120. His impudent imposture upon Fathers, Apostles, and Christ himself, c, 2.
n, 22. p. 281 2, 3. Thirty eight Jews burnt in the Marchy of Brandenburgh, and
all the rest banished for stabbing the B. Sacrament, c. 4. n, 5. p. 421, t, m,
422, m. John Clement's miraculous cure at our B. Ladies of Sichem, p, 423, 4,
5. Images used by the ancient holy Fathers, c, 2. n, 12. p, 243. Confirmed by
miracle, c, 4. n, 2. p. 404, 5. t. m. Innocentius the third, falsely taxed to
have first brought up Transubstantiation, c, 2. n, 16. p, 257. t. m. The
Invisibility of the Protestant Church before Luther, c, 4. n, 3. p, 408. t. m.
^ish forced to hear English Sermons, which they understood not, c, 3. n, 98. p,
377.
K
OF John Knox, c, 1. n, 60, 1. from p, 165. to 170. inclusive. Why many
particulars of his turbulent seditious spirit are omitted, p, 165. King James
his censure of him, p, 166. His dreadful death, ibidem.
L
Dr. Laud acknowledges Catholic Faith to be saving, c, 5. n, 9. p, 465, 6.
Lent, held of obligation by the Fathers, c, 2. n, 12. p, 211, 12, 13. Limbus
Patrum, held by ancient Fathers, n, 3. p, 198, 9. t. m. Lyturgy in an unknown
tongue, c, 3. n, 87. p, 364. etc. Of Luther, c, 1. from n, 1. to 20. from p, 1.
to 71. inclusive His own testimony of his pious and penitent life before his
Apostasy, n, 1. p, 2. His raging Lust, described by himself, p, 2, 3, 4, t. m.
His blasphemy, that no Sin, Lust, or other, can separate from Christ, p, 4.
Whence he gave scope to all villainy, ibid. He secretly, to the disgust of his
friends, married Katherine Bore a Nun, and i^ such heat, that he could not
expect until next morning when the forbidden time for marriage expired, p, 4,
5. t. m. This shamelesly excused by Melancthon, Luther himself acknowledging
that he did not profess good life, but Doctrine, p, 5. t. m. Hence
Protestants, when they will be licentious, say, This day we will live Luther-
like, p, 6. t. m. His inclination to Poligamy, n, 2. p, 7, 8. t. m. His
contempt of superiority. His hideous railing against K. Henry the Eigth and
other Princes; forced the Protestant Lansgrave to disallow his Writings by a
public Manifest, p, 9, 10, 11. t. m. He hired Corolostadius to rail against
him, n, 3. p, 12. t: m: He gives as much power to Laymen, yea, to Women,
concerning the Sacraments, as to Priests, n, 4. p, 12, 13: t: m: and n, 7: p,
27: He says, that the Devil can truly consecrate the Sacrament of the Altar,
n, 4. p, 13. m. and n, 7. p, 34. For his opinion of Baptism, vide Baptism. He
held, that had not Christ's Divinity suffered, we had had but a base Redeemer,
n, 5. p, 15. That Christ's Soul suffered in Hell after death, p, 16. He boasted
of more truth in his Doctrine than in the Fathers, or Apostles, n, 6, p, 16, 17.
t. m. His contempt of the Fathers, p, 18. His Doctrine, as certainly divine,
must judge Angels, not be judged by them, ibid. and p, 19. Chief Protestants
do sharply reprove this his pride, p. 19, 20, 1, 2, 3. His inconstancy in
Doctrine, n, 4. p, 14, 15. He was taught by the Devil to impugn the Mass, n,
7. p, 23. t. m. and that by bodily conference, not by spiritual fight, as Fulke
would have it, nor by dream as Sutcliff says, both against Luther's express
words, p. 22. to 36. inclusive. he was grievously haunted and frighted by an
evil spirit, p. 23, 22. He affirms, the Emp. Oecolampadius and others, were
slain by evil spirits appearing to them, p. 24, 25. He denies obedience to
spiritual Pastors, and G. Councills, and right to judge of Doctrine, and
grants it Lay People, n. 8. p. 37.8. He teaches, that whatsoever a General
Council commands, the contrary is to be done, n. 12. p. 44, 5. He affirms,
that when one dies, the Soul sleeps as Insensibly as the Body, and denies
Purgatory and prayer to Saints, n, 9. p, 39. t. m. He puts three: Divinities as
three persons; and praises the Arrians for rejecting (...) n, 10. p, 39, 40.
t.m. His wicked Doctrine concerning the Author of sin, n, 11. p, 40, 1, 2. His
Blasphemy that God crowns and damns without desert, p, 42. By these Doctrines
he opened the way to all lewdness, p, 43. To have his will he stuck not to
contradict himself and Scripture, n, 12. p, 43. He acknowledges that he
believed not what he preached, p, 46. He acknowledges his fall to have been
Pride and wilfullness, and speaks of it with great perplexity and terror of
Conscience, p, 47, 8. Yet false Flatterers will call him Saint, ibid. He is
deeply taxed by Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and all Calvinists, for his
unchristian bitterness against them, n, 14. p, 49, 50, 1. He most arrogantly
conceived himself the only man opposed by Satan, as the first teacher of
Christianity, and sole right understander of the Gospel, n, 15. p, 51, 2. His
wicked Doctrine in favor of the Turk, and disesteem of Christianity, n, 16.
p, 53, 55, 54, 56. His Scholars ashamed of diverse things in his Works,
corrupted them in the edition at Wittenburg, n, 17. p, 57, 58. t. m. and alibi
ipse. His wilful corruptions and impudent censures of Scriptures and holy
Writers, makes them of no credit, p, 57, to 64. t. m. inclusive. He
acknowledges that the manifold translations of Scripture, will force to receive
Councills, n, 34. p, 97. He teaches that only Infidelity condemns, and only
Faith (which cannot be without Good works) justifies, n, 18, 19. p, 64, 5.
That, who is good, can do nothing but good: that good works neither justify,
nor are any way necessary to salvation, p. 65. but hurtful to it, p. 66, 7. t.
m. Erasmus his saying of him, n. 20. p, 68. m. He cannot be held a Protestant.
p, 68, 9. His vild Doctrine and Manners are now so notorious, as none can be
excusable in following him, p, 69. He preferrs Melancthon to all the Doctors of
the Church, n, 54. p, 155. His Blasphemies against the Holy Ghost, c, 1. n, 2.
p, 187, 8. By his Life and Doctrine many Protestants held Lewdnes to be an
Evangelicall Institution, and serious Christian Discipline, a new Popery, c, 1.
n, 1. p, 6.
M
St. Malacias his Miracles, c, 4. n, 1. p, 400. i. t. m. and n, 4. p, 414, 15.
Calumniated as wrought by the Devil, n, 1. p, 400. m. Dying he gave his
Blessing to St. Bernard n, 4. p, 414. m. Marriage forbidden to Priests from the
Apostles time, c, 2. n, 7. p, 166, 7. t. m. Like for Monks, p, 167. t. m.
Mass, and the sacrifice of it, most ancient, n, 17, p, 267. t. m. Of
Melancthon, c, 1. n, 55, 6. p, 156, 7, 8, 9. He held three Divinities. He
persuaded Polygamy to King Henry the eight: n, 56. p, 156. He taught, that in
case of Divorce the offending party might marry another: p, 157. He changed
from Lutheranisme to Calvinisme, n, 57. p, 157. Yet he persuaded others to
remain Catholics, and wished he had rather lost a Finger, than wrote of
Divinity, p: 159. Melchisedeck and his sacrifice presigured Christ and his
sacrifice: c, 2. n, 17. p, 260. etc. Merit of Good Works: n, 5, 6. p, 200.
etc. Of Miracles, c, 4. per totam: wrought in confirmation of points believed
by Catholics Protestants, and are testimonies of true Faith, although wrought
by wicked men, they being of that kind, which cannot naturally be done: n, 1 p.
396, 7. t. m. The gift of Miracles, necessary to the conversion of the World,
m, 2. p, 401, 2. Much more necessary to reverse, what by infinite miracles the
whole world had embraced, p. 402. m. No miracles wrought by Luther, Calvin etc.
n. 3. p. 408. t. m. Yet they pretend an extraordinary calling, which they
confess must be proved by Miracles p. 409, 10. t. m. No miracle that Luther's
sensual Doctrine should suddenly spread, p. 410. t. m. Many miracles
acknowledged by Protestants wrought by Catholic Priests for the conversion of
Con. n. 1. p. 397, 8. By St. Xaverius in the Indies. The miraculous
incorruption of his body, ibid. Wrought by St. Austin at the conversion of
England, p. 398, 9, 400. t. m. and, n. 4. p. 411, 12, 13. t. m. Many, of which
St. Austin the Dr. was an eye-witnes, n. 2. p. 402, 3. t. m. Undoubted miracles
recounted by the Centurists to have been done in each of the thirteen ages next
after Christ, p. 404. t. m. etc. Many of them by Monks of most austeer life.
Many in confirmation of points now controverted, ibid. One, of the B. Sacrament
stabbed by the Jews, n. 5. p. 421, 2. t. m. Another also of the B. Sacrament,
n. 2. p. 405, 6. t. m. True miracles defended against the shifts and impostures
of Protestants, n, 7. p. 427. etc. to the end of the fourth Con. Monasteries of
professed Virgins in St. Ignatius the Martyrs time, c. 2. n. 1. p. 173, 4. t.
m. Montanus, falsely said to be the first Author of Fasts, n. 11. p. 230, 1.
Mortons shameless falsifying of Delrius, to cloak Luther's Conference with the
Devil, c. 1. n. 7. p. 26, 7. t. m. He accounts the Arrians a true Church, n.
48. p. 140, 1. Mo^ives to convince Protestants of the safety of the Catholic
Religion, c. 3. n. 105. p. 383, etc.
N
NIcene Council censured by Luther, c. 2. n. 2. p. 187, 8. It gave no liberty
for married men to keep their Wives after Priesthood, p. 186. etc.
O
OEcolampadius. wished his right hand cut off, on condition he had never wrote
of Controversies, c. 2. n. 20. p. 7. He pretended Visions, and was, in one
slain by the Devil, n. 23. p. 79. t. m. He was the first that disswacted
Luther from saying Mass, p. 80. Holy Oil, confirmed by miracle, c. 4. n. 2.
p. 407 Osiander's Nonsense, c. 2. n. 2. p. 187. King Oswald's miracles, c. 4.
n. 4. p. 412. t. m.
P
PAphnutius defended against Socrates, c. 2. n. 2. p. 186. etc. Dr. Potters
large verdict, that Catholic Faith is saving, c. 5. n. 6. p. 453, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. Prayer in an unknown tongue, as now used, not gainsayed, 1 Cor. 14. c. 3.
n. 89. p. 370, 1, 2. t. m. Prayer directed by the words to one party, may be
offered to another, n. 96. p. 375, 6. Prayer to Saints, and for the dead,
confirmed by miracle, c. 4. n. 2. p. 405, 6. t. m. Reflections for Protestants
to ponder, c. 1. n. 61. p. 167, to 170. inclusive. Protestants are Children
without a Father, p. 167, 8. They acknowledge the ancient holy Fathers to hold
with us against them, c. 2. per totam, For Vows of perpetual Chastity, n. 1. p.
171, 2, 3, 4. t. m. Priests forbidden to marry, p. 174, 5. t. m. Or to have any
woman living with them, except their Mothers, Sister, Fathers fister, Mothers
sister, n. 2, p. 186. And that if they had been married before Priest hood,
they must not after accompany or live in the house with their Wife, p. 186, 7.
etc. Religious Vows, n. 1. p. 176. t. m. Prayer to Saints, n. 2. p. 202, 3, 4.
Purgatory, n. 18. p. 265, 6, 7, 8, 9. t. m. Saint Peter's Primacy, of which
Protestants finding no beginning, nor of the Popes exercising all that now he
does, they ascribe it to St. Peter's Ambition, n. 10. p. 207. t. m. etc. They
acknowledge the name and office of a Priest as most ancient, n. 17. p. 261. t.
m. etc. The uniform Doctrine of the Roman Church, and division of their own, n.
20. p. 271. 2, 3. Many of their Tenets to have been condemned for Heresies, and
the Abetters of them for Heriticks, within the first six hundred years, n. 21.
p. 273. etc. Had those that now are, lived then, they would likewise have been
condemned, n. 26. p. 318. Yet they impudently challenge the holy Fathers for
theirs, and falsify all sorts of Writers, old and new; yea, of their own
Brethren, n, 22. p. 281. t. m. etc. They must confess the present Doctrine of
Catholics not repugnant to salvation, or damn the ancient Fathers, whom they
hold to be Saints, n. 24. p. 317. see many other points noted in their
Alphabeticall Order. Protestants confuted, and the now Catholic Religion
proved by the practice, in the great Constantin's time, n. 23. p. 291. t. m.
etc. Chief Protestants, in the following most important points stand for us
against their brethren c. 3. p. 301. per totam. The real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, and not only inefficacy n, 1, 2. p. 301, 2. Sacraments
do not only signify, but confer Grace, n. 2. p. 303. The Church must be
continually visible, p. 303, etc. Good works necessary for salvation, n. 5. p.
307, 8. Christ died for, and gives grace to all, n. 7. p. 308. God only
permits sin, n. 8. p. 309. Men uncertain of their Election, and may finally
fall from the state of Grace n. 9. p. 309, 19. In divorce, the innocent party
cannot marry again, n. 10. p. 310. No salvation promised to the Children of the
Faithful, dying unbaptised, n. 12. p. 310, 11. Freewill, n. 12. p. 312. Good
works with Faith, meritory, n. 13. ibid. Temporal punishment for sinremitted,
n. 14. p. 311, 12. No Civil Magistrate, head of the Church universal, or
particular, n. 16. p. 312, 13. Invocation of Saints, their, and Angels
intercession, n. 17, 18, 19. p. 313. Vows of Chastity, n. 28. p. 313, 14. Of
Poverty, n. 21. p. 314. Prayer for the dead, Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, n. 22,
3, 4. p. 315, 16. Images in the Church, worship of them, bowing at the name of
Jesus, Good works of one may help another, n. 25, 6, 7, 8. p. 316, 17. Priests
truly give remission of sins, Confession to Priests, Distinction of Mortal
and venial Sin, n. 29, 30, 1. p. 317, 18. Communion under one or both kinds:
Sacrifice of the New Testament, according to the order of Melchisedeck n. 32,
3. p. 319. The first motions of Concupisence not consented to, are no sin, n.
34. p. 319, 20. The Commandments not impossible, n. 35. p. 220. No Widow
bigama professed, n. 36. Transubstantiation, n. 37. p. 321. Christ
Consubstantiall to his Father, n. 38. p. 321, 2, 3. As man full of knowledge
from his Nativity. He descended with his Soul into Hell, but suffered nothing
there, n. 39, 40, 1. p. 323, 4, 5. The Sacraments of the old Testament,
inferior in operation to the New. Grace conferred by imposition of hands in
the Sacrament of Confirmation. Also in the sacrament of Order, Deaconship, a
distinct order from Priesthood, and a step unto it, n. 41, 2, 3, 4, 5, p. 325.
Extraordinary calling is ceased, n. 46. p. 327. An indelibel Character
imprinted by some sacraments, n. 47. p. 328. Baptism by Lay persons and women
in case of necessity, n. 48. p. 328. The known intention of the Church,
needful to administer Sacraments, n. 49. p. 328, 9. Seven Sacraments, n. 50.
p. 329. Implicit Faith, n. 51. p. 329, 30. Usury unlawful, n. 52. p. 330.
Antichrist not yet come, n. 53. p. 331, Distinct degrees of Angels. Angels
Protectors of several Countries. By Michael the Arch-Angell, is not meant
Christ, n. 54, 5, 6. p. 331, 2, 3. Sunday for our Sabbath is unalterable, and
an Apostollicall Tradition, n. 57, 8. p. 333, 4. Get Fasts and Abstinence from
certain meats for spiritual motives, n. 59. p. 334, 5. Vows not obrogated, n.
60. p. 335, 6. Fasting, Chastity, giving ones Goods for pious uses, and
Vlountary poverty, are more pleasing to God than their contraries, n 61. p.
336, 7. Who has the gift of Continency, may lawflly marry or refrain, n. 62.
p. 337, 8. The sin against the Holy Ghost, is only final impenitence, n. 63. p
338. One Text of Scripture may have diverse under standings, n. 64. p. 339.
Ecclesiastical persons equal in Order, unequal in Jurisdiction, n. 65. p. 339,
40. The whole truc Church cannot err, n. 66. p. 340, 1. Scripture without
external judgment, cannot end Controversies, n. 67. p. 341, 2. The Church
Government is monarchical, n. 68. p. 342, 3. Children have not vertual Faith,
n. 69. p. 343, 4. Sacred Books only determined by the Churches Tradition, n.
70. p. 344. The Church of Rome is part of the Church of God, n. 71. p. 344, 5,
6. One Primate over the Church in all Nations, n. 72. p. 346. Unwritten
Tradition must be observed, n. 73. p. 146 7, 8. Equivocation, n. 74. p. 348, 9,
50, 1, 2. Use of the sign of the Cross, n. 75. p. 352, 3. Many other added, n.
76. p. 353. Most points in which we disagree from them, held by some or other
of their chief men, indifferent matters, n. 77. p. 3^3, 4. Protestants to
continue a Succession, allege such as hold against them n. 78. p. 354. etc.
They cannot with consequence deny the Roman Church to be infallible, n. 97. p.
376, 7. They judge the Faith of Catholics saving, c. 5, p. 437. per totam,
Protestants clear testimonies, that the Catholic Faith is saving, c. 5. n. 1.
Many confessed by them to be true Saints, yet rigid Roman Catholics, n. 2. t.
m. They allow that Infants baptized are saved by the Faith of their Catholic
parents, which then must needs be saving in the Parents themselves, n. 3. t. m.
That our Church is a true Church, one with theirs, not differing in
Fundamentalls, both good and saving, and only controverted which is the
better, n. 4. Diverse Protestants, drew from Luther's Life and Doctrine, that
Lewdnes was an Evangelicall Institution; and serious Christian Discipline, a
new Popery, c. 1. n. 1. Pultrot strangely taken, after he had by Beza's
counsel and encouragement, murdered the Duke of Guise, n. 49.
R
THE Real Presence in the blessed Sacrament confirmed by Miracle, c. 4. n. 1.
Relics acknowledged by the holy Fathers, c. 2. n. 12. Confirmed by Miracles,
c. 4. n. 2. Rome acknowledged by Protestants to be the Seat of, and fittest
for, the Primate of the Church, c. 2. n. 10. t. m. And the Bishop of it to have
exercised what now he does for the first 500 years, p. 213, 14, etc. And the
Church to be uniform and constant in its Doctrine, n. 20. They cannot fancy it
to be infallible, c. 3. n. 97, It is evidently showed to be sigularly protected
by the Holy Ghost c. 5. p. 450, 1, 2, 3.
S
WHat is confessed by Protestants concerning Sacraments, vide Protestants, and
c. 2. n. 13. Of the sacrifice of the Altar, c. 2. n. 3. t. m. The Antiquity of
it, p. 196. t. m. see more n. 17. and c. 3. n. 89. t. m. It is offered for the
dead, p. 368, t. m. Prayer to Saints, impugned by the Devil, c. 1. n. 7. Held
by the holy Fathers, and they reproached for it by the Protestants, c. 2. n. 7.
Scriptures manifold and corrupted translations, c. 1. n. 28. to 33. inclusive,
which forced Luther to confess that the Conncills must be received again, n.
34. The vulgar Translation preferred by Protestants, before all other, n. 34.
What Scriptures are Canonical, must be learnt from the Church, c. 2. n. 12. t.
m. Liberty of reading Scriptures confessed by Protestants to be the cause of so
many Heresies, c. 1. n. 29. Siricius Pope, was not the first that made the
Decrees of Priests Chastity, c. 2. n. 2. Socrates his false relation of
Paphnutius, His heretical writing of the celebration of Easter, and of other
things p. 189, 90. Sorrow necessary for remission of sins, c. 3. n. 102. Mr.
Sparks excuse of Beza's liconciousness refuted, c. 1. n. 48. Sutcliffs
impertinent and false interpretation of Luther's Conferrence with the Devil,
c. 1. n. 7. He falsely said that Innocentius the third, was the first that
brought in Transubstantiation, c. 2. n. 16.
T
ONes testimony against himself is most strong, c. 3. n. 106. Tindall, and
Teuxbury, Fox's Martyrs, held Good Works hurtful to salvation. That all
Christ's works did not deserve Heaven. That God is no more pleased with one work
than with another, c. 1. n. 19. t. m. Traditions, c. 2. from n. 12. to 16.
inclufive. whence it is concluded, that those, of which no certain beginning is
known, were introduced by the Apostles. Transubstantiation, not first brought
in by Innocentius the third n. 16. But held, (as Protestants confess) by most
ancient Fathers, n. 2. t. m. The Antiquity of it, n. 16. t. m.
V
VOws acknowledged by Protestants, to be held by ancient holy Fathers, lawful
and obligatory, c. 2. n. 1. By the first Faith 1 Timothy 4. is understood by holy
Fathers, the Vow of continency, p. 172, 3.
W
WAldo and Waldenses no Protestants. They pretended an Order of begging Friars,
but could get no confirmation. Some of their Tenets, c. 3. n. 79. Water to be
mingled with Wine in the Consecration of the Eucharist. c. 2. n. 2. t. m.
Wicliff no Protestant: his, and his Disciples habit, c. 3. n. 80. Whitaker's
impudent justification of Calvin's branding, c. 1. n. 37. His false imputation
upon Pope Siricius, c. 1. n. 2. t. m. He condemns the ancient Fathers, for
holding that Antichrist is one single person, n. 3. t. m. He falsely says, that
Innocencius the third began Transubstantiation, n. 16. His impudent provocation
to the first 600. years, n. 22. Continent Widows the Sanctuary of God, n. 1.
Mr. Wotton falsifies St. Ignatius, n. 6. m.
X
ST. Xaverius his miracles in the Indies, and the incorruption of his body
acknowledged by Protestants, c. 4. n. 3. Xenaias the first opposer of Images,
c. 2. n. 12. t. m.
Z
ZOzomenus followed Socrates in his false report of Paphnutius, and is affirmed
by St. Gregory to have lied much in his Writings, c. 2. n. 2. Of Zuinglius, c.
1. from n. 22. to n. 39. To cloak his acknowledged incontinency, he affirms
that St. Paul found no other cause of Marriage, but to sattisfie Lust, n. 22.
He was taught in a dream, which Hospinian calls a Revelation, to impugn the
Mass, n. 23. t. m. He taxes Luther for contradicting himself, to temporise, n.
24. m. Himself did shamfully the same, but (says he) Invenite Domino, p. 80,
1. He calls Gods promise of reward Hyperbolicall, p. 81. Original sin no sin,
but a Disease, which deserves not Damnation, n. 25. t. m. and is reproved for
it by his Brethren, p. 82. t. m. He teaches that Heathens, never beleiving in
Christ, are saved, if they have a pious mind. For this also his Brethren
reprove him, n. 26. t. m. That neither St. Paul, or any of the Apostles thought
their own Writings Canonical, or. could think so, but with extreme Arrogance,
n. 27 Wheresoever be finds in Scripture, This is my Body, This is my Blood; for
is he puts signifies, for which Schlusselburg reprehends him, p. 84, 5. He
says, that to God, who is bound by no Law, it is an honor to move to sin; but
in man, who is bound by Law, it is a sin, n. 35. That Civil Magistrates,
opposing his Doctrine, must be resisted by the Sword, and deposed, n. 36. Armed
in this quarrel he was killed: and died, as Protestants affirm, a Child of
Hell. n. 36. t. m.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 22. Line 18. in the text, read Charke. p. 25. l. ult. t. r. Charke. p.
30. l. 28. t. r. est. p. 72. l. 26. t. r. lecto. p. 94. l. 18. t. r. Parker. p.
158. l. 31. t. r. graves. p. 159. l. 13. t. r. vocasse. p. 162. l. 9. t. r.
mulierem. p. 102. l. 11. t. r. cohabitante. p. 200. l. 26. t. r. Apostolos. p.
221. l. 31. m. r. Archiepiscope. p. 222. l. 36. m. r. latere. p, 231. l. 2. m.
r. Eusebius. p. 257. l. 16. m. r. constat. p. 273. l. 29. t. r. to. p. 276. l.
29. m. r. negare. p. 346. l. 21. t. r. a diverse. p. 349. l. 26. t. r. nomine.
p. 350. l. 24. t. dele not. p. 352. l. 24. t. r. cubitum. p. 360. l. 6. t. r.
no. p. 375. l. 24. t. r. is. p. 367. l. ult. m. r. for. p. 368. l. 35. m.
Annuas. p. 389. l. 31. t. add next to the word error (to free her from actual
sin, if etc.


