THE VANITY OF Humane Inventions, Held forth in a brief exercitation upon the
controverted CEREMONIES, managed in certain Queries: first drawn up for the
satisfaction of some private Friends, and now made public for the good of
others.

Psalm. 119.113. I hate [(...)] Vain Inventions, but thy Law do I love.

Luth. Oper. t. 2. fol. 369. Vere non est res in qua vigilantior esse debet
Ecclesiastes quam formando Populi judicio in Ceremoniis.

London, Printed in the Year, 1666.

To his much honored and loving Friends, -- the Author of the ensuing Queries
wishes sound Judgment, true Zeal, and unstained Purity.
My Christian Friends and Brethren,
THough God was pleased some years ago, out of zeal to his own Name, and pity
to his poor afflicted People in these Nations, that had so long prayed, sighed
and waited for deliverance to begin a happy Reformation, in extirpating the
body of Popery, with much of the rubbish and trash belonging thereunto, yet
have there, from first to last, still risen up some amongst us, who though they
pass under the name of Protestants, yet being impatient of sound Doctrine,
purity of Worship and the power of Godliness, have been so far from being duly
thankful for so great a mercy, and faithful in the improvement of it, that they
have not only with the ill-affected Samaritans, Ezra 4.^
weakened the hands of their Brethren, troubled them in building the House of
the Lord, and done much toward the frustrating of their zealous purposes and
designs about it, but with the discontented Israelites, Numb. 14.4.
preferring the Onyons and Leeks of Egypt, before the Milk and Honey of Canaan,
have at least implicitly and interpretatively solicited the people to return
from whence they came. And amongst these (which is sad to tell) the very Stars
and Angels of the Churches (as they count themselves) are the chief, D. Hamond
Diss. 4. c. 4. Sect. 1. p. 187.
who notwithstanding all the Arguments, Complaints, Petitions and Addresses
that their Brethren have at several times presented them with, to go on with
the Work of the Lord, and root out the remaining Ceremonies, as well as they
have done the forementioned body of Popery, and other Ceremonies belonging to
it, every jot as lawful and innocent as those which they retain, will not for
all that yield to do it, but still continue, urge and impose them, to the
evident hardening of Papists in their superstitious courses, the begetting of
many sad thoughts and jealousies in the hearts of all such as are true to the
Protestant Interest, and the occasioning of manifold and great evils amongst
us. Now that you may the better understand whether this their course be just
and warrantable yea or no, I shall offer to you somewhat concerning the nature
of the Ceremonies, which I shall manage in these following Queries, whereby you
may in some measure come to know the state of the difference betwixt them and
their Brethren, and upon what ground they have cast them out of the Ministry,
and thereby done what in them lies to undo, not only them and their families,
but thousands of souls with them.

Qu. 1. Whether do you not think that the Word of God contained in the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles, and by his good providence transmitted and
handed-down from them to us, without either loss or depravation, is (...) a
complete and perfect Rule of Religion, and all matters pertaining to it, such
as Faith, Worship, Discipline and Life? It testifies of it self that it is. The
Law of the Lord (says David) is perfect. Psa. 19.7
There is a twofold perfection of the Law of the Lord; there is perfectio
certitudinis, and perfectio plenitudinis; or, a perfection of verity, and a
perfection of sufficiency. The former the Psalmist spoke of before in another
place, telling us that the words of the Lord are pure words, Psa. 12.6
as Silver tried in a furnace of Earth, purified seven times. The latter he
speaks of here, signifying to us, that the Law of the Lord is not in any thing
defective, but every way sufficient to teach us our duty, and lead us unto
happiness. According to what he says afterward; I have seen an end of all
Perfection, Psa. 119.96.
but thy Commandment is exceeding broad. Now here we are to note, that he
speaks this of the Word as it was in his time, when there were only the five
Books of Moses, and some few more. And if it were so perfect then, what may we
judge it to be now, after the addition of so many choice and excellent Books,
not then extant, wherein some things that before were dark, are there made
plain; and other things that before were unrevealed, are there set down? And
that the two Testaments might, like the faces of the two Cherubims, Exodus 25.20.
look one toward another, and in all things answer one the other: the same
doctrine that the holy Ghost taught first by David, he taught aftarwards by
Paul. All Scripture (says he) is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in
Righteousness: 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. What
testimony could he have given more large and full than this? what thing is
there in Religion but it is either to be learned, reformed, or done? And what
thing is there either to be learned, reformed or done, but it falls either
under Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, or Instruction? And if it fall under any
of these, the Scripture affords sufficient light and direction in it. What ever
matter or business a Man of God, or Minister, has occasion to teach, reprove,
correct or instruct in, it has wherewith thoroughly to furnish him. And herein
(if in any thing that amongst Christians falls under dispute) we have the
unanimous and concurrent testimony of the Ancients. Answ. to the Jes. Challeng.
p. 36.
Bishop Usher (to mention no more) has impanell'd a full Jury of them, and
taken their verdict, which is plain and clear for us in this particular. As for
Protestants, they do all, as it were with one voice, in their Confessions,
Articles, and other Writings, speak forth the sense of the Ancients, assert the
sufficiency of the Scripture, and profess to take it for the Judge and Measure
of their Controversies in all matters of Religion whatsoever. Panstrat. T. 1.
de Can. l. 8. c. 1. s. 17. p. 206.
Chamier has set down the Confessions of several of their Churches about this
point, wherein they do with much boldness and freedom profess and teach, that
the Word of God, contained in the Writings of the Old and New Testament,
comprehends in it whatever is needful for us to believe, hope for, observe, or
practice, in order to the pleasing of God, and obtaining of everlasting
happiness. Nay, Protest. App. l. 2. c. 25. sect 13. p. 330
several of the Papists themselves (as Bp. Morton shows) being overcome with
the evidence and strength of Truth, do herein join with them, teaching the
sufficiency of the Scripture to all religious purposes and uses whatsoever
as well as they. And if they will but keep to the vulgar Latin, Sess. 3.
Decret. 2
which the Council of Trent appointed to be the rule and standard not only of
all other versions, but but of the Originals themselves, they must needs do it.
For whereas David in the forementioned place says (...), which our Translation
renders, thy Commandment is exceeding broad; the Vulgar renders it, Latum
Mandatum tuum nimis, thy Commandment is too broad; intimating that the Word of
God is so far from lying under any narrowness or straitness, that it is rather
full to a redundancy. And indeed it is not likely that God, who is perfect in
all he does, Deuteronomy. 32.4.
and would have his Servants to give him perfect obedience, should be unperfect
in his Word, or deliver to them an imperfect Rule. Yet when I say the Scripture
is a perfect Rule for all matters in Religion, I do not mean, it is an express,
particular Rule for every individual case or circumstance belonging thereunto;
that is not to be imagined. Should God have drawn us such a Rule, John 21.25.
the World it self would not have contained the Books that should have been
written. It is a particular Rule only for Substantials, and a general one for
Circumstantials, which are so numerous, various, and mutable, that no other
than a general one could be expected of them. Now as we must take care, that
our Substantials be such as fall under the particular directions of it; so we
must take care that our Circumstantials, how small soever they may seem, be
such as fall under the general directions of it.

Qu. 2. Whether can you find in this Perfect Rule, either any thing for a
ceremonious administration now in the days of the New Testament in general, or
for the Ceremonies the Bishops impose, and we refuse, in particular? It speaks
much against such things, but not one syllable, that I know of, for them. When
our Savior saw how many in his time were afflicted, partly with the pressure
of the Ceremonial Law, and partly with the Traditions of the Scribes and
Pharisees, who bound heavy burdens and grievous to be born, Mat. 23.4
and laid them upon men's shoulders: being moved with compassion, as he used to
be in such cases, he invites them from them, and encourages them to come to
him, who was about to put them under an easier administration, and deal more
gently with them. Matt. 11.28, 29, 30
Come unto me (says he) all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light. By these that labored and were heavy laden, Harm. Evangel. c.
56. p. 742
he means not only (as Lyserus shows) such as were inwardly afflicted for sin,
but such as were outwardly afflicted with Ceremonies and Traditions. So that
his words imply as much as if he had said, My Disciples and followers, I see
you are afflicted both inwardly and outwardly; your minds are afflicted with
the sense of sin, and the apprehensions of the Wrath of God due unto you for
it; your bodies are afflicted with the Ceremonial Law, and the Traditions of
those hard Taskmasters, the Scribes and Pharisees; but be of good cheer, I
undertake to free you both from the one and the other. And accordingly we find
that when the Scribes and Pharisees came to him, and complained of his
Disciples for refusing to comply with them in the tradition of washing of hands
before meat, Mat. 15.3
he was so far from accepting the complaint, that he very sharply blames them
for their vanity in that and such like things, encouraging his Disciples to
persist in maintaining their just Liberty. Yet when I say that he invited the
People from the Legal Ceremonies, I do not mean that he did it with reference
to the present, for the time of actual freedom was not as yet come, but with
reference to the future, intending thereby to comfort them under the bondage
they were then in, and prepare them for their approaching deliverance. And when
the fullness of time was come, rather than he would fail to perform what he had
obliged himself to do, Gal 4.4, 5.
by suffering them to continue under that ceremonious burdensome administration,
he lays down his Life to redeem them from it, Col. 2.14
blotteth out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against them, which was
contrary to them, takes it out of the way, and nails it to his Cross. And he
is no sooner dead but the merit and efficacy of his Death beginning to work,
the types and shadows begin to flee away. According to that of the Church,
until the day break, Cant. 2.17.
and the shadows flee away; turn my Beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young
Heart upon the mountains of Bether. In which words the Church of the old
Testament begs the aid and assistance of Christ, for her support and comfort,
till the day should break, and the shadows flee away; that is, till the day of
his Death, at which time she foresaw that the old ceremonious administration,
consisting in types and shadows, would give place to a new one, of a more
spiritual and simple nature. And as she foresaw, so it came to pass; for, as
upon the rising of the natural Sun the day breaks, and the shadows of the night
flee away; so upon the coming and death of Christ, See Mr. Brightman in loc.
the mystical Sun, the Sun of Righteousness, the types and shadows began to
flee away. As when the Building is set up, the Scaffold is taken down; so when
Christ was come, and had offered himself to his Father, and done the work he
came about, he took down that paedagogical subservient Administration of the
Ceremonies, giving order that they should be laid aside. This the renting in
twain of the Vail of the Temple from the top to the bottom held forth. Mat 27
51.
And behold (says the Evangelist) the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain
from the top to the bottom. For the better understanding of this, we are to
note that there were two Vails belonging to the Temple: the one hanged betwixt
the outward Court and the Holy-place, where the Priests officiated: the other
betwixt the Holy-place and the Holy of Holies; and it is that which the
Evangelist here means. Now within this Vail there were certain things of a
typical ceremonious nature, and esteemed most sacred; as the Ark, the Golden
Censer, Aarons Rod, the Pot of Manna, with other things: all which the Vail
kept from the view of the people. God therefore by his own immediate hand
renting this Vail, took away the distinction both of place and things, Vid.
Aug. tom. 10. Append. Sermon. 41. page 675: Ed. Paris. Cloppenb. schol. Sacrif.
page 137. Exodus 20.18.
and showed that what they prefigured was come, and that thenceforth they were
to be laid aside. As all that thundering, lightning, and smoking that was upon
Mount Sinai, showed that the Ceremonial Law (as well as the Judicial and Moral)
then to be de^^^^^ed, was divine and to be observed; so the renting of the Vail
of the Temple (with the other miraculous works that accompanied it) showed that
it then ceased to be divine, and was no longer to be observed. And thus the
Apostles, Elders and Brethren, assembled together at Jerusalem to consult about
the Ceremonies, understood the matter, as appears by the Decree they then made
concerning them. Acts 15.28.
It seemed good (say they) to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden than these necessary things: that ye abstain from meats offered
to Idols, from Blood, and from things strangled, and from Fornication; from
which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well. And thus Paul likewise
understood the matter, and thereupon, notwithstanding all the reverence he once
bore to the Jewish Religion, and the several Ceremonies belonging to it, he
calls them all to naught, terms them carnal Ordinances, worldly Rudiments, Heb.
9.10 Col. 2.8. Gal. 4.9.
beggarly Elements, and the like; persuading those he writes to, to lay them
aside, maintain the liberty purchased them by Christ, and not burden themselves
either with those, or any other unprofitable useless Rites, that superstitious
and ill-minded men might urge upon them. Thus you see the Scripture has much
against Ceremonies, but where has it any thing for them? Vid. Hoorrib. cont.
Jud. l. 7. c. 1. p. 446. Spanhem. Dub. part 3. p. 548.
It is plain (as I have here briefly intimated, and Christian Writers have at
large proved, against the Jews) touching the taking down of the old
Ceremonies, but where says it any thing for the setting up of new ones? saving
Water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Supper, it mentions not any
Religious standing Ceremonies be-belonging to these days of the New Testament.
See Gillesp. Disp. against Cerem. part 3. c. 6. p. 207.

Ames Fresh suit part 2. p. 334.


As for Imposition of Hands, Love Feasts, The Kiss of Charity, Women's Veils,
and such like, they were of a mere civil nature, common to other Persons as
well as Christians, and to other Actions as well as Religious. And as for
Anointing of the Sick, it seems to have been of a temporary nature, according
to the gift of miraculous healing that went along with it.

Qu. 3. Whether, if it had been the will of God, that his Church in the days
of the New Testament, should have worshipped him in the use of Ceremonies,
would he not have appointed them himself, now, as well as he did before? Nay,
whether if he had had any such will, when he appointed some, such as Water in
Baptism, Bread and Wine in the Supper, would he not have appointed the rest?
What reason can be rendered wherefore he should appoint them before, and not
now; some, and not all? We know when it was his pleasure, that the Jews in the
time of the Old Testament, should worship him in the use of Ceremonies, he
appointed them himself, (...) 27.19.
and that so particularly, that he went to the very Pins of the Taberncle. And
when the time designed for their continuance was expired, he did likewise
himself abolish them. And therefore no doubt if it had been his pleasure, that
the Church in the days of the New Testament, should have worshipped him in the
use of Ceremonies, he would have appointed them himself, as he did before, that
so they might have come forth in his Name, and have had a Divine Stamp upon
them as theformer had; and would never have left the appointing of them to Men,
who he well knew would be unbridled, and unsatiable in introducing their own
Inventions into his Worship. But it is very evident, that he wholly took down
the former, saying not so much as one word, either by Himself, his Son, or his
Apostles, concerning the setting up of any other in their stead, saving those
before mentioned; which plainly shows it was never his pleasure, that his
Church in the days of the Gospel should worship him in a Ceremonious way. For,
what reason can any give, wherefore he should be so exact and punctual in
appointing them heretofore and not now, if it had been his pleasure that his
Church should worship him in the use of them now as it did then? Bell. l. 1. de
Rom-Pont. l. 4. c. 17. p. 338. Imp. Agrip.
Perhaps our Adversaries will here fall in with the Jesuits, as they use, and
say, That though Ceremonies might be determined for one Nation, such as Judaea,
that was but a little spot of ground, yet not for the whole World, and that in
regard of the great diversity of persons, places, occasions and conditions. The
same Ceremonies that would have been decent and comely in one place, would have
been ridiculous and foolish in another. But there is little strength in this;
for why might not the command of Christ have made other Ceremonies acceptable
to all Places and People, as well as those which he did appoint, or as well as
other things which he commanded them to observe; such as self-abasing,
mortification, forgiving wrongs, loving enemies, and the like; which are as
much, nay far more inconsistent with their customs and fashions, than any of
the Ceremonies under dispute, are? The Laws of Christ have many things in them
that suited no better, no, nor so well as the Ceremonies imposed on us would
have done, had he enjoined them; yet did not that either cause him to forbear
the giving forth of his Laws, or his Servants the publishing of them. But
suppose that Gestures, Vestures, and some other of the Ceremonies could not
well have been pitched upon for all Nations, in regard of the diversity of the
Circumstances before named, yet this is no sufficient reason why none of them
might; for there are some of them that have no such dependence on those
Circumstances. As to instance in the Sign of the Cross; what reason can any
show, wherefore if it had been the pleasure of Christ that his Church should
have used it, that he did not appoint it himself? I hope none will say, because
of the diversity of places, persons or the like; for why might not it have been
as welcome to all places and persons, as the Doctrine of Faith it self, had it
been enjoined? Wherein would the one have disagreed more with the Customs and
Fashions of People than the other? Nothing at all; no, nor near so much. It is
evident then, that Christ being silent concerning the Ceremonies contended for,
when as he might have appointed them (especially that last mentioned) as well
as other things, or as well as the Church did in after Ages, that it was not
his pleasure that they should be made use of, at least that they should be made
so necessary as they are. And if it were not his pleasure that they should be
so, let those who stand so much for them, and urge them under such severe
penalties, see how they will justify it.

Qu. 4. Whether, though God has not instituted any Ceremonies for these days
of the New Testament himself, save those few abovementioned, has he yet
empowered the Church to do it? It does undoubtedly belong to God, to prescribe
things belonging to Religion; and he all along has done it, either immediately
by himself, or mediately by those whom he authorized and enabled by special
inspirations, and abilities to do it. Now since Ceremonies are things belonging
to Religion, and he has no where appointed them himself, Whether can it be
made to appear from any authentic and sufficient evidence, that he has
empowered the Church, or any Person or Persons whatsoever, to do it? Our
Adversaries in the twentieth Article, tell us that the Church has Power to
decree Rites and Ceremonies. But 1. We would gladly know how they came by that
Clause in the Article. We find it not in the Articles of Edward the sixth, nor
in that of Queen Elizabeth, confirmed by Act of Parliament, nor in those of
Ireland, though taken verbatim out of the English, and therefore suspect they
have not played us fair play. They have served us so many feats of Legerdemain
in matters of this nature (some whereof you may find mentioned in the Author
quoted in the Margent) that they must not take it ill, Mr. Pryn Apol. Sect. 1.
p. 3.
if we have a jealous eye over them. But, 2. Admit this clause in the Article
were genuine, yet we would know how the Church came by this power of decreeing
Rites and Ceremonies. Has God any where in Scripture committed such a power to
her? Can they lead us to any Command or Grant therein, whereby they may with
any color or show of reason conceive her invested with such a power? What
Charter (as a learned friend of their own says) has Christ given the Church
to bind men up to more than himself has done? Mr. Stillingf. Iren pref. p. 8.
Till they have showed us somewhat in Scripture to that purpose (which we
believe they will never do) they must give us leave to take it for granted,
that she has no such Power committed to her. Indeed the Contents of Psalm.
149. make a show as if the Holy Ghost in that Scripture exhorted us to praise
God for that power which he has given the Church to rule the Consciences of
men. But there is no mention at all of the Consciences of men in it. And that
any Society, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, should have power over the
Consciences of men, is a point so in jurious to the Prerogative of Christ, and
every way so absurd, that I hope, those whom we now deal with, will not dare to
own it, and therefore I shall say no more of this. The place they most trust in,
and which upon all occasions they retire to as their Sanctuary, is that of
Paul, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. This is the only place that the
Church of England, in the Discourse prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer,
concerning Ceremonies, insists on. And are not our Adversaries and their
Ceremonies in a desperate condition, when this is all they have to show out of
the Word of God for them? Ceremonies are external Rites and Figures, which by
reason of some Analogy or similitude, are instituted to shadow forth some
divine mystical Truths, which Nature never appointed them to do. And what are
Decency and Order to these? May not we as well as the Primitive Reformed
Churches, do all things Decently and in Order without these? Ames, Fresh Suit,
part 2. p. 80.
Hear what a man of great judgment in these as well as in other Controversies,
writes on this passage. Those (says he) that are devoted to the Ceremonies,
may shufflle up and down, first to Order, and when they are beaten thence, to
Decency, and from thence when they can defend that no longer, to Edification,
as the Rejoinder does: But all will not help. Let them pitch or insist upon one
of these grounds, without starting, I will pawn my head their Anchor will come
home to them again, as finding no fast ground either in Order, or Decency, or
Edification, for double significant Ceremonies (such as ours) to ride at. Thus
he. And whosoever will lay aside partiality and prejudice, and read the place
with an indifferent mind, shall find that the Apostle (as Expositors both
ancient and modern show) aims not at Ceremonies either Jewish or Christian, but
mere circumstances of order, necessary in genere, which humane Ceremonies are
not. He speaks not at all of devising or framing any new matters, but of the
prudent determining and ordering of such as were already made, and at the
Corinthians free choice, so that they might either take them, or refuse them,
as they should judge most fit, in order to the edifying, decent and orderly
carrying-on of the Work of Christ. As for instance; he will have the Prophets
to speak in a known tongue, one by one, submitting themselves to the judgment
of others. The women he will have to keep silence, etc. And what is this for
the authorizing of any to institute a company of mystical, significant rites,
good for nothing (as experience has abundantly proved) but to trouble the
Church and beget strife amongst Brethren? nothing at all. T. 3. de Bapt. l. 1.
c. 24. p. 131.
And therefore Bellarmine, having mentioned the sign of the Cross, and some
other matters used by us in Baptism, challenges our Writers to prove any of
them either from Testimonies or Examples of holy Scripture. What the Ceremonies
under debate are, for decency and order, shall appear in due place.

Qu. 5. Whether, since God has no where empowered the Church to institute
Ceremonies, she may take upon her to do it without Warrant from him? If we may
measure her power in these days by what it was in former, she may not. Hear
what God says to the Jewish Church; Ye shall observe (says he) to do as the
Lord your God has commanded you: Deuteronomy. 5.32.
you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left. Again; What thing
soever I command you, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Mark, he
does not only forbid them to add to his Commandment, but to that which he
commanded; which is so plain and full, that one would think it should make
those who believe the Scriptures, cautious how they introduce any thing of
their own into the Worship of God. But leaving precepts, I shall offer you some
particular instances, which may serve to clear this matter. Abel, Noah, and
other ancient Patriarchs, offered external Sacrifices unto God; but did they do
it of their own heads? no, but as Cappellus shows, These. Sal. part 1. de
Orig. and Nec. scrip Sect. 9. p. 38.
at his appointment, made known to them in such a way as at that time he
revealed himself. And if we come to the Church in after-ages, when she was
attained to greater perfection, and was fitter for such a work, durst she then
do it? no, neither by one person, or many, how wise and holy soever. What a
wise and great man was Moses? he was God's especial Favorite, and faithful in
all his House, Exodus 39, 42, 43.
yet durst not he in building the Tabernacle go one jot beyond his pattern. And
what an eminent man was David? he was the Light of Israel, and a man after
God's own heart, 2. Sam. 7.7.
yet might not he build God an house without special order from him. Though God
did both intend, and had foretold in the Scripture, that he would have an House
built where he would cause his Name to dwell, yet might not he undertake to do
it, without a positive license from him. And what a famous man was Solomon? he
was so wise that all the Kings of the Earth admired him, and sought to him; 2 Chronicles. 18.19. ^ Chr. 3.3.
yet durst not he do any thing in building the Temple but what was agreeable to
the instructions God had delivered in writing to David his father about it. He
durst not engrave an Image upon the Wall, hang up a Vail, set up a Candlestick
or Lamp, bring in a Singer or Instrument of Music, but what God had appointed
him. Nay, he durst not bring in so much as a Shovel, Spoon, or any such thing,
but what he had received special order for from God. And if we come into the
New Testament, what a choice man was Paul? what rare and excellent gifts had
God blessed him with? yet when he himself had received no Commandment about
Marriage, he would not command any thing concerning it, but as he finds it a
thing indifferent, 1 Cor. 7.6
he declares it to be so, and so leaves it, saving that as a Minister of the
Gospel he gives his opinion and advice about it, without imposing any thing.
And if we leave single persons, and come to societies; what a grave and
orthodox Council was that at Jerusalem? Act. 15.28
yet durst not they decree or impose any thing upon the Churches but what the
holy Ghost directed them to, and suggested as necessary. And durst not such
persons as these, who were Prophets and Apostles, and guided by an unerring
Spirit, institute any thing without Command from God, and yet may our
Convocation-men, when they have neither received any Command from God, neither
were elected by those whom they pretend to represent, adventure to do it? Would
not such persons as those command but where God had commanded, nor forbid but
where he had forbidden, and yet may they do it? Would not such persons loose
where he had bound, nor bind where he had loosed, and yet will they do it? This
shows they have either more power or less caution; but whether of the two it
is, let the indifferent judge. If we may credit the Judgment of our learned
and soundest reformed Writers, whom God made so eminently instrumental in
restoring the Church to her primitive simplicity and purity, it is not lawful
to set up, urge or use any thing in the Worship of God, above or besides what
he himself has appointed. Calvin (who was a man so much admired and honored by
Andrews, Downham, Hooker, and other of the most grave and learned Advocates
amongst us for the Ceremonial way, choose what some latter of less note through
either ignorance or prejudice have to their own disgrace suggested against him)
speaking of the Lord's Supper, says, it is a thing so sacred and holy, Epist
ad Protect. Angl. p. 69. Ed. for
that it is a sin to defile it with any humane additions. Where note, that he
does not speak this, as if some additions were defilements, and others not; but
that whatever is done to it by way of addition, without warrant from God, is
so. And Zanchy speaks to the same purpose. In external Worship (says he) which
belongs to God, Vol 2. de sec. Praec. c. 14. col. 262. Decret. part 2. cause.
11. q 3. c. 101
or in Ceremonies, we may not mingle any thing of our own head. Nay, the very
Canon Law it self determines, that he who is President, if he say any thing,
or command besides the Will of God, or besides what is evidently commanded in
the Scriptures, let him be looked upon as a false Witness of God, or
Sacrilegious. Notwithstanding this, and much more that might be alleged both
out of Scripture and other eminent Authors against the Churches having power to
institute significant Rites and Ceremonies, our Adversaries still affirm that
she may do it; and for proof thereof, they produce several instances out of
Scripture, such as the gesture of Abraham's Servant in swearing to his Master;
the Altar of Jordan; the Feasts of Dedication and Purim, with several others of
the like nature: but how impertinent and aliene they are to the matter in hand,
Packer of the Cress, par. 1. c. 2. sect. 33, 34. p. 109. Ames fresh suit part
2. p. 104. Oil esp. Disp. agt. Engl. Cerem. part. 3. p. 200.
diverse learned men have particularly manifested; whom when they have answered,
we shall better know what to say to them. Do but set out natural signs of
devotion and seriousness, and moral signs of civil subjection and respect: and
such things as were done by the special suggestion and instinct of the Spirit
of God: and such things as were extorted by extraordinary Providence and
urgent necessities: as also such things as were Politic Acts or Civil
Observations: and such things as were done without any general or particular
Warrant from God, and so were unlawful; I say, do but set these and such like
matters, altogether aliene to the present business, and then see what all their
instances, wherewith they make such a goodly flourish, will contribute toward
the proving of a power in the Church to institute religious, significant Rites,
when God has neither in general nor in special (as I have before showed)
appointed or licensed her to do it.

Qu. 6. Whether, since the Church may not institute Ceremonies without order
from God, is it not a bold and impious presumption in her to attempt to do it?
Whether is it not an high affronting of his Sovereign Authority, Wisdom and
Goodness? Whether does she not thereby do as much as tell the World that he is
so far from Sovereign Authority, that it belongs not to him only to make Laws
and Ordinances for the management of his Service, but to her likewise: and that
he is so far from infinite Wisdom that she is fain to come after him and supply
the defects of his Institutions with her Inventions: and that he is so far from
infinite Goodness, that he neglects her, and provides not for her matters of
Decency and Order, as he should do? Whether does she not as much as say, 1 Timothy
5.8
that though the very Infidel provides conveniences for his family, yet God
provides not for his? And if this be not an high affronting of him, what is?
Mat. 15.3
If the Scribes and Pharisees did so far offend in those darker times, by
urging of that innocent and decent Rite, the washing of hands before meat, (for
so it was in it self) how do those offend that in these Sunshine days of the
Gospel, do urge things of a far worse nature, to the great hindrance of
Religion, and disturbance of the Peace of the Faithful?

Qu. 7. Whether, since the Church may not institute Ceremonies without Warrant
from God, is it not very dangerous, as well as presumptuous, for her to do it?
The Scripture is plain that it is. God does therein not only forbid us to do
less than he has required, but more. Deuteronomy. 4.2
As he forbids us to diminish from the Word that he commands us, so he forbids
us to add to it. As he forbids us to fall short in our righteousness by doing
less than he has commanded; so he forbids us to exceed in it, by doing more
than he has commanded. And he does not only forbid us to do it, but by severe
and dreadful denunciations labors to deter us from it. Ecc. 7.16.
Be not righteous overmuch (says he) neither make they self over-wise; why
should thou destroy thy self? And Paul anathematizeth that Man or Angel that
shall preach (...), above what he had preached. Though we (says he) or an
Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8, 9
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you,
let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach
any other Gospel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed. And
John closes up the Bible with a passage of the like nature; Rev. 22.18.
I testisie (says he) unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of
this Book; if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this Book. As we count that which is above, or
besides a man's will, to be contrary to it; so God counts every thing that men
teach, observe and do in his Church, that is above or beside his Word, to be no
other than contrary to it. Hen. 2d. the Emperor was wont to say, Ne quid
nimis; over-doing is under-doing: and indeed so God esteems of it and reputes
it. He takes himself to be as much disobeyed and dishonored when he sees men
do more than he has commanded, as when they do less. Nay we do not find that
the flames of his wrath have broken forth with greater fury upon any than
Innovators, or those that have brought into his House and Worship such things
as he did not appoint. How memorably was his hand upon Nadab and Abihu? The
relation says, they took either of them his Censer, and put fire therein, Lev.
10.1, 2.
and Incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not; and there went out fire from before the Lord, and devoured
them, and they dyed before the Lord. Here we have two things considerable;
their sin and their punishment. Their sin consisted in this, that in their
sacrificing they used such fire as God had not commanded. God left not the
choice of fire any more than other things to them, but appointed it himself;
and they should have kept to his appointment, but they declined from it, left
it, and so sinned. In Religious matters, and especially in the Worship of God,
it is not only sinful to go contra Statutum, but to go supra Statutum. Vid Am's
Bell. Ener t. 1. p. 9.
Or to speak home in the case, in Resigious matters acting supra Statutum is
all one with acting contra Statutum. Therein God's not requiring is equivalent
to forbidding; and doing more than he commands, to do doing contrary to it.
Then, as we have their sin, so we have their punishment, and that is very
remarkable; there went out a fire from the Lord and devoured them, and they
dyed before the Lord. Though they were the sons of Aaron, and men of renown,
yet God was so provoked with this offense, that he slew them before him, and
that both suddenly and dreadfully: Suddenly, for he gave them not so much as
the least time of repentance, but destroyed them immediately, even as they stood
before the Astar. Dreadfully, for he did it by fire, the most furious and
terrible of all the elements. Formerly it came in mercy, now in judgment.
Formerly it devoured the Sacrifices, now the Sacrificers. We see then, when men
bring their own Inventions into the Worship of God, they are so far from having
the Sacrifices they offer accepted, that they do no less than expose themselves
to the danger of becoming a Sacrifice to Justice. A further instance we have in
the Temple at Jerusalem in the days of the New Testament. When our Savior had
by his Death abolished the Ceremonial Law, and appointed it to be laid aside,
and the Jews would notwithstanding keep it up, God was so incensed against
them, that he takes that stately Temple, sets it on a flame, and burns it to
ashes; thereby accomplishing his own Sons Prophecy, Luke 21.6
As for these things which ye behold, the days will come in the which there
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. For
men either to set up Inventions of their own, or to keep up any Ordinances of
God longer than the time for which they were designed, Vit. Fab. p. 179.
graecol.
is provoking and dangerous. Plutarch tells of Manlius Torquatus, that though
his Son fought valiantly, yet because he exceeded his Commission, he struck off
his head. In like manner, those who in the Worship and Service of God exceed
his Commands, may upon good grounds fear the breaking forth of his wrath upon
them, as the just recompense of their presumption. God has appointed his Word
for the Rule of our service, and he will not have us turn either to the right
hand or to the left, either to do more or to do less than it commands, but to
keep to it without any deflection whatsoever.

Qu. 8. Whether is it likely that God would utterly abolish and remove such
Ceremonies as were of his own Institution, to make way for such as are of men?
Comment in Joh. 4.23.
This Bucer urges against the Papists. If God (says he) approve not of those
Ceremonies which the Patriarchs long ago, being taught by his Spirit, observed
in their Temples on Mount Garizim, or elsewhere, nor of those which afterward
he delivered by Moses, how much less will he approve of those which men have
since invented, without the direction of his Spirit, to the irreparable loss of
the (...), and the liberty purchased by Christ? Ours likewise Dr. Whitaker
inges to Bellarm. T. 2. Cont. 4. q. 7. c. 3. p. 727.
What (says he) were the Old Figures taken away that there might be room for
new ones? Were these that were Divine taken away, that such as are Humane might
succeed them? And this likewise Amesius urges to him. Bell. ener. t. 2. p. 251
God (says he) took away his own Ceremonies of the Old Testament, which were
as teaching Images, not that he might make way for humane Images, but for
spiritual Worship and Teaching. Nay, the reason of this consideration is so
manifest and certain, that some of our Adversaries skilfullest Advocates do
acknowledge it, nay improve it themselves against a Ceremonious Administration.
He (says one of them) that came to take away the insupportable yoke of Jewish
Ceremonies, Mr. Stillingf. Iren. pref. p. 8.
certainly did never intend to gall the necks of his Disciples with another
instead of it. Either men are fit to institute Ceremonies, or not; if they are,
why did not God leave it to them in the time of the Old Testament? if they are
not, how can we think he would leave it to them in the time of the New?
Doubtless his care of his Church is as great now as it was then, and therefore
if he would have been worshipped in the use of Ceremonies, as before-time he
was, he would either have kept up the Old ones, or else have instituted New
ones himself, without leaving it to the prudence of men, which he knows is
attended with so much folly and vanity.

Qu. 9. Whether do you think that the Ceremonies under dispute, are at the best
in themselves any more than things indifferent? The Convocation-House it self
challenges no more to them; and therefore speaking in one of their Canons of
the Sign of the Cross, Can. 30.
they represent it as established upon Rules of Doctrine concerning things
indifferent. T. 3. de Eff. Sac. l. 2. c. 31. p. 92.
Though with Bellarmine they hold them necessary in respect of observation when
they are enjoined, yet they confess, that in themselves they are indifferent,
and that therefore it is in the power of Authority either to continue or remove
them, impose or leave them free, as they shall think meet.

Q. 10. Whether if the Ceremonies are indifferent in their nature, they should
not be so in their use? Things indifferent are such things as are neither
commanded nor forbidden, and upon that account are neither virtuous nor sinful.
If therefore the Ceremonies are of this nature, whether should not our
Adversaries leave it to their Brethren to close with them or refuse them, as
they shall think sit? Whether should they censure them any more for omitting
them, then they do them for using them? The Scripture says no. Romans 14.3
Let not him (says Paul) that eats despise him that eats not. Again, 1
Cor. 10.29.
Why (says he) is my liberty judged of another man's Conscience? In all matters
of indifferency we should certainly exercise mutual indulgence one toward
another, without making any disturbance or raising any strife about them.
Bishop Jewel shows out of Cyprian, and Mr. Parker out of August. Jerome.
Gregory, Repl. art. 2. p. 117. of the Cross part 2. c. 7. sect. 22. p. 91.
^iet. ord. Holland. p. 60. and passim.
that it should be thus. And Grotius says, That in every Church those are to
be tolerated, that differ about things not simply necessary. And our first
Reformers (as all know) did in many things comply with and yield to the Papists
for the winning of them. And if they complied with and yielded to them for the
winning of them, whether may not we reasonably expect that our Adversaries, in
these things of indifferency should comply with and yield to their Brethren who
in all Fundamentals at least, agree with them, for the winning of them? If the
Ceremonies are necessary, wherefore do they say they are indifferent? If they
are indifferent, wherefore do they urge them as necessary? God would have
necessary things to remain necessary, and indifferent things to remain
indifferent. And it is not in the power of any humane Authority whatsoever to
alter either the one or the other; either to make necessary things indifferent,
or indifferent things necessary; but when they have done all that they can,
necessary things will be necessary, and indifferent things will be indifferent.
Confess. Basil art. 10. p. 137.
We believe (say the Divines of Basil) that as no man may command where Christ
has not commanded, so no man may forbid where Christ has not forbidden. And
Chamier, T. 3. l. 15 c. 8. s. 6. p. 325.
speaking in the name of the Protestant Churches, concerning the Authority of
the Church, says, We deny that she can change the nature of things; that those
which were in themselves indifferent, should become necessary. And thus I might
without troubling you any further, have dismissed this Querie; but finding that
the learned Author whom I mentioned before has lately delivered somewhat
contrary to that which I have here maintained, I shall make a little stay to
consider it, Mr Stillingfl. Iren. c. 2. sect. 9. p. 54.
and inquire into the truth of it. He affirms, That lawful Authority may
command any thing that may be lawfully done. But this I conceive is not sound.
For, 1. To say nothing of what I have already urged, the Magistrate must not
only see that what he commands be lawful; that is to say, not sinful, but that
it be good, expedient and profitabe; and that for this reason, because the end
for which God has set him on high above his brethren, and invested him with
supereminent power, is, That he may be his Minister to us for good. Romans 13.4.
He has not any power but what he has from God, and he has not any power
from God but what is for our good. There is not any Ordinance God has
instituted, any Officers he has appointed, or any power that he has given,
but it is for our good. The Apostles were men of extraordinary power, Ephesians.
4.12. 2 Cor. 10.8.13.10. 1 Cor. 14.26.
yet for all that, they had not any but what was for the Churches edification;
neither might they teach, require, or do any thing but what tended to it. And
the like may be said of all other Officers, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil,
ordinary or extraordinary. The end of their power is the common good, and they
may not do any thing but what is both consistent therewith, and leads
thereunto. If therefore the Magistrate will answer the end of his power, which
by all means he is to endeavor, he must see that whatever he commands or does,
have a real and proper tendency in it to the good of those over whom he rules.
Now the commanding of unnecessary things, not tending unto the the common good
(for if it did they were not unnecessary) and consequently not answering the
end of his power, he may not do it. 2. There are many things that God has so
far committed to us, and settled upon us, that he has left them wholly at our
own disposal, to be used freely, and as common discretion shall prompt us, for
the good of our selves and others; so that though we may lawfully of our own
accord retain or let them go, do them or omit them, yet Authority may not
lawfully constrain us either to the one or the other without manifest abridging
of our Liberty. 1 Samuel 18.4.
Jonathan might lawfully strip himself of the Robe that was upon him and give
it to David, with his graments, even to his Sword, his Bow, and his Girdle; and
Nehemiah might lawfully refuse to take Bread, Neh. 5.15.
Wine, and Money from the People; and Zacheus might lawfully give half of his
goods to the poor; Luke 19.8.
yet might not Authority have lawfully enjoined them to do it. Our reverend
Fathers may with Paul lawfully labor with their hands, 1 Cor. 4.12.11.15.8.8.
forbear taking of wages, and eating of flesh, with many other things that I
could name, and yet if Authority should command them to do it, I believe they
would not well resent it. Every man may lawfully wear a Buff Coat; and yet if
Authority should enjoin all to do it, perhaps some that pretend greatest
respect and Loyalty would count it but hard measure. And if they should, Vol.
3. t. 8. epist. l. 1. col. 245.
they would yet have Zanchius to second them. For he, speaking to Queen
Elizabeth, in that golden Epistle which he wrote to her against the Ceremonies,
says, What if your Majesty should command all English Men that leaving their
ancient grave and comely attire, they should wear Turkish Coats or Soldiers
habit, Who would ever count such a Decree just? And it is much less
praiseworthy that godly Pastors should be enjoined to lay aside or change the
honest and ancient Apparel which the Apostles wore, viz. the common grave
Habit, and put on the ridiculous and execrable Garments of Mass-Priests. Much
more might be said to this particular, See this case hanled by the reverend and
learned Mr. Baxt Disp. of Church Govern. p. 460.
but I shall perhaps have occasion to speak further of it hereafter, and
therefore shall at present forbear, and go on with what I was about to propound.

Qu. 11. Whether, if the Ceremonies are indifferent in their Nature and ought
to be so in their Use, should not our Adversaries complie and bear with the
Consciences of their weak Brethren, since they neither neglect the use of due
means for satisfying them, nor carry themselves contemptuously toward the
Authority that injoyns them? The Scripture is plain that they should. Such was
the condescension and compassion of Christ toward his Disciples, that he was
ready upon all occasions to comply with the Infirmities both of their souls and
bodies. Genesis 33.14. Mar. 4.33 Mat. 15.3 9.15.12.3:
He used not rigor and severity, but like Jacob, he led on softly as they were
able to endure. He spoke the Word to them as they were able to bear it. And
when the Scribes and Pharisees came to him, and accused them for transgressing
the Traditions of the Elders, in not washing hands before meat; he finds no
fault with them, but with those that accused them. And in like manner, when the
Disciples of John came to him and complained of them, that they fasted not; and
the Pharisees, that they plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, he does
not only bear with them, but excuse for them. And as he carried it thus gently
toward his Disciples, so they carried it gently one toward another. Acts
15.28.
The Council at Jerusalem would not burden their brethren with any other, then
necessary things. And (says Paul) We that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.1, 2, 3.
and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his
good to edification; for even Christ pleased not himself, etc. And this spirit
of Christian tenderness that wrought thus in the hearts of the Apostles,
wrought also in the eminent Pastors of the Church in after ages. Though they
were for the observation of some Ceremonies, yet (as Mr. Parker proves by
various instances) they would not have them pressed upon any, any further than
they were willing to close with them. Of the Cress part 1. c. 2. sect 17. p.
86. and part 2. c. 5 sect 10. p. 17. Tom. 1. de Romans pontif l. 4 c. 18: p: 339.
De Eccl. l. 2. tract. 13. in Ep. ad Paul. 4. fol. 542. Of Christian subject.
part. 1. p. 46.
And such is the ingenuity of Bellarm. that whereas the Church of Rome imposes
fasting on all, he interprets the Canon so favorably, that he exempts
Children, the Aged, Sick and all such who are not able to bear it. And such was
the boldness of Andrew Frisius, that though he were a Papist, yet he sticks not
to expostulate with the Pope himself about this business. If (says he) it le
indifferent, wherefore may it not le lawful to those that will to use both? For
this is the nature of things indifferent, that the use of them should neither
profit nor prejudice any. Nay herein we have the suffrage of some of our
Adversaries chief friends. Dr. Bilson (after Bishop of Winchester) speaking of
the power of the Magistrate, says, We may not for things indifferent trouble
the weak minds of our Brethren. Epist. ad Commit. Leicestr.
And Dr. Pilkington (who was after Bishop of Durham) says, that the strict
imposing of things indifferent amongst us destroys Christian Liberty, for that
liberty turned into necessity is liberty no longer. It appears then, if we may
either heed Christ, or his Apostles, or the Ancients, or the Papists, or our
Adversaries own friends, that we should in matters of less moment, such as
things indifferent, exercise forbearance and tenderness toward each other: As
the weak must not envy the strong, so neither must the strong despise or
trouble the weak, but leave them to enjoy the privilege proper to their state.
They must do all they can to edify and further them, but nothing whereby they
may discourage of hinder them, lest they occasion their fall, and so become
accessory to their ruin.

Qu. 12. Whether, if the Ceremonies are but things indifferent, and ought to be
used as such; should not our Adversaries prefer the peace of the Church before
them? If they should, then whether do they well to urge them to the begetting
such lamentable Auimosities and Divisions amongst us? Though they pretend they
impose them in order unto Unity, yet Experience teaches, and they cannot but
know it, that the imposing of such matters has ever proved the certain means
of Rents and Divisions. Mat. 15.2
When the Scribes and Pharisees would be urging the washing of hands upon the
Disciples, what did it produce but parties and complaints? And when the false
Apostles afterward urged Circumcision, Act. 15.2.
what was the issue of it but strife and contention? And when Victor in
succeeding Ages would have all to celebrate Easter at the same time, Euselius
Eccl. hist l. 5. c. 25. gr. Sleidan. Com. l. 20 p. 369.
what did it less than set all Christendom on a flame? And when Charles the
5th published the Interim, it did not only make the contention hotter betwixt
the Papists and the Protestants, but also amongst the Protestants themselves,
setting every man's sword against his fellow. And when Augustine the Monck would
reduce the Bishops of Britain to the Western mode, Sir Hen. Spelman. Counc. ^^
p. 111.
what came of it but the Martyrdom of eleven hundred pious and painful Moncks
at Bangor, who withstood him in his impositions? And so he (as a learned Author
descants upon him) who was termed Gregorii Vicarius became Gregis Sicarius; and
he who was sent to be Ecclesiae futurae Anglicanae Conversor, Mr. Wheelock not.
in Bedam. p. 115.
proved to be Praesentis Brittanicae Eversor. And what work the urging of the
Ceremonies of latter times has made amongst us, all Europe is witness. How
many Persons, Families, Congregations has it ruined and undone? what a world
of Variance has it made amongst Brethren, who afore-time lived in peace and
love together, that now can scarce endure the company or sight of each other?
How has it filled the hearts of men with jealousies, the Presses with
Controversies, and the Pulpits with Invectives? Tom. 3 de Ess. Sac. l. 2. c.
31. p. 92.
Bellarmine uses this as an argument to prove that the Ceremonies are not of
free observation, that they have successively begat most grievous dissentions.
Now were it not a thousand times better that such fooleries as these, unworthy
of the defense or approbation of any wise men, were for ever banished from
amongst us, and never while the World stands heard of more, than that they
should make such uncomfortable discords in the Church of Christ? Vit. Pub^ p.
103.
Plutarch tells of Valerius the Consul that when he had built a sumptuous and
stately House, and the People were displeased with it, he without any more ado,
gets a company of workmen together, and causes them to pull it down, and raze
it to the very ground. And did an Heathen do this, and yet will Christian
Bishops (that wear long white Robes to proclaim their innocence and holiness)
keep up a company of beggarly Ceremonies, when they see them offend their
Brethren, and beget such sad and unhappy differences wherever they are
imposed? T. 6. cont. Faust. Manith. l. 20. c. 23 fol. 81.
Would they follow August. (whom they use to speak of under the titles both of
Saint, and Bishop) they might learn better: Those things (says he) which are
not necessary, though in some sort good, are yet often to be taken away, or
altogether removed, for the evils that do thence arise. And are the Ceremonies
any more than not necessary, that is, indifferent? or, to go to the utmost, are
they any more than in some sort good? And do not many and great evils arise
from them? Why then, according to the doctrine of this judicious Father, are
they not taken away and abrogated? Acts 19.19.
It were sure better to bring them forth, and (as the Exorcists served their
Conjuring Books) make one common flame of them, rather than they should make so
many combustions and flames, in such peaceable and flourishing Kingdoms.

Qu. 13. Whether, if the Ceremonies are but things indifferent, and ought to be
used as such, they ought not to prefer the preaching of the Word, the Power of
God to man's Salvation, before them? If so, then whether do you think they do
well in ejecting and silencing their Brethren, and not suffering them to
fulfill their Ministry because they refuse to close with them? Is it not a sad
thing to see multitudes of Church doors shut up, the people scattered like
Sheep without a Shepherd, and perishing for lack of knowledge, and all for the
sake of two or three things accounted indifferent, that may either be used or
not used, done or not done? Is it not a sad thing that these men who look upon
themselves as the only sound Christians, and pretend so much respect to Christ
and his Interest, should rather choose to see his Work stand still, his Kingdom
decrease, and thousands of souls go to Hell, than wave the urging of a few
frivolous Ceremonies that perish with the using? Morals should not give place
to Ceremonials, but Ceremonials to Morals. They should not throw out the Word
to bring in the Ceremonies, but rather throw out the Ceremonies to keep in the
Word. And if our Savior thought the Scribes and Pharisees worthy of a Woe for
paying tithe of Mint and Anise, Mat 23 23.
and Cum^in, and omitting the weightier matters of the Law, such as Judgment,
Mercy and Faith; what will he think those worthy of, that prefer a company of
mere baubles, unworthy of any thing but disdain from grave and sober
Christians, before the preaching of the Word, and in it not only Judgment,
Mercy and Faith, but all graces and duties whatsoever? It may be they will say,
they have a Law that things shall be so ordered. Admit they have, had not they
an hand in procuring, nay in making it? Or if they had not, (which yet surely
no body is so ignorant as not to know) may not they (if they please) obtain the
reversing of it? or if they cannot, yet should they not forbear the observing
of it, when it comes in competition with a Law of an higher nature? 2 Samuel 21.6.
David and those that were with him, had a Law against the eating of the
Shewbread, yet when it came in competition with the preservation of life, they
adventured to act against it, and were blameless. Our Savior also had a Law
for the strict observation of the Sabbath day, Mat. 12.3
yet when it came in competition with greater, such as those that concerned the
propagation of the Gospel, and the necessary refreshment of his Disciples, who
had attended him from place to place, to the neglect of their bodily
sustenance, he urges it not, but justifies them in the nonobservance of it.
Nay, he did not only make that Law to give place to the preaching of the
Gospel, and the necessary refreshment of his Disciples, Luke 14.5
but the helping of an Ox or an Ass out of the ditch. Now did he thus make a
Divine Law to give place to the necessities of a few of his Servants bodies,
nay to the necessities of an Ox or an Ass; and should not our Adversaries then,
that argue from his fasting of forty days for the observation of Lent, make a
human Law give way to the necessities of thousands of souls? Mr. Sprint labors
from such places as these to prove, Cassand. Anglican p. 26.
that though the Ceremonies are inconvenient, and not as they should be, yet in
case of deprivation we may conform to them. But though what he alleges (as I
shall show hereafter) do not hold against us, yet it does against them. Though
we may not do evil that good may come of it, yet they may forbear evil that
good may come of it. Though we may not use the Ceremonies that thereby we may
gain liberty to preach the Word, yet they may wave the imposing of them, to let
us have liberty to do it.

Qu. 13. Whether should they not in all their Constitutions, Observances and
Impositions, take care that they avoid scandal and offense? Choose what thoughts
they may have of it, Christ makes a business of it, and such a business that he
advises us rather to pluck out a right eye, Mat. 5.29.
or cut off a right hand, than suffer them to offend. Nay, he declares that it
were better for a man to endure the greatest temporal punishment and so escape,
than offend any of his Servants: Whosoever shall offend (says he) one of these
little ones, Mat. 18.6
which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. If it be such a
dangerous thing to offend one, what is it to offend many? And if it be such a
dangerous thing to offend such as are of little stature in godliness, what is
it to offend such as are of great? But to go on. Paul likewise makes a business
of it. 1 Cor. 10.32.
Give none offense (says he) neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God. Should we occasion our brothers fall, God may justly suffer
him to dye in his iniquity, and after require his blood at our hands.

Qu. 15. Whether notwithstanding this, are not our Adversaries in their
rigorous urging of the Ceremonies, guilty of gross and apparent scandal? That
you may the better understand this, note that there is a three-fold-scandal;
such as is merely active, that is, given and not taken: or such as is merely
passive, that is, taken but not given: or such as is both active and passive,
that is, both taken and given. A man does actively scandalize his Brother,
either by becoming a stumbling block to him, and occasioning his fall; and so
Balak scandalized Israel, Rev. 2.14
in tempting them to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and commit Fornication;
or by displeasing or grieving him, through some actions which he perhaps takes
to be lawful, but his Brother takes to be otherwise, and thereupon is troubled,
thinking he offends God and dishonours him, and does not make that conscience
of his ways he should; and so Peter scandalized our Savior, when he diswaded
him from going up to Jerusalem. Mat. 26.23.
In both these a man is very injurious to his brother; for by the former he
attempts the ravishing of his innocence, and by the latter, his comfort. Now
are not our Adversaries guilty of both these? of the former they are guilty, by
hardening and encouraging Papists in their way, whereas they should rather
labor to convince and reduce them; by suggesting to the Magistrate the
necessity of the Ceremonies, and moving him to make Laws to constrain such as
stand out to submit to them; by creating in the People a conceit of excellency
and usefulness in them, and persuading them to close with them; and by telling
both the one and the other, that those who refuse to comply with them in the
use of them, are proud factious, disloyal, and the like, laboring thereby to
incense them against them, and stir them up to persecute them. And of the
latter they are guilty, by vexing and grieving their brethren with these their
sinful practices, whereby they hinder them of that joy and comfort that
otherwise they might have, Epist. ad Regin Eliz. col. 24 c.
What should I say (says Zanchius) of the consciences of private believers? It
is manifest that they are greatly troubled with this Commandment, about putting
on these linen garments. For they do so greatly complain, that their lamenting
voices and groans do reach unto, and are heard in Germany. Now how grievous,
and distastful an offense it is to trouble the consciences of the Godly, the
holy Scripture shows, Repl p. 270.
etc. Nay Mr. Sprint says, It may be granted, that offense and hinderance to
edification does arise from the Ceremonies. And who, setting out those whom the
God of this world has been dealing with, are so blind as not to see it? To
pretend it is offense taken and not given (as our Adversaries do) is a shift
too gross to take place in a day of such light. When they have proved that the
Ceremonies are lawful, and that they do lawfully impose them, then they may
with some show of Reason make such a pretense, but till they have done that,
they should forbear. But suppose it were offense taken, not given, yet would
not that clear them, because they are the occasion of taking it. It is not only
required that we do not intentionally or directly give offense to our brethren,
but likewise that we do not so much as administer an occasion whereby they may
take it, unless it be in the necessary discharge of our duty, and then indeed
it is not culpable to us but to them. What do our Adversaries think of the high
Places, Gideons Ephod, Exodus 20.24. Judge. 8.27. 2 Kings 18.3. 1 Cor. 8.13.
the Brazen Serpent, the eating of Flesh before a weak Brother? Was the offense
in these things given or taken? which of them all was not in it self lawful?
nay which of them all might not have been very useful? Yet the holy Ghost when
they came to be occasions of stumbling would have them laid aside. If we will
walk evenly and avoid offense, we must not only shun that which is evil, but
that which has so much as an appearance, Syntag. l. 6. c. 3. p. 339. Sum. 22. q
4. art 7. Comm. eru^ in illum loc. de Repub. part 1. l. 1 c. 11. n. 18. p. 130.
or show of it; as not only Polanus and such like Protestant Writers, but
Aquinas, Cajetan, Bannes, Spalatensis and other Papists teach. And whether the
Ceremonies before us have not in them so much as an appearance or show of evil,
you may hear anon. But they go on, and say, That in urging the Ceremonies, as
they neither desire nor intend any offense, so they render a reason of the
lawfulness of what they do for the preventing it. They appoint Ministers to
show the intention of the Church, and declare the true sense and meaning of
them. Ans. 1. Just thus the Adiaphorists of Saxony and Lipsia reasoned: Vide
Schluss. catal. vol. 9. t. 13. p. 509.
They would have Corpus Christi day observed, but withal, to salve the
business, they would have a Sermon to teach the People their meaning in it. 2.
The greater part of Ministers understand not the meaning of the Ceremonies,
themselves. 3. Though they did, they have sure weightier matters to insist on,
which all their time is little enough for. Ex. 21.33 Vid. Whitak. t. 1. cont.
Dur l. 5. p. 138
4. It Is better to fill the Pit (as God commands) than set one to warn
passengers from falling into it. It is far easier to throw offensive things out
of the Church, than keep them from doing hurt if retained. But 5. to let pass
these things, as also the instances I mentioned before (though abundantly
sufficient to repel this pretense) might not our Savior have alleged this to
have excused his not paying of Tribute, Mat. 17.27. 1 Cor. 9.12
or Paul his receiving of Wages, when the former might have withheld the one,
and the latter have taken the other? No doubt they might, and that with far
more reason than our Adversaries may do it in the behalf of the Ceremonies, and
yet they would not use any such shift, but readily recede from their own right,
and deny themselves, rather than they would occasion that prejudice to the
Gospel that otherwise would have ensued. But notwithstanding the case be thus
plain, in stead of acknowledging themselves guilty of scandal, and laying down
the Ceremonies, the instruments of it, they retort the charge upon us, telling
us, That by our standing out against the Ceremonies, we disobey and offend
Authority, whom we should by all means labor to please. But this is of small
weight; For 1. If Authority be offended, we may at least in part thank them for
it, who in stead of acquainting them with our innocence, and endeavoring to
pacify them, do inform and exasperate them against us. 2. We must remember,
that (as I intimated before) there is a double active scandal; there is such a
one whereby we occasion our brothers sin, and such a one whereby we occasion
his displeasure. Now if we have two ways before us, one of which we must
necessarily take, and the one will occasion our brothers sin, and the other his
displeasure, we must venture upon the latter, as being a lesser evil, rather
than the former; We must please him to his edification, To. 15.2.
not destruction. To apply this to the present case; if we make use of the
Ceremonies, we occasion our brothers sin by drawing some to a liking of them,
and confirming others in their over high esteem of them. If we do not make use
of them, we displease Authority. In this strait what must we do? Why of two
evils we must take the less; and whether the occasioning of the sin of the one,
or the displeasure of the other be the greater sin, let the indifferent judge.
But 3. If Authority be offended at our standing out, it is evidently offense
taken, and not given. We deny them not obedience in any thing but what is
sinful, and if they are offended because we will not sin, we cannot help it. We
offend them herein no otherwise than Moses and Aaron did Pharaoh, in seeking of
liberty for Israel to go and serve God in the Wilderness; Exodus 5.1
or than Shadrach, Dan. 3.18
Meshach and Abednego did Nebuchadnezzar, in refusing to fall down and worship
his Image; Dan. 6.10
or than Daniel did Darius, when according to his wonted manner he prayed to
his God; Act. 4.19
or than Peter and John did the High Priest and his Company in preaching the
Gospel; Mat. 13.2
or to come nearer to the point in hand) than the Disciples did the Scribes and
Pharisees when they would not comply with them in washing of hands. However,
that we may not seem in the least seditious, or rebellious toward Authority,
we are ready to submit to the penalty of the Law, and endure what they shall
think meet for an offense of this nature to inflict upon us.

Qu. 16. Whether do you think there is not such a thing as Christian Liberty?
The Scripture over and over again says there is; 1 Cor. 8.9 10.29. Gal. 5.13.
1 Pet 2.16.
and almost every Commonplace Book has a chapter or more upon it. And wherein
does this Liberty consist? It does not only consist in our freedom from the
Curse of the Moral Law, the dominion of Sin, Tom. 1. de Romans Pon tif. l. 4. c.
17. page 338. Whit. t. 2 cont. 4. q. 7. c 3: p: 727. Ames Bell Ener: t: 1 p 255
Mr: Stillingfleet Iren: c 2: sect 10: p 56.
the Obligation of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law, to which Bellarmine would
have it restrained, but likewise in our freedom from the Inventions,
Traditions, and Impositions of men. This Protestant Writers do agree in: but
then it is questioned whether this Liberty do extend to Judgment only, or both
to Judgment and Practice. The learned Author, whom I have before mentioned,
will have it to be founded upon the freedom of Judgment, and not of Practice;
that is, he will have it to consist (as he himself explains it) in judging
those things to be free which are so. But herein I conceive he is no sounder
than in the forementioned Hypothesis to which he would have it serviceable.
For, 1. our being free from any Commands whatsoever, does not consist in our
judging or esteeming our selves to be so, (that looks too like the Antinomian
Faith) but in our being so indeed. But 2. admit he had said that which I would
think he intends, namely, that this Liberty consists in a freedom of our
Judgments, and in that only; so that though we are imposed on as to the
outwardman, yet whilst that remains undisturbed we may be said to enjoy our
whole Christian Liberty; yet could not we close with him. For it is evident
that Christian Liberty does not only consist in the freedom of the Judgment, so
as that we are not either obliged or constrained to assent to things
indifferent as necessary, but likewise in our freedom of practice, so that it
is in our own power and choice to observe and use them or not. For, 1. if the
Bondage of the ancient Church consisted not only in her being bound to assent
to such and such Ordinances as good and necessary, but also in her being
strictly tied to observe and practice them, then the Liberty Christ has
purchased us therefrom, does consist not only in our being disobliged from such
assent to those Ordinances, but also in our being freed from the observation
and practice of them; but the Bondage of the ancient Church consisted not only
in her being bound to assent to such and such Ordinances as good and necessary,
but also (nay much more) in her being strictly tied to observe and practice
them; therefore the Liberty Christ has purchased us therefrom, does not
consist only in our being disobliged from such assent to those Ordinances, but
also in our being freed from the observation and practice of them. The
consequence must needs be granted; for such as is the extant of our Bondage,
such must needs be the extant of that Liberty whereby we are freed from that
Bondage. It is the Assumption then that can only be pretended to need proof;
and yet who is so unacquainted with Scripture, as not to know that much, nay
the greater part, of the ancient Churches bondage consisted in external
Observances, such as Circumcision, Oblations, Purifications and the like? And
of what force this Argument is as to the Jewish Ordinances, the like it is of
as to any Humane Ordinances about indifferent things: for it is not to be
imagined, that Christ should purchase for us greater liberty from those
Ordinances that once were of Divine institution, and in their season so
necessary and profitable, than from those that never were instituted by him,
neither are any way necessary or profitable. 2. That which the Holy Ghost even
whilst he is explaining and bounding of Christian Liberty, does disoblige and
discharge us from, that we are to look upon as matter of Liberty, but even
whiles he is explaining and bounding of Christian Liberty, he does disoblige
and discharge us not only from assenting to indifferent things as necessary,
but also our observance of them, and therefore we are to look not only upon our
non-assenting to them as things necessary, but also our observance of them, as
matter of Liberty. The Major cannot be denied; for so far as the Spirit makes
us free, Joh. 8.36.
so far we are free indeed. And the Minor is evident from the Decree of the
Council of Jerusalem. Acts 15.28, 29.
It seemed good (say they) to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden, than these necessary things, -- from which if you keep your
selves, ye shall do well. It belongs to the Holy Ghost to determine what things
are necessary, and what are not; and as he was pleased to do it for the
Churches of those times in particular, so he has done it for the Churches of
all succeeding Ages in general, telling us, that if we observe those necessary
things we shall do well. And therefore as for other matters, we are freed from
them, and bound no further to observe them, then reasons of brotherly love and
peace in order to the furtherance of the Gospel, do persuade and move us. 3.
That which the Apostles in defense of Christian Liberty abstained from
themselves, and moved the People to whom they preached and wrote, to do the
like, censuring and condemning their actings otherwise as a breach of their
Liberty, that we are to look upon as matter of Liberty; but they abstained not
only from assenting to indifferent things as necessary, but also from the
outward observation of them, and moved those to whom they preached and wrote to
do the like, censuring and condemning their acting otherwise as a breach of
their Liberty; therefore we are to look not only upon our non-assenting to
indifferent things as necessary, but also on the outward observation of them as
matter of Liberty. The Major. is good; for as we must not think but that the
Apostles understood their own Liberty, so neither must we think that they would
abstain from, or press others to abstain from any thing but what was matter of
Liberty. And the Minor is clear from several places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.12.
Gal. 4.10 Col. 2.20.21.
which to prevent tediousness I shall only set down in the Margent, leaving you
to consult them at your leisure. 4. If Christian liberty lie only in the
judgment, then we may not draw it forth into outward practice; but we may draw
it forth into outward practice, therefore it lies not only in the judgment.
The Consequence is no other than sound; for we may not extend our Liberty
beyond its prefixed bounds. The truth of the Assumption appears from the
practice of the Apostles, and the whole Christian Church all along, and our own
Church in particular, which does not only exercise a liberty of judgment, but
also a liberty of practice, using some things, and declining others, as she
thinks fit. 5. If Christian Liberty consist only in freedom of Judgment, then
though men urge upon us the observation of all the unnecessary, frivolous, idle
Ceremonies that ever were used by Jews, Heathens, Turks, Papists or any other
People whatsoever, and upon our refusal to close with them, bring upon us, the
Inquisition, imprison, torture, burn us, yet if in the mean time they allow us
the freedom of out Judgments, they cannot be said to hinder us of our
Christian Liberty; but if men should urge upon us such a multitude of
Ceremonies, and upon our refusal to close with them, exercise the forementioned
severity, though in the mean time they allow us the freedom of our Judgments,
they might be said to hinder us of our Christian Liberty, therefore Christian
Liberty does not consist only in freedom of Judgment. The Consequence is no
other than what does fairly offer it self, and therefore is not to be excepred
against. And as for the Assumption, I prove it thus. If the urging us to
worship God in a more troublesome, burthensom way than he has been pleased to
appoint, may be said to be an hindering us of our Christian Liberty: then to
urge upon us the observation of such a multitude of Ceremonies may be said to
be an hindering us of our christian Liberty; but to urge us to worship God in a
more troublesome burdensome way than he has appointed, may be said to be an
hindering us of our Christian Liberty, threfore to urge us to worship God in the
observation of such a multitude of Ceremonies, may be said to be an hindering us
of our Christian Liberty. Here I see not what can be denied; and therefore I
think I have made good what I undertook, namely, that Christian Liberty does
not consist only in freedom of Judgment, but also in the freedom of Practice.
But this Author goes on, and says, That what he asserts, namely, that Liberty
does lie in the freedom of Judgment, and not in the freedom of Practice, and
so is consistent with the restraint of the exercise of it, appears both in the
case of Scandal, and in the actions of the Apostles and Primitive Christians
complying with the Jews in matters of Liberty. To this I answer briefly. There
is a twofold Liberty; either such as is absolute, so that it may be used at
all times, and in all places; or such as is limited and bounded, so that it is
not to be used at all times, or in all places, 1 Cor. 8.9.
but only when it may be done to edification. It is not the former of these
that in this place we pretend to, but the latter. For though Christ has given
us a Liberty in indifferent things, yet he has so limited it that we may not
use it, but when we may do it without being a stumbling block to them that are
weak. Circumstances do so vary and alter matters of this nature, that that may
be lawful for us at one time and place, which is not at another. It is lawful
for us to bow the knee, but yet to do it in the house of Rimmon, or at the
passing by of the consecrated Host, when we may harden Idolaters, is not
lawful. The Apostles had a liberty in the use of indifferent things, yet when
the good of their weak Brethren called for it, they not only might, but also
ought, especially in that juncture of things, to wave it. And therefore their
compliance with the weak Jews was not matter of Liberty, but Duty and
Necessity, insomuch that they had sinned if they had not done it. Now because
this their liberty of practice was thus liable upon special occasions to
restraints, it does not follow that their Christian Liberty did not at all
consist in practice, but that it was granted to them in a limited sense, to be
used so, as it might become most serviceable to the Gospel, for the furtherance
whereof it was given.

Qu. 17. Whether, if Christ has purchased us such a privilege as liberty from
humane Ordinances and Impositions, should not our Adversaries allow it us, and
suffer us peaceably to enjoy it, Cant. 8.4
without either disturbing or censuring us in the use of it? Gal. 2.4.
The holy Ghost says they should; and withal sets it down as the property of
false Brethren, that after they have spyed out the Liberty Believers have in
Christ Jesus, they seek to bring them into bondage. And certainly if it be an
injury to take from us that civil liberty that belongs to us by the Law of the
Land, it is much more an injury to take from us that Spiritual Liberty that
belongs to us by the Law of Christ. By how much the one is made over to us by
an higher power, and is of a more excellent nature than the other, by so much
the taking it away from us must needs be the more injurious. Dr. Morton proves
out of Socrates, that Holy Days were anciently free, Apol. pt^ 2. l. 2. c 9.
p. 211.
either to be observed or not observed, and that therefore no necessity should
be imposed on Christians, which (says he) does it not seem to shake the Popish
yoke? And if the same case had been urged to himself and his fellows, they
would not have had an answer over ready. It is writ indeed of Bishop Ridley,
that he enforced the Surplice Acts and Mon best. of his life p. 1367.
upon Hooper, to the great trouble of (...) good man's conscience, but withal,
that afterward having weighed things better, he repented of his rigor, and was
sorry for what he had done. And if ever God open the eyes of the men of this
generation, they will see that by their vehement urging of that and other
unnecessary things, they have done us no small wrong, and will with that blessed
Martyr be sorry for it.

Qu. 18. Whether, though they will not allow us the Liberty purchased by
Christ, and bequeathed to us by his own Will and Testament, but will be tying
our hands, and laying upon us burdens contrary to it; yet is it not our duty to
defend and maintain it, by withstanding them in their unjust commands and
impositions? I call them unjust commands and impositions, because they do
command and impose such things as ought to be left free, and at the discretion
of every one to use them or not use them, as he is more or less persuaded of
the lawfulness or necessity of them. Certainly if Christ has bestowed such a
Liberty upon us as a token of his tenderness and bounty, and for this end, that
we should improve it for him, and serve him with cheerfulness in the use of it;
then as they ought to allow it us, so we ought to maintain it. It is no less
than tyranny and cruelty in them not to do the one; and it were no less than
folly and unthankfulness in us not to do the other. As it was the work of Jesus
Christ to give it us, so it is our duty to maintain and improve it now it is
given. When the Scribes and Pharisees urged washing of hands before meat on the
Disciples, and they for the maintenance of their just Liberty withstood them,
Mat. 15.3
our Savior openly countenances them in it. Instead of falling on them and
condemning them for their disobedience, he falls on the Scribes and Pharisees,
and blames them for observing such vain Traditions, to the subverting of his
Fathers Commandments, and troubling of his Disciples. But perhaps our
Adversaries will except and say, We must distinguish betwixt the Commandments
and impositions of private men, and of such as are in Authority, and have
Dominion over us, and may give Laws to us. The Scribes and Pharisees, though
they were wise men, yet they were not men of Authority, and so had nothing to
do to impose such a Ceremony either on the Disciples or on any other, and
therefore no marvel if the Disciples withstood them, and our Savior
countenanced them in it. Answ. This exception runs upon a mistake, for it is
evident that both the Scribes and Pharisees were men of Authority. As for the
Scribes, they were so far from being altogether private men, 2 Kings
12.10.18.18.22.3. Ezra 10.5 Jer. 36.12
that some of them were Secretaries to the Jewish Kings. To say nothing of
others, what think you of Ezra, that had dominion over the chief Priests, and
Levites, and all Israel; and of Elishama, whom the holy Ghost reckons among the
Princes? others, Mat 2.4.
even in our Saviors time were employed in Courts of Judicature, and thereupon
were called (...), Mat. 23.2, 4.
or the Scribes of the People. And as for the Pharisees, the case is no less
plain; for as the Scribes sat in Moses Chair, so did they; and as the Scribes
bound heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and laid them upon men's
shoulders, so did they. Now this binding of heavy burdens, and laying them on
men's shoulders, seems to have been an act of Authority; for how could they
compel the People in a peaceable Commonwealth to come under their burdens,
unless they were invested with Authority to impose them? But if you think this
not plain enough, Antiq. Jud. l. 13. c. 24. Graecol. p. 463.
hear what Josephus has; speaking of Alexandra the Queen, a woman of excellent
endowments, he tells us, that she committed all things to the disposition of
the Pharisees, commanding the People to obey and serve them. And that she
renewed and confirmed that which Hircanus had disanulled, and the Pharisees,
according to the custom of their forefathers, had introduced; so that she
bare the Name, and the Pharisees the Authority Royal. For, they restored such
as were banished to their estates, and in all things demeaned themselves like
great Lords. Thus he. And latter Writers speak to the same purpose; Harm.
Evang. in Mat. 23.2
Calvin says, That in the government of the Church, and interpreting of
Scripture, this Sect held the Primacy. And Camero says, They were men of chief
Authority; Praelect. in Mat. 10.3. p. 165.
referring us to Josephus, who he says every where teaches so. It seems then
that the Ceremony of washing of hands, was not imposed on the Disciples by
private persons, but men of great authority and account; and yet the Disciples
disobey them, and our Savior countenances and upholds them in it; for we do
not find that either then or at any other time, he spoke so much as one word by
way of Reproof to them about it. But that which makes what I have alleged
about this instance yet more probable, is, that both the practice and doctrine
of Paul were exactly agreeable hereunto. Though he were a man of a most
complying sweet spirit, yet herein he was steadfast and peremptory, declaring
that though he were free to use all indifferent things yet he would not be
constrained to it. 1 Cor. 6.1^
All things (says he) are lawful to me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. But did not he speak this by virtue of his Apostolical Authority,
which might set him above those whom ordinary persons ought to be subject to?
No; the same course he took himself, the same he persuades all Christians to. 1
Cor. 7.23. Col. 2.20 22. Gal. 5.1.
Be ye not (says he) the servants of men. And, be ye not subject to
Ordinances. And, stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free.
He speaks not in these places against obeying lawful Governors, whether Civil
or Ecclesiastical, commanding things necessary or convenient (these he urges
those he writes to with strongest motives and arguments to close with and
observe) but against obeying such as taking upon them to do that which Christ
has no where empowered them, will be framing new inventions and means of
carrying on his Work, and imposing them on his Servants. Now these he will have
them to withstand, and thereby assert and maintain their own Freedom. And
answerable hereunto is what we find taught and observed by many famous
Protestant Writers. Censur. Lit. Angl c. 2. p. 458 Exam. part 2. de Rit. Pa.
230. Com. in 1 Cor. 7.23. Syntag. part 2. disp. 44. de Libert. Christian sect.
33. page 748.
Bucer says It is our duty in all matters stoutly to defend our Christian
Liberty, and bear it before us. Chemnitius says, It is profitable in
indifferent things to show liberty by example. Pareus says, We are not so at
our own disposal as to inslave our selves to the servitude of men: that would
be to the manifest injury of Christ our Redeemer: we are the freemen of
Christ. Tilenus says, We must not obey the Magistrate and Governors of the
Church any further than usque ad aras, or so long as we may do it with a good
conscience; neither must we decline any strife or danger for the defense of the
Liberty purchased us by Christ, since Paul asserts that we make void his death
if we suffer our selves to be entangled with the yoke of spiritual bondage. But
leaving these single Testimonies, hear what several say at once. Cent. 3. cap.
4. col. 86.
The Centuriators of Magdenburgh teach, that whilst indifferent things are free
we may lawfully use them, but when they are imposed we ought to withstand them
for the maintaining of our own Liberty. And the Protestants in the Augustan
Confession say, Marm. Confess. sect. 17. conf. August. p. 223.
When there is a necessity placed in a Ceremony, we are by example to show the
contrary. And it is well known that the Protestant Churches wave several
things, in their own nature indifferent, that are appointed by the Papists, for
this end, to assert their own Liberty. These. de Symb. Caenae do. disp. 4. these
8. p. 493.
Gerard Vossius discoursing of the mixing of Water with Wine in the Eucarist,
confesses, it is probable our Savior in regard of the generousness and heat of
Wine in the East, made use of it; and that the ancient Church did the like; and
that the ancient Fathers expounded Wine and Water, so mingled, allegorically;
teaching one while that Water signifies People, and Wine Christ; and the
mixture of them, the union of People with Christ. Another-while, that Wine and
Water signified the Blood and Water that flowed out of the side of Christ.
Notwithstanding, he says, that the thing in it self is indifferent, and that
the present Churches may not only lawfully use pure Wine, but that since the
contrary Rite has been accounted necessary, they do wisely to do it, to show
in such things their own Liberty. Nay, and Dr. Morton teaches, Apol. pt. 21.
l. 1: c. 42. p 139
that Ritual traditions, which pertain to Order, and the Rites of Divine
Worship, are to be received only so far as they clash not with Truth, Piety,
Simplicity, and Christian Liberty. And things being thus, what reason have our
Adversaries, when in defense of our own Liberty we withstand their Impositions,
to charge us with Pride, Obstinacy, Schism, Singularity, and such like crimes?
Some of them have not stuck to give it out, that we are worse than the Papists.
Saravia N. Fratri and Amico, art. 17. p. 16
Now this is not fair dealing. They would take it ill if we should offer to
hinder them of their liberty in the use of their indifferent things (as they
account them) or reproach them for it; why then do they hinder us of ours,
reproach us for using it, or think much if we stand up to maintain it?

Qu. 19. Whether do you think that the enjoyment and use of the Ceremonies will
recompense the Church for the injury she sustains by them? You hear they create
Divisions, destroy Christian Liberty, occasion the persecuting and silencing of
Ministers, hinder the preaching of the Word, and scandalize Magistrates,
Ministers, People, Protestants, Papists, and in one kind or other all sorts of
persons. Now whether do you take the enjoyment and use of them to be of such
advantage to the Church, and the Cause of Christ therein maintained, as to
countervail all these injuries? Did they occasion nothing but the loss of so
many Ministers labors, I might yet say, as Esher did in another case, Esth.
7.5.
the enemy could not countervail the Kings damage. If one single Elias were
the Chariot of Israel, 2 Kings 2.12.
and the horsemen thereof, what then are so many faithful Ministers, endued in
some good measure with the spirit and power of Elias? Luk 1.17
And if the silencing of one Chrysostom were a greater evil, than if the Sun
(that bright eye of Heaven) had been put out; what then shall we say of the
silencing of so many Chrysostoms? And if the enjoyment and use of the
Ceremonies will not countervail the loss of so many Ministers labors, how then
should they recompense the Church for that and the many other injuries she
sustaineth by them? But I go on.

Qu. 20. Whether do you think that denying us that liberty which (as you have
heard) they should allow us, they may take upon them to institute new
Ordinances, and devise new means of teaching by their mystical signification,
of working grace in the heart, and exciting to devotion? Whether is not this
against the second Commandment, which (as we use to tell the Papists) forbids
the introducing of humane inventions into the House of God, and the setting of
them up in his Worship? Whether is it not an high impeachment of the honor of
Jesus Christ the great Prophet and Teacher of his Church, and the only
appointer of those Ordinances and Means whereby she is to be instructed and
built up in the Faith? Whether is it likely that he who would not allow of
teaching by that decent Ceremony of washing of hands, Mat. 15.3
will allow of teaching by these men's Ceremonies? Mr. Parker tells us that some
of the Ancients used the emblem of a Fish, Of the Cross. pt. 1. cap. 2. sect.
28. page 101.
to put them in mind of Christ, whose Fishes they took themselves to be made by
the water of Baptism. As the Water of the Creation begat Fishes to life, so
they held that the Water of Baptism begat them to new life. And he likewise
says that some amongst them let down a Dove upon the Baptized, to denote
regeneration by the Spirit. And, that Constantine set a Lamb in the Baptistery
of Lateran, to signify the washing away of sin in the Water of Baptism, by the
Blood of Christ. And is there any thing to be learned but the Papists have some
visible signs to teach it? Now do not all orthodox and sober Writers condemn
these things as needless matters, nay as dangerous presumptions, telling us
that Christ himself has instituted helps enough to instruct and teach us our
duty, both to him and one another, and that no other helps are to be used but
such as he has instituted? Calvin says, Harm. Evang. in Mat. 21.25. Epist. 8.
ad Grindal, p. 210
no Doctrine, no sacred Sign ought to be admitted among the Godly, unless it
appear they come from God. Beza says, I affirm that so often as the Ancients
brought into the Church any Sacramentals, that is, significative Ceremonies of
Spiritual things, so often they grievously offended. Withal I think that all
Symbolical Rites should be at once profligated out of the Church, whereinto by
no right they could ever enter, nor as long as they remain can the Church have
her native beauty restored. Peter Martyr says, Comm. in 1 Reg. 8. fol. 70.
The most wise God needs none of our help to devise means to excite Faith.
How bold then are these men who will prescribe to God wherewith to help forward
our Salvation? Polanus speaking of the Popish Clergy and their Priestly
Appartel, Syntagm. l. 9. c. 38. p. 649.
says, That distinction and variety of Sacerdotal Vestments was typical in the
old Testament, and the Truth being exhibited, what do they require them for any
more? Exam. pt. 2. de Rit. p. 228.
Chemnitius says, Whereas it is pretended that by these Rites of men's addition
many things are profitably signified, admonished and taught; it may be
answered, That Figures do properly belong to the old Testament, but those
things that Christ would have to be taught in the new Testament, he would have
them delivered and propounded not by shadows, but by the Light of the Word.
Lastly, hear what is alleged by the Divines of Wittenberg. Confess. Wittenb.
sect. 17. p. 229.
It is not lawful (say they) either to restore the old Ceremonies of the Law,
or devise new, to shadowforth the Truth already laid open, and brought to light
by the Gospel; as in the daylight to set up Candles to signify the Light of
the Gospel; or to carry Banners and Crosses, to signify the Victory of Christ
through his Cross. Of which sort is all that Massing Attire, which they say
does shadowout the whole passion of Christ, and many other things of that kind.
These are Testimonies so pertinent to the matter in hand, that none but such as
have either bad heads, or evil hearts, or both, can deny but that they are full
against our Adversaries, and the significant Ceremonies which they do with so
much zeal and confidence plead for, and with so much rigor and severity urge
upon their Brethren. And yet you must know that they are not so ill furnished
but that they have somewhat to allege for themselves in this case. And 1. they
say, that such kind of Ceremonies serve as Books to instruct the ignorant, and
mind them of spiritual matters. Answ. 1. This is the very pretense the Papists
insist on in the behalf of their Ceremonies, Vid. Bell. t. 3. de ess. sac. l.
2. c. 31. P. 92.
and likewise in the behalf of their Images, which they commonly call, the
Books of the illiterate; and therefore if our Adversaries can tell how to
answer them, they may tell how to answer themselves. 2. They have laid aside
many Ceremonies of the Papists, every whit as innocent as those they retain,
for which the same pretense might as rationally be pleaded. 3. As for the
instructing of the ignorant, I answer with our Savior, Luke 16.29.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; if they will not be
taught by them, much less will they be taught by such kind of Ceremonies which
God never ordained nor sanctified to such a use. Praelect. de sacrom. p. 203.
And with this agrees that of Whitaker; The ignorant (says he) are not to be
taught by Ceremonies: God has given the Scriptures, that out of them such as
are ignorant might draw necessary instruction. But 4. If they must needs have
Ceremonies to instruct the ignorant, let them tell us what they make Priests
for. Should not their lips preserve knowledge, and are not the People to seek
the Law at their mouths? Is it not their work to instruct them, and feed them
with knowledge and understanding? But substituting the word [Ceremonies] in the
place of Images, which they themselves are, as I shall show anon, I may say of
our Adversaries in this case, Repl. art. 14. div. 10 p. 510.
as Bishop Jewel does of his. Of their Priests (says he) they have made
Images, and of their Images they have made Priests. For their Priests for the
most part, have eyes and see not, have ears and hear not, hearts and understand
not, mouths and speak not, in all respects even like unto their Images. Their
Images have no eyes, and yet are made to see; have no ears, and yet are made to
hear; have no mouths, and yet are set up to speak, and so in these respects do
the duties that pertain to Priests. This plea therefore not serving the turn,
some have bethought themselves of another, drawn from the spiritualizing of
things. It is acknowledged (say they) on all sides to be a duty to spiritualize
such things as come before us, that is, from those outward sensible objects
that present themselves to us to raise spiritual Meditations. And if so,
wherefore may we not frame or take up such matters as others have framed, which
are apt to teach and mind us of spiritual things? Answ. 1. This plea as well as
the former tends to the justifying of Images, and those Ceremonies which are
laid aside as well as those which remain. 2. We must put a difference betwixt
taking occasion from those outward sensible matters that are before us to raise
spiritual meditations, and a setting up of such matters for a standing use, and
placing a spiritual signification in them. Joh. 6.27 4.10.
We may with our Savior, from common Bread and Water, take occasion both to
think and speak of spiritual; yet we may not take either the one or the other,
and set it up as a standing remembrancer to us. We may from the beholding of a
Surplice, take occasion to think of the presumption and boldness of men, that
not contenting themselves with the simplicity of Christ and his perfect
Institutions, will be framing of such needless, superstitious vanities; but yet
if we should take a Surplice and hang it up before us, that so it might
continually put us in mind thereof, we should render our selves as ridiculous
as those who use them for another end. 3. We must also put a difference betwixt
making a spiritual use of those sensible matters that are before us, and
bringing them into the house of God, and there allowing them state in his
Worship. We may from the be holding of a Lamb, take occasion to think of him,
who was led as a Lamb to the slaughter; but yet we may not bring a Lamb into
the place of Worship to mind us of him; that were to put upon a silly beast the
office of the Word and Sacraments, which were ordained for that use. But to
leave this, whiles our Adversaries are laboring to maintain the lawfulness of
their significant Ceremonies, I would by the way know one thing of them, and
that is this, They say they teach no Doctrine but what is contained in
Scripture, and yet withal say, that the sign of the Cross does teach us not to
be ashamed of Christ crucified. Now let them either show us where the Scripture
says, that the sign of the Cross does thus teach us, or else confess that they
teach some Doctrine besides what is contained in Scripture.

Qu. 21. Whether, may they take upon them to add New parts to the Worship of
God? That surely they may not do without guilt of highest presumption. It does,
and ever did, and always will undoubtedly belong to God, and none but him, to
institute and prescribe his own Worship, and every part of it. And therefore
all such as undertake to do it, how wise, holy, or great soever they may seem
to be, do no less than invade his Royal Throne, and usurp his Sovereign Power.
What guilt then have our Adversaries drawn upon themselves in instituting of
the Ceremonies! For, have they not introduced them into the Worship of God, and
made them parts of it? Are not remembrances and instructions concerning
constancy, pureness, reverence, and such like duties, really and properly
religious Worship? And are not the Ceremonies such things as these? Do they not
allow them state in their Worship? Have they not the same use and end that
other parts of Worship have? Do they not urge them with the same rigor that
they do hearing of the Word, Praying, Singing of Psalms, and other substantial
duties? Do they not count the purest, holiest, sincerest service as imperfect,
disorderly, slovenly, and I know not what, without them? Is it not therefore
evident that they make them parts, and confiderable parts too of Worship? T 3.
de effect. sac. l. 2. c. 31. p. 92.
Bellarmine deals openly herein, and in plain terms tells us, That Ceremonies
are a part of Divine Worship. And if our Adversaries, that follow him so
closely in other points, thought it convenient to speak their minds, perhaps
they would say as much of theirs? Whether there be not ground for it, I leave
you to judge by what I have here briefly hinted, Ames fresh suit part 1. p. 46.
and a learned Author has fully proved.

Qu. 22. Whether may they institute New Sacraments, and add them to those
instituted by Christ? If they may, let them show where they are empowered to do
it. If they have a power to do it, let them show their Letters of Credency for
it. If it be a thing common to all Christian Pastors and Churches, wherefore do
they fall so foully upon the Papists for it, whenas in other things they are so
ready to justify them, and join with them? If they may not institute New
Sacraments, how will they defend the Ceremonies, which though they do not call
them Sacraments, yet they give them the nature of them. Sacraments (as they
themselves teach) are outward sper^^^^ signs of inward and spiritual grace. And
are not the Ceremonies such things as these? When they Baptize a Child, do they
not make a Cross upon his forehead, in token that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner against Sin, Dr. Burg. of the lawfulness of kneeling. c. 17. p. 52.
Mr. Paybody, apol forkneeling, part 3. c. 2. sect. 15. p. 264.
the World, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and
Servant unto his lives end? And as for the Surplice, do not they maintain the
use of it to be, to signify the pureness that ought to be in a Minister? And as
for kneeling at the Supper, do not they say it is a signification of the humble
and grateful acknowledgement of the benefits of Christ? Wherein then do their
Cross, Surplice, Kneeling, fall short of Sacraments? They are new devised
signs, and every new divised sign, in the judgment of very eminent Protestant
Writers, Willet of Baptism, q. 8. err. 15. p. 587
is a Sacrament. It Is true, they lack Divine Institution, but have they not
gone as far as they can toward the making of them Sacraments? They are not in
every respect Sacraments, but that is not because they would not have them to
be so, but because they could not make them so. Now may they take upon them to
make Sacraments when they are not empowered to do it? are they able to work that
which is signified by them? or do they think that God will make them effectual
for producing of the ends intended? As for the former, I suppose, as bold as
they are, they will not pretend to it; and as for the latter, I may say with
Chemnitius, We have a promise of the efficacy of the Word, Exam. pt. 2. de Rit.
p. 228.
but not of Figures invented by men. Though we may upon good grounds expect
that God will bless his own Ordinances; yet we have no grounds to expect that
he will bless those devices which men have taken up, not only without any
warrant from him, but likewise in contempt of him, and to the prejudice of his
glorious Gospel; no, we may rather look that he should take vengeance on them,
Ps. 99.8.
as in times past he has done.

Qu. 23. Whether, will they justify the use of Images in the worship of God?
If they will, they must first with the Papists, expunge the second Commandment,
and thrust it out of the Decalogue; for as long as that stands they will never
do it. For proof hereof, I need do no more than recite it to you. Ex. 20.4.
Thou shall not (says God) make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of
any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is
in the Water under the Earth. God in this place does not only forbid (...) but
(...); not only a graven Image, made of gold, silver or such like matter, but
any similitude or likeness of any thing whatsoever (if made for a Religious
use) as being homogeneal therewith. If they will not justify the use of
Images, how will they defend the Ceremonies, for what are they but Images? does
not one figure to us Constancy, another Pureness, and another Reverence? and if
they do this, what do they less than perform the office of an Image?

Qu. 24. Whether to these new means, parts of Worship, Sacraments, Images,
which they have instituted of their own accord, without any warrant from God,
may they ascribe a moral divine efficacy? If they may let them produce their
warrant. If they may not, wherefore do they do it? Do they not impose and use
them for this end to teach the Understanding divine Mysteries, to stir up the
Affections to divine Objects, and to help the Memory to retain divine Truths?
To this purpose is that prefixed to the Book of Common Prayer; Such are
retained which are apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of
his duty to God, by some notable and special signification, whereby he might be
edified. Nothing can stir up the dull mind of man, edify him in the ways of
God, or work any holy impressions upon him, without a divine efficacy. Those
therefore who judge the Ceremonies apt to do any such thing, must needs be
thought to ascribe to them a divine efficacy.

Qu. 25. Whether if they will not content themselves with the Institutions of
Christ, but will be bringing of New matters into his house. should they take up
such as are of base original and descent? That they may not do without casting
much reproach both upon him and his Worship, which should not have any thing in
it but what is honorable, and becoming the Majesty of him to whom it is
performed. The Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 23.2.
That a bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord to the tenth
Generation. And why so, but because he was not begotten in lawful Matrimony,
but in the act of uncleanness, and therefore of base descent, and consequently
unfit to approach Gods holy things? His works p. 214.
And I remember K. James disputing against a thing much used amongst us, does
in the first place insist upon the base Original of it, which he looked upon as
sufficient not only to render it unworthy of the great respect that is given
it, but also of common use. How then will our Adversaries justify the
Ceremonies, which are each of them of such a base Original? As for the sign of
the Cross, Parker of the Cross part 2. c. 9. sect. 9. p. 129.
Valentinus the Heretic was the Father of it; and Montanus and his Scholars
(amongst whom Tertullian was a special instrument) were the men that preferred
it to have some esteem and use in the Church. As for the Surplice, the first
that I think we read of, that used it, was Sisinius a Novatian Bishop, a
riotous, Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 22. gr.
sensual man, who going to visit Arsacius Bishop of Constantinople, one of
Arsacius his Familiars asked him why he used such attire as was uucomely for a
Bishop; and where he found it written that a Priest ought to wear white? To
whom by way of answer, he alleged that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 9.8.
Let thy garments be always white: with some other passages of the like
nature, wherewith notwithstanding, he gained the admiration of all that heard
him; which shows the vain facility of People in those days, and how apt they
were to be drawn to Superstition. And as for kneeling at the Supper, Mornaeus
mist. ad ann. 1209 (edit. lat. in fol.) p 343.
it was in all probability brought in by Honorius 3d. a tyrannical bloody
Monster, who lived in the 13th. Century, when the Church was in a dark and sow
condition. Innocent the 3d. his immediate Predecessor, bringing in
Transubstantiation, he to perfect the mystery of Iniquity, brought in the
Ceremony of Bowing the knee at the Elevation, that is, when the Bread is showed
in the Mass; from whence it is very likely proceeded kneeling at the taking of
the Elements. You see then, the Cemonies have little cause to boast of their
pedigree. They were not instituted by God, but divised by men, Epist. ad Regin
Eliz. col. 244.
and such as were of the worst sort. Nay Zanchius says, They were rather the
invention of the Devil himself than men. And has Jesus Christ been so
unfaithful in his house or provided so ill for his Church, that we must be
beholding to the worst of men, such as Valentinus, Sisinius, Honorius, nay the
very Devil himself, for matters of Edification, Decency and Order? Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon: lest the daughters of the
Philistines rejoice, 2 Samuel 1.20.
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

Qu. 26. Whether if they will have humane Ceremonies, and other Ordinances and
Observations of their own devising, they should pitch upon such as are like to
be the occasions of much evil? Doubtless as we must wait for, and seek
occasions of good, so we must in all matters, especially in those wherein we
are at our own liberty, decline and avoid the incitements and occasions of
evil. For what end did Jacob take away Labans Images, Genesis 31. 30. Exodus 34 6.
2 Kings 18.4.
the Archangel bury Moses Body in an unknown place, and Hezekiah break in
pieces the brazen Serpent, but to prevent the evil that otherwise would have
been committed by them? And how fatal the neglect of this prudent foresight
and zeal has been to many, who either through ignorance or unwariness have
dashed themselves upon those stumbling blocks they should have removed, both
sacred and profane Writings tell us. Gideon, Judge. 3.27.
without any warrant from God, went and made a rich and costly Ephod, and put
it in his own City, even in Ophrah, and what was the issue of it? Why, all
Israel went thither a whoring after it, 1 Kings 22.43.
which thing became a snare to Gideon and to his house. So Jeoshaphat, though
he were a pious and holy man, yet suffered the High Places to continue, and
what followed upon it? Why, the People offered and burned Incense in them. In
like manner Constantine, though forward in promoting the Christian interest,
Socrat. Eccl. hist. l. 3. c 1.
yet suffered the Temples and Groves of the Pagans to stand, and so upon
Julians coming to the Empire, they forthwith entered into them, and there
celebrated their Idolatrous services and feasts, as in times past. There is
such an innate and settled propensity in men to depart from God, and commit
wickedness, that we should neither set up nor tolerate any thing that may any
way incite or provoke to it. According to that excellent Decree of the Fathers
of Carthage; Council. Carth. 1. c. 3.
The occasions of sin (say they) are to be cut off, and all suspicions taken
away, whereby the subtilty of the Devil under the pretense of Charity and Love,
uses to ensnare the souls of such as are unwary or ignorant. As it is in vain
for men to pretend love to God, till they are at war with sin; so it is in vain
for them to pretend war with sin, while they connive at, and tolerate the
occasions of it. Which being so, what shall we think of our Adversaries who do
not only tolerate the Ceremonies, which are the evident occasions of so much
evil amongst us, as I have already showed, but do likewise defend them, nay
urge and impose them in all places throughout their Jurisdictions?

Qu. 27. Whether, if they will not be persuaded but will have humane
Ceremonies, they should make use of such as are of bad report, and tend to the
disparagement of the Gospel? Such is the purity and holiness of God, and the
zeal that he bears to his own Name, that he will not endure any thing in his
Worship that is infamous or scandalous, or may render it vile, but will have
every thing therein to be of good report. When the Church must have
Evangelists, Pastors, Acts 16.2 1 Timothy 3.7 Acts 6.3 1 Timothy 5.10.1 Sam. 2.17.
Deacons, Deaconesses, and other Officers, he will have them all to be of good
report. He will not have them like the sons of Eli, sons of Belial, that caused
men to abhor the Offering of the Lord, but men of good behavior and report,
and such as may adorn Religion. And whatever they, or any of the Members of his
Church do, he will have it to be honest, just, Phil. 4.8
pure, lovely, and of good report. And what is the reason of this, but to keep
up Religion in its due esteem, and secure it from the contempt and vileness
that attends both infamous persons and things? And if so, how will our
Adversaries ever make Religion amends for the injury they have done to it, in
using and imposing the Ceremonies, which are things of such ill report through
all the Reformed-Churches? Luther says, Yom. 4. fol. 351.
all humane Ceremonies have two properties of the Devil, that is, lying and
murdering. Ep. 8. ad Grindal, p 210. Epist. ad Reg. Eliz fol. 244.
Beza says, they are the Ensigns of the Priests of Baal. And says Zanchy, All
these Pomps and Popish Ceremonies are nothing else but whorish Paintings,
invented and devised for this end, that men might thereby le enticed to
Spiritual Fornication. And how should they be other than matter of bad report
when they have so long been used in the profane misteryes of that infamous
whore, whom the most High himself has stigmatized with the hateful name of
the mother of harlots and al ominations of the earth. Rev. ^7.5
As the common harlot that prostitutes her self to the lust of every impure
vilain, casts disgrace upon the very garb and dress she wears; so has that
filthy Strumpet cast disgrace upon the Ceremonies, and that in such a high
degree that they are utterly unfit to be used by the chaste Spouse of Christ,
whom he has strictly charged to keep her self pure; managing his worship, and
what ever she undertakes for him, with all possible advantages of integrity and
holiness, that so she may not dishonor her head, but be a praise to him. And
it is the carrying on of the Service of God in the use of the Ceremonies, that
makes many amongst us to abhor the Offering of the Lord, See Mr. Cheynell of
the rise growth, and danger of Socin. c. 5. p. 63.
separate themselves from our Congregations, and betake themselves to private
meetings, choosing rather to in joy the Worship of God in its purity in a
corner, then join with the Public Assemblies in the use of those things which
their consciences tell them are unlawful. Whether this their withdrawing be
justifiable or no, I shall not here determine, but this I shall venture to say,
that those who have the management of affairs in the Church, should not provoke
them to it, by using a company of infamous and scandalous Rites, which they
know they cannot away with.

Qu. 28. Whether if they will be sraming and using new matters, they should
take up or have to do with such as have so much as an appearance or show of any
evil in them? The Scripture tells us no. Moses says, Exo. 23 7 2 Cor. 6.17 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
Keep thee far from a false matter. And Paul says, Touch not the unclean
thing. And, abstain from the appearance of Evil. Jude 23.
And Jude says, We must hate the Garment spotted by the Flesh. Sin is like a
Plague, and therefore we must not come near it, but keep our selves at a remote
distance from it. Hence that saying of the Jews, Remove thy self from
filthiness, See Drusius Praeterit. in 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
and from all that which has a show of it. And as we must do it in other
matters, so especially in the Worship of God, which he has instituted for the
sanctifying of his own Name, and the setting forth of his Purity and Holiness,
with other of his Excellencies. It is dangerous to offend in any thing, but
especially in that. We must carry our selves with circumspection, reverence and
unblamableness at all times, but especially when we are before him, engaged in
the discharge of those sacred and solemn duties he requires from us. And
therefore we must not dare to bring into his presence any new Ordinances, no,
not so much as a Ceremony, how small soever, that is either evil, or has so
much as a show of it. As for the Jewish Ceremonies, T. 2. Ep. 19. ad Hieron.
fol. 16.
hear Augustine speak. That man (says he) is thrown down into the dungeon of
the Devil, that observes a Jewish Ceremony in deed or in show. And as for the
Popish Ceremonies, Censura Lit. Ang. c. 9. p. 471
hear Bucer. None of those things, words and gestures (says he) shall find
place with us, in which there does so much as appear to be any thing that is a
kin to so great Impieties, or that may be strained (though unjustly and without
cause given) to the commending of these their impieties. And as if this were
not sufficient, S. hluss. Cat. t. 13 p. 751.
the Divines of Germany say, That we must not only abstain from such things as
have in them a show of Popery, but from such things as have in them so much as
a shadow of a show of it. A truly golden saying worthy the wisdom, integrity
and zeal of those eminent persons, who with so much Christian courage and
valor fought the battles of the Lord! Now whether the Ceremonies our
Adversaries with so much rigor urge upon us, have neither evil in them, nor
show of evil, nor so much as a shadow of a show of it, let all the world judge.

Qu. 29. Whether if they will be joining of humane inventions to divine
institutions, they should make use of such things as have been grossly and
notoriously abused by corrupt and profane men in their impious mysteries, and
execrable practices? Ex. 34.13 Number. 33.52, 53. Isa. 27.9. Rev. 2.14 20. 2 Kin
18.4. 2 Chr. 34.4. Dan. 1.8. Act. 19.19 1 Cor. 11.22.
The Scripture (as you may see by the places quoted in the margent, which for
brevity-sake I refer you to) is full against it, teaching us by various
Precepts, Promises, Reproofs, Presidents, and Reasons, to decline the use of
such things, nay, utterly to exterpate and abolish them, as being odious to
God, and altogether unfit to be employed in his Service. And with the Scripture
agree both the Doctrine and Practice of the Ancients. He (says Augustine) that
comes to the Sacrament with an Heathenish Ear-ring, T. 2. Ep. 73. ad Possidon.
fol. 70.
such as the Gentiles superstitiously use in the service of their Gods, comes
to the Lord's Table with a badge of the Devil. Council. Carth. 5. c. 15.
And the Council of Carthage were so set against the Relics of Idolatry, that
they besought the Emperors that they might be abolished in all places what
soever, And Mr. Parker, has showed, Of the Cross, pt. 1. c. 1. sect 15. p. 24.
and sect 28 p. 41.
that though the Love Feasts, the Nocturnal Vigils, the Churches of Heretics,
the shriving of Penitents, the Imperial Standard, Sanctuaries for Offenders,
with many other things were of ancient and plausible use, yet because they were
abused, the Church laid them aside. And if we come down to latter Writers, they
tell us we must be so far from sparing such things as have been abused in
Idolatrous services, that we must utterly destroy them, and root them out, not
leaving so much as any foot-step or remainder of them; Comment on 2 King 18.
Comment on Luke 5.39. Ep. cuid. amico in Angl. p. 1125. T. 1: cont. Duraeum, l.
5. p 158 de Sacra. manduc. p 267. See the Discourse of Cerem. prefixed to the
Liturgy.
as we may see in Wolphius, Gualter, Martyr, Whitaker, Sadeel, and others. Nay,
and the Church of England renders this as the weightiest cause of the
abolishment of certain of the Ceremonies, that they have been so far abused,
partly by the superstitious blindness of the rade and unlearned, and partly by
the unsatiable avarice of suchas sought more their own lucre than the glory of
God. And whether the Ceremonies retained have not bin grossly and notoriously
abused, as well as those that are abolished, is evident to all that know any
thing of the proceedings of the Church of Rome. There is not any of them but it
has been in times past, and is still abused by them every day in their
Idolatrous Solemnities; which (as appears by what has been alleged) renders
them altogether unfit for the sincere and pure Worship of God, into whose
presence nothing must enter that defiles, Epist ad Reg. Eliz col. 244.
or that is unclean. Though for no other (says Zanchy) yet for this very cause
such Garments ought not to be thrust upon the Church of Christ, because the
Harlet of Rome has abused, and does still at this day abuse them. In his
judgment then, if there were nothing else to allege against the Ceremonies,
but the very abuse of them, it were sufficient reason wherefore they should be
laid aside. Here you see the evidence is clear on all sides: yet even in this
our Adversaries have somewhat to say for themselves. And 1. They allege, that
if we must not make use of those things that have been abused, we must make use
of nothing; for there is not any thing in the world, how lawful, holy, or
necessary soever, but it has been one way or other abused. Not only
Ceremonies, but also the Word, Sacraments, and all the Ordinances and Creatures
of God have been abused: and therefore, according to this Doctrine, we must not
make use of any of them. Ans. 1. After this manner the Papists defend
themselves against us, when we, disputing against their Ceremonies, urge them,
with the abuse of them, among the Idolatrous Gentiles. T. 3. de Eff. Sac. l 2.
c. 32. p. 95.
If this kind of reasoning (says Bellarmin) availed, we ought to abolish both
Baptism and the Supper, for that they have been abused. And yet who sees not
the weakness of such an answer? 2. Our Adversaries may do well to remember,
that by this defense they reflect upon their Mother the Church of England, who
(as I have already showed) thought the abuse of some Ceremonies a sufficient
reason wherefore they should be abolished. 3. We must distinguish betwixt the
Ordinances of God, and such things as are of necessary and standing use: and
the unprofitable devices of men, and such things as are unnecessary, and may be
parted with, without any detriment or prejudice to the Church. When the
Ordinances of God, and other necessary things suffer abuse, we must not
thereupon lay them aside, any more then our Savior did the Law, Mat. 5.17.
Joh. 2.15.
or the Temple, (the former of which was abused by the Scribes and Pharisees,
the latter by the buyers and sellers) but labor to vindicate them from it, and
restore them to their due esteem and use: But when the unprositable devices of
men, and such things as are unnecessary, as the Ceremonies, and other matters
of the like nature, are abused, we must not stand to vindicate them (for the
use of them will not countervail the pains) but forthwith abolish them, and
throw them away, as the instances I have already alleged, do fully show. And
to this purpose is that of Bucer. Censur. Lit. Angl c. 9. p. 472
All matters abused (says he) must be abolished, unless they are of those
things, words, or signs, that the Lord has commended to us. But 2. They
allege further, and say, That though the same individual things that have been
abused ought to be abolished, yet it does not follow, that others of the same
kind, that have not been abused, must: and therefore, though those individual
Ceremonies that have been abused by the Papists ought to be abolished, yet
there is no reason that ours should that have not been abused. Answ. 1. If this
kind of reasoning be good, then the Papists may free themselves from the
charge of Heathenism, Turcism, Judaism, since their Ceremonies are not the same
in number with those of the Heathens, Turks, Jews, but only in this kind; Vid.
Bull. de Orig. Error. l. 1 c. 33. Sutliv. de Turcopap l. 1. c. 10. p. 49. Vives
in Aug. de Civit. l. 8 c. 27. p. 74 P. Virg. de Invent l. 5. c. 1. p. 405.
and yet our Writters think they cannot do it, nay some of their own think so
too. 2. They do in this, as well as in the former, fly in the face of the
Church of England; for she has not only abolished many of the same individual
Ceremonies, abused by the Papists, but the same in kind likewise; and not
without reason: for the evil that befalls certain individuals, does as it were
diffuse it self all over, stain and disgrace the whole species; insomuch that
for the evils of certain individuals, the whole kind is often laid aside: as I
might show by many instances, which I shall not here trouble you with. Now such
is the purity of God, that he will not endure any thing in his Worship that
has so much as an evil report, or a bad name, or any affinity or relation to
what is evil. 4. God forbids us (as I shall acquaint you further anon) to do
after the manner of Idolaters; which plainly shows it is his will that we
should not only forbear the use of the same things in number, which they have
abused, but the same things in kind also. 5. Idolatry is a sin, so
dishonorable and displeasing to God, that we ought to show our utmost
detestation of it, which we cannot do so well by forbearing to use only the
same things in number that have been abused in it, as the whole kind likewise.
So long as we make use, either of the same things in number or in kind, that
have been abused by Idolaters, we seem to own and allow of what they do. Now we
should not so much as seem to allow of their courses; and therefore for
preventing of it, we should renounce both the one and the other.

Qu. 30. Whether, whiles they are regulating and ordering affairs in the House
of God, they should not avoid Superstition? That none will deny that ever heard
what superstition meant. Isiderus says, Origin. Theol l. 8 c. 3. p. 1009.
Superstition is derived of supra statutum, and so imports a doing of somewhat
more then God requires. As he that does less then he requires, incurrs the
guilt of contempt, so he that does more then he requires, incurrs the guilt of
Superstition. For, we must not think that Superstition consists only in the
worshipping of a strange God, then none but gross Idolaters were guilty of it;
no, it consists as well in the worshipping of the true God after a strange
manner, that is, in the use of such things as he has not commanded. And
therefore as the Athenians were guilty of it, Acts 17.22. Mark 7.5, 6, 7. Col.
2 20 Gal. 4.10.
in worshipping they knew not what, so the Pharisees were guilty of it in their
washing of hands; and some Christians in the Apostles times in their abstaining
from meats, and observing of days. And the Papists likewise are, and have long
been gurlty of it, and that in a very high degree, in framing, imposing, and
using so many Articles, Doctrines, and Observations that have no foundation in
the Word. When men content not themselves with the Laws and Ordinances of
Christ, but to his Laws add new Laws, and to his Ordinances add new Ordinances,
they do as really become guilty of it as if they worshipped a strange God.
Herein Zanchius is express. There is (says he) a fault in Worship by way of
excess, if thou addest any thing to what Christ has instituted, or followest
what is added of others: as if to the Sacraments instituted by Christ, thou
addest other Sacraments; if to Sacrifices, thou addest other Sacrifices; if to
the Ceremonies of either Sacrament thou addest other Ceremonies, which are all
deservedly called by the name of Superstition. Now things being thus, how will
our Adversaries ever justify the Ceremonies they contend for, since they are
such manifest additions to the Institutions of Christ, and are Ceremonies
annexed to his Ceremonies? If they can justify Superstition, they may then
justify them; but if they cannot justify it, neither will they justify them.
Vol. 3. Epist. ad Reg. Eliz col. 242.
Zanchy does not only charge humane Ceremonies in general with Superstition,
but ours in particular, and that several times over in the same Epistle,
persuading Queen Elizabeth, upon that very account, not to urge them on
Ministers, but rather lay them aside. Mr. Cawdrey Answer to 24 Queries, p. 21
And a late judicious Author has showed, that they are Superstitious in
several particulars, and that upon that account it is unlawful to impose or use
them. Notwithstanding this, our Adversaries are so far from accepting the
charge, as that they do not only disclaim it, bat retort it upon us; alleging,
that they are not guilty of Superstition, in imposing or using the Ceremonies,
but we in refusing them. But there are Answers enough to clear us from this
Imputation. 1. If we are guilty of it, and so guilty as is pretended, how comes
it to pass that the Papists, that are so ready upon all occasions to load us
with all manner of hateful reproaches, did never yet accuse us (nor any of the
Reformed Churches that join with us in opposing their Ceremonies) of it? Nay,
such is their candidness in this particular, that they do in their writings
openly acquit us from it, thereby doing us more justice than our own Brethren,
whom one would think we might better expect it from. That you discharge us
(says Dr. In Act. 17.4.
Fulk to the Rhemists) of your Superstition, we accept your Testimony, as the
witness of our Adversaries. 2. Whether upon the same grounds that they charge
it upon us, may not the profane Crew charge it upon all those that will not
drink, swear, game, and the like, as they do? 3. If they will have us, upon
this account, to be guilty of it; how will they clear themselves from it, when
as they reject many Ceremonies of the Papists, as lawful and innocent in every
respect as those which they retain? Nay, 4. does not this charge fall upon them
again, and so lay them under a double superstition? For when they appoint such
positive Ordinances, as the Surplice in Divine-Service, the Cross in Baptism,
kneeling at the Supper; do not they for bid the contrary, as do not perform
Divine-Service without the Surplice, do not Baptize without the Cross, do not
receive Supper without kneeling; each of which Negatives notwithstanding is not
only lawful, but a duty? And whereas they argue from the words of the Apostle,
Touch not, ^aste not, handle not, that there is a Negative Superstition,
consisting in Negative Observations, we say so too, but withal, that it is
nothing to us; for these Observations, were humane without any warrant from the
Word: ours are Divine and founded upon it, so that we should greatly sin, if we
did not what we do. Moreover, they who used these observations, used them as
matters of special and peculiar Worship, whereas we look upon our abstinence
from the Ceremonies, as no more matter of Worship than abstaining from
Idolatry, Murder, Theft, or such like sins: and therefore it is most
unreasonable that our Adversaries should charge us with Superstition. But yet
we may not wonder at it, for it is usual with some men to term all such as
make a greater stir about Religion than they would have them, superstitious.
Thus Pliny in an Epistle of his to Trajan, Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97. p. 317
charges the Christians of his time with being guilty of it in a high degree.
And we will not be ashamed of those reproaches, wherein those blessed Saints
and Martyrs did so glory.

Qu. 31. Whether, whiles they are decking and trimming the Worship or God, with
matters of pretended decency and order, they may set up Idols in his House, and
give religious respect to them? This is so far from being lawful, that they
should abhor the very thoughts of it. The The Apostle says, 1 John 5.21.
we must keep our selves from Idols. An Idol is a thing so odious and provoking
that we should run from it, as from a devouring flame. August. says, T. 10.
serde temp. 241. fol. 246.
We must flee the Idolothyte, or that which is offered to an Idol, as if we saw
the very Devil. And if we must thus flee, that which is but offered to an Idol,
how must we flee from the Idol it self? One of our Adversaries own Writers, Mr.
Sillingf. Orig sac. l. 2. c. 5. s. 2 p 168.
says, God would not suffer the Prophet to eat and drink in Bethel, to
testify how much he loathed and abominated that place since it was polluted
with Idolatry. How then will they ever justify the setting up and using of the
Ceremonies, which have not only been polluted with Idolatry, but are themselves
filthy Idols, as appears by these particulars? 1. They are other means for the
carrying on of Gods work, than he has any where appointed; and such things in
the judgment of some of our best Authors are Idols. One of them showing the
several ways of erecting Idols, Mr. Perkins vol. 1 the Idolatry of the last
times p. 659.
says, The second way is, when God is worshipped otherwise, and by other
means, than he has revealed in the Word. If then he has not any where
revealed in the Word that he will be worshipped in the use of the Ceremonies,
(which, as I have before showed, he has not) they must needs, according to his
judgment, be Idols. 2. They are Images devised by man, without any appointment
or warrant from God, and such are Idols. The very notation of the word tells us
so; for (...) is derived, as both ancient and modern Critics agree, from
(...), which signifies the form or similitude of any thing, whether real or
feigned, true or false, that is represented to us. The Papists indeed, who
would fain distinguish away their Idolatry, have found out a difference
betwixt Idolum and Simulacrum; but Erasmus tells us, Paraph. in 1 Cor. 8 4.
that Ambrose knew none, and that he himself knew none, saving that the one is
a Greek word, and the other a Latin. And Beza says that Idolum with the
Greeks, Annot. in eund loc.
signifies the same that Simulacrum does with the Latins. And therefore we
find that whereit is said of Rachel, Genesis 31.19
that she stole (...) or the Images that were her fathers, the Sept. Vulg. and
Pagnine do all render it Idols; thereby teaching us that Images are Idols.
Orig. l. 8. c. 11. p. 1024 De Idol. c. 3. p. 150 Dr. Fulk against the Rhemists
in Acts 17.4, 5. Mr. Perkins vol. 1. Refor. Cath. point. 9. p. 581.
And Isidorus, shows us that the Heathens used the names of Image and Idol
indifferently. But leaving the Notation of the word, Tertullian tells us, that
every form or representation is to be termed an Idol. And several of our own
Writers of eminent note speak to the same purpose, telling us, That Images made
without warrant from God for Religious use, are Idols, and upon that account to
be avoided. 3. They have more respect and honor given them by far, than they
do either in regard of their nature or use deserve, and therefore are Idols.
For we must not think that those are Idols only that men professedly take for
deities, and worship as such (then there were but sew comparatively in the
world) no, Vol. 2. de secund: praec. col: 504.
those (as Zanchius shows) are likewise Idols, and to be esteemed such to which
we ascribe any of the attributes, offices, prerogatives, or works of God. When
we take the honor in any respect belonging to God, and bestow it on the
Creatures, we make those Creatures, on which we bestow it, Idols. He that
invocates deceased Saints, adores the Eucharist, attributes infallibility to a
man, makes them all Idols. He that with the Epicure places his happiness in the
contentment of his belly, does as the Apostle shows, Phil. 3.19.
make his belly his God, and consequently an Idol. So he that desires or loves
the world more then God, and depends upon it, makes it an Idol, and himself (as
the same Apostle speaks) an Idolater. Col. 3.5.
Now that the Ceremonies have more honor given them than belongs to them, is
evident. The Papists tell us they are consecrated to God, are holy things, have
relation to him, and that in this respect they are to be adored. Some of them
say, they are to be adored per se, as they are holy things: See Mr. Parker of
the Cross part. 1. c. 6 sect. 6. p. 8
others, secundum quid, as they have relation to God; but they all agree in
this, that they are to be adored. As they hold that Images, holy Books, and the
sacred Utensils are to be adored; so they hold that the Ceremonies being holy
things, and having relation unto God, are in like manner to be adored: as
appears by their daily practice in their oblations, kissings, bowings, and
other testimonies of undue repect which they give to them. But to say nothing
of the rest, See Mr. Bradsh. Treatise of the Cross, p. 117.
what think you of the sign of the Cross? Do not they make a plain Idol of it?
do they not how to it, and worship it? do they not ascribe a divine efficacy to
it? do they not say it expels Devils, heals Diseases; and sanctifies those that
are signed with it? do they not say it is powerful to throw down strong holds,
to convert sinners, and bring them to salvation? If this be not to make it an
Idol, what is? But as if this were not sufficient, they go on, and tell us,
That the same honor that belongs to Christ extended on the Cross, belongs to
the Cross it self; and the same honor that lelongs to the Cross, belongs to
the Image of the Cross, and the same honor that lelongs to the Image of the
Cross, belongs to the sign of the Cross made in a transient way, with the
finger, upon the forehead, breast, or elsewhere. For they do not place the
merit or worth of it in the matter of it, but in the form or similitude of it
to Christ extended on the Cross. And upon this ground, as they worship the one,
so they do the other; and as they make an Idol of the one, so they do of the
other. But to this our Adversaries say, grant the Papists ascribe too much to
the Ceremonies, and make Idols of them, what is that to them, they make no Idols
of them. Answ. 1. Not only the Papists, but they likewise ascribe too much to
them. Do they not ascribe to them the power of teaching divine and spiritual
mysteries, which belong to none but God, and those whom he authorizes to do it?
Do they not use one to teach Constancy, another Purity, a third Reverence? Do
they not look upon them as the things that give beauty and life to the worship
of God? Do they not teach, Vide Mountag. Orig. Eccl. t. 1. pt. 2. p. 80.
that the Sign of the Cross is the instrument of Divine power and sufficient to
drive away Devils? And if we leave them, and go to such of the common People as
they have instructed and proselyted to their way, do not some of them place as
much holiness, necessity, and efficacy in them, as they do in the very
Ordinances of God? Do they not make as much account of the Cross, as they do of
Baptism it self? Do they not sign themselves with it as constantly morning and
evening, as they say their prayers, accounting it a shield and defense to them
against evil spirits? I speak not this upon conjecture or hearsay, but from
the mouths of some of them themselves, who in discourse have professed it to
me, and labored to justify it. But 2. Suppose the Papists only, ascribe too
much to the Ceremonies, yet that is sufficient to render them unfit to come
into the house of God, or have state in his Worship; 2 Cor. 6.16.
for, as the Apostle says, What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?
It is not so material who it is that makes them Idols, as whether they are made
Idols yea or no. Choose who they are that make them such, they do, by being so
made, become unfit for Religious use. As for the pretense that those used
amongst us, are not the same individual Ceremonies that have been made Idols by
the Papists, I have in part answered it already, and here add; 1. When our
Adversaries would convince us of the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, they
presently send us to the Fathers, telling us that they used the same that we
do; not the same in Number, but in Kind. Now if we should take the same course
with them that they do with us, and say that those used by the Fathers, were
not the same in Number with ours, but in Kind only, and that therefore their
practice is not at all of force to us, would they not laugh us to scorn? And if
we may argue from the use of some, to the use of others of the same kind, why
may we not argue from the abuse of some to the abolishing of others of the same
kind? The Church of England heretofore thought we might, and therefore (as I
told you even now) renders this as the weightiest reason of the abolishing of
certain of the Ceremonies, that they had been so much abused. 2. The Papists,
have not only defiled the Ceremonies, as to some individuals of them, but
likewise as to the whole kind, and that by a general consecration. Decret. part
3. did. 5. c. 10.
As to instance in the Sign of the Cross; Pope Stephan the 5th consecrated it
to such and such Idolatrous uses in general: by virtue whereof every individual
Cross is an Idolothyte, Levit. 23.10. Dan. 1.8.
and so unfit for religious use. For, as the Jews in consecrating the sheaf of
the first fruits, consecrated the whole harvest; and as Nebuchadnezzars Priest
in offering one dish upon the altar of Bell, hallowed all that was upon the
Table, so that Daniel would not eat of any part thereof, lest he should defile
himself; so this Pope in consecrating the sign of the Cross in general,
consecrated every individual Cross in particular, and has thereby fastened
such defilement on it, as all the water of Tiber will not wash off.

Qu. 32. Whether, if our Adversaries will be devising and determining such
matters of Decency and Order, should they not pitch upon such things as are not
only free from the forementioned evils, wherewith the Ceremonies stand justly
charged, but likewise have in them some good? They should not only see that
what they decree and appoint be lawful, but that it be good, expedient and
edifying. Our Savior tells us that the unsavory Salt, Mat. 5.13.
Which is good for nothing, is cast forth. And though somethings that Paul was
moved to do, were in themselves lawful, yet because they were not expedient and
edifying, he would not do them. 1 Cor. 6.12.
All things (says he) are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient;
all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any.
He would not use any indifferent things, how innocent soever they were in
themselves, or how eminent soever the persons were that commended or urged
them, any further than Christian wisdom and charity told him they were
expedient. And he did not only endeavor to promote expediency and edification
in the use of indifferent things in his own practice, 1 Cor. 14.26.
but also exhorted others to do it. Let all things (says he) be done to
edifying. There should not any thing come into, or continue in the house of
God, but what may do service in it. The Jewish Ceremonies were laid aside for
this reason, because they did not profit such as were exercised therein. Heb.
13.9.
Those then that bear rule in the Church, must not only see that what they
institute and enjoin be not evil, but likewise that it be good. They must not
only see that it tend not to the hindrance of the Gospel, Mat. 12.36. Ephesians. 5.11
Loc. Com: monuclas: 4. c. 4. s. 4. p. 771. Exam. part. 2. de rit. p. 228.
Comment in 2 Cor. 5. T. 3. de effect. sac l. 2. c. 32. p. 95.
but to the furtherance of it. If they must beware of idle words, then much
more of idle and unprofitable works. Peter Martyr, Chemnitius, and other
reformed Writers teach, That all Ceremonies what soever that are inexpedient
and unuseful, ought to be thrown out of the Church. And some of the Papists say
the same. Aquinas says, It is sufficient for the casheering of a thing that it
be not profitable or edifying. Nay Bellarm. renders this as the reason
wherefore the Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees were unlawful, because
they were vain and unprofitable. Some amongstus demand, What hurt there is in
the Ceremonies, and what evil we can see in them? Now this even in the
judgment of Papists is a frivolous question; for we must not only see that
what we use in the Worship of God, be not evil, but that it be good; not only
that it be not hurtful, but that it be helpful. And how then will our
Adversaries justify the Ceremonies, since they are so far from being good and
helpful, that they are many ways evil and hurtful. They disturb the peace of
the Church, destroy Christian Liberty, occasion the displeasing of Magistrates,
throw out many hundreds, if not thousands of godly Ministers, suppress the
preaching of the Word, bring it into contempt, draw away the hearts of people
from spiritual matters, undo multitudes of families, ingross much precious time
which is spent in the study explaining, opposing, and defending of them, grieve
many good Christians, cause many to separate from our Congregations, and some
to leave the Nation, draw upon us the censure of foreign Churches, harden
Papists, weaken the Protestant Interest, and rejoice Satan and all that bear
ill will to us. Or if you would rather have it from the mouth of a stranger,
who may be supposed to be more impartial in the case (though I allege nothing
but what is too well known to be denied) hear the learned and judicious
Zanchius; Epist. ad Regin. Eliz. col. 247.
speaking of the Surplice, and such like Vestments, They avail not (says he)
to edification, that is, to further piety, but rather tend to the overthrow of
it: nor to any good order, but rather to disorder, for they confound godly and
wicked Pastors; whereas it is meet and equal that they should be distinguished
from one another, even by their garments. Neither do they make Christ's Spouse
comely, therefore we ought not to yield to them. And a little after, What
profit or wholesome use (says he) can Christan People have by them? On the
contrary we have showed, that godliness is weakened by them, the pure Worship of
God is violated, Popish Superstition is by little and little called back, the
godly are offended, the wicked are confirmed and hardened in their ungodliness;
the weak in Faith are brought into hazard of their Salvation; they are
occasions of many evils given. Monks and other popish Preachers are hereby
helped to confirm their followers in their superstition; the wrath of God is
provoked against us; those things which God would have to be destroyed, are
hereby builded again by us; the whole face of the Church is defiled and
disgraced; there is a foul sin committed against honest and good Laws,
forbidding the putting on of strange and outlandish garments, and so the whole
Church is dishonored, the peace of the Church, yea of many Churches is
troubled; one Minister is set against another, the Consciences of the godly are
disquieted, the Minds of good Men are offended, God's Spirit is made sad in
them; and this apple of contention is cast as it were upon the Table of the
gods. Thus he. And are these the best matters of expediency that our
Convocation after so long deliberation can help us too? The Lord in his own due
time deliver his poor Church from such expedients.

Qu. 33. Whether they should not content themselves with the same simplicity in
the Worship of God in these days, that the primitive Christians, following the
steps of Christ and his Apostles, did content themselves with in theirs? If
they ought not, let them declare their grounds. If they ought, then what do
they with so many gaudy inventions, which the primitive Christians in their
days knew nothing of? Had they any such stately Cathedrals, Quires and Organs
as are amongst us? or if the infelicity of the times wherein they lived would
not permit the actual having of such things, yet did they discover any
inclination or desire after them? Or, to let such matters wholly pass, had they
any Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Sacrament, bowing at the Name of Jesus,
Surplices and other Vestments, which our Adversaries keep such ado about,
accounting the Worship undecent, and disorderly that is without them? No, it is
well known they had no such things. If you would have a particular account of
the antiquity and rise of the Ceremonies you may read Bugenhagius his
Commentary upon Jonah, who has there inserted the History of them, and showed
when and how each of them came into the Church. In the mean time hear what
others say concerning the primitive Churches, and their state, as to the
Ceremonies in general. De Orig. err. l. 2. c. 5. Exam. pt. 2. de Rit. p. 228.
Bullinger says, it never came into their mind that any Rite, beside what
Christ ordained, would profit the Church. Chemnitius speaking of the simplicity
of the Apostles, says, it continued for a season after, the Sacraments being
administered only with those Rites which have the Commandment and Example of
Scripture. Zanchius showing how the Apostles upon the Ascension of Christ,
Epist. ad Reg Eliz col. 243.
abolished the Ceremonies of Aaron, and how the Papists call them back, says,
Whether it be better to follow the pious simplicity of the Apostles or the
impious pomp of the Papists who is ignorant? Nay, De Eccl. Romans Praejud. c. 10.
p. 560.
hear what Camero, a noted Formalist, has; Let us consider (says he) the
Primitive Church flourishing more in the times of the Apostles than ever it did
afterward: who will not admire the great simplicity in all points, and
especially in Ceremonies? for excepting the celebration of Baptism by washing
of Water, and of the holy Supper according to the Lord's Institution, in taking
the Bread and Wine, and distributing them after thanksgiving: excepting also
the Imposition of hands upon those who extraordinarily received the holy Ghost,
whether it were in a general calling, or a particular, to a charge in the
Church, and anointing for a miraculous healing the sick; I say these excepted,
there will not be found any other Ceremony in those primitive times; so
admirable was their simplicity. And herewith agrees that which Rhenanus tells
of Winefridus, Rer. Ger. l. 2. p. 98.
born at Kirton in Devonshire, afterward surnamed Boniface. Being asked
whether it were lawful to sacrifice with wooden Chalices? he answered, that in
old time there were Golden Priests and Wooden Chalices, but now Wooden Priests
and Golden Chalices. Which saying Durand. Ration, l 1 de Picturis. and Cortinis
and ornamentis Eccl. f. 7.
himself, though so great a patron and friend to the Ceremonies, makes use of
to show how the state of things was altered, and how unlike the times wherein
he lived were to the primitive. Then there was more of inward zeal, and less of
outward pomp; but now there is more of outward pomp, and less of inward zeal.
Then the minds of Christians were set upon Prayers, Tears and Martyrdom; but
now they are set upon Ceremonies, and how they may do all things in state, and
please the eyes and ears of carnal sensual people, who had rather hear a
tinkling Cymbal, than the sound preaching of the Word. How our Adversaries that
so much cry up the Primitive Times, and upon all occasions are urging us with
them, will justify this their departure from them, I see not.

Qu. 34. Whether they should not consult the proceedings of the best Reformed
Churches, and so far as they act according to the common Rule, hold communion
with them? Certainly Jesus Christ would have them to do it. He would have his
whole Church, Ps. 122.3.
to be as a City compact together. He would have all his Servants to be one,
and to hold communion with each other, and prays that they may do it,
suggesting that his Name and Glory are concerned in it. John 17.20, 21.
Neither pray I (says he) for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe on me through their word; that they all may be one as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the World may
believe that thou have sent me. It Is true, we are mainly to endeavor union in
Faith and the principal Doctrines of Religion, but yet we are not to neglect it
in other things so far as it is attainable, but to do all we can to procure it.
Josephus says, Cont. Ap. l. 2. p. 1072.
To worship one God all after the same manner, and nothing differ in manner and
conversation one from another, is the only way to establish amity and concord
in a Commonwealth. And our Adversaries themselves when they are pleading for
Uniformity in our own Nation, can tell us, that from diversity flows dislike,
from dislike, Bishop of Worcest. Letter touching Mr. Baxter, p. 18.
enmity; from enmity, opposition; and from opposition, separation and schism.
And is Uniformity in the outward mode of Worship, so necessary amongst
particular Churches in the same Nation, and is it not at all necessary with
Churches of different Nations, agreeing with us in all points belonging to the
foundation, and bordering thereupon? Is not the Name and Honor of Christ
concerned as well in the one as in the other; nay, more conspicuously and
eminently in the one than the other? Wherefore then, whilst they are such
pretenders to Uniformity, do they leave their Brethren, and retain the
Ceremonies which they have cast off? What the common judgment and practice of
the Protestant Churches is, we may without troubling our selves with particular
inquiries, learn from what is suggested to us in general by the great Chamier:
Panstrat. t 4. de sacram, l. 15: c. 16. sect. 27. p. 297.
Discoursing of the Rites of Baptism, and condemning the Papists for using so
many things in it, not appointed by Scripture, he comes to examine the Answer
given in by Vasquez, who alleges the same against us; to whom in the name of
the Protestant Churches in general, he makes this Reply. We observe (says he)
comely circumstances in the celebration of the Sacrament, but we justly condemn
those who have added such things, unto which they have fancied mysteries and
proper significations, and that of those effects which appertain to the Water
of Baptism; as though the work must be twice or thrice done, and that divine
Institution were nothing, or not sufficient, T. 3. de eff Sacram. l. 2. c. 31.
p. 92, 93.
unless helped out by homane temerity. And this Bellarmine, who had been
amongst the Protestant Churches, observed of them; and therefore having spoken
of their own stately Cathedrals adorned with Crosses, Images, Altars, Lamps,
and how they beget devotion, says, that in the Temples of the Heretics there
is nothing but a Pulpit for the Minister to preach in, and a Table to receive
the Communion from. And he after mentions it as the common opinion of
protestants, that God is not to be worshipped by any Ceremonies, but such as he
himself has appointed. Notwithstanding this, Mounseur Durell would persuade us
that the reformed Divines beyond the Seas are for humane Ceremonies, and that
they approve of ours as lawful and commendable. And for proof hereof he
produces many testimonies, but how far they fall short of doing what he would
have them, I leave to the intelligent and observant Reader to judge. He that in
perusal of him will but remember to distinguish betwixt all Reformed Divines
beyond the Seas, and some few: betwixt what those few say upon certain evidence
of the state of things amongst us, and what upon palpable misinformation:
betwixt what they say of Circumstances of Decency and Order, and what they say
of Ceremonies in a proper sense: betwixt what they speak as to an extraordinary
juncture of things, or special case, such as ours was when we came out of
Popery, and what as to a state of Liberty: betwixt what they speak out of their
composed standing judgment, and what out of mere sympathy and compassion to
their afflicted, suffering brethren, and the Churches then under their charge;
he, I say, that will but observe these and such like distinctions, will easily
see that all his testimonies wherewith he makes such ado, have little in them
for him. You have already heard what Chamier in the name of his own, and other
Churches speaks. And you have heard likewise what Bellarmines observation was
of them. Were it needful I might weary you with Testimonies both of Protestants
and Papists, to the same purpose; but I shall only offer to you one, instead of
many. It is that of Dr. Bilson, afterward Bishop of Winchester, who speaking
to the Jesuits, of some of the Reformed Churches of greatest eminercy, Of
Christian subjection, part 1. p. 31.
which they instanced in as most favorable to their Religion, he tells them,
That they were so far from admitting the full dose of their Heresies, that they
could by no means digest one dra^^m of their Ceremonies. Now if Uniformity be
so neceslary, and the Churches beyond the Seas have laid down the Ceremonies,
wherefore do not our Adversaries do the like? Where do they stay behind their
Brethren? Wherefore, 2 Samuel 19.12.
like the men of Judah, are they the last to bring the King lack to his Throne?
Wherefore do they still retain the Ceremonies, to the offending of their
Brethren, the drawing of their censure upon them, and the begetting of
uncomfortable jealousies and differences? Whether does not this their
unnecessary departing from them, lay them under the manifest guilt of Schism?
Amongst other unjust imputations that they labor to asperse us with, they
commonly charge us with Schism, because we join not with them in the
Ceremonies, and are not they in the mean time more truly and eminently guilty
of it, when they will not join with other Churches in abolishing and casting
them away? Mr. Stillingf Iren part 1. c. 6. p 128.
Is there not more danger (as a friend of theirs very justly demands) in the
scandals of Churches than persons? But perhaps they will say, That the Churches
beyond the Seas have left us, and not we them, and therefore if they will have
Communion with us in the outward Form of Worship, it is fit they should return,
and fall in with us, not we with them. Answ. That they have left us, is true,
but little either to our credit, or their disparagement; for they have left us
no otherwise than we have left the Papists; so that they may take up Bishop
Jewels words, and say concerning us, as we in him, Apol Ecc. Angl. p. 135.
said concerning them. We have departed from them, and for that cause give
thanks to God, and gratulate our selves in it; but from the Primitive Church,
from the Apostles, from Christ, we have not departed. As it is not the
suffering, but the cause that makes Martyrdom; so neither is it in the
judgment of our Adversaries themselves, the departure, See Mr. Cheynel of
Soyinianism. p. 64, 65.
but the cause that makes the Schism. And therefore we are to enquire whether
they had not cause to depart from us; If they had, the charge of Schism falls
not upon them but us, who occasioned their departure. But admit they and we
stood upon even terms, yet it is more reasonable that we should fall in with
them than they with us. 1. Because they were before us in Christ, lead the way
in the Reformation, and delivered the Gospel to us; so that they may reason
with us, as Paul with the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14.36.
What? came the Word of God out from you, or came it unto you only? 2. Because
they exceed us both in number and greatness. And it was the course of the
Ancients (as one has showed by several instances) to take that way which the
greatest number of Churches did chalk out to them. Mr. Park. of the Cross, pt.
1. c. 3. sect. 16. p. 159.
Nay, and our Adversaries themselves, when we urge them to wave the Ceremonies,
answer us with disdain enough, and ask, Whether they being the greater number
are to give place to us, or we to them? Now if there be reason that in lawful
matters the less number of persons, of the same Nation, should give place to
the greater, is there not likewise reason that in lawful matters (such as the
abolishing the Ceremonies is) the less number of Churches of diverse Nations,
should also in order to the perfecting of Communion, give place to the greater?

Qu. 35. Whether should they not tread in the sters of godly and holy Martyrs,
who loved not their lives unto the death, but sacrificed them in the cause of
Christ? I propound this the rather, because they urge it as a considerable
evidence of the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, that some godly Martyrs in their
life time, allowed and made use of them. Now if it be any evidence of the
lawfulness of them, that some godly Martyrs allowed and made use of them, is it
not much more an evidence of the unlawfulness of them, that in those dark times
wherein the world wondered after the Beast, and doted on his Superstitions,
there were yet found many holy men, who afterward died Martyrs, that utterly
disliked and condemned them? What then will they say to the Old Waldenses, See
Hist. of the Wald. pt. 3. l. 1. c. 6. p. 43, 46.
so famous for their Orthodoxness and purity? Did not thousands of them dye
Martyrs? And did they not constantly refuse to conform to any of those
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, which they perceived to have no necessary use
in Religion, but tended rather to superstition than edification? Did they not
contemn all Customs of the Church which they read not in the Gospel? and did
they not hold that those things which were appointed by the Bishops and
Prelates, were not to be observed, because they were the Traditions of men and
not of God? And does not Thuanus, a late Popish Historian, Hist. sui. temp. t.
1. l. 6. p. 177.
upon this ground liken them to the Puritans of England? And whoever will but
take the pains to compare them, will find that as they were acted by the same
Spirit, and walked by the same Rule, so they maintained the same Principles,
and suffered in the same Cause. But leaving them, what will our Adversaries say
to Rogers, See Acts and Mon hist. of their Lives.
Hooper, Ridley, Bradford, Hawks, Philpot, Gibson, Denly and others of our own
Nation? Were not they men famous for their holiness and zeal? Did they not dye
Martyrs, and did they not resolutly protest against the Ceremonies, declaring
they would use none but those instituted by Christ? If then either the judgment
or practice of holy and blessed Martyrs take place, the Ceremonies must down.

Qu. 36. Whether should they not take counsel of, and imitate our former grave
and learned Bishops, that by their excellent labors have made themselves
famous throughout the Churches? If they should, what will they say to Hooper,
whom I mentioned before, who was not only a Bishop, but a Martyr? or what will
they say to Jewel, Pilkinton, Westphaling and others, who notwithstanding the
ignorance and Superstition of the times wherein they lived, and the eminent
places they supplied in the Church, did for all that, not only exercise much
moderation, and forbearance in the matter of the Ceremonies, but also gave
evident Testimonies of their dislike? The truth hereof is so evident, View of
Government, p. 239.
that Mounseur Durell does of his own accord, not without some show of
relenting, confess it. Speaking of Bishop Hooper, he says, It is well known,
that good and pious man, who suffered death for the testimony of Christ's truth
(together with man) other godly Bishops of the Church of England) had a strange
weakness about the Ceremonies, of which he could not be cured by any of his
friends. As then, the unlawfulness of the Ceremonies is a point that has been
sealed by the blood of zealous and holy Martyrs, so it has been attested by
the judgment and practice of grave and learned Bishops.

Qu. 37. Whether, leaving the pious simplicity of the Primitive Christians,
Reformed Churches, Faithful Martyrs, and godly Bishops, do they well to go to
the Vestry of Antichrist, and there take up a company of gaudy Vestments (with
other superstitious stuff) bring them into the house of the Lord, and there
make use of them in his Worship, to the great grief of their brethren that
would fain see it carried on in a more pure and holy manner? If Achan sinned in
bringing a Babylonish garment into the Camp of Israel, Jesh. 7.21.
and if Tobiah sinned in bringing his furniture into the chamber of the House
of the Lord, and that so greatly, Neh. 13.8.
that Nehemiah was sorely grieved at it; what then do these men do in bringing
such a deal of Antichrists stuff, polluted with his abominations, not only into
the Camp of Israel, or into the Chamber of the House of the Lord, but into the
House it self, nay to the very Altar thereof?

Qu. 38. Whether, is not this putting of themselves into garb of Antichrist, a
wearing of his Livery, and a doing of special nonour to him? That is too
manifest to be denied. And shall those who pretend to be godly Bishops go and
do special honor to him? Would not Mordecai, Esth. 3.2.
though commanded by the Persian King, bow or do reverence to Haman, because he
was an Amalekite, and of a stock that God would have destroyed; and yet shall
they go and do honor to Antichrist, the implacable enemy of the Son of God,
whom he will ere long consume with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
and destroy with the brightness of his coming?

Qu. 39. Whether, is not this putting of themselves into the garb of
Antichrist, and wearing his Livery in the use of the Ceremonies, an assuming of
his Image, and a receiving of his Mark? Rev. 7.3.13.16.
The holy Ghost shows, that as Christ has his Mark, wherewith he seals his
Servants, and distinguishes them from others; so Antichrist has his mark,
wherewith he also seals his servants and distinguishes them from others. Now
the Ceremonies being propria insignia, T. 3. de Eff. Sat. l. 2. c. 31. p. 93.
or special badges or notes of discrimination, whereby (as Bellarm. teaches) he
will have his vassals distinguished and known from those of other Religions;
whether may they not be said to be this his mark, and those that use them said
to receive and bear it? If Writers of great eminency and authority are not
mistaken they may. Pareus approving of the judgment Of Dr. Abbot Bishop of
Sarisbury, Comment in Apoc. 13.16.
says, His mark is twofold, the one common to all, the other peculiar to those
that buy and sell. To that which is common (says he) belong those things,
which he has commanded to be in the common use of all; as the observation of
Fasts, and Feasts, instituted by him, the adoring of the Host, the Kiss of
peace, the worshipping of Images, auricular Confession, the performance of the
penitential Rites, and the rest of those things required of him, not of God.
But the peculiar mark (he says) is the Oath of the Spiritual Buyers and
Sellers, wherewith binding themselves as in a special Bond, they promise
Obedience and Subjection to him, and for a testimony thereof, they are
separated and divided from the rest of the Church, by certain particular Rites
and Religions, prescribed by him, as Vows, Unctions, Shavings, Vestments. Thus
he. Who though he do not place the mark of the Beast solely in the Ceremonies,
yet he teaches that they are comprehended in it. Schluss. catal. t. 13. p. 593.
But the Divines of Germany who opposed the Interim, reduce it to a narrower
compass, and tell us, that the Popish Rites urged upon them, were the very
Notes, Characters, and Name of the Beast; and that the third Angel appointed to
preach against the Image of the Beast, and the receiving of his Mark, is no
other than the Ministers that withstand the tail of Antichrist left behind him
in the Church. See Napier and Carthw. in loc.
Others do yet restrain his mark to a narrower compass, and say, That the holy
Ghost does in an especial manner aim at the Sign of the Cross in it. And to
render it more probable, we may observe this, That as there is not any Rite
which the Papists more dote on, employ and abuse than it, so it is that which
they make use of more than any, to distinguish them from others. What more
ordinary, when they are in a strange place, than to notify to one another who
they are, by making with the hand a Sign of the Cross, as if that Were the very
Badge of their Religion? But admit that we could not make it out to our
Adversaries, that either the Cross in particular, or the Ceremonies in general,
are the mark of the Beast, yet whether should they make use of them (especially
they being in other respects, as you have heard, so evil) since such learned
and judicious men have reputed them to be it? If the Commands in Scripture
touching the avoiding of Scandal, matters of bad report, and such like things,
be of any force, they may not do it.

Qu. 40. Whether this their taking up and using the Rites and Ceremonies of
Antichrist be not (at least in a degree) a giving him the right hand of
fellowship and an holding communion with him? That cannot reasonably be
gainsaid; for as both the notation of the word, and the standing use of it
shows, Communion is no more then Coitio in Unum, or a becoming of one, whether
in judgment, affection, privileges, observations, or any other thing wherein
we are capable of joining. So far as we differ from any Sect or Society in any
of these things, so far we fall short of Communion with them; and so far as we
agree or are one with them in them, so far we may be said to hold Communion
with them. And therefore if our Adversaries agree with Antichrist, and are at
one with him as to the Ceremonies he uses, so far they must needs be said to
hold Communion with him. And may they lawfully hold Communion with him? Is he
not an Apostate, an Heretic, an Idolater? Nay, is he not (as his Name imports)
the direct enemy of Jesus Christ and his Truth? And has not God expressly
prohibited us to hold Communion with such as are his enemies? has he not
forbidden us the use of many things unquestionably lawful, nay in some degree
necessary, and that for this very end, Exodus 20.25, 26.14.1. Lev. 18.3 19.19,
27 28.20.23 Deuteronomy. 12.30. 1 Samuel 6.8. 1 Chr. 15.13. 2 Kings 16.11. 2 Chr. 13.9
Ezekiel. 8.16.11.12 Hos. 2.16 Mat. 6.7
that we may not hold any fellowship with them, or seem in the least to approve
of their ways? Read the places in the Margent, and orthodox Expositors upon
them, and you shall see that as he forbad his people in former times (and us in
them) in general, to do after the manner of other Nations, so likewise, that
the reason wherefore he forbad them such and such things in particular, and
blamed them for the use of them, was because he would not have them to hold
fellowship with them, or become one with them. And hence we find that his
servants in aftertimes, understanding this to be his will, were very cautious
of having any thing to do with such kind of People, either in Religious or
Civil matters. Historians tell us of the Christians of former times, Cent.
Magd. cent. 3. c. 6. col. 141.
that of all other things they took care in this, that they had nothing common
with the Manners and Customs of the Heathens. Nay, such was their holy zeal and
caution, that let them be Heathens, Jews, Heretics or what they would, they
would not have Communion with them, no not in the smallest matters, unless they
would lay down their enmity, come into Christ, and close with his truth and
ways. See Mr. Parker of the Cross part. 1. c. 3 sect. 16. p. 157, etc. Ames
fresh suit part 2. p. 438.
They would not worship toward the East, wear Garlands, Fast on Fridays, bring
Wine and Cakes into the Church, sing Songs of Hallelujah and joy on the Calends
of January, celebrate Birth-days, set Lights at their doors, because they would
not symbolize with Heathens. They would not observe Easter at the usual time,
look in Prayer toward Jerusalem, use the word Priest or Sacrifice, forbear
decking their houses, or dressing of meat on the Lords day, or have a Lamb to
represent Christ; because they would not hold Fellowship with the Jews. They
would not Fast on the Lords day, use Trin-immersion in Baptism, abstain from
Flesh, have Lights in their Worship, shave their Heads, so as to leave long
hair below; and all because they would not do after the manner of the
Heretics. And they who stood out in this zealous opposition against these
enemies of the Truth, were not a company of the Vulgar sort only, who commonly
have a zeal that is not according to knowledge, but the eminentest Lights of
the whole Church, and the strongest defenders of the Christian interest.
Neither were they a few of those only, acting singly and privately, but whole
Councils, both Provincial and General, and those too of the most Orthodox and
Famous that ever were since the Apostles times. Neither did they stand out in
Religious matters only, but also in such as were of a civil and common nature;
nor in some weightier things only, but also in such as in themselves were small
and trivial, as the wearing of a Garland, celebrating a Birthday, and the
like, thereby declaring to the World their utter detestation of them and their
ways. And if we come nearer our own times, and consult the Writers of the
Reformed Churches, we shall find that they (treading in the steps of the
Ancients, and imitating their godly zeal) do unanimously cry down Communion
with the enemies of the Truth, whether Infidels, Idolaters, or Heretics, as
not only unlawful, but pernicious and dangerous. Epist. ad Reg. Eliz col. 243.
Zanchius tells Queen Elizabeth, that we ought to have nothing at all to do
with the Papists in the business of Religion, save in those things which they
have common with the Apostles. And Gualter says, Com. in Luc. 11. fol. 309.
that common sense admonishes Christians to abstain from all the Rites and
Ceremonies of Infidels and Heretics. To these I might add many more, Ames
fresh suit, part 2. p. 456.
speaking to the same purpose, but it is done by others, and therefore I
forbear. Besides, that we should thus decline communion with Infidels and
Heretics, is a Truth so plain, that several of the Papists themselves, though
the greatest users of foreign Rites, do own and teach it. Decret. part 2.
cause. 26. q 7. c. 13. Annal. ad ann. 184.
Gratian speaks against the observing the Calends of January, and adorning of
houses with Laurel and green Boughs, because the Pagans did so. And Baronius
would not have Christians to celebrate Play-dayes in the beginning of the
Spring, because the Heathens were wont to do the like in honor of the Mother
of their Gods. T. 2. l. 2. de Monac. cap. 40. p 200. De Ador. l. 2. disp. 4. c.
3.
And Bellarmine tells us, that shaving was forbidden the Jewish Priests, lest
they should be like to the Priests of the Gentiles. And Vasquez says, that God
forbad the Israelites the use of Images, and the setting up of Stones and
Monuments, because he would not have them like the Canaanites and other
Idolaters. And as for Heretics, the Rhemists will not have us so much as use
their words. Annot. in 1 Timothy 6. sect. 4.
We shall (say they) keep the Faith of our Fathers, if we keep their very
words; but avoid we the words of Heretics, although they seem to have no harm
in them. Now things being thus, that the People of God must not do after the
manner of such as are of a strange Religion, nor hold communion with them; how,
on the one hand, will the Papists justify their doing after the manner of
Heathens, Jews and Turks, and holding communion with them? and how, on the
other hand, will our Adversaries justify their doing after the manner of the
Papists in the use of their Ceremonies, and holding communion with them therein?

Qu. 41. Whether this their giving to the Papists the right hand of fellowship,
and holding communion with them in their Ceremonies, be not likely to beget in
them a greater liking of their way, and to confirm and settle them in it?
Whether instead of bringing them over to us, is it not likely to beget in them
hopes that we will return to them? Hear what Zanchius says. Epist. ad Reg.
Eliz col. 243.
This recalling (says he) of Popish Garments, your gracious Majesty may
believe me, will be a greater evil than perhaps it may seem, even to wise men,
at the first blush. For methinks I see and hear the Monks crying out with very
loud voices in the Pulpits, both confirming their followers in their impious
Religion, by the example of your gracious Majesty, and also saying, What? does
not even the Queen of England also, a most learned and prudent Princess, begin
by little and little to come back to the Religion of the holy Church of Rome,
the most holy and sacred Vestments of the Clergymen being taken on again? We
are to be in good hope that the day will come, wherein they will at length,
though now they be thought to be dead, recall also all the other Rites and
Sacraments of the holy Church of Rome. These and suchlike words, no doubt,
most prudent Queen, the Moncks and Jesuits will use in the Pulpits. For they
take all occasions to confirm their Superstitions. Therefore to recall these
stinking Garments, and other rubbish of the Popish Church, into the Church of
Christ at this time, what is it but to give the Papists an occasion, and the
best that may be, to confirm and harden themselves and theirs in their
Superstitions, and also to help them in this business? Thus he. And it is well
known that our using of their Rites and Customs does furnish them with
Arguments against us, See Mr. Parker of the Cross part 1. c. 3. sect. 6. p. 135.
and supply them with somewhat to say in their own defense. They do not only
argue for their Mass Book from our Service Book; and the necessity they ascribe
to the Sacrament from our private Baptism; and their Absolution, Auricular
Confession, and Sacrament of Penance, from our Absolution of the Sick,
prescribed in the aforesaid Service Book; but they likewise argue for their
Cross from ours; and for other Rites used by them, from those used amongst us.
And thus the Fathers of our Church, who yet would be looked upon as the only
malls of Papists, instead of refuting the Arguments they had before, help them
to new ones; and instead of convincing them of their errors and evil ways, and
reducing them from them, encourage and settle them in them. And shall the
Prophets of Jerusalem, strengthen the hands of evil doers, Jer. 23.14, etc.
that none return from his wickedness? Let them know for this, that if they
repent not, the Lord will be against them, and that he will feed them with
wornswood, and make them drink the water of Gall; and that his whirlwind shall
go forth in fury against them, even a grievous whirlwind, and it shall fall
grievously upon their heads.

Qu. 42. Whether this their zealous retaining the Ceremonies of the Papists,
and holding communion with them therein, be not an argument that they have a
secret design, when the wind stands right, to return to them again? If they
have not some purpose that way, what is the reason that notwithstanding all the
solicitations and entreaties of their Brethren, to lay the Ceremonies aside,
and all the unhappy contests they have occasioned amongst us, they will not be
got to do it, but choose to hazard Religion, Peace, Laws, Liberties and all,
rather than they will part with them? What does this hold forth, but that they
use them in a Sacramental sense indeed, that is, to signify to the Papists
that they have a secret respect for them; and that as they came from them, so
they have a purpose to return to them? Whether it be so or no, I will not
positively affirm, but it is manifest the Papists hope it is so, and we fear,
if opportunity serve, it will prove so. If they would have us to lay aside our
jealousies, let them lay aside the Ceremonies that do occasion them. It has
been usual that when any Nation or People have set up such a Religion, whether
good or bad, they have also set up the Ceremonies of that Religion. When the
Israelites fell to the worship of Baal, they bowed the knee to Baal; 1 K. 19.18
Hos. 13.2.
and when they fell to the worship of the Calves, they kissed the Calves. Beda
hist Angl. l. 2. c. 2. fo. 57
So when Gregory sent Augustine the Monck hither into England to reform things
amongst us; and when one of his Successors Agents swore Jerome of Prague to the
Church of Rome; Council. Constantiens. sess. 19. Genebr. chron. ad an. 1549.
and when the Emperor urged the Interim; they each of them exacted assent to,
and compliance in the Ceremonies. And so, on the other hand, it has been usual
that when any Nation or People have thrown out such a Religion, they have with
it thrown out the Ceremonies belonging to it. When the Israelites threw aside
the worship of Baal and the Calves, they neither bowed to the former, nor
kissed the latter; but as they despised them, so they did their Ceremonies. And
when the Heathens forsook their Idols, and turned Christians, they also forsook
their Ceremonies, refusing (as I have before showed) to have any thing common
with them, or those that worshipped them. So when the Churches beyond the Seas
cast off Popery, they likewise cast off the Ceremonies belonging to it, not
suffering so much as a dram thereof to remain. As the morning ushers-in the
day, so the Ceremonies of any Religion tend to the introducing and bringing-in
of that Religion. And therefore (says Augustine) If ye enquire how the Pagans
may be convinced, Tom. 10. de Verbis dom. ser. 6. fol. 5.
how they may be enlightened, how they may be called to Salvation, forsake all
their Solemnities, forsake their trifles; and if they will not consent to our
Truth, let them yet at the least be ashamed of their own pancity. And upon this
ground Pope Zechary proceeded; Decret. part 2. cause. 26. q. 7. c. 14.
and therefore when he saw some celebrate the Kalends of January, and feast and
dance after the manner of the Pagans, he forbad them to do it, for this reason,
lest Paganism should re-pullulate and spring up again. And have not we cause to
fear, lest the retaining of Popish observations, may occasion the springing up
again of Popery, as well as those men had cause to fear lest the retaining of
Paganish observations, might occasion the springing up again of Paganism? I
believe all those that are affected to the Protestant Interest as they should
be, judge we have. I would (says Peter Martyr) that those who think these
things should be retained amongst us, Ep cuida^ Amico in Angl. p. 1125.
saw that the continuing of them will endanger the removal of the Gospel. But
it was not he only that saw danger in it, but others likewise, who thereupon
warned us to beware of it. In Cyprian. ep. 56. not. 31.
Goulartius saw so much danger in the very Cross, that he says, If we mean to
maintain the Doctrine of Christ crucified, we must abolish it. Let not
therefore our Adversaries think it strange that upon our observing their
tenaciousness of the Ceremonies, and lothness to part with them, we become
jealous that they have more respect for Popery than they would have the world
to think they have; and that if circumstances would fairly concur, they would
attempt the bringing of us back to our former state.

Qu. 43. Whether is it not probable (all things considered) that they retain
the Ceremonies on purpose to serve them as instruments in the promoting of
Popery? Whether is it not to be feared that they retain them to keep up the
memory of it for the present, and to serve them as Engines to help them to wind
it in amongst us when a fit opportunity presents it self? They know very well
that the Ceremonies of Rome may be of great use to them to prepare the people
for the Doctrine of Rome; and that if ever they can get Popery in amongst us,
it will be no small advantage to them to tell the people, that the Ceremonies
and Doctrine of Rome, being like the Harlots attire and songs, both of the same
stamp, they ought to go together; and that therefore as they have hitherto used
the former, so it is fit they should now close with the latter. As for the
peoples fleeing to distinctions, and telling them that though they used the
Ceremonies of the Papists, yet they used them not in that sense that they do,
not one in a thousand (as they themselves know and confess) is able to do it;
and if they could, See Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sect. 65.
yet how soon can they take them off it? How easily can they tell them, that as
the Popish Ceremonies are Images, so were theirs; as the Papists make their
Ceremonies necessary, so did they theirs: as they ascribe efficacy to their
Ceremonies, so did they to theirs. With these and such like Answers how easily
will they take the ignorant people off what they will have to allege in their
own behalf? And what a snare then will the people find themselves in? what a
temptation then will they lie under, to submit to whatever they will urge upon
them? Now this our Adversaries know; and therefore, I say, since they urge the
Ceremonies with so much zeal, that they will not be got upon any terms to lay
them aside, but will part with Peace, the preaching of the Word, Religion, and
all, rather than let them go; is it not likely in the judgment of any
indifferent persons, that they intend them as Engines to draw in the body of
Popery, when an opportunity for such a work offers it self? Sure I am that
diverse learned men in a parallel case thought as much. Witness what the Divines
of Hamburgh say concerning the Ceremonies of the Interim. These indifferent
things (say they) are nothing else but the seeds of corruption, the nerves of
Papistical Superstition, Epist. ad Melanct.
and the little passages by which our Adversaries endeavor to creep into our
Churches, that they may turn them off the foundation. And the Divines of Saxony
speak to the same purpose. Satan (say they) from these small beginings of the
Ceremonies makes progress to the corruption of Doctrine it self. Confess.
Saxon. ed. 1560. Com. l. 21 p. 391.
And Sleidan tells us, that the reason wherefore the Protestants disliked the
Interim, was, because they looked upon it as that which would open a way to the
body of Popery. Many amongst us are ready to say, Alas, what are two or three
Ceremonies? what danger is in them? what are they to the business of Popery?
but we see the Protestants of Germany thought otherwise, they looked upon them
as the in-lets of Popery, and upon that consideration withstood them. And how
well is it known that little matters have produced great events, and that small
beginings have in a short time grown up to no less than a stupendous
magnitude? Who would ever think that a company of Moles, Froggs, and such like
despicable animals, should overthrow whole Towns and Cities, and yet (as Pliny
shows by various instances) they have done it, in Spain, Thessaly, Not. Hist l.
8. c. 29. p. 138.
France, and several other places? Who living in the Apostles times would ever
have thought, had not the Scripture foretold it, that the Mystery of Iniquity,
then in working, would ever have ascended to such a monstrous height? what a
grain of Mustard Seed was it in those days? yet in a short space it grew and
waxed a great tree, sufficient to lodge the Fowls of the Air in the proud
branches thereof. But to come yet nearer to our present case; What a small
matter was the Cross in the beginning? At the first it was only an indifferent
thing, then became holy, after necessary, and at the last a filthy Idol. Now if
the Cross became so great a thing in a short time, when it had not been used
before, what may it (if Providence prevent not) in a short time become in these
days, when it has not only been used before, but likewise is at present of
such account amongst the Papists; nay, of such account amongst us, that a Child
must not be received into the Church without it? In a word; as small things as
the Ceremonis seem to be, they may (if not looked to in time) come to kindle
fires to burn us all to ashes, as well as other humane inventions, as small as
they in the beginning, did for multitudes of our blessed Ancestors, who
suffered in Hen. the 8th, and Queen Mary's days. That we may therefore secure
our selves against the tyranny of Babylon, and inherit the blessing belonging
to her destroyers, Ps. 137.9.
let us spare neither great nor small, but let us take even the Ceremonies,
those little ones thereof, and dash them against the stones.

Qu. 44. Whether is it not evident (notwithstanding all the advantages and
opportunities we have had of carrying on the Reformation so happily begun
amongst us) that our Sun is gone back many degrees, and that we are much nearer
to Popery now than we were many years ago? Epist. ad Reg. Eliz col 243.
Zanchius took notice that we were gone back in his time, and told Queen
Elizabeth of it. And several learned men have instanced in diverse particulars,
both in Doctrine and Worship, wherein we are nearer to Popery now, than we were
in King Edward 6. days. Freshsuit, part 1. p. 115.
As for Doctrine, Dr. Ames has showed that the Articles printed 1552. are in
diverse respects better than those that have been printed and set forth since.
And as for Worship, the Liturgy used then is in many particulars to be
preferred before that we have now. This a learned Knight took notice of many
years ago. Europ. Spec. p. 153.154. Script. Argl. p. 455. Reasons of the
necessity of Reform. p. 32, 34. Pacific. Exam. p. 59.
And the case is plain, for in the former (as Bucer notes) the
Convocation-house left several things to the peoples discretion, which in this
they require and impose. As for bowing the knee (say they) signing with the
sign of the Cross, elevation of the hands, smiting of the breast, and such like
gestures, it shall be free for every one to follow his own opinion. And as for
Vestments. Dr. Corn. Burgess has showed, and Mr. Pryn out of him, that the
Parliament in the 5th and 6th years of King Edward's Reign, did not only
appoint the Book of Common Prayer to be revised and amended, but that the use
of the Rotchet, Surplices, Caps, and such like things prescribed in the former
Book, should be quite laid aside. Nay our declension is so visible, that the
Papists themselves take notice of it, and triumph in it. Here what a Jesuit
says. See Mr. Chilling-worths Preface, sect. 20.
Protestanism (says he) waxes weary of it self, the Professors of it, they
especially of greatest worth, learning, and authority, love temper and
moderation, and are at this time more unresolved where to fasten than at the
Infancy of their Church. Their Churches begin to look with a new Face, their
Walls to speak a new Language, their Doctrines to be altered in many things.
Thus you see that instead of improving the privileges and encouragements God
has vouchsafed us, and going on forward with the work of Reformation in the
use of them, we have gone much backward. Instead of razing Babylon to the
foundation, we begin to favor the dust thereof, and build again the things we
have destroyed, Gal. 2.^^.
and so in the Apostles language, make our selves transgressors.

Q. 45. If the Ceremonies are such Innocent, Decent, Edifying things, as our
Adversaries pretend they are, how comes it to pass, that Atheists, Papists,
Blasphemers, Drunkards, Whoremasters, and the whole rabble of Impious and
Profane Persons are so much for them? If they are what they should be, how
comes it to pass, that the Worst of Men are to in love with them, so zealous in
observing them. so violent in urging and pressing them? How comes it to pass
that they are most in request where Christ is least taught, and least in
request where he is most taught? Censur. Lit. Angl c. 2. p. 458
Bucer observed long ago, that People where the Gospel was painfully preached
cared not for them, but in places where it was unknown there they reverenced
them. It is pretended that they teach the People Spiritual Truths, and Duties;
but if it be so, how happens it (as Bishop Jewel says in the case of Images)
that where there is greatest store of such Schoolmasters, Repl. art. 14. div.
10 p. 510.
the People are ever most ignorant? Nay, how happens it, that People upon
their Conversion care so little for them; nay, do thereupon take up such
dislike and contempt of them? How happens it that their very hearts do rise
against them, and that of their own accord without any persuasions to it? If
they are such convenient useful things, as they are said to be, how happens it
that the Worser sort of men are so fond of them, and the Better so much against
them? I confess its possible that a wicked man may be in the right, when a good
man is in the wrong; but yet I should think it no less than a wonder, if the
profane crew, that are Children of wrath, estranged from God, and that do not
so much as desire the knowledge of his ways, should successively from
generation to generation, hit upon the Truth: and that the most gracious holy
men, that are enlightened by the Spirit of God, are under a Promise of being led
into all Truth thereby, and that spend their days in reading the Scriptures,
Praying, holding Communion with God, should successively, from generation to
generation, lie in darkness and error. Though all men are fallible, and
therefore to be followed with suspicion and caution, yet its sure far more
likely that those who fear God, and consequently have his secrets with them,
should possess the Truth, than that a company of carnal, sensual dissolute ones
(for such are the generality of those that stand for the Ceremonies) should do
it.

Qu. 46. If the Ceremonies are what they are said to be, how comes it to pass
that God does not set his seal to them, own them and bless them? How comes it
to pass that those Ministers who are the most zealous defenders, urgers, and
observers of them, are so insuccesful in their Ministry? How comes it to pass
that they fall so far short of others in the working of grace and holiness in
the hearts and lives of their People? I could mention two or three old
Non-conformists, of whom if I should say that they have brought more souls to
Christ and Heaven, and done more to the demolishing of Satan's Kingdom and
Interest, than all the Bishops, Deans, Prebends and Canons in England, I
believe the People would second me. Nay, (to drive this inquiry yet a little
further) if the Ceremonies are what they should be, how comes it to pass, that
such as for a season stand out, and afterward Conform to them, do so far fall
short, both in Doctrine and Manners, of what they were before? It is
notoriously known that some who heretofore were against them, and have since
fallen in with them, are become as much unlike in Prayer, Preaching,
Conference, Life, to what they were before, as the Tree in Winter to what it is
in Summer.

Qu. 47. Whether do not you think that many of those who Conform, close with
the Ceremonies, rather to avoid Sufferings and gain Preferment, than out of any
real liking they have of them? Sleidan tells of Islebius and Sidonius, Com. l.
21. p. 376. Catal. t. 13 p. 696
that they defended the Popish Oil and Chrism, that they might go away more
unctious. And Schlusselburg says the like of George Major the Schoolman. And
we have good reason to think that many amongst us make use of the Ceremonies
rather that they may have their Liberty, and gain unctious Places, than out of
any good grounds that they have for the lawfulness of them. And were the Scales
turned, and Preferment laid in the other end, there were little doubt to be
made, but they would be as ready to profess their dislike and dissent, as they
have been to declare their assent and consent. Sure I am that some of them,
before Balaks Engine came to be used upon them, Number. 22.17.
spoke as contemptibly of them, as those do who suffer for refusing them.

Qu. 48. Whether, since the Ceremonies are such things as in the foregoing
particulars I have showed they are, would it not be a very great sin in us, if
out of desire of Liberty, or upon any other account whatsoever, we should go as
many do, and declare our unfeigned assent and consent to them, and being
restored to our Ministry, should use them in the discharge of it? Certainly if
they are chargable with those things I have alleged, and in part proved
against them, we should very greatly offend if we should do it. The People
still cry out to us to Conform, and not by our silence hinder them of the
benefit of our pains; but alas, they are in this like those Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 1.7
understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. We give not over
our Ministry out of idleness, worldliness, timerousness, unfaithfulness or the
like, as the hireling does, John 10.12.
but out of conscience toward God; and that we may make it appear, we believe
as we have taught, and that we are willing to suffer rather than sin, which we
are verily persuaded we should do, if we should conform to the Ceremonies.
Things are got to such a pass, that we cannot have liberty to preach unless we
close with them, and we cannot close with them, unless we leave the Word, which
is the measure of truth and falsehood, good and evil. And may those that are the
Ministers of Christ, and have been employed in teaching the authority of the
Word, the necessity of keeping to it, and the danger of departing from it, go
and leave it themselves? No; Balaam, as mad as he was, will teach us sounder
doctrine, Number. 22.18.
If Balak (says he) would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
go beyond the Word of the Lord my God, to do less or more. Mr. Sprint. Cassand.
Anglican p. 8.
But to this an English Adiaphorist Objects; 1. That the Apostles ly direction
of the holy Ghost, and upon reasons of common and perpetual equity, did
practice themselves, and caused others to practice, yea advised and enjoined
(as matters good and necessary to be done) Ceremonies as inconvenient and evil
in many main and material respects, as the Ceremonies enjoined and prescribed
in our Church are supposed to be. From whence (says he) it follows, that to
suffer deprivation, for refusing to conform to the Ceremonies of our Church, is
contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles. Answ. 1. we must
destinguish betwixt such Ceremonies as are of Divine Institution, Vide Martyr.
ep. amico cuid. in Angl. p. 1125.
and such as are only of Humane. As for the Ceremonies the Apostles used, they
were such as proceeded originally from God, and were appointed by him; but ours
are of no such extraction, they were fetched from the very den of Antichrist,
with whom he has forbidden us to hold Communion. Now though it be true, that
Gods own institutions, when they are kept up longer, or converted to another
use then they were at first designed for, cease to be his Institutions, and
become the Institutions of men; yet there is far more respect belonging unto
them than there is (caeteris paribus) to any institutions of men whatsoever,
and that in regard of the divineness of their extraction. And therefore though
the Apostles showed so much respect to the Ceremonies of the Jews, yet it is
not to be thought that they would have done the like to others. Suppose some in
their times had brought in some of the Ceremonies of the Samaritans or Pagans,
and had urged them upon them and others, whether do you think they would have
showed the like respect to them, they did to those of the Jews? It is not
likely they would. If they would not comply with the Scriles and Pharisees in
the use of their Ceremonies (as I have showed they would not) much less would
they have complied with Samaritans or Pagans in the use of theirs. And if they
would not have used the Ceremonies of Samaritans or Pagans, much less would
they have used the Ceremonies, of Antichrist (such as ours are) had he existed
in their days. 2. We must distinguish betwixt such Ceremonies as God has
owned, and blessed, and made eminently useful in his Church; and such as he
has never owned, nor blessed, but has rather born witness against and cursed,
by rendering the endeavors of such as have been the greatest defenders of them
ineffectual. Now for the Jewish Ceremonies, as God did at the first institute
them, so he was pleased afterward all along, until the time when they were to
be laid aside, to own them, and make them useful in his Church; but as for the
Ceremonies of Antichrist, he has been so far from owning them, or making them
useful, that he has followed them with remarkable symptoms of his displeasure.
And therefore though the Apostles, in order to their more decent and honorable
burial, might for a season use the former, yet it does not therefore follow
that they would have used the latter, or that we may do it. 3. We must
distinguish betwixt such Ceremonies as have been abused by Idolaters, and by
them made Idols, and such as have not. The Jewish Ceremonies though they were
abused, yet they were never abused that way; but ours have been, and that in a
high degree, as I have before showed. 4. We must distinguish betwixt what is
done only for two or three times, in a special exigence, and what is not. As
for what the Apostles did, they did it in an extraordinary juncture of things,
betwixt the taking down of an old Administration, and the setting up of a new
one, before they had thoroughly published the Gospel, or instructed the People
in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty. What we do is in no such juncture, but in
a time when the Gospel has been preached all the World over, and the Church
has been fully instructed in the Liberty belonging to her; and that upon such
grounds as render them necessary at all times and in all places. Epist. 19.
August. says, That the observation of the Jewish Ceremonies at that time was
to be approved; but that time being over, it was to be detested. 5. We must
distinguish betwixt such Ceremonies as are used in a mystical significant
manner, and such as are not. Though the Apostles used the Jewish Ceremonies,
yet it does not appear that they used them in any mystical way, but only as
circumstances of order and policy, serving to unite the Christian Jews and
Gentiles. But ours are to be used as teachers of spiritual Mysteries, and in
that sense we must either allow of them, or else we cannot declare our unfeigned
assent and consent to the Service Book, neither approve our selves in the use
of them, obedient Sons to the Church. 6. We must distinguish betwixt such
Ceremonies as tend to the preventing of Scandals, and Separations, and such as
tend to the begetting of them. The Jewish Ceremonies served to unite the
affections of divided brethren, but ours (as the experience of many years has
fully evinced) serve to divide the affections of united brethren; and therefore
being of the number of those things that God has declared a peculiar hatred
against, Pro. 6.19.
we should be so far from bringing them into the House of God, and using them
there in his Worship, that we should cast them out from us with no less than
detestation and abhorrency. Indeed the Author I now deal with, Cassand. Ang p.
68
reflects the charge on us, and says, that Nonconformity is the occasion of
Discord, and I confess it is; but yet no otherwise than Naboths keeping his
Vineyard was the occasion of his stoning; 1 Kings 21.3.
or the Apostles preaching the Gospel was the occasion of their Imprisonment.
Act. 4.19.
For as that which they did, had nothing in its own nature that might provoke
just and righteous Magistrates to exercise such severity against them, so
neither has our standing out against the Ceremonies any thing in its own
nature (it being no more than our duty) that may move those we have to deal
with, to withdraw their affections from us. But 2. He goes on, P. 24.
and tells us that when two works or duties commanded of God do meet in one
practice, so as we cannot do them both, but one of them must of necessity be
done, the other must of necessity be left undone, in this case the work or duty
of greater reason must be performed, and that of lesser reason must be omitted,
and it is a sin to neglect the greater to perform the lesser; out of which
ground he assumes, That the the Doctrine and Practice of suffering Deprivation
for refu sing to Conform, does cause men to neglect greater duties to perform
the lesser. The former he proves by several instances, as the Priests
sacrificing on the Sabbath, David's eating of the shewbread, the Disciples
plucking the ears of corn, and several other instances of the same nature. To
all which I shall answer briefly; And 1. We must distinguish betwixt such
things as are evil accidentally, that is, merely because they are forbidden,
and such as are evil simply and in their own nature. Now those things which
these Servants of God did in cases of special necessity, were not simply and in
their own nature evil, but only because they were forbidden. Neither were they
for bidden absolutely, but only so far as the forbearing of them might consist
with the avoiding of greater evil. But the case is far otherwise with us; for
in order to the gaining of our Liberty, we must not only do those things which
are evil meetly because they are forbidden, but because they are so likewise in
their own nature; as the declaring our unfeigned assent and consent to
unwarrantable Observations, fabulous Stories, unsound Doctrine, as also the
scandalizing our Brethren, fashioning our selves to Idolaters, honoring of
Images and Idols, with many other things which would have been evil though God
had never by any positive Law forbidden them. 2. We must distinguish betwixt
such necessity, as God himself, either by his positive Command or special
Providence lays upon us, and such as oppressive and unreasonable men bring us
under. The Instances alleged were of Gods making, and therefore nothing at all
to us who are in the hands of men, that forbid us that liberty, that he has
not only allowed us to use, but commanded us to maintain. Now though God who
has power over his own Law, be pleased to dispense with our nonperformance of
those works and duties which he himself, either by his positive Command, or
special Providence does disoblige us from, yet we must not think that he will
in like manner dispense with our omission of those works and duties, which
ungodly men out of their enmity to him, and his truth, do forbid us to perform,
and we out of timerousness or worldliness do thereupon neglect. And therefore
though the Priests, David, the Disciples and others, did upon urgent necessity
laid upon them by God himself, act contrary to some positive Laws, yet we must
not think that they would have done it upon the bare command of men, how great
soever, without such necessity. This we may gather from the example of Daniel,
Dan. 1.8.
who would rather adventure upon the offending of the King and incurring his
displeasure, than he would eat of his polluted meat; and from the example of
the Maccabees, 2 Mace. 7.2.
who would rather endure the greatest torments, than taste of Swines flesh.
Though the Kings meat and Swines flesh were both of them contrary to the
Ceremonial Law, yet no doubt if Providence had brought them into such a strait
as David and the Disciples were in, they would have eaten as well as they; but
being there was no necessity for it, save what the command of man made, they
would not do it. So as to our case; though we should suppose the things
required of us, to be such as that in a case of special necessity laid upon us
by God, we might do them, yet does it not follow that we may do them out of
such a necessity, merely upon the command of man; Nay, it appears by what I
have here alleged, that in such a case only, we might not do them. And so much
for Answer to the substance of what is alleged by this Author. Grand Case, p
37
Others of the same Adiaphoristical spirit seeing that such shifts as these are
too gross to serve their purpose, endeavor to subtilize the matter, by telling
us that Authority does not expect that we should declare our unfeigned assent
and consent to all and every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book
of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, absolutely, but comparatively. Answ. 1. How shall we
be assured that Authority expects no more? Its rather likely that they, taking
all so contained and prescribed, to be sound and necessary, look that we should
do so too, and declare as much in public. And therefore if we will declare, we
must declare in that sense, otherwise we equivocate, and deceive their
expectations. 2. The Letter of the Declaration leads to an absolute sense, and
therefore unless Authority put another upon it, we must look upon that as being
the only sense intended by them. But 3. suppose Authority intended such a
comparative sense, yet might we not close with it; for how can we lawfully
declare our unfeigned assent and consent to the use of unlawful things, which
we stand bound unfeignedly to dislike and dissent from, and endeavor the
extirpation of? As we may not declare our unfeigned dislike of and dissent from
what we do unfeignedly assent and consent to, and stand bound to maintain; so
neither may we declare our unfeigned assent and consent to what we unfeignedly
dislike and dissent from, and stand bound to extirpate. If declaring our
unfeigned assent and consent to the Ceremonies be a fit and proper means for
the extirpating of them, then we may do it, otherwise not.

Q. 49. Whether, since we cannot declare our unfeigned assent and consent to
the Ceremonies, or in the course of our Ministry make use of them without the
guilt of sin, may our Adversaries persecute us for refusing to do it? Whether
may they revile and reproach us for it, and represent us as persons
Schismatical, and Turbulent, unworthy of the favor of Authority, or employment
in the Church? Whether may they throw us out of our places and silence us, not
only to the undoing us and our families, but the rendering of us useless to the
People, whose necessities do cry so loud in our ears for help? Whether do you
think it is a good work, and such as they may look back upon with comfort when
they come to dye, to set up a company of Ceremonies (in their own judgments
needless) that we cannot close with, and then persecute us for refusing?
Whether is not this to build the Sepulchers of their Fathers, that persecuted
the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, and shake hands with the bloody Inquisitors?
Whether do you think it is agreeable to the nature of the Christian Religion,
for them to compel men by civil penalties to a compliance with them, and
persecute them if they do but in the least vary from them? Plut vit. These. p. 5.
Whether may they with Procrustes the Tyrant stretch out all they meet with to
their own stature, and wrack them into conviction and obedience? DeImper. c 3.
s. 9 p. 55. Right use of the Fathers, l. 2. p. 171, 173. See also Mr.
Stillingf. Iren pt. 1 c. 2. s. 11. p. 64.
The Ancients whom sometimes they seem to have in so much veneration (if we may
credit the quotations of Grotius or Daille) thought and taught quite otherwise.
They were so far from approving the use of a Coercive power in the business of
Faith and Religion, or the exercising of force and violence upon dissenters,
that they looked upon it as unchristian, irreligious, unreasonable contrary to
the example of God and Christ, and contrary to the practice of the Saints. Nay,
they looked upon it as the invention and work of the Devil, and upon those that
did it as his Friends and Fiends. And did they think it unlawful to persecute
or use violence for the Faith it self, and the very substantials of Religion,
and yet do our Adversaries think they may do it for circumstances? Did they
think it lawful to do it for things necessary, and do our Adversaries think
they may do it for things indifferent? Do they think that the sticking at a
frivolous, vain Ceremony, is sufficient ground for them to deliver men up to
Satan, throw them into prison and undo them? if so, who will ever think they
regard Scripture, Reason, or Fathers, more? Who will ever think that they
regard the peace of the Church, propagation of the Gospel, or Humanity more? If
this be the Spirit of our Mother the Church, who will ever think her religious
or Compassionate more? Lam. 4.3.
Who will not take up the words of the Prophet, and say, That she is become
cruel like the Ostriches in the wilderness? Who will not count her hard-hearted
and merciless, Ps. 1^2.6.
and choose rather to be a Pelican in the Wilderness, or an Owl in the Desert,
than lie in her bosom? What Is become of all that grace and pity that her sons
use to say is in her? Does she spend it all upon Harlots and Whoremongers? Does
she lay it out all in conniving at their miscarriages, and commuing and
remitting their Penances? Has she none at all left for the scrupulous and
doubting? This may tempt a man to think, that she is of the same mind with
those of her Sons who teach, That Nonconformity is worse than open Profaness:
That to refuse at the Churches Command to put on a Surplice, is worse than to
Swear, be Drunk, or go to a Bawdy House; as if the transgressing of the
Churches Ceremonial Law, were a greater offense than the breach of Gods Moral
Law, then which what can be grosser Blasphemy? Well, if notwithstanding all we
can say, our Adversaries eye toward us be still evil, Ap^vd M^^n. Mist. ad
ann. 1416. (Edit. lat in yel.) p. 523.
and they will yet proceed to persecute us, we shall sit down and say as
Clemangis did in the like case. These carnal Sons of the Church (says he) do
not only not care for spiritual things, nor have any feeling of them, but
persecute those that are according to the Spirit, as since the time of just
Abel, whom carnal Cain murdered, it has ever been and will be to the end of
the World. These are they who for temporal commodities flee to the Church, and
living like Secular men, covet, and grasp, and rob, desiring to rule, but not
to serve; glorying in their superiority, oppressing their inferiors, rejoicing
in their own pride and luxury. They account gain godliness, and are always
ready to do and endure any thing for the increase of their temporalties, choose
how they are gotten, scorning and laughing at those that are willing to live
justly, holily, chastely, innocently, spiritually. So far he.

Qu. 50. If notwithstanding all the evils we see in the Ceremonies, we should
yet submit to them, whether do you think it would serve our turns? If we should
fall in with our Adversaries, and do all that at present they require from us,
whether do you think such compliance would satisfy them so that they would then
let us be at peace, and live quietly among them? Many wise and sober men think
it would not, but that (if we would be painful in Preaching, holy in Life, and
appear in any good degree for the power of Godliness) we should be as far from
having their true love, and living in peace with them, as ever we were before.
And indeed if we look upon past Ages, and observe what has been the issue of
such complyances, we shall find that the stitching of old and new cloth, or the
joining of contrary Spirits and Principles, Mat. 9 16
has not (as our Savior teaches) filled up the rent but made it worse. When
Paul at his coming to Jerusalem, Act. 21.2.
did upon the advice of some Brethren there, and for preventing the offense of
some Jews, Vid. Tert. cont. Mar cion. l. 1. c. 20. Hieron ep 89. Magd. Cent. 1.
l. 2. c. 10. vit. Paul. Zanch. vol. 2. de vit. exter. cult oppos these. 11. col.
541. Gualth. Bulling and alios in loc. Vid. Theodor. hist. eccl. l. 2. c. 21.
Mr. Park. of the Cross, pt. 1. c. 3. sect. 16. p. 159.
zealous of the Mosaical Ceremonies, comply (and that sinfully as many think)
in purifying himself after the manner of the Law, what did it avail him? Why,
the Jews were so far from being satisfied with it, that they stirred up the
People against him, laid hands on him, reproached him, drew him out of the
Temple, beat him, and had not the Roman Captain prevented, they had taken away
his Life. And when some of the more simple and facil^ sort of the Orthodox in
the Council of Ariminum, yielded to the Arrians that the (...) should be laid
aside, the Arrians did not only publish all over the World, that they had
overcome the Orthodox, and substitute (...) instead of (...), but being
unsatisfied with that, they turned (...) into (...). So likewise when Zeno, to
hush the strife about the Council of Chalcedon, framed his Henoticon, and
Anastasius to accord all parties, established an Amnestia, or Act of Oblivion,
commanding every one to preach according to the custom of his place; and when
Heraclius, to pacify the hot contention betwixt the Orthodox, that held there
were two Wills in Christ; and the Monothelites that held he had but one,
enjoined silence on both sides; what did all this produce? Did it unite the
differing parties? No; but set them further at distance than they were before.
And if we descend to later times, has this course wrought any better therein?
No; but has yielded the same effect it did before. For instance, when
Rochezana with some other of the more lukewarm sort of the Hussites, submitted
upon mutual abatements, to an accommodation with the Papists, what was the
event of it? why, not long after their Adversaries reduced them to their former
state, and made them subject to the tyranny of the Pope as before. And what
became of the German Interim? Did it heal the breach betwixt the Protestants
and Papists? No, but made it wider than ever; and which was worse, begot
differences amongst the Protestants themselves. The like may be said of diverse
other compositions betwixt both Papists and Protestants, Lutherans and
Calvinists, which have proved ineffectual as to the procuring of the unity and
peace aimed at and intended by them. In like manner when those good men that
carried on the Reformation in this Nation in Edward the 6th days, out of a
charitable zeal, let many things alone that should have been removed, hoping
thereby to win the Papists; Smectym. Ed. 5. p. 9.
this their compliance (as some learned men have noted) proved so far from
answering their expectations, that it did not only harden the Papists in their
way, and prevent their coming in to us, but likewise drew many of ours back to
them. But to come yet lower even to our own times; when his present Majesty
upon his coming in, was pleased in pursuance of his Declaration from Breda, to
authorize several learned divines of several persuasions to meet together, and
confer about the Liturgy, and the one party out of an unfeigned zeal to the
Churches peace, yielded further than many of their brethren could have done,
what were either they or the Church the better for it, as to the thing mainly
intended? Their opposites were so far from accepting their condescension, and
answering it with the like on their part, that they loaded some of them, who
labored most in the work, with most odious calumnies and reproaches. When men
are once set upon superstition, they cannot endure to let it go. Though when
they are in a strait they may somewhat recede and give place (as Pharaoh when
he was under Gods Judgments) yet when their opportunity comes, they are sure to
return to their former height. And such is the insinuating, bewitching nature
of Superstition, that when men have entertained it they know not where to rest,
but commonly go from step to step till they have overthrown the pure Worship of
God, and made themselves the perfect Vassals of Satan. Besides, it is to be
observed, that as God has no where allowed his Servants to use dishonorable
unworthy complyances, Cont. Burdegalens. art. 13. p. 430.
so (as Sadeel notes) he does not bless them. And therefore though we should go
against our Consciences, and fall in with the men who are over us in the
Church, and do what they at present require, yet it is scarcely to be imagined
that they would be (...) satisfied therewith, or that God would bless us with
peace in so doing.

And thus I have given you the Queries I promised you, and therein what I
thought convenient to say at this time touching the so much controverted
Ceremonies. I have indeed much exceeded my intended bounds, but the particulars
I had to speak of were so many, and the exceptions to which they (with other of
the plainest truths, in this critical and cavilling age) lie open to, so
various, that I could not, if I would obtain the end of my undertaking, well
confine my self to a narrower compass. What advantage the reasons I have
insisted on might have received from farther amplifications, illustrations,
testimonies, I presume I need not to tell you. All the favor I crave from you
is, that you would allow them a just and even Balance, and then account of
them but according to the weight and worth that thereby you shall find in them.
If the Ceremonies stand chargable neither with all, nor any of those things I
have brought in against them, then you are to acquit our Adversaries, who
defend and impose them and condemn us who refuse and withstand them; but if
otherwise, then you are to condemn them, and acquit us. And yet you are to
remember, that you are not to measure our standing out, as to the matter of
Conformity only by the Ceremonies, so as to judge of our carriage as to that
particular as you find them; for notwithstanding the manyfold evils we charge
them with; yet there are other things urged upon us that we stick at, no less
than we do at them; so that though they were either proved lawful, or the
Imposition of them waved, yet we could not, for very weighty reasons, come in
and do what is required from us, in order to our Liberty. If our Adversaries
will stand to Mr. Answ. to the Pref. sect. 23.
Chilling-worths motion, and take course that there be some form of worshipping
God propounded, that is wholly taken out of Scripture, then they shall find us
no backwarder to comply with them, then they are upon the like terms to comply
with the Papists. They shall then have our heads and hearts, assent, consent
and all; but till then, they must excuse us if we stand at some distance from
them. We must not follow the prescriptions of men, but the directions of the
Spirit of God; who as he knows best what is fit for us, either to observe or
do, so he is only able to bless us in observing and doing of it. But I must
forbear. The Lord be pleased at the last to gather every stone out of his
Vineyard, Isa. 5.2. Mat. 15.13 Mat. 3.12
pluck up every plant that he has not planted, thoroughly purge his floor,
rebuke that spirit of Superstition and Presumption that is gone forth into the
world, persuade us all to be content with his most holy and perfect
Institutions, bind up our bleeding Wounds, take away our Reproach, remove all
the impediments of our Edification and peace, and unite us both in Judgment and
Affection under that one common Head Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be given pure Worship and Service for evermore.

FINIS.
Errata, In the Margent.
Page 11. f. l. r. t. p. 27. f. v. r. c. p. 61. f. Sacrom. r. Sacram. p. 90. f.
comment. r. commun. p. 94 f. c. 98. r. p. 98. p. 109. f. Luc^. r. Luc.

In the Book.
Page 5. l. 7. d. but. ib. l. 9. f. (...) r. (...) p. 9. l 6. f. destroyed r.
delivered, p. 12. l. 14. after, so well, add, with the Customs of Nations. p.
20. l ult. after, set, add, out. p. 67. l. 6. f. (...) r. (...) p. 79. l. 1 d.
this. p 98. l. 26. f. dram. r. dram. ib. l. 30. f. where r. wherefore. p.
103. l. 25. f. a r. the.


