A Complete Course OF Chemistry. Containing near Three Hundred Operations;
Several of which Have not been Published before.

ALSO, The Structure of several Furnaces, with near Three Hundred Characters,
which are dispersed in Chemical Authors; And such Instruments and Ve^sels as
are necessary in a Complete Elaboratory. All cut in Copper.

By George Wilson, Chemist.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold at the Author's House, in Well-Yard, near St.
Bartholomew's Hospital; And by Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Church Yard, 1699.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Paston, Baron of PASTON, Viscount and
Earl of Yarmouth
My LORD,
THE Kind Reception I have upon all Occasions met with from your Lordship,
Emboldens me to lay the following Papers at your Feet; not that I pretend to
offer any thing worth your Lordships Favor, your thorough Experience into, and
Exquisite Skill in whatever relates to Chemistry, makes me too Conscious to my
self how little this deserves your Patronage and Protection.

But since I have no other way left me of acknowledging the many Obligations I
lie under to your Lordship, I rather choose to run the hazard of my Reputation
on this account, then pass off the Stage with the Guilt of Ingratitude upon me,
who must ever attribute all I now enjoy at Home to the Care and Goodness of
your Lordship.

Accept then my Lord, I beseech you, the Sincere, though weak Endeavors of my
Declining Years, and judge not my Respect and Duty by the meanness of the
Performance. The Honor of your Lordships Approbation will Fortify me against
Censure; And however defective I may seem to have been, yet I have still the
hopes that I may by this means Incite others to greater and nobler Attempts of
this kind, and put them upon a deeper Search into the more close Recesses of
this so Useful, but Mysterious Art.

And here, my Lord, I cannot omit, with humble Submission, Suggesting to your
Lordship, how happy would the present Age be, as well as Posterity, if so great
a Genius as your Lordship would please to borrow some few Minutes, from your
other more weighty Affairs, to Collect the Curious Observations you have made
in Cymistry, and Communicate them to the World; What might we not expect from
such Indefatigable Industry, and so great a Capacity! Even the Admirable Mr.
Boil, where he alive, might with pleasure see himself outdone, in what was
his Chiefest Darling and Mistress.

But I shall wave the Enlarging on this Subject, lest by attempting to give
your just Praises I should lessen that Character, which all who have the Honor
to know your Lordship, must confess you truly deserve.

May your Lordship enjoy a full Measure of Health and Honor; and may
After-Ages with Admiration behold your Lordships Excellent Virtues still
shining forth, in a Generous and Noble Posterity, is the Earnest Prayer of

My LORD, Your Lordships Most Faithful, Humble, and Dutiful Servant, George
Wilson.

TO THE READER.
I Need not Enlarge my self in the Use of Chemistry, and the great Improvements
made by it among the Affairs of Mankind; it has been done by many and better
Hands; but in Physic it is of that vast Extent, that every Age, for some
Hundreds of Years, has Administered to its Growth; and with that Success, that
there are few Simples of Note, in any of the Kingdoms, whether Mineral,
Vegetable, or Animal, but have received some Advantage by it: The common
Approbation of the Learned has not only rendered it unquestionable, but its Use
has made it one of the chief Props of Physic; and without doubt it is capable
of being more Improved, and will be in so Capacious a Subject as Nature it self.

But to the Matter in hand, I freely acknowledge the Collection I have made is
not New, nor can I say I designed it, being always persuaded it was the best
way to place those several Processes I have added out of my own Store, under
such General Heads they naturally belonged to, in such manner that it might
make up an entire or complete Body of Chemistry.

As for the Processes which are not mine, but have been Extant before, I have
made use of them as things necessary to my Design, but with some Improvement;
because I have joined new Observations about the way and manner of working
them, which I have found not only convenient, but sometimes obsolutely
necessary, by the Experience of near Forty Years, wherein I have been a
Diligent Operator in Chemistry.

I have divided the whole into Two Courses, as may be seen at the end of this
Book, to save such Gentlemen as are Curious in Natural Philosophy, the Writing
or Transcribing Processes. I have evry much Enlarged the Courses, and have so
ordered it, that the whole may be Finished in the space of one Year.

I have all along studied Brevity, and therefore have rejected those things
which are frivolous, or of little Use: And my Answer to them who find Fault
with the Style is, Perspicuity was more my Endeavor than Ornament; thinking it
sufficient in Matters of this Nature, if I can be understood without any
difficulty.

I shall say nothing of the Processes I have annexed, but leave them to the
Public; only taking notice, That I have briefly given the Properperties, Use
and Dose of each Medicine, that there might be nothing wanting to render it
Complete.

The Contents.
OF Lutes Page. 1 Of the Degrees of Fire Page. 3 Of the Terms that are used in
Chemistry Page. 4
Part I. Of Metals and Minerals.
Of Gold Page. 9 Of Silver Page. 17 Of Tin Page. 24 Of Lead Page. 34 Of Iron
Page. 41 Of Copper Page. 57 Of Mercury Page. 65 Of Antimony Page. 88 Of Lapis
Calaminaris Page. 119 Of Vitriol Page. 122 Of Sulphur Page. 136 Of Arsnick
Page. 151 Of Salt Peter Page. 160 Of Common Salt Page. 173 Of Amber Page. 179
Of Coral Page. 186 Of Japan Earth Page. 191
Part II. Of Vegetables.
Of Rhubarb Page. 198 Of Guiacum Page. 200 Of the Peruvian Bark Page. 204 Of
Sugar Page. 207 Of Wine Page. 212 Of Vinegar Page. 224 Of Tartar Page. 227 Of
Aloes Page. 245 Of Myrrh Page. 247 Of Saffron Page. 251 Of Elixirs Page. 253
Of Opium Page. 264 Of Essential Oils Page. 276 Of Turpentine Page. 280 Of
Benjamin Page. 282 Of Camphire Page. 286
Part III. Of Animals and Insects.
Of Sal Armoniacum Page. 290 Of Urine Page. 298 Of Hartshorn Page. 304 Of
Vipers Page. 311 Of Honey Page. 323 Of Hog-Lice Page. 329 Of Ants Page. 331 Of
Spanish Flies Page. 337
There are several Errata's escaped the Press, those which corrupt the Sense
are as follow.
Page 9. line 10. read and for is, p. 13. l. 1. r. powered for pour, p. 42 the
Process is misplaced, and should have come in after the Third. p. 64. l. 4. r.
Copper for Powder, p. 66. penult. add put, p. 103. l. 13. add half, p. 105. l.
ult. r. half a Dram, p. 271. l. 9. dele both.

The Introduction.
AS in all Arts and Sciences whatever, there are certain Instruments and Terms
of Art necessary to be known, before they can possibly be understood, so in
Chemistry there are certain Requisites to every Operation before it can be
performed, and these are,

First, An Elaboratory, in the Erecting of which care ought to be taken that
there be a good Light, plenty of Water, and large Chimneys, for the ready
Conveyance of Obnoxious Fumes.

Secondly, Instruments and Vessels, and these are of different sorts, and
various Figures, according to their several uses: you will find the Description
of those most in use, in the first Cut of this Book.

Thirdly, Furnaces, which are also of different Forms, some for moist, and
others for dry Heats: the moist are Bal. Maris, Bal. Vaporos. etc. The dry are
the Sand Furnaces, Reverberatories, or open Furnaces for naked Fire, etc. which
may be seen at large in Chemical Authors. But I content my self with describing
those that are necessary; they are in the Plates properly placed in this
Treatise.

Fourthly, Lutes.

Fifthly, Degrees of Fire.

Sixthly, Such Terms of Art as you will meet with in Chemical Authors; And,

Seventhly, Such Characters as are dispersed in their Writings.

A Complete Course OF Chemistry.
Of LVTES.
To Defend a Glass in a naked Fire.
TAKE Yarmouth-Sand, Scoria of Iron, Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, of each one Pound,
Glass, and fixed Nitre, of each four Ounces, of course Tow, cut short, half a
Pound; dissolve the Tobacco-Pipe-Clay in Water, and beat the Glass and Scales
of Iron to fine Powder; then mix all together, beat and work this mixture well,
'till it comes into a stiff Paste; spread it upon the Retort with a Knife, the
thickness of Half a Crown, to the middle of the Neck of it; let it dry gently,
after which you may use it.

With this Lute you may fasten the Receivers in the Distillation of Corosive
Spirits, viz. Ol. Vitrioli, Spirit of Nitre, Spirit of common Salt, Alum, Aqua
Fortis, Aqua Regis, etc.

To Lute Limbecks.

Take Starch, Glue, Flower, and Water boiled, or Flower and Water well beaten
together; any of these spread upon Slips of Paper will serve; but when you
Distill, or Rectify Spirit of Verdigreece, Vinegar, Tartar, Guiacum, Box,
strong Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Hart's Horn, etc. you may
use slips of Bladder, or Parchment, dipped in equal parts of Flower, and slack'd
Lime, beaten into the Consistence of a Syrup, with the Glear, or white of an
Egg.

To Fortify cracked Glasses.

Take the Scrapings of hard Suffolk-Cheese, and Calx Vive, of each alike
quantity, beat them well together, with the White of an Egg, to the thickness
of a Syrup; dip Linen Rags in this mixture, and lay it presently upon the
crack. Remember you mix no more at a time, than you use in the space of a
Minute.

To Seal a Glass Hermetically, is to heat the Mouth of the Glass gradually,
'till it is red hot, and pliable, which you may do either with such a Lamp as
the Goldsmiths use to Solder with, or by a clear Charcole-Fire, and with a pair
of Pincers (being also red hot) nip it up so close, that no Air can pass in, or
out.

There are many other Lutes, but these are sufficient to carry on any Chemical
Operation.

Of the Degrees of Fire.
THE several Heats required in Chemical Operations are as follow.

Balneum Mariae, is warm or hot Water. Balneum Vaporosum, is the Steam or
Vapor of Water. The Heat of Ashes, is sifted Ashes. The Heat of Sand is Sifted
Sand. There is also an Heat of Filings of Iron, A Reverberating Heat, or naked
Fire. And lastly, a Melting Fire. The Water, Ashes, Sand, and Filings of Iron,
are contained in proper Vessels, made of Copper or Iron, and placed in
Furnaces. The Reverberating, or open Fire, is made in the Furnace we call a
Reverboratory, or open Furnace.

All these Heats have their First, Second, Third, and Fourth Degrees of Fire.

The First Degree, is a handful of small Cole, or three or four Charcole, of
the thickness of a Man's Finger, well kindled.

The Second Degree, is six or seven such Charcole kindled.

The Third Degree, is such a one as will make the Fireplace of the Furnace, of
a Worm red.

The Fourth Degree, is such as will cause the Fireplace of the Furnace to be
of a white Heat, or the most extreme Fire you can make.

Of Dry Heats, Ashes is weakest, Sand stronger than Ashes, and Filings of Iron,
stronger than Sand.

Of such Terms as are used in Chemistry.
A Malgama is to mix with,,, or, which is to be done thus:

First, melt the,, or, etc. so that it may but just flow, then heat the till it
begins to Fume; and by little and little, pour the to the melted Metal, and
stir them about with a warm Iron Rod, 'till they are Incorporated: If you would
make the Amalgama so hard as to beat into a Powder, you must take three parts
of the hard Metal, to two parts of: If you would have it so soft as to spread,
you must take two or three parts of, to one part of the hard Metal.

Alcohol is to reduce any Substantial Matter into an Impalpable Powder; also,
very high Rectified Spirit of Wine, is called Alcohol.

Cement, is to stratifie Lamels of Gold with a Paste, made of one part Sal
Armoniack, two parts common Salt, and four parts Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, or
Tobacco-Pipes beaten to Powder, moistened with a sufficient quantity of Urin:
This is called the Royal Cement.

Coagulate, is to Evapourate a Liquid to a Substantial Mass.

Circulation, is a Motion given to Liquors, contained in a double Vessel, or
Circulating Glass, excited by Heat to Ascend and Descend.

Cohobate, is to return the Liquor which has been Distilled, upon the Matter
remaining in the Vessel, after Distillation.

Congeal, is to let a Metal, Wax, or Fat, which is melted, to fix, or cool,
when taken from the Fire.

Detonation, is a Noise that is made when the Sulphurous Parts of any Mixture
rush forth with Impetuosity; its also called Fulmination.

Digestion, is some Matter put into a Menstruum, to infuse in a gentle Heat.

Distillation per Ascensum, is when the Fire is made under that which is to be
Distilled.

Distillation per Descensum, is when the Matter which is to be Distilled, is
placed under the Fire, by which the Spirits are Precipitated and Forced
down-wards.

Dissolution, is to reduce any hard Body into a Liquor, by the help of a proper
Menstruum.

Edulcorate, is to sweeten, or make insipid, some Matter which is Impregnated
with Salts, by washing it with Distilled, or Fountain Water.

Effervescency, is the Ebullition of a Liquor by boiling; or when two Liquors
of a contrary Nature are put together, which cause Ebullition without
separating the parts.

Fermentation, is an Ebullition raised by Spirits that endeavor to separate
themselves from the Body, but meeting with Earthy Parts that oppose their
Passage, they swell, and rarifie the Liquor 'till they find their way out: In
this Separation of Parts, the Spirits divide in such a manner, as to make the
Matter of another Nature than it was before

Filtration, is to purify a Liquor by passing it through a brown Paper; or lay
stripes of Cotton or Woollen in the Vessel which contains the foul Water, to
the middle of the stripes, the other end hanging over the Vessel, which
receives the filtred Liquor.

Fumigation, is to make one thing receive the Fume of another.

Granulation, is to pour a melted Metal through a new Birch Broom, or Brass or
Iron Culender, into cold Water.

Levigation, is to grind any hard Matter into an impalpable Powder upon a
Marble.

Menstruum, is any Liquor capable of dissolving Metals, Minerals, Gums, or any
other hard Substance into a Liquor.

Mortification, is to change the outward Form of a Mixture, as, etc. Also
Spirits being mixed with other things which deprive them of their Strength.

Putrefaction, is the Corruption of any mixed Body, whether by the Air, or other
Mixtures, and which always emitts a smell different from the Body before it was
Corrupted.

Projection, is to put into a hot Crucible, by little and little, any Matter.
Also to put a small quantity of something, to a greater quantity of a Metal,
to Meliorate the Metal.

Rectification, is to Distill Spirits after their first Distillation, in order
to separate from them such Heterogenous Matters have risen with them in their
first Distillation.

Reverberation, is to make the Flames of the Fire beat upon the Matter which is
Reverberated.

Revivification, is to reduce any Preparation of, into its Form again.

Sublimation, is to elevate any Volatile Matter, into the upper part of such
Vessels as contain them, by heat of Fire.

Stratification, is to lay two different things, bed upon bed, or lay upon lay,
one over another.

Praecipitation, is to make any Matter dissolved, fall to the bottom of the
Vessel, by putting something into the Dissolution, which is more agreeable to
the Menstruum.

The Principles of Minerals in the Mines,

(Not to say any thing of the Universal First Matter of Things, not
Specificate) are Argent Vive, and Sulphur; out of these Two are all Metals
Generated, and all Mer^^rial Minerals, of which there are many and diverse
Species, and by the endeavors of Nature, all tending to the Perfection of
Gold, but by different Accidents hindered, or at least retarded, in their
attaining to the intended Perfection, for according to the Purity, or Impurity
of these Two, are different Metals produced.

CHAP. 1. Of GOLD.
GOLD, the Purest of all Metals, is by Nature Generated of a most Pure Fixed,
and a small quantity of clean fixed Sulphur, of most pure Redness, which
tingeth the: That it is most Mercurial, appears by its easy Conjunction with,
and Reception of pure; that this is Fixed, and clear from all Operations upon
it by Fire; that the Sulphur of it is tinging, is manifest by this, That joined
rightly with pure, it transforms, or changes its Color, into a most pure Red;
that it has greater quantity of than Sulphur, is clear from its ready
admission, and reception of.

It is a most Noble Subject for Medicine, in the hands of an Expert Artist;
witness Dr. Anthony's Aurum Potabile.

Purification of Gold.
Put one Ounce of Gold into a Crucible; when it is red hot, put to it Reg.
Antimony three Ounces; let them melt together in a strong Fire, 'till little
sparkles fly about in the Crucible, then cast out the Golden Reg. into a little
Cone, or let it stand in the Crucible till it is cold; then beat off the
Scoria, and put the Reg. into a Crucible, and set it again in the Furnace to
melt; when it is in Fusion, cast upon it two Drams of Salt Peter, and a quarter
of an Hour after that, cast two Drams more of Salt Peter, and so do the third
time, still keeping it melting, 'till you perceive it emits no Fumes, then pour
it into an Ingot, and beat the Scoria off from the Gold. It is then perfectly
Fine, and fit for any Operation.

There are other Purification of Gold, viz. per Cupel, Cement, etc. but this is
the best.

Amalgamation of Gold.
Take of Fine Gold half an Ounce, beat it into thin Plates, heat them red hot
in a Crucible, put to it of clean (first made hot in a Curcible) two Ounces,
and stir them about together with a hot Iron Rod till they grow cool; then wash
them in a Stone Mortar, with clean Salt and warm Water, till the Amalgama will
emit no blackness; this done, it is pure: But if it be too soft for your
purpose, you may squeeze some from it, through a Diaper Cloth.

If you would reduce the Gold into an Impalpable Powder, put the Amalgama into
an unglaz'd Dish or Poringer, place it over a gentle Fire, and the will ascend
in a Fume, and leave the Gold in an Impalpable Powder.

Aurum Fulminans.
Take what quantity of Gold you please, in thin plates, File dust, or small
Granules, put it in a separating Glass, or any other convenient one; pour upon
it, by little at a time, four times its quantity of Aqua Regis, or Spirit of
Nitre, Bezoardick; place the Glass on warm Sand, and let it there continue till
all the Gold is dissolved; then put the Dissolution into five or six times its
weight of clean Water, mix them well by shaking, then drop to the Solution Oil
of Tartar, per deliquiem, or Spirit of Sal Armoniack, made with Salt of Tartar,
or Potashes, till the Ebullition is over, then let it stand ten or twelve
Hours, for the Gold to precipitate, and then pour off the Water by gentle
Inclination; wash it with several clean Waters, till the Golden Calx is
insipid; dry it in a gentle Heat, between clean Paper, and keep for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick.

Its Dose from five to twenty five Gr. given in Pestilential Fevers, and
Smallpox, with good Success, and is often given to those who have too much in
them.

N. B. That you be careful in drying of it, lest in take Fire.

Aurum Potabile, as I Prepared it for the Chief Physician of a Great Prince,
1692.
I Dissolved four Ounces of Gold (purified as before) in one Pound of Bezoart.
Spirit of Nitre, and drew the Spirit from the Gold in a Heat of Sand, returned
the same Spirit upon the Gold, and Distilled it off again. I made the Second
Cohobation with the same Spirit, as also the Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Cohobation, with one Pound of New Spirit of Nitre Bezoart. And likewise the
Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Cohobation, with one Pound more of New Bezoart.
Spirit of Nitre.

Whilst I was doing this, I made the Oil of Chalk thus: I took half a Pound of
clean Chalk, scraped it, and dried it before the Fire in an Earthen Dish, then
put it into a Cucurbit, and pour upon it, by little and little, one Pound and
half of Spirit of Nitre, which dissolved the greater part of the Chalk. I
Filtred the Dissolution, put it into a Retort, and Distilled it in Sand; that
which Distilled from it came off almost Insipid; I dissolved that which
remained in the Retort, in part of the Phlegm which I drew off from it; it set
new Feces; I Filtered the Dissolution again, and Filtered, and Exsiccated, as
before; I dissolved it again in the Phlegm which came off, it then totally
dissolved, without any Feces; I Exsiccated it again, and mixed of it, and the
aforesaid Calx of Gold, ana, and ground them extremely well together in a clean
Marble Mortar, with a Glass Pestle.

I then divided the whole Matter into equal parts, and with one Part I ground
double its weight of purified Salt Peter, and with the other part treble its
weight of Sal Armoniack Sublimed twice, and equal its weight of Stellate
Regulus Martis, in subtle Powder; each Parcel being well mixed by a long
Trituration; I put this Mixture in a Retort; placed it in a Sand Furnace, made
gradual Fire under it for eight Hours, and kept it two Hours longer in the most
extreme degree of Fire; the Sal Armoniack rose into the neck of the Retort, so
much Impregnated with the Sulphur of Gold, that it was as red as Blood.

The other Mixture of Golden Calx and Nitre, I put into a red hot Crucible, by
a quarter of a Spoonful at a time, ceasing one Minute between each Projection;
when all was in, I gave it a strong melting Fire for three Hours, and before it
was cold, made it into Powder in a clean, warm, Iron Mortar, and put it
presently into a clean and dry Cucurbit, and put so much highly Rectified
Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine upon it, as to appear four Fingers above the Mixture,
then inverted another Glass into the Mouth of the Cucurbit, to make it a
Circulating Vessel, and let it stand in a simmering Heat for twenty four Hours,
in which time the Spirit of Wine was well tinged, I decanted it, and put on
more Spirit of Wine, and let it stand twenty four Hours in the same manner as
before, and so did the third time, but then it took but little Tincture.

I ordered the Sublimed and Impregnated Sal Armoniack, with Spirit of Wine, as
I did the other; I put the Tinctures of each parcel apart, into Cucurbits,
adapted Heads and Receivers to them, and in a gentle Heat drew off the Spirit
of Wine, not leaving above eight Ounces in each Glass, both the Tinctures were
deeply tinged, of which I gave a part to the Gentleman that Employed me, who
seemed to receive them with great Satisfaction, and Gratified me generously.

The Operation of both the Tinctures are Diaphoretick, and esteemed great
Cordials.

Their Dose from five to twenty five, or thirty Drops, in a Glass of Spanish,
or French Wine, or any other Vehicle, even to Water.

They are good in Cachexies, Consumptions, all sorts of Fevers, and to such
whose Bodies have been overcharged with Mercurials.

N. B. The several Cohobations are to Subtilize the Gold; the Calcined and
Purified Chalk is mixed with it for a Bole, which by that Purification is
Subtiliz'd sufficiently to mix with the Minute Particles of the Gold, the
better to make it give forth its Sulphur to the Menstruum. In its Fusion with
the Salt Peter; it emits its pure Sulphur into the Nitre, the more gross part
falling to the bottom in a Regulus.

Its being Projected into the Crucible, in so little a quantity at a time, and
so leasurely, is to prevent its boiling over, which it would do by too hasty
Projections.

Its being mixed with clean Sal Armoniack, is to cause its pure Sulphur to
sublime, it being the nature of Sal Armoniack to carry up Metallic Sulphurs.

The Tinctures are taken each by themselves, that the Physician may use them
alone, or mixed, as he pleases.

When we reduced the Gold, we had three Ounces, three Scruples, two Drams, and
five Grains; of a little paler Color than it was at our first Dissolution of
it.

CHAP. II. Of SILVER.
SILVER, or Luna, is Generated or Produced by Nature, of pure Mercury, and a
pure clean, and fixed white Sulphur, but comes not yet up to the Purity and
Fixation of Gold; as is evident by its Diminution in the Fire, as also of its
Sulphur, which is neither fully fixed, nor incombustible. But though its
Sulphur, compared with that of Gold, cannot properly be said to be fixed, yet
with respect to other Metals, it may be called Fixed and Incombustible.

Preparations of Silver.
Purification by the Cupel.
SET a Cupel, made of Bone-Ashes, in a Melting Furnace; make a gradual Fire to
it, till the Crucible is red hot; and to every Ounce of Silver you design to
Purify, put four Ounces of Lead. When it is melted, put in your Silver to the
middle of the Test, keeping still a good Fire about it (under a Muffle) till
you see the Silver lie like a Polished Lump in the middle of the Test. Then let
it cool, and beat it from the Test, and it is perfect, fine, and fit for any
Physical Preparation.

Chrystals of Silver.
TAke of the Cupel'd Silver, what quantity you please, put it into a Separating
Glass, or Cucurbit, and put to it four times its weight of good Aqua Fortis;
set them in Sand, over a gentle Fire, till the Silver is dissolved, then
Evaporate two Thirds of the Liquor, and set it in a cold place to shoot into
Chrystals.

The Infernal Stone, or Silver Caustic.
TAke of the Chrystals of Silver one Ounce, put them in a Crucible which is
capable of containing five or six times their quantity, by reason they are apt
to boil and swell: You must give a very gentle Heat till the Ebullition is
over, then increase the Fire a little, till the Silver sinks, and flows like
Oil, and cast it into a warm greased Ingot; keep it in a Box, with some Cotton,
in a dry place.

The Silver Pill.
Dissolve one Ounce of Refined Silver in three Ounces of Spirit of Nitre, in a
Matras; Distill off all the Spirit of Nitre to dryness, then dissolve the Matter
remaining, in as much Rose Water as it requires; Filter and Evaporate again to
dryness. Then take two Ounces of Refined Sal Prunella, and grind it well with
the Lunar Calx, in a Marble Mortar, with a Glass Pestel, and put to it again as
much Rose Water, as is fit to dissolve it; Filter and Evaporate again to
dryness. When it is cold, put it again into a Marble Mortar, and add two Ounces
of the finest Wheat Flour; grind them well together, with a sufficient
quantity of Rose Water, to make them into Pills, of the bigness of a small Pea;
when the Pills are formed, dry them between Papers, and keep in a wooden Box
for Use.

Their Operation is Cathartick, and Diuretic.

They are given in all Distempers of the Head; and very successfully in
Dropsies.

Their Dose is from half a Pill, to one Pill and an half, or two Pills.

The Precipitation, and Tincture of Silver.
Dissolve one Ounce of Fine Silver, in three Ounces of Spirit of Nitre, in a
Glass Vessel, placed upon warm Sand; when it is dissolved, put it into sixteen
Ounces of Filtred Salt Brine: The Silver will precipitate in a white Powder;
let it stand two Hours to settle, then pour off the Water by Inclination; wash
the Lunar Calx with warm Fountain Water, till it is insipid; then dry it upon
clean Paper; when it is dry, put it into a Mattress, and pour upon it twelve
Ounces of Spirit of Wine, to which put half an Ounce of Volatile Salt of Urin;
stop the Mattress with another Glass, fitting its Mouth; Lute the Joint with
Bladder dipped in the white of an Egg, beaten well with a little Water, then set
it in a gentle Heat twelve or fifteen Days, shaking it about once in twenty
four Hours; in which time it will have acquired a Sky-colored Tincture: When
cold, Un-lute the Glass, Filter the Tincture, and keep for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick, and Diuretic. It is given in Apoplexies,
Epilepsies, Palsies, and all Distempers of the Head.

Its Dose is from five to twenty five, or thirty Drops, in any proper Vehicle.

The Calx remaining in the Cucurbit, may be reduced into Silver again, by
mixing it with equal its weight of Charcole Dust, and a fourth of its weight of
Borax, giving them a good Fluxing Fire in a Crucible.

Diana's, or the Philosophical Silver Tree.
DIssolve one Ounce of Fine Silver, in three Ounces of Rectified Spirit of
Nitre; pour the Dissolution into a Mattress, in which there is a Pint of Clean
Fountain Water, and two Ounces of clean Crude; let the Mattress be no bigger
than to contain this quantity; cover it loosely with some Glass, to keep out
the dust, and set it by in some place where it may not be moved for five or six
Weeks; in which time you will see an Idea, or Representation, of a Tree,
spreading forth its Branches, with little knobs at their ends, resembling Fruit.

Another Curiosity of this Nature may be performed, with a Dissolution of
Silver in Spirit of Nitre, and Distilled Vinegar; but neither of them being of
any other Use, this will be sufficient at this time.

Observations.
MAke all the Dissolutions of, Dissolution.
or any other Metal, or Mineral, with Aqua Fortis, in a Chimney, to avoid the
Nitrous Fumes which are hurtful to the Head.

Lead is made use of to Separate such base Metals, as Superficially adhere to
the Silver. Purification.
For being full of Sulphurous Parts, it readily absorbs, and sucks up the base
Metals, which also abound with foul Sulphurs, and will not permit them to enter
the close Pores of the.

The Test is made of Bone-Ashes, The Test.
because these Ashes contain no fixed Salt; and therefore is Porous enough to
suck in the Lead, with the baser Metals, which adhered to the Superficies of
the Silver.

The Chrystals, Crystal.
or Vitriol of Silver, receive their Cathartick Quality from the purified Sal
Prunella, with which they are mixed. For the sharp Points of the Spirit of
Nitre, which adhere to the Lunar Chrystals, are blunted by the Sal Prunella,
which makes them slide through the Bowels, which otherwise would Corrode them,
and be as Fiery a Caustic, as the Infernal Stone.

The Precipitated cannot be totally Separated from the Nitrous Spirits,
Precipit.
by washing, therefore the Tincture is not (as some fancy) the pure Sulphur of
Separated from its Terrestreous and Saline Parts, by the Spirit of Wine, and
Salt of Urin; but it is part of the Lunar Calx, dissolved by the Spirit of
Nitre, which sticks to the Particles of the Calx, and so Communicates that
Sky-Colour to the Menstruum; for I have more than once Reduced that Tincture
into Malleable Silver.

The Philosophical Tree is a Chrystallization of the dissolved Metals, Diana's
Tree.
which in five or six Weeks time will appear of different Forms, according as
the quantity of Water, and Capaciousness of the Vessel which contains it. For,
if there be too little Water, it will be a confused Lump of Chrystals; if too
much, it will fall into a Precipitate.

The Dissolution of Silver is several ways Precipitated ( viz.) by a Lixivious,
Urinous, or common Salt, and by Plates of Copper. And again, Copper will be
Precipitated by Iron; and that again by Lapis Calaminaris; and the Lapis
Calaminaris will be Precipitated by a Lixivium of fixed Nitre, or Salt of
Tartar; and that Lixivium, by Evaporation, will become common Salt Peter again.

CHAP. III. Of TIN.
TIN is a soft Metal, of a shining blue Color, containing a Mercury something
purer than other Ignoble Metals. It is more Soft and Volatile than Copper or
Steel; more Fixed than Lead, and more Crude than Silver. All its Preparations
are accounted Specific, for Diseases of the Liver and Matrix.

Purgation of Tin.
PUT what quantity of Tin you please in a little Pan of Iron; set it over the
Fire, and when it begins to melt, put to it some Hog's Lard, Wax, or Honey,
stir them about with a wooden, or Iron Spatula, and then cast them into hot
Water; Repeat this two or three times, by which the Tin will be cleansed from
some of its foul Sulphur, and made more bright and hard than it was before.

To Reduce Tin into a Powder.
MELT half a Pound in a Crucible, and pour it into a round wooden Box, cover it
close, and shake it about till it is cold; some part of it will be in a gray
Powder, which put by; that Part which remains in Solid Metal, melt again, and
put it in the Box, shaking it, as before. Repeat the same Operation, till you
have as much of the Tin Pulveris'd, as you desire.

Amalgamation of Tin.
MELT what quantity of Tin you please in a Crucible; put the same quantity of
Mercury in another Crucible; let the Mercury stand in the Fire, till it begins
to Crackle and Fume; then pour it out to the melted Tin, and stir them about
with a small Iron Rod, till they are cold. If you would have the Amalgama so
hard as to beat into Powder, one Part of Mercury will be enough for two Parts
of Tin; but if you would have it soft, you may put two Parts of Mercury to one
Part of Tin.

Calcination of Tin.
PUT what quantity you please of Tin in an Iron Dripping-Pan, Place it in a
Reverberating Oven, and make such a Fire, as to keep it melting red hot, every
now and then stirring of it with an Iron Spatula, full of holes, the better to
break the Tin, and forward its Calcination; this you may continue till you have
a sufficient Quantity for your use.

Salt of Tin.
TAke what quantity you please of the aforesaid Calcined Tin, and Reverberate
it yet two or three Hours longer, stirring it all the time, 'till it becomes
more white than it was in the First Calcination; then put it into a Pewter, or
Glass Vessel, and to each Pound of the Calx of Tin, put ten Pound of Distilled
Vinegar; let them stand (now and then stirring them about) in a small Heat of
Sand, till the Vinegar has acquired a sweet Taste; then Decant, and Filter the
Liquor, and set it to Evaporate in a Pewter Basin, and when you see a Film
appear upon the Surface of the Liquor, pour it into a Glass Funnel (the Hole of
it being stopped with a Cork) and set it in a cold place to shoot into Salt; you
may Evapourate and Chrystallize the remaining Liquor after the same manner.

Sublimation of Tin.
MIX one part of Tin with two Parts of clean Sal Armoniack; both being made
into Fine Powder, and well mixed, put them into an Earthen Cucurbit, which will
endure the Fire; but above two Thirds must remain empty: Place it upon an Iron
Bar, in an open Furnace, which must be set nine or ten Inches above the Grate;
and a third part of the Cucurbit remain above the top of the Furnace: Enclose
the lower part of the Cucurbit with Tiles and Lute, leaving three or four
Registers at an equal Distance one from another, to give Air to the Fire; then
fit to the Mouth of the Cucurbit, two or three Aludels, and a blind Head; Lute
them, and kindle the Fire, and increase it gradually, till the lower part of
the Pot is red hot, in which state keep it, till you perceive the Aludels and
Head cool; then Un-lute the Aludels carefully, without shaking, and wipe off
the Sublimate which adhere to them, and also that which sticks to the upper
part of the Cucurbit.

The Magistery of Tin.
DIssolve the aforesaid Sublimate in clean warm Water; Filter the Dissolution,
and precipitate it with Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Ol. Tartar, per deliqui^m.
The Precipitate will be very white, which must be washed with several Waters,
^ill the Calx is insipid; then dry it gently between Papers, and put it up for
use.

It is a good Fucus, and used in Pomatums, or Washes.

Flowers of Tin.
TAke one part of the Powder of Tin, and two parts of Salt Peter; mix them very
well; then have ready an unglas'd Cucurbit, with a Hole in its middle, by which
the Mixture must be Projected: let the Furnace be of a fit proportion, so that
there may be two Inches clear between the Pot, and sides of the Furnace. Place
it upon an Iron Bar, six or seven Inches distant from the Grate; Fit it in with
Tiles, and Lute, as you did in the Sublimation; have also a Stople fitted to
the Hole in the middle of the Pot. When the Pot is fitted into the Furnace, fit
to it (and Lute the Joints well) three or four Aludels, and to the uppermost, a
Head with a Beak, to which a Receiver must be fitted. Kindle the Fire, and when
the bottom of the Pot is red hot, cast about half an Ounce of the Mixture into
the Hole, which presently must be stopped; a Detonation will follow; when it is
over, project another half Ounce, and so continue (still keeping up the Fire)
till all the Mixture is in; then let all cool, and Un-lute the Vessels
carefully, and wipe off the Flowers upon clean Paper; put them in a clean
Vessel, and wash them with Fountain Water till they are tasteless; dry them
gently between Paper; when dry, put them up in a Vial for use. They are very
white, and serve for the same use with the former.

In the Receiver you will find a Nitrous Spirit; and in the bottom of the Pot,
you will have a hard Lump, which is the grosser part of the Tin, and fixed
Nitre: By boiling, or steeping of it in warm Water, you will have the Water
Impregnated with the Salt Peter, which you may Evapourate to Dryness, or cause
it to dissolve per deliquium.

The Jovial Calx being washed sweet, and dried, serves to be used in
Desiccative Unguents.

Some there are who pretend to order the Flowers, and fixed Powder of Tin, so
as to whiten Copper.

The Gummy Smoking Oil of TIN.
TAke one part of Powder of Tin, and three parts of Mercury Sublimate, mix them
quickly, and put them in a Retort; place it in Sand, and Lute a large Receiver
to it; give it a gentle Fire, which will bring over a Smoking Spirit, when
those Fumes decrease: augment the Fire a little, and a Butter, or Gum will
ascend into the Neck of the Retort; at last let the Fire be increased two or
three Hours, to the fourth Degree, and Crude Mercury will ascend, with a good
part of the Tin, in gray Flowers; separate the Mercury, and put all the rest of
that which is Sublimed, in a Tin Pan, to dissolve in the Air, into an Oil, per
deliquium.

Aurum Mosaicum.
TAke of,, {sal ammoniac}, and Flowers of Sulphur, ana four Ounces; Let them
all be made clean, and grind them in a Marble Mortar, till they are perfectly
mixed: Then put them into a Bolt Head, set it in a Sand Furnace; give it
gradual Fire, to the third degree; in which keep it two Hours; then increase
the Fire to the fourth Degree, and keep it so one Hour longer: When all is
cold, break the Glass; you will find a dirty Sublimate, which put away, and the
Aurum Mosaicum will remain in the bottom of the Mattress. You must Amalgamate
the Tin and Mercury to grind with the Sulphur and Sal Armoniack.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick; and is Administered against Hypochondriack
Distempers, Fits of the Mother, and the Venerial Pox.

Its Dose from ten Grains, to half a Dram.

Observations.
IT is poured into hot Water, Purification.
the better to separate the Fat from it, which you mix with it in its
Purification.

The Amalgama of Tin and Mercury ought to be washed in several Waters warmed,
to take away its blackness. Amalgamation.


If you design to make Salt of the Calcined Tin, Salt.
you must put it in an Iron flat Pan, and Reverberate it two or three Hours
longer, till it inclines to a whitish gray Color.

In its Sublimation you ought to take care that the Sal Armoniack be clean,
Sublimation.
otherways some Particles of Dirt, which has accidentally adhered to the Sal
Armoniack, may discolor the Flowers.

In the Precipitation of its Magistery, Precipitation.
you may use Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Ol. Tart. per deliquium,
indifferently; for they both being Alkalies, weaken the Acid Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, so that it lets fall the Tin which was Dissolved by it.

In the Sublimation of its Flowers I have sometimes used one Part and a half of
Salt Peter, Sublimation.
to one Part of Tin, and sometimes three Parts of Nitre, to one of Tin; but I
find by Experience, two Parts of Nitre, to one Part of Tin, to be the best
Proportion; for if there be too much Nitre, there wants Sulphur to give
Flagration, to raise the Flowers; and if there be too little Nitre, there will
not be of the Nitrous Spirit sufficient to raise them. Also Note, That where
the Powder of Tin is to be used, it is indifferent whether it be that made by
shaking in a Box, or a hard Amalgamation beaten to Powder, or fine Filings of
Tin.

In your Mixture of Tin, Smoking Spirit.
and Mercury Sublimate, for the Smoking Spirit, you must immediately put them
into the Retort, otherways they will attract Air, and grow clammy, and be
troublesome to put in.

Its Stench is very Offensive, Aurum Mosaicum:
but not Pernicious; To avoid the Offense, set it to work in a Chimney: The
Degrees of Fire is the greatest Secret in the making this Medicine, which
observe thus; Keep it in the First Degree one Hour; in the Second Degree two
Hours; in the Third Degree Two Hours; and in the Fourth Degree one Hour.

There is also a Magistery of Tin, made by dissolving it in Aqua Regis; Pour
four Ounces of the Dissolution, into half a Pound of clean Water, it will
immediately turn white; Let it be in a Vessel which will contain three or four
Pints; Then put to it (gradually) so much Spirit of Sal Armoniack, till the
Ebullition ceases; a white curdly Matter will Precipitate; wash that
Precipitate with clean Water, till all its Acrimony is gone, and dry it gently;
This Magistery will more readily dissolve in Distilled Vinegar, and make a
better Salt of Tin, than that Calx made by Calcination.

The Aqua Regis is made of three Parts Spirit of Nitre, and one Part of
Sublimed Sal Armoniack.

CHAP. IV. Of Lead, or Saturn.
LEAD, or Saturn, is a foul Metallic Body, and Imperfect, Composed of an
Argent Vive impure, not Fixed, and Feculent, somewhat white outwardly, but
inwardly red, and of a Sulphur in part combustible; It wants Purity, Fixation,
Color, and Ignition, yielding to an Expert Physician Excellent Medicines.

Purification of Lead.
IT is Purified, by melting with Honey, Wax, or Fat, and pouring them into hot
Water, in the same manner as you do Tin.

Calcination of Lead.
IT is Calcined in an Iron Pan, being kept red hot, and stirring with an Iron
Spatula, after the same manner as you did Tin, till it comes into an
Ash-colored Calx. This Ashy Calx being put to Reverberate three or four Hours
longer, becomes Red, and is called Red Lead, or Minium. The White Lead, or
Ceruse, is made of Plates of Lead, by the Steem of Vinegar, after this manner:
They put into a Glas'd Earthen Pot Plates of Lead, so that they may lie hollow,
either by hanging them upon a Wire, or otherways, and setting them in a Bed of
Horse-dung (with a sufficient quantity of Vinegar in the Pot) for three Weeks,
or a Month's time. When they are taken out, beat off what is Calcined, and put
the rest into the Pots again with New Vinegar, and order them as before, till
all is brought into Ceruse. Lead is also Calcined by Spirit of Nitre, Aqua
Fortis, Aqua Regis, Spirit of Salt, or any other Corrosive.

Litharge is made by the Refiners, when they Refine great Quantities of Silver;
that which is of a Pale Color, they call Litharge of Silver, and that of
Yellow or Red, Litharge of Gold.

Burnt Lead, or Plumbum Vstum, is made by mixing two Parts Lead, and one Part
Sulphur (the Lead in Filing, and Sulphur in Powder) put in a Pot, and set in a
Fire to burn, as long as any combustible Sulphur is left.

Sugar of Lead.
TAke of Litharge, Red, or White Lead, what Quantity you please, Powder it, and
put it into a Pewter, Glass or Earthen Vessel, and put to it eight times its
weight of Distilled Vinegar: An Ebullition will appear upon their Mixture: Stir
them well about; then set them upon a digesting Furnace in Sand; Let them stand
in Warmth three or four Days, two or three times in a Day stirring them well
with a clean Stick, when the Vinegar will have acquired a Sweetness; Pour off
the Impregnated Vinegar by gentle Inclination, and Filter it; then put it to
Evapourate in a Pewter Basin, till a Film appears upon the Surface of the
Liquor; Then put it in a Glass Funnel (the small End being stopped with a Cork)
and set in a cool place to shoot; When it has stood so twenty four Hours, pull
out the Cork, and let the Liquor, which is not Coagulated, run from the Sugar
of Lead.

This Liquor is called Honey of Lead, which you may make into Sugar, by
Evapouration and Chrystallization, or keep to make the Balsam or Magistery, as
follows.

Drop Oil of Tartar, by Dissolution, into the Honey of Lead, and a white Powder
will fall to the bottom; which Powder must be washed sweet, and kept for Use,
which is the same of the Magistery of Tin.

The Balsam, or Butter of Lead, is made by mixing the Honey of Lead with its
equal weight of Salad Oil; Beat them well together, till they are united in the
Consistance of a Balsam.

It is used in Scalds and Burns.

The Balsam of Lead, with Oil of Turpentine.
PUT what Quantity of Sugar of Lead you please, into a Mattress; Put upon it
four times its weight of Oil of Turpentine: Let them stand in a gentle Heat of
Digestion, Forty Eight Hours, shaking them about three or four times a Day: In
that time the Oil will be well tinged; Pour it off from what remains
undissolved, by gentle Inclination; Put the Impregnated Oil of Turpentine into
a Retort, and draw two Thirds off in a gentle Heat of Sand; that which remains
in the Retort, is the Balsam, which keep in a Vial well stopped, for Use.

It is accounted an Excellent Medicine for Healing and Sicatrizing Ulcers. It
is also used with good Success in Cancers, they being touched with it once in
twelve Hours.

The Burning Spirit of Lead.
MIX what Quantity of Sugar of Lead you please, with three times its weight of
Fuller's Earth, Powder of Bricks, or Tobacco-Pipes clean burnt, and beaten to
Powder; Put them into a coated Retort, of which one third must be empty; Place
it in an open Furnace, fit a Receiver to it without Luting, and make a very
gentle Fire under it, to draw off the Phlegm: When the Drops begin to Taste,
Lute well the Joints of the Receiver, and increase the Fire a little, 'till
whitish Clouds come into it, and as you find the Fumes to abate, increase the
Fire to the most Extreme Degree, till no more Fumes appear in the Receiver:
Then take off the Receiver, and put all the Liquor into a clean Retort, or a
Body with its Head placed in Sand. Lute the Joints well, and make under it a
gentle Fire, which will drive over its ardent Spirit, in an imperceptible
subtle Vapor; After that will rise a Liquor (a little tinged) which some call
The Yellow Oil of Saturn, and will appear in little oblique Veins: After that
the Phlegm will rise in strait Veins, and in the bottom will remain that which
is called The Red Oil of Saturn. These Substances ought to be Separated by
Changing the Receiver in the Rectification.

The Burning Spirit is Diaphoretick, and is given in the Plague, Burning
Fevers, Small Pox, and Venerial Pox, and in Hypocondriack Melancholy.

Its Dose is from ten, to twenty five, or thirty drops.

Observations.
THE Pouring it into hot Water, Purification.
is to Separate the Fat from it.

It gains Weight by Calcination, because a greater quantity of Igneous
Particles Insinuate themselves into the Lead, Calcination.
then the Sulphurous ones the Fire drive out. For in Calcination, the Acid of
the Fire, joins it self to the Alkali of the Lead, and having driven away its
combustible Sulphur, makes a new and incombustible Body.

White Lead also gains in its weight by the Acid Particles of Vinegar, and
burnt Lead by those of Sulphur.

Any of these Saturnine Calxes will make Salt; Salt.
but I have found the Flake-Lead, as they beat it off the Corroded Flakes, to
serve best. You may have it at the Colour-Mens for 6 d. per l.

Pewter Vessels are best both to Evaporate and Digest the Distilled Vinegar,
and Lead in; Earthen Vessels suck up too much of the Liquor, and in Glass
Vessels it requires more time, and is in danger of breaking. And, besides, its
Evaporation in a Pewter Basin, makes it shoot better into Chrystals.

I mix Bole with the Salt, to keep it from melting, ^urning Spirit.
so it will the better emit its Spirit.

All Calxes of Lead may be reduced into Solid Lead again, by melting, with
Charcole-Dust, and Nitre.

CHAP. V. Of IRON.
MARS, or Iron, is a foul, imperfect Metal, Generated of impure Mercury and
Sulphur, full of Earth, and strongly United by the Nature of its Parts, but
wanting Fusion and Weight. However, when it is well prepared, it yields many
Excellent Medicines both for Internal and External Use.

Preparations of Iron.
Dr. Willis his Preparation of Steel.
TAke clean Filings of Iron, and Cream of Tartar in Fine Powder, of each alike
quantity; mix them well, and make them into a Paste, with White Wind. Then set
them to dry in the Sun, or other gentle Heat; break it, and if it has not
acquired a greenish Color, Powder it, moisten, and dry it again, as before.

Another opening Crocus with Sulphur.
ANother opening Crocus is Prepared with Sulpher; by mixing equal Parts of
Filings of Steel, and Sulphur in Powder, and burning them in a flat-bottom'd
Earthen, or Iron Pan, continually stirring them with a Spatula, till they come
into a Subtle Powder, which will be black, and is Steel Prepared with Sulphur.
This Prepared Steel being mixed with more Sulphur, and Fired, as before, and
continued in Agitation, will acquire a Saffron-Colour.

Its Use and Dose, as the former.

Crocus Martis Aperiens.
TAke Filings of Iron, what quantity you please, moisten them with Rainwater,
and dry them in the Sun, or at a gentle Fire; when they are dry, moisten them
again, and dry as before: Repeat this five or six times, and the Filings will
be in a Subtle Powder, which is called the opening Saffron of Mars.

You may Expose Filings of Iron to the Air, where Dew may fall upon it, and dry
it, as before; this being repeated fourteen or fifteen times, the Mars will be
converted into a Subtle Powder, which is called Crocus Martis.

Both these Powders are Opening, and given with good Success in the Green
Sickness, Stoppage of Terms, and in Dropsies.

Its Dose from five Grains, to two Scruples, or fifty Grains.

An Aperitive Crocus, in the making of Ens Martis.
TAke the Cap. Mort. of Ens Martis, Put it into a large Crucible; Set it in a
Melting-Furnace, with a good Fire about it; Keep stirring till it has done
Fuming.

Any of the aforesaid Crocuses, after being sprinkled with Vinegar, and being
Reverberated three or four Hours, are accounted Binding, and are given in
Diarrhaea's, Spitting of Blood, Immoderate Hemorhoids, and Terms.

The Dose from fifteen Grains, to fifty or sixty Grains.

Crocus Martis Astringens.
IT is made by Reverberating Filings of Iron, in the Flame of a Wood Fire, for
sixteen or twenty Hours. Some advise to stir it once in two or three Hours; but
this is troublesome, and after all, it is no better than those which went
before, and useful generally for the same Purposes.

Salt, or Vitriol of Steel.
TAke four Ounces of Iron, and sprinkle upon, or moisten them with two Ounces
of Oil of Vitriol: Put them into a Mattress, and let them stand a quarter of an
Hour: Then put to them twelve Ounces of Fountain Water by degrees. When all is
in, set them in a gentle Heat, to stand twenty four Hours. Then decant, and
filter the Liquor, which must be Evaporated in an Earthen or Glass Vessel, till
you see a Scum appear: Then take it from the Fire, and if you see any yellow
Powder in the bottom of the Vessel, decant the clear Liquor from it, into a
wide-mouthed Glass, and set it in a cool place, where it may stand twenty four
Hours, to shoot into Chrystals: Then pour the Liquor from the Chrystals, to be
further Evaporated; and so on, till it all shoots into Chrystals.

It is used in all Diseases caused by Obstructions.

Its Dose, from five to twenty Grains.

Salt of Steel, by the Sweet Spirit of Vitriol.
TAke a Flat Iron Pan, turned up at the Edges, and put into it so much Spiritus
Vitrioli Dulcis, as will fill it two Fingers; let it stand quietly in some warm
place, till it is Coagulated into a Salt; then dry it gently, and keep it in a
Vial, well stopped.

Its Use and Dose is the same with the former.

Ens Martis.
TAke Filings of Steel one Pound, Sal Armoniack in Powder two Pound, mix them
well, and put them into a Retort, which set in a Sand Furnace, and give gradual
Fire to the Fourth Degree: when all is Sublimed, let out the Fire, and you will
have in the Neck of the Retort, the Sal Armoniack Impregnated with the Sulphur
of Steel.

Its Operation is Diuretic, and a little Diaphoretick.

It is accounted a Specific against the Rickets and Worms in Children; also
against Hysteric Fits, and a great Opener of Obstructions.

Its Dose from five Grains to one Scrup.

Diaphoretick Steel.
DIssolve the Ens Martis in a sufficient quantity of warm Water; Filter the
Dissolution, and by dropping leisurly the Oil of Tartar, per deliquium (or
Spirit of Sal Armoniack) into the Filtred Liquor, a Powder will Precipitate;
Let it settle, and decant the Liquor, and dry the Precipitate.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick, and Diuretic, and is given to Hypochondriacal
Persons, also in Quartan Agues.

Its Dose from Ten to Thirty Grains.

The Tincture of Steel.
TAke that which remains in the bottom of the Retort, after the Sublimation of
Ens Martis, Powder it whilst warm, in a warm Mortar, put it presently into a
Mattress, with so much Spirit of Wine, as will cover it four Fingers high; Let
it stand five or six Hours in warm Sand, and it will be tinged of a red Color.
When it is cold, decant it from the Feces, and put it in a Glass well stopped,
for Use.

This Tincture is said to be a Specific against Worms in Children, Cachexia
and Dropsy.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from five to fifty Drops.

That which remains, after the Tincture is Extracted, may be Reverberated a
little; and it is one of the best opening Saffrons of Steel. But the
continuance of its Reverberation three or four Hours, makes it Astringent, as
it is commonly so called.

Another Tincture of Steel, and its Sweet Salt.
TAke half a Pound of Filings, without Dust, put to it one Pound and a half of
Spirit of Salt: Let it stand upon warm Sand twenty four Hours; then decant and
filter the Liquor: Put to the remaining Steel, one Pound and a half more of
Spirit of Salt: Let it stand, as before, twenty four Hours; shake it two or
three times a Day, and in that time the Steel will be almost all dissolved;
Decant and Filter, as before; Put both the Filtered Liquors into a Retort,
which place in Sand, and draw off two Pound of the Liquor; then let the Retort
cool, as soon as you can, but before it is quite cold, pour the Liquor from the
Sediment, into a Glass, and set it to shoot in a cold place.

These Crystals will have a sweetish Taste, and by three or four Dissolutions
and Coagulations in the same Liquor, they will acquire a sensible Sweetness.

This is accounted the best Salt of Steel, and more successfully Answers the
Intentions of all the rest, and is more Pleasant for the Patient to take.

Its Dose is the same with the other Salts.

The Tincture of Mars.
TO make this Tincture you must draw the first Dissolution to dryness, or till
such time the Drops which Distill from it appear yellow; then, to that which
remains, put a Quart of Distilled Vinegar; and let it stand twenty four Hours
in warm Sand; in that time it will tinge: Then take off, and Decant that Red
Tincture, and put upon it more Distilled Vinegar; let it stand as before, and
so proceed till it yields no more Tincture; Distill off the Vinegar, to the
Consistance of a Syrup, and put to it so much Spirit of Wine, as will cover it
Four Fingers; set it in warm Sand twenty four Hours, and it will be Tinged;
Decant that tinged Spirit, and proceed, as long as it will give any further
Tincture

When you have done, take all the tinged Spirits of Wine, and put them into a
Cucurbit, set it in a Heat of Ashes, and draw off all the Spirit of Wine,
except sixteen or twenty Ounces, which will be a deep and clear Tincture. Put
this, when cold, into a Vial, well stopped.

This far exceeds the other Tinctures, and is used in the same Cases and Dose.

The Tincture of Steel, with Tartar.
TAke half a Pound of Rust of Iron, mix with it twenty Ounces of Cream of
Tartar in fine Powder. Put them into an Iron Kettle, with eight or ten Pints of
clean Water; set them over a Fire; cause them to Boil for eight or ten Hours,
and stir them often, still supplying hot Water, as it Evaporates: Then let the
Mixture settle, and whilst warm, filter it, and Evaporate to the Consistence of
a thin Syrup, in an Earthen Pan.

It is a good Aperative Medicine, and given in the same Cases the others are.

Its Dose from one Scruple to five, in any proper Vehicle.

The Anodine Sulphur of Steel.
TAke of the aforesaid Tincture Extracted, with Distilled Vinegar, and drop
upon it, either Spirit of Sal Armoniack, or Ol. Tart. per deliquium, so long
till you see nothing will Precipitate; then let it stand to settle, and Decant
the Liquor, which is of no use: Pour warm Water upon this Precipitate, and when
settled, shake it; Decant that Water, and put on more, and so proceed, till the
Sulphur has no salt Taste; then dry it gently, and keep in a Vial, well stopped,
for use.

Its Operation is Suderifick and Anodine, and is suceessfully used in the Gout,
Rheumatism, Scurvy, all Fevers, and the Small Pox.

Its Dose is from ten Grains to half a Dram, or one Dram, in any proper
Extract, or Conserve.

The Opening Extract of Steel.
TAke any of the aforesaid Opening Crocus's, four Ounces, of the Juice of
Apples (ordered as follows) four Pound, put them in an Iron Pan, in a gentle
Heat of Digestion in Sand, sixty or seventy Hours; Augment the Heat in such
manner, that it may boil very gently, three or four Hours; Stir it every
quarter of an Hour with an Iron Slice, and when you perceive it to be black,
take it from the Fire, and let it stand to settle a little; whilst warm, pour
it through a straining Cloth, and by gentle Evaporation bring it to the
Consistence of an Extract.

It is endued with the same Virtues other Opening Chalybeats are.

Its Dose is from half a Scruple, to two, or one Dram.

You Must put half a Pound of Tamerinds bruised, to four Pound of the Juice of
Apples, and mix them well in an Iron Mortar: Let them stand twenty four Hours,
in a gentle Heat of Sand, then strain it through a Cloth for the use abovesaid.

The Binding Extract of Steel.
TAke of the binding Crocus Martis, four Ounces; Put to it of Red Port Wine
(wherein half a Pound of the Pulp of Ripe Sloes has been mixed and digested, as
in the Opening Extract) four Pound: Proceed in every thing as in the other
Extract, and you have that which they call the Binding Extract of Steel.

It is given in Bloody Fluxes, Looseness, and Immoderate Courses.

The Dose the same with the former Extract.

Observations.
SOme Authors are of Opinion that Steel is the better Subject to Work upon,
Choice of Mars.
and Others give the Preference to Iron; But I think it is Indifferent which we
take, since Steel is no other than a Concentrated Iron; I have used them both
very often, and never found any Difference, either in their Preparation, or
Operation, only Steel (by Reason of its Concentration) requires a little more
time for its Dissolution.

Always wash the File-dust in several Waters, to separate the Dirt, To clean
the Mars.
which has accidentally fallen into it; the Dirt will swim upon the Surface of
the Water, and the clean Filings will sink to the bottom; they are best dried
in the Sun.

Rainwater and Dew are accounted better than common Water, Aperative Crocus.
to moisten the Filings with, because they are Impregnated with the Nitre of
the Air, which causes a better Penetration, and is more Aperative.

In the Preparation of Mars with Sulphur, Steel Prepared with Sulphur.
place the Vessel in a Chimney, the better to avoid those Offensive Fumes it
emits.

This Operation requires nothing but diligent Grinding, Dr. Willis his Prepar.
if there be occasion to moisten it a second time.

Let the Dissolution of Mars for its Salt be always made in a Chimney, Salt of
Steel.
for the better Convenience of the unpleasant Sulphurous Fumes which rise from
it; nor fill the Vessel in which you dissolve it, above a quarter full, lest it
should boil over.

Some Prepare this Salt with equal Parts of Oil of Vitriol, Salt of Mars, with
sweet Spir. of Vitriol.
and Spirit of Wine, but the Spirit of Vitriol dulcified, produces a finer Salt.

Of Sal Armoniack we take two Parts to one Part of Mars, Ens Mart.
the better to Penetrate the Filings, and make a Separation of its Volatile
Sulphur.

In this Precipitation of Mars, Diaphoret. Steel.
the Diaphoretick and Diuretic Operation proceeds from the Particles of Sal
Armoniack, which are mixed with it. Therefore we do not wash this, as we do
other Precipitates.

This Tincture is also Impregnated with the Sal Armoniack, Tincture of Mars.
which makes it operate by Urine.

In this Preparation some use Crude Tartar, Tincture of Mars, with Tartar.
but I rather choose Cream of Tartar, because its grosser, and more Earthy
Parts are separated from it, and therefore it makes the better Penetration into
the Iron.

Some there are who make a Distinction of the Parts of Iron, Sweet Salt of Mars.
affirming that the purer part of it dissolves first, and most easily in an
Acid; but I have often tried that Experiment, and could never find any sensible
Difference. Most Corrosives are capable of dissolving the whole Body of Mars,
but the Spirit of Salt more kindly and readily than any other.

This Tincture is thought to be more Penetrating and Noble, The Tinct. of
Steel, made with Spirit of Salt, Distilled Vin. and Spirit of Wine.
than the Foregoing ones, because the Mars is Purified by three Dissolutions,
(viz.) with Spirit of Salt, Distilled Vinegar, Spirit of Wine, and in each
Dissolution it leaves new Feces.

This is called, Anodine Sulphur of Mars.
The Anodine Sulphur of Mars, because it gives Ease, by quieting the Archaeus.

This Extract must be made with the Juice of such Apples as have an Acidity,
The opening Extract of Mars.
which must be Augmented by that of the Tamerinds, the better to dissolve the
Saline Soluble Salt of the Steel.

The deepest Red Wine you can get is best for this Preparation: The binding
Extract.
The Astringent Quality of the Sloes do much increase the Virtue of this
Medicine.

Notwithstanding all those Preparations which are commonly called Aperitive,
there are some who will not allow any Preparation of Mars to be truly such; but
that meeting with their proper Acid, in great quantity, as in Diseases of the
Liver and Spleen, they become Opening, and sometimes violently Purging.

CHAP. VI. Of COPPER.
VENUS, or Copper, is a Metalline Body, Foul, Imperfect, and Generated of an
Impure Mercury; Its Sulphur is Earthy, Combustible, and of an obscure Red; it
wants Fixation, Purity, and Weight; but if handled by an Expert Artist, is of
great use both for Internal and External Mecidines.

Purification of Copper.
TAke Plates of Copper, of the thickness of a Shilling, lay them stratum super
stratum, with Powder of Sulphur, in a large Crucible; let the first and last
Lays be Sulphur; Put them in the Arch of a Glass-maker's Furnace twelve Hours;
Then take them out, and when they are cold, scrape off what is Calcined: The
rest of the Plates, which the Sulphur has not Penetrated, may be again
stratify'd and calcined, as before: This Calcined Copper is called Aes ustum.

If you would reduce it into Copper again, take the Aes ustum, and heat it red
hot in a Crucible, and cast it into an Earthen Pan, wherein Linseed-Oil is;
cover it presently, to hinder it from Flaming; Let it lie in the Oil till it is
pretty cool; Then take it out, and heat it red hot, and quench it as before: Do
this nine or ten times, every third time putting new Oil: Then take the Copper,
which looks very fine, and with Charcole-Dust, and Borax, put it into a
Crucible; set it in a Melting Furnace; give it a strong Fire of Fusion, till it
is well melted, and cast it into an Ingot.

Another Purification of Copper.
STratifie Plates of Copper with Common Salt, in a Crucible, Calcine it in a
Glass-house-fire, as you did the other; scrape all that is Calcined; and the
remaining Plates stratifie and calcine, as before; Then mix this Calcined
Copper with Charcole-Dust, and Borax, put it in a Crucible, and with a very
strong Fire, in a Melting Furnace, reduce it into a Body, which you may either
let cool in the Crucible, or cast into an Ingot that is heated and greased.

Crystals, or Vitriol of Copper.
DIssolve the aforesaid Copper in Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Nitre: To one Part
of Copper, you must put three Parts of Spirit of Nitre, by little at a time:
Put the Dissolution upon warm Sand, and Evaporate one half; Set that which
remains in the Cucurbit, in a cold place to shoot into Crystals; the Liquor
which remains may be Evaporated as the former, and again set to shoot: Dry the
Crystals between Paper, and put them in a Vial stopped from the Air.

They are a good Caustic to consume proud Flesh.

Other Crystals of Copper, or Verdigreese.
TAke of Verdigreese in Powder one Pound, put it into a Mattress, with four
Pound of Distilled Vinegar: Set them upon warm Sand, the space of three or four
Days, stirring them about three or four times every Day; When it is well
settled, pour off the blew Liquor by Inclination, and put new Distilled Vinegar
to that which remains undissolved, and keep it in the Heat again two or three
Days, stirring it about, as before, and if the Second Extraction be as blue as
the First, pour it off by Inclination, and put two Pound more of Distilled
Vinegar upon that which remains in the Cucurbit, using the same Method as
before. This Third Extraction will take all that is dissolvable. This done, put
all the Impregnated Waters together, and Filter them; Put them in a clean
Cucurbit, and Evaporate one half of the Liquor; then take it from the Fire, and
before it is quite cold, Decant it into a clean Vessel, from the Feces (which
sometimes fall in the Evaporation) and set it in a cold place, where it may
stand forty eight Hours, to shoot into Crystals; Pour the remaining Liquor
from the Crystals, and Evaporate again, and shoot into Crystals, as you did
before.

This is called Distilled Verdigreese, and is more used by Painters than it is
by Physicians; It is very detersive, and is sometimes used Externally.

Spirit of Verdigreese.
TAke the Chrystals of Verdigreese, with which fill a Retort half full; Place
it in Sand, giving a gentle Fire till the Phlegm is Distilled. As Soon as you
perceive the Drops to be Acid, change the Receiver, and Lute it well with
Bladder; then increase the Fire, and the Receiver will fill with white Fumes:
When you perceive those Fumes to decrease, Augment the Fire, and at last lay
kindled Coals round the Neck of the Retort, and keep up the Fire to the highest
Degree, till the Fumes cease, and the Receiver grows cool: Then take off the
Receiver, and put the Spirit into a clean Retort, and Rectify it in a gentle
Heat of Sand: Put it out of the Recipient into a Bottle, and stop it close.

It is accounted a good Medicine in the Palsy, Epilepsie, and Apoplexy; And is
also a good Menstruum to Dissolve Pearl and Coral.

The Dose is from five, to twenty five, or thirty Drops, in a convenient
Vehicle.

The Crocus of Copper.
LET the Cap. Mort. of the Spirit of Verdigreese be beaten to fine Powder, and
in an Unglas'd Pot Reverberated for ten or twelve Hours, often stirring it with
an Iron Rod; Then wash off the most Subtle Powder from the Gross; Dry it, and
put it up for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic. It stops Bleeding, both Internal
and External: It is Anodine, and successfully used in Gonorrhaea's, by
Injection: It is also good against Looseness of the Belly, and Dysenteries.

Its Dose is from five, to twenty Grains.

The Tincture of Copper.
TAke the Reverberated Crocus, before it is washed, four Ounces; Put it in a
Mattress, with Spirit of Salt twelve Ounces; Set it upon warm Sand to Digest,
Forty Eight Hours, (shaking it about three or four times a Day) in which time
the Spirit will receive a Red Tincture; decant the Tincture; Put upon the
Copper half a Pound of new Spirit of Salt; digest, and shake it, as before; Put
the Tinged Spirit into a clean Retort, and draw to a dry bottom in the Second
Degree of Sand-Heat; To that which remains in the bottom, put Distilled
Vinegar, twelve Ounces; Digest, and Agitate, as in the former Digestion, you
will have a Red Tincture, which pour off by gentle Inclination; Put to that
which remains, half a Pound more of Distilled Vinegar, and Digest, as before;
Then put the Tinctures together, and Filter them; Put the Filtered Liquor into
a clean Cucurbit, with its Head and Receiver; set it in Sand, and in the Second
Degree of Fire, let it be drawn to the Consistence of Honey; Then put to it
twelve Ounces of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; Let this Digestion be made in a
Circulatory, or double Vessel, well Luted; give it Forty Eight Hours
Digestion, with the same Agitation as formerly; Decant the Tinged Spirit of
Wine, and put on more; and so do 'till it will Extract no more Tincture: Put
all the Tinged Spirits into a clean Cucurbit, and in a gentle Heat of Sand,
draw all off to about eight Ounces, which put into a Vial, well stopped, for Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick: It is given in all Diseases of the Head, in
Fevers, Small Pox, and the Venerial Pox.

Its Dose is from ten to fifteen Drops.

Observations.
ALL the Faeces from which you have drawn the former Tinctures, you may save,
and Reduce them into a very fine Powder, in a strong Fire, with Charcole-Dust,
Nitre, and Borax.

Such Salt, Purification.
or Sulphur, as you shall find to lie loose between the Cemented Plates, after
you take them from the Fire, you may keep a part, and only scrape off such as
stick to the Plates.

Dissolve the Copper, Dissolution
and Evaporate the Dissolution, always in a Chimney, to avoid the obnoxious
Fumes.

To make the Spirit of Verdigreese, Spirit of Copper.
always choose the Crystals. For Crude Verdigreese being mixed with some parts
of the Grapes (with which it is Corroded) sends forth an Oiliness, from which
the Spirit is not easily Separated by Rectification.

Sometimes the Reverberation of the Crocus is as well Performed in five or six
Hours, Crocus of Copper.
as it is in twelve Hours, according to their Diligence in keeping up the Fire,
and stirring the Matter.

CHAP. VII. Of MERCVRY.
MErcury is no other than a Mineral, or Metallic Water, or Liquor, agreeable
to all Metals, as their Mother, but more closely adhering to Gold, than to any
other, by reason of its Purity; and Philosophically opened, yields the True
Metalline Menstruum, etc.

It is sometimes to be found running in the Veins of the Earth, in the perfect
Form of Quicksilver; but much the greater quantity of it is drawn from a
Mineral Stone Called Natural Cinnaber: The Vivification of it into running
Mercury, I shall give in one of the following Processes.

Purification of Mercury.
IT is Separated from such Dirt as has accidentally fallen into it, by forcing it
through a clean Cloth, or Leather: It is better cleansed by grinding it with
Salt and Vinegar, and washing it with warm Water, and continuing so to do, till
it blackens not the Salt or Water: But there is yet a better way of Purifying
it, by putting what quantity of it you please into a Retort, with equal its
weight of Salt of Tartar, and the same weight of Calx Vive upon it; Place it in
a Sand Furnace, and give a gradual Fire, till it is Distilled into the
Receiver. Some fill the Receiver half full of Water, but this gives an
unnecessary trouble, because the Mercury comes not over in Fumes, but drops out
of the Neck of the Retort into the Receiver. If you repeat this three or four
times, it makes the Mercury extreme bright and pleasing to the Eye, and frees
it from all its foul External Sulphur. It is also well Purified by Vivifying it
from Sublimate, Cinnaber, or an Amalgama of Gold or Silver.

Artificial Cinnaber.
TAke of Sulphur one Pound, melt it in an Earthen-Pan; then put to it by little
at a time, three Pound of Crude Mercury, stirring them till no Mercury appears;
then let them cool; Powder the Mixture, and them into an Oval Bolt-head Luted;
Place it over a naked Fire, which increase gradually, to the Fourth Degree, and
the Cinnaber will be Separated in a Cake above the Faeces.

The Vivification of Cinnaber.
TAke of Cinnaber one Pound, Calcined Tartar, or Potashes, one Pound, Calx
Vive two Pound; Grind them well together, and put them into a Retort, leaving
at least one Part of Three empty. Place it in a Reverberatory Furnace, and fit
a Receiver; Let it stand twelve Hours, and then kindle the Fire, increasing it
gradually to the fourth Degree; Keep it so till the Mercury is raised into the
Neck of the Retort and Receiver, which will be in Seven or Eight Hours time.

Then put all the Mercury into a clean Diaper Napkin, placed over a clean
Earthen Dish, and squeeze it through to separate from it any Heterogeneous
Matter, that may have ascended in the Distillation.

It is also Revived by mixing Cinnaber, one Pound, with one Pound and a half of
Filings of Iron, and Distilling as before.

The Corrosive Sublimate of Mercury.
TAke of Quicksilver seventy Pound, of Corrosive sublimate five Pound, of
Common Salt, and Nitre, of each fifty Pound, of Rubify'd Vitriol, one hundred
Pound; of Caput Mortuum of Aqua Fortis twelve Pound and an half. The Mercury
Sublimate, Common Salt, Nitre, Caput Mortuum, and Rubify'd Vitriol, made into
Fine Powder, and kept each by themselves, are to be mixed as follows. The
Quicksilver and Sublimate must first be mixed with about a quarter part of the
Salts, in a convenient Vessel, by Agitation. This Mixture will grow moist, and
part of the Quicksilver will Incorporate with the Salts. Proceed putting in the
Salts (by a quarter part at a time) till all is in, continually stirring, till
no part of the Quicksilver appear in a running Form: Then put to it the Caput
Mortuum, which will a little thicken it. When these Ingredients are equally and
well mixed, they will become pretty dry, and then you may Agitate them through a
Sieve; And last of all, mix the sifted Powder, and Rubify'd Vitriol. Put this
Mixture in equal Proportions, into Four Subliming Glasses; the Figure of which,
with the Furnace, you will see in the beginning of this Treatise. Place them in
Ashes; fit Heads and Receivers to them, and give a gentle Fire for twenty four
Hours; in which time the Mercury will be dissolved, and an Aqua Fortis will
Distill into the Receivers. After that increase the Fire, and keep it in
continually, till you perceive the Sublimate to rise in the Vessel above the
Ashes, separated from the Caput Mortuum, in form of a Cake, which commonly
happens about the Fourth or Fifth Day. When all is cool, carefully remove the
Glasses from the Ashes, and take out the Cake of Sublimate, which keep for use.

Mercurius Dulcis.
TAke of Corrosive Sublimate, one Pound, to which add of Purified Quicksilver
twelve Ounces; Grind them well together in a Stone Mortar, with a Glass or
Wooden Pestle, till no Quicksilver appear. Then fill one third Part of a
Bolt-Head with the Mixture; set it in a Sand Furnace; let the Sand lie half an
Inch thick betwixt the bottom of the Bolt-Head, and the Kettle, filling it up
with Sand, within an Inch of the Neck; Stop the Mouth of the Glass with a
little Paper, or Cotton-wool; Then give Fire of the First Degree two Hours,
increase it to the Second, in which keep it three Hours; go on to the Third
Degree, three Hours more, and in that time the Sublimation will be performed.
Take it out, when cold, and wipe the Sand and Dirt from the Bolt-head; break
the Glass over a clean Sheet of Paper, and separate the Sublimate from the
light Flowers at the top, and the Dust which lies in the bottom. Afterward
Powder this grossly, and Repeat the Sublimation the Second and Third time. If
you Sublime it six or twelve times, it is called Calomelanos.

Its Operation is Cathartick, and is given to kill Worms, and in all Venerial
Cases.

Its Dose is from five Grains to two Scruples.

Red Precipitate of Mercury.
TAke Crude Mercury one Pound, of Aqua Fortis made as follows, two Pound; Let
them stand in the Heat of Ashes, that the Aqua Fortis may simper till the
Flowers being to appear. Then increase the Fire, till the Flowers rise red
about the middle of the Glass, and proceed with the Fire to the higest Degree,
for the space of three Hours. After which, let all cool, and take out the
Precipitate.

It is never given inwardly, without Correction. It eats Proud Flesh, and is
used for the laying open of Shankers.

The Aqua Fortis for this use is to be made of Alum and Nitre, of each two
Pound, and of Vitriol one Pound, and Distilled as other Aqua Fortis.

The Red Panacaea of Mercury.
TAke what quantity you please of Red Precipitate; Put it into a Cucurbit, and
afterward, eight times its quantity of Spring Water: Let it stand in a Heat of
Sand twenty four Hours, shaking it three or four times; Pour off the Water, and
keep it for Use. Then dry the Precipitate, and put to it eight times its weight
of Spirit of Wine; Fit a Glass to the Mouth of the Cucurbit; Lute it well; and
set it in a gentle Heat. Let it continue there fifteen Days; shake it often,
and after it is cool, pour off the Spirit of Wine by Decantation. Then take the
Precipitate, and put it in a China-Dish, with twice its weight of Tincture of
Sulphur; set it on the Fire, and burn off the Tincture; and then put on fresh
Spirit of Wine; Let it simper two or three Hours, and after it is settled,
Decant, dry the Precipitate, and put it up for use.

It is one of the best Mercurial Precipitates, especially in the Venerial Pox.

Its Operation is Cathartick, and sometimes a little Emitick.

Its Dose is from two to twelve, or fifteen Grains.

The White Panacaea of Mercury.
GRind Calomelanos to very fine Powder, and put it into a Cucurbit, with eight
times its weight of Spirit of Wine; Place it in warm Sand; Let it stand fifteen
or twenty Days, and shake it ever Day two or three times. Then fit a Glass to
the Mouth of the Cucurbit, to make it a Circulating Glass; Separate the Spirit
either by Decantation, or Distillation, and dry the Powder in a gentle Heat.
This is called Panacaea Mercurii.

Its Dose the same with Mercurius Dulcis; and some think it a better and more
safe Medicine, because the Spirit of Wine takes from it some of its Corrosive
Salts, or at least Corrects them.

White Precipitate.
DIssolve four Ounces of Mercury in eight Ounces of Spirit of Nitre; when it is
all Dissolved, put it into a wide-mouthed Glass, in which is a Pint of
Spring Water; shake them together, and pour on Filtered Brine, by little and
little; let the Brine be as strong as you can make it; to a Pint of which put
in two Ounces of Spirit of Sal Armoniack; stir the Matter about, and let it
settle; then put on more Brine; stir, and let them stand to settle, as before;
and so continue, putting on Brine, till you perceive no more will Precipitate
thereby. Then let it stand five or six Hours to settle, and pour off the Water
by Inclination. Put on common Water; stir it about, and when settled, Decant as
before, and so proceed, putting on fresh Water, stirring and pouring off, till
you find the Precipitate insipid. Then lay a clean Paper upon a Chalk-stone,
put the Precipitate upon it, and let it lie there till the Chalk has absorbed
the Water; then remove it to a Board; and let it dry in the Shade, between two
Papers.

Its Operation is a little Cathartick, and Emetick sometimes; it also procures
Salivation.

It is given in the French Pox, Scurvy, and Yellow Jaundice.

Its Dose is from five to fifteen, or twenty Grains.

If you boil it two or three Hours in Spirit of Wine, it will free it from some
of its Corrosive Salts, and render the Medicine more safe.

Turbith Mineral.
TAke four Ounces of Quicksilver, put it into a Retort, and to it four Ounces
of Spirit of Nitre; Let it stand till it had done Fuming, then add Oil of
Vitriol half a Pound; Place the Retort in a Sand Furnace, give it a gradual
Fire to the Fourth Degree, and the Operation will be performed in six or seven
Hours time; Then take out the Retort, and break it; Pulverize the white Mass,
either in a Glass or Marble Mortar; Put it into a wide-mouthed Glass, and pour
to it three Pints of warm Water; Let it stand two Hours, and shake it three or
four times; when it is settled, pour off the Water by Inclination, and keep it
by it self; Put more Water to the yellow Powder; stir it well about, and when
settled, pour off as before, and so proceed with several Ablutions, till the
Powder has no Taste; Dry the Powder upon a gentle Heat of Sand, and put it up
for Use.

The first Washings are good to touch old and stubborn Ulcers with, and to mix
with any sweet Water to Cure the Itch.

The Turbith is Cathartick and Emetick, and is chiefly used in Venerial Cases.

Its Dose is from two to eight Grains.

Green Precipitate.
PUT four Ounces of Mercury into a Mattress, to which put of Spirit of Nitre, or
double Aqua Fortis, eight Ounces. In another Glass put half an Ounce of fine
Copper, which dissolve in an Ounce and half of Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua Fortis.
Put both the Dissolutions together; place them in Sand, and Abstract the Aqua
Fortis. In the bottom of the Vessel there will remain a blackish Mass, which
must be Powdered in a Glass or Marble Mortar. This done, put it into a
Cucurbit, and pour upon it four Pints of Distilled Vinegar; Set it in a Heat of
Sand, where let it continue Forty Eight Hours, shaking it once in two or three
Hours. At last, augment the Fire, to make the Distilled Vinegar boil; Let it
continue so, at least one Hour, and when cold, pour off the Distilled Vinegar
by Inclination, and you will find it tinged of a green Color; Put upon that
which remains, more Distilled Vinegar, and proceed as before; Filter the tinged
Vinegar, and put it into a Cucurbit; set it in a Heat of Sand, to Evaporate
gently, to the Consistence of Honey, or that it begins to sparkle; then take it
from the Fire, and let it cool; when it is cold it will be an hard Mass, which
make into fine Powder, and keep for Use.

Its Operation is Cathartick, and Emetick.

It is a Specific in Gonorrhaea's, and is given in all Venerial Cases.

The Dose is from two to six Grains.

Aethiops Mineral.
TAke Flowers of Sulphur, and crude, clean Mercury, of each half a Pound; Let
them be ground together in a clean Iron Mortar, till they are Incorporated into
a black Powder. It will take up four or five Hours time to grind it.

The Coraline Secret of Mercury.
TAke four Ounces of Red Precipitate, put it into a Retort, and put to it eight
Ounces of Spirit of Nitre; set it in a Sand Furnace, and draw off the Spirit in
a gradual Heat, to the Fourth Degree: This Operation will be performed in five
or six Hours: Return that Spirit of Nitre, with four Ounces of new Spirit upon
the Precipitate, and draw off, as before; Repeat the same Operation, with four
Ounces of new Spirit; and at last let it continue at least two Hours, in the
Fourth Degree of Fire; Then let all cool, and you will have a very Red and
Subtle Powder, which put in a Crucible, and set in a Fire of Charcole, but not
exceeding a Worm Red, half a quarter of an Hour; Then put it into a Mattress,
and put to it three Pints of Distilled Fountain, or Rainwater; set it in a
Sand Furnace, and give it a gradual Fire till it boils; and so keep it half an
hour: Pour off that Water by Inclination, and dry the Powder gently: Then put
to it twelve Ounces of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, and in a gentle Heat draw it
off, and so proceed by two Cohobations. Then put to it twelve Ounces of new
Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, fit a Glass to the Mouth of the Cucurbit, to make it
Circulatory; Let it stand in a gentle Heat of Sand Forty eight Hours; and at
the last of all, let it simper a little; then let all cool; Decant the Spirit
of Wine, and dry the Powder, which is called Arcanum Coralinum.

Its Operation is chiefly Cathartick.

It is given in the Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, and the Pox; and is one of the best
Precipitates commonly made.

Its Dose is from three to ten Grains.

Oil of Mercury.
EVaporate the First Washings of Mineral Turbith to a Salt; set it in a cold
moist place, and it will Dissolve into a strong Corrosive Liquor, which is
called, Oil of Mercury.

It is of excellent Use to touch Venerial Shankers, if you apply to them
Pledgets dipped therein.

Another Oil of Mercury.
TAke four Ounces of Corrosive Sublimate, and of Sublimed Sal Armoniack half a
Pound; make them both into Fine Powder, and mix them well; put them into a
Retort; place it in Sand, with a Receiver to it; make a Fire, which raise
gradually, to the Fourth Degree, and in seven or eight Hours time the Operation
will be done.

Take all that is Distilled and Sublimed, grind it in a Glass or Marble Mortar,
and afterward set it in a Cellar, in a flat Glass, to Dissolve into a Liquor,
which is called, Oil of Mercury.

It is Endued with the same Virtues the Preceding Oil is.

Observations.
TAke care you place the Mixture in a Chimney, Cinnaber.
that the Stench of the Brimstone do not offend you. And Note, that it is
sufficient if the Sulphur be kept in just so much Heat as to be Fluid, till
such time the Mercury be Incorporated with it.

The Mixture is left twelve Hours without Fire, Revificat. of Cinnab.
to give the Calx time to swell gradually, which otherways might endanger
cracking the Retort; And also that the Alcalical Salt may have Mortified the
Acid Sulphurous Spirit, by which the Mercury was Coagulated; which done, the
Mercury will separate more easily: As for putting Water into the Receiver, it is
a trouble to no purpose; for I have several times Revived Mercury from an
Amalgama of Cinnaber, Sublimate and Precipitate, without one drop of Water in
the Receiver.

The Mixture of Crude Mercury, Corrosive Sublimate.
Sublimate, Salt, and Nitre, becomes moist, and of a pappish Substance; to
which, if you put the Rubify'd Vitriol, it would presently grow hard as a
Stone; which would be very troublesome to Reduce again into Powder. But the
Caput Mortuum of Aqua Fortis, or (if you have it by you) some Caput Mortuum of
Mercury Sublimate answers the same end, and brings the Mixture to a temperate
dryness, which by Agitation comes into a Powder of it self. With this Powder
the Rubify'd Vitriol may conveniently be Incorporated, and the Operation ought
always to be performed in a Chimney, to avoid the Nitrous Fumes, which are very
Suffocating. You may make the Composition in any quantity your occasion
requires; the less your quantity of Mixtures, the less Time and Fire will
finish the Operation.

When you grind the Sublimate and Crude Mercury together, The Sweet Sublimate
muffle your self with a Napkin, or Handkerchief, to keep the Volatile Atoms,
which will rise from the Sublimate, out of your Mouth and Nostrils; and be
careful not to make the Fire too big, for too fierce a Fire makes it rise
black, and if so, you must Sublime it again; and if that Sublimation does not
bring it to its color, mix with every Pound of Mercurius Dulcis, one Ounce and
a half of decrepitated Salt, and Sublime again.

The Aqua Fortis which you save in making of Sublimate is best for this
Operation, Precipitate Red Subli.
which also ought to be performed in a Chimney. Before you put the Spirit of
Wine to it, White Panacaea of Mercury.
you must reduce it into a most impalpable Powder, which must be past through
the finest Sieve, that so the Spirit of Wine may the better act upon those
Minute Atoms, and wash off part of the Corrosive Salt which keeps it in a dry
Form.

The Red Precipitate must also be ground very fine, Red Panace of Mercury.
before it is washed, for the Reason aforesaid.

Put not above two Ounces of the Spirit of Nitre at a time upon the Crude
Mercury; White Precipitate
and when it has acted upon the Mercury, and the Fumes begin to cease, put on
two Ounces more, and so do till the Mercury is all dissolved; If you should put
all the Spirit of Nitre on at once, the action would be so violent that it
would heat too suddenly, and endanger the Glass: Be as cautious as you can, the
Fumes will rise with some violence, and therefore this Operation ought always
to be done in a Chimney that the ill Fumes may be avoided.

The Oil of Vitriol does not Dissolve the Mercury, Mineral Turbith.
it only calcines it, but the Spirit of Niter dissolves it, and produces a
Turbith more subtle than that made with Oil of Vitriol alone.

Here is nothing worthy of Remark, Aethiop Mineral.
but to choose clean and good Ingredients, and to grind so long, till the
Medicine becomes very black.

You ought to observe the same precaution here, as in the White Precipitate,
Green Precipitate.
viz. to put the Spirit of Niter upon the Mercury by little and little, and
also to perform the Operation in a Chimney.

You may take clean crude instead of Red Precipitat if you please; Arcanum
Coralinum.
The first Dissolution and Exsiccation makes it Red Precipitate, Then you may
freely put all the Spirit of Niter upon the Precipitate at once, because the
Action of the Mercury, and Spirit of Niter is over in the first Dissolution of
the Mercury. In all things else proceed as the Process directs.

These Oils are Mercury coagulated by the corrosive Spirits of Vitriol, Oils of
Mercury^
common Salt, and Sal Ammoniac, which afterward will dissolve again like a
Salt; it ought to be Evaporated in Glass, because Earthen Vessels will suck in
too much of the Salt, and it will prey upon the Lead with which the Vessel is
glazed.

If you desire to make Mercury Sublimate in a small quantity, Corosive
Sublimate in small quantity.
Dissolve one Pound of crude Mercury in 18 or 20 Ounces of Spirit of Niter:
Distill off that Spirit, break the Glass, and take out the Mass, beat it into
Powder in a Glass or Marble Mortar; and afterward take of Vitriol calcined and
powdered, and Common Salt Ana one Pound; Grind them all well together; Fill a
Mattress not above half full, and set it on a Sand Furnace; Increase the Fire
gradually to the Third Degree, and the Sublimate will all rise in Seven or
Eight Hours.

CHAP. VIII. Of Bismuth, or Tinglas.
IT is a Smooth, White, Metallic Matter, brittle, and breaks in large Flakes
like Regulus Martis. It is Artificial, and composed of Tin, Tartar, and
Arsnick, but not made in any Quantity in England, but in the Northern Parts of
Germany, from whence we have it.

Preparations of Bismuth, or Tinglass.
Flowers of Bismuth, or Tinglass.
BEat the Tinglass into very fine Powder, and to Four Ounces of it put half a
Pound of Nitre also in fine Powder; put in that Mixture by half a Spoonful at a
time, when the Body is red hot; and when the Operation is over, take away the
Aludels, and wipe off the Flowers with a Feather.

These Flowers are very white, and Esteemed an Excellent Fucus.

Magistery of Bismuth.
PUT one Pound of Spirit of Nitre, (made with Oil of Vitriol) in a quart Body
uncut, and put to it as much Powder of Tinglass, by an Ounce at a time, as the
Spirit is capable of dissolving, which will be about Seven or Eight Ounces;
Then take two Gallons of Water, and dissolve in it four Ounces of Common Salt;
Filter the whole, and put it into a clean, Earthen Pan; Pour upon it the
Dissolution of Bismuth, and immediately it will turn Milky, and a Precipitate
will fall; Permit it to stand till settled, and by gentle inclination, pour out
the Water from the Magistery; put on more fresh Water, stir it well, and when
settled, pour it off, and so continue the ablutions, till the Magistery is
insipid, which dry gently, and keep for use, which is the same with the Flowers.

Observations.
LET all be sublimed, Flowers of Bismuth.
which will rise from one half Spoonful, before you put in another, which you
may know by a little crackling Noise which will cease; Wash the Salt from that
which remains in the bottom of the Subliming Pot, and it is not only a good
Fucus, but also a good Diaphoretick, especially if the Spirit of Nitre be once
or twice distilled from it after it is washing.

Its Dose and Virtue is the same with Mineral Bezoar.

Be sure to place the Cucurbit (in which you make the Dissolution) in the
Chimney, Magistery of Bismuth.
the better to convey the Fumes, which are bad for the Breast, Lungs and Brain;
And if you see a black Scum upon the Surface of the Water, when you make the
Precipitation; take it off with a Spoon.

CHAP. IX. Of Antimony.
ANtimony is a Mineral Body, nearly related to Metals, but more approaching to
the Nature of Saturn. It is composed of a Mineral Sulphur, partly pure, and of
a Solar Nature, and partly combustible, like other Sulphur.

It is full of an indigested fuliginous Mercury, but more fixed than the
Common. It is a most excellent Subject both for Internal and External Medicine,
etc.

Regulus of Antimony.
TAke of Antimony one Pound, Tartar Twelve Ounces: Nitre Six ounces, powder
them finely and mix them exactly; Then put your Crucible in a Melting Furnace,
let the Fire increase gradually till the Crucible is red hot, before you put in
your mixture, which do by a small spoonful at a time till all be in; Then
increase the fire and stop the door of the Wind-Furnace and there let it
continue in Fusion half or three quarters of an hour till its sparkling in the
Crucible is well spent, Then Pour it into a little Mortar, being first made
clean, and afterward heated and greased with a little butter, Tallow, or Wax.
Let it stand till cold; and then turn it out; beat of the Scoria; and put it by
in an Earthen Pan to make the Sulphur Auratum with; Then melt your Regulus
again, and project one Ounce of Nitre in Powder: let it stand in fusion a
quarter of an hour, and cast it out into the Mortar heated and greased as
before, and it will be more pure.

If you would have it yet more pure, repeated the last Operation once more,
still saving the Scoria together; This Regulus you may form into Cups, Pills,
or infuse it in White Wind Ten or Twelve Hours, and it will have the same
Operation with the infusion of Crocus Metallorum.

Different Quantities are used in the making this Regulus; Some take Equal
parts of Antimony, Nitre and Tartar; Others, Antimony one Pound, Tartar one
Pound and an half, and Nitre two Pounds; but I have found no Composition
produce more, nor better Regulus than this I have given you.

The Golden Sulphur of Antimony.
Boil the Scoria's of the Regulus in Twenty times its Weight of Fountain Water,
the space of one Hour; Stir it often, and whilst hot, run it through a fine
Straining-Clout; Then put Distilled Vinegar to it, and there will Precipitate a
red Powder; Let it stand to settle, and drop more Distilled Vinegar into it,
and if it turn the clean Liquor muddy, let it settle, and drop yet more
Distilled Vinegar again into it; and so proceed till you see the subsiding
Liquor will not turn muddy by putting Distilled Vinegar to it; Wash it with
many warm waters till it is without Taste or Smell; Then put it into a Coffin
of Paper to drain off as much of the Water as you can; And lastly, Put it into
a flat Earthen Dish, and set it in a gentle warmth to dry.

It is Emetick and Cathartick, and Endou'd with the same Virtues other
Antimonial Emeticks are.

Its Dose is from one to Six or Eight Grains.

The Martial Regulus of Antimony.
TAke of small Nayls one Pound and an half, put them into a large Crucible
placed upon a Tile in a Melting Furnace, let the Fire Kindle about them
gradually till the nails are ready to melt, then project (by a good spoonful at
a time) of Antimony one Pound, Nitre Four Ounces, and Two Ounces of Tartar,
powdered and well mixed. Bury the Crucible in Charcole, shut the Door of the
Furnace, and let it stand in the strongest Fusion till it has done sparkling:
Then take it from the Fire, and pour it into an Iron Mortar, hot and greaz'd as
usual: When it is cold, beat off the Scoria, and Melt it again; and put to it
(by a Spoonful at a time) Two or Three Ounces of Nitre in gross Powder; Let it
stand in strong Fusion as before, till it cease to sparkle; then remove it from
the Fire, and pour it into a warm Mortar as before: Repeat the same Operation
the Third and Fourth time, always casting in Two Ounces of Nitre, but the
Fourth Time, let the Regulus melt well, before you put in the Saltpetre; when
cold, beat off the Scoria, and you will see a perfect Star upon the Surface of
the Regulus.

Its Operation is as the Regulus Antimonii, but more Cathartick. Some say, it is
altogether Cathartick, but I have not found it so.

It is given in the Venereal Disease, Dropsy, and Scurvy.

Its Dose is from Two to Eight Grains.

Regulus of Antimony with Tin.
TAke good Regulus of Antimony Four Ounces; Melt it in a Crucible with Four
Ounces of Tin a quarter of an Hour, in which time put in one Ounce of Nitre,
and when the Flame is spent, and the Matter well fluxt; take it from the Fire,
and cast it into a warm, greaz'd Mortar.

In the same Manner you may make the Regulus of Gold, Silver, Copper, or Lead.

It is usually given in the Suffocation of the Womb, and to open all
Obstructions.

Its Dose is from Three Grains, to a Scruple.

Crocus Metallorum.
TAke of Antimony one Ounce, Nitre Fourteen Ounces, and Common Salt Twelve
Ounces; Powder them finely, and mix them well: Set a Crucible in the Fire; when
it is red hot, put in the Mixture by a Spoonful at once; When all is in, shut
the Door of the Furnace; Let the Matter stand in strong Fusion half an Hour;
Then take it from the Fire, and cast it into a warm, greaz'd Mortar.

Its Operation is Emetick. But the Infusion of it in White Wind or Canary, is
generally used thus, ( viz.) One Ounce of the Crocus in fine Powder, to a Quart
of Wine; of which is given from one Ounce and an half, to Four Ounces.

Its Dose is from Two to Eight Grains.

Diaphoretick Antimony.
TAke of Antimony one Pound, and Saltpetre Three Pounds; Powder and mix them
exactly; Then put them into a red hot Crucible, by a Spoonful at a time, and
let it stand half an Hour; Remove it before it is quite cold, and put it into a
large Earthen Pan, almost full either of hot or cold Water: Let it remain there
Ten or Twelve Hours to dissolve the Salt; then take it out, and if any of the
Calcined Antimony adheres to the Crucible, scrape it off with a Knife; stir the
white Matter about with a clean Stick, and when it is well settled, decant the
Water into a clean Pan, and keep it to make the Antimonial Sal Prunellae; Put
on more warm Water, and decant it as useless; Repeat the Ablution till the
Antimony is insipid. When this is done, put more fresh Water, stir it about,
and presently pour it off into another Pan; put on more, and pour off as
before, and so do till all the finest part of the Preparation is washed off, and
by this means you may separate it from the gross, dirty part: Having thus
separated the siner part, let it stand to settle, and pour off the Water by
Inclination; Put the Antimonium Diaphoreticum upon a clean Sheet of white-brown
Paper, and lay it upon a Chalk Stone to suck in the Moisture; Remove it into a
very gentle heat to be perfectly dried, and put it up for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick, and is given in Vereal Diseases, Dropsies,
Scurvies, Malignant Fevers, and the Small Pox.

Its usual Dose is from Five Grains to Twenty-Five; but I have known it given
with good Success by half an Ounce at a Dose, and repeated Two or Three times
in a day, and that for several days successively.

The first Washing which you put by, may be evaporated, and you will have the
Antimonial Sal Prunellae, which is endowed with the same Virtues as Sal
Polichrestum.

Cerus of Antimony.
IT is made with the Regulus of Antimony and Niter in the same Proportion and
Manner as you made the Antimonium Diaphoreticum.

Its Use and Dose the same.

Antihecticum Poterij.
IT is made of one part of Regulus Jovis, and three parts of Nitre beaten into
Fine Powder, and mixed, and in all things proceed as you did with Cerussa
Antimonij.

Its administered in the Pox, Hectic Fevers, and Consumptions.

Its Dose is from Five Grains to a Dram.

The Medicinal Antimony.
ANtimony Five Ounces, Salt of Tartar one Ounce, Common Salt Four Ounces,
Powder and Mix them well, and let them stand in the Crucible half an Hour
melted; Then turn out the Compound into a warm, greaz'd Cone, or let it stand
in the Grucible till cold; beat off the Scoria, and powder the purer part which
remains in the bottom; give it several lotions of warm Water till the Salts are
all washed from it: Then dry it, and keep it for use.

Some attribute only a Diaphoretick Quality to it; but it will in some
Constitutions* both Vomit and Purge.

Its Dose is from Three to Fifteen Grains.

The Magistery of Antimony.
TAke Four Ounces of Antimony in very Fine Powder; Put it into a large Mattress;
pour upon it one Pound of Aqua Regis by Four Ounces at a time, set it upon a
Sand-heat in a Chimney, that the Fumes may ascend without offense; Make a small
Fire, and let it stand in a heat of digestion Ten or Twelve hours, shaking it
once in Two or Three hours; Then let it cool and put to it a Gallon of Fountain
Water, which you must pour off before it settles; put to it more Water: stir it
and pour it to the other before it settles, repeat this Operation till nothing
remains in the Mattress but a Yellow Powder, which is the combustible Sulphur of
Antimony; Let the white powder settle, and decant the Water, and by several
Ablutions make the Magistery, insipid, dry it, and Keep it for use.

Its operation is more Cathartick than Emetick, sometimes it operates by Sweat.

It is used in Apoplexies, the Palsy, and Hypochondriacal Distempers.

Its Dose is from Five to Fifteen Grains.

Poterius his Cordial.
TAke Regulus Martis in fine Powder Four Ounces, of Gold dissolved in Aqua
Regis one Ounce and an half; Let the Aqua Regis be drawn from the Gold, then
mix it with the Regulus; Put to the Gold and Regulus, twelve ounces of Nitre;
Mix all Exactly, and put it into a red hot Crucible by a spoonful at a time;
Let it stand in a melting heat an hour, then let it cool, and proceed, as you
did in the Antihecticum Poterij, or Cerussa Antimonij: I have made it both with
Gold and the anodine Sulphur of Mars; and the latter has been approved of as
the better Medicine.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick, and It is said to be a purifier of the Blood, a
strengthener of the Heart and Stomach, good against Malignant Fevers, the
Smallpox, and the Plague.

Its Dose is from Six Grains to Two Scruples.

If to one Ounce of this Magistery you put Twelve Ounces of Spiritus Nitri
Dulcis, and let them stand Three days in Digestion in a Mattress, shaking them
now and then, after which draw off the Spiritus Nitri Dulcis; and if you
afterward put upon it one Pound and an half of Spirit of Wine tartaris'd, and
let it stand Twenty Four hours on warm Sand and Decant the Spirit of Wine, and
lastly set it in the Arch of a Glass-House Five or Six Days, it will have
aquir'd a red color, and be more Diaphoretick.

Its operation is then Diaphoretick and sometimes a little Cathartick; and I
have heard it has cured the Venerial Pox and Gout, King's Evil, and Leprosy.

Its Dose the same as before.

The Glass of Antimony.
TAke a Pound of Antimony, and reduce it into Fine Powder, and set it over a
gentle Fire; calcine it in an Unglaz'd Pan, till it comes to be of an
Ash Color and ceases to Fume; you must keep it continually stirring, and if it
should run into Lumps, you must powder them again, and then proceed to finish
the Calcination: When that is done, put the Calcined Antimony into a Crucible;
set it upon a Tile in a Wind Furnace; put a thin Tile on the Top, and cover it
all over with Coals, and when it is brought to Fusion, keep it so in a strong
Fire for an Hour; then put into it an Iron Rod, and when the melted Antimony
which adheres to it, is transparent, power it upon a smooth hot Marble, and when
it is cold, put it up for use; This is Vitrum Antimonii, or Stibium.

Its Operation is Emetick, and one of the strongest that is prepared.

Its Dose is from Two to Eight Grains. It is used in Infusion like Crocus
Metallorum, and given in the same Cases.

White Flowers of Antimony.
PRepare a Set of Subliming Pots, and let the lowermost be of the Shape of an
Earthen Body; it must be Twelve or Fourteen Inches high, and its Mouth Three
Inches Diameter; In the middle of this Body must be a Perforation of an Inch
and a quarter Diameter, exactly fitted with a Stopple of good Earth; Place this
upon an Iron Bar in a naked Furnace, Nine or Ten Inches above the Grate; and
close the Body to the Perforation with Lute and Tiles, only leaving Three or
Four Registers of an Inch and a quarter Diameter, at an equal Distance. Then
fit to it Three or Four Aludels of Earth, one above another, and upon the
uppermost Aludel fit a Glass-Head with a Beak; Lute the junctures of the
Aludels Body and Head; and to the Beak fit a small Receiver un-Luted.

Kindle the Fire, and when the lower Pot is red hot, put in of Antimony in
Powder about a Spoonful, with a Latinware Scoop made for that purpose; Keep up
the Fire well, and when you perceive no more Fume to rise into the Head, put in
another Spoonful, and so continue till you have as many Flowers as you desire;
when all is cold, take off the Aludels carefully, and with a Feather wipe off
the Flowers upon a Sheet of Paper, and put them up for use.

It is a strong Emetick, and its violence is such, that it is seldom given
without Correction.

It is given to Lunaticks; also in Agues, and all intermitting Fevers.

Its Dose is from Two to Five or Six Grains.

Flowers of Regulus of Antimony, with Sal Ammoniac.
TAke Regulus of Antimony, and clean Sal Ammoniac ana half a Pound, Powder and
Mix them well; and in all things proceed as in making the other Flowers. When
you wipe the Flowers from the Aludels; Put them into clean Water to dissolve
the Sal Armoniacum, and wash the Flowers from the Salt; Dry them, and put them
up in a Vial for use.

They are not so violent as the former, and given in the same Cases.

Antimonium Resuscitatum, or Antimony Revived.
TAke the Flowers of Antimony and Sal Armoniacum, without separation; Put them
into a Cucurbit, and to every Four Ounces of these Flowers, put of Distilled
Vinegar One Pound; Let them stand upon warm Sand in Digestion Eight Days; Then
exhale the Distilled Vinegar, and by Ablution sweeten the Flowers, which then
will be of the Pristine Color of Antimony, and is accounted a very good
Medicine.

Its Operation is Emetick and sometimes Diaphoretick.

It is administered in the Scurvey, Dropsy, Jaundice, Agues, Fevers and
Consumptions.

Its Dose is from Four to Ten Grains.

Dr. B's. Panacaea of Antimony.
TAke of Antimony Six Ounces, of Nitre Ten Ounces, of Common Salt One Ounce and
an half, and of Charcole an Ounce; Let them all be made into Fine Powder, and
well mixed, and be put into a red-hot Crucible by half a Spoonful at a time,
continue the Fire a quarter of an Hour after: Then either pour it into a Cone,
or let it cool in the Crucible, and you will find Three Substances, viz. in the
Bottom a little Regulus; above that a compact Matter, something like the Liver
of Antimony, and upon the Surface, a more Spungy Mass; separate them one from
another, and put by the Regulus; Powder the other two, and wash them apart,
till they have no Taste of the Salts; dry them gently, and keep for use.

The uppermost Substance is counted the best, and is of a sine Golden Color,
when it is washed. The middle Substance is not of so pleasant a Color, and works
more Churlishly. The Regulus is equal with the Regulus of Antimony.

Its Operation is Emetick and Cathartick, and is given in the Venereal Pox,
Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, and all Intermitting Fevers.

Its Dose is from Two to Five or Six Grains.

This is that which Mr. Lockyer aimed at in the Composition of his Pill, by
which he got a good Estate.

The Panacaea of Antimony without Fire.
REduce Four Ounces of Antimony into a most subtle Powder; Put it into a
Mattress, and pour upon it One Pound of strong Capital Lees of the Soap-Boylers:
Set them to Digest on warm Sand, Four or Five Days, and shake them often; Then
add some warm Fountain Water; shake it well about; let it stand Two or Three
Seconds of Time, and pour it off into a clean Pan; Repeat that Ablution, till
all the brown Powder is separated from that which appears like crude Antimony;
to which put more Capital Lees, and so proceed in all things as before, till
all the Antimony is brought into a subtle brown Powder; which wash well from
its Salts; Dry it, and keep it for use.

Its Operation is sometimes Diaphoretick, other times Diuretic; and also,
Cathartick and Emetick.

Its Virtues are the same with other Antimonial Preparations; and is frequently
given as a Succedanium to that called Russel's Powder.

Its Dose is from Five Grains to an Ounce and an half, or Two Scruples.

The Butter, or Icy Oil of Antimony, and its Cinnaber.
TAke of Antimony and Mercury Sublimate ana Two Pounds; Powder and Mix them
well; Put them into a coated Retort, which must not be charged above a Third
Part; Set it upon an Iron Bar in a little flat Dish with some Sand in it in an
open Furnace; Make a small Fire at first, but increase gradually to the Second
Degree, and the Butter will rise into the Neck of the Retort, which melt into
the Receiver with Live Coals. Keep the Fire still in that Degree, till you
perceive the Neck of the Retort tinged Red: Then change the Receiver, and
increase the Fire to the Third Degree, where keep it two Hours, after that give
two Hours Fire of the Fourth, and it will raise the Cinnaber into the Neck of
the Retort: When all is cold, take it out of the Furnace, break the Retort, and
take out the Cinnaber.

It is only used Externally as a Caustic.

Mercurius Vitae.
LET the Butter be melted, either by the Air, or a gentle Heat: Put it in a
clean Retort; Set it in a Sand Furnace, and by a Fire of the Second Degree
Distill it; The Butter will be made more white and pure, and by this
Rectification by separated from some dirty Faeces, which will remain in the
bottom of the Retort. Melt all the Rectified Butter into the Receiver, and put
to it warm Fountain Water; stir it well with a clean Stick; when it is settled,
pour off by Inclination, and keep the first by; Put on more Water, stir, and
let it settle; and so do till the Powder is freed from all saltish Taste; then
dry it gently, and keep for Use.

Its Operation is Emetick.

Its Virtues are the same with the Flowers of Antimony.

Its Dose from two to eight Grains.

Mineral Bezoar.
TAke four Ounces of Rectified Butter of Antimony; Put it into a Retort, and to
it twelve or sixteen Ounces of Spirit of Nitre, by two or three Ounces at a
time. Place the Retort in a Chimney, to avoid the hurtful Fumes: When all the
Spirit of Nitre is in, and the vehemence of its Action over, put it in a Sand
Furnace; Fit and Lute a Receiver to it, and give gradual Fire to the Third
Degree. When it ceases to drop, let out the Fire, and when cold, take it out,
and keep it in a Glass well stopped from the Air.

Its Operation is Sudorifick; which Operation it performs more sensibly than
Antim. Diaphoret.

It is counted a great Resister of Poison, and given in all Pestilential
Distempers.

Its Dose is from ten Grains to two Scruples.

Some Calcine it in a Crucible, after it is taken out of the Retort: Others
think it better to let that part of the Spirit of Nitre it holds, to remain
with it.

Oil of Antimony, with Sugar Candy.
TAke of Antimony and Sugar Candy, of each one Pound; Let them be well
powdered, and mixed with three Pound of clean dry Sand; Put them in a Retort,
leaving it above half empty; Set it in a Sand Furnace, and with a Fire of the
First Degree; let the Phlegm Evaporate, till the Drops come Acid. Then throw
away that which is Distilled, and fit the Receiver again, which Lute with a
Bladder dipped in the White of an Egg; Increase the Fire to the Second Degree,
and so keep it one Hour; then to the Third, in which continue it two Hours; and
so proceed to the Fourth two Hours more, which will finish the Operation: When
all is cold, take out the Liquor, and keep for Use.

It cleans Ulcers and Teters, it also kills the Itch.

The Essence of Antimony.
TAke the Flowers of Antimony, or Mercurius Vitae, and Sal Mirabile, of each
one Ounce; of clean Crystals of Tartar two Ounces; of Sugar Candy four Ounces;
Powder and grind them well together; Put them in a clean Pan, with three Pints
of Spring Water; Let them simper over a Fire, for eight or ten Hours, and stir
them often. Filter the Liquor whilst it is warm, and Evaporate it in a gentle
Heat, to the Consistence of a Syrup. Then put to it a Pint of Spirit of Wine;
let it stand in Digestion in a Matras well stopped, three Days, in which time it
will be well tinged: Then by gentle Inclination, pour off the Tincture into a
Body, to which fit a Head and Receiver, and draw off one half of the Spirit of
Wine; that which remains in the Body put into a Vial, and keep for Use.

Its Operation is Emetick and Cathartick, and is given in all Diseases wherein
Antimonial Medicines are proper.

Its Dose from five, to fifty Drops, in Ale, Wine, Milk, or Water.

The Tincture of Antimony.
PUT half a Pound of Salt of Tartar into a Crucible, set it in a melting
Furnace, and heat it till it melts; Then put to it (by a spoonful at a time)
four ounces of Antimony in Powder; let it stand in a strong melting heat, the
space of One Hour; Take it from the Fire and put it into a warm Mortar; beat it
to Powder, and whilst warm, put it into a Martrass; Pour upon it Tartaris'd
Spirit of Wine one Pound, and invert a Glass into the mouth of the Cucurbit;
lute it well, and set it in Digestion Three or Four Days, in which time the
Spirit of Wine will be well tinged, take it from the heat, set it on one side
to settle, and decant it into a dry Vial, which keep well stopped for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic, It opens the obstructions of
Women, is good against Hypochondriack Melancholy, Smallpox, and Malignant
Fevers.

Its Dose is from Ten to Fifty or Sixty Drops.

Tinctura Regalis.
TAke of Copper in little pieces Two Ounces, put it into a Crucible, set it in
a melting Furnace; when it is red hot, put to it (in gross Powder) Fourteen
Ounces of Regulus Jovis; Let them melt well together the space of a quarter of
an hour; Then cast them into a warm greased Cone, when cold, beat them into
fine Powder, which must be put (by a spoonful at a time) into double its weight
of Melted Salt of Tartar, when it is all in, shut the door of your Melting
Furnace, and keep it in the strongest Fire you can give for Two or Three hours:
Then take it from the Fire: and pour it into a clean warm Iron Mortar, beat it
to Powder whilst warm, and before it attract any Air, put it into a Mattress
wherein there is One Pound of Spirit of Wine tartaris'd; Lute it as you did the
Tinctura Antimonij, and in all things proceed as in that Tincture.

Its operation is Sudorifick and Diuretic: some think it almost an Universal
Medicine, and indeed I have known it successfully used in several distempers.

Its Dose is from Twenty to an Hundred Drops.

Observations.
THe Melting Furnace must be placed in a Chimney, Antim. Regulus.
and have a care you do not bring any spark of Fire along with the Spoon you
project the mixture with, if you do, it will set all the Composition on Fire.

If you do not pass the Liquor through the Strainer while it is hot, Sulph.
Auratum.
it will coagulate, when it has past the Filter, and when you precepitate the
Sulphur, remove it into some place where the Stench may not offend you. You
must wash it very often with warm water, to dissolve the Salts which adhere
very strictly to it.

Nails are better then Filings of Iron, Regulus Martis.
because they lie more hollow, giving way for the Antimony to mix and melt more
easily with the Mars.

If you give this Regulus Two or Three Fusions more, Regulus Jovis.
and in each Fusion cast one Ounce and an half of Nitre into it, and do so as
long as the Nitre meets with any Sulphur to cause a flame, the Regulus will be
as white as Silver.

I lessen the usual Quantity of Nitre, Crocus. Metalorum
and in its place substitute Common Salt, which both helps Fusion, and causes a
better Separation of the Crocus from the Scoria.

You must in this, Antimon. Diapkeret.
as in most Calcinations of Antimony with Nitre, be careful not to bring a
Spark of Fire from the Furnace to the Mixture; and after Calcination, beware
you put not the Crucible into Water, when it is too hot, least it fly all about
your Face.

In the Cerus there is no danger of firing the Mixture, Cerussa Antimon.
because the Combustible Sulphur is spent in making the Regulus.

The Jupiter gives it a Bluish Color; Antihect. Poterij.
and that is all in which it Differs from the Cerussa Antimonij.

Let the Salts be very dry when they are mixed with the Antimony, Antimoninm
Medic.
and after they are Sufficiently melted together, and become cold, make them
into a subtle Powder, before you wash off the Salts.

Make the Dissolution in a Chimney and in a large Vessel, Magister. Antimonij.
because the Ebullition is so Violent, that if the Vessel be not large, the
matter will boil over.

If you will not be at the Charge of Gold in this Preparation, Poterius. ^is
Cordial
the Anodine Sulphur of Mars is a good Succedaneum.

Its Calcination requires Care and Patience; Vitrum Antimon.
The Fusion must be strong, and the Quantity proposed in the Process, requires
at least Two hours Fire.

This Operation requires Attendance; Flores Antimon.
for If you let the Heat slacken you will loose both Time, and Fire
considerable before you raise the Flowers again.

If you desire but a small quantity of these Flowers, Flor. Reg. Antimon.
you may perform the Operation in a Sand Furnace, by putting the matter into a
Retort, sitting to it a Receiver, and proceeding with gradual Fire, as you do
in the Preparation of Ens Martis.

If you make this Medicine of the Flowers of Regulus, Antimon. resuscitat.
it will be milder than that made of crude Antimony, because much of its foul
Sulphut is evaporated in the Preparation of the Regulus.

If you mix Ten Grains of the siner sort of this Preparation with one Ounce of
white Sugar Candy in impalpable Powder, Dr. B's Panacaea Antimon:
and will make them up into a Mass, you may divide them into an Hundred Pills,
and One, Two or Three of these will work gently by Stool and Vomit. The
Mucilage of Gum Tragac. is proper to make up the paste.

Reduce the Antimony into most subtle powder, Panacaea. Sineigne;
and see that the Capital Lees and Vessel be clean, and you cannot Err in this
Operation.

When you mix the Sublimate with the Antimony musfle your self for a Defense
against the Steam of the Sublimate; Butyrum Antimonij.
and also carefully avoid the Fumes of the Butter when you change the Receiver.

If you have a Pound of Butyrum, Mercurius Vitae.
Put not above four Pound of water to it for the first Ablution: stir it often
with a clean wooden Spatula to break its Coagulum; Then let it stand to settle,
and carefully pour off the Water, of which by Rectification is made the
Philosophic Spirit of Vitriol.

Lute not on the Receiver, Bezoard. Mineral.
till the violence of the Fumes are over, lest when the Fire augments its
Motion, it break the Retort or Receiver. Do not exceed the third Degree of
Fire, nor let it stand long in after the Spirit of Nitre is drawn off, to
prevent discoloring the Bezoardicum Minerale. The Spirit of Nitre being now
impregnated with the Spirit of Common Salt which was in the Butyrum is become
an Aqua Regia, and will dissolve Gold, and is called Spiritus Nitri Bezoardicus.

The Sand is mixed with the Antimony and Sugar, Ol. Ant. cum Sacharo.
to hinder the matter from boiling over, which it would be very apt to do
without the Sand; If you would have it freed from its Empyreum, and fit for
internal use; weigh the Oil and Spirit; and put to it a Third part is weight of
Spiritus Nitri Dulcis. Set it in a Matras, upon warm Sand, in Digestion Four or
Five days, Then put it into a long bodied Retort, or Cucurbit, with its head
and Receiver; Lute the joints, give gradual Fire to the Third degree, which
Keep till it leaves dropping; Then put up the Spirit for use.

It is accounted an excellent remedy against all intermiting Fevers,
Especially Quartane.

Its Operation is gently Emetick, and Cathartick.

Its Dose from Five to Fifty drops.

As the Liquor Evaporates in boiling, Essentia Antimonij.
take care to supply it with clean warm Water till it is fit to be Filtred.

If you would produce this Tincture in less time then the Process directs,
Tinct. Anti.
let it stand in such a Heat as will keep the Spirit of Wine simpering five or
six hours, and the Tincture will be Extracted.

In place of two Ounces of Copper, Tinct. Rega.
if you put two Ounces and an half of the Scoria of Copper (which the Brasiers
call Spill-dust) you will have a more glori-Tincture.

Some are of Opinion, That the Emetick Quality of Antimony is not to be so far
destroyed by any Preparation that can be made thereof, but that it will return
again when it has bin kept for some time, or exposed to Air; but I have kept
several of the foregoing Preparations, and especially the Tinctures, many Years
without any sensible alteration.

CHAP. X. Of Lapis Calaminaris.
IT Dries, Binds and Cleanses, fills Ulcers with Flesh, and is a good
Opthalmick; It Incorporates with Copper, and makes Brass: It is found in the
North Parts of Germany, in the North of Wales, and in the West of England.
Internally it is not much used; although it affords one of the best Emeticks
and Diaphoreticks commonly known.

Preparations of Lapis Calaminaris.
The Magistery of Lapis Calaminaris.
TAke four Ounces of Lapis Calaminaris, beat it into fine Powder; Put it into a
Matras, and Pour upon it one Pound of Spirit of Salt; Let them digest upon warm
Sand forty eight Hours; Filter the Dissolution, and Precipitate the Magistery
with Spirit of Urin; free it from its Salts by several Ablutions; dry it
gently, and keep for Use.

Its Operation is Emetick and Cathartick, and is used in all Cases wherein
Antimonial Emeticks are proper.

Its Dose is from three to eight Grains.

Diaphoretick Calaminaris.
BEat four Ounces of Lapis Calaminaris into fine Powder; Put it in a Matras
(which place in a Chimney) and put to it (by three or four Ounces at a time)
one Pound of Spirit of Nitre; Let it stand covered from Dirt falling into it
twenty four Hours; then decant the clear Liquor, which put into a Retort; set
it in a Sand Furnace, and give it gradual Heat to the Third Degree, and so keep
it till no Drops fall from it. When all is cold take it out of the Retort, and
keep for Use.

It is a good Sudorifick, and answers the Purposes of Antimonial Diaphoreticks.
It is also an Excellent Collyrium; one Ounce of it being infused twenty four
Hours in half a Pint of white Wine, and a drop or two of that Infiusion put
into the Eye, three or four times a Day.

Its Dose from ten Grains to half a Dra.

Observations.
LET the Spirit of Salt be Rectified, Magifler. Lapis Call.
because in the first Distillation there is mixed with it a foul Sulphur or
Flower, which may discolor the Magistery.

Some Persons will wash the Diaphoret. Calamin. Diaphoret.
when taken out of the Retort; others will put to it three times its weight of
Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, and let it stand in Digestion twenty four Hours,
shaking it often, and then let it simper one Hour, and when cold, pour off the
Spirit of Wine, and dry by a gentle Heat the Diaphoretick, which they keep for
Use.

It is a good Diaphoretick.

Its Dose from ten, to forty or fifty Grains.

CHAP. XI. Of VITRIOL.
OF Vitriols we have six Sorts Vendible among us (viz.) Hungarian, Dantzick,
Roman, or Cyprus, English and Germain, and likewise White Vitriol. It is said
they are all Composed of an Acid Salt, and Sulphurous Earth; but it is most
certain that there is a Proportion of Metal in them all, as it evidently
appears by rubbing Dantzick, Hungarian, Roman, and White Vitriol, upon the
Blade of a Knife, which they will leave tinged of a Copper Color. And in
London, it is well known, that all the Old Iron which is gathered by many poor
People, are sold to the Copperas-Houses at Rotherhith and Deptford, which they
boil up with the Dissolution of the Marchasite Pyritis, or Fire-stone.

In Color the Hungarian and Dantzick are Green, but the first is the deeper:
The Roman or Cyprus is Blue; The English is yet of a Paler Green than either.
The White takes its Name from its Color. There is also a Red Vitriol, which is
that of Germany, and yet of no great Use among us. It is supposed to be a Green
Vitriol, Calcined by a Subterranean Heat.

The Purification of Vitriol.
ALL Vitriols are made Pure by Dissolution, Filtration, Evaporation and
Coagulation, or Crystalization. If you will Purify them to the height, you
must so often Repeat the former Operations, that by ten Days digestion between
each Dissolution, there will settle no Faeces.

Calcination of Vitriol.
PUT what quantity of Green Vitriol you please into an Earthen Pot; make a
gradual Fire under it, and as it heats, it will dissolve; continue the Fire,
and increase it, till the Liquor is again Coagulated, and the Mass of a greyish
Color.

This is Calcined Vitriol, fit for some Uses: But if you design it fit for the
Distillation of its Oil, or for Calcanthum Rubefactum, you must continue it in
a strong Fire, till it is very Red.

It is used to stop Blood, being applied to the Wound.

The Distillation of Oil, and Spirit of Vitriol.
BEat the Colcothar to Powder, and sift it through a corse Hair Sieve, then put
into those Pots called Long Necks, five or six Pound a piece of Calcined
Vitriol, and place them in a Reverberatory Furnace; Lute on the Receivers, with
Lutes made of Clay, Sand, and cut Flax; then make a small Fire under the Grate,
with Charcole and Small-cole; stop the Fire-hole of the Furnace, and the
Ash-hole slightly: Let the Fire smother so six or eight Hours, to dry the
Furnace and Junctures of the Receivers: Then put the Fire upon the Grate, and
keep it in the first Degree six or eight Hours; increase it to the Second, four
or five Hours, and so to the Third, which will raise white Clouds into the
Receiver; continue it so long as you see white Clouds come over; when they
begin to abate, augment it to the Fourth Degree in its Extremity, and continue
it till the Vitriol emits no Fumes.

Then let all cool, and carefully take off the Receivers, and put the
Distillation into a Retort, which place in a Sand Furnace; fit a Receiver
without Luting; make a gentle Fire, which will raise a little insipid Phlegm,
which has a Sulphurous Smell; put that into a Vial, and stop it. Put on the
Receiver again, and continue the Second Degree of Fire, and so pass on to the
Third, which continue till Fumes rise into the Receiver, and you perceive the
Oil in the Retort to be clear and white, as Rock-water: Then let all cool, and
put the Spirit by it self, and the Oil left in the Retort by it self also.

The Sulphurous Spirit is given in Palsies, and Diseases of the Lungs. The
Spirit is commonly mixed with Juleps. In Physic the Oil is of the same Use as
that of the Spirit, in an Eighth, or Tenth Part the Dose.

Gilla Vitrioli, commonly called, Salt of Vitriol.
DIssolve what Quantity of white Vitriol you please in warm Fountain Water,
Filter it, and let it stand warm twenty four Hours to settle its Faeces: Decant
it off from the Sediment, and Evaporate it to a Pellicle in an Earthen-Pan. If
you see still some yellow Faeces at the bottom of the Pan, pour it out into a
clean Vessel, by gentle Inclination, and set it two or three Days in a cold
place to shoot into Crystals.

Its Operation is Emetick.

Its Dose from ten Grains to one Dram.

There is a Salt Extracted with warm Water out of the Caput Mortuum of the Oil
of Vitriol, which is very little (if at all) in Use.

The Compound Cathartick Salt of Vitriol, and its Sulphur.
DIssolve what Quantity you please of Common Martial Vitriol; Filter the
Dissolution, and put it into a Matras, set it in Digestion fifteen Days; if any
Faeces fall in that time, carefully decant the Liquor from them into a clean
Vessel, and drop into it as much Oil of Tartar, as will Precipitate all its
Sulphur, which you will see fall in a brown Powder. Let it settle, and pour off
the clear Liquor. Evaporate it to a Pellicle, and set it by in a cold place to
shoot into Crystals.

The Operation of the Crystals is Cathartick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from ten Grains to 2 Scruples, or one Dram. It is a very Aperitive
and Cleansing Medicine. The Sulphur is the same with that of Mars
beforementioned.

Aqua Stiptica.
TAke Colcothar, burnt Alum and Sugar Candy ana one Dram, Urin of a sound
Person, and Rosewater ana one Ounce; Plantane-water Four Ounces; Grind all well
together in a Mortar till it is without the least Lump; then put it into a
Mattress, and let it stand in Digestion Twenty Four Hours; let it settle, and
pour it from the Faeces. If you would have it more Stiptick, put one Dram of
the Liquor left after the last shooting of Sal Chalibis, or Vitriolum Martis to
it.

Spiritus Vitrioli Dulcis.
PUT into a Mattress, Spirit of Wine Two Pounds, and pour into it one Pound of
Oil of Vitriol, by an Ounce at a time; fit and lute on a Head and Receiver;
kindle the Fire, which increase gradually to the Third Degree, till no Drops
fall from the Nose of the Head; Then cease the Fire, and put what is Distilled
into a Vial well stopped.

Some will return the Spirit upon the Black Matter left in the Body, and draw
it over again; and so do three or four times till nothing is left but a dry,
black Crust.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from Twenty to an Huundred Drops, in a large quantity of Liquor.

The Diaphoretick Spirit of Vitriol.
TAke of Salt of Tartar and burnt Hartshorn ana Two Ounces; put them in a
Mattress, and add to them, by little and little, half a Pound of the foregoing
Spiritus Vitrioli Dulcis; set the Mixture in a Sand Furnace, fit to it a Head
and Receiver, lute well the Junctures, and draw it off to a dry bottom, in a
Fire of the Second Degree: Then take off the Spirit, and put to it Saffron and
Cocheneal ana one Ounce, Virginia Snake-root half an ounce, stop the Vessel
well; set it upon warm Sand to Digest Twenty Four Hours, sometimes shaking it;
afterward let it settle, and keep it in a Vial well stopped.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

It is given in all Fevers, and even in the Plague it self, with good Success:
Also in Dropsies and the Jaundice. It powerfully opens Obstructions, and
cleanses the Lungs.

Its Dose is from Thirty to one hundred and twenty Drops.

The Medicinal Stone.
TAke common Green Vitriol half a Pound, and the same quantity of White
Vitriol, of Alum twelve Ounces, Anatron or Sandiver, and common Salt ana one
Ounce and a half, Salt of Tartar two Ounces: beat them grossly, mix them with
four Ounces of Vinegar, and put all into an Earthen Pan, which will contain
three times their quantity, set them in a Fire to melt, and stir them often;
when they begin to thicken, mix diligently of Venice Cerus four Ounces, and of
Bole Armoniack two Ounces, both in fine Powder; keep them in the Fire,
continually stirring 'till they grow hard; then let all cool, break the Pot,
and put up the Stone for Use.

It Fastens Teeth, Preserves the Gums, Heals and Dries up Ulcers and Wounds,
and is also used in Injections, and Eye-Waters.

The Sympathetical Powder.
TAke good English Vitriol, such as we call Bow-Copperas, Purify it as before
directed, by two or three Dissolutions, Filtrations, and Crystallizations; set
those Crystals in a clean Pan in the Sun, either of June, July, or August, so
long till they are Calcined to Whiteness; when one side is Calcined, turn the
other, and in a few Days the Crystals will crumble into Powder; if they do not,
you may Beat, and Expose them again to the Sun, stirring them three or four
times every Day: At last beat them into very fine Powder, and again set them in
the Sun, stirring as before, for two or three Days more, in which time they
will be very white: Then take in the Matter, while the Sun shines hot upon it,
and keep it from the Air in Glasses well stopped, and in a dry place.

It is a Mild, but a Powerful Stiptick, always successfully applied in Stopping
of Blood, either at the Nose, or of Wounds, and where there is no Fracture of
the Bone, will heal.

The Royal Stiptick.
UPon four Ounces of Sympathetick Powder, affuse half an Ounce of good Oil of
Vitriol; stir them well in a Glass Mortar, with a Pestle of the same, and let
them stand twenty four Hours on warm Sand, in a wide-mouthed Glass; Grind this
Mixture again with a little Spirit of Wine, and put it in a Matras; pour upon
it more Spirit of Wine, to make that already used, a Pint. Lute it well, and
let it stand forty eight Hours in Digestion, often shaking it; then let it
stand to cool and settle, and decant the Spirit of Wine, which keep well stopped.
Remove the Cucurbit or Matras, into a Sand Furnace; Lute on its Head and
Receiver, and drive over the Helm, all that will rise in the Third Degree,
which also keep by it self; Let all cool, and take out what is left in the
bottom, powder it, and put it into a Cucurbit; Pour upon it Distilled
Rainwater one Pound; set it on warm Sand forty eight Hours, and shake it
often; then let it settle, decant, and keep it for Use.

The Impregnated Spirit and Water may be used apart, or mixed; and if you would
add strength to the Mixture, you may put some of the Acid Spirit drawn off,
after the Spirit of Wine was Decanted: But if you would make the best Stiptick
Powder, put equal Parts of the Impregnated Spirit of Wine and Water, and
Evaporate to Dryness.

It is both a Powerful Stiptick, and one of the best Vulneraries in the World.

Observations.
IN Calcination begin with a very gentle Fire, till the Vitriol is melted;
Calcinat.
then increase leisurely, 'till it begins to Crust about the sides of the
Vessel; otherways you may crack the Pan, and the Liquor will run out; but after
it is Coagulated about the sides of the Pan, you may increase the Fire boldly.

If the Vitriol be only Calcined to greyness (as some direct) it will Coagulate
in the Pots, and become a hard Mass, Distillat.
so that the Fire (though never so vehement) is hindered from acting upon its
Particles, by the Compactness of the Matter, and will never raise the full
Strength of the Spirit in twenty Days time; therefore it ought to be Calcined
to Redness, and beaten into Powder, and put in the Pots before it Attracts Air.

The Gilla, Gilla Vitri.
or (what we call) Salt of Vitriol, ought to be dissolved in no more Water than
will keep it from Crystallizing whilst it stands to settle, viz. Two Pound, or
Two Pound and a half of Water, to one Pound of Vitriol, and that Filtered while
it is warm.

The Long Digestion is to make the more gross. Cathartick Salt of Vit.
Metallic Part settle to the bottom; the better it is Separated from that
Metallic Part, the less Emetick, and more Cathartick it is rendered. The
Precipitate Matter, must by many Ablutions, be rendered Tastless and gently
dried.

The Liquor left after the shooting of Vitriolum Martis, Stiptick Water.
is both more Stiptick and Vulnerary (by its Impregnation with the Sulphur of
Mars) than the Oil of Vitriol is of it self.

If you Cohobate the Spirit. Spirit Vit. Dulcis.
Vitrioli Dulcis, upon the black Residence left in the bottom of the Retort, it
Exalts its Virtue.

Let the Salt of Tartar be clean, Diaphoret. Spirit of Vitriol.
and the Hart's Horn well burnt, and put not above one Ounce of the Dulcified
Spirit of Vitriol to the Salt and Calx at a time.

The Vessel in which you make it must be three or four times bigger than will
contain the Ingredients, Lapis Medicament.
by reason of the great Ebullition which will arise from the mingling of the
Acid of Vitriol, and Distilled Vinegar, with the Salt of Tartar, and Calx of
Lead; but especially when you put in the Cerus, you must do it warily, and keep
it down by continual stirring.

You must so expose it to the Sun, Sympathet. Powder.
that the Rain may not fall upon it, lest it should wash it away. Some think it
sufficiently Calcined in six or seven Days, exposing it only six or eight Hours
in a Day; but it has been observed, That it is better performed by giving it
thirty or forty Days Sun.

I have known some direct the putting of Distilled Vinegar to the Dissolution
of Vitriol, to cause a Precipitation, The Roya Stiptick.
but I could never find so great a disagreement between them as to be capable
to effect it. I fear such have either wrote after others, or foisted in their
own Conceits, without consulting an Elaboratory, and it has cost me much Time
and Money to follow them to no purpose.

CHAP. XII. Of Sulphur, or Common Brimstone.
IT is brought to us from Italy, and some of the West-India-Islands, being
Generated of a Fat, Resinous Substance, full of an Acid, Vitriolick Spirit, as
appears by its Spirit made with a Glass Vessel, resembling the shape of a Bell,
from which it takes the Name of Spirit of Sulphur per Campanum, differing very
little from that of Vitriol.

We have it in three Forms, viz.

First, Sulphur Vive, which come to us as it is dug out of the Earth, and
valued at the dearest Price of the Three, for no other Reason, but that it is
less Vendible than the other.

Secondly, Mineral Rough Brimstone, which by Melting is Separated from a great
deal of Insignificant Earth, which the Sulphur contained.

Thirdly, That cast into small Rolls, commonly Sold by Grocers and Chandlers,
which is said to be mixed with Rosin, or some other Bituminous Substance, and
by Experience found to be the worst sort for the making either Flowers or Oil;
the rough Mineral Brimstone is the best, for the aforesaid Uses, as having less
Earth than Sulphur Vive, and not being mixed with any Heterogeneous Particle.

Preparations of Sulphur.
Flowers of Sulphur.
TO make this to any Advantage, it must be Sublimed in an Arched Room, instead
of a Glass or Earthen Receiver, and one, two, or three Hundred Weight
(according to the Magnitude of the Room) may be put in at a time. You must have
a great thick Iron Pan, called a Tampin, to put the Sulphur in, which must be
placed immediately over the Grate, and about a third part of the Diameter of
the Tampin left open above its brim, to suffer the Fumes to come into the Arch
where they Condense into Flowers: The Arch ought to be at least eighteen, or
twenty two Inches thick; and that Cramped together with Iron, to resist the
Force of the Fumes.

If you design your Furnace to Sublime one hundred Weight of Flowers at a time,
your Pan must be capable of holding one hundred and a quarter; your Arch five
Foot high, three Foot broad, and five Foot long; and its inside and floor to be
set with glas'd Tiles: In the end, or side of the Furnace, you must have a
Door, which must be two Foot square; it must be strongly Barricado'd, and a
little Hole in it of a quarter of an Inch Diameter, which must be exactly
stopped with a Plugg, by which you may know when all is Sublimed: For when you
think the Operation is almost at an end, pull out the Plugg, and if the Fume
come not forcibly out, the Operation is over, but if you find a strong Fume,
with some Noise, continue the Fire till all is over.

Then let all cool twenty four Hours, before the Door is opened, and then go
in, and with a Wing, or clean Brush, wipe the Flowers into a heap, and take
them out for use.

It may be made in less quantity in Vessels of another Form: A Description of
both you will see in the Preceding Plate.

It is a good Pectoral Medicine, and used in other Physical Preparations.

Its Dose from ten Grains to a Scruple.

The White Flowers of Sulphur.
Take Salt Petre fixed with Charcole (as hereafter) half a Pound, or but four
Ounces; of clean Mineral Sulphur, twice its quantity, grind and mix them well
together, then put them into a Retort, and set it in a Sand Furnace; fit to it
a Receiver, but Lute it not; make a gentle Fire under it, which gradually
increase to the Third Degree, and so keep it till all the Flowers rise; which
you will know by the upper Part of the Retort above the Sand, being clear.

Its Use and Dose is the same with the other. But some are of Opinion that it
far exceeds the other Flowers in Virtue.

The Milk of Sulphur.
TAke clean Salt of Tartar one Pound, of Flowers of Sulphur six Ounces; grind
them well together in a Stone Mortar; then put them into a strong Earthen Pan,
and add of Fountain Water eight Pound: Set this Mixture over some kindled
Coals, and by degrees make it boil, till the Liquor is very red, which will
require three or four Hours (as the Water wastes, supply it with new warm
Water) Take it from the Fire, and before it is quite cold Filter it; then drop
into it Distilled Vinegar, which will cause the red Liquor to be muddy, and a
white Powder will Precipitate; when the first Precipitation is fallen, drop in
more Vinegar, and so proceed till you see the Vinegar will not make the Liquor
muddy any more. After this, let all settle, and by gentle Inclination pour off
the Liquor; Put Fountain Water to the Magistery; stir it well about, and let it
settle; pour it off as before, and so proceed with six or eight Lotions, till
the Powder is Insipid, and free from its Urinous Taste.

Its Operation is the same of the Flowers.

Its Dose from twenty Grains to three Scruples and a half.

The Milk of Sulphur, with Quick Lime.
TAke one part Sulphur, and two parts of Quick Lime; Grind them well together,
put them into an Iron Kettle, with six Quarts of Water to every three Pounds of
the Mixture, and boil it till the Liquor be as red as Blood; strain it (whilst
it is warm) into a Vessel, either of Glass or Earth, and let it stand to
settle: What is not very clear Filter; but if it be clear, decant it into a
glass Vessel, and drop into it some warm Urine, which will Precipitate the
Dissolution: Wash it, as you did the former, and it answers to the same
purposes.

Balsam of Sulphur, with Oil of Olive.
TAke of the Flower of Sulphur four Ounces, Salad-Oil one Pound; Put them in a
Pipkin which will contain about three times their Quantity; Set them over a
Fire, and make the Matter to boil gently; keep it continually stirring with a
wooden Spatula, for the space of an Hour and half, till it is quite cool, and
put it up for Use.

It is given in Coughs, Colds, Astmah's, and Wheesings, Ptisicks and
Consumptions: And Externally to heal and dry Ulcers: It eases the Pains of the
Gout.

Balsam of Sulphur, with Oil of Turpentine.
TAke four Ounces of Flower of Sulphur, and one Pound of Oil of Turpentine;
Place the Mixture in a Sand Furnace, and stop the Matras loosly with another
Glass; give a small Fire for one Hour, then increase it till the Oil boils
gently, in which degree keep it three or four Hours: Then let it cool, and pour
off the Impregnated Oil from that which is not dissolved.

It is a Nauseous, but an excellent Medicine for Ulcers of the Lungs.

Its Dose from five, to fifteen, or twenty Drops.

The Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oil of Anniseed, is performed after the same
manner, and is more grateful to the Palate; also that with Oil of Amber,
Juniper, etc.

Balsam of the Sulphur of Mars.
TAke clean Filings of Iron, or broken Needles, one Pound; Put them into a
Cucurbit, with Spirit of Salt five Pound; Let it stand in a Digestive Heat five
or six Days; in which time the Iron will be almost all Dissolved; Filter and
remove it into a Glass Retort; Place it in the Furnace, with a great deal of
Sand about it; give Fire of the first Degree for one Hour, augment it to the
Second, which continue till you cannot perceive any more Drops to fall: Then
change the Receiver, and increase the Fire to the Third Degree, for one Hour,
and so pass on to the Extremity of the Fourth, and keep it there four or five
Hours, in which time you will have red Flowers ascend into the Neck of the
Retort, and some yellow Spirit come into the Receiver. Let all cool, and remove
the Vessels. In the Receiver you will have about four Ounces of a yellow
Spirit: And (if you have proceeded regularly) about four Ounces of Foliated red
Flowers in the Neck of the Retort. Take of the Flowers three Ounces, of the
yellow Spirit one Ounce; Put them into a Matras; affuse upon them eight Ounces
of Oil of Turpentine; Let them Digest upon warm Sand twenty four Hours; then
augment the Fire, so as to make the Matter simper for two Hours. Let all cool,
and put it carefully from the Faeces for Use.

I have heard it Affirmed to be one of the best Vulneraries in the World, and
seen wonderful Effects of it, both Internally and Externally.

It is given in all Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, the Stone, and Ulcers
of the Reins; and all other Internal Ulcers whatever. It also Cicatrises and
Heals External Ulcers to a Miracle.

Its Dose is from ten, to fifty or sixty Drops.

Liver of Sulphur.
TAke Flower of Sulphur four Ounces, Pure Salt of Tartar two Ounces; Mix and
melt them in an Earthen Dish; keep them stirring till they are as red as Blood,
without any white Specks. Take it out of the Dish, and put it in a Glass close
stopped.

Of this is made the Tincture, Syrup, and Vulnerary Balsam, as follows.

Tincture of Sulphur.
BEat the Liver of Sulphur (while it is warm) in a warm Mortar; Put it
presently into a Matras, and to four Ounces of the Liver, put one Pound of
Spirit of Wine; set them in Digestion twenty four Hours, and you will have a
very Red Tincture, which put up in a Vial stopped for use.

It is given in all Distempers of the Lungs, and said to be a Preservative
against Contagious and Pestilential Air.

Its Dose from fifteen to twenty five, or thirty Drops.

A Vulnerary Balsam of Sulphur.
TAke of Hepar Sulphuris four Ounces, of Aloes Succatrine one Ounce and a half,
and of Myrrh one Ounce, all in fine Powder; Put them into an Earthen Pot, and
pour upon them one Pound of Balsam of Turpentine, with two Drams of Saffron;
set them over a gentle Fire in Sand, which increase by degrees, till the Oil
simper, and the Ingredients are dissolved; then let them cool, and strain the
Balsam through Flannel, into a Glass, which keep for use.

It is said to be one of the best of Balsams for the Cure of Wounds and Ulcers.

Oil of Sulphur by the Bell.
IT is made of the Yellow Mineral Sulphur: There is required to this Operation
two wooden Frames, one Earthen Dish, with a Hole in the middle, a flat
Gally-pot, and an Earthen Poringer, to burn the Sulphur in, a wide-mouthed
Glass for a Receiver, and the Bell, or Campane Glass.

Set one of the wooden Frames upon two Bricks, and put the Dish, with the Hole
in its middle, upon it, and the flat Gally-pot in the middle of the Dish, with
the bottom upwards, upon which set the Poringer which contains the Sulphur.
Support the second wooden Frame upon two Bricks more, as you did the first, in
which Frame a Hole must be made, fit for the Bell-Glass to rest in, so that the
Edges of the Bell be clear of the Wood.

When the Poringer (charged with Sulphur) is fitted, set the Sulphur on Fire
with a red hot Iron; when it is all melted, stir it with a clean Tobacco-Pipe,
or Iron-wire, to make it burn clear; then cover it with the Bell, and in three
or four Hours time you will perceive the Oil to condense about the sides of the
Bell, and drop into the Dish, and so into the Receiver.

When you perceive the Sulphur to burn dull, take off the Bell, and stir about
the Sulphur with an Iron-wire, as before; then set the Glass again, and so
proceed till you have as much Oil (or rather Spirit) of Sulphur, as you desire.

Its Operation is Diuretic, and it is given in Juleps, to give 'em an
agreeable Acidity to qualify the Heat in continued Fevers: Some ascribe
greater Virtues to it, than is given to Oil of Vitriol; but I never could
distinguish any difference more, than that one is the Vitriolick Spirit in
Sulphur, and the other the Sulphurous Spirit of Vitriol.

Salt of Sulphur.
PUT four Ounces of Sal Polychrestum, Prepared as hereafter, in the Chapter of
Nitre; Powder it in a Glass Mortar, with a Pestle of the same; Put it in a
flat, wide-mouthed Glass, and put to it two Ounces of Spirit of Sulphur; stir
them well together with a clean Tobacco-Pipe, and set them in a gentle Heat of
Sand to Evaporate; you will have a pleasant Acid Salt, which put up in a Vial
for Use.

Its Operation is Diuretic and Cathartick.

Its Dose from one Scruple to one Dram and a half, in Broth, or any proper
Vehicle. I have known it given to five or six Drams, and then it has given four
or five Motions per inferiora, as most Salts will.

Observations.
THE yellow, Flower of Sulphur.
rough, Mineral Brimstone is best for this Operation; you may have it at the
Refining-Brimstone-House in Petticoat-Lane. For the first twelve or sixteen
Hours, give but gentle Fire, so much as to make the Fumes rise, but not to boil
over.

You may make use of Salt of Tartar, White Flo. of Sulphur.
and Nitre powdered, mixed and melted in a Crucible, instead of fixed Nitre, or
Salt of Tartar; but you must not put into the Crucible above a Spoonful at a
time, as you will see in the Chapter of Tartar. Milk of Sulphur.


You ought to make the Precipitation in some place where the Noisome Scent has
a good Conveiance, either in a large Chimney, or in the open Air; for though it
is not dangerous, yet it is as Offensive as a stinking House of Office.

The Vessel ought not to be filled above one third, least it should boil over,
Balsam of Sulphur, with Salad Oil.
and take Fire with violence, and put you in Confusion. Have also a fit Cover
to the Vessel ready, that you may smother it, if it should take Fire within the
Pipkin.

This ought to be placed in a Chimney, Balsam of Sulphur, with Oil of Turpentine
because the Steam which comes from it, is as offensive, as that in the
Precipitation of Sulphur.

This might have been placed with the Martial Preparations, but being a
Sulphur, Martial Balsam of Sulphur.
and of the Nature of these Medicines, I have given it here.

This Operation ought to be Performed in a Chimney: you must keep it, The Liver
of Sulphur.
after it is melted, continually stirring, till it is red as Blood, and have a
Cover ready to suppress the Flame if it should take Fire.

You ought to make the Liver of Sulphur into fine Powder, in a warm Mortar,
Tincture of Sulphur.
and put it into the Matras as warm as possibly you can, before it Attracts any
Air; then presently put the Spirit of Wine to it, and fit a Glass to the Mouth
of the Cucurbit, Lute the Joint well, and set it to Digest.

The Pot in which you make this Balsam ought not to be filled above a third
part; The Vulner. Balsam of Sulphur.
carefully stir it when it begins to Heat, lest it should boil over, and take
Fire, which it is apt to do; have a Cover, and wet Clothes ready, against such
an Accident.

After the Sulphur burns clear, Oil of Sul. by the Bell.
and the Bell set over it begins to work, it will burn, and work well for five
or six Hours, when the Flame begins to decrease, take off the Bell, and place
it upon an Earthen Dish (which you must set by the Frame for that purpose) put
in more Sulphur, and when it is all on Fire, stir it with a clean Pipe, and put
on the Bell again; and so continue till all the Sulphur you design for Spirit
be burnt.

This is not really the Salt of Sulphur, Saltof Sul.
but Nitre Fixed by Sulphur, and afterward Impregnated with its Spirit.

CHAP. XIII. Of ARSNICK.
IT is a Juicy Combustible Mineral Substance, confisting of Sulphur, and
Corrosive Salts; of which there are three sorts, viz. Yellow Arsnick, called
Orpiment, Red Arsnick, called Sandarach, and the White, properly called
Arsnick. It is made of the Red, by mixing equal parts of Sandarach, and Common
Salt, and Subliming them together.

The White is most used in Physic, the Yellow less, and the Red very little.
It is one of the most Pernicious of Poisons, and so great an Enemy to the
Balsam of Life, that it produces strange Symptoms, as Convulsions, Swoonings,
Gripes, Vomitings, Palpitation of the Heart, Intolerable Heat and Thirst, with
Mortification of the part where it comes.

Preparations of Arsnick.
To Sublime Arsnick.
THE common way is to mix equal Parts of Arsnick and Salt decrepitate, in fine
Powder; Put them in a Matras, in a Sand Furnace, within a Chimney, stopping the
Mouth of the Matras loosly with Cotton, or Paper; make a gentle Fire, which
increase gradually to the third Degree, and so keep till all is Sublimed: Six
or Seven Hours time will be sufficient to raise the Mixture of half a Pound of
each. This you may repeat as often as you think convenient, every Sublimation
separating the light, fuzy Flowers, and taking only the Crystaline part. This
Sublimation cleanses it, but in my Opinion makes it the more Corrosive, by
carrying up some of the sharp Spirit of Salt with it.

To Sublime Arsnick for Physical Use.
TAke of the aforesaid Sublimate one Pound, put it in a Crucible; set it in a
melting Furnace, in such a Fire as will just keep it melting, where continue it
for two Hours, in which time a great deal of the most Corrosive Poisonous Part
will be Exhaled.

Let it cool, and that which remains in the Crucible make into Powder, and
grind it with equal its weight of fine Filings of Iron; set them in a Sand
Furnace to Sublime, as you did before, observing the same Degree of Fire, and
space of time, proportionable to the quantity; Repeat this Operation twice
more, every time separating the light Flower, and then you have a Sublimed
Arsnick, pretty well freed from its Corrosive Poison, and fit for farther
Preparation: Some have ventured to give the Infusion of this Arsnick inwardly,
and say it is a great Antidote against Poison.

Its Operation is Emetick and Cathartick.

Its Dose from three to eight Grains, Infused in Wine.

Diaphoretick Arsnick.
TAke of the aforesaid sweet Sublimate of Arsnick, four Ounces, bring it into
fine Powder; put it into a Retort; put to it twelve Ounces of Spirit of Nitre;
set it in a Sand Furnace; make to it a gentle Fire, which increase gradually to
the third Degree, and so keep it till no Drop falls from the Nose of the
Retort; let it cool, and take out, and grind the Arsnick again; put it in a new
Retort, and put to it twelve Ounces more of fresh Spirit of Nitre; proceed, as
you did before, to the third Degree of Fire; and when you perceive no Drop to
fall from the Nose of the Retort, increase the Fire to the Fourth Degree, and
so keep it for two Hours; then let all cool, take out the Medicine, which make
into very subtle Powder; Put it in a Matras; put to it Tartaris'd Spirit of
Wine half a Pound; Invert a fit Glass into the Mouth of the Matras, Lute well,
and let it stand upon warm Sand twenty four Hours, often shaking it about; Take
it from the Sand, let it settle, and decant the clear Spirit of Wine; Put to
the Medicine half a Pound more of fresh Spirit of Wine, let it stand as before,
twenty four Hours, then let cool, and when settled, decant; dry the Powder
gently, and keep for Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick.

Its Dose from five to twenty five, or thirty Grains.

I remember it to have been oftentimes used with good success in the Plague,
in the Year 1665.

Regulus of Arsnick.
TAke Arsnick eight Ounces, Salt of Tartar, made of Tartar, and Nitre, ana six
Ounces, Filings of Steel four Ounces, Charcole-dust one Ounce; beat and mix
them, and by a Spoonful at a time, put them into a red hot Crucible: when it is
in, make a Fire all over it, and let the Matter stand in good Fusion half an
Hour, then take it out, and pour it into a warm greased Cone, or Mortar,
knocking it about the sides, to make the Regulus settle; you may purify it as
that of Antimony.

There is also a Regulus of Arsnick, made of Arsnick one Pound, Potashes six
Ounces, and soft Soap one Pound; mix, and put in a Crucible, covered with
another that has a Hole in it; and so bring it to Fusion gradually in a Melting
Furnace.

Spirit and Butter of Arsnick.
TAke Arsnick half a Pound, Mercury Sublimate one Pound; mix them well, and put
them into a Retort; place it in a Sand Furnace; Lute on its Receiver, and give
it gradual Fire, as in the Butter of Antimony, and you will have a thin Fuming
Spirit, and a Butter: When all is cold, take off the Receiver; pour the Spirit
into a Glass, which keep well stopped, and the Butter you must keep by it self.

The Spirit some say will Radically dissolve Iron: the Butter is a great
Caustic.

If you put on a new Receiver, after you have taken off the Spirit and Butter
of Arsnick, urge the Fire strongly, and the Crude Mercury will distill in Drops,
which serves for any use that other Quicksilver can be put to; there is no need
of putting Water into the Recipient, the Mercury will Condense without it. And
if you desire more Dissolving Spirit, put the Butter and Spirit into a new
Retort, and Distill again; and by Repeating that Operation, you will make
(almost) all the Butter into Spirit.

Arsenical Magnet.
TAke of Crystaline Arsnick, Yellow Sulphur, and Crude Antimony, of each three
Ounces; These all made into Subtle Powder, and mixed, put them into a Retort;
Fit a Receiver without Luting, and give it gradual Fire to the Third Degree,
where keep it three Hours; augment the Fire to the Fourth, for an Hour more;
then let all cool, and in the bottom of the Retort you will find a Pellucid
Mass, of a dark red Color.

In the time of the Plague, 1665. I made this Magnet, and it was much used both
in Plasters and Amulets.

Observations.
LET all your Operations be Performed in a Chimney, Sublimate of Corosive
Arsnick.
that the Pernicious Fumes may freely ascend without Prejudice to the Operator;
and when you grind the Arsnick, Muffle your Mouth and Nostrils.

The Filings of Steel being an Alkali, Sublimate of Sweet Arsnick.
absorbs the Corrosive Salt of Arsnick, and keeps it from Ascending with its
more Sulphurous Part.

Put not above four Ounces of Spirit of Nitre at a time upon the Arsnick,
Diaphoret. Arsnick.
and dispose the Mouth of the Retort so, that the Fumes may best go up the
Chimney; when the Fumes are well wasted, put on four Ounces more of Spirit of
Nitre; and so the third time.

When it is melted, Regulus of Sulphur.
and fit to take out of the Fire, let the Cone, or Mortar, be placed in the
Chimney, so that you may keep from the Fumes it emits.

When the Butter is all raised, Spirit and Butter of Arsnick.
you may melt it down out of the Neck of the Retort into the Receiver, by
holding a kindled Charcole under it, as you do in the Butter of Antimony; then
take off the Receiver, put on another, and Distill the running Mercury.

Some order it to be done in an Earthen Vessel, Magnet of Arsnick.
and kept stirring till it is well mixed, and whilst soft, to form it into
Amulets; but to do it in a Retort is more safe from the obnoxionsness of the
Fumes, and renders the Magnet as useful.

CHAP. XIV. Of Salt Peter.
IT is a Salt, though Extracted out of the Earth, yet abundantly Impregnated
with the Spirit of the Air. It also cleaves to Stone-Walls, Rocks, Clefts, and
Caverns under Ground. That which is Extracted out of Fat Earth is made in most
Countries of Europe; but our greatest Quantities come from the East-India's.

It is Composed of near an equal quantity of Fixed and Volatile Nitrous Aireal
Salts, bitterish in Taste: It is the Product of the Elements, deposited in the
Bosom of the Earth, for the Generation and Nourishment of Vegetables, and may
not improperly be called, The Universal and Un-specifick Mercury; which I shall
leave to Quick and Fit Souls to Reflect and Philosophize further upon.

Purification of Salt Peter.
TAke what Quantity you please of Nitre, dissolve it in warm Water; Filter,
Evaporate, and Crystallize, as you do other Salts. This is an Operation not
absolutely necessary amongst us, our Refiners of Salt Peter giving it well
Purified to our Hands. Some esteem the Crystalline Nitre best, and others the
Lump; but I could never observe any difference in them, the one being the top;
and the Lump, the bottom of the Pan, in which the Nitrous Liquor was put to
shoot.

Crystal Mineral.
MElt what quantity you please of Salt Peter in an Earthen Pot, or very clean
Iron Kettle; When it is well melted, cast a little Flower of Sulphur upon it;
when that is burnt, put on more, and so do till the Nitre flows clear as
Rock-water, without any scum; then with a clean Iron or Brass Ladle, take it
out of the Pot, and put it into a warm Brass Pan, or Mould; when that is
Coagulated, put it by, and with the Ladle take out more; and so do till all the
Melted Salt is cast, which keep for Use. It is also called Sal Prunellae.

If you desire it yet more Pure, dissolve it in clean warm Water; Filter the
Dissolution, and Evaporate till a thin Skin appear upon its Surface; then set
it to Crystallize; and this is called Crystal Mineral, or Sal Prunellae
Crystallisatum.

Its Operation is Diuretic and Cooling. Its given in Fevers, Quinseys,
Gonorrhea's, and in Pestilential Diseases.

Its Dose from ten Grains to one Scruple, or half a Dram.

Sal Polychrestum.
MIX equal Parts of Sulphur and Nitre in fine Powder, and put them into a red
hot Crucible, by a Spoonful at a time; as soon as the Flame of one Spoonful is
consumed, put in another, and so continue it till all your Mixture is in; put a
Tile over the top, cover it all over with Coals, and keep it in Fusion four or
five Hours, and then pour it into a warm Copper Vessel, and when cold, Powder
and Dissolve it in warm Water; Filter the Dissolution, and Evaporate till it is
dry.

If the Salt be not so white as you desire it, put it in a Crucible, and set it
in a strong Fire three or four Hours longer, continually stirring it till it is
very white. Then again Dissolve, Filter, and Coagulate, and you will have a
pure Sal Polychrestum.

Its Operation is Cathartick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from half a Dram to one Ounce.

If to six Ounces of Sal Polychrestum, you put one Ounce of Sublimed Sal
Armoniack, and half an Ounce of Sal Mirabile Glauberi, and then Dissolve,
Filter, and Crystallize them together; the Composition will be much more
agreeable, and better deserve the Name of Polychrestum than before.

The Purging Salt of Nitre.
PUT one Pound of Nitre in a Crucible, set it in a wind Furnace; give it
gradual Fire till it melts; then put into it a live Charcole, about a quarter
of an Inch Diameter, when it has done Flaming, put in another, and so continue
to do till the Cole emits no Flame: This is called Fixed Nitre; Pour this into
a warm Mortar, beat it to Powder, and dissolve it in Distilled Vinegar; Filter
and Evaporate in a wide-mouthed Glass; dissolve it again in fresh Distilled
Vinegar, Filter and Coagulate the third time; then dissolve it in high
Rectified Spirit of Wine, which Distill from it, and you will have a Salt easy
of Fusion, pleasant in Taste and Operation.

It is Cathartick and Diuretic, and opens Obstructions in all the chief Bowels.

Its Dose is from two Scruples, to four or five Drachms.

The Fixed Nitre being Exposed to the Air, dissolves into an Oil of Nitre, per
deliquium.

Spirit of Nitre.
TAke one Pound of Nitre in fine Powder, and four Pound of clean Tobacco-Pipes,
or Fullers Earth, also beaten to fine Powder; mix them well, and put them into
a good Earthen, or coated Glass Retort; place it in an open Furnace; Lute a
Receiver, and kindle a Fire under it, which keep in the first Degree, till you
see some reddish Fumes appear in the Recipient; neither augment it till those
Fumes disappear; then increase to the Second, which will raise more red Fumes;
when they begin to decrease, raise it to the Third, and so on to the Fourth,
and most Extreme Degree of Fire, till no more Clouds come over; then let out
the Fire, and as soon as it is cool enough, take off the Receiver, and put the
Spirit in a Glass, with a Glass or Wax Stopple.

Its chief Use is to dissolve Metals, which it performs as well (and some think
better) than Aqua Fortis.

Spirit of Salt Peter, with Oil of Vitriol, and the Sal Enixum of Paracelsus.
PUT one Pound of Salt Peter into a Glass Retort, and pour upon it one Pound of
Oil of Vitriol; place the Mixture in a Sand Furnace; Lute on a Receiver, and
give a Fire of the first Degree two Hours, advance to the Second, where keep it
two Hours longer; and so to the Third and Fourth, giving two Hours to each
Degree, in which time the Operation will be ended. When all is cold, take off
the Receiver, and put the Spirit in a Vial stopped with Wax, or a glass Stopple.
This Spirit Answers all the ends of the former.

In the Retort you will find a white Mass of a pleasant Acid Taste.

Its Operation is Diuretic, and a powerful Opener of Obstructions.

Its Dose is from one Scruple to one Dram, in Water Gruel, Broth, Water, or
any other Vehicle.

The Sweet Spirit of Nitre.
PUT into a Retort of Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd, half a Pound, to which must be
added four Ounces of Spirit of Nitre, by half an Ounce at a time; a crackling
will ensue upon the Mixture, and when that is over, you may put in more, and so
proceed till all is in; then shake them well together, and place the Retort in
a Sand Furnace; Fit a Receiver, not Luted, or but slightly; make a Fire of the
First Degree, proceed from thence to the Second; where keep it one Hour and a
half; and then one Hour more of the Third will finish the Operation.

It is Diaphoretick and Diuretic; also a great Expeller of Wind, and Opener of
Obstructions.

Its Dose is from ten Drops, to one hundred.

Single Aqua Fortis.
TAke of Crude Vitriol three Pound, of Nitre two Pound; beat, and mix them
well; put the Mixture into an Earthen Pot, called a long Neck, place it in an
open Fire; fit to it a Receiver, which Lute well with Clay, Sand, and cut Flax,
wrought together; give a Fire of the first Degree for three Hours; in that time
you will see some red Fumes in the Receiver, which will again disappear; then
raise the Fire to the Second Degree, where keep it three Hours longer; go on to
the Third and Fourth, where keep it till the Receiver is free from Fumes. When
all is cold, take the Receiver off carefully, and keep the Aqua Fortis for Use;
which is chiefly for Dyers and Refiners, and is also a good Menstruum to be
used in the Preparation of other Medicines.

Double Aqua Fortis.
TAke of Vitriol Calcined almost to Redness, four Pound, of Nitre two Pound,
both made into fine Powder, and well mixed; Put the Mixture into an Earthen
Long-neck, or Glass Retort Luted, set it in a Reverberatory Furnace; Fit and
Lute on a Receiver to it; kindle the Fire, and proceed, as in the single Aqua
Fortis. Some mix Clay with the Calcined Vitriol and Nitre, but it is altogether
unnecessary: And if you desire its Caput Mortuum washed, it is inconvenient.

Tincture of Salt Peter.
TAke of Nitre fixed with Charcole, as directed in the Purging Salt of Nitre,
one Pound; put it into a Crucible, and give it a strong melting Heat, for three
or four Hours; then put it into a warm Mortar, powder it, and whilst warm,
pour upon it half a Pound of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; set the Mixture in a
Matras, upon warm Sand, gradually increasing the Fire, till the Spirit of Wine
simper; and so continue it two or three Hours, in which time the fixed Nitre
will have communicated its Tincture to the Spirit of Wine; Decant, and put on
more, and Digest so long as it yields any Tincture.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

It Purifies the Blood, and is a great Antiscorbutick.

Its Dose is from twenty Drops to a Dram.

Fulminating Powder.
IT is Composed of Nitre three Parts, Salt of Tartar two Parts, and Sulphur one
part; mix them diligently, and keep the Powder dry for use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from ten Gr. to one Dram.

If you put one Dram of this Powder into a Spoon, Fire-shovel, or on the Point
of a Knife, and hold it over a gentle Fire, half a quarter of an Hour, it will
then begin to melt, and give a Report like a Musket.

Observations.
THis differs not much from pure Nitre; Sal Prunel. or Crystal Mineral.
the burning of Sulphur upon it, consumes some accidental Dirt, which may have
fallen into it; and Evaportates a little of its Humidity and Spirit; but
whether this makes the Medicine more or less effectual, the Physician is the
best Judge.

This ought to be made of pure Nitre, because what is impure, Sal Polychrestum.
or of the nature of common Salt, fixes with the Medicine in its Preparation:
which some (with good Reason) think not to answer the Intent of the Medicine.

You ought to dissolve the Fixed Nitre so often in Vinegar, Nitrum Cathartic.
till it comes off as sharp in its Distillation from the Nitre, as it was when
put to it.

The Nitre for this Operation ought to be pure and dry; Spir. Nitri
for if it be not Separated from the common Salt, which is in all our unrefined
Nitre, it will produce an Aqua Regia. If it be not dry, it cannot be made into
such fine Powder as is requisite to keep it from melting together, by which the
Emission of its Spirits would be hindered.

This Spirit is made with less trouble than the former, Spir. Nitri. Ol. Vitrio.
and to answer the Charge of the Oil of Vitriol, you have the Salt which some
have observed to be endued with all the Virtues of Tartarus Vitriolatus.

For this Operation you need not take the trouble of making the Nitre so fine,
Aq. Fortis simplex.
as in the Spirit of Nitre, the Crude Vitriol and Nitre melting together in the
Retort, susficiently mixes them.

The Nitre ought to be finely Powdered, Aq. Fortis duplex.
the better to mix the Calcined Vitriol and Nitre, before they are put into the
Retort, for the Reason recited in the Spirit of Nitre.

You may put the First and Second Tinctures together in a Retort, Tinct. Sal.
Nitri.
and draw off so much Spirit of Wine as is necessary to leave the remaining
Spirit of Wine well charged with the Tincture.

Observe but the Process, Spir. Nitri Dulcis.
and no other Caution is required.

Let the Nitre, Salt of Tartar, and Sulphur, Pull Fulminans.
be all very dry, and grind them in a warm Mortar, with a warm Pestle. For if
you let them Attract Air, it lessens the Crack.

Note, That in the Rectification of these, and all other Acid Spirits, the
Phlegm comes first; whereas in all Vinous and Urinous Spirits it comes last.

CHAP. XV. Of Common Salt.
COmmon Salt is the Quintessential Part of Salt Water, (viz.) of the Sea, or of
Fountains, which remains after a full Evaporation of the insipid Humidity of
the said Marine, or Fountain Water. Of it there are three sorts (viz.) Sal Gem,
so called from its Trasparency, and similitude of Precious Stones; that made by
Evaporation of the Water of Salt Fountains, and of Seawater. The Sal Gem we
have from the North-East-Countries, as Poland, etc. where there are large Rocks
of it; the Fountain-Salt out of Cheshire and Worcestershire, and that of the
Sea from all Parts of the World near the Sea, and of it there are two sorts,
that made by Evaporation with Fuel, and that dried by the Sun, the last of
which is the strongest. The Sal Gem is the most Penetrating, as appears by its
Dissolving, and Volatilizing Gold, more powerfully than the other.

Purification of Salt.
IT is separated from its Earth, and accidental Dirt, by Dissolution,
Filtration, and Crystallization.

Decrepitation of Salt.
PUT what quantity of common Salt you please into a Crucible, or any other
Earthen Vessel which will endure the Fire; give it such a Heat as will make it
crackle, but not melt; continue it in that Degree of Fire (now and then
stirring it with an Iron Hook) till it cracks no more; and this you may do
either before, or after Purification.

Spirit of Salt.
TAke of common Salt one Pound and a half, of Burnt Tobacco-Pipes, or Fuller's
Earth, four Pound and a half; let the Salt and Bole be well dried, and beaten
into very sine Powder; then mix them exactly, and put them into an Earthen or
Glass Retort Luted, which ought not to be quite two thirds full; place the
Vessel in a Reverberatory Furnace; cover it with its Dome; Fit and Lute on a
Receiver; make under it a Fire of the first Degree, and continue it about two
Hours, in which time the Lute will be dry; then increase the Fire to the Second
Degree, and continue it so three Hours, and so proceed to the Third, and there
keep four Hours; urge it further to the Fourth, for five Hours longer; in which
time (the Fire being exactly managed) the Operation will be ended, which you
will perceive by the disappearance of the white Clouds in the Receiver; let it
cool, and take off the Spirit.

Put the Spirit into a clean Cucurbit, or Retort; place it in Sand, in a gentle
Heat, fit a Receiver, not Luted; give it a gentle Fire, to raise the insipid
Phlegm; when you perceive the Drops to have an acid Taste; put away that which is
in the Receiver, which put on again, and Lute; keep it in a Fire of the Second
Degree, till there is a Minutes space of time between the falling of each Drop.
Then take off the Spirit, and keep for use. It is more grateful in Taste than
it was before its Rectification.

In the Retort will be left the heavy Spirit of Salt, which is improperly
called its Oil; which may also be Rectified, and rendered more grateful, by
increasing the Fire to the Third and Fourth Degree, till nothing is left in the
Retort, but a Stiptick Yellow Earth.

Its Operation is Diuretic, and is used in any Vehicle, to make it of a
pleasant Acidity. It is given in Fevers, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
Dropsies, Jaundice, and to quench Thirst.

Its Dose is from ten, to sixty or seventy Drops.

Spirit of Salt, made with Oil of Vitriol, etc.
TAke of clean common Salt, two Pound, of Oil of Vitriol the same quantity, and
mix them thus. First put the Water into an Earthen Vessel; then put the Oil to
it by two or three Ounces at a time; if you put in more it will endanger
breaking the Vessel by its violent Heat.

Then put the Salt into a Glass Retort, and put the Oil and Water to it; set it
in a Sand Furnace; Fit a Receiver to it, and make a Fire of the First Degree
for one Hour, and advance to the Second; where keep it three Hours; increase to
the Third four Hours, and so to the Fourth, till no more Fumes or Drops come
into the Receiver. This Spirit (without any Rectification) is more greateful
than the former, and equal, if not exceeding it in Virtue.

Sal Mirabile.
TAke the Salt left in the Retort, after the Distillation of the aforesaid
Spirit of Salt; Dissolve and Filter it; Evaporate part of the Water, and set
the other in a cold place to Crystallize. In could Weather it will Shoot in
Forty Eight Hours, and in warm Weather three or four Days.

Its Operation is Cathartick and Diuretic, and Answers all the Uses of any of
the Purging Waters.

Its Dose from half an Ounce to an Ounce, in a Pint of Purging or Spring Water.

Spirit of Sal Gem.
SPirit of Sal Gem is made in every respect as that of common Salt, either with
Bole, or Oil of Vitriol.

Its Use and Virtues are the same as Common Salt, but it is a more powerful
Dissolver of Gold.

Observations.
YOU may put one part of Crude Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, Spirit Salt com.
to two Parts of Bole, and work it well with the Bole or Clay moist; make it
into little Pellets, which dry, and then Distill, as you are directed.

About the middle of this Distillation the Matter in the Retort will bubble and
make a noise, Spirit. Sal. cum Ol. Vit.
then be careful that you do not augment the Fire too fast, lest the Retort or
Receiver breaks.

If the Retort perform the Operation without cracking, Sal Mirab.
you may put Water to the Salt which is in it, and Dissolve and Filter, and so
save the Retort. The Evaporation may be made in a clean Iron Kettle, or an
Earthen one.

CHAP. XVI. Of AMBER.
IT is supposed to be a Bituminous Juice and Rosin of the Earth, soft and
viscous; for in it we often find Flies, Ants, etc. It is called Amber,
Succinum, Carabe, and Glessum. It is found in the Persian Gulf, on the Italian
Shore; also in the Currents near the Baltic Sea, in the Duchy of Prussia. It
is of different Colors, viz. White, Yellow and Black: But those who work it
into Beads, and other things, make a Distinction of twenty or thirty sorts.

The White is most esteemed in Physical Use, as being best Digested, and of the
most Odoriferous Smell, containing the greatest quantity of Volatile Salt. The
yellow is next in goodness, and most valued by the Amber-workers, by reason of
its Transparency. The Black is least in esteem. Amber, by agitation, sends
forth an agreeable Smell, and being ground into fine Powder, is given in
Gonorhea's, Spitting of Blood, the Bloody Flux, and the Immoderate Flux of the
Hemorrhoids, Terms, etc. also to stop the Violence of Catarrhs, if the Fume of
it be received up the Nose.

It is found in pieces of different sizes, from the bigness of a great Pin's
Head, to those of five, six, or seven Inches Diameter; the greater Pieces are
wrought into Cabinets, Cups, and several Figures, and are valued according to
their Bigness and Transparency.

That we meet withal in the Shops, is by the Druggists generally disposed into
two sorts, by separating the White and Yellow Pieces, from those that are full
of Scurf and Black, which they distinguish by the Names of Fine and Course
Amber: The Fine Levigated is for Physical Use, and the Course for Distillation.

Preparations of Amber.
Oil, Volatile Salt, and Spirit of Amber.
TAke of course Amber in fine Powder one Pound, of Tobacco-Pipes, Bricks, Sand,
or other Bole, also in fine Powder, three Pound; mix them well, and with the
Mixture fill a Retort half full; set it in a Sand Furnace; fit to it a Receiver
(not Luted) make Fire of the first Degree for one Hour, increase it to the
Second, and so keep it two Hours; then to the Third, in which keep it four
Hours. In the first Degree some of the Acid Water we call Spirit, with a little
of the finest Oil will Distill. In the Second, the Spirit and Oil will continue
dropping, and some of its Volatile Salt will rise into the Neck of the Retort.
In the Third, you will elevate more Salt with the Balsamic Oil; and if you
will urge the Fire to the Fourth Degree, it will raise its thick Balsam. As the
Salt rises into the Neck of the Retort, you ought to scrape it out with a clean
flat Stick, and put it upon brown Paper to suck up the Oil: The Salt, by this
means, will be white, and if you desire it more fine, you may Dissolve, Filter,
and Evaporate it, and you will have a very white Salt. When the Distillation is
over, and all cool, Separate the Oil and Spirit, by a Funnel, or other
Separating Glass. If you would Rectify the Oil, you may put it into a long
bodied Retort, and set it in Sand, and by gradual raising the Fire to the
Second Degree, there will Distill a fine yellow, and clear Oil. But if you would
have a pure white, and Aetherial Oil, you must put it into a Cucurbit, with
three times the quantity of Water to that of Oil, with which the Vessel must
not be quite half full, and then fit on the Head and Receiver, and gradually
bring up the Fire to the Second Degree, or so as to make the Oil and Water
bubble, and you will Distill a pure Aetherial Oil, which must be separated as
before. Separate the Water from the Oil left in the Retort, and you will find
it Impregnated with some of the Salt, and therefore put it into the Receiver,
into which you made the First Distillation, and shake it well, to rinse out the
Salt. Then pour all into a Cucurbit; fit to it a Head and Receiver; give a
gentle Fire to Evaporate the Water, till the Drops fall a little Acid; then let
it cool, and put it to the Spirit which you separated in the first
Distillation; Rectify them together, and you have the Spirit of Amber.

The Operation of the Oils, Spirit and Salt, is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

The Dose of the Rectified Oils is from one to twelve, or fifteen Drops; of the
Unrectify'd Oil from one to six or seven Drops. The Dose of the Spirit is from
ten Drops to one Dram; and that of the Salt from two Grains to one Scruple.

The Rectified Oil is given in Hysterical Distempers, in the Palsy, Apoplexy,
and Epilepsie: The Salt and Spirit is given in the Stone and Gravel in the
Kidneys and Bladder, Stoppage of Urine, Ulcers in the Neck of the Bladder, etc.
The Balsamic Oil is most used externally, but often given, with good success,
in old Gleets, a Disease which frequently puzzles the best Physicians.

Tincture of Amber.
PUT Four Ounces of Amber in very fine Powder, into a Boult-head, power upon it
Twelve Ounces of Spirit of Wine, invert a small Boult-head into the Mouth of
the bigger, lute well the Juncture, and set it to digest upon a heat of Sand
four or five days, shaking it about two or three times in a day; when the
Spirit is well tinged of an Amber Color, power it into a Vial, and put half a
pound more of Spirit of Wine, digest as before, which also will extract a
Tincture, both which put into a Matras, and in a gentle heat of Ashes, draw off
one half of the Spirit of Wine, which will serve again for the same Use; and
put the Tincture into a Vial well stopped.

Its Operation is a little Diaphoretick; it is give to Histerical Women, and is
good for the Apoplexy, Palsy and Epilepsie.

Its Dose from Ten to Seventy or Eighty Drops in any proper Vehicle.

The Powers of Amber.
TAke Oil of Amber one Ounce, the volatile Salt of Sal Ammoniac half an Ounce,
grind the Oil and Salt well together in a little Mortar, power to them Spirit of
Wine Tartariz'd half a pound, and put them afterward into a bolthead, invert a
little Glass to make it fit for Circulation. Lute well the Joint, and put it on
warm Sand to stand in Digestion four or five days, shaking it two or three
times every Day, in which time the Spirit of Wine will have imbid'd the Oil and
Salt; set it by, and when it is cold, put it in a Vial, well stopped, and keep for
Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic. It is of the same Use with Oil,
Spirit, and Salt of Amber, and is an Excellent Medicine against the Cholick in
Stomach or Bowels.

Its Dose from ten Drops to half a Dra. or two Scruples.

Observations.
THE Oil, Spirit, Salt and Tincture, require no other Remarks than what is
given in the Processes: And if you put the Salt of Sal Volatile Oleosum,
instead of the Sal Volatile Armoniacum, it will be more acceptable to some
Persons.

CHAP. XVII. Of CORAL.
IT is a Petrified Plant, which shoots out from Rocks in the bottom of the Sea:
There are three sorts of it, viz. Red, White, and Black. The Red is most in
Esteem and Use; the White next; but of the Black I have never met with any
Preparation: The Red is found in the Seas of the East-India's, and the
Mediterranean: Some say it is Green and Soft under Water, and by the Air is
presently turned Red and hard; the Black is often upon the same Branch with the
Red: The White is found in the West-Indian-Sea, upon the Coast of Spain, and in
the West of England, upon the Coast of Cornwall. The Chemical Preparations of
the Red are the Tincture, Magistery, and Salt; and of the White, the Magistery
and Salt. But some prefer the Use of Coral brought into an Impalpable Powder,
by grinding only, before any other Preparation whatsoever.

Preparations of Coral.
Salt and Magistery of Coral.
TAke what quantity you please of red or white Coral in fine Powder, put it in
a clean, smooth Earthen Dish, or wide-mouthed Glass; Mix with it distilled
Vinegar, and there will arise presently a strong Ebullition: when it is over,
put more Distilled Vinegar to it; and so continue to do as long as you perceive
any Fermentation; then set it upon warm Sand, stirring it now and then with a
clean Tobacco-Pipe, till you see the heat excites no Effervescense; then filter
the Liquor, put by the moiety of it for the Magistery, and the other part
evaporate to dryness in a gentle heat, which is the Salt of Coral.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic; and is said to revive and
fortify the heart; stop Bloudy-Fluxes, and all other Haemorrhagies, and to
resist Poison.

Its Dose from ten Grains to one Dram.

Upon the other part of the Liquor, drop Oil of Tartar per deliqnium, upon
which will arise a White Curd, and will in a little time precipitate to the
bottom; when the Liquor is clear drop in more; and if it turns the Liquor white
as before, let it settle, and so continue till the Liquor will not curdle by
the Oil of Tartar; when the Magistery is all settled, decant the Liquor, and
put clean Water to the Magistery; shake it about, let it settle and decant as
before, and so do five or six times, till the Magistery has lost all its Salt
Taste; dry it gently, and keep it for use.

It is endued with the same Virtues with the Salt.

Its Dose may be augmented to Four Scruples.

The Tincture of Coral.
IT is made several ways, and with diverse Menstruums, which by time and heat,
becoming red, it is thought (with good reason) that the Tincture proceeds more
from the Spirits than from the Coral; I will therefore give you one, which I
think to be the most genuine Tincture of Coral.

Reduce half a Pound of Red Coral into impalpable Powder, and mix it with equal
its weight of sublimed Sal Armoniack also in Powder; put the Mixture into a
Retort; which place in Sand; fit to it a Receiver, and having well Luted the
Junctures, make Fire of the first degree, one hour; proceed to the second,
which continue two hours; go on to the third, and keep it there three Hours, or
'till all the Sal Armoniack is Sublimed. It will be Tinged with variety of
Colors, as Red, Green, Blue, etc. and contain in in the true Tincture of
Coral, which is apparent by its Body, being left White in the bottom of the
Retort. Put all these Sublimed Flowers into a Matras, and to every four Ounces
of the Flowers put ten Ounces of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; set them upon warm
Sand, in a double Vessel to digest, for three or four Days, and shake them
every Day two or three times; when the Spirit of Wine is well tinged, put on
more, and let it stand as before: Then put the tinged Spirits together (being
twenty Ounces) in a Matras; draw off twelve or fourteen Ounces, and the six or
eight remaining will be deeply Tinged with the Sulphur of Coral.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from ten Drops to one Dram.

Observations.
MAke the Evaporation in a Glass Vessel, Sal Coral.
with a wide Mouth, and in a gentle Heat of Sand; the Earth will suck up a
great deal of Salt, and too strong a Heat will discolor it.

When it is well settled, Magist. Corallij.
and washed sweet, you may drop it upon a clean Chalk stone, to absorb the
Humidity, and then dry it further between Paper in the shade.

The Sal Armon. ought to be prepared by Dissolution and Sublimation; Tinct.
Coral
so that no heterogeneous Matter may be elevated with the genuine Sulphur of
Coral.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Japan Earth.
IT is brought from Japan, and by the Natives called Catechu, in Color and
Weight it differs; some make nine or ten distinct sorts of it; But be it of
what Color it will, that which is lightest, breaks smooth, and is most
stiptick on the Tongue is best; in Taste it is something bitter, but not
unpleasant, prepares the Palate to receive Wine with much pleasure: There is
several Compositions of it made into Troches, that most in esteem is called
Catechu; it is good against Catarrhs, Fluxes of Rheum, the Flux of the Bowels,
and overflowing of Terms, etc.

Catechu.
MAke what quantity you please of Japan Earth into Powder; dissolve it in weak
Cinnamon Water; power off the dissolution from the Foeces, and dry it gently;
when it is dry, mix two Ounces of it with three Ounces of Sugar Candy,
Ambergreece half an Ounce, Musk fifteen Grains; and Butter, or (as they call
it) Spirit of Roses fifteen Drops; grind them all extremely well together till
they are impalpable, and with the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, make them into
little Pills of the bigness of Pearl Barley.

One of these Pills held in the Mouth, causes a sweet Breath, and renders all
Liquors very pallatable; forty or fifty of them dissolved in the Mouth, and
swallowed in a day, helps Catarrhs, Fluxes of Rheum, the Bloudy-flux, and
overflowing of the Terms.

The Tincture of Japan Earth.
POwder finely four ounces of Japan Earth. Of the best Cinnamon one ounce, of
the Peruvian Bark one ounce and an half, let them be made also into fine
Powder, with Musk and Ambergreece, ana six Grains; let the two last be well
ground with one ounce of Sugar Candy; Put them all in a Mattress, and put to
them Spirit of Wine twenty four ounces; make of the Mattress a circulating
Vessel; lute well the Juncture; set it upon warm Sand to digest four or five
days, shaking it about two or three times a day; then set it by to settle, and
by gentle inclination power it into a Vial, and keep for Use.

It is good for all the forementioned Purposes, and also an excellent
Antifebrifick.

Its Dose from half a Spoonful to three or four, in Wine, or any other proper
Vehicle.

These need no other Observation than adhering to the Processes.

A Complete Course OF Chemistry. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of VEGETABLES.
ALL Plants proceed from Seed, in which they are for some time shut up, as in a
Matrix, 'till the Saline Humidity of the Earth and Fire has Penetrated and
Softened the outer Part of the Seed, entered its Pores, and given Extention to
the young Plant, by which its parts become perceptible.

Plants are Nourished by their Roots, which receive their Nutriment by Pores,
and are afterward Exalted by the Heat of the Sun, which distributes it self
into the Fibers of the Plant, and causes such a Filtration and Circulation of
the Juices, as gives Nourishment to the Vegetable Parts; the most Exalted and
Subtle Parts whereof ascend to the Flowers and Fruit, the more Aqueous and less
rarified, give Nourishment to the Leaves and Branches. From the more Oily Part
proceeds Gums, and Resins; and of the more Gross and Terestrial is Composed the
Bark.

CHAP. II. Of JALAP.
IT is a Root brought to us from America, sliced and dried; that which is most
Ponderous, and breaks with shining black Resinous Veins is best. It is a great
Cathartick, and as they say, Purges watery Humors: The Powder of it is given in
White Wind, from ten Grains to one Dram.

Resin of Jalap.
TAke of Select Jalap one Pound, Powder it, and put it into a Matras; put to it
six Pound of Rectified Spirit of Wine; invert a Bolt-Head, and Lute it; set it
upon warm Sand three or four Days, and shake it every Day two or three times;
when the Spirit is well Tinged, decant it carefully through a Hair Sieve into a
Cucurbit; set it in a gentle Heat of Sand, or Balneo, and draw off the Spirit
of Wine to one Pint, which you may return upon the Jalap, to make a second
Extraction; Decant the Spirit as formerly; Lute on its Head and Receiver, and
Distill as before. Let all cool, and in the Cucurbit you will find the Resin in
Form of Turpentine, which wash in three or four Waters, and in a gentle Heat
dry it, till it will beat into Powder.

Its Operation is Cathartick.

It is given to open Obstructions, and in Dropsies, made into Pills, or an
Electuary.

Its Dose from three, to ten or twelve Grains.

CHAP. III. Of RHVBARB.
IT is a Purgative Root brought to us from Turkey and the East-India's; it is
the Product of some Parts of China and Tartary. The most Compact (not Flinty)
which cuts in Grains like Nutmegs, and of a pleasant Flavor, is best. And
observe, that generally the small Pieces exceed the great ones in Goodness, as
being less subject to Corruption; after its Purgative Operation is over, it
Binds, and is therefore given in Fluxes.

Its Dose is from ten Grains to sixty or seventy.

Extract of Rhubarb.
BRuise, or cut into very thin Slices, what quantity of Rhubarb you please;
steep it ten or twelve Hours in a sufficient quantity of Distilled Rain Water,
or any proper simple Distilled Water; let it just simper, and then pass it
through a Strainer; infuse the Remainder in more Water, as before; pass and
press it hard through the Strainer; put the Infusions together, and let them
settle; then, by gentle Inclination, pour off the clear Tincture from its
Residence, and Evaporate to the Consistence of Honey, and it is the Extract of
Rhubarb.

Observations.
THese Extracts made with Water are apt to grow moldy; therefore if you intend
to keep them long, they ought to be made with Spirit of Wine.

After the same manner are all Vegetable Extracts made, except Resins, which
require Spirit of Wine to dissolve them: Also observe, when you make the
Extract of any Aromatic Herb, Flower, or Spice, that instead of Evaporation,
you Distill the Water, and save it for Use, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of GVIACVM.
GUiacum is the Wood we call Lignum Sanctum, and Lignum Vitae: It grows in
several places of the West India's, and is a Tree of great Magnitude. It is
Sudorifick, and therefore used in such Decoctions. That which is most Compact,
Resinous, and Ponderous, is best. Its Gum is both Sudorifick and Cathartick.

Spirit and Oil of Guiacum.
FILL an Earthen Retort two thirds full of such Dust of Guiacum as you have at
the Turners; Place it in a Reverberatory, and Lute to it a Receiver; give it
Fire of the first Degree one Hour, increase it to the Second, and keep it there
two or three Hours; go on to the Third two Hours; and so to the Fourth for two
Hours more; or until you see no more Fumes will come into the Receiver: Let it
cool, and take off what is Distilled, and put it into a Coffin of Filtring
Paper, in a Funnel; the Spirit will Filter through the Paper, and the Oil will
remain in it: Put the Spirit into a Glass Retort; set it in a Sand Furnace; Fit
on its Receiver, and give it Fire of the First Degree, to raise the Phlegm; when
you perceive the Drops to come Acid, remove the Receiver, and put away the
Phlegm as useless: Put on the Receiver again, and Lute it, increasing the Fire
gradually to the Second and Third Degree, and it will bring over all the
Spirit, which put in a Vial for Use.

The Oil may be Rectified in a Retort, but it is generally used for the
Toothache, and to clean Rotten Bones, without Rectification.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick.

Its Dose is from two, to eight or ten Drops.

The Spirit is Diaphoretick and Diureick.

Its Dose from twenty Drops to sixty, or seventy.

You may Calcine the Caput Mortuum to a white Ash, and then with warm Water
Extract the Salt, as you will see hereafter of other Vegetable Fixed Salts.

CHAP: V. Of Sassafras.
IT is a Tree affording good Timber: It grows in several of our Western
Plantations; especially in Virginia, from whence we have it. Its Root is more
Fragrant than the Tree; and therefore it is most used in Physical cases. The
Bark of both the Tree and Root is more Fragrant than the Wood of either, and
yields more Oil considerably.

Oil of Sassafras.
TAke of the Shavings, or the Wood ground to Powder, twenty eight Pound; Put it
into a Copper Still, to which put of clean Water twelve Gallons: Lute on the
Head, and set a Spout Receiver to the Worm; make a gradual Fire, till it runs
in a small thread into the Receiver; in which condition keep it, till by holding
a Spoon under the Nose of the Worm, you perceive no Oil to Distill with the
Water; when the Operation is ended, separate the Oil which sinks to the bottom,
and put it up.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic. It is given in the Venerial
Disease, Gout, Stone, Scurvy and Dropsy.

Its Dose from three, to ten or twelve Drops.

After the same manner you make the Oils of Rhodium, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Clove-bark, all Aromatic Herbs, and Seeds; and therefore I will not trouble
you with any other Process of this kind.

CHAP. VI. Of the Jesuits, or Peruvian Bark.
IT was brought to us from Peru, in New Spain, and its Use first taught us by
the Jesuits: There has been for some Years two sorts of it (viz.) the
Cultivated and the Wild: The Cultivated is the best, and the best of that kind
is that which is most Compact, Bitter, and of a reddish Color.

It is a certain Remedy to hinder the Fits of an Ague, and is given either in
Powder, or infused in Wine: the Patient being well Purged before.

The Infusion of Peruvian Bark.
TAke of the Bark in Powder two Ounces; Put it in a Matras, and to it two
Quarts of White, or Pale Red Wine; Fit the Matras for Circulation, and set it
upon warm Sand, or in Balneo, forty eight Hours; shake it about two or three
times a Day, then let it cool, and pour off the Infusion (through a Strainer)
into a Vial, and keep it stopped for Use.

Two or three Ounces of this Infusion is given three or four times a Day in
Agues, at some distance from the Paroxism. Dr. Smith of Paris (who was Sir
Robert Tabor's Successor there) made his Infusion in Pale Red Wine.

The Tincture of Peruvian Bark.
TAke four Ounces of the Bark in Powder; put it in a Bolt-Head; put to it
Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine twelve Ounces: Invert another less into the Mouth, to
make it a double Vessel; set it in a gentle Heat of Sand, Balneo, or Bal. Vap.
four or five Days, shaking it every Day two or three times; then Decant the
Tinged Spirit of Wine carefully into a Vial, which keep for Use.

Its Dose from one Scruple to one Dram, or one Dram and a half, to be given in
any convenient Vehicle, as a Febrifuge, some distance from the Fit.

The Extract of Peruvian Bark.
PUT half a Pound of Peruvian Bark in Powder, into a large Matras; Put to it of
the simple Distilled Water of Wormwood, Carduus, or any other proper Water,
five or six Quarts. Place it in Sand, and let it boil gently two or three
Hours; strain it; put more Distilled Water to the Bark; Boil and Strain as
before; Put the Infusions together, and in a Glass or Earthen Vessel, Evaporate
gently, to the Consistence of Honey. Put this Extract in a Pot for Use.

Its Dose is from fifteen Grains to two Scruples, in Pills, or Dissolved in
Wine.

it is Endued with the same Virtues as the former.

CHAP. VII. Of SVGAR.
IT is the Essential Salt of a Reed which grows in the East and West-India's;
That from Brasile, brought into Europe by the Portugals, is accounted the best,
which is called Brasile, or Lisbon Sugar; but that which now we have from
Barbados and Jamaica is very good, and by the Refiners of Sugar made equal to
any other in Goodness. It is Refined by Dissolution, and the Separation of its
Earthy, Gross, Oily and Molosus Part: That which is made most white and
acceptable to the Eye, is Refined by the help of Limewater, and being
Evaporated to a due Consistence, is put into Moulds, of a Pyramidical Form,
with a hole in the bottom, to let the more Feculent Part run out.

Sugar Candy is made of both Refined, and Unrefined Sugar, by boiling of them
in Water, and setting them to Crystalize in Vessels, in which they put little
Sticks for the Crystals to adhere to. The White Candy is of the Refined Sugar,
and the Brown of the Unrefined.

Sugar Candy is counted a good Pectoral, and given in Diseases of the Breast
and Lungs.

Spirit of Sugar.
TO one Pound of Powdered Sugar, put three Pound of Fullers Earth, also in
Powder, or in its room, so much Sand clean washed; fill a Retort half full of
this Mixture; place it in a San Furnace, and give it Fire of the first degree,
for two Hours; then increase it to the Second for two Hours more; proceed to
the Third, where keep it till no Fumes appear in the Receiver. Then let all
cool, and in the Receiver you will find a Foetid Spirit and Oil, which separate
as usual. Put the Spirit into a Retort, or Cucurbit; set to it a Receiver
un-luted, make Fire of the first Degree; and there keep it till you perceive
the Drops have a little Acidity; put away the Phlegm; Lute on the Receiver;
increase the Fire to the Second Degree; where keep it till all is come off.

It dissolves Pearl and Coral, and is also counted a good Medicine in the Stone
and Gravel in the Bladder or Kidneys.

Its Dose is from ten, to fifty or sixty Drops, in any appropriated Liquor.

The Compound Spirit of Sugar Candy.
TAke Sugar Candy (white or brown) half a Pound, of Sal Armoniack four Ounces,
both made into fine Powder, and well mixed; put them into a Retort, which must
be two Thirds empty; place it in a Sand Furnace, and make Fire of the first
Degree for an Hour; increase it to the Second, and there continue it as long as
the Drops fall at the distance of one Second of Time; proceed then to the third
Degree, and let it remain there till no more Fumes appear in the Receiver: In
it you will find an Empyreumatical Spirit, with a little Oil; take out this
Spirit and Oil; put them in a clean Retort, and Rectify in a gentle Fire of
Sand, leaving the Oil in the bottom of the Vessel, and you will have a clear
Spirit, more agreeable than that of the first Distillation.

It is more Aperitive than the former, and its Use and Dose the same.

The Ardent Spirit of Sugar.
TAke coarse Sugar, or Molosses, q. v. put to it ten or twelve times its weight
of Water, and let them stand a sufficient time to Ferment; as soon as the
Fermentation is over, put the Liquor into a Copper-Still, with its
Refegeratory, and give it gradual Fire till it begins to drop: Observe then so
to manage the Fire, that the Spirit come from the Mouth of the Worm in a small
thread; and so continue till that which Distills is insipid; then let out the
Fire, and Rectify the Spirit by a Second Distillation, either in a Glass Body
and Head, or (if your quantity be great) in a Copper Vesica; observing to
separate the Spirit from the Phlegm, as in the first Distillation, which may be
farther Rectified till it burns all away.

It is of the same Use with Spirit of Wine, and is preferrable next to that of
the Grape.

Observations.
THE Sand, or other Bole, is mixed with the Sugar, to hinder its boiling over.

The Vessel in which you Distill it ought to be at least half empty.

The insipid Water which comes over in the Rectification ought to be kept by it
self, changing the Receiver as soon as you perceive the Drops which fall, to be
of an Acid Taste.

If you put a tenth Part of Dulcified Spirit of Salt, to the Spirit of Honey,
or Sugar, in their Rectification, it will make them of a more grateful smell,
and not lessen, but rather increase their Virtues.

Lastly, Urge not the Fire too strongly at the latter end, lest you raise some
of the Foetid Oil.

CHAP. VIII. Of WINE.
WINE is made of the Expressed Juice of the Grape, which immediately after the
Pressure, is called Must, and being Fermented, becomes Wine. The Fermentation
causes a Separation of the gross Tartar, and the Viscous Parts of the Must,
from the pure Sulphurous and Oily ones, in which is the Spirit and Essential
Salt. The petrid Part of the Tartar adheres to the sides of the Vessel, and the
Viscous falls to the bottom.

The sharp sprightly Wines, such as Champaigne, Burgundy, Nants, Bordeaux, etc.
being most Impregnated with Essential Salt, yield more Spirit than Sweet
Spanish, and Muscate Wines, because they are more loaded with a Syrupical
Substance.

Spirit of Wine, or Brady,
FILL a Copper-Still (which has a Refegeratory) two Thirds full of French
Wine; Lute on its Head, and put a Receiver to the Nose of the Worm; give it
gradual Fire, till the Spirit runs in a small thread; keep it in that Degree
till that which comes over being thrown into the Fire, with a Spoon, will not
burn; then let all cool, and remove the Receiver, which contains the weak
Spirit of Wine, or Brady, etc.

Spirit of Wine.
PUT into a long-bodied Matras, so much of the Foregoing Vinous Spirit, as
will fill one half of it; place it in a gentle Heat of Sand; and draw off one
half, or till you see the small Veins Expand themselves twice the breadth that
at first they appeared; then remove the Receiver, and you will have a Spirit
that will burn away to a Drop or two, in a Spoonful set on Fire, by the Flame
of a Paper or Candle.

This Spirit serves for making several Extracts and Tinctures.

But if you will have yet a more high and perfect Spirit of Wine, put what
quantity you please of the foregoing Spirit into a Vessel, and to each Gallon
four Pound of Calcined Tartar, or the same quantity of Potashes in Powder, and
very dry; shake them well, and let them stand a quarter of an Hour; Repeat the
Agitation two or three times, that the Salt may Imbibe the Phlegm; when it is
well settled decant the Spirit into a long Body, in the Mouth of which hang a
clean Cloth, which contains in it one Pound of Salt of Tartar, proportionably
to each Gallon; Place your Matras, or Body, in a gentle Heat of Sand; and the
Spirit of Wine which Distills into the Receiver will be perfect, the Salt
receiving and keeping back the Phlegm. This Spirit is fit for any Use in
Chemistry, as a Menstruum, or for Extracting Tinctures, etc.

It is sometimes taken inwardly, to the quantity of half, or three quarters of
a Spoonful, by Apoplectical Persons, and is externally used in Burns, also in
cold Pains and Contusions, etc.

Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd.
TAke Salt of Tartar, two or three times Coagulated and Dissolved, one Pound;
give it a strong Fusion in a Crucible, for two Hours, Powder it in a warm
Mortar, and whilst warm, put it into a Matras, to two Quarts of the former
Rectified Spirit of Wine; shake them well together, and place them in a Sand
Furnace; Lute the Junctures of the Head and Receiver; Give Fire to such a
Degree, as may make the Drops succeed each other very quickly: This Spirit of
Wine Volatizes, and carries over with it some part of the Salt of Tartar, which
is demonstrable by the Salt sustaining the loss of at least one Ounce of its
weight.

By this Operation the Spirit of Wine acquires a more agreeable Scent and Taste
than before, and it is more Subtle, and given in a less Dose, and for the same
Uses as the former.

Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd another way.
TAke the Salt of Tartar left in the bottom of the Matras, in the foregoing
Operation, dissolve it in Pure Rectified Distilled Vinegar; Filter the
Dissolution, and Coagulate the Salt, which Dissolve again in more Distilled
Vinegar, Filer and Coagulate as before. Repeat this Operation so often, that no
black Foeces remains, and that the Distilled Vinegar comes off as strong as it
was put upon the Salt; then is this Salt Prepared, which some call (but not
truly) by the Name of Volatile Salt of Tartar.

If you will farther exalt this Salt, take of the foregoing Salt of Tartar,
four Ounces, and put to it one Pound of the Spirit of Wine, which will readily
Dissolve it. Let the Dissolution stand quiet three or four Hours, and Decant it
gently from the Foeces; draw off the Spirit of Wine in a gentle Heat of Sand in
a Retort; dissolve the Salt again in the same Spirit of Wine, and repeat the
Operation till no Foeces remains; Return the Salt again into the Spirit of
Wine, in which it will totally dissolve.

This is the true Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, with which I Extract the Tinctures
and Anodine Sulphurs of Metals, and unite them with Vegetable Fixed, and Animal
Volatile Alkalies, which is one of the chiefest Ingredients in the Composition
of that Excellent Anti-Rheumatick Tincture, which Fifteen or Sixteen Years ago
Cured me of a violent Rheumatism, that Afflicted me Three Year successively:
And I was not only freed then from those Acute Pains that attended the
Distemper, but have been preserved to this Day without the least Symptom of
them. Nor is its Virtues confined to the Cure of that Disease only, but even to
the Gourt, Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundice, Cholick, Green Sickness, Stone and Gravel
in Bladder or Kidneys, and in Fevers: In all these Distempers it has manifested
its Virtue, and given Relief to some Hundreds within this two Years last past.

This Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine is Cathartick, Diuretic, and Diaphoretick.

Its Dose is from fifty Drops to two Drachms, in Wine and Water, or Water alone.

The Cephalic, or Head Spirit.
TAke of the Essential Oils of Cloves, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs, of each half a
Dram; of Marjorum, Lavender, and Rosemary, of each two Scruples; of Oranges
and Lemons, ana one Scruple and a half; of Fine Benjamin in Powder, one Ounce.
Mix these all together in a Cucurbit, with three Pints of Tartaris'd Spirit of
Wine; place them in a Sand Furnace, Fitting and Luting too, the Head and
Receiver; kindle the Fire, which gradually increase to the Second Degree, and
in that Heat continue it till three Pints is drawn off.

Then take off the Receiver, and put the Spirit into a clean Matras, to which
put of Marum Syriacum, and Lilies of the Valley, ana one Ounce, of Sal Volatile
Oleosum, two Ounces, and of Essence of Ambergreese one Dram and a half; shake
them well together, and invert a blind Head, to the Matras, and keep it in a
gentle Heat of Digestion three or four Days, and then put it into a Vial, well
stopped for use.

It is a most Pleasant and Excellent Cephalic, three or four Drops of it being
strongly snuft up the Nostrils, and the Temples a little rubbed with it, does
immediately remove any Pain of the Head; It may also be taken from ten to
thirty or forty Drops, in a little Glass of Wine or Water, and is a most
Effectual Pectoral Medicine.

This is that True Spiritus Cephalicus which I have made above thirty Years,
and has by several Persons of late Years been Counterfeited, and called by the
Name of Liquid Snuff.

Spirit of Scurvy Grass.
TAKE of Garden-Scurvy-Grass in Flower, or fresh and newly gathered, at any
other time, twenty Pound; bruise it grossly, and put it presently into a
Copper-Still, Tinned within; Put to it three Gallons of the Grounds of Ale,
with a Pint of New Yest; stir them well together; Lute on the Head, and kindle
a little Small-Cole under it, to give just a Fermenting Warmth; let it stand
twenty four Hours, and then give Fire to Distill the Spirit. That which comes
first is the best, and ought to be kept by it self: The second Running will
serve to put to more Grass, when you Distill it another time.

It is also made without Fermentation, with Spirit of Wine, thus. To Twenty
Pound of Scurvy Grass, bruised as before, put two Gallons of Brandy, or
Distillers Proof Spirit, make Fire under it, and Distill one Gallon, which will
be strongly Impregnated with the Virtue of the Herb. The Second Running you may
keep for the same Use as before. Some add to every ten Pound of Grass, two
Pound of Horseradish, sliced or bruised, etc.

The Purging Spirit is made by Dissolving one Ounce of Rosin of Scammony, or
Jalap, in one Pound of the Spirit.

The Dose of the Plain Spirit is from twenty to an hundred Drops; and of the
Purging Spirit, from twenty to sixty or seventy Drops, etc.

The Queen of Hungary's Water:
TAke of the Tops of Rosemary when full of Flowers, what quantity you please;
put them in a Copper-Still, Tinned within; Pour upon them three times their
weight of Rectified Spirit of Wine, with as much clean Water; Lute on the Head;
fit a Receiver to the Worm, and make a little Fire of Small-Cole, but not so
hot as to Elevate any Spirit; and thus let it stand twenty four Hours; then
give it Fire to cause it to Distill in a small Thread; and draw off the same
quantity of Spirit, and half the Water. Then let out the Fire, and take the
Rosemary-tops out of the Still, and put one third part of the quantity of
Flowers to those already in the Still. Return all the former Distillation upon
the Flowers; Lute on the Head; Digest as before, and draw off by gentle Fire
the same quantity of Spirit of Wine, which at first you put on, which keep
close stopped for Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick. It is given in Convulsions, Cramps, Palsies,
Lethargies, Apoplexies, and Histerical Maladies.

Its Dose is from one Dram to two or three, in a proper Vehicle.

Observe, That after the same Method with the two foregoing Spirits, you may
make the Spirits of all Herbs and Flowers, etc. adding to such Herbs as yield
no Moisture, so much Water as is sufficient to keep them from burning.

Observations.
IF you have a great quantity to Rectify, Spir. Vin. Rectificat.
you may put several Parcels to work in a digesting Furnace, in five or six
Vessels, and you may have of Pure Rectified Spirit two or three Gallons in
twenty four Hours time; or it may also be Rectified in Copper-still, with its
Refegeratory.

If you let it stand thirty or forty Hours, upon the Salt of Tartar in
Digestion, Spir. Vin. Tartarisat.
before you begin the Distillation, the Spirit will the better Imbibe the more
Subtle Part of the Salt.

The Distilled Vinegar you use in this Operation, ought to be Rectified so
often, Spir. Vin. Tartar.
till it leaves nothing in the bottom of the Vessel, in which it is Rectified
in, but a little white Salt.

In this Operation exceed not the Second Degree of Fire, Spir. Ceph.
nor draw off above three Parts of Spirit, before you take off the Receiver,
which you may do while the Fire is still under it. Then put the Receiver on
again, and without supplying the Fire any more; let what will come off, till
all is cold, which will be about a Pint more, and is a pretty Water to wash your
Fingers and Mouth after Meals.

CHAP. IX. Of VINEGAR.
WINE becomes Eager by a Second Fermentation, caused by the loss of some of its
most Subtle Sulphurous Spirits, by which Debilitation the Acid Salts
predominate, and fix the rest of the Spirits remaining in the Wine.

Distillation of Vinegar.
PUT of good Wine Vinegar into a large Retort, or Body fitted with a Head, what
quantity you please, so that one third part remain empty; Place it in a Sand
Furnace, and with a Fire of the first Degree, draw off a fifth part, which keep
by it self, for it will serve for some Uses: then increase the Fire to the
Second Degree, and so continue till all is Distilled, except a small quantity
left in the bottom of the Vessel, of the Consistence of Honey, When all is
cold, take off the Receiver, and if you would Rectify it, put it in a clean
Vessel; set it in the same Degree of Fire, to separate more Phlegm, and in every
thing proceed as before, till you come almost to a dry bottom, which however,
must not be urged too far, for fear it should give an Empyreum to that which is
already Distilled.

Its chief Use is for the Dissolutions and Precipitations of several Bodies.

Spirit of Vinegar.
PUT Distilled Vinegar upon Filings of Venus, or to that Scoria of Venus which
the Brasiers call Spittle-dust, and make it into a Paste; let it stand some
time without Heat, to penetrate the Venus; Evaporate over a very gentle Fire,
till you begin to smell the Fumes of the Vinegar; then take it presently away,
and Imbibe it again; let it stand again to Imbibe, without Heat, and then
Evaporate as formerly; do this so often till you perceive an eager Scent at the
beginning of the Evaporation, which signifies the Venus is Satiated with the
Distilled Vinegar: Put this Satiated Calx into a Retort; place it in a Sand
Furnace; Fit to it a Receiver, and Lute well the Joint with a wet Bladder; give
it the first Degree of Fire for two Hours, then increase it to the Second two
of three Hours more, and so to the Third three Hours longer; at last give it
the Fourth Degree for two Hours more; then let all cool, and in the Receiver
you will have a Concentrated Vinegar, which is called Spirit of Vinegar. You
may still separate the more Phlegmatic Part by Rectification. It has all the
Properties of Distilled Vinegar, but will perform any Operation with more force
and in much less quantity.

Observe, That the same Venus will serve several times for the Concentration of
more Distilled Vinegar.

CHAP. X. Of TARTAR.
IT is the Essential Salt of Wine, which after Fermentation separates and
adheres to the sides of such Casks as contain the Wine. It is Red and White;
the White contains less Earth than the Red; and is therefore preferrable to the
Red; the best white Tartar is that of Rhenish-Wine, which comes from Germany:
The Lees of Wine also contain much Tartar, which being dried and Calcined, are
called Cineres Clavellati, or Gravelled Ashes, out of which a Salt of Tartar
may be Extracted.

Crystals, or Cream of Tartar.
TAke of Crude Tartar what quantity you please, boil it in Water, till the
parts which are capable of Dissolution be entirely dissolved; run the Liquor,
whilst it is hot, through a Flannel Bag into an Earthen Pan, and Evaporate till
a Pellicle appears: Then set it in a cold place, and suffer it to stand quiet
two or three Days: Afterward Decant the Liquor, and you will find Crystals
adhere to the sides of the Pan, scrape them off, and Evaporate the rest of the
Liquor, as before; and set it again to shoot into Crystals; Repeat the
Evaporation till all the Crystals are shot.

Its Operation is Cathartick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from half a Dram to three Drachms.

The Fixed Salt of Tartar.
TAke what quantity of Crude Tartar you please, Calcine it in a Pot (or Glass)
House; or you may put three or four Pound of it in strong brown Paper, which
tie up with Thread, and wet it with Water; then put it upon some kindled
Charcole, and bury it with more Coals; there let it continue till all that is
Combustible be consumed, and you will find the Calcined Tartar in an entire
Lump. Dissolve it in warm Water, then Filter and Evaporate to dryness, in a
clean Iron, or Earthen Pan, and that which remains is the Fixed Salt of Tartar,
which may farther be Purified by Dissolution, Filtration, and Evaporation, till
in the Dissolution it leaves no Faeces at all.

It is a good Aperitive Salt, and used to draw sorth Tinctures from Vegetables,
and is given in all Obstructions.

Its Dose is from fifteen Grains to one Dram.

Some think it of the same Use with every fixed Vegetable Salt.

Let this Salt be laid in a Cellar, or other cool moist place, and it will
attract the Air so as to Liquifie it, which after Filtration we call Oil of
Tartar, per deliquium.

It is endued with all the Virtues of the Salt, and is sometimes dropped in Lily,
Bean-Cod, or Organge-flower-water, to clear the Complexion.

Soluble Tartar.
MIX four Ounces of Salt of Tartar, with eight Ounces of Cream of Tartar, and
pulverize them together; put them into an Earthen Pan, whereinto you have
poured three Pound of Spring Water; boil them till they are dissolved, and
remember to stir them now and then. Filter the Dissolution whilst it is warm;
Evaporate to Dryness, and keep it in a Glass well stopped.

Its Operation is Cathartick and Diuretic.

It is given in Obstructions, Cachexies, and Dropsies.

Its Dose is from one Scruple to a Dra. or a Dram and an half, in Broth or
any other proper Vehicle.

Chalybiated Soluble Tartar.
TAke half a Pound of the Tincture of Tartar made with Steel, and put it into a
Glass Body; pour upon it two Ounces of the aforesaid soluble Tartar; set the
Glass in a gentle Heat of Sand to Evaporate; stir it about sometimes with a
clean wooden Spatula; and when it is dry, you will have a black Powder, which
keep in a Vial well stopped.

It is a good Aperitive, and is Endowed with all the Virtues of the Tincture of
Tartar, with Mars, acording to the description in the Chapter of Mars.

Its Dose from one Scruple to one Dra. or one Dram and half.

Chalybeated Tartar.
POur three Pints of Spring Water into an Earthen-Pan, and set it over the Fire
to boil; as soon as it boils, put in half a Pound of Crystals of Tartar, and
half an Ounce of Vitriolum Martis, finely powdered apart, and ground together.
Let them boil a quarter of an Hour, stirring them with a wooden Spatula, till
they are dissolved: Then strain the Mixture, boiling hot, through a Cotton Bag,
into a clean Pan, and set it in a cold place to Shoot into little Greenish
Crystals.

It is endued with the Qualities of the foregoing Preparations; and its Dose
from one Scruple to one Dram.

Emetick Tartar.
TAke Cream of Tartar half a Pound, Crocus Metallorum, two Ounces, let them be
very sinely powdered, and after they are well mixed, put them into a Glas'd Pot;
and add two Pound of Spring Water; let them boil seven or eight Hours, stir
them often, and as the Water wastes, supply it; Take off the Mixture from the
Fire boiling, and run it presently through a Flannel Bag; then Evaporate two
Thirds in a Glass Body in Sand, and set it in a cold place to Shoot; separate
the Superfluous Water, and Evaporate as before; gather the Crystals, dry them
gently, and keep them in a Vial for Use.

It is a gentle Emetick.

Its Dose from three, to ten or twelve Grains.

The Soluble Emetick Tartar.
PUlverize four Ounces of Crystals of Tartar, with one Ounce of Crocus
Metallorum, grind them well together, and put them into a Glass Body. Pour upon
them half a Pound of Spirit of Urine; and when the Ebullition is well over, add
twelve Ounces of Spring Water. Boil them in a Sand Heat seven or eight Hours,
supplying the Liquor as it consumes: Take it from the Fire as hot as you can,
and run it through a fine Flannel Bag; then Evaporate it gently, till it is
dry, and keep it in a Vial fo Use.

It is a very gentle Emetick.

Its Dose from four to fifteen Grains, in Broth, or thin Water Gruel.

The Emetick and Cathartick Salt of Tartar.
TAke of Salt of Tartar half a Pound, Crocus Metallorum two Ounces; make them
both into fine Powder, and mix them well; Put them into a Crucible, and let
them melt together half an Hour; then take it from the Fire, and dissolve it in
clean Water; Filter and Dissolution, and Evaporate till a Skin appears: Then
drop gradually into it Oil of Vitriol, till the Ebullition ceases, and over a
gentle Heat of San Evaporate to dryness; stir it in the Evaporation with a
Glass Spatula, or clean Tobacco-Pipe; and when it is cold, put it up in a
wide-mouthed Vial, well stopped, for Use.

Its Operation is Emetick and Cathartick.

It is a Febrifuge, given with good success in Tertian and Quartan Agues, also
in Dropsies, Scurvy, Jaundice, and Hypochondriack Melancholy.

Its Dose is from three, to fifteen Grains.

Vitriolated Tartar.
PUT what quantity of Oil of Tartar you please into a Glass Cucurbit, drop
gradually upon it Rectified Oil of Vitriol, till the Ebullition ceases: Then
Evaporate the Humidity in a gentle Heat of Sand, and there will reside a very
white Vitriolated Tartar, which keep in a wide-mouthed Glass, well stopped.

It is a little Cathartick and Diuretic, and a good Aperitive, given in
Quartans, in Scrophulous and Hypochondriacal Cases.

The Soap of Tartar.
TAke Rhenish-wine Tartar, or Cream of Tartar, and Salt Peter, of each one
Pound, in Powder; mix them well together, and put them into a red hot Crucible,
by a Spoonful at a time; when it is melted take out the Mixture, with a little
Iron Ladle, and put it into a warm Earthen Pan, adding to it so much warm Water
as is necessary to Dissolve it; Filter and dry it into a Salt, and grind it to
Impalpable Powder, or as fine as possibly you can; then put it into a wide
mouthed Glass, and Expose it to the Air, till it is a little moistened, which
it will sufficiently be in sixteen, eighteen, or twenty four Hours, according
to the moistness or dryness of the Weater. Then put to each Pound of the Salt,
four Ounces of Rectified Oil of Turpentine; stir them well together with a
wooden Spatula, till they seem to be Incorporated: Then set the Mixture aside,
and cover it, to keep out the Dust; stir well two or three times a day, till
you perceive the Oil and Salt Incorporated, and of the Consistence of a Syrup:
If it wants Oil to make it of that Consistence, add more.

This Soap is an excellent Diuretic, and something Cathartick; and is given in
the Stone and Gravel in the Bladder or Kidneys.

Its Dose from one Scruple to a Dram, in a little fine Sugar.

It is called the Correcter of Vegetables; and the chief Ingredient which
Corrects the Opium in Starky's, or Matthews's Pill.

The Distilled Oil and Spirit of Tartar.
FILL an Earthen, or Coated Glass Retort, half full with Cream of Tartar; place
it in a Reverberatory Furnace; and Lute to it its Receiver; Let the Fire of the
first Degree be for three Hours, then increase it to the Second three Hours
longer, and on to the third three or four Hours more; at last to the fourth
Degree, where keep it till no Fumes ascend any more into the Receiver, in which
you will find a Foetid Oil and Spirit; you may separate the Oil by Filtering it
through a Cossin of Paper; then put the Spirit in a long-boll'd Retort, and in
a gentle Heat of Sand Rectify it, and separate the Phlegm which comes over
after the Subtle Spirit.

To make this Spirit more Aperitive and Excellent, to three parts of the Oil
and Spirit which your Distillation produced, put one part of spiritus Nitri
Dulcis; shake them well in the Receiver, and put them carefully into a clean
Glass Retort, which set in a Sand Furnace; Fit and Lute on a Receiver, and give
it a Fire of the First Degree, till the Lute be dry; then advance to the
Second, in which you will have a most Penetrating and Grateful Spirit, which is
one of the most powerful Diaphoreticks that I know. It is also Diuretic and
Anodine.

It is given in the Palsy, Epilepsie, Asthma, Histerical Maladies, Scurvy, and
in Fevers, with good success.

Its Dose is from two Scruples to two Drachms, in any proper Vehicle.

A Volatile Salt of Tartar.
TAke the Lees of Wine, and dry them gently, when dry, beat them into gross
Powder; fill a Glass coated, or Earthen Retort, half full with them; Place it
in a Reverberating Furnace; give it gentle Fire to drive off the Phlegm which
first comes over; and when you perceive Fumes to rise, fit and lute on the
Receiver, augmenting the Fire gradually, till at last, with the most extreme
degree, no more Fumes will arise. Then let all cool, and take off the Receiver,
in which you will find a whitish Liquor, which contains the Volatile Salt, and
upon it will swim a little Foetid Oil; put it into a Vial, and with a little
clean Water rinse out the Salt which adheres to the sides of the Recipient, and
put it to the rest. Then put them into a Coffin of brown Paper, and the Spirit
with the Salt will pass through, and leave the Oil in the Coffin.

Put the Spirit into a long Mattress, fit to it a Head and Receiver; lute the
Joints well, and with a gentle heat of Sand sublime the Salt into the Head;
when it is pretty well charged, take off that Head, and presently fit on
another, and continue the same degree of Fire, till the Salt begins to melt,
then change the Head, and augment the heat a little to distill the volatile
Spirit of Tartar; when the Drops are insipid, take off the Receiver, and keep
the Spirit from the Air in a Vial well stopped, because of its volatility, as
also the Salt; for if the least Air be admitted, it will relent.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from ten Grains to half an Ounce; it is a Medicine much esteemed by
many Physicians; and is given in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Tertian and
Quartane Agues; it opens all obstructions, and provokes the Terms; The volatile
Spirit is some of the Phlegm impregnated with the Salt, and endued with the same
Virtues, and given from ten drops to two scruples.

Another Volatile Salt of Tartar.
TAke the satiated Salt of Tartar described to make the true Tartariz'd Spirit
of Wine; fill a coated Retort half full with it; place it in an open Furnace,
lute on a Receiver, and give it gradual Fire, observing the same Method as in
the former Operation, both in the distilling and rectification.

Tincture of Tartar.
PUT a pound of pure Salt of Tartar into a Crucible; Place it in a Melting
Furnace, and let it heat gradually, till it is of a white melting heat; cover
it well with Coals, and keep it in the most extreme degree of Fire, five or six
hours; then pour it into a warm Mortar, and whilst warm, powder it, and put it
into a Mattress, heated upon warm Sand to preserve it from breaking with the hot
Salt. Then pour upon it twenty ounces of Tartariz'd Spirit of Wine, invert and
lute well to it another Mattress to make it a double Vessel; make a gentle Fire,
and let it simper six or seven hours, and in that time it will acquire a good
Tincture, which when cold, put it into a Vial, and keep it well stopped.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic; it is an excellent aperitive, and
a good anti-scorbutick.

Its Dose from ten to fifty or sixty Drops, in any convenient Vehicle.

Observations.
IF you dry the crude Tartar in an Oven, Cream of Tartar.
till it is a little scorcht (not calcined) to evaporate some of its acid
Particles, it will dissolve more easily, and the Cristals will be larger and
whiter than otherwise they would be.

The first Evaporation may be made in a clean Iron Pan, Salt of Tartar.
which ought to be kept stirring when it begins to coagulate, till it is quite
dry; and if you design a farther purification, and that it is not so white as
you expect it; put it into a Crucible, and set it in a little Charcole Fire (so
that it do not melt) and in a quarter of an hours time it will be very white.

If you desire it to crystallize, Soluble Tartar.
evaporate only till a skum appears; then in a clean Earthen Pan, or
wide-mouthed Glass, set it in a cold place to shoot into Crystals, which must
be carefully dried, and kept close stopped, because they are apt to dissolve.

Be careful in the drying of it, Chalybeat. Sol. Tartar.
that it be not burnt, because Burning deprives it of its Cathartick Quality.

It may be made with the Vitriol, Chalybiat. Tartar.
or Filings of Mars; if you put one Ounce and a half of Filings in the place of
half an Ounce of Vitriol; and bake the common Crystals of Tartar to a
browneness, it will dissolve with more ease, and the Crystals will be fairer.

It may be made with Crocus Metallorum, Emet. Tart.
Vitrum Antimonii, Flower of Antimony, or Mercurius Vitae. The Cream of Tartar
as before, being baked, will render the Emetick Crystals more large and fair.

The Spirit of Urine partly satiates the Acidity of the Tartar, Soluble Emet.
Tart.
by which it more readily dissolves. Take care to dry it without burning.

This Evaporation will be best performed in a Glass Cucurbit, Emet. Cathart.
Salt of Tartar.
because the Inspissation of the Oil of Vitriol would prey upon the Glasing of
an Earthen Vessel, to the Prejudice of the Medicine.

It may be made of pure Salt of Tartar, Vitriolated Tartar.
instead of the Oil, Inspissating the Oil of Vitriol upon the Salt, and
stirring it with a Glass Spatula, or clean Tobacco-Pipe, till the Fermentation
is over. But take care you do not Evaporate too much, least you deprive it of
the Acidity it ought to retain.

The Salt may be Evaporated in a clean Iron Pan; Soap of Tartar.
and if it be a little moistened by the Air, before the Oil is put to it, their
Union will be facilitated thereby. You may also Distill the Oil of Turpenpentine
from Aromatic Herbs and Spices, to give it an agreeable Scent. The older this
Sapo is the better it is: I have several Ounces of it by me now, which I made in
the Year 1665. which I value as much as its weight in Gold.

The Phlegm may be separated either at the first Distillation, Distillat. of
Tartar.
or in its Rectification: If at the first Distillation, put on the Receiver,
without Luting it, and when the white Fumes appear, change, and Lute on the
Receiver.

If you can have such Lees as the Juice is pressed out of by those who make
Vinegar, Vol. Salt of Tartar.
it will save you the labor of drying them, and will be altogether as good for
this Operation. And if in the Rectification you desire to preserve the Salt in
a dry Form, you must be watchful; and when you see the Salt have the least
Inclination to Dissolution, you must change the Head; presently take out the
Salt, and put it in a dry Vial, well stopping it, to preserve it from the Air,
which would presently dissolve it. But if so much Water come over with it, as
to render it in a Liquid Form, it then has the same effect with the Salt, being
given in a greater Dose.

If after the Rectification you separate the Phlegm from the Oil, and return the
Volatile Spirit upon it, and put to them a third their weight of sweet Spirit
of Nitre, digest them in a double Vessel two or three Days, in a gentle Heat,
then Un-lute the Vessel, and Fit and Lute on a Head, with its Receiver, and you
will obtain, with a gentle Heat, a most Excellent and Penetrating Salt and
Spirit.

Melt not less than one Pound of the Salt, Tincture of Tartar.
because it wastes considerably, by long Fusion, and be sure that your Spirit
of Wine be totally Deflegamted, otherways your Tincture will not be full.

CHAP. XI. Of ALOES.
IT is the Juice of a Plant called Semper Vive, which grows in Egypt, the
Island of Soccotra in the Persian-Gulph, in the Island of Berbadoes in the
West-India's, and other places.

That of Soccotra is counted the best, because they Transplant and Cultivate
it, but in other places they use the Plant wild, as they find it: Every Country
produces two sorts of it, viz. that made of the Juice which drops from the
Plant by Incision, and that made of the Expressed Juice. Hepatick Aloes is that
sort made by Incision in all Countries, and takes its Name from its similitude
to the Liver.

Extract of Aloes.
DIssolve what quantity of Aloes Succotrine, or Hepatrick, you please, in the
Distilled Water of Roses, Sucory, Borage, or any other, Filter the Dissolution
through a Flannel Bag, and Evaporate to the Consistence of an Extract: A better
Extract is made with Spirit of Wine; but the best is made with Tincture of
Tartar, which does not only Correct the Crudity of the Aloes, but that pure
Salt of Tartar the Spirit of Wine is thereby Impregnated with, will preserve it
in its full Virtue, and due Consistence very may Years.

Observe, That if the Aloes be very good, it will almost all Dissolve, leaving
nothing behind it but some dirt, which accidentally, in its drying, falls into
the Juice.

CHAP. XII. Of MYRRH.
IT is a Resinous Gummy Juice which drops from a little Thorny Tree by
Incision. The best is in Transparent smooth Drops, and when new, of a whitish
Color, but in time becomes yellow, but continues Transparent, and breaks with
little white specks in it; such as this is not often met with: but of such as
is commonly vendible, choose that which is Yellow, or Red, Bitter, Transparent,
and of a grateful smell.

It grows in Abyssine in Africa, and Moco in Asia: That of Abyssine comes
through Egypt into Europe; and that from Moco by the Caravans to Aleppo, etc.

Tincture of Myrrh.
PUT into a Matras of Fine Myrrh in Powder, one Pound, of Spirit of Wine four
Pound; invert another Glass into the Mouth of the Matras, to make a double
Vessel; Lute the Juncture, and set it in a gentle Heat of Sand, to Extract its
Tincture.

It is Sudorifick and Aperitive. It is given in the Apoplexy, Lethargy, and
Palsy, is good to Expedite Women's Labor, and is often applied outwardly.

Its Dose is from eight to twenty four Drops in a proper Vehicle.

Oil of Myrrh by Distillation.
FILL a Retort half full with coarse Myrrh; place it in a Sand Furnace, and
Lute to it a Receiver; give it Fire by Degrees, to the greatest height; when
the Fumes cease, let out the Fire, and in the Receiver you will have a Foetid
Oil, and an Acid Spirit.

The Oil is Externally applied, to bring stubborn Ulcers to Suppuration. The
Spirit is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from eight to twenty four Drops, in a proper Vehicle.

Oil of Myrrh, per deliquium.
BOil Eggs till they are hard, split them in the middle, and take out the
Yelks; fill the Cavity with sine Myrrh, in Powder; place them upon little
Sticks of about an Inch and a quarter long, three or four of them being pricked
into the Egg, set them in a clean Earthen Pan, which place in a Cellar, or some
such moist place, and there will drop from them into the Pan, a Liquor, which
is called Oil of Myrrh.

Its Use is to take away Spots and Blemishes on the Skin, outwardly applyd.

Observations.
SHake the Myrrh and Spirit of Wine well, two or three times every Day,
Tincture of Myrrh.
and let it be charged with a full Red before you pour it off from the Myrrh,
which will require two or three Days time.

You may Rectify the Oil and Spirit together, Oil and Spir. of Myrrh.
and then separate them; then put to the Spirit a fourth part of its weight of
Spiritus Nitri Dulcis, and Rectify them; by which the Spirit will be rendered
more agreeable both to Smell and Taste, and made more Aperitive.

It is improperly called Oil, The Oil per deliquium.
being only some of the most subtle Parts of the Myrrh Liquify'd by the
Moisture of the Air. If any Dirt has accidentally fallen into the Deliquiated
Oil, you may Filter it through Paper.

CHAP. XIII. Of SAFFRON.
IT is a Flower which comes to its Perfection in the latter end of September,
and in October. That of England is accounted the best, both for the largeness
of the Leaf, its Fragrancy and Color. The English have also a way to Preserve
it, exceeding that of any other Country.

Tincture and Extract of Saffron.
PUT four Ounces of good English Saffron into a Matras, with twenty four Ounces
of Spirit of Wine; let them stand in a gentle Heat of Sand forty eight Hours,
sometimes shaking them, and you will find the Spirit well charged with the
Tincture of the Saffron; Pour off the Tinged Spirit, and put on one Pound more,
proceeding as you did before, and you will have a Second Tincture, but not
altogether so deep as the First; put both the Tinctures into a Cucurbit; place
it in Sand; Lute on its Head and Receiver, and in a gentle heat draw one half
of the Spirit of Wine off, and that which remains behind will be a strong
Tincture.

This Tincture is made into an Extract by Evaporating it into a due Consistence.

Observations.
AFter Decantation of the Tinged Spirit, Tincture of Saffron.
you may add new Spirit of Wine, as long as it yields any Tincture, and then
put all the Tinged Spirits into a Cucurbit, and draw off, till you leave not
above twenty Ounces of Tincture in the Cucurbit.

In a very gentle Heat of Ashes Distill off as much Spirit of Wine as you can,
Extract.
without burning the Extract; then pour it into the bottom of a Glass cut
shallow, or a clean smooth Earthen Vessel; set it upon so much Hay or Straw as
to stand firm in a Balneum; and in that Heat keep it continually stirring,
'till it is Evaporated into an Extract.

CHAP. XIV. Of ELIXIRS.
ELixir is the Name of a Medicine intended to Heal all Humane Diseases, and
remove the Impurities of imperfect Metals. But my design is only to handle
those Vegetables whose Essential Parts being separated from the grosser and
more Feculent, by proper Menstruums, and the Industry of the Artist, will yield
greater Medicines by the Union and Conjunction of their Virtues, and so may not
improperly, though subordinately, be called by the Name of Elixirs. And first
of Elixir Proprietatis.

Elixir Proprietatis, with Oil of Sulphur.
TAke of the best Aloes, fine Myrrh, and English Saffron, of each one Ounce;
let the Myrrh and Aloes be beaten into fine Powder, and the Saffron cut into
small pieces; put them into a long Body, or Bolt-head, and put to them six
Ounces of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; make the Vessel double, fit for
Circulation, and set it in a gentle Heat for seven Days, shaking it once or
twice a Day; then un-lute the Vessel, and put to the Tincture nine Ounces of
Ol. Sulph. per C. by an Ounce at a time; and when all is in, shake them well;
Lute on the other part of the Circulatory, and let them stand in Warmth
fourteen Days, agitating them as before, once or twice a Day; then let them
cool, and press out all the Moisture through a strong Cloth; let it stand till
settled, and by Decantation separate the Elixir from the Foeces; put it in a
Vial, and keep it close stopped for Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Aperitive: It Fortifies the Heart, and
Purifies the Blood, Creates an Appetite, and helps Digestion; and some count it
a great Preservative against Pestilentious Air; with many other Virtues.

Its Dose is from ten to fifty, or sixty Drops, in Wine and Water, Beer or Ale,
Broth or Spring Water, or any other Vehicle appropriated to the Disease you
would remove by it.

Elixir Proprietatis, with Tincture of Tartar.
TAke of Select Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, ana one Ounce; beat and cut as
before; put them in a Vessel of Circulation, and pour upon them twelve Ounces
of Tincture of Tartar; place them in a gentle Heat, to stand twenty one Days,
shaking the Mixture every Day; then let it cool, and press it out as you did
the former; let it settle; Decant the Elixir from the Foeces, which put in a
Vial, and stop it for Use.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic; and is said to have all the good
Qualities of the former, and to be more Aperitive, and a greater Sweetener of
the Blood.

Its Dose is from one Scruple, to one Dram and half.

Elixir Proprietatis, with Spirit of Hartshorn.
TAke of the best Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, ana one Ounce, Tartaris'd Spirit
of Wine eight Ounces, Spirit of Hartshorn four Ounces, and proceed in every
thing as in the preceding Process.

This is also Diaphoretick and Diuretic, and endued with the Virtues of the
former, but more Effectual in Hysteric Vapors.

Elixir Proprietatis, with Sal. Volat. Oleosum.
TAke of choice Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, ana one Ounce; place them in a
Circulatory Vessel, and put to them of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine four Ounces,
and of Sal. Vol. Oleosum nine Ounces, and proceed in every thing as before.

It is Diaphoret. and Diuret. is proper in all Cases where the former is
useful, and more agreeable both to Scent and Taste.

Its Dose the same with the other.

The Anti-Pestilential Elixir Proprietatis.
TAke of Myrrh, Aloes, Saffron, and Camphire, ana one Ounce,
Virginia-Snake-Root four Drachms, and Cocheneal half an Ounce; Powder what is
to be powdered, mix the Ingredients, and put them into a Matras; pour upon them
Spiritus Nitri dulcified twelve Ounces, and let them stand in Digestion twenty
one Days, observing every thing as in the foregoing Process.

This is said to be the most powerful Medicine against the Plague, and all
Contagious Diseases, that is yet known: It expels Wind, and is an excellent
Remedy against the Cholick, and all Gripings of the Stomach and Bowels; a great
Aperitive, and gives Ease in the Stone, both in the Reins and Bladder; also in
the Measles and Smallpox, a better Medicine is not known.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from half a Scruple to one Dram, or one Dram and a half, in
any proper Vehicle.

The Volatile Elixir Proprietatis.
IT is the foregoing Elixir with Spirit of Wine six Ounces, and Oil of Sulphur
nine Ounces, with the same Proportions of Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, which
after Digestion must be Distilled in a gentle Heat, with two Cohobations of the
same Spirit, and must be drawn off with three Days Digestion between each
Cohobation.

It has the same Virtues of most of the Preceding Elixirs, and is more
agreeable to the Palates of many People.

Its Operations is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from ten Drops to a hundred, in any proper Vehicle.

Elixir Vitrioli.
TAke Galangal one Ounce and a half, Calamus Aromaticus, Mint, and Sage dried,
ana half an Ounce, Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger, ana three Drams Nutmegs and
Cubebs, ana two Drams, Lignum Aloes, and Lemon Peel, ana one Dram, white
Sugar Candy, three Ounces, all Pulveris'd; put them into a Matras, and pour
upon them Oil of Vitriol, one Pound, Spirit of Wine one Pound and an half;
Invert another to make it a double Vessel; Lute the Joint, and set it in a
gentle Heat to Digest, fifteen or twenty one Days. It is counted a good
Stomachick.

Its Dose is from ten, to sixty or seventy Drops.

Elixir Paeoniae.
TAke of the English Roots of Palma Christi, Pyrethri, ana one Ounce, Missetoe
of the Oak, Fennel-Seeds, Anacardi, ana six Drachms, Rosemary-Flowers,
Staechad. Arab. Lavender, ana three Ounces, Shavings of Hartshorn, Elks-Hoof,
Man's Skull, ana one Dram and a half, Marjorum one handful, Rectified Spirit
of Wine two Pound; Digest these fourteen Days, and then Distill in Balneo
Mariae; to which add the Roots, Flowers, and Seeds of Paeony, ana one Ounce,
Spec. Diamosci Dulcis, Diaxylo-Aloes, of each half an Ounce; Digest them a
Month, and Filter.

To twelve Ounces of this Tincture add one Dram and a half of Salt of Paeony,
and four Ounces of Spirit of Vitriol Rectified and Impregnated with Native
Cinaber. Then Circulate them into an Elixir.

Otherways it is made as follows.
TAke the Root of English Pal. Christi, Pyrethri, Missetoe of the Oak,
Fennei-Seeds, Anacard. Rosemary-Flowers, Marjorum, Staechad. Arab. Castor. and
Lavender, in the foregoing quantities: And instead of the Shaving of
Hartshorn, Elks-Hoof, and Man's Skull, take of the Aromatic Spirit of
Hartshorn, hereafter-mentioned, half an Ounce: Digest them all in two Pound of
Rectified Spirit of Wine fourteen Days; at the end of which Distill them in
Balneo Maris, or a gentle Heat of Sand or Ashes, and to every Pound of this
Distilled Spirit, add four Ounces of Rectified Spirit of Vitriol, the Roots,
Flowers, and Seeds of Paeony, ana one Ounce; Spec. Diamosc. Dulcis,
Diaxylo-Aloes, of each half an Ounce, and with one Dram of Salt of Paeony,
Circulate into an Elixir.

Elixir Salutis.
TAke Leaves of Sena half a Pound, Jalap in Powder four Ounces, Enula Camp.
also in Powder, and Liquorish, ana two Ounces, Juniper Berries, Anniseeds, and
Coriander-Seeds, ana one Ounce, Cream of Tartar, one Ounce and a half, Honey
and Manna, of each two Ounces; slice the Liquorish; put them all into a Glass
Body, and put to them French Brandy, or clean English Proof Spirit, four
Quarts; Lute on a Glass, to make a Circulatory, and let them stand in a gentle
Heat of Sand two or three Days; then pour off the Liquor, and press it out from
the Ingredients, and let it stand in a Vessel close stopped twenty four Hours to
settle; then by gentle Inclination, pour it from the Foeces, and keep it well
stopped for Use.

Its Operation is Cathartick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from half a Spoonful, to three or four Spoonfuls, either by it
self, or in any convenient Vehicle.

Elixir, or Balsamum Polychrestum.
TAke Salsaparilla four Ounces, China-Root, and Guiacum rasped, ana two Ounces
and a half; let the Salsapar. and China be grossly powdered, put them into a
Matras, with three Pound of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; stop the Mouth of the
Matras with a little Egg, or Bolt-Head; Lute it well, and set it on warm Sand,
to digest three Days, shaking it now and then. Then let it cool, pour out the
tinged Spirit, and press what you can from the Ingredients; put the Tinged
Spirit into the Matras again, and add to it of Gum Guiaci in Powder, nine
Ounces; Lute up the Glass, and let it stand in Digestion three or four Days,
and shake it often every Day. Then let it cool and settle, and pour off the
Tincture from the Sediment; put the Tincture into a clean Matras, and put to it
one Ounce of Balsam of Peru, and half an Ounce of Balm of Gilead; mix them with
the Tincture by much Agitation; let them stand in Digestion, as before, three
or four Days longer, and shake them often; when the Balsam is well Incorporated
with the Tincture, pour it off clear into a Vial, which stop and keep for use.

It is Cathartick, and sometimes Diaphoretick.

Its Dose is from ten, to seventy, eighty, or a hundred Drops, in any proper
Vehicle.

To these Elixirs there needs no other Observation than to make good choice of
the Ingredients, to Lute the Joints of the Circulating Vessels well, and to
moderate the Heat so, as not to endanger the breaking of them.

CHAP. XV. Of OPIVM.
IT is a Juice which Distills from the Heads of Poppies by Incision, found in
the Kingdom of Cambaia, about Grand Cairo in Egypt, and Thebes in Greece. Some
tell us of three sorts, viz. Black, Yellow, and White; but none of these come
frequently amongst us, the Inhabitats of those Countries keeping them for their
own use, and sending us the expressed Juice of Poppy-heads, thickened and wrapped
up in Leaves, for the Convenience of Transportation: It is properly called
Mecoacan; such may be also Expressed from Poppy-Heads, which grow in Italy, and
the Southern Parts of France, but not so strong as the former.

That which comes from Thebes is accounted the best. Choose that which is
Black, breaking with a little cast of Yellow, free from little Stubs or Leaves,
a little Acrimonious, of a very bitter Taste, and a disagreeable Stupefactive
Scent.

Extract of Opium.
PUT four Ounces of good Opium in thin Slices, into a glass Body, wherein there
is two Pound of Spring Water; set it in Sand, and stop the Mouth of the Body
with another Glass, make Fire under it, till by gradual Heat it is made to
Boil, in which state keep it two or three Hours, then let out the Fire, and
whilst the Dissolution is hot, run it through a Flannel Bag, and press it
strongly with your Hand, into an Earthen Vessel; put that which remains in the
Bag into a Matras, in which there is a quart of Rectified Spirit of Wine; make
a double Vessel of the Matras, and let it stand in Digestion twenty four Hours,
now and then shaking it. Then take it out, and when it is cool, run it also
through a Flannel, as before; put the Spirit of Wine which is charged with the
Gummous Part of the Opium, that the Water was not capable of dissolving, into a
Cucurbit, and in a gentle Heat draw off two Thirds of the Spirit of Wine, which
will serve again for the same Use. Then put both the Extractions together, and
in a clean Earten-Pan, with a moderate Fire Evaporate, till it is of a
Consistence fit to form into to Pills, which put up in a Gally-pot for Use.

It is the most certain Anodine yet known to Physicians, and is fit for any
Compound Laudanum.

Its Dose from half a Grain to two or three Grains.

Dr. Goddard's Compound Extract of Opium.
TAke of Saffron and Nutmegs, ana one Ounce, of Castor. half an Ounce: slice
the Nutmegs and Castor. thin, and put them into a Matras, with the Saffron; put
to them twelve Ounces of Tincture of Tartar; set them in a gentle Heat of Sand
(with the Mouth of the Matras well stopped) in Digestion twenty four Hours,
shaking it now and then; then let it cool, and press it through a Cloth into a
clean Earthen Pan; what stays in the Bag put into the Matras again, and put to
it half a Pound of Rectified Spirit of Wine; let it stand warm twelve Hours,
and strain it off to the other; into these Tinctures put five Ounce of the
Extract of Opium, set them over a gentle Fire to Evaporate into an Extract.

It is a good Soporisick, causing rest, and alleviates all Pains, in what pat
of the Body soever.

Its Dose from half a Grain to three or four Grains.

Liquid Laudanum, with Juice of Quinces.
TAke two Ounces of good Opium, one Ounce of English Saffron, and one Pound and
an half of the Juice of Quinces. Let the Opium be thin sliced, and with the
Saffron be put to the Juice of Quinces, in a Glass Body; some adding Yest of
Ale to Ferment it. Set them in a gentle Heat of Sand, to digest till the
Fermentation is over, and the Saffron subsides. Then express the Juice, and let
it stand to settle: when it is settled, pour it off by gentle Inclination; put
the Liquor into a Matras, and put to it two Ounces of Cinnamon, one Ounce and
an half of Cloves, and one Ounce of Jamaica-Pepper; let them be bruised, and
put them into the Liquor to stand in Digestion fourteen Days. Then again
express the Juice, gently Evaporate it to a due Consistance, and put it up for
Use.

Its Virtues are the same with the former.

Its Dose is from ten, to forty or fifty Drops.

Liquid Laudanum, with Tincture of Tartar.
TAke choice Opium two Ounces, Saffron one Ounce, Cinnamon two Drachms, Nutmegs
and Mace, ana one Dram. To these Ingredients in a Matras, put twenty four
Ounces of Tincture of Tartar; make the Matras a double Vessel; Lute well the
Joints, and set them in a Heat of Digestion three Days, shaking them every Day.
Then open the Vessel, and add to the Mixture two Ounces of Juniper Berries
bruised; Let it stand in Digestion three Days longer, then let it cool, and
press it through Flannel. Put the expres Liuqor into a Cucurbit, and with its
Head and Receiver Luted; set it over a gentle Fry of Ashes; draw off eight
Ounces of the Spirit; let that which remains cool, and decant it gently from
the Foeces, into a Vial well stopped, which keep for Use.

Its Virtue and Dose the same with the foregoing.

Dr. Sydenham's Liquid Laudanum.
TAke Select Opium two Ounces, Saffron one Ounce, Cinnamon and Cloves powdered,
ana one Dram; put them in a Matras, and pour upon them one Pint of good
Canary-wine; let the Matras be fitted for Circulation, and set them in good
Heat of Digestion for three or four Days; then press them through Flannel; let
the Liquor settle, and by gentle Inclination pour it into a clean Vial, and
keep it for Use.

Its Operation the same with the foregoing.

Its Dose is from ten to forty or fifty Drops.

Liquid Laudanum, with sweet Spirit of Nitre.
TAke two Ounces of the best Opium, which slice, and put into a Matras, with
one Ounce of Saffron; and to them one Pound of Spiritus Nitri Dulcis; invert
into the Mouth of the Matras another Glass; Lute it, and set it in Digestion
five Days (shaking it about every Day) then let it cool, and drop into it (by
degrees) one Ounce and an half Sal Volatile Oleosum. When the Fermentation is
over, Stop and Lute it up again, and let it stand three Days longer in
Digestion: Then let it cool, and set it inclining to settle, and gently decant
it into a Vial for Use.

It is an excellent and certain Anodine, and a great Expeller of Wind, and
seldom or never, that I have yet heard of, offends the Stomach or Bowels of the
Patient.

Its Dose is the same with the former.

Liquid Laudanum, made with the Volatile Oily Salt.
TAke four Ounces of the Extract of Opium, put it in a Marble Mortar, grind it
with half a Pound of Tincture of Tartar, which must be put to it by two Ounces
at a time, grind them till the Opium is well mixed with the Tincture of Tartar;
then put them into a Matras, and put to them one Pound of Sal. Vol. Oleosum,
upon which you must drop half a Dram of sweet Spirit of Nitre; shake them
well together, which will produce a little Fermentation; when that is over,
make a Circulating Vessel of the Matras, Lute the Juncture well with Bladder;
and set it in a gentle Heat of Digestion six Days, shaking it about every Day.

Then let it settle, and decant into a clean Vessel, both which keep well stopped
for Use.

It is an Excellent Laudanum, a certain Sudorifick, and a great Expeller of
Wind.

Its Dose is from ten, to thirty or forty Drops.

Matthews his Pill.
TAke of the Extract of Opium, of Black Hellebore, of Liquorish, and the
Corrector, or Soap made with Salt of Tartar and Oil of Turpentine, as
beforementioned, ana four Ounces. Let the Hellebore and Liquorish be made into
Subtle Powder; beat and mix these four Ingredients very well; then with two or
three Ounces of this Mass, mix two Ounces of good English Saffron, cut in very
small pieces, and beat them well together, till the Saffron is perfectly mixed
with the Mass, so that no part of it is discernable from the rest: Then beat
and mix that as well with the rest of the Mass. If the Mass be too dry, you may
mix with it some of the Oil which comes from the Soap, which it spues out when
it stands by a long time; or in its stead so much Rectified Oil of Turpentine
as is sufficient to make it into a Mass fit to form into Pills. Then put it
into a wide-mouthed Glass, or Gally-pot, tied over with a Bladder or Leather.

It is Diaphoretick, Anodine and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from two, to five or six Grains,

Dr. Starkey's Pill.
TAke Extract of Opium four Ounces, Nutmegs and Mineral Bezoar. ana two Ounces;
Saffron and Virginia-Snake-Root, ana one Ounce; beat the Nutmegs and Saffron
together into a Paste; so that the Saffron cannot be discernably distinguished
from the Nutmegs. Also let the Mineral Bez. and Snake-Root be in Impalpable
Powder. Then mix all together, with half a Pound of the Corrector, half an
Ounce of Oil of Sassafras, and two Ounces of Tinct. of Antimony; let them all
be well Incorporated, by beating in a Mortar: Then keep them in a Glass, or
Gally-Pot, tied over with Bladder and Leather for Use.

This I had from the Ingenious Dr. Starkey's own Mouth, in the Year 1665. a
little before his Death, who then told me, He gave Matthews the former for a
little Money; but this is it which he successfully made use of himself.

It is both more Diaphoretick, and a greater Anodine than the former; and I
have heard it affirmed by several Gentlemen, who have made use of it in their
Practice, to be the best Laudanum they ever met with.

Its Dose is the same with the former.

Observations.
THat the Extract of Opium may as well be made with Brandy, Extract of Opium.
or Proof Spirit, as with Water and Spirit of Wine, there being Water enough in
either of them to Dissolve that we call the Spirituous Part of Opium; and also
Spirit enough to dissolve the more Terrestrious Resinous Part: But be careful
in drying it into an Extract that you do not burn it.

When you put the Extract of Opium to the Tincture of Saffron, Compound Extract
of Opium.
Castor, and Nutmegs; stir them well together till the Extract and Tinctures be
Incorporated; and likewise be careful to prevent burning the Extract.

The Yest does often make the Medicine muddy, Laud. liq. Cydoniat.
and therefore I substitute in its place two Ounces of Juniper Berries, which
renders the Laudanum more pleasing to the Eye, and takes off its griping
Quality.

Of late I have put in the Juniper Berries with the Saffron, Laud. liq.
Tartarisat.
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and Mace, and digested them three or four Days, then pressed
them through Flannel, decanted that Liquor, and when settled, put to the
Tincture one Ounce, or six Drachms of the Extract of Opium; Incorporated them
well, and Distilled off eight Ounces of the Spirit.

The Canary-Wine will endure something a stronger Heat of Digestion than Spirit
of Wine, or Tincture of Tartar; Laud Liq. Sydenham.
because there is not Spirit enough in the Wine to Extract the Resinous Part of
the Opium. If after three or four Days Digestion of the other Ingredients you
press it out, let it settle, pour it off by gentle Inclination, and then put to
it one Ounce, or six Drachms of the Extract of Opium, you will better perform
the Operation.

If you add two Ounces of Juniper Berries to the Saffron, Laud. Liq. cum Spir.
Nit. Dulc.
the Medicine will be a greater Carminative, and if instead of Crude Opium, you
take the Extract, and proceed as in the former Observation, you will the better
succeed.

If you Distill the Oil of Turpentine, with which you make the Soap, Starkeys
and Matthew. Pill.
from Aromatic Herbs and Seeds, viz. Lavender, Mint, Rosemary, Marjorum,
Carraway-Seeds, and Juniper Berries, the Laudanum will be made more grateful.

CHAP. XVI. Of Essential Oils, and Fixed Salts.
ESsential Oils are such as retain the Smell and Taste of the Spices, Gums,
Herbs, Flowers, Berries, Seeds and Woods, from which they are drawn, viz.
Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, etc. Benjamin, Balsam Peru, Ammoniacum, Galbanum,
Capivii, Turpentine, etc. Mint, Balm, Marjorum, Wormwood, Pennyroyal, Rosemary,
Sage, Camomel, etc. Anni-seeds, Coriander-seeds, Caraway-seeds Cumin-seeds,
Sweet Fennel-seeds, etc. Juniper Berries, Bay Berries, etc. Rhodium, Sassafras,
etc.

The Fixed Salts are Extracted out of the Ashes of the Woods and Plants.

The manner of Distilling Essential Oils.
TAke what quantity of any Spice, Gum, Berry, Seed, Herb or Wood you please,
such as are proper to be bruised or powdered, let them be put so into a
Cooper-Still, and to them put eight or ten times their weight of common Water;
Lute the Head to the Still, and its Refrigeratory or Worm, make Fire under it
to make it Boil, and in a little time the Water and Oil will run into the
Receiver, which we call a Spout Receiver, such as the Figure at the beginning
represents; when you apprehend that all the Oil is come off, hold a Spoon under
the Nose of the Worm, and if you perceive any Oil comes with the Water into the
Spoon, continue the Fire longer, if no Oil appears in the Spoon, let out the
Fire, and separate the Water from the Oil.

Observe, First, Few of these Oils are worth Distillation, except in great
quantities, that is to say, several Still fulls.

Secondly, That you watch it at its first beginning to Distill, to prevent its
boiling over; and if you think the little Stream runs too fast through the
Worm, open the Door of the Fire-hole, and that will a little allay its vigor;
if it be not sufficient, interpose, a Fire-shovel between the Fire, and the
bottom of the Alembick, so as to keep it running in a small Thread, and after
the first half Hour of its working, you may be more bold with the Fire.

Thirdly, That you leave Water enough in the Still to secure the Matter in it
contained from burning.

Fourthly, That you return the Water you Distilled off upon the fresh Matter in
the Still, so long as it is the same Spice, Wood or Herb you drew the first
Water from; for that Water being filled with some Oily Particles of the
Vegetable from which you drew it, you will have by returning it, more Oil from
the said quantity of Wood, Seeds, or Herbs, the Second Distillation than you
had the First.

Fifthly, Also observe, That the Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves and Sassafras, being
more Concentrated and Compact than the other, sink to the bottom of the Water,
and all the rest of the Essential Oils swim upon the Surface of Water.

Sixthly, Observe, That the Oils of Anni-seed, Sweet Fennel-seed, and Roses,
will coagulate; therefore you ought so to order your Matter toward the latter
end of your Distillation, to keep the Worm warm to the very Nose of it, by
which means the Coagulated Oil melts down into the Receiver.

The Fixed Salts of Plants are made out of their Ashes. For Example:
Take dry Wormwood, what quantity you please, burn it upon a clean Hearth; rake
the Ashes so long as any Fire appears amongst them; put those Ashes into an
unglased Pan, which set in a Calcining Furnace; make Fire about it till the Pan
is red hot, where keep it (continually stirring the Ashes) till they are
perfectly Calcined into whitish gray Ashes, without any blackness: Then put
them into a clean Pan, and pour hot Water to them; when that Water is
sufficiently Impregnated with the Salt, Filter and Evaporate to dryness; and so
continue the Extraction, Filteration and Evaporation, till the Ashes are left
insipid.

CHAP. XVII. Of TVRPENTINE.
IT is of a Balsamic Consistance and Nature, and comes by Incision from
several kinds of Trees, viz. the Turpentine Tree in the Island of Chios, from
which the Chios Turpentine proceeds; also from the Pine Tree, the Larix and
Firr.

It is Diuretic, and given in Gonorrhea's, Ulcers of the Reins, Bladder and
Matrix.

Its Essential, or Aetherial Spirituous Oil, is drawn in Water, in a large
Copper Still, as other Essential Vegetable Oils are.

From the Colophone which remains in the Copper-Still, may be Distilled by
Retort, its Yellow Oil, and Red Balsam, as follows:

The Yellow Oil, and Balsam of Turpentine.
TAke the Colophone which remains in the Copper-Still, after the Spiritual Oil
is Extracted, what quantity you please, break it in little pieces, and put it
into a Retort not above half full; place it in a Sand Furnace; heat it
gradually to the second degree of Fire, in which some Oil will drop into the
Receiver; augment that Degree a little, and it will cause all the Oil to
Distill; then change the Receiver, and urge the Fire to the third Degree, which
will cause yellow thick Drops to Distill, with some Fumes; when the Fumes
decrease, augment the Fire to the Fourth Degree, which will drive over its Red
Balsam; when the Receiver begins to cool, and the Fumes disappear, let out the
Fire.

By this Method you may Distill the Oil and Acid Spirits of Mastick,
Frankincense, Tacamahacca, Gum Elemi, Labdanum, and all other Gums of this
Nature.

CHAP. XVIII. Of BENJAMIN.
IT is a Resinous Fragrant Gum, which Distills out of a large Tree, growing in
Samaria, and the Countries adjacent; Its greatest Consumption is by the
Perfumers: Its Physical Use is to resist the Malignity of Humors. It is also
Pectoral and Cephalic.

That which breaks Gray, and is full of white lucid Spots, is counted best.

The Tincture of Benjamin.
POwder four Ounces of Select Benjamin, put it in a Matras, and put to it
Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, one Pound; fit the Matras for Circulation; Lute the
Joint, and set it in warm Sand three or four Days, now and then shaking it
about; in that time it will acquire a fine Tincture, which Decant, and keep for
Use.

Its chief Use is to smooth the Skin, and take away Spots out of the Face. One
Dram of it being put into four Ounces of clean Water, turns it white; this is
called Virgins Milk. It is also used in Asthma's, and other Diseases of the
Lungs.

Its Dose is from twenty, to sixty or seventy Drops.

Flowers of Benjamin.
PUT into a Subliming-Pot (of which you have the Figure in the Cuts) two or
three Ounces of Benjamin in gross Powder, set on its Cover, without Luteing,
and keep it in the Second Degree of Fire in Sand, or immediately over a very
small Fire of Charcole; the Flowers will presently begin to rise into the
Cover, which once in an Hour, or Hour and a half, must be taken off, and wiped
out upon a clean Sheet of Paper with a Feather; you ought to have two Covers to
one bottom, that you may clap on one as soon as the other is taken off. When
you see the Flowers begin to rise yellow, take the melted Benjamin out of the
Pot, with a Spoon, and put into it more powdered Benjamin, as you did at first,
and so proceed till you have as many of the Flowers as you desire.

The Oil and Spirit of Benjamin.
TAke of the black melted Benjamin, (which you took out of the Pot after the
Sublimation of the Flowers) one Pound; put it into a Retort, which place in a
Sand Furnace; cover it well with Sand; Lute on its Receiver, and make Fire of
the first Degree for one Hour; then increase to the Second, in which you will
have some Oil and Spirit, with some discolored Flowers; augment the Fire to
the third Degree, and at last to the Fourth, till no more Fumes appear, and you
will have a blackish Oil, with an Acid Spirit, and the neck of the Retort will
be filled with the discolored Flowers, which you may take out, and put upon
clean brown Paper to suck up the Oil. These Flowers (though not so beautiful)
are as good for Use as the former; and though both the Oil, Spirit and Flowers
have acquired (at present) an Empyreumatical Scent, in six or eight Months time
their Fragrancy will return.

The Oil is a Balsam for Wounds. The Spirit is Diuretic.

Its Dose is from ten to fifty Drops, in any proper Vehicle.

After the same Method you may Distill the Oil, Spirit, and Volatile Salt of
Tolu and Peru, etc.

Observations.
YOU may add to the four Ounces of Benjamin, one Ounce of Storax, Tincture of
Benjamin.
and also one Dram of the Balsam of Peru; they will not only render the Scent
more grateful, but also add to the deepness of the Tincture.

You must take care that the Fire is not too big, if it be, Flowers of Benjamin.
it forces up some of the Oil with the Flowers, and discolours them.

If you have the quantity of two or three Ounces of the black Oil, Oil of
Benjamin.
you may put it into a Cucurbit, which is capable of holding a Gallon of
Liquor, in which you may put two or three Quarts of Water to the Oil, and set
it in a Sand Furnace, Luting on its Head and Receiver, and give it gradual Fire
till the Water is ready to boil. In this Heat the Spirituous Part of the Oil
will Distill with the Water, of a fine Amber Color, and a Fragrant Scent.

It is a good Internal Medicine, a powerful Diuretic, and a Specific against
the Stone and Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys.

Its Dose is from three to fifteen Drops, in a little refined Sugar. The Spirit
may (before the Rectification) be separated by Filtration.

CHAP. XIX. Of CAMPHIRE.
IT is a Volatile Sulphurous Substance, which drops from a large Tree growing
in the Island of Borneo in the East-India's. It is separated from its Dirt by
Sublimation, and is brought to us in a Transparent Friable Cake; The clear,
white, and such as is hard to quench, when set on Fire, is the best. It is
counted a Volatile Alkali, saturated by Nature with its own Fatness.

It is Anti-Pestilential, and Procreative, (though some have Asserted the
contrary) good against Fits of the Mother, and a great Smoother and Beautifier
of the Skin.

The Oil, or Dissolution of Camphire.
TAke clear white Camphire, four Ounces, powder it grossly, and put it into a
Matras; pour upon it eight Ounces of Spirit of Nitre; set it in a very gentle
Heat of Digestion, often shaking it; and in two or three Hours time it will
dissolve into a clear Liquor swimming above the Spirit of Nitre, which you may
separate as you do other Oils. Its Use is chiefly External.

If it be dropped into Rose Water, and with it washed from its Acrimony, it
reassumes its Body, smooths and whitens the Skin.

Compound Oil of Camphir.
TAke of the aforesaid Oil four Ounces, of the Rectified Oil of Amber,
Juniper Berries, Oranges and Lemons, ana three Ounces; put them into a Matras,
and let them stand in Digestion till they are united, which will be in three or
four Days: But if you will more strictly Unite them, put into a large glass
Body so much Water, as to fill it two Thirds; put to it the Compound Oil; set
it in a Sand Furnace, with its Head and Receiver, give it Fire gradually till
the Water simper and bubble; continue that Fire till all the Oil is Distilled.
If any of the Camphire remains coagulated, either in the Head or Receiver,
return it, (with all that Distilled) into the Body again, and Distill as before:
Repeat this Operation two or three times, and the Oils and Camphire will become
inseparable.

Observations.
IF you drop this Oil into Water, Oil of Came. by Dissolut.
it reassumes its Body, not being Subtilized into an Essential Oil, but only
dissolved by so much of the Nitrous Spirit, as it is capable of receiving.

By repeated Distillations it will perfectly Unite with the other Oils,
Compound Oil of Came.
and become Essential.

A Complete Course OF Chemistry. PART III.
Of Animals and Insects.
I Shall here, in this Third and Last Part, speak only of those Animals, and
such Parts of them, as we make use of in Chemistry, as Sal Armoniack, Urine,
Blood, Bones, Horns, Hoofs, etc. Also, Serpents, Vipers, Wood-Lice, Pismires,
etc. And First,

CHAP. I. Of Sal Armoniack.
SAL Armoniack is brought from Alexandria in Egypt, Venice, Antwerp, etc. It is
either Natural or Artificial. The Natural is found in very hot Countries, where
the Earth has Imbibed the Urine of Animals; but of this very little is brought
to us. The Artificial is made of Urine ten Pound, Sea Salt two Pound, and the
Soot of Wood one Pound: These are boiled into a Mass, and Sublimed into such
Cakes as come to us.

Purification of Sal Armoniack.
DIssolve what quantity you please in warm Water, Filter and Coagulate, or only
Evaporate to a Pellicle, and set it to shoot in a cold place; either of them
will render you a very white Salt.

Its Operation is Sudorifick and Diuretic; and said to be good in Malignant
Fevers; also in Quartane Agues; Provokes Women's Terms, Resists Putrefaction,
and therefore given in the time of the Plague.

Its Dose is from twenty Grains to one Dram and half.

Sublimation of Sal Armoniack.
PUT what quantity of Sal Armoniack (in gross Powder) you please into a Retort,
or Matras, with its Head; place it in a Sand Furnace; fit a Receiver to it, and
give gradual Fire to the Third Degree, in which you may keep it till all is
Sublimed, which you will perceive by the Sublimate rising clear above the Sand.
Some Sublime it with common Salt, and others with Burnt Alum, but they serve
for no other Use than taking up room in the Glass, which must not be quite half
full. Sal Armoniack being Sublimed with common Salt, is that which Mr. Lemery
calls Flowers of Sal Armoniack.

Its Use the same of the Purified.

Spirit of Sal Armoniack, with Salt of Tartar.
TAke of Sal Armoniack, and Salt of Tartar, ana one Pound; Powder and mix them
well, and put them presently into a Cucurbit (or rather into a Retort, because
there is but one Joint to close) sprinkle it with twelve Ounces of Phlegm of
Wine, or eight Ounces of Spring or Rainwater; place it in Sand and Luting well
its Receiver with Bladder, give it Fire of the First Degree one Hour and an
half; increase it to the Second, and keep it so two Hours; go on to the Third,
and keep it there till you see the Salt begin to dissolve in the Neck of the
Retort, or Head of the Cucurbit: Let all cool, and put the Spirit into a Vial
by it self, and the Salt in another by it self.

Its Operation is Sudorifick and Diuretic.

It is given in Epilepsies, Palsies, Smallpox, Malignant Fevers and Plague.

Its Dose is from ten Drops to one Dram.

Spirit of Sal Armoniack, with Quick Lime.
TAke of Sal Armoniack, in fine Powder, one Pound, of Calx Vive, which has lain
in the Air till it is broken into fine Powder, three Pound; mix them well, and
put them presently into a Retort, to which put two Pound of River, Rain, or
Spring Water; shake it, to mix the Powder and Water, and place it in a Sand
Furnace, Lute well the Juncture of the Receiver, and give Fire of the First
Degree one Hour and a half; augment it to the Second, where you may keep it
till about twelve Ounces of Spirit be Distilled. Then take it off, and keep it
in a Vial well stopped for Use.

You may Lute on the Receiver again, and draw off three or four Ounces more,
which will be pretty strong.

Its Operation, Use, and Dose, the same with the other.

It is accounted the better Spirit to smell to, being more Penetrating; but by
reason of its heat, it is not thought so good for Internal Use.

The Spirit and Volatile Salt of Sal Armoniack, which Mons. Lemery calls, Sweet
Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
TAke of Sal Armoniack, and Salt of Tartar, ana one Pound, make them into fine
Powder, and mix them; put them into a Cucurbit, fit a Helm to it, with a wide
Beak, and likewise a Receiver to the Helm; Lute them well with Bladder dipped in
the white of an Egg, well beaten with a little Water; place them in a Sand
Furnace, and give Fire of the First Degree two Hours; the Salt will rise into
the Head, and some Spirit drop into the Receiver: Raise the Fire to the Second
Degree, and keep it so four or five Hours, in which time all the Volatile Salt
will be Sublimed: Let all cool, and take off the Head and Receiver, put the
Spirit into a Vial well stopped, and the Salt in another also well stopped. If you
would have the Salt converted into Spirit, it is done by three or four
Rectifications.

It is of the same Use with the other Spirits of Sal Armoniack, and may be
given in a greater Dose.

The Acid Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
TAke the Caput Mortuum of the former Spirits one Part, and of Fullers Earth
three Parts, both beaten into fine Powder, and well mixed; put them in an
Earthen Long-Neck, and place it in a Reverberatory; Fit and Lute on the
Receiver; make Fire of the First Degree for one Hour, increase it to the
Second, and keep it there three Hours longer, and so to the Third and Fourth,
till the Receiver comes clear without Fumes: Then let all cool, take off the
Receiver, and put up the Spirit for Use.

It is of the same Nature and Use as the Spirit of Common Salt, etc.

The Diuretic Salt.
TAke the gray Salt which remains in the Vessel after Distillation, of either
of the Spirits made with Sal Armoniack and Tartar, Dissolve, Filter and
Evaporate, either to a Pellicle, and so to shoot into Crystals, or to a dry
bottom.

Its Operation is Diuretic and Diaphoretick. It works by Urine very
powerfully, from which it takes its Name.

It is given in the Stone and Gravel, also successfully in intermitting Fevers.

Its Dose is from ten Grains to one Dram, in any proper Vehicle.

Sal Volatile Oleosum.
TAke of Sal Armoniack and Salt of Tartar, ana half a Pound, powder them apart,
and mix them; put the mixture into a Retort; put also into the Retort half an
Oun. of Marum Syriacum, and of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine one Pound and a half,
Impregnated with these Essential Oils, viz. Cloves half a Dram, Cinnamon one
Scruple, Nutmegs two Scruples, of Marjorum, Lemons and Oranges, ana one Dram;
put to them of clean Water two Pound, and set all in a Sand Furnace; Lute on
its Receiver, and give Fire of the first Degree one Hour and a half; increase
to the Second, in which continue it five or six Hours, or until you have in the
Receiver, about a Pint and a half of Spirit and Salt.

You may Aromatize it with Essence of Ambergreece, to your pleasure.

This Medicine is differently composed, as the Operator pleases.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

It is given in all Pains and Diseases of the Head: It is good in Palsies,
Lethargies, Scurvy, Pestilential Fevers, Suffocation of the Womb, and in all
Hysteric Cases.

Its Dose is from ten, to sixty Drops.

The hidden Spirit of Sal Armoniack.
TAke of pure Spring Water 5 Pound, Potashes two Pound, Sal Armoniack one
Pound; put them into an uncut Body, and stop it with a Bolt Head, firmly Luted;
let them stand three or four Days in a gentle Heat of Sand to Digest, shaking
them two or three times every Day. Then let the Mixture settle; Filter, and
keep the Water for use.

It Is said to open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Provoke the Terms,
Sweeten the Blood, and to give Ease in the Gout.

Its Dose is from forty, to sixty, or one hundred Drops.

The double Menstruum of Sal Armoniack.
REduce Sal Armoniack and Calx Vive, into fine Powder, q. v. mix them in equal
quantities, and let them run, per deliquium, in a moist place.

It is of the same Use with the foregoing Spirit.

Its Dose is from ten Drops to one Dram.

Note, That it readily Dissolves Mercury Sublimate into a clear Water, which
may be of Use to the Curious.

Distillation of Urine.
TAke Urine of Sound Young Men, newly made, as much as you please, put it into
an Iron Kettle, and Evaporate it to the Consumption of one half, in a gentle
Heat; put the Remainder into a Stone Bottle; stop it well, and set it by to
Ferment for about two Months. Open the Bottle, and if you find it smell quick
and strong, put it into a large glass Retort; Lute on a Receiver, and give Fire
of the First Degree for an Hour; then increase to the Second, which will raise
its Salt and Spirit; continue that Degree till you find the Salt begin to
dissolve, and let all cool. Then take off the Receiver, and put all you find
there into a Cucurbit; set it in Sand; Lute on its Head and Receiver, and give
a gentle Heat at first, and the Salt, and some part of the Phlegm, which we call
Spirit, will rise. Continue the Fire till you see the Head well lined with
Salt, which when you perceive to decrease, let all cool, and put what you find
in the Receiver into a Vial well stopped.

It is Diaphoretick and Diuretic, and given in Intermitting and Malignant
Fevers.

Its Dose is from five to fifty Drops.

But however, as to the Evaporation, observe to do it by a gentle Heat, lest
some of its Volatile Salt, by too great an Agitation, should fly before its
Fermentation. The use of this Fermentation is to separate the Phlegm, which
would take up too much room to no purpose.

Secondly, If you find not the Urine sufficiently Fermented, which you may know
by its quick Scent, stop it again, and let it stand longer.

Thirdly, If you desire the Salt and Spirit apart after the Rectification, then
pour off the Spirit into a Vial, and tie a double Paper over the Mouth of the
Receiver; set it down-wards, and let it drain till the Salt is dry: Then scrape
it off from the sides with a crooked Hoopstick, and put it into a Vial well
stopped.

If you desire yet a greater quantity of the Salt, put both it and the Spirit
together, into a long Body; Lute on the Head and Receiver, and let it stand in
a digesting Heat of Sand, that the Salt may gently Sublime.

I have made the Spirit of Urine without Fermentation, by Evaporating to the
Consistence of a Syrup, and giving it gradual Fire to the Third and Fourth
Degree. In this Operation the Phlegm comes first, and then some Volatile Salt;
afterward more Volatile Salt will appear in white Fumes, with the Spirit, and
a little stinking Oil, which must be separated from the Salt and Spirit before
Rectification. After one Rectification you may separate the Volatile Salt and
Spirit, as in the former, but I do not esteem it of equal Goodness with the
Fermented Spirit, because all the Salt of Urine is Volatized by the
Fermentation. In the Caput Mortuum, as some call it, you will find a strong
Lixivious Salt; and if the Volatizing Fixed, or Lixivious Salts deserve that
Encomium the most Celebrated Authors give of them, the Salt of Fermented Urine
must be the best Medicine; and indeed there is a perceptible difference betwixt
them, the Fermented Spirit and Salt being more Pleasant and Penetrating, both
in Smell and Taste, than the Unfermented.

Observations.
THis Operation separates the accidental Dirt from the Salt, Purificat. Sal
Armo.
and renders it fit for Sublimation. If without this Separation you should
Sublime it, the foul and dirty Sulphur would rise with it, and render it unfit
for some curious Operations.

Instead of a Pound of Salt of Tartar, Spirit Sal Arm. cum Sal. Tart.
you may take one Pound and a half of Potashes, made clean by Dissolution and
Filtration, and Evaporate it to dryness; it is of the same Use with Salt of
Tartar.

If the Lime be not a little quenched before it is mixed with the Sal Armoniack,
Spirit Sal Arm. cum Call. Viv.
the Spirit will fly with such violence, that it will be very troublesome to
put it into the Vessel, and the most Essential Part will be lost.

If you put half a Pound of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine to the Salts, Spirit Sal
Arm. Dull.
before Distillation, you will have a greater quantity of Salt, then can be
produced without it.

This is the Spirit of common Salt which was before in the Composition of Sal
Armoniack, Spir. Acid. Sal. Arm.
but kept down by the Salt of Tartar, and therefore it requires as strong a
Fire to Distill, as that of common Salt.

If after the Humidity is Evaporated, Sal. Diure.
you make too strong a Fire under it, you will burn and discolor it.

If you make it with the Spices and Herbs, instead of the Essential Oils, Sal.
Volat. Oleosum.
it will acquire a little Tincture, which by some is disliked, but I think it
not the worse.

You may Dissolve and Filter the Salts apart, and then put the Dissolutions
together, Spirit Sal Ar. Occult.
in a Glass big enough for the Spirit to Circulate.

Let the Lime be two or three Days exposed to the Air, Menstru. Duplicat.
before you mix it with the Sal Armoniack, otherways a great part of the
Volatile Spirit will evaporate, which ought to be United with the Salt.

The Distillation of Hartshorn.
TAke that which we call the Velvet-Head, in the Springtime, while it is soft,
cut it in little pieces, and put them into a Cucurbit; Lute on its Head and
Receiver; place it in Bal. Mar. and Distill a Water from it.

Its accounted good to help forward the Births of Women, and to resist
Malignant Humors in Fevers.

Its Dose is from two, to four of five Ounces.

The Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Oil of Hartshorn.
TAke that which remained in the Cucurbit after the foregoing Distillation, or
pieces of solid Hartshorn, as much as you please; put them into an Earthen
Retort, or Iron Pot, either of which may be filled two Thirds: If it be an Iron
Pot, you must fit to it a Copper-Head, with its Receiver; if a Retort, only a
Receiver: Place them on a naked Fire, which increase gradually, so as to keep
some Fumes in the Receiver, but not to force them so violently, as to blow off,
or break it; at last give the Fourth Degree, in which keep it till no Fumes
appear: Then let all cool; take off the Receiver, and put the Oil and Spirit
into a Separating Glass; wash out the Salt which remains behind with clean
Water, and put it to the Oil and Spirit. Then let it stand twenty four Hours to
separate, and draw out the Spirit; then put them into a Cucurbit, or long
boll'd Retort, in a gentle Heat of Sand to Rectify; the Salt (and some part of
the Liquor, commonly called Spirit) will first ascend; the Salt will increase
till the Neck of the Retort and Receiver is well charged. When the Salt begins
to dissolve, take off the Receiver, and separate the Spirit from the Salt, as
before directed in that of Urine. If after Rectification any Oil appears upon
the Spirit, separate it by a Glass, and keep the Spirit in a Vial well stopped.

It is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose is from ten Drops to forty or fifty, in any convenient Vehicle.

After the same manner we make the Spirit, Oil, and Salt of Human Skulls and
Bones, Vipers or Serpents, Ivory, Hoofs, Hair, etc.

The Aromatic Spirit of Hartshorn.
TAke the Spirit, Oil and Salt of Hartshorn, after the first Distillation, and
Rectify them; put them so Rectified into a clean long boll'd Retort; to each
Pound of which put two Ounces of Sal. Vol. Oleos. and four Ounc. of Spir. Nit.
Dulc. shake them well together, and set them in a very gentle Heat of Sand;
Lute on a Receiver, and continue the Fire (not exceeding the second Degree)
till all the Distilled: In the Receiver you will have a Spirit which has
quitted its Empyreum, and received a penetrating, but a very pleasant Scent.

It is a powerful Diuretic and Diaphoretick; it wonderfully expels Wind from
any part of the Body, and by many Experiments found to be endu'd with all the
Virtues attributed to Godard's Drops.

Its Dose is from fifty, to sixty or seventy Drops, in any proper Vehicle.

Observations.
IF you Distill any Animal Spirit in an Iron Pot, with a Copper-Head, that Head
ought to be kept only for such use.

If you would have that we call Spirit and Salt absolutely free from the Oil,
to one Pound of the Spirit (after the second Rectification) you may put of
Bones, or Horns, Calcined to whiteness four Ounces, and Distill in a gentle Heat
of Sand.

If you desire all the Salt in a dry form separated from the Phlegm, put the
aforesaid Mixture in a Matras, or long Body, with a Head and Receiver fitted to
them, and in a very gentle Heat of Sand, the Salt will be Elevated into the
Head and Neck of the Body or Matras: For know, that the Volatile Salt of
Animals are properly their Spirits, and what we call Spirits, is no other than
part of the Volatile Salt dissolved in the Phlegm, which nevertheless has the
same Virtue of the True Spirit, or Volatile Salt, but given in a greater Dose.

If you Rectify the Aromatic Spirit once more, Spir. C. C. Arom.
its pleasant Smell will be augmented.

To Elixirate, or make Essential Animal Vol. Salts.
TAke half a Pound of Volatile Animal Salt; put half a Pound of Tartaris'd
Spirit of Wine to it, and it will Coagulate, and is that which Helmont calls
his Offa Alba; Put that Salt into a Matras, pouring upon it pure and strong
Distilled Vinegar, by little and little at a time, till the Ebullition ceases;
Then set it in a gentle Heat of Sand, with its Head and Receiver well Luted;
there will first come a subtle Liquor, dropping from the Nose of the Alembick;
after that will sublime into the Head, a most glorious Salt, white as Snow, in
figure like large Flowers of Benjamin, of a quick, pleasant, penetrating Scent,
and a very agreeable Taste.

In this Operation you must have a watchful Eye; as soon as you perceive the
Crystals to fall or relent in the Head, draw the Cucurbit out of the Sand, and
take off the Head and Receiver; put the Spirit and Salt apart, into Vials, and
carefully stop them: In the Cucurbit you will find a very stinking Phlegm, which
may be thrown away.

This is that Animal Salt I Unite with the Salt of Tartar, that so readily
dissolves in Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, beforementioned, with which I Extract
the Anodine Sulphur of Metals, and of them Compose that Surprising
Anti-Rheumatick Tincture,

Which Rectifies lost and depraved Appetites, restoring the Stomach to its true
Tone, and preparing the Aliment for further Digestion, Cleansing the Blood of
all the Corrosive Salts which occasion those Acute Pains in Rhumatisms, Gouts
and Scurvies, etc.

It is a powerful Diuretic, and of Excellent Use in the Stone and Gravel,
either in the Kidneys or Bladder, by dissolving and washing off that Petrifying
Matter which is the cause of both.

By its gentle Diaphoretick and Anodine Quality, it quiets the Archaeus, and
allays the irregular Ferment in the Blood, by which means it becomes an
Excellent Medicine in all Fevers; and by its Carminative and Sweetning Quality,
gives present Ease in the Cholick, and all Gripings in the Bowels and Stomach.

In its Taste and Operation it is most pleasant, and mixes with all Liquors
without Ebullition, Coagulation, or Precipitation. So much for the
Anti-Rheumatical Tincture.

This Essential Animal Salt is Diaphoretick and Diuretic. Its Dose is from
five Grains to one Scruple.

The Dose of the Anti-Rheumatick Tincture is from fifty to one hundred, or one
hundred and twenty Drops, in any Liquor which is proper. My common Vehicle is
Spring Water.

CHAP: II. Of VIPERS.
THE Viper is one of the Reptiles, but whether Animal or Insect I dispute not:
The Creature is well known, and has a Skin scaly, and withal so very compact,
that it permits little or no Transpiration of Spirits, which is the reason why
it is able to live several Months without any other Nourishment than that of
the Air.

As to the Story of Pliny about their Generation, that the Male puts his Head
into the Mouth of the Female, which she bites off; that the young Vipers pierce
the Womb and Sides of their Dam, and by that means revenge the Death of their
Sire. Of their particular hatred to the Ash-Tree, that they will rather run
into the Fire then come near it, and the like, I reject them as Fabulous.

Authors are of different Opinions about the manner of emitting their Poison;
some Asserting it proceeds from the yellow Juice which often appears upon the
surface of the Wound; and others from the Rage or Exasperation of the Animal.
But my design being only to give such Antidotes and Medicines as are produced
from them by Chemical Preparation, I omit all Disputes as Foreign to my purpose.

The Distillation of Vipers.
TAke what number of Vipers you please, open and cleanse them from all Worms
and Excrements, and the Females from their Eggs, which must be thrown away:
Take out their Hearts and Livers; dry them in the shade, separately from the
Bodies, and when they are dry, cut the Bodies into small pieces, and fill a
coated Retort three quarters full; place it in a Reverberatory fit for the
Retort; Lute to it, its Receiver, which must be capacious; cover the Furnace
with its Dome, and make a gentle Fire under it for two Hours, in which time the
greatest part of the Phlegm will come off; then increase the Fire to the second
Degree for two Hours more, which will raise its Spirit and Volatile Salt;
increase it still to the Third, which will fill the Recipient with Clouds; keep
up that Degree till the Clouds seem to lessen in the Receiver; continue the
increase of the Fire still, to the fourth Degree, and keep it there till all be
come over, and the Receiver grows cool; then cease the Fire, and you will find
the Phlegm, Spirit, Salt and Oil, which must be Rectified as follows.

Rectification of the Salt of Vipers.
PUT all that you find in the Receiver in a Long-bodied, un-cut Cucurbit; If
more Salt adheres to the Receiver than the Liquid which Distilled from the
Vipers will dissolve, put in a little Water, and rinse all the Salt out into
the Body; place it in Balneo, or a gentle Heat of Sand or Ashes; Lute on the
Head with a Bladder daubed with stiff Starch, and dipped in the Glear of an Egg.
You may also Lute on a small Receiver to the Beak of the Alembick, and the Salt
will Sublime into the Head, or upper part of the Body, distinct from the Phlegm,
and grosser part of the Oil, which must be kept in a clean Vial, carefully and
exactly stopped for Use.

To this Salt many Virtues are attributed; as that it gives Relief even to
those Diseases which are most Refractory and Difficult to cure; as Apoplexies,
Lethargies, Convulsions, Palsies, and all other Diseases believed to have their
Source in the Brain: Likewise in Distempers of the Breast; as difficulty of
Breathing, Palpitation of the Heart, Pleuresies, Soundings, etc. and
particularly it opens the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Misentery, etc. It
dissipates all inward Imposthumes, and dislodgeth secret and unknown Pains,
which have their Origin in the Spirits. It helps Digestion, and purifies the
whole Mass of Blood, resolves and prevents Coagulations in all parts of the
Body. It Is an excellent Remedy against all intermitting Fevers, particularly
Quartanes. It works powerfully in the Distempers of the Matrix, and is an Enemy
to all the Vices of the Skin, even to the Leprosy it self. But above all, a
most certain Specific against the Bitings of all Venomous Creatures. It is
also a great Antidote against the Plague, and all Contagious and Epidemical
Diseases, as the Measles, Smallpox, etc.

Its Dose is from ten Grains to two Scruples, in any proper Vehicle.

This Excellent Salt is also another Ingredient in the Anti-Rheumatick Tincture.

A Sudorifick Water of Vipers.
TAke what number of Living Vipers you please; put them into a strong Earthen
Body, tie a Hair-Cloth over its Mouth, such as Coarse Hair-Sieves are made of;
fit and fasten a Head well to it, then place it in a Balneo, which gradually
make to boil; this will Elevate a Water, which you will see drop into the
Receiver; when the Drops cease to fall, let it cool, and take out the Water.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick, and it is successfully Exhibited in many Cases
where the Salt is proper.

Its Dose is from twenty, to seventy or eighty Drops, in any proper Vehicle.

The Essence of Vipers.
TAke of dried Vipers what number you please, cut them in small pieces, and put
them into a Cucurbit, place it conveniently, and pour to it (by a little at a
time) so much Spirit of Nitre as will dissolve them; commonly twelve Ounces of
Spirit of Nitre will dissolve four Ounces of Vipers. When all the Spirit is put
upon them, let them stand five or six Hours, and there will be a black Scum
upon the Surface of the Dissolution, which must be taken off with a glass
Spoon, or in defect of that, a clean Tobacco-Pipe. You will likewise find a
little white Foeces in the bottom, which must also be Separated from the clear
Dissolution; Pour the clear Liquor into a Retort, and by an Ounce or two at a
time, put to it three times its weight of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, shaking
them often about, as you mix them; place the Retort in a Bath of Ashes, and
with a gentle Fire distill off the Spirit of Wine, which will be an excellent
Dulcified Spirit of Nitre: To the black Matter remaining in the bottom of the
Retort, put the same quantity of new Spirit of Wine Tartaris'd, and Distill it
off, as you did the other; Put on again the same quantity as before, and Distill
in the same manner; and repeat this so often with new Spirit of Wine, till it
has neither any Nitrous Smell, nor Acid Taste; keep that which remains in the
Retort, to unite with the Volatile Salt, and Rectified Oil of Vipers, as
follows.

The Rectification of the Oil of Vipers.
PUT the Oil and Phlegm from which the Salt of Vipers was Sublimed, into a
Cucurbit; let the Cucurbit be capable of holding two Gallons; pour to them one
Gallon of clean Water, set it in a Sand Furnace; fit to it its Head and
Receiver; give it a gradual Fire, till the Matter within the Body bubble;
continue the Fire so, till holding a Spoon under the Beak of the Head, you
perceive very little or no Oil swim upon the Water, which drops into the Spoon.

Then let all cool, and you will have Water, with the Aetherial Oil of Vipers,
in the Receiver.

The Union of the Volatile Salt, Aetherial Oil, and the most Subtle Particles
of the Viper into an Essence.
PUT to four Ounces of the Dissolved Body of the Vipers left in the Retort, one
Ounce of Tinctura Regalis, beforementioned in the Chapter of Antimony, by a
Dram at a time; then to two Ounces of the Salt, and half an Oun. of the
Aetherial Oil, put one Pound of the same Tinctura Regalis; put them in a
Matras, which make a Circulatory, and let them stand ten Days in the Sun, or an
equivalent Heat, shaking them every Day: when you see the Tincture has Imbibed
all the Salt and Oil, take it out, and put it to the Dissolution of the Vipers
aforesaid; and when by strong agitation you have loosned the Dissolution from
the Retort, put it all into a Matras, and let it Circulate in a very gentle
Heat ten Days, shaking it every Day; In this time all the several Substances
will be united into an Essence, which pour off from the Foeces into a clean
Vial, and keep carefully stopped for Use.

This Essence is endued with all the Virtues of the Salt of Vipers, and if any
Animal Medicine exceeds the Salt, it is this.

Its Dose is from twenty to one hundred Drops, in any appropriated Liquor.

Observations.
SOme take only the Bodies, Distillat. of Vipers.
pulling off the Skin, and cutting off the Heads and Tails, which they put
away; also they put away their Heart and Liver; but all these yield as much
Salt, proportionable to their weight, as the Bodies do: And you may as well
perform this Operation in a good Sand Furnace, and uncoated Retort, as you can
in a Reverberatory.

If you desire it more nicely Separated from all the Oily Particles which it
carries with it in the First Rectification. Rectificat. of the Salt.
Mix three parts of clean, and very dry Chalk, in fine Powder, with one part of
Rectified Salt of Vipers; put into a Matras, or uncut Curcurbit, with its Head
and Receiver well Luted, and with a gentle Fire Sublime the Salt, and it will
leave all its Oily Particles Absorbed in the Chalk.

The Hair-Cloth is fastened over the Mouth of the Cucurbit, Sudorifick Water of
Vipers.
to keep the Vipers from jumping up into the Head, when they begin to be
heated, by which means they may break the Head, and get out, whose Biting then
would be extremely pernicious, by reason of their iritation by the Heat of the
Fire.

When you put the Spirit of Nitre to the Vipers, Essence of Vipers.
place the Vessel where the Fumes may ascend without offending you. Also be
careful not to put above an Oun. or two at once of the Spirit of Wine to that
of Nitre, wherein the Vipers are dissolved, lest the Ebullition should be so
strong, as to fly out of the Vessel with violence. The repeated Distillations
with new Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, are to elevate as much of the Spirit of
Nitre as is possible, and to hinder its fixing the Salt of Vipers.

One Gallon of Water will be sufficient to rectify four Ounces of the black
Oil in, Rectificat. of the Oil.
and generally by that time you have Distilled two Quarts of Water, you will
have all the Aetherial Oil come over.

The Ounce of Tinctura Regalis is put to the dissolved Vipers, Union of the
Oil, Salts, etc.
to satiate (in part) that Acidity still remaining in them, which otherwise
might too much fix the Salt of Vipers, and reduce it to the Nature of common
Sal Armoniack, which being again mixed with fixed Alkalies, may be Sublimed into
an Animal Urinous Salt, as it was before.

You may likewise Dulcifie the Dissolution, by putting to it (a little at a
time) so much pure fixed Nitre as will satiate its Acidity: then let it stand
in a cold place, and it will shoot into a cumbustible Salt Peter again, and the
Dissolution will thereby be freed from the Corrosive Spirit of Nitre, which
would have changed the Volatile Salt into that which some call the Secret Sal
Armoniack.

N. B. That whatever Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, is dissolved in the Spirit
of Nitre, it will be made to Precipitate with the fixed Salt; and on the
contrary, whatever is dissolved in the Olc. Nitri, per deliquium, or by its
fixed Salt, will be separated by the Spirit; and this (if carefully Elaborated)
may be done without prejudice to the Matter dissolved, and to the augmentation
of their Virtues, by digesting and ripening their undigested Crudities.

CHAP. III. Of HONEY.
IT is the Juice of Heavenly Dew, which falls upon Flowers and Herbs, and is
gathered by that Industrious Insect the Be, and in them further digested. The
best is of a bright Yellow, having a pleasant Scent, and an equal Consistence
in every part.

It Nourishes, Cleanses and Opens. It is Pectoral and Diuretic, cures Coughs,
and resists Putrefaction.

Tincture of Honey.
TAke one Pound of pure Virgin Honey, despume it in a clean Earthen Pan, and
put to it three Ounces of pure Salt of Tartar finely pulverized; stir them well
together, and an Ebullition will arise; stay till it is over, and take off the
Scum, and put the Mixture into a Cucurbit uncut, and pour upon it one Pound and
an half of Tartariz'd Spirit of Wine; close the Mouth, and set it in the Heat
of Digestion forty eight Hours, agitate the Matter three or four times a Day,
and in that time the Spirit of Wine will have charged it self with the purest
part of the Honey. Decant it from the Foeces into a new Cucurbit; Lute on an
Head and Receiver, and draw off one half of the Spirit of Wine in a gentle
Heat. That which remains will be a sweet thick Tincture, being an excellent
Pectoral Medicine.

Its Dose is from forty Drops to two Drachms.

Spirit of Honey.
MIX one Pound of Honey with three Pound of clean Sand, and put it into a
Retort in a Sand Furnace; make a Fire of the first Degree for two Hours;
Increase it to the Second for two Hours more, and so go on to the Third, where
let it remain till no more Fumes or Drops will fall. You will find an
Empyreumatical Spirit and Oil; put them both into a Cucurbit, and with a Fire
of the First Degree draw off the insipid Water, and by the Second you will
raise the Spirit.

It is an Acid Spirit which dissolves Pearl and Coral; and some use it to
procure, or make Hair to grow.

Sweet Honey Water.
TAke good French Brandy one Gallon, of the best Virgin Honey, and
Coriander-seeds, ana one Pound, Cloves one Ounce and an half, Nutmegs one
Ounce, Benjamin and Storax, ana one Ounce, Benilloes, number four, the thin
Rind of three large Lemons. Bruise the Cloves, Nutmegs, Coriander-seeds and
Benjamin, cut the Benilloes in small pieces; put all into a Cucurbit, and pour
the Brandy to them, and after they have digested forty eight Hours, Distill off
the Spirit in Balneo Mariae.

To one Gallon of this Water add of Damask-Rose, and Orange-flower-water, ana
one Pound and an half, of China, Musk, and Amber-greese, ana five Grains. First
grind well the Musk and Amber-greese with some of the Water, and afterward put
all together in a large Matras; shake them well, and let them Circulate three
Days and Nights in a gentle Heat; then let all cool, Filter, and keep the Water
in a Vial well stopped for Use.

This Water I often made for King James: It is an Anti-paralitick, smooths the
Skin, and gives one of the most agreeable Scents that can be smelt. Forty or
fifty Drops put into a Pint of clean Water, are enough to wash the Hands or
Face with; and the same proportion to Punch, or any Cordial-water, gives a most
pleasnt Flavor.

Oil of Wax, with its Spirit and Butter.
PUT three Pound of clean warm Sand into a Pan, slice into it one Pound of
Beeswax, in small pieces, stir it about that the Wax may melt, and mix equally
with the Sand; when it is quite cold, put it into a Retort, and place it in a
Sand Furnace; make Fire of the first Degree one Hour; increase it to the
Second, and keep it so two Hours, and after in the Third for three Hours, in
which time the Oil and Spirit, with some of the Butter, will be in the
Receiver, and the rest of the Butter will stick in the Neck of the Retort; you
may separate and keep them apart.

Their Operation is Diuretic.

The Dose of the Spirit is from ten Drops to forty or fifty, in any
appropriate Liquor. The Dose of the Oil is from five to twenty five Drops, mixed
with Sugar, to make it the better Incorporate with Liquor. The Butter is the
same. The Butter and Oil are also outwardly applied, and are a good Dissolvent
for Tumors.

Observations.
LET the Earthen Vessel you mix the Honey and Salt of Tartar in, Tincture of
Honey.
be Capacious enough to contain six or eight times the quantity you put into
it, otherwise the Ebullition will be so strong, that it will cause it to boil
over.

The Sand is mixed with the Honey, Spirit of Honey.
to keep it from boiling over, notwithstanding which, it will swell and bubble,
and therefore you ought not to fill the Retort above half full. In its
Rectification, fit a Receiver, without Luting, and as soon as you Taste any
Acidity, change the Receiver, Lute it, and draw off the Spirit in an Heat not
exceeding the third Degree; and if you add a Twelfth, or Sixteenth Part of
Spirit of Nitre Dulcified, it will abate its unpleasant Scent.

The Honey is added to cause a kind of Fermentation, Sweet Hon. Water.
by which it more powerfully opens the Aromaticks, which would not all
otherwise ascend in the gentle Heat of Balneo.

You may mix the Wax with three times its weight of quick Lime, especially if
you rather desire the Oil than the Butter; for the igneous Particles of the
Lime mixing with it, rarifies it more than any other Bole; and if you desire to
convert all the Butter into Oil, one or two Rectifications from quick Lime will
produce it, and make it more penetrating then Ol. Cerae, made any other way.

CHAP. IV. Of Sows, or Hog-Lice.
THey breed in Cellars and moist places, under Stones, old Casks, and Logs of
Wood; being touched, they gather themselves up like round Beads; they are said
to Digest, Extenuate, Open, Cleanse, and Resolve Tartarous Mucilage; are good
in the Jaundice, Cholick, Stone, and Difficulty of Urine.

The Spirit, Volatile Salt, and Oil of Hog-Lice.
PUT what quantity of Millipedes you please into a long bodied Retort, so that
it be not above half full; place it in a Sand-Furnace; Lute on its Receiver,
and give it the first Degree of Fire till the Retort is thoroughly hot; then
increase the Fire to the Second, in which keep it two or three Hours (according
to the quantity of Lice) and some Liquor will drop into the Receiver, and the
Volatile Salt will begin to rise; increase it to the Third and Fourth Degree,
till the Receiver grows cool; then cease, and take off the Receiver, where you
will have Spirit, Oil, and Salt, which you may separate and Rectify apart; or
put all together into a long Neck'd Matras, Luting on its Head and Receiver,
and separate the Salt by Sublimation, as you do that of the Vipers.

Its Operation is Diaphoretick and Diuretic.

Its Dose from ten, to fifty or sixty drop.

Observe. You may make the Tincture and Essence of them in the same manner, as
you are directed, in the following Chapter of Ants.

CHAP. V. of the ANT.
THis is a wise and Industrious Insect, making Provision in the Summer, for
their support in Winter, observing a regular Discipline in their Labor,
Regimenting their Number, and as it were constituting Officers over those that
are appointed to work, to see its performance.

I have with delight and wonder observed them to Issue out of their Nests in
order, and when loaded with Provision, returning in a continued Line, without
jostling those which have disburthened themselves, and are marching out for
more Stores. This Labor they perform in the Full of the Moon, and rest in the
New.

They are Black, or Reddish, the Male winged, the Females not; in the Winter
they breed Eggs and Worms, which in the Summer become Ants; those which breed
under Trees, and smell sour, are accounted best: They are said to Provoke
Venery, and Create Courage; They use their Eggs to restore Hearing.

The Spirit, Oil, and Volatile Salt of Ants.
TAke what quantity of Ants you please, put them in a long-bodied Retort, or an
uncut Cucurbit; let not the Vessel be above half filled with the Insect; fit a
Recipient, and Lute the Joint well; give gradual Fire, as you did to the
Millipides, and in all things proceed as in the Distillation and Rectification
of them.

The Tincture of Ants.
TAke what quantity of Ants you please, put them into an un-cut Body, and put
upon them so much Oil of Nitre, per deliquium, as will cover them; let them
stand in a gentle Heat of Digestion five or six Days, in which time they will
be dissolved; toward the end of which you may increase the Fire three or four
Hours to make them boil; then let them cool, and pour upon them three times
their weight of Spirit of Wine; stop the Body with a small Matras, and Lute the
Joint well; let it stand in a good Digesting Heat till the Spirit is well
tinged; let that cool, and pour it off; put on more Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine,
and set it again in Digestion, till it has also acquired a Tincture, which will
be in two or three Days time; Decant that Tincture to the first, and put both
into a Cucurbit, Lute on its Head and Receiver, and in Balneo Mariae draw off
two Thirds of the Spirit of Wine; that which remains in the Cucurbit let cool
and settle, and by gentle Inclination pour the Tincture into a clean dry Vial
for Use.

In Virtue it exceeds that which is attributed to the Creature in every respect.

Its Dose is from ten, to sixty or seventy Drops, in a Glass of Canary, or Wine
and Water.

The Essence of Ants.
DIssolve Ants in Spirit of Nitre, in the same manner as you did the Vipers,
Skimming off the Froth and Decanting it from the Foeces; to the clear
Dissolution of four Ounces of Ants, put of its Rectified Oil four Drachms,
which drop in by half a Dram at a time; then put also, by a little at a time,
two Oun. of its Salt; when all is mixed, and the Ebullition ceased, shake them
well, and set them in a very gentle Heat of Digestion forty eight Hours, in a
Circulatory Vessel; then, by gentle Inclination, pour off the Dissolution from
the Foeces, into a clean Cucurbit; to which also put so much fixed Nitre in
Powder, by a little at a time, till no Effervesence appears; let them stand
cool and quiet, and in a few Hours they will be shot into a renovated Salt
Peter: If any Liquor remains with the Crystals, pour it off into a clean
Cucurbit, with its Head and Receiver, and in a very gentle Warmth dry it;
likewise dry gently that Precipitate, which the Spirit of Nitre let fall, when
it embraced its own first Salt.

Then put the renovated Nitre, Precipitate, and the Residence of the Liquor
which was Evaporated, all together, grind them in a Glass, or Marble Mortar,
put them in a Matras, pour upon them one Pound of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine,
invert a small Matras, and Lute the Joint well, and let it stand in Digestion
three or four Days, shaking it every Day once or twice, then let it cool and
settle, and Decant off the Tinged Spirit, and to the Matter remaining, put
another Pound of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine; let it stand as before, to Extract
more Tincture, and so proceed, till it gives no color to the Spirit of Wine.
Then put all the tinged Spirit into a Cucurbit; Lute well on its Head and
Receiver, and in a gentle Heat of Balneo draw off three Fourths of the Spirit,
which keep well stopped, for any such like Operation hereafter.

That which remains in the Cucurbit let cool, and pour it into a clean Bottle,
which keep well stopped for Use.

This is the most Excellent Medicine which is Prepared of this Industrious
Insect.

Its Dose from ten, to seventy or eighty Drops.

Observations.
AFter you have separated the Salt by Sublimation, Rectificat. of the Oil and
Salt.
put the Oil and Phlegm remaining in the Matras into a Retort, with a long Body;
rinse out as much as you can of the Oil which adheres to it, till it is above
half filled with Water; place it in a Sand Furnace, and give it gradual Fire
till the Water and Oil bubble a little; but take care it boil not over, for
then your labor will be lost.

If you put a quarter part of Spir. Nit. Dulcis, to that of the Oil in its
Rectification, it will render the Oil more pleasant, and no way hurt its Virtue.

If the Oil of Nitre be very strong, The Tinct. of Ants.
the Spirit of Wine will not mix with it, but will swim upon it, as Oil does
upon Water, and will only prey upon the Animal Sulphur opened by the Oil;
remember to shake them often while they stand in Digestion.

Place the Vessel in which you make the Dissolution in such a place where the
obnoxious Fumes may Evaporate without offense, The Essence of Ants.
and continue it there, after you have Decanted it from its Foeces, till you
have charged it with the Volatile Salt and Oil of the Insect, and also with its
own fixed Salt; then set it in Digestion, as the Process directs.

CHAP. VI. Of Spanish Flies.
THEY are a sort of Beetle, of a golden greenish Luster, produced from a Worm
like a Caterpiller; they breed of a Moisture proceeding from Wheat, the Leaves
of Ash, and Poplar. The best are found amongst Wheat, and in Meadows: They
abound in Provence and Languedock, from whence we are chiefly supplied.

They are Hot, and very Corrosive, seldom used inwardly, without good
Correction.

The Essence of Spanish Flies.
BRuise four Ounces of Cantharides, put them into a Cucurbit, and pour upon
them, by a little at a time, twelve Ounces of Spirit of Nitre, and let them
stand in Digestion twelve Hours; then with a Glass Spoon, or Spatula, take off
a black Scum from the Surface of the Spirit, which cast away; pour gradually
upon them one Pound and half of Tartaris'd Spirit of Wine, mix them well by
shaking, and place them in a Sand Furnace; Lute on a Head and Receiver; kindle
the Fire, which gradually increase to the Second Degree, and in that Heat draw
off a Pound and half of Spirit, which keep by you for farther Use.

To that which remains in the Cucurbit, put (by a little at a time) so much
fixed Salt Peter, as will Satiate its Acidity, which you will know by the
Ceasing of its Ebullition. Then put that Mixture into a Glass or Marble Mortar;
put to it one Ounce of Resin'd Camphire, and grind them till they are well
Incorporated, and return them again into the Cucurbit; rinse out the Mortar
with some of the Spirit of Wine which you drew off from them, which pour into
the Body, with the remaining part of the Spirit of Wine; shake them well, and
set them in a Heat of Digestion; make the Cucurbit a Circulatory; Lute the
Joint close, and let them stand in that Heat eight or ten Days, shaking them
well about every Day; then let it cool, and stand to settle; pour off the
Tincture into a clean Cucurbit, and in a very gentle Heat draw off one half, or
more, of the Spirit, which again put upon the Mixture, to Extract more
Tincture; and when that Spirit is again Tinged, draw off two Thirds, which put
the third Time to Extract more Tincture, and Distill as before, still putting
the Tincture remaining after Distillation of the Spirit, to the first Tincture.

Then take one Dram of Ambergreese, half a Dram of Musk, and two Drachms of
white Sugar Candy; grind them very well together, with a little of the Spirit
last drawn off; pour them into a Matras, and to them put four Ounces of the
aforesaid Spirit, close the Matras well, and set it to Digest four or five
Days; then put it to the Tincture of Cantharides, also in a Matras, and let
them Circulate together four or five Days more; then pour it into a clean dry
Bottle, which keep well stopped for use.

It is accounted a great Cordial, and really is endu'd with that quality which
is attributed to the Essence of Satirion Root.

Its Dose is from ten to one hundred Drops, in a Glass of Canary-wine, or any
other Vehicle which better pleases the Patient.

Observations.
THat you make the Dissolution in a place where the Fumes may freely ascend
without Annoyance to the Operator; the same Care must be taken in mixing the
Spirit of Wine with that of Nitre; and also the same Caution ought to be used
in putting the fixed Salt of Nitre to its Spirit.

The Camphire absorbs the Corrosive Quality of the Fly; and the Fixed Salt of
Nitre Satiates that of the Spirit, so that there is no need to fear any ill
consequence from either.

The Dissolution Subtilizes the Fly, and Corrects all its Poisonous Quality.

The Discharge of the dissolved Particles, by the Fixed Salt, renders it fit to
yield its Essential Being to the Spirit of Wine.

FINIS.
THE foregoing Preparations are divided into two Courses, which I design to
perform once every Year, so long as God shall enable me; The First beginning
about the Tenth of April, and the other about the Tenth of September. And
therefore those Gentlemen who desire to see the said Courses, with the whole
Dependancies thereof, may be Accomodated for two Guineas and an half, paying
one Guinea entrance, by the First of April or September, and the rest at the
beginning of each Course.

And if any Gentlemen, to the number of Four or Five, desire to see such
Processes as they will conclude of in the Intermission of my Course, they may
be Accomodated for one Guinea a Piece, and taking off the Preparations at a
reasonable and common Price.

The April Course.
Auri. PVrificatio Page. 9 Amalgamatio Page. 10 Calcinatio ibid.
Argenti. Purificatio per Cupel Page. 17 Dissolutio Page. 18 Crystallizatio
ibid. Precipitatio Page. 20
Stanni. Purificatio Page. 24 Amalgamatio Page. 25 Calcinatio Page. 26
Sublimatio Page. 27 Precipitatio Page. 28 Dissolutio per Aq. Reg. Page. 33
Plumbi. Purificatio Page. 34 Dissolutio Page. 36 Sacharum Saturni ib.
Precipitatio Page. 37
Ferri. Preparatio Dr. Willis. Page. 41 Crocus Martis Aperiens. Page. 42
Dissolutio Page. 44 Crystallizatio Page. 45 Ens Martis ib. Precipitatio Page.
46 Tinct. Martis Page. 47
Cupri. Purificatio Page. 57 Dissolutio Page. 59 Crocus Veneris Page. 62
Argenti Vivi. Purificatio Page. 65 Cinnaber Page. 66 Revivificatio Page. 67
Sublim. Corrosivum Page. 68 Mercur. Dulcis Page. 69 Dissolutio Page. 70 Precip.
Rubrum ib. Panacaea Alba Page. 72 Aethiops Minerale Page. 76 Ol. Mercurii Page.
78
Bismuti. Flores Bismuti Page. 85 Magisterium Page. 86
Antimonii. Reg. Antimonii Page. 88 Sulphur. Auratum Page. 89 Reg. Martis Page.
91 Antim. Diaphoreticum Page. 93 Crocus Metallorum ib. Magist. Antimonii Page.
97 Sulph. Combustibile ib. Calcinatio Page. 99 Vitrificatio ib. Panacaea Antim.
cum igne Page. 103 Tinct. Antimonii Page. 110
Vitrioli. Dissolutio Page. 123 Crystallizatio ib. Distillatio Page. 124
Rectificatio Page. 125 Gilla Theophrasti ib. Aq. Stiptica Page. 127 Spiritus
Vitrioli Dulcis Page. 128
Sulphuris. Flores Sulph. flavi Page. 137 Lac Sulphuris Page. 139 Bals. Sulph.
cum Ol. Oliv. Page. 141 Bals. Sulph. cum Ol. Terebinth. Page. 142 Hepar
Sulphuris Page. 144 Tinct. Sulphuris ib.
Arsenici. Sublimatio Page. 152 Arsen. Diaphoret. Page. 153 Regulus Arsenici
Page. 155 Magisterium Page. 157
Salis Nitri. Dissolutio Page. 160 Crystallizatio ib. Sal Prunella Page. 161
Sal Polychrestum Page. 162 Spiritus Nitri Page. 164 Aq. Fortis simplex Page.
167 Aq. Fort. duplex Page. 168 Pulvis Fulminans Page. 169
Salis Comunis. Decrepitatio Page. 174 Dissolutio ib. Crystallizatio ib.
Distillatio ib. Spiritus Salis Gemmae ib.
Succini. Ol. Succini Page. 180 Spiritus ib. Sal. ib. Balsamum Page. 181
Corallorum. Dissolutio Page. 187 Precipitatio ib.
Perlarum. Dissolutio Page. 187 Precipitatio ib.
Terrae Japanicae. Dissolutio Page. 192 Tinctura ib.
Jalapii. Dissolutio Page. 197 Resina ib.
Guiaci. Spir. Guiaci Page. 201 Oleum ib. Sal Page. 202
Corticis Peruviani. Infusio Page. 204 Tinctura Page. 205 Extractum Page. 206
Sacchari. Spiritus Acidus Page. 208 Oleum Foetidum ib.
Vini. Distillatio Page. 213 Rectificatio ib. Spiritus Vini Tartarisatus Page.
215 Aq. Reginae Hungar. Page. 221
Aceti. Distillatio Page. 224 Spiritus Aceti Page. 225
Tartari. Dissolutio Page. 227 Crystallizatio ib. Calcinatio Page. 228 Sal
Tartari fixum ib. Sal Solubile Page. 229 Ol. Tartari per Deliquium ib. Tart.
Solub. and Emetic. Page. 232 Spiritus Tartari Page. 236 Ol. Tartari per
Distillation. ib.
Aloes. Dissolutio Page. 246 Tinctura ib. Extractum ib.
Myrrhae. Tinctura Page. 247 Ol. Myrrhae per Deliquium Page. 249
Crocus. Tinctura Page. 251 Extractum ib.
Elixirium. Elix. Propriet. cum Ol. Sulph. Page. 253 Elix. Propriet. cum Tinct.
Tart. Page. 255 Elix. Propriet. cum Spir. C. C. Page. 256 Elix. Propriet. cum
Sal. Vol. Oleo. ib.
Opii. Dissolutio Page. 265 Extractum ib. Laud. Liq. Cydoniatum Page. 267 Laud.
Liq. cum Tinct. Tartari Page. 268 Pil. Matheae. Page. 271
Ol. Essentialium. Distillatio Page. 276
Terebinthini. Distillatio Page. 281
Benzoni. Tinctura Page. 282 Flores Benz. Page. 283
Salis Armoniaci. Purificatio Page. 290 Crystallizatio ib. Spir. Sal. Arm. cum
Sal. Tartari Page. 292 Spir. Sal. Arm. Acidus Page. 295 Sal Vol. Oleosum Page.
296
Urinae. Distillatio Page. 298
Corn. Cervi. Distillatio Page. 304
Viperarum. Ol. Viperarum Page. 312 Spiritus ib. Sal. ib. Rectificatio Page.
313 Aq. Sudorifica Page. 315 Essentia Viperarum Page. 316 Rect. Ol. Viperarum
Page. 317 Vnitio Ol. and Sal. cum part. Vip. dissol. Page. 318

The September Course.
Auri. Aurum Fulminans Page. 11 Aurum Potabile Page. 12
Argenti. Lun. Caustica Page. 18 Pil. Lunaria Page. 19 Tinct. Lunae Page. 20
Arbor. Philosophor. Page. 21
Stanni. Dissolutio Page. 26 Sal Stanni ib. Magisterium Jovis Page. 28 Flores
Jovis ib. Aurum Mosaicum Page. 30
Plumbi. Bals. Saturn. cum Olco Terebinth. Page. 37 Bals. Saturn. cum Ol.
Olivarum ib. Spir. Ardens Page. 38
Ferri. Croc. Mart. Astringens Page. 44 Sal Mart. cum Spirit. Vitriol Dull.
Page. 45 Sulph. Martis Diaphoret. Page. 46 Tinct. Martis cum Spir. Salis Page.
49 Sulph. Martis Anodinum Page. 50 Extract. Mart. Aperiens Page. 51 Extract.
Mart. Astringens Page. 52
Cupri. Dissolutio Page. 59 Crystallizatio ib. Spir. Veneris Page. 61 Crocus
Veneris Page. 62 Tinct. Veneris ib.
Argentum Vivum. Calomelanos Page. 70 Precip. Rubrum ib. Panacaea Rubra Page.
71 Turp. Minerale Page. 74 Precip. Viride Page. 75 Arcanum Corallinum Page. 77
Ol. Mercurii Page. 79
Antimonium. Reg. Jovis Page. 92 Reg. Martis and Veneris ib. Cerussa Antimonii
Page. 95 Antihect. Poterii Page. 95 Cordiale Poterii Page. 98 Flores Antimonii
albi Page. 100 Flores Antimonii rubri Page. 102 Antim. Resuscitat. ib. Panacaea
sine igne Page. 104 Mercurius Vitae Page. 107 Bezoard. Minerale Page. 108
Essentia Antim. Page. 109 Tinct. Regalis Page. 111
Lapis Calaminaris. Magisterium Page. 119 Calam. Diaphoret. Page. 120
Vitrioli. Dissolutio Page. 126 Sal Vitrioli Cathart. ib. Sulph. Vitrioli ib.
Spiritus Vitrioli Diaphoret. Page. 128 Lapis Medicament. Page. 129 Pull.
Sympatheticus Page. 130 Spir. Vitr. Philosoph. Page. 137
Sulphuris. Flos Sulph. Alb. Page. 139 Lac Sulphuris cum Calce V. Page. 140
Bals. Sulph. Anisatum Page. 142 Bals. Sulph. Succin. ib. Bals. Sulphuris
Martial. ib. Bals. Sulphuris Vulnerar. Page. 145 Ol. Sulph. per Camp. Page. 146
Sal Sulphuris Page. 147
Arsenici. Sublimatio Page. 152 Butirum Page. 155
Nitri. Sal Nitri Catharticum Page. 163 Spiritus Page. 164 Spir. Nitri cum Ol.
Vitriol. Page. 165 Sal Enixum Page. 166 Aq. Fortis simplex Page. 167 Aq. Fort.
duplex Page. 168 Tinct. Sal. Nitri ib.
Salis Communis. Spir. Salis Page. 174 Spiritus Salis cum Ol. Vitr. Page. 176
Ol. Salis ib. Sal Mirabile Page. 177 Spir. Sal. Dulcis
Succini. Oleum Succini in Arena Rectificat. Page. 181 Ol. Suc. cum Aqua
Rectificat. ib. Tinctura Page. 183 Potestates Suc. Page. 184
Corallorum. Tinctura Coral. Page. 188 Sal Coral. Page. 187
Terrae Japanicae. Catechu Page. 191
Sacchari. Spiritus Composit. Page. 209 Spiritus Ardens Page. 210
Vini. Rectificatio opt. Page. 214 Spiritus Vin. vere Tartaris. Page. 216
Spiritus Cephalicus Page. 218 Spir. Cochleariae simplex Page. 220 Spir. Cochl.
Cathart. Page. 221
Aceti. Spiritus Concentratus Page. 225
Tartari. Sal Tart. Catharticum Page. 230 Tartarum Chalybeatum Page. 231 Tart.
Emeticum ib. Tart. Emet. and Cathart. Page. 233 Tart. Vitriolatum Page. 234
Sapo Tartari ib. Sal. Tart. Volatile Page. 237 Tinct. Tartari Page. 239
Myrrhae. Spir. Acidus Page. 248 Ol. Myrrhae per Distillationem ib.
Elixirium. Elix. Propriet. Anti-pestilentiale Page. 257 Elix. Propriet.
Volatile Page. 258 Elix. Vitrioli ib. Elix. Peoniae Page. 259 Elix. Salutis
Page. 261 Elix. sive Bals. Polychrest. Page. 262
Opii. Extract. Compos. Godardi Page. 266 Laud. Liq. Sydenham Page. 269 Laud.
Liq. cum Spir. Vit. Dull. ib. Laud. Liq. cum Sal. Vol. Oleos. Page. 270 Pil.
Starkei Page. 272
Benzoni. Spir. Benz. Acidus Page. 284 Ol. Benz. per Distillat. ib.
Camphorae. Ol. Camph. cum Spir. Nitri Page. 286 Ol. Camph. Compositum Page.
287
Salis Armoniaci. Sal Arm. Sublimatum Page. 291 Spir. Sal. Arm. cum Calce viva
Page. 293 Spir. Sal. Arm. Dulcis Page. 294 Sal Diureticum Page. 295 Menstru.
Duplicat. Page. 298
Corn. Cervi. Spir. C. C. Dulcis Page. 304 Sal C. C. Essentiale Page. 308
Viperarum. Aqua Sudorifica Page. 315
Mellis. Tinctura Page. 323 Aq. Mellis Aromatica Page. 325
Formicarum. Spiritus Page. 331 Oleum Page. 332 Sal Volatile ib. Tinctura ib.
Essentia Formic. Page. 333
Cantharidum. Essentia Page. 338

Chemical Charactrs Notes of Metalls Saturn Lead Jupiter Mars Jron ^^ Sol,
Gold Venus, Coper Mercury Quick silvr. Luna Silver

Notes of ye 12 Signs of the Heavens Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo
Scorpio Sagitari Libra ^ Aquary Capricorn Pisus

Notes of ye and Elements Fire fire Air air Water {water} Earth earth

Chemical Charactr^ Day {day} Night {night}

Notes of Mineralls and other Chymicall things Antimony antimony ^ ^ Arsenick
arsenic arsenic Auripigmentu^: {orpiment} {orpiment} Alum alum ^ ^ Aurichalcum
^ ^ ^ Amalgama aaa ^ ^ Aqua Vitae ^ Aq: Fortis aqua fortis aqua fortis Aq:
Regis aqua regis Borax ^ ^ ^ ^ Balneum Marice ^ Balneu^: Vaporis ^ Brick ^
Black Sulpher ^ ^ ^ Blew Vitriol vitriol Crocus Martis ^ ^ Crocus Veneris ^
arsenic ^ ^ Cinaber {cinnabar} {cinnabar} ^ Caput Mortuu^: Common Salt {salt} ^
^ ^ ^ Crystal ^ Coagulate ^ ^ Crucibl ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Cerus ^ ^ ^

Chemical Charactrs. Distilled Vinegar ^ {vinegar distilled} {vinegar distilled}
Distill ^ Flowers of Antimony. ^ Flowers of Tiles ^ Filings of Steel ^
Gravelled or Pottashes potash Gumm ^ Glass glass Lime ^ ^ Light; or day {day}
{day} Litharge ^ Lutu^: Sapientu^: ^ Mercuri of Saturn ^ Marcasite ^ ^ Niter
{nitre} Night {night} Oil {oil}: ^ ^ Orpiment ^: ^ Powder of Bricks ^
Philosophers Sulp: ^ Quintessence ^ ^ Quick Lime quicklime Realgar ^: ^ ^
Retort ^ Sublimat Mercur: ^ Sand ^ Stratu Super Stratu: ^ ^ Salgem: ^ Sal
Armoniack {sal ammoniac}

Chemical Charatrs. Salt of Cali ^: ^ Sulphur {sulphur}: ^ Sulph: Philosoph: ^
^ Spt: of wine ^ ^ Spirit ^: Sp: ^ Sulphu: Vivu: {sulphur}v Soape ^ To Purify
{purify} Tartar tartar: ^ ^ Tutia ^ Talk talc To Calcine ^ To Digest ^ To fix ^
To Sublime subli ^ To Precipitate precipi: {purify} Verdigrease {verdigris}
Vitriol ^: vitriol Vrin Vinegar vinegar Wax {wax} Wine ^ Whit Vitriol ^ Wheel
Fire ^

Chymicall Alembeck alembic Ashes ashes A Covered Polt ^ Cement ^ Ink ^ Month ^
Powder ^ Hearts horn ^ ^ Hour ^ Bez Mineral Limbeck alembic

Medicinal Lib: apound Lib. an ounce a Dram. a Scruple. agraine gr.

Characters Soape weed ^ To Lute ^ Pott ashes potash To Filtrate To Purify ^
Magnet {purify} Mercur Proeup: ^ Spt: of Hartshorn ^ ^ Bole Armo ^ Tincture ^

Characters a hand full: a Pugil P: a half Quantity ss. apart p Number No: of
Each aa,

The Explanation of the Figures.
A The great Furnace, in which the Flower of Brimstone is Sublimed in great
quantity. 1 The Fireplace. 2 The Ash-Hole. 3 The Door into the Body of the
Furnace, by which the Flowers are taken out.
B The little Furnace in which Flower of Sulphur is Sublimed in small quantity.
4 The Head, made of Earth or Iron. 5 5 The two Ballons, or Receivers. 6 The
Vessel which contains the Sulphur in the Furnace. 7 The plain Bell-Glass. 8 The
Bell with a Verge and Beak. 9 The Receiver to the plain Bell. 10 The Receiver
to the verged Bell.
C The second Plate of Subliming Furnaces. 1 The Head of the Aludels. 2 2 2 The
three Aludels. 3 The Body, in which the Matter that is to be Sublimed, is
projected into. 4 The Body of the Furnace. 5 5 The Covers of the Top of the
other Subliming Furnace. 6 The Body of the other Subliming Furnace. 7 7 The
aludels, to which more Receivers may be adapted. 8 8 8 8 The Heads of the
Vessels wherein the Mercury Sublimate is made in great quantity. 9 9 9 9 The
Subliming Vessels set in the Furnace. 10 The Body of the Furnace. 11 The
Subliming Vessel out of the Furnace.



two plates

The Explanation of the Figures.
1 The Head, of Copper or Pewter. 2 The Copper-Still. 3 The Body of the
Furnace. 4 The Tub, or Refrigeratory, which contains the Worm and Water. 5 The
Supporter of the Tub. 6 A Vessel of Glass or Pewter, called a Spout Receiver. 7
A Glass Funnel. 8 A Separating Glass. 9 Another Separating Glass with a Tap. 10
A Glass Spout Receiver. 11 The Body of the Balneum, to fit into the Mouth of
the Copper-Still. 12 The upper Part of the Balneum. 13 The Head of the Balneum,
with its Bucket, or Refrigeratory.


one plate

The Explanation of the Figures.
1 The Tower of the Athanor. 2 The dry Bath of the Athanor. 3 The moist Bath of
the Athanor. 4 A little Pot to place on the top of the Tower, wherein you may
Boil, or Stew any thing at your pleasure. 5 The Cover of the Tower when the Pot
is removed. a a The Holes by which you may cleanse the Flue when there is
occasion. b b The Ovens, wherein you may Bake Puddings, Custards, Apples, etc.
in which you may also Hatch Chickens. c An Iron Door to slip up and down, as
occasion requires, when you would Roast a bit of Meat pull it up. The Furnace
called an Athanor, was invented to keep a constant Heat for Fourteen Days, a
Month, Twelve Months, or more, as some Chemical Operations require, which may
be augmented or decreased, by opening or shutting the Registers, as you please,
and according to the Magnitude of the Tower, requires no Attendance above once
in twenty four, forty eight, or one hundred Hours. 6 The Neck of the Vessel
which contains the Matter you design to Distill, or Sublime. 7 The Body of the
Furnace. 8 8 The Ballons or Receivers. This Furnace is to Distill any
Cumbustible Composition of Nitre, Sulphur, Antimony, etc. by Projecting a
little at a time into Fig. 6. and presently stopping the Orifice with a fit
Stopple. 9 The lower Part of the Furnace from the Ash-hole, to the upper Part
of the Fire-hole. 10 The middle Part of the Furnace which contains the
Distilling Vessel. 11 The Dome, or upper Part of the Furnace. This is a
Portable Furnace, easily removed, in which you may Melt, or Distill in Balneo,
Sand, or naked Fire, as you please to order it. The outside of the Furnace may
be made of Copper or Iron, and it may be Lined with a Lute, or Fire-stone.



one plate

The Explanation of the Figures.
1 A Reverboratory Furnace, to Distill with twenty long Necks. 2 A Pelican, or
Circulatory. 4 A Balneum at the end of the digest. Furn. 5 The Sand Bath of the
digesting Furnace. 6 The Balneum Maris. 7 A melting Furnace. 8 A Hook to clear
the Grate with. 9 A Testing Furnace. 10 A Pair of Tongues. 11 A small
Reverboratory, or an open Furnace, for one Retort. 12 A Retort. 13 Iron Rings
to cut Glasses withal. 14 A Cone, or Antimonial Horn. 15 A Test. 16 A Test with
its Muffle. 17 A Ladle. 18 An Ingot. 19 A Crucible. 20 A less Crucible. 21 A
Pair of Tongues to take a Pot out of the Fire withal. 22 Two Bolt Heads, or
Matrasses, made a Circulating Glass of. 23 An uncut Body. 24 A Body and Head.
25 An Egg, or Oval Matras. 26 A Cut Body. 27 A Distilling Head. 28 A Blind
Head. 29 A Ballon, or Receiver. 30 A Matras, with its Head. 31 A Body, with a
double Head.


two plates


