THE LEGACY OF John Wilmer, Citizen, and late Merchant of LONDON; Humbly
offered to the LORDS and COMMONS of England.

Felix quem faciunt aliena Pericula cantum. LONDON, Printed for the Author,
MDCXCII.

TO THE Nobility and Commons OF ENGLAND.
ALthough (my Lords and Gentlemen) I have read many Men, yet few Books; so that
it is not my Talent to write in an eloquent Rhetorical Style, and therefore
hope you will pardon my blunt and plain way of writing. The substantial Matter
of these following Papers I drew presently after my Return from Holland in
January last was three Years, but did by the Advice of Friends forbear
publishing them at that time. The Excuse for my Boldness in dedicating these
Papers to you, is because they do of right to you belong: You are the right
Heirs at Law to them; for though in the Matter of them I am wounded, yet it was
for warding the Blow from you, at you was the Blow aimed. The Reasons for my
publishing them now, are, First, to discover some Particulars, which it may be
might be unknown to you, that for the sake of Posterity I would not bury. And
secondly, because of my Intentions in some short time for Jamaica, from whence
it is very probable I may never return, having here no way to employ my self;
and there I hope, with God's Blessing, I may make some Provision for my poor
Children How little soever, for your sakes, I am made, or whatsoever coarse
Usage I meet with, it will be a Comfort to me, if you make good use of it for
your selves and Posterity, that you may not be lessened and made little. I am
sure you were not abroad so accounted, nor can be made so at home, without you
bring it on your selves by your own Act and Deed, by your Clemency to the
Traitors and Betrayers of your Liberties. The choice of three things lies now
before you; to be great, or to be little, or to be nothing: Vtrum horum
mavultis accipite. These Papers are not to stir up your Anger or Revenge at
what is past, but rather to look forward, to prevent the like Mischiefs for
time coming: and I hope your profound Wisdom and Prudence will take care to
build up the old waste Places, and make good the Fences and Bulwarks, that
neither the wild Boars of the Forest, nor Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, may be
able to break over; and stop up the Holes, that the Foxes, the little Foxes,
may not creep through, and hurt the Sheep and Lambs of the Flocks: that all
your Fortifications may be so artificially strong, that no Confederacies of
Jesuitical Priestcraft, with their battering Rams, may hurt, annoy or endanger
them.

Many great and weighty things are before you, and one thing I humbly recommend
to you; Let not the black Infamy and horrid Imputation of Self-Murder lie on
the Memory of my Lord of Essex, nor on the Family of so great a Man, who was to
all that knew him, a Man great for Wisdom and Parts, and for Love to the
Liberties of Mankind, valued neither Life nor Honor, nor any thing else in
this World, in comparison to them. That which prompts me to say this, is,
Though I cannot point out the individual Murderers; yet I can give that
circumstantial Proof that shall satisfy all Mankind, that the cutting his
Throat was designedly premeditated both for Time and Place, and perpetrated by
bloody Men. It may be some Men, for supposed Reasons of State, may oppose doing
of Justice to the Dead, or making Reparation to the Living, as being ill
Precedents, and which may be of dangerous Consequence to encourage others to
withstand the like black Attempts, if they should design to begin where the
late Reigns left off. I will hope that amongst others of your weighty Affairs,
you will carefully maintain and defend the Right of Juries, which are the
Shields and Bucklers under a Civil Government, to defend you in the quiet
possession of your Lives, Honors and Estates. If Corruption be amongst them,
no Punishment can be great enough; but if no such thing, it may be of bad
Consequence to have them punished, ruined and undone, merely for giving in
Verdicts according to their Consciences, guided by right Reason.

Bear with me, I beseech you, my Lords and Gentlemen, in declaring that I am
fully satisfied, that before the Sword of the Lord that is drawn be put up, he
will convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment; he will open the
Eyes of this blind World, and make them see their mad Wickedness and Folly.
That the great God of his infinite Mercy would give you true Wisdom, to be
Healers of our Breaches, and Restorers of our Paths to dwell in, is the Prayer
of,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your humbly devoted Servant, J. Wilmer.

THE PREFACE.
WHAT Pains did evil Men take in the late Reigns to ruin these poor Nations?
What Mischief, what Ruin was then brought upon us? The old Tyranny of Nero,
Caligula and Domitian, seemed to revive again in our late Kings. Certainly
there was never such a villainous Attempt or Contrivance as then appeared, to
forge a Plot upon all the Community at once, a Conspiracy to destroy both Lords
and Commons by a Company of Miscreants and Varlots! How were they kicked up and
down all over the City and Country, as if none else had Sense but those Kings,
their Courtiers and Clergy; and as if the Nobles of the Land, with the
Representative Heads of the People, instead of being a Fence and Bulwark to the
Nation, and for redressing their Grievances, in punishing Offenders, and
relieving the Oppressed, and making good and wholesome Laws for the Weal-Publick,
were only summoned together to be like Pharaoh's Egyptian Taskmasters over the
People, and only to raise Money to be laid out and expended, to gratify the
ambitious Lust and arbitrary Will of the Tyrant, and thereby to enable him to
oppress, depress and destroy the People. I remember an old Story, and it is
this: In the beginning of the Reformation here in England, the Romish Priests
in foreign Countries, told their People, that since English Men were turned
Heretics, God, as a just Judgment upon them, had miraculously caused long
Tails to grow on their hinder Parts, like those of Monkeys. And we were treated
in the late Reigns, as if our freeborn People bore only the Shape of Men, but
were a sort of Animals much resembling Baboons and Monkeys, only dressed up in
Men's Apparel, but were to be treated as Children do Hobby-horses, or used only
in places of Asses to carry Burdens.

Indeed in all Ages Kings have found Evil Counselors, and Priests for their
Turn, to help to befool and lead by the Nose the rest of Mankind. In the late
Reigns, how did it look like a Design and perfect Agreement between the Kings
and some hotheaded Clergymen, for the latter out of their Pulpits, by their
Doctrines of Non-Resistance and Implicit Obedience, to preach up the former to
be as Gods; and in requital the latter were promoted to the best Dignities in
the Church; that by the mutual assistance of each other, the Kings might
enslave the Bodies and drain the Purses, and the Priests enslave the Souls, and
ride the Consciences of all Men? But after our late State-Mountebanks had thus
for a time tried their Tricks, at length they felt the Weight of the Nation to
fall like a Millstone upon them, and found that the People of England would be
the People of England still, and be governed as reasonable Men and freeborn
Subjects. Nevertheless in every bad Reign Evil Counselors will be at the old
Game; and better is not to be expected, unless in a good one we find Justice to
be executed in Terrorem, and it be made the Interest as well as it is the Duty
of every Man to serve the Public. The Politic States of Holland do make it
so; and thereby is it, that they not only stand, but prosper, and are well
served: for every private Man there finds his Account of Interest and Profit in
serving the Common Good; whereas here in the late Reigns every Judas to his
Country, that most betrayed the fundamental Rights, and debauched his Country,
had Honors and Profits for so doing; and on the contrary, where any stood in
their way to oppose them, they were certainly taken off or ruined. Which shows
how precarious the Lives, Liberties and Properties (as also the Religion) of
the People of England were made. What Rapines, barbarous Murders and Outrages
were in the late Reigns! such as no Chronicle can parallel. Ahab and Jezabel's
Murder of Naboth, and taking possession of his Vineyard, so blackned in holy
Writ, and so revenged by God, seems to be far outdone by the cruel and
barbarous Murder of the Brave and Noble Earl of Essex: the first was done in
the face of the World; and owned; but the latter in Hugger-mugger, when he was
under the Custody of the Law in Confinement; and which highly aggravates the
Heinousness of the Fact, it was perpetrated at that moment when it was made to
serve the wicked Design of destroying another of our greatest Men, the Noble
Lord Russel: And lastly to throw the Odium of it on himself; which if England
take not off, I am sure will cost them dear, and they must feel the Vengeance
of Heaven until Justice be in some kind satisfied. When we took God's Way, he
blessed us; and when we return to him, he will return to us, and bless us
again. I cannot but admire the Fineness of God's Providence, how he called
forth the Virtuous, Puissant and Illustrious Family of Nassan, to rescue his
People out of the Jaws of Spanish Tyranny under Charles the Fifth, and broke
that Hellish Yoke made by Popish Priests; and now to call the same Family, in
his present Majesty, to break the French Yoke: This is a stupendous Providence,
an amazing Work, which will give him a glorious Name, more lasting than that of
Sons and Daughters. God is shaking the Earth; he has begun with us in Jamaica
in a terrible manner, and since has come to our own Doors, and given us a
Warning of his Power, to show us what he can do. Let us labor to understand
the meaning of the Voice of God in the Earthquake: Shall we say the People of
Jamaica were more wicked than we, because they perished? I tell you, God seems
to call to us in this still Voice, and say, Repent, or ye shall all likewise
perish. Let us away with our dastardly Cowardliness, and sordid Covetousness,
and Self-seeking, which is the Root of all Evil; and seek more the things of
God, and things of good Report amonst good Men in our Generation. Let us reform
and amend our Manners, our Ways and Doings, or else leave those Names of
Protestants and Christians: for our Immorality is a Shame to them all, and the
old Heathens and Turks will condemn and rise up in Judgment against us; and it
will be more tolerable for them in the Day of Judgment than for us.

The CASE of JOHN WILMER, Citizen, and late Merchant of London. With
Reflections thereupon.
SECTION I.
THAT there was a damnable Conspiracy to introduce Popery and Arbitrary
Government, carried on long before the great Alarm thereof was given to the
three Kingdoms about the Month of September, 1678, was well known to all
thinking Men, and is now put out of question; as it is that the late unhappy
King James gave Life to it. The House of Commons in the first Westminster
Parliament, after the Dissolution of the Long Parliament in January, 1678,
declared, That the Duke of York being a Papist, and his Hopes of coming such to
the Crown, gave Countenance and Encouragement to the Popish Conspiracies. It
appeared at that time to both Houses of Parliament, by Letters from several
Cardinals and others at Rome, that the Duke held great Correspondences with the
Pope, and that his pretended Holiness could not but weep for Joy at the reading
some of the Duke's Letters. Whereupon a Bill was brought into the House of
Commons, to disable the Duke to inherit the Crown; which upon a second reading
in a Committee of the whole House, being carried by the Majority of near two to
one, that Parliament was dissolved, and never sat more.

The honest and most necessary Resolution then taken, being thus defeated, to
the Grief and Astonishment of the greatest part of the Nation, the undernamed
Lords and Gentlemen, viz. the Earl of Shafesbury, Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Gray
of Werk, Lord Russel, Lord Cavendish, Lord Brandon, Thomas Wharton Esquire; Sir
William Cowper, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Henry Calverly,
Sir Scroop How, Thomas Thynne Esquire; William Forrester Esquire; and John Trenchund
Esquire; went in Person upon the 26th of June 1680, and presented Reasons to the
Grand Jury, which served in the Court of King's Bench for the County of
Middlesex, for the indicting the Duke of York as a Popish Recusant; whereupon
that Jury took the Indictment into Consideration. But the Judges of that Court
getting Information thereof, sent for the Jury, and in an unheard of manner
hastily dismissed them at a time when many other Indictments were depending
before them. The former Lords and Gentlemen no way discouraged by the aforesaid
denial of Justice, upon the 30th of July following, together with the Earl of
Clare, Sir John Cope, Sir Rowland Gwynn, and Mr. Wandsford, did personally
prosecute the same Accusation against the Duke before a second Grand Jury; but
they were in the same arbitrary manner dismissed by the Court, to the
obstruction of that Prosecution.

In the ensuing Michaelmas Term, 1680, I John Wilmer was returned and sworn
upon the Grand Jury, which served in the Court of King's Bench for the County
of Middlesex: at that time began the Parliament, commonly called the second
Westminster Parliament from the Dissolution of the late Long Parliament; and
upon the 11th of November the House of Commons passed a Bill entitled, An Act
for securing the Protestant Religion, by disabling James Duke of York to
inherit the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland; which Bill was upon the 15th
of November carried up to the Lords by the Great Lord Russel, attended by
almost all the Commons. My then Station as a Grand-Jury-Man, my Duty and my
Oath obliging me thereunto, and I imagining that the just Prosecution of the
Duke in the Court of King's Bench, might facilitate the passing that
Exclusion-Bill, which was then set on soot and carrying on by the great Council
of the Kingdom, as the only humane Security for our Religion and Liberties; I
brought in a Bill of Indictment, which the present Mr. Sergeant Rotherham drew
up, against the Duke as a Popish Recusant. This Indictment was found by that
Grand Jury, and presented to the Court. That the defeating of that highly
necessary Bill of Exclusion, laid the Foundation of all the Calamities which
the three Kingdoms do to this day so sensibly feel and groan under, will not be
now controverted: and it is as certain that hence sprung my future Sufferings.
It may not therefore be impertinent to remember the World in this place how it
fared with that Bill in the House of Lords; and I shall do it in the very Words
of an Author, who in his Preface asserts that the Nation is not a little
obliged to Sir Roger L'Estrange, a Person who (says he) might be compared to
some Pictures that are placed too near the Sight to discover their true Value;
and that he is consident that the next Age, who will behold him at a more
advantageous and impartial Distance, will have a truer and far greater Esteem
of his Merits. This very Author obligingly tells us, that on the second reading
of the Exclusion-Bill in the Lords House, it was debated till 11 a Clock at
Night, (the King being present all the while) and then thrown out by a Majority
of about 30 Votes, in which Majority were all the Bishops then present, which
were 14. The foregoing Account may be found by the Reader in a very villainous
Book, wrote by James Wright Esquire; entitled, A compendious View of the Tumults
and Troubles of this Kingdom, from the beginning of the 30th to the End of the
36th Year of his late Majesty King Charles the second of blessed Memory, page
90. printed 1685.

Much good may do my Lords, the fourteen Bishops, with the Honor here done
them by this their Admirer. But I cannot withold my self from observing that
the beforementioned Bill was read once in the House of Lords; and being
ordered a second reading, Blessed Memory abovementioned (that never-failing
Defender of the Protestant Faith) did in Person solicit the Popish Cause; and
by his Influence, and by the helping Hand of the fourteen Fathers, we were
fairly kidnapp'd to Rome, and are yet to seek in what Court to bring our Writ
de homine replegiando, in order to the obtaining a Capias in Withernam against
them: But it is out of doubt that the Prosecution of our Deliverance has
already (besides a Sea of precious Blood) cost the Nation more Treasure than
the said Bishops Lands are worth a hundred times over.

Some modest Reflections on the first Section.
THE two great Points that Mankind ought in this Life to be most careful in,
and concerned for, are first his Duty to, and Worship of his God; and the
second is like unto it, his Duty to his Neighbor: which is not only in
particular to his Country and Countrymen, but to all Mankind in general. Now
the Laws of England bind every Man in his Station to maintain, defend and
preserve the Civil Government, and the Protestant Religion, and to let and
hinder, what in him lies, that may endanger either of the same. In the Year
1678, was a discovery of a dangerous and hellish Plot of the Papists, that
threatened the Ruin of the Government, with all our Civil and Religious Rights:
this wrought in most Men great Thoughtfulness which way to secure themselves
and the Nation from this threatened Ruin; some were for this, and others were
for that: but in fine, the Parliament saw no other way to secure the Nation,
but a Bill of Exclusion against the Duke of York, he standing next in
Succession to the Crown; upon which the Papists built great Hopes, and were
mightily emboldned and encouraged by him and their Priests, to carry on their
Designs for the rooting out the Northern Heresy, as they called the Protestant
Religion. And as the Parliament was herein busied, so every honest Man looked
upon himself in Duty bound to assist them in so necessary and good a Work. I
being then on the Grand Jury, attending the Term, and all Men do or should know
a Grand Jury is a Jury of Enquiry, I taking notice how illegally the Chief
Justice, the Term before, prevented the Indictment against the Duke of York,
and perceiving what Heats and Quarrels it begat in City and Country, about
drinking his Health, some affirming he was a Protestant, and others refusing
it. As he was a Papist, I thought it my Duty, being then on the Jury, and being
satisfied in my Conscience of his being a Papist, I did upon a Political
Account bring in a Bill against him, which was proved by Witness, and found by
the Jury. The Reasons that moved me to bring in this Bill, were as follows.
(1.) As he was next Heir to the Crown, which if he came to, would endanger the
Overthrow of the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad, in regard of his
Jesuitical Bigotry, and fast Friendship with the French King. (2.) As he was
Brother to the then present King Charles the Second, on whom he had a mighty
Influence, and who himself also had as good a Mind to the Work, but acted more
craftily, and was not willing to go his Brother's pace, but take slow and sure
Steps; for I then could as well, and by substantial and credible Witness, have
proved him as much a Papist as his Brother: but that was none of our Work, nor
lay before us, for that a Law was made in the 13th Year of his Reign, making it
a high Misdemeanour for any to say the King was a Papist, or Popishly affected.
(3.) The finding this Bill, and the farther Prosecution of it, would animate
and put Life into the Protestants, and be a Check to the Romish Zeal in their
Designs, and would also put the King upon considering of not venturing all upon
the Cast of a Dye; especially the Parliament's being then awakened to encourage
it, and to back it with a Bill of Exclusion. And I declare to all the World,
had the Duke of York been a private Person, he might have lived and died a
Papist without the least disturbance from me, it being always my Judgment not
to disturb or prosecute any Man barely for his private Opinion, so he were not
prompted thereby to Designs for disturbance of the Government and public
Peace. But by my doing this, I knew the War was begun, and my Name in the black
Book, and I had hereby exposed my self to all the Rage and Malice of the Popish
Party, that they would never leave pursuing me, until by one way or other they
had my Blood, or ruined or removed me out of the way; the first God prevented,
the latter they effected.

SECT. II.
IN a short time after the rejection of the Bill of Exclusion by the Lords, the
second Westminster Parliament being dissolved, another is summoned to meet at
Oxford upon the twenty first of March, 1680/1: but in the interval, Discovery
being made of a horrid Conspiracy to sham the World with a pretended Protestant
Plot, Fitz-Harris a Papist, who had been employed at White Hall to carry on
that cursed Intrigue, being detected, was committed to Newgate: but that the
Villainy might not be pried into by the Magistrates of London, he is soon
caught away, and removed to the Tower. The Parliament being assembled at
Oxford, the Commons fall upon this matter, and draw up an Impeachment against
Fitz-Harris: but to obstruct their Enquiry into the Case, they are also
dissolved, having first passed a Vote, declaring, That for any Person to try
Fitz-Harris, (his Case being before the Parliament) he should be deemed and
taken for a Betrayer of the Liberties of the Nation. Nevertheless Sir Francis
Pemberton is instantly made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and
undertakes to try him, I being then returned upon the Panel for his Trial: but
it was remembered at Court, that I had lately brought in a Bill of Indictment
against the Duke of York; I must therefore be kept off from this Jury, and was
excepted against by Mr. Attorney General, Sir Robert Sawyer, without any Reason
shown for it. Fitz-Harris being tried, condemned and executed, to the
unspeakable Joy of the Papists and their Adherents, who above all things
dreaded the Discovery which he might and would have made, they were no way
discouraged at the unlucky Miscarriage and Disappointment (or rather Delay) of
the Resolution taken to turn the Popish into a Presbyterian Plot, but were
found to prosecute it with all imaginable Application.

Reflections on the second Section.
WHat were Mr. Attorney's Reasons, upon the King's Account, to except against
me, are best known to himself; but I had a strong Presumption one chief Reason
was, that I had brought the aforesaid Bill of Indictment in against the Duke of
York; and therefore might be likely also to puzzle this great and mighty Affair
of the Papists upon the Wheel, to take Fitz-Harris out of the way, either by
urging and insisting upon the Vote of the Commons, or by bringing in a special
Verdict, and so have thrown it wholly upon the Judges: But I had a Writ of Ease
from this Trouble; and so a Jury of honest Men I verily believe was sworn; and
Fitz-Harris was convicted, condemned, and executed; which occasioned great
Rejoycings and Acclamations at Court, that such a dangerous Conspiracy of
theirs, against the Parliament and Nation, should be no farther discovered.

SECT. III.
THE Popish Plot being laid aside, the Witnesses who came out of Ireland, to
prove the part thereof which had been carried on in that Kingdom, were in order
to the new Intrigue tampered withal, and the Relief and Support which the King
had allowed them was withdrawn; hereupon, some of them listed themselves in the
Plot-Office at Whitehall, and were well fed and clothed: others of them applied
themselves to several Citizens, making woeful Complaints of their distressed
Condition; whereupon, my self (amongst many others) commiserating their
Distress, esteemed it my Duty to relieve them that had discovered a Plot
against the Lives and Liberties of Protestants, and frequently gave them Bread
in their Necessity. Thus for some time they continued in the City, but every
day looking blacker and darker, without any prospect of a Parliament to defeat
the bloody Designs of the Popish Conspirators, these Wretches not being
Temptation-proof, and observing that their Brethren at the other end of the
Town had better Quarters and Entertainment, they were also hereby carried over
and listed there.

These Men had often intimated to me what large Offers were made them if they
would come over and swear for the King, (as it was termed;) and four of them,
viz. John and Denis Macknamar, Brian Haines, and Bernard Denis, being listed
and entered into present Pay, they watched an Opportunity at a Tavern which I
mostly dined at, and inviting me to a Glass of Wine, complemented me with many
Expressions of Thankfulness for my Kindness to them, assuring me that they
should always retain a grateful Sense thereof. After the drinking a Glass or
two of Wine, John Macknamar did further enlarge to this effect: Sir, you have
been a kind Friend to us all, and helped us with Meat, Drink and Money, when we
were slighted and cast off by others; and your Kindness to us shall never be
forgotten; therefore we could not part with you, until we had expressed as
much, and to let you know further, there is a Business will shortly come upon
the Stage which will make thousands be amazed, and their Hair stand an end.

They then bid me not be troubled nor afraid, and swore, not a Hair of my Head
should be touched, for they would stand between me and danger for old
Kindness-sake: John Macknamar farther added, the Scene will begin with Stephen
College, my Lord Shaftsbury, and others. He having thus expressed himself, I
thanked them all for their Respect, but thought it not prudent to ask them any
Questions, and therefore took my Leave civilly of them. Soon after College, and
then the Earl of Shaftsbury, were taken up and committed to the Tower for
High Treason, whereby I was confirmed in the Belief of the Villainy of these
Irish Men.

The Midsummer-Quarter-Sessions (1681) approaching, great was the Expectation
of the whole Kingdom what Proceedings there would be had against the Prisoners
in the Tower. Mr. Bethel and Mr. Cornish being then Sheriffs, and they
well-knowing that honest and able Juries were the great Fence and Bulwark to
the Lives and Estates of all Men, they took special Care to return such to
serve at this Sessions, as in truth they did upon all other Occasions, insomuch
that in the End of their Year, the Lord-Chief-Baron Mountague gave them this
Encomium openly in Court, That in all the Verdicts of the several Juries in
Causes tried before him, he never saw more equal distributive Justice in his
Life; and that he did in every one of them, in his own Judgment, both in Law
and Equity, concur with them, and thanked the Sheriffs for their Care.

Reflections on the third Section.
MY Lord Shaftsbury, and Stephen College (called the Protestant-Joyner) with
others, being in the Tower upon the black Imputation of High Treason, it filled
the City and Nation with Discourse; every one speaking and giving their
Judgments as they stood affected; some decrying them at a strange rate,
blackning them as much as they could; others were more mild, and looked upon it
as a Sham-plot. And farther note, by the way, at this time, by the Cunning of
the Jesuitical Priestcraft, were the Nicknames and Distinctions of Whig and
Tory trump'd up, and under those two Names were listed Persons of all Ranks;
like as among the Italians were the Names of Gwelf and Gubeline; and such Heat
between Whig and Tory, and such Folly and great Partiality, that no Reason nor
Moderation could take place; but the Tories had the advantage of the Whigs,
having the Court and Judicial Government on their side; but to speak the Truth
modestly, the Whig had the Law and Equity on theirs, however there was too much
of Warmth and Passion in either Party. But to return, The Midsummer
Quarter Sessions drew near, and great were the Expectations of both Parties,
what Proceedings would be against the Prisoners in the Tower for High Treason;
the Friends of Shaftsbury and College bethinking themselves what honest, just,
and reasonable Methods were to be taken.

SECT. IV.
I Being returned upon the Panel of Jurors for this Sessions, and appearing at
Guild Hall according to the Summons, I was sworn Foreman of the Grand Jury.
After the Dispatch of the City-Business there, the Jury were adjourned to the
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer at the Old Bailey, where there was a great
Appearance of the Nobility, and no less than eleven of the Twelve Judges. The
first Day was chiefly spent by the Judges, Mr. Attorney General (Sawyer,) and
the King's Counsel, in Debates with my Lord Mayor (Sir Patient Ward) and the
Sheriffs, about the Panel of the Grand Jury: It was insisted upon to have a
new Panel, or one or two at the least of the Panel struck out, and others
taken in. The Bystanders who knew not the Intrigue of the Court, were put into
admiration at this unusual struggling to change the Jury; but the Plot-managers
did well remember, that I had brought in a Bill against the Duke of York for
Recusancy, and therefore was not a sit Person to serve the present Turn. The
Judges pressed the Matter upon the Sheriffs with all imaginable Vehemence; but
Sheriff Bethel made answer, that he knew the Duty of his Place by Law; and told
the Judges positively, that he would not change one of the Jury: Whereupon, Mr.
Attorney said, Well, if you will not part with any of the Jury, we will try
them with one Bill, and so slung into the Court an Indictment of High Treason
against Stephen College, and moved that the Indictment might be read, and the
Witnesses heard in open Court, which was granted.

Reflections on the fourth Section.
THere was in this juncture of Time such a Turn to be served as scarce any Age
can parallel: It Is certain no History since the Reformation shows any thing
like it; We had had a manifest Discovery of a hellish Popish-Plot, that had
been prosecuted; and three successive Parliaments had been intent upon the
Exclusion of the Duke of York, as the head of that Plot, and the fountain of
all the Mischiefs thence threatening these Kingdoms. But now the Conspirators
took heart, the Plot must be no farther prosecuted; but to divert from it, the
Nation is to be amuzed with a sham Protestant-Plot; and proper Judges being
placed on the Bench, there only wanted Juries for the Purpose: The worthy
Sheriffs of London, Mr. Bethel and Mr. Cornish, not gratifying them therein, we
here find the Judges and King's Counsel attempting to usurp their Office, and
in effect, to assume to themselves a Power to return Juries: for what
difference is there between the doing that, and the taking out and putting into
the Pannels at their pleasure? The Honesty and Courage of the Sheriffs can
never be sufficiently commended: Had not they stemmed the Design, what a
torrent of Mischief, what a Sea of Blood should we have instantly beheld? but
being here happily checked, Mr. Attorney said, in a Passion, He would try the
honest Jury now returned with one Bill; from whence we may fairly infer, that
as they had a Set of Witnesses, such as they were, so they had Indictments and
Accusations enough at hand.

SECT. V.
THE Witnesses produced, were Sir William Jennings, (now in the Service of the
French King) the two Macknamars, Smith (called Narrative Smith) alias Barry,
Bernard Denis, and Brian Haines. Some of the Jury took their Evidence in
Shorthand; the Substance whereof was, That the Lords and Commons of England
were engaged in a horrid Plot to seize the King at Oxford; wherein they swore
40000 were listed besides Householders, and that they had provided 100000 Arms,
and 1500 Barrels of Powder, besides some particular Arms which College had in
readiness for himself.

The Witnesses having told their Tales to the Court, before the Jury withdrew,
I moved the Judges that the Witnesses might attend the Jury in the
Grand-Jury-Chamber, to the end that they might ask them some Questions, if upon
the Debate of the Evidence which had been given, it should be found requisite;
that being granted by the Court, the Jury retired to consider of the Evidence:
some of them declared that they observed the Witnesses to have Papers in their
Hands in the Court, that while one was giving his Evidence, the others were
conning their Lessons; and most of their Papers appeared to be much interlined,
and all of them to be written by one and the same Handwriting, as near as could
be guessed.

The Jury called the Witnesses in before them one after another, and demanded
of them to rehearse the Evidence given in Court; and those that took it in
Shorthand, to observe whether they varied, and wherein: they were also put to
answer such Questions as were proposed to them. When the Jury had dispatched
the first of the Witnesses, they directed one of their Officers to take him
aside, that none of the others might speak with him until they had sinished
with them all; but by that time they had half done, the Lord-Chief-Justice sent
a Message requiring me to attend him; and coming before his Lordship, he said,
Mr. Foreman I understand you imprison the King's Witnesses: To which I
answered, My Lord, I understand no such thing; we only keep those we have
examined apart from those we have to examine, that we may find out the whole
Truth, and be able to do Right and Justice both to the King and to the Subject.
The Lord-Chief-Justice replied thereupon, You had best have a care what you do;
and so I returned to my Brethren, and we went through the Examination of all
the Witnesses, and then compared what they had sworn in Court with what they
had now sworn before us, and found them greatly disagreeing and contradicting
one another in many Particulars: whereupon, every individual Person of the
Nineteen which were upon the Grand Jury, gave his Verdict Ignoramus, which I,
as the Fore man, endersed upon the Indictment.

Reflections on the fifth Section.
HEre the tragical Show and Scene of Swearing begun, even to make the Hairs of
thousands stand an end, according to the Phrase of the Irish Men: and sure I
am, many seemed sad in Countenance, and struck with Fear, not knowing what
Event might happen. Our Task being of that mighty Importance and Difficulty, it
required Men of far greater Depth and Sagacity than we were of, to manage such
an Affair methodically, and to purpose. Here was first a Difficulty and
Innovation upon us, in the Court's ordering the Witnesses to give their
Testimony in open Court; a new Thing, and not heard of before; and indeed if we
had asked them any Questions in open Court, it could scarcely have been
consistent with a Grand-Jury-Man's Oath, (at least I thought it so;) for how
can the King's Secrets and our own be kept, if all Examinations and Debates be
in open Court? besides, it is an Awe upon, and takes away all the fundamental
Freedom and Liberty of Juries, and would quickly render them useless, and all
Power would soon center in the Judge, and his being from the King, durante been
placito; then the Law in his Breast, would be according to the Saying in
Juvenal, Sic volo sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. Would not the People
then be in a sine pickle, and the Lords and Commons of England be in the same
State with Sheep and Calves in Smithfield-Pens, first to be brought thither by
every Court-Jobber and State-Higler, and sent to the Shambles by every But
herly been placito Drudg?

The Witnesses had very large Consciences, for they bring all into their Net:
First, the Lords and Commons in general: Secondly, Forty thousand in
particular, that were listed; and thirdly add, besides Householders, an
indesinite Number, so might take in the whole Number or Householders; in which
Rank, we looked on our selves as comprehended. Surely these Irish thought this
Swearing in England, must answer the cutting Protestant Throats in Ireland in
41, that none must escape them; so that had we found the Bill, Billa vera, we
might have brought in every individual English Man for a snack. It Is strange
such a general Plot should be, and none of us know one word of it, but these
Irish Men, and those to whom they pleased to impart it. And as for the 100000
Arms, and 1500 Barrels of Powder, they could never be found to this day; if
they now could, they would do our King William a Kindness at this time. Our
Dear Joys, with their Popish Masters at the Plot-Office at Whitehall, thought
the English Protestants had very thick Skulls, or little Wit, Honesty or
Courage, to be frighted out of their Senses by their horrid Swearing, or rather
Forswearing themselves: If any of our Priest-ridden Tools, or the Jesuitical
Bigots can yet make this Plot plainly appear, now we have a Set of honest
Judges, and honest Juries too, if it be not our own Faults, I am content still
to take my Trial as one of the chief guilty in it; and I do hereby promise
them, I will take no advantage of any Act of Grace made since, by pleading any
other Pardon than only for the single Act of Coming over in the Descent with
his Highness the Prince of Orange, which was not until all the Foundations of
the Government were broken up. It is also farther more strange, if there were
such a general Plot, that never a one of us, amongst whom many of us were
wholly Strangers one to another; and I can truly say, to my knowledge I never
saw the Faces of many of them, before they came upon this Jury; I say, that all
the nineteen of us should immediately, at the first sight, enter into a
Combination to smother and stisle the Discovery of so horrid and detestable a
Plot, and not one of the whole 19 to this day tell Tales, and betray the rest:
nay, it is so far from it, that I hear not one of that Jury repents of the said
Verdict to this day, but is of the same Opinion still; that they were not only
then in the right, but now would do the same, were it to be done again. I think
16 of us are now living; if any of the Popish Party have a mind to enquire
farther, or question the Truth herein, I refer them to the rest of my Brethren
for their further Satisfaction.

SECT. VI.
THE Indictment being carried and delivered into the Court, some of the Judges,
with the Attorney General, seemed much concerned that the Bill was indorsed
Ignoramus; especially the Lord-Chief-Justice Pemberton, who demanded of me,
being Foreman, what Reason the Jury had for this Verdict? I replied to his
Lordship, I humbly conceived we are not bound by Law to give any Reason: The
Chief Justice thereupon said Will you give none? I answered, No my Lord; but
after a little pause said, We have done according to our Consciences: upon the
hearing whereof, some Counsel in the Court said aloud, That is a good Reason.
The Chief Justice then spoke to my Lord Mayor, that the Jury might be
discharged; but he replied, it could not be, for after the Business ended
there, they were to attend at Guild Hall at the Sessions of the Peace. The
Attorney General then moved that they might never more be Jurymen.

Reflections on the sixth Section.
WHat Disappointment is here, and Concernedness for it! I always thought the
Judges were to be indifferent Persons between the King and People, and keep
only to the Rule of Law, without Partiality, and to have no respect of Persons
in Judgment; and not against Law, to taunt at Grand-Juries like School Boys, as
the Chief Justice did, when he asked a Reason for our Verdict. If I had
replied, My Lord, by what Law do you ask that Question? (as I had much ado to
forbear) I believe my Lord would have said, I had been a saucy Fellow. If any
Corruption or Bribery had appeared in our Jury, we ought then severely to have
suffered; but I dare affirm there was not the least touch of it; but I cannot
say so for the Witnesses. As to the Motion of Mr. Attorney's, that we might
never be Jurymen more, I think my self and Brethren have reason to think him
for it: I know no Profit by it, but only Trouble, Sorrow and Ruin of me and my
Famimily: I have found it so, for I may modestly reckon my self 8000 l. (if I
should say 10000 l. I should not be extravagant in my Account) the worse for
serving on Juries; for it is to that I must attribute all my Troubles; I know
of no other Reason. It is pretty hard methinks, that there is not better
Provision in our Laws, to defend Grand-Juries, and all Juries, that are the
great Security to the Lives and Estates of all Ranks of Men.

SECT. VII.
THey appeared at Whitehall as Thunderstruck with the sad News of the
Disappointment at the Old Bailey; and Sir Thomas Linch, late Governor of
Jamaica, told me that King Charles was in a great Rage, and angry with me: It Is
well known that that Prince was very crafty, and had a great command of his
Passion; yet in his Rage, throwing his Hat and Periwig on the Ground, he was
heard to express himself to this effect; This Rogue Wilmer has broke all my
Measures; God's Fish I will have his Blood, or ruin him, although it cost me
ten thousand Pounds.

Reflections on the seventh Section.
NO Age can parallel the Wickedness of such Magistrates, to contrive such
horrid things against a brave and honest People, to bring such alparcel of
Varlets and Irish Cutthroats to swear against innocent Men, that no honest Man
in the Kingdom, in Life or Estate, could escape them, if they could have had
Jury-Tools, as well as Judges and others. It is a difficult Task to keep within
bounds, and to bridle in Passion under Oppression, to have our Spirits in a
Christian cool Frame, when we are injured; it requires great Measures of Grace.
You see I was here in a fine Case, having such thundering Threatenings, that
nothing but Death or Ruin must follow. For what is mentioned, is Matter of
Fact in the foregoing Section, and I believe I can prove it at this Day, if
need require.

SECT. VIII.
THE Conspirators unwilling thus to lose their hopeful Plot, and the Cost which
they had been at in suborning and instructing their Irish Witnesses, they cast
about how and where to employ them to better purpose than in the City of
London; and at length they resolve to make an Experiment at Oxford: thither
they send College to be tried, upon a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer
issued into that County. Hereupon it being evident that I might be a most
material Witness to show the Inconsistency and Falsehood of the Irish Evidence,
Inquiry was made of me whether I would go to Oxford to testify my knowledge in
the Matter on the behalf of College. I declared, that if I were Subpena'd, I
would go: but upon the very Day when a Subpena was brought to my House,
Atterbury the Messenger came thither, with Stephens, Messenger of the Press;
and seizing me, said, You are my Prisoner. Hereupon I demanded a light of his
Warrant; and finding it to be from Secretary Jenkins for High Treason, I told
Atterbury, (as Counsel had before advised me) that it was an illegal Warrant,
and would not run in London, I being within the Freedom, and a Freeman of the
City; but if any Warrant came from my Lord Mayor, or from an Alderman of the
City, who was a Justice, I would readily obey it: but Atterbury with his
Assistants laid hold of me, and forced me into a Coach, carrying me to
Atterbury's House, where I was kept two Days: from thence I was carried before
the King and Council at Hampton Court; and being very sick with an Ague and
flayer, the Lord Chancellor said to me at my coming in, You come in like an
Ignoramus: upon which the King pulled him by the Sleeve, and winked on him;
which seemed to intimate, that though my giving the Ignoramus Verdict upon the
Indictment against College, was in truth the Crime which brought me thither,
yet it should not be published: wherefore the same Lord turning it, said. You
come here as one not only guilty of High Treason, but have begun a Rebellion in
resisting his Majesty's Warrant for your Apprehension: Whereupon I replied, May
it please your Majesty, I have not, not will I resist any legal Warrant of your
Majesty's; but I humbly conceive, the Warrant by which I am apprehended, is an
illegal Warrant, being from the Secretary of State, and will not run in London;
for the Justices of London are not Justices by Commission, but by Prescription
and Charter. Said the King, Will not my Warrant run in London? Yes, may it
please your Majesty, I answered; a Warrant from my Lord Chief Justice of your
Majesty's Bench will run in London to apprehend any Citizen, but it is to be
executed by its proper Officer, a City-Constable, and he to carry his Prisoner
so apprehended before the Lord Mayor, or any other Alderman that is a Justice
of the said City. To which the King said, Who told you this Law? I replied, One
Mr. Smith an able Lawyer. Whereupon I was ordered to withdraw; and within an
hour after, without any other Accusation or Examination, a Warrant was sent out
of the Council Chamger to commit me to the Tower for High Treason.

Reflections on the eighth Section.
IT is thought by many, that one Reason of my being taken up at this time, was
to prevent my going to Oxford to Colledg's Trial, to confront the Irish
Evidence, and declare my knowledge of them. By this Warrant against me, and by a
like Warrant against Mr. Whitaker, the Customs and Privileges of the City of
London, granted by Charter, and confirmed by Act of Parliament, were broken
through: for it was granted by the Charter of King Edward the Third, (as may be
seen in the printed Charters of the City, p. 45.) and which has been very
often confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, That no Summons, Attachments or
Executions be made by any the King's Officers whatsoever, by Writ or without
Writ, within the Liberty of the City, but only by the Ministers of the City.

The famous Lawyer Bracton expresses himself to this purpose, Bracton, lib. 1.
cap. 8. fol. 5. lib. 2. cap. 16. fol. 34. Mirror of Justice, p. 8, 15.
The Law is not only the King's Maker, but his Master; and whatever he does
against it, he is as liable to answer as the Subject, save in Life and Member;
therefore does nothing in Person, but all in his Political State and Capacity
by Ministers: And therefore if any Minister by the King's Command, breaks the
Law, or acts against Law, he is punishable for the Crime, whether
Privy-Counsellor, Chancellor, Judge, or other inserior Minister. Every Citizen
of London, with the same Breath he swears Allegiance to the King, he also
swears to maintain the Charters, Grants, Rights and Privileges of the City; and
I take each Oath to be binding alike, and no ways contradictory the one to the
other; and as I take it, I was bound by the latter to have resisted Atterbury
even to the hazard of my Life, he coming with his illegal Warrant to seize me,
contrary to the Grants, Charters and Customs of the City. Now to evince the
truth of what I assert, and to remember my Fellow-Citizens of their Duty, I
shall here subjoin the Oath which we all took as Freemen of the City, and also
the Oath which is taken by every Member of the Common Council, by both which
Oaths I then stood obliged.

The Oath of every Freeman of the City of London, I here insert, word for word,
as follows.
YE shall swear, that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord and Lady,
King William and Queen Mary. Obeysant and obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and
Ministers of the City: The Franchises and Customs thereof ye shall maintain,
and this City keep harmless in that that in you is. Ye shall be contributary to
all manner of Charges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions,
Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and to all other Charges, bearing your part as a
Freeman ought to do. Ye shall color no foreign Goods under, or in your Name,
whereby the King or this City might or may lose their Customs or Advantages. Ye
shall know no Foreigner to buy or sell any Merchandise with any other
Foreigner, within this City, or Franchise thereof; but ye shall warn the
Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue
no Freeman out of this City, whilst ye may have Right and Law in the same City.
Ye shall take no Apprentice, but if he be freeborn, that is to say, no
Bondman's Son, nor the Child of any Alien, and for no less Term than for seven
Years, without Fraud or Deceit: and within the first Year ye shall cause him to
be enrolled, or else pay such Fine as shall be reasonably imposed upon you for
omitting the same: and after his Term's End, within convenient time (being
required) ye shall make him free of this City, if he have well and truly served
you. Ye shall also keep the King's Peace in your own Person; ye shall know no
Gatherings, Conventicles nor Conspiracies made against the King's Peace, but ye
shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your Power. All these Points and
Articles ye shall well and truly keep, according to the Laws and Customs of
this City, to your Power.

So God you help.

Here follows the Common-Council-man's Oath.
YE shall swear, that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and readily come when ye be summoned to the
Common Council of this City, but if that you be reasonably excused. And good
and true Counsel ye shall give in all things touching the common Weal of this
City, after your Wit and Cunning. And that for favor of any Man ye shall
maintain no singular Profit against the common Profit of this City. And after
that ye be come to the Common Council, ye shall not from thence depart, till
the Common Council be ended, without a reasonable Cause, or else by the Mayor's
License. And also that all secret things that are spoken or said in the
Common Council, the which ought to be kept secret, ye shall in no wise disclose.

As God you help.

By which Oaths all Citizens may see how far they stand obliged to the
Community, to defend and preserve the Rights and Privileges granted to them, if
at any time they are invaded or infringed.

SECT. IX.
THE Warrant against me was as follows. Whereas several Informations upon Oath
have been this Day read at the Board against John Wilmer, of High Treason by
him committed, in conspiring the Death of the King, and endeavoring to depose
his Majesty from his Imperial Crown and Dignity; These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to will and require you to receive into your Custody the Body of
the said John Wilmer for the High Treason aforesaid, and him safely to keep,
till he shall be delivered by due Course of Law. And for so doing, this shall
be your Warrant.

Dated at Hampton Court, the 15th of August, 1681.
To Thomas Cheek Esquire; Lieutenant of the Tower of London, or his Deputy.
Signed, Canterbury, etc. (14 in all.)

Reflections on the ninth Section.
AS in Section the 8th I gave the Relation of the King's Rage against me, that
he would have my Blood, or ruin me; now here he begins: first he makes his
Secretary Jenkins by his Warrant break over the Rights and Privileges of
London, and fetched me out thence; and now he makes the Lords of the Council
leap over Hedge and Style of all Law, to send me to the Tower. As I take it, the
Law of England is, No Man shall be by Warrant or Mittimus sent to Goal, until
first the Accuser comes face to face, and makes Oath: Secondly, The Criminal
shall be sent to the County-Goal where the Fact is committed, and not where the
Justice or Privy-Counsellor pleases. For the first, here is no Accuser face to
face, nor to this day know I mine Accusers. Secondly, Mention is made of
several Oaths read, but never a word by whom made, or before what Justice
taken; neither can I guess before what Justice they should be taken, or by what
Witnesses sworn; unless they were taken by Mr. Justice Warcupp, and sworn by
our Dear-Joys; for I knew he was conversant with them. I believe old Pious
Memory himself was ashamed of letting either Justice or Witnesses be public to
the World, they were so scandalous. My Warrant of Commitment was signed by
thirteen more Lords of the Council, whose Names I omit to publish, as having
that Charity for some of them; it was their Ignorance and Fear that made them
set their Hands; and others of them I have hopes God will give them Grace to
repent, and make satisfaction for their Wrongs done me: I am sure some of them
may do it with the lifting up of a Finger, if they have a Will to it. I will
engage, let them serve half the Merchants upon the Exchange as they did me,
they will forbid their being Merchants again.

SECT. X.
UPon this Warrant I was detained in the Tower fifteen Weeks and odd Days, and
not allowed in all that time Pen, Ink and Paper; for the space of six Weeks I
was denied the sight of any Friend, and not so much as my Wife, Children,
Servants, Doctor or Apothecary permitted to come near me, though I was
languishing under a violent Ague and Fever. My Wife petitioned all that time to
be confined with me, but could not obtain it, till six Weeks being clapsed,
when she procured it, and also Liberty for me to walk with my Warder in the
Tower.

In the time of my Imprisonment several Stratagems were used to destroy me;
diligent Enquiry was made in most of the neighboring Counties about London, to
find whether I had been in any of them, to the end that they might pack me out
of London, and get me indicted and murdered as College was at Oxford: they
endeavored to suborn English Witnesses against me, the Irish being become
infamous: they also took some into a Messenger's Custody, and threatened that
they themselves should be hanged, if they would not swear against me. Moreover,
they had it under consideration to cut my Throat in the Tower; for Major Hawley
(in whose House the Earl of Essex's Throat was cut) being enquired of, what
would be done with Wilmer? he made answer, He is a stubborn Rogue, his Throat
must be cut.

During the time of my Imprisonment my Petition was put in by Friends at two
several Sessions at the Old Bailey, praying to be tried or released: but that
would not avail; so that I was detained till the last Day of Michaclmas Term,
1681; when being brought by Habeas Corpus to the Court of King's Bench, I was
set at Liberty upon 9000 l. Bail, my self in 3000 l. and four Sureties in 6000
l. to appear the next Term; and then appearing, I was discharged.

Reflections on the tenth Section.
WAS not here a denying and delaying of Justice, and an absolute Breach of
Magna Charta? What shall I say? All Designs of taking away my Life failing, now
I must be ruined in my Estate. At that time I owed almost 10000 l. no Servant
nor any Friend was suffered to speak to me: my People were forced to follow the
best ways they could to pay running Bills of Exchange, and in order to it to
sell Goods at any Rates, every one calling for every Penny I owed, and no one
giving me Credit for a Penny; I being then in so strong a Hold, and under so
black a Charge: whereas before I thank God I had a fair Credit upon the
Exchange, and was in great business. The Wisdom therefore of our Forefathers,
to obtain the Privilege that no Citizen should be committed to any Prison but
the City's, where he is sure quickly to come to Trial, deserves to be remembered
with Honor: for it is not with a Merchant in Trade, as it is with a
Country-Gentleman; though he be falsely imprisoned, he is not damnified as is
the Merchant; for his Estate being in Lands, his Rents are going on, which he
will receive at his being restored to Liberty; but a Merchant in great Trade
and Credit, and doing much as a Factor, as well as upon his own account; and
his Business lying in many Countries, as was my Case: I say, let him be sent to
the Tower four or five Months, and denied Pen, Ink and Paper, or Friend, or any
to come to him; I will engage it shall spoil him, and lose all his Commissions,
especially those in the Territories of the Monarch who lays his Hand on him;
besides the Damage in his own particular Concerns; all Persons will be afraid
to have to do in Trade with him against whom the Government has a Pique. But
before I could be hence released, the Popish Party would take the other Blow or
two, to try if they could hit the Nail o'th'Head: but here also, as God would
have it, they also missed, for now a second Jury is Ignoramus; and afterward a
third, returned by the next Sheriffs, brave Pilkington and Shute, is Ignoramus
also.

SECT. XI.
SHortly after, my fast Friends at Court resolving to follow their Blow upon
me, employ two wicked and infamous Persons Vavasor and Beaumont, to give me a
new Vexation: these Varlots bring an Indictment against me in the City of
London, charging me with the stealing of a Boy; but in this they were also
disappointed by an Ignoramus returned upon the Bill; which so enraged the
little Engines Vavasor and Beaumont, that they told me to my Face, that they
would never leave me till they had Colledg'd me.

In a few days afterward, they came upon me with a Writ de homine Replegiando,
pretending that I had kidnapp'd a Boy; and also with an Information in the
King's Bench, at the same time, and for the same Matter. To the Writ de homine
Replegiando, the Sheriffs Pilkington and Shute, by the Advice of able Counsel,
made a special Return; setting forth, that the Boy before, and in the presence
of two Justices, had bound himself Apprentice to me, and was by me sent in my
Service to Jamaica; so that they could not replevy him. But the Court of
King's Bench not liking this Return, sent an Attachment against the Sheriffs;
who appearing in Court, were threatened if they would not return Elongavit upon
the Writ, they should be committed: The Sheriffs seeing this, told me that the
Quo Warranto being brought against the City, if they should go to Prison for
standing by me, it might tend to the great Prejudice of the City, in taking
them off from attending the Desence of the Charter; and asked me what I would
have them to do? Whereupon, seeing Matters at this pass, I was content that the
Sheriffs should give me up, by returning Elongavit, as the Court required.
Which being done, a Writ called, A Capias in Withernam, is immediately issued
against me, to take me into custody, and detain me until I produced the Boy.
Upon the Writ, I was instantly and most industriously searched after, and had
fallen into their hands, but that going just before to retain Mr. Pollexfen
(lately Lord-Chief-Justice of the Common Pleas) as my Counsel; He very honestly
and worthily, like himself, said to me, I am loath to take your Money, for I can
do you no good; I see the Court is set against you, and resolved to ruin you;
therefore my Advice is, fell what you can, and put it into Money, and go your
ways.

Within a few days after, they brought on a Trial against me in the
King's Bench, by a well-prepared Kentish Jury, upon the Information for the
pretended Kidnapping. To this Trial, the villainous Prosecutors brought a pack
of suborned Witnesses, who had all imaginable Countenance and Encouragement
from the Court: when on the other side, the Lord-Chief-Justice Pemberton did
brow-beat the Witnesses brought by me, and committed one of them, who
confronted, and in a Point most undoubtedly true, falsified a Witness brought
against me; and also denied to hear many of my Witnesses. By this Management,
was a Verdict obtained against me; for which Service, the Jury were well paid,
having been allowed a great Sum of Money upon pretense of their Traveling,
besides upwards of 40 l. spent at a Dinner upon them. And thus did King Charles
the Second, carry in great measure his Point, and execute his Threat to ruin me.

Reflections on the eleventh Section.
THE Prosecution of me, upon this pretense of Kidnapping, was committed to two
vile Wretches, as all who knew them will declare. Vavasor speaking of me,
declared his Expectation of great Preferment if he could rout the Dog Wilmer,
that Ignoramus Dog, as he expressed himself: and not long after, as a very
useful Man, he was preferred, and made one of the Witnesses against the
pretended Rioters at Guildhall, in the Election of Sheriffs at Midsummer, 1682,
when Sir John Moore made a Riot there, in order to the making North and Rich
Sheriffs: And Beaumont was a Miscreant who had been guilty of razing a Record,
and of Perjury. Such Men as these were most proper Instruments for such a Work.
A certain knowledge of the Expense in this malicious Prosecution of me, which
was found in the Accounts of Graham and Burton, reported in the House of
Commons, and which Major Wildman can produce, would convince the World how far
the State was concerned in this Matter, and that it was esteemed more than a
private Quarrel.

SECT. XII.
FRom the time of this Verdict, I was advised by Counsel, and persuaded by
Friends, to keep out of the Reach of those who were bent upon my Ruin, and
thirsted after my Blood; and I secreted my self in England for about a Year's
space; in which time, Messengers with Constables would come at all Hours of the
Night to search my House for me. I then retired into Holland, whither about a
Year after my Wife and Children followed me. My implacable Enemies now finding
that they could not have their Will on my Person, cast about how to starve me
and my Family in Holland; to which End, they procure a Commission upon the
Statute of Bankrupts to be taken out against me: Which a Person related to me,
understanding, went to the Commissioners, and told them that they needed not to
take such a Course with his Cousin Wilmer, for he would pay every Man twenty
Shillings in the Pound who should make due proof of his Debt: hereupon, the
Commissioners seeing the Villainy and foul Practice in the Case, were backward
to proceed upon the Commission; and having no Proof of my being a Bankrupt,
they never declared me such, but the Commission fell. This malicious
Prosecution being thus over, I had some Rest in Holland: And meeting with very
civil Treatment from the Dutch, I continued there five or six Years, until the
Expedition of his Highness the Prince of Orange, in which I attended him,
having pawned my Plate and Wive's Jewels, to equip my self and Servant, as a
Volunteer of Horse.

Reflections on the twelfth Section.
THE Hardships in this my Case are not to be readily paralleled: I was at first
marked out for Destruction, for having (when I was called out as a Jury-Man)
given a most righteous Verdict. My Ruin was most closely pursued, by the
several Steps before recited, and I being by that transcendently malicious
Prosecution, drove into Exile, a most unreasonable and unjust Attempt was then
made to complete my Ruin, and starve me and my Family in a strange Land: but
the divine Providence did wonderfully preserve and support us there; and I
returned to my Native Country with his present Majesty, in his glorious
Expedition; which, as God be praised, has so well succeeded; but if it had
miscarryed, I should not have found Mercy, but must have died in the Field with
my Sword in my Hand; or if taken alive, may say, without pretending to the
Spirit of Prophecy, that my Head and Quarters would have been set on the Gates
of London.

To conclude; As I have given you a Jury of Sections, with Reflections on them,
let me now sum up all with brief Considerations on the whole. It could not be
possible to imagine there should have been so virulent, violent and
unprecedented Prosecutions against several Persons as there were in the late
Reigns, had the Government not had some mighty Projects in their Heads for
Antichrist: These were chiefly managed by Father Peter's, and the rest of his
accursed Order, all along within the Curtain, until the beginning of King James
the Second's Reign; then they pulled aside the Curtain, and threw off their
Vizards. In these late Reigns, there was a Wheel within a Wheel, the outward
Wheel was all for the Church of England as by Law established, but the inward
Wheel was for the Church of Rome, and was turned by the politic Strength and
Craft of the Jesuits and their Interest in this and all other Courts: And this
inward Wheel, how far and how fast did it make this outward Wheel run! what
Distractions, and what Divisions were made in this poor Nation! here was House
against House, Father against Son, and Son against Father, Husband against
Wife, and Wife against Husband, Master against Servant, and Servant against
Master; the Master become the Apprentice, and the Apprentice become the Master.
All these Artifices were used to compass their wicked Ends, to rule over us
according to their Maxim, Divide and Impera. This may therefore be a Caution to
all English Men for the future, to be jealous of any Party whatsoever, that is
Red-fire-hot against all Men that are not of the same Church with them. When
any Church or Number of Men shall confederate themselves to oppress or
tyrannize over any sort of Men that differ from them, but more especially fall
on them that differ only in Circumstance and not in Substance, I shall much
question the Truth of that Church, or of that Confederacy, whether they are of
Christ or not; especially, that tyrannize over Men that stand in the way of
their worldly Greatness and worldly Preferment. I must look on that Church, and
on that Confederacy, as a worldly Church and Consederacy, and not the Church of
Christ. All Mankind, by Nature, that have only restraining Grace, are only
chained Devils, and may live sober in Civil Societies, under the Government of
good Laws duly executed, and be neighbourly with their Neighbors; but if once
the Chains of good Laws be taken off, or the due Execution be omitted, then the
Devils let loose, will soon show themselves, and Right and Wrong will be Weak
and Strong, and the Greater preying on the Lesser: therefore the great Wisdom
and Care of all Civil Governments and Societies, are to look well to it, that
they have good Laws and impartial Execution of Justice, without Favor and
Affection; that is the only way to keep all in Peace and Quiet. For under a
Government where Partiality is used in Justice and Judgment, though it may not
come presently to Fire and Sword in the Field, yet it makes the Blood boil, and
in such Ferment, that like dried Sticks, are ready to take Fire from every
Spark; and Men will be ready to lay hold of every Opportunity of righting
themselves. I grant, in this World, we are in an imperfect Estate, and in all
Ranks and Degrees of Men there are bad as well as good; therefore the Care of
wise and honest Governors, is to see well they have wise and honest
Sub-governors, both in Church and State; Men fearing God and hating
Covetousness; Men that labor to keep Consciences void of Offense toward God
and toward Men: Some bad will creep in amongst the good, some Tares will grow
amongst the Wheat. In the late Reigns, what Tools to the Court were many of the
Church-Ministers made, to preach up strange Doctrine, such as our Savior never
taught; to make Cullies of unthinking People, and to gull the poor Citizens and
Country-Towns of their Charters, Franchizes and Liberties, not considering that
at the same time they were cutting the Bough they stood on? I have that Charity
as to believe, many of them did not see the Wheel within the Curtain; for that
the God of this World had blinded them, they being only for the Riches and
Honors of the World; for then Compliance to the Court, was the only way and
step to Preferment.

After some-time of my being in Holland, and observing all Religions amongst
them, and all these agreeing as one Man in preserving and defending their
National Rights and Privileges, I wondered at the great Wisdom of the People,
and our Folly, that it was not so with us in England: But when I saw farther
into the reason, why there was such a Union in Holland amongst that People, I
then admired the Wisdom of the States: For the Law of that Country is, that no
Minister of the Gospel shall intermeddle with State-Matters or
State-Government; if they do, the States send them a Staff and a Pair of Shoes:
the Meaning whereof is, to depart the Country in a presixed time, or suffer
Death; with this additional Message; Your Work is to preach the Gospel of
Peace, Love and Unity, and show your Flocks the way to Heaven, your selves also
being exemplary in all Morality and Godliness; and our Work is to govern the
State. And this is a convincing Argument to me, that a Nation where the
Governors thereof have ill Designs against the Constitutions of the Government
to alter and change it, and to help them herein, stand in need of some
Church-Ministers to be their Tools to forward their Designs, they cannot miss
finding some worldly unthinking-Men for their by-Ends, that shall lead their
silly Flocks to be helpful in this Work, and thereby miserably divide a Nation
to serve a Court's Design in order to set up Popery, as was lately our Case. As
in all Civil, so also in all Religious Orders of Men, there are good and bad;
they are like Isaiah's Figs, them that are good are very good, and them that
are bad are very bad; even the worst of Men, if they have not Gifts and Graces
fitted for their Function, and so called, and sent of God, they are fitted for
the Work, and sent by the Devil: if they are not Angels of Light, they are of
Darkness, the Firebands and Incendiaries of Hell; and if they do not most good,
they do most hurt, as by sad Experience has been shown. And indeed this is no
new thing; for if we do but consider and look back, that ever since the
Reformation the Order of Jesuits have, like Moulds under Ground, been
undermining us, to bring back these Nations to the Church of Rome, the
Mother Church, as they call it. Consider in Queen Elizabeth's Reign their
several Attempts, privily to assassinate her, and publicly, by the Spanish
Armada, to destroy us: and in King James the First's Reign, the Powder Plot, to
blow up King and States all at once. And in King Charles the First's Reign,
what Massacres were then in Ireland; and Wars in England, all fomented by them?
But now in King Charles the Second's Time, what Work did they make by the help
of his Hypocrisy? for he engaged to the Jesuits, when on the other side of the
Water, to set up Popery in England if ever he came to the Crown, and was
himself then reconciled to the Church of Rome, though, through Cowardice, he
durst not here show it. But yet, by debauching the Nation, and by his great
Hypocrisy in pretending to be a Protestant, what Cullies he made thereby of
Parliaments and Churchmen, to be his Tools to crush and ruin the honest and
sober English Men, that for Real Religion, Liberty and Property, stood in his
way. How many Plots were carried on in his Reign to destroy the Protestants?
And how were they wonderfully by God discovered? And the Papists having
prepared and ripened Matters for Execution, in breaking down all our Hedges and
Fences, and dismantled our Charters and Franchises, and had raised up the
French King at Sea and Land to his Greatness, now saw it high time to take off
King Charles, and set up King James. Here the Mask is thrown off, and King
James declares for Rome, and riding Post thither, and Father Peter's and his
Order publicly set up to rule the Roast: Yet all was well whilst he was
crushing the Dissenters, all was Passive-Obedience and Non-resistance, and no
fear of Popery until he came to touch the Churches Interest: then they began to
be sensible of Popery, and all the Pulpits and Presses rang out, O Popery,
Popery! Others felt it, and saw it long before: And these Men now at last, God
be thanked, came to a sellow-feeling; and now Passive-Obedience and
Non-resistance must turn out of doors: And now to your Tents, O Israel, and
pray to God to stir up the Heart of his Highness the Prince of Orange to come
and help us against the Mighty. And God be thanked, he heard us; and God by his
mighty Hand has brought about this mighty Revolution and Deliverance. Now is
all done we promised and vowed to God we would do, in the Day of our Affliction
and Trouble? No surely. Are we not still daubing with untempered Mortar? Are
there not some Wedges of Gold, some Babylonish Garments amongst us? When God,
by the Hand of his Prophet Samuel, sent a Message to Saul to destroy the
Amalekites out of the Land; Saul told him, he had performed the Commandments of
the Lord: says Samuel to him, What means then this bleeting of the Sheep and
lowing of the Oxen in mine Ears? Mauger all the Tobias's and Sanballat's of the
Age, that God that has so gloriously begun his Work, will carry it on; and he
that has so wonderfully laid the Foundation of Deliverance, will also finish
the Building, and lay the Top-stone thereof, that all Nations shall to him cry,
Grace, Grace. God will have plain Dealing in his Work, without the carved Work
of trinkling Shams and Tricks in Church or State; and let the Drunken,
Swearing, Whoring, Passive-Obedience, Non-resistance Priests, have a care of
using any more new Designs, lest they bring the Weight of the Nation to fall on
them; which if they do, they will be ground to Powder: therefore let it be the
Care and Study of all English Men to defer no longer the Use of right Ways and
Means to our honest Settlement, lest we provoke God to send a Sword in our own
Bowels: I pray God to prevent it. I desire not to see that woeful Day, O Lord,
thou know! But if our Sins should bring it upon us, it would be bloody Work;
for then will be called to remembrance old Wrongs, Injuries and Oppressions:
Therefore, as we have Work enough, and brave Work on our Hands, and our King is
hearty and courageous with us in it, to pull down that Monster of Men, and
Tyrant of the Earth, the French King; which our late Reigns, with the help of
our Passive-Obedience Priests, have set up to his Greatness: And still these
and their Party, are the great Grumblers to part with their Morey toward this
Work at this Day. But they must part with a great dea more, and thank God they
escape so too: for they set up this Jack of Lent in the last two Reigns, and now
the Bodies and Purses of the Nation must pay for knocking him down again; for
as Matters stand now, he or we must down. But some flattering Priest will say,
you deal coarsly with a crowned Head. I tell that Baal's Priest, I will not
change Estate and Condition with the French King, Lewis le Grand: and I dare be
bold to say, without Breach of Charity, that brave Stephen College will not
change Crowns nor Kingdoms with the late King Charles the Second. I will pay as
much Respect and Deserence to a good Man and a good King, as far as I am in
Duty bound, as any Man shall; but I hate all Flatterers and Flattery, which are
the Bane and Pest of Kings, and all Men: For all Men are naturally proud, and
by Flatterers too too apt to be puffed up.

Now having finished what I intended; and though the subject Matter has cost
my Purse dear, and I have run great Hazards of Life for you, yet I shall think
it the best Money I ever parted with; and all my past Hazards will no more be
thought of than the Pangs of a Woman in travail, when the Man-child is born, if
you will but make right use of them for your selves and Posterity, and will now
in a good Reign be like provident Joseph, making Provision against a bad one. I
have lived in the World near 54 Years, have experienced a great deal of it; and
see very little in it worthy the desire of living longer than only for these
two Things: The first is more affectionately and sincerely to love and serve my
God: And the second is to be doing more good, and serving of my Generation. For
14 Years past, ever since I saw plainly your Ruin was determined by Popish and
Jesuited Councils, I dedicated my Life, and all that is dear to me and my
Family, to your Service, to the Truth whereof God bears me witness herein, that
I lie not; and notwithstanding the many Hazards I have run for you, and Damages
in Estate suffered for you, and the coarse Usage I have met with since my
Return to you, yet I am no ways discouraged hereat from doing my Duty to serve
you, but am still as ready as ever to run through as many more Dissiculties for
you if Occasion be, or Necessity require, God assisting me. All Glory and
Praise be to God on High, Peace on Earth, and Good Will to Men. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

