BELPHEGOR: OR THE Marriage of the Devil A Tragi-Comedy. Lately ACTED at the
QUEEN's THEATER IN DORSET-GARDEN.

By Mr. WILSON.

-- Prodesse potest, aut delectare -- LICENSED,

October 13. 1690.


LONDON: Printed by J. L. for Luke Meredith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1691.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
MAtchiavel (whether the Original were his own, or Straporola's, for both lived
near the same time, and both played with the same Story) gave me the Argument
of the ensuing Play; the substance of which, is briefly thus.

The Argument.
IT having been observed in Hell, that the Souls of such as came thither,
generally complained, That their Wives sent them; it was at last resolved, that
some one of themselves (as by Lot it fell) should for the better discovery of
the Truth thereof, repair to the Earth, take upon him some Humane Figure, and
for his better Encouragement, carry with him a round Sum of Money in his
Pocket; subjected nevertheless to all the Conditions of Humanity, and, in the
first place, to Marry a Wife, and live with her Ten Years (if possible) and
after that, to return, and make them a true Account, upon his own Experience.

This Lot fell to Belphegor, their old General, who assuming a brisk young
Figure, settles in Florence, under the Name of Roderigo, and Quality of a
Merchant, newly come from the Indies; and Marries a Lady, of greater Blood,
than Fortune, whom he so loves in earnest, that she finds it, and seeks all
occasions of squandring his Estate; which yet, he as readily complies with,
because it pleases his Wife: However, the Trade of a Merchant goes forward, and
his Adventures at Sea, fall nothing short of her Extravagance at Home.

This, and other Accidents, make him incurr Debts; and, as other Men in like
Cases, he takes up Money to support his Credit; till at last, his Ships at Sea
being all lost, what with his Creditors pressing him on the one hand, and his
Wife's Uneasiness on the other, he fairly Breaks.

And now, being subjected to all the Conditions of Humanity, like those other
Men, he flies, and takes Sanctuary with one Matheo (a Neighboring
Vineyard-Keeper) tells him his Condition; and that if he will shelter him from
the Bailiffs, that are in close pursuit of him, he will make him a Man for ever:
In short, Matheo does it; and expecting the performance of his Promise,
Roderigo tells him, that he is not what he appears to be (a Man) but a very
Devil; and gives him some pregnant instances of it: However, to show him what a
Gentleman of a Devil he had met in him, further tells him, that as soon as he
parted from him, he would instantly possess such a Great Lady, and that nothing
should remove him; till he came, and therefore bad him be assured, and make his
terms; and so, leaves him.

Nor was he worse than his Word; but immediately possessed the said Lady, and
suffered himself to be dislodged from her by Matheo; as also of a second; with
this Caution nevertheless, that if he put him to it a third time, he should find
him his mortal Enemy.

On this Belphegor makes a trip into France, and possesses that King's
Daughter, but not sooner than the Report of the Two former Ladies had reached
that Court. Whereupon, the King sends several Messages, with large Promises of
Reward to Matheo, to come and dispossess his Daughter, which he as often
shifts; till at last, the King having gotten him into his Hands, tells him,
that unless he dispossess her, he will certainly hang him. To be short, Matheo
puts on a bold Face, and accosts Belphegor; but, finding all to no purpose,
throws himself upon the King's Mercy, in favorably accepting his Endeavors;
and demands a large Stage, with all sorts of Music, and Pomp imaginable; and
that the Lady be brought upon it: to be sure withal, that when he threw up his
Cap, that they all strike up together, with a general Shout: And this (said he)
with some other Ingredients he had, would, he doubted not, but deliver the Lady.

In fine, all things being accordingly prepared, and ready, the Lady is brought
upon the Stage, and from one thing to another, they at last, quarrel, and
Matheo throws up his Cap; which is seconded with a full shout; at which the
possessed Lady starting, and demanding the meaning of all that noise; Matheo
tells the Devil in her, his Wife had found him out, and was just coming up
Stairs; on which the Lady gives a Spring at him, and drops; and Belphegor
leaves her.

Thus far Matchiavel, whom I have chiefly followed; saving, that where he runs
his Fable from one Country, to another, I found my self necessitated (for
preserving the unity of Time, and Place, as much as it would bear) to fix the
Scene, in some one place; and accordingly, changed it from his Florence, etc.
to Genoa; and this, the rather; partly, in that the Women of Genoa, have a
greater liberty, than in other parts of Italy; and partly, that the Dukedom of
Genoa being elective, from two Years, to two Years, I might make way for a
cross Walk of Virtue, and thereby divert the tediousness of a single Walk. A
Path (I must confess) not so generally trodden, yet even in that, the less
subject to Sloughs, or Dust.

To this purpose, I fancy, Imperia the Wife of Belphegor had a Sister Portia
(of as high Virtue, as herself was void of it) married to Montalto, a noble
Genoese, who had sunk his Fortune, in serving the Republic; which yet (unknown
to him) had been generously restored, by another Nobleman his Friend; and
thence, endeavor some short Characters of Friendship, and Gratitude -- Of a
Woman, that sweetens her Husband, on all occasions of discontent; One, whom no
accident of Fortune can move, nor Injury how designed soever, provoke to an
Indecency: And of a Man in him, that weathers his Troubles with an evenness of
Mind; One, whom his Country's Ingratitude cannot tempt to a Revenge, and so
little affecting his own Grandeur, that when the Senate had at last elected him
Duke, he modestly refused it.

And having wrought altogether the best I could, I absolve the whole: Of which
yet, because I may not be so competent a Judge my self, I here give it, as I
wrote it, and leave it to my unbiased Reader to determine, whether it might
not have expected as much Justice from the House, as it found from the Actors.

PROLOGUE
On the occasion that the Play fell to be acted next after the Prophetess.
BOld was the Man that first put out to Sea;
Nor less adventrous, he that writes a Play:
Both have their hits; some scudd before the Wind,
Others lie by, and others, lagg behind;
And what is the Fate of Plays, the bare Success
Of any one, makes the next Comer less;
The Market's cloyed; some like not this, some that,
And (as in Surfeits) would, they know not what:
So when the Prophetess has fed your Eye,
From Pit, and Box, to Upper Gallery,
What may our Devil of this Night expect?
Our Auther once, was half afraid, neglect;
'Till he bethought him, the best remedy,
For a palled Stomach, was Variety:
What made the Poets Gods so often below?
Or what Apollo, so unbend his Bow?
Or what makes you, leave a fair Wife at home,
For a Grass-Girl, or some odd homely Joan?
What, but diversion? And so, I Am bid say,
He Is in good hopes you will not forejudge his Play.
But stay -- Let Us see whom it is he must accost?
It Is not the Wits he fears, they are ever just:
And for those, that can only carp, nor care
While they keep pushing, how themselves lie bare:
Those, that speak well of nothing, but their own,
And damn, or save, merely for Faction:
Those, that bolt what they please, no matter how,
And carry't off not by their Brains, but Brow:
If any such are hene, 'twere well they knew,
Rome's greatest Wits, were the best natured too:
But, if this will not do, he justly, thence
Brings his Appeal to you, the Men of Sense;
And if he must be pelted, beggs this Boon;
Let him that has least Wit, throw the first Stone.
The Persons.
Montalto. A Noble Genoese, who had impaired his Fortune in serving the
Republic. Grimaldi. One other Nobleman, his Friend, who (unknown to him)
relieves his Estate. Roderigo. A Devil disguised under that Name, and Person:
His proper Name Belphegor: Given out for a Spanish Merchant, come from the
Indies. Fieschi. Nephew to Grimaldi; Gallant to Imperia. Marone. And upstart
Officer of St. George's Bank: Speaks evil, of Mankind; admires Roderigo for his
Wealth, and vilifies Montalto. Matheo. A Vineyard-Keeper. Pansa. Servant to
Fieschi. Don Hercio. A Bravoe. Crispo. Mingo. Two Puggs, Servants to Roderigo.
Crispo, his Vallet: Mingo, his Page. Picaro. The common Executioner. Portia.
Wife to Montalto. Imperia. Her Sister, Wife to Roderigo. Julia. Niece to the
Duke of Genoa: A Damonaic^ possessed by Belphegor. Bianea. Woman to Portia.
Quartilla. Matrona, to Imperia. Scintilla. Woman, to Imperia. Servants.
Officers. Watchmen. Jews. Women. Beelzebub, and Puggs. Boys. Rabble.
SCENE, Genoa.

BELPHEGOR: OR, THE Marriage of the Devil,
ACT I. SCENE I.
A stately Room in Roderigo's House.
Enter Roderigo, followed by Crispo and Mingo. Rod. WE Spirits, uncompounded
Essences,
Not manacled, or immured with Walls of Flesh;
We can dilate, condense, or limb our selves,
As like us best; assume what Color, Shape
Or Size we please. And I have taken this;
My Servants, that -- my Name below, Belphegor;
Here, Roderigo. -- My Quality, a Merchant
Come from the Indies. -- O most happy Lot!
Who would believe, that void and formless Mass,
That fluid infinite, had ever produced
Such an harmonious Order? -- It strikes Wonder
And Ecstacy. --.
[He turns to his Servants. And what think ye of this World? Is not this better
than toasting the Soals of our Feet?


Cris. The Air, I must confess, is somewhat better -- but for the People -- not
a doit to choose.


Min. I fancy 'em the worst of the two; and more fond of the Place, than our
selves.


Rod. Can ye blame 'em? -- They know what they are in this World, they know not
what they may be in the next.


Cris. Yet live here, as if they expected no other -- And so exquisitely
practiced in Cheating one another, that the best of us is a mere Novice to 'em.


Min. Not a Skip-kennel, but gives you three Tricks for one.


Cris. And for their Masters -- could you believe it, Sir, I met with a Signior
the other Night, most devoutly, with his Beads in one Hand; and the other in my
Pocket.


Rod. Why did not beat him?


Cris. I did but challenge him for it, and the Rogue had the Impudence to kick
me, for taxing a Person of his Honor.


Min. I believe both our assumed Bodies were damned Cowards, while they lived
here; -- for my part, I had rather take ten kicks, than so much as look back to
see who gave me one of 'em.


Rod. But sure, the Women treat ye better?


Cris. As judge your self -- it is not long since I had a concern with a
Signiora; and just as I had stripped, and was going to Bed to her, slip, went the
Trap-door, and down dropped Crispo into the Common-shore.


Min. And mine has given me such a Remembrance of her Love, that, as Young
soever as my Figure speaks me, I can hardly speak Knitting-needles, without
endangering the Bridge of my Nose -- And when I taxed her for it, had the
Impudence to ask me, how she could give it, when she still kept it her self?


[Rod. smiles. Rod. But how do you find Mankind in general?


Cris. Still slandering us -- As drunk as a Devil -- As mad as a Devil -- As
poor as a Devil -- As dull as a Devil -- And what not! -- when yet, there is not
so much difference between us, as would turn a pair of Scales.


Min. And then perpetually playing Fast and Loose with us -- Ever and anon
giving their Souls to the Devil; yet, at last, bequeathing them another Way,
without the least thought of the pre-conveyance to us. -- And therefore, I
beseech ye, give me leave to return to my old Quarters.


Cris. Not forgetting thy Excellencies, poor Crispo.


Rod. Villiachoes! -- And must ye throw up your Cards, when they play into your
Hand? Peace -- and be thankful -- All this but makes our Game -- Go -- humor
them -- for we are restrained, and can do nothing without themselves -- They
hold the Candle to us -- The Mud's their own; We only shake the Viol, and stir
it up -- and so -- look out -- and sharp. -- [Exeunt Crispo and Mingo. Now to
my own Affair -- [Rod. takes out a Paper and reads. At the Pandaemonium, or
Common Council of the Infernal Lake -- Present -- Lucifer, Abaddon, Beelzebub,
and others, the High and Mighty Lords, Potentates, and Princes of the Grand
Abyss -- Whereas, upon taking our Yearly Audits, it has been observed, that the
Souls of such as arrive, generally agree, that their Wives sent them -- And
whereas, the said Board had formerly Ordered, That for the better discovery of
the Truth thereof, some one of their Body (as by Lot it should fall) repair to
Earth -- And whereas the said Lot fell to Belphegor, Generalissimo of the
Aspaltick Lake -- Resolved, as follows.

1. That the said Belphegor forthwith take upon him that Province, and that a
Million of Duccats be assigned him; not as Advance, but his full Complement. --
And well enough -- no ill Encouragement.

2. That for the better carrying on of the said Service, Himself (and Two other
Spirits assigned him as Servants) be at Liberty to assume, and actuate what
Bodies, and settle in what Part of the World, shall like him best. -- And I
have don't.

3. That upon his first Choice, of his Place of Residence, he immediately Marry
a Wife, and live with her Ten Years (if possible) after which (pretending to
die) that he return, and, upon his own Experience, make Affidavit, of the
Pleasures and Calamities of Marriage. -- And I have done that first. -- A
desperate Service, no doubt! --

[He Smiles. 4. That he lose all Qualities of a Spirit (unless, perhaps, upon
some last Exigence) and become in all things as a Man; subject to all the
Conditions of Humanity, -- Poverty, Imprisonment, Passions, Fear, Hate, Love.
--

Where there Ten Thousand more, that sweetened all.
Love! -- There Is no Passion, but what is founded on it:
Men Fear, for what they Love -- Desire, Hate, Envy,
And all, because they Love themselves. -- But mine
Carries a nobler Tincture; and I Love
To that Degree, I Have half forgot the Sex.
[He changes his Voice. And, but that she has little odd Humors, and perhaps
too, some Fits of her Mother; O Origin! I Would release thy Kindness, and never
accept other Heaven, than here.

But see! -- She comes!
[ Imperia and Attendants cross the Stage, as conducting her Sister Portia to
her Coach -- They bow at distance -- He points after her. Such was the
Infant-Morn, when it first brake
And blushed, to see the Chaos left behind her.
Thence I felt Passion first -- What else I viewed
Wrought in my Mind no Change, no fond Desire:
But there, I am transported. -- I, that was
High Proof against all things else, There, there alone,
Weak, for to me, whatever she Wills is Fate.
[ Imp. returns, sola. He runs to her. Sure Nature was asleep when thou stol'st
forth,
And all the Graces she designed an Age,
Crowded themselves together, and made thee.

Imp. And are not you a fine Gentleman, to coax your poor Wife? --
Alas, poor Fool! she cannot choose but believe ye.

Rod. Could thou but see my Heart, thou would.


Imp. You cannot Dissemble -- not you -- you are -- Mary, that you are --


[She strokes him. Rod. At least would be, whatever I thought might please thee:
And were the World at my dispose, 'twere thine.

Imp. No doubt of it -- Witness the Necklace.


Rod. I had forgot --


Imp. And so you do every thing that concerns me.


Rod. See -- I have brought thee a better.


[He gives her a Necklace. Imp. But I longed for the other -- The Set of
Neapolitan Horses too -- But I Am your Wife -- There -- [She throws it away]
'Pray' bestow it where you intended it -- I could observe that Eye of yours, as
my Sister past you.


[He offers to Embrace her -- She turns him off. Rod. Fie, my Imperia, fie --
Will thou be always thus?


Imp. And much you care, whether I am or not -- One would think a Woman of my
Quality -- [She puts Finger in Eye.] I know not why so many good Women die; --
but wish I were dead too, that I might trouble you no longer.


Rod. No -- I Will die first, that thou may have another.


Imp. No marvel, truly -- I live so well with you.


Rod. She cries! -- By Heaven, she cries! -- Poor Innocence! -- My
Life! -- My Soul! -- My Imperia! -- Thou shall have any thing; --
We'll come to Articles.

Imp. And long you will keep 'em.


Rod. By this Kiss -- for ever.


[She receives it, still sobbing. Imp. And shall I have the Necklace I longed
for?


[Sobs. Rod. Thou shall, my Dear.


Imp. The Set of Horses too?


[Sobs. Rod. I would they were better for thy Sake. -- Thou shall.


Imp. The broach of Diamonds would be very becoming, -- and the Locket, -- [a
half sob] now 'twas so pretty.


Rod. That, and whatever else thou will.


Imp. The Pearl too -- Were large, round, Oriental -- and the
Pendants -- so delicate -- I fancy how I should appear in them.

[She comes into a pleasant Humor. Rod. Less than thou truly art: -- But thou
shall have 'em.


Imp. And -- [She strokes him] do what I will?


Rod. What pleases thee, sha'n't be amiss to me -- only be kind, -- and love
thy Roderigo.


[They strike hands upon it. Imp. A match, a match, -- I will.


[Makes a low Reverence. Exit. Rod. Some techy Mortal now would have
quarreled; but we, old
Experienced Devils, know better things, --
[He walks. And live with her Ten Years (if possible.) -- Mistaken Fools --
it is possible. -- I will live with her, -- and that, for ever.

[It Thunders. A Head rises. Head. Thy Articles, Belphegor; thy Articles.


Rod. And what of them? -- The Casuists are clear in the point; --
They may be shifted for Advantage. -- Sue 'em.

Head. But is there not a Public Faith, even among Devils?


Rod. It may be broke for Empire, why not for Love then, that commands
Empire? It may, and shall -- Be gone.

Head. Be Witness, thou inviolable Styx! Thou 'ast broken thine; and I
pronounce thee Mutinous.


[Sinks. Rod. That I could reach the Slave, -- I Would make him know,
I fill my Orb my self, and make my Circle
Without a barrowed Light --
[Another Thunder. Squib on -- and say,
I am more proud in my Imperia's Love,
Than when (as Thunder-proof) I once bestrid
That vast Unequal of Fire; and leading up
The embattled Legions of Apostate Cherubs,
Plowed the Parched Earth, and make the affrighted Deep
Shrink to its last Recess.

Enter Imperia running. Imp. O my Dear, heard you not the Thunder? I Am so
afraid. --


Rod. Of what? of thy own Shadow?


Imp. How can you be alone?


Rod. Yet, meditating on thee -- That very Thought were Company enough.


Imp. O, but confess; you look as you were disturbed.


Rod. And thou so near? Impossible. -- Or were it so,
The Sight of thee would reconcile my Passions,
And give me to my self.

[She strokes him. Imp. But will not you tell me true? Are you not well?


Rod. How can that Man be Ill, that is Happy enough
To pity Caesar? And such am I in thee.
[He Embraces her. Here will I fix my Empire -- Here I Will Reign,
And Reign alone.

[He leads her off. Exeunt. SCENE II. A stately Room in Grimaldi's House.
Enter Grimaldi, Marone, Fieschi, Pansa. Gri. YOU cannot say, but that he paid
you honestly.


Mar. I wish I could say, I were as well satisfied. -- I never found such
honest Payments raised an Estate; -- if ever I deal more on single Interest,
may I lose my Principal.


Gri. Who'd have expected even that, at least, taken it from one so honorable,
that has perished his own Fortune, to save the Public.


Mar. These honorable Rags are such fine Things! -- how, I pray', do you find
the price current? Does the Frippery deal in such Lumber? -- I think not. --
Good Sir, keep your whipt-posset for your better Friends, and give me, more
substantial Fare.


Fies. His Virtue, might deserve better Language; and it may be a Question, if
it had not been for him, Whether the State had been -- at least, what it now is.


Gri. And true. -- When the Sun could hold no longer, and the Moon slept, his
Eyes have been our Sentinels.


Mar. But what Money has he got with all this? Or what Share in the Government?
-- Simple Merit Lords few Men's Horoscope.


Gri. Greater than both, -- the Conscience of Worthy Actions.


Mar. What Credit has it in the Bank? -- for my part, I can boast I have killed
mine. -- And, if you would here me, could show you a Man has done nothing of all
this, and yet, even the Senate will confess him Wise, Prudent, Virtuous, --
every thing. -- And, that he is not one of themselves, I believe it more his
own Fault, than theirs.


Gri. Who should this be?


Mar. What think ye of his Brother-in-Law? -- Roderigo. --
There Is a Man for ye! and, to my Glory, he calls me Friend.

Gri. But whence this Meteor?


Mar. Whence ever he came, he darkens all our Stars:
You Would swear he were descended of the Goths,
Or had been at the Siege of Constantinople.

Gri. Some Moor, or Baptized Jew?


Mar. Be what he will,
Turk, Pagan, or Infidel, would I Would his Wealth
With his Religion. -- He Is a Castilian.
Were I that Man!

Fies. You Would take it for an Affront
His Catholic Majesty should call you Cousin.

Mar. And yet you hear me not complain. -- I Have that
Which finds me Friends, or makes 'em. -- That one Thing
That can do all Things. -- How it makes a Door --
Or shut, or open.

Fies. Or your self (perhaps)
Snore over your Cup, or find a Fly in the Ceiling.

Mar. That matters not; -- I Am sure it breeds Compunction,
And Fellow-feeling in a Man of Office;
Makes, and remits Offenses; -- even Justice,
More Deaf than she is Blind. -- And who would want it?

Gri. That would Grimaldi, and every Man, whose Soul
Is not composed of the same Dirt he treads.
Want it, (I mean) rather than have't, on terms
Dishonorable, or Sordid.

Mar. But do you think
Any ones Morals can reform the World?
Don't they all thus? And, which is more, Court, Follow,
Adore the Rich, and spurn the Unfortunate.

Gri. And I as much the World.


Mar. But say, that World
Spurn you again. -- Did ever wise Man choose
Him for a Friend, that was deprest by Fortune?
Rats quit a falling House -- and Men, a Party,
When they perceive it going.

Gri. Where Is Honesty and Honor, all this while?


Mar. Nay, if you come to that, farewell Kingdoms.
Nor is it mine to Question 'em. -- Your Servant.

[Exit Mar. Gri. Well, Fieschi, -- and what think thou?


Fies. As is his Name, such is the Slave himself:
Who'd expect other from a Dog, but Snarling?

Gri. His Soul is Sense; and as he has no Knowledge of Virtue, he has no use of
it. -- But how have you disposed Montalto's Matter? Is it so ordered, that it
be not known from what Hand it came?


Fies. 'Twas the last thing I did. -- I left the Writings in a sealed Box, with
Bianca, who has assured me, she will watch an opportunity, and convey it into her
Ladies Closet.


Gri. As well as I could wish. -- Good Man!
He could have sooner Perished, than told me,
Told me, his Friend, he wanted me. -- Who sees
His Friend's Distress, and stays till he is entreated,
He comes too late. -- It Is an Extorted Kindness;
Lost ere it comes, and shows he wanted Will
T'ave done't at all. -- But, this Marone sticks in my Stomach. --
Whence truly is he?

Fies. Pansa (I think) remembers the first Plantation.


Pan. That do I, Sir, from the time he first came to Town in Second-Mourning;
-- that is, in a Livery as ragged and tattered as an He-Goat; -- his Hat, right
Beggars-block, no Crown to it; -- his Doublet and Breeches so suitable, that in
a dark Morning, he would have mistaken one for the other; -- his Stockings, without
Feet or Anckles, like a Chandler's drawing-sleeves; and those too he durst not
trust off his Legs, for fear of crawling away. -- In a word, a Thing made up of
so many several Parishes, that you would have taken him, at first sight, for a
Frontispiece of the Resurrection.


Fies. Thence, he came in as a Sub-subcollector; and thence, into St George's
Bank; and now, being in his Nature insolent, this imaginary Reputation has made
him intolerable.


Gri. And for his other Qualities, I know somewhat my self: -- He never forgave
beyond the Opportunity of a Revenge; or spoke well of any Man, but to his
greater Disadvantage. -- A pretty Gentleman. -- But -- it is pity. --


Fies. Nay worse, shall play both the Devil's Parts, of Tempter and Accuser:
Provoke his Friend into a freedom of Talk, and then inform it.


Gri. Enough -- And for fear of any mistake, make another step to
Bincaa.
[Exeunt Fies. and Pan. Manet Gri. And this Man thrive! -- O Lucian thy Gods!
-- The Groans of deprest
Virtue, and loud Laughters of exalted Folly, gave first name to the
Fortunate Islands, where Men slept themselves away in the melancholy
Contemplations, between Virtue and Success.
[To him enter Montalto and Portia. You have prevented me -- I was just coming
To give you joy. -- The Senate have, at last,
Considered your Services.

Mon. And sent me a Gugaw,
[ Mon. takes out a Chain and Medal, and shows it. An empty Nothing -- Pth --

Gri. 'Twas never intended
Beyond a Mark of Honor, and a Pledge
Of future Kindness.

Mon. He Is a Beast that serves
A Commonwealth; for when he has spent his Blood,
And sunk his Fortune, to support the Pride
And Luxury of those few that Cheat the rest,
He straight becomes the Object of their Scorn
Or Jealousy.

Gri. How odly my Friend argues
Against himself. -- Have you not served the State
These Twenty Years? And can you think it Wisdom
To quarrel now? Or now, when reasonably
You might expect the Fruit of all your Hazards,
Arm them against you? -- Virtue, Merit, Worth,
Never wanted Enemies; make not you more.

Mon. When they behold themselves through their false Optics,
They swell a Gnat into an Elephant;
When others, -- how they turn the Glass, and lessen
A Mountain to a Molehill.

Gri. Are you the only Man has been so served?
Who deserved better for a Lawgiver,
Than Solon? Or Captain, than Thrasibulus?
Or Orator, than Demosthenes? Yet Athens,
Ungrateful Athens, banished the two first,
And slew the latter. -- Unto whom owed Rome
More, than to Manlius; who, when her Capitol
Was grown too hot for Jupiter, preserved it?
Or what might not Camillus have pretense to,
Who, when she was reduced to her last Stake,
Pushed it, and won it? -- What should I mention
Rutilius, Scipio, Hannibal, Themistocles,
Men, famous in their Ages? Yet they fell:
Fell, where they most deserved.

Mon. How my Blood curdles at it! And methinks,
I feel a kind of Currishness, shot through me;
And want no property of a Dog, but fawning,
Though necessary to a rising Man.

Por. Is this that Fortitude, my Montalto?
This, that heroic Virtue you taught me?
Sure, it is not the Montalto I have seen,
When Victory sat perching on his Helm;
Or that Montalto, when Oppressed by Numbers
He lost the Day, and yet brought Home more Glory,
Than if he had been Conqueror: Yet still,
Still the same even Temper; Unconcerned
At Loss, or Victory.

Mon. Would it not heat a Man,
To view his Wounds, which, like so many Mouths,
Speak out his Wrongs the louder? t'ave consumed
Himself, to warm Ingratitude?

Por. The Fruit
Of worthy Actions, is, to have done 'em;
And every Man, that will, may give't himself.

Mon. How can I stand my Breast, against a Torrent
Of adverse Fortune?

Por. It Is your greater Glory,
To stem that Flood. -- How 're you beholding to her,
That she could pass the Heard, and single you,
To Combat her?

Mon. But she has cut my Sinews.


Por. The more your Honor: -- I have heard you say,
That a Roman, was more Glorious in his scorched,
Than armed Hand. -- Do not distrust your self,
And you must Conquer her. -- The Constant Man
Is Master of himself and Fortune too.

Mon. Bless me! -- Thou glorious Woman, never made
Of common Earth! -- I am concerned for thee.

Por. To the World's Fondlings, be their World, -- with me,
My own Montalt' out-weighs the Apparition,
The Airy Dream, which, when they think a Substance,
Grasp at it, they awake, and find it nothing:
Sure, had it any thing worthy our Love,
It were a mind that can contemn it.

Gri. Brave Woman!
And who might bring Philosophy to manners.

Por. If you call this Philosophy, it is what
Its first Inventers meant it, ere our Pedants
Had made it, rather difficult, than great.
Come, my Montalto, come; and let the Example
Of others Virtue, now, engage your own;
Their Glory, your imitation.

Mon. Thou have overcome my, Portia -- and I Will try
If that Content, the larger World denies,
May be found in our selves. -- Even Poverty,
If it can be content, has lost its Name.
He never has enough that gapes for more;
Opinion was never Rich, nor Content Poor.

Gri. Now how I love this rugged Honesty!
Like the first Matter, 't'as all the Seeds of Good,
Only wants Form and Order.

[Exeunt. SCENE III. The first Scene again.
Enter Quartilla, Scintilla. Qua. BElieve me, our Signiora has managed her
Affair; and (if I understand any thing of the World) well.


Scin. As how? 'Pray' instruct me against the good Time.


Qua. She Has brought my Don on's Knees; -- it is all now, as she will have it.


Scin. That all! -- a mighty Business! -- Have Not they been married two Years?
-- And does not he Love her? -- And she know it? -- Few Women but would have
done as much. -- Besides, (and it is every days Experience) even the wisest Men,
when they once come to Love in earnest, turn generally half-witted.


Qua. You are to be instructed indeed, Scintilla. -- He is good natured, and
does Love her. -- But there are a many stubborn Fools in the World; and a Woman
need have all her Wits about her, to keep her own. -- But to get ground! -- I
know it may be done, but not so easy.


Scin. I warrant ye -- do but bring him to the right manage at first; humor
him in every thing, you cannot hinder, and the rest follows; -- it is not the
point whether she Loves, but whether he believes so. -- There Is your Art, to
get him play himself into the Nooze, and be proud often too.


Qua. Well, well the World is strangely altered since my time; -- Young Girls
then were not wont to be so knowing, -- but now, they are even able to teach us.


Enter Pansa. Pan. Now Grannum, -- and my pretty Convenience.


Qua. Grannum, with a Murrain to ye! [Pansa colls Scintilla. Nothing down with
you, but Squab-Pigeons; -- a likely Fellow, if a Woman durst him -- But Men now
adays are so deceitful --


[Aside. Scin. Get ye to Bianca -- I Will tell her -- you do so mousle one.


Qua. Fie, Signior Pansa, fie; -- is there no more, but fall on, without so
much as a short Grace: I Am sure it was not so --


Pan. The Year you lost your Maidenhead; -- and that was so long since, you
have by this time forgotten you ever had one.


Qua. Away, Knave, -- away.


Scin. Yet she will not turn her Back to you now.


Qua. Nor a better than himself.


Pan. No anger, I beseech ye -- After the dull rate Men made Love formerly, I
should look upon a Petticoat, as one of the most defensible Spots in
Christendom -- So many Scarfes, Curtains, Portcullises, Counterworks, and what
not; but now, that we'ave a shorter cut, of Surprise, Sapping, downright
Storm, or Springing a Mine; up goes Scarf, Curtain, Portcullis -- And hey da.


Scin. Well, Pansa, thou wilt never break thy Heart for Love.


Pan. Love! -- it is a kind of Cholick; -- as long as ye keep it under Girdle,
ye may linger on with it, and well enough; but if it once get Breast-high, the
whole Mass is infected, and I can only say (as Physicians of their dying
Patients) his Time is come; cover him up, and send for a Parson.


Enter Bianca. Qua. Come, Scintilla, -- it is as thou said, -- here she comes,
-- he is a filthy Man, -- even leave 'em together.


[ Exeunt Qua. Scin. Pan. B'w'ye Grannum -- And now, my best Girl -- Thou have
not forgot, I hope.


Bian. I wish I had. -- My Lady was Abroad this Afternoon, and I laid the Box
as you directed; -- but when she came forth, she gave me such a Look, -- asked
me, who had been there, -- and particularly named your Master.


Pan. Never the worse, -- she could not have done less. -- But thou had the
Grace to deny all?


Bian. Do You take me for a Fool? -- But this I told her, -- A Gentleman, I never
saw before, brought it, and prayed me to lay it in her Closet, as I had done;
and I hoped, without Offense; -- if otherwise, -- I was sorry.


Pan. And that cleared all again?


Bian. Quite contrary, -- I saw Fire in her Eyes, -- yet trembled, and could
hardly speak; -- at last, she commanded me to find you out, -- and that you let
your Master know, she must speak with him.


Pan. Must? -- my She Secretary.


Bian. Yes, must -- and out of hand. -- And if I lose my Place by the Bargain,
I have spun a fine Thread.


Pan. Fear nothing: -- Or if thou should, my Master's a Gentleman, and my Bed
will hold two.


Bian. You Men consider nothing.


Pan. And you Women too much. -- I tell thee, my Master, the Knight, shall make
his Amor to thy Lady the Princess, while I Pansa the Squire, put it in
Practice with thee, Bianca, the Dam'sel.


Bian. Well now, and that is so fine -- But when will ye bring me some of those
Books. -- Beshrew me, but I should have broke my Heart long ere this, if 'twere
not for 'em.


Pan. Thou shall have any thing; my Heart, my all.


Bian. It Is not the first time you told me so. -- I -- But --


Pan. Do You think I am bound to find ye fresh Oaths every time?


Bian. When shall I see ye at our House?


Pan. To morrow, without fail. -- And is not this better than putting all to
the last? -- And what is that, but singing a Psalm under the Gallows?


Bian. But be sure now; -- and, find out your Master presently, and send him to
my Lady.


Pan. Doubt not of either -- [ Exit Bianca.] it is the best humored thing; -- a
jolly Pug, and well-mouth'd, -- none of the first or second Rate, I must
confess. -- He that sees her by Day, would hardly break his Neck to come at her
by Night. -- However she is good Merchantable Ware, and well Conditioned; and
(how shy soever she now and then makes it) serves my turn, when a better's out
of the way.


[ Exit. Pansa. ACT II. SCENE I.
The first Scene again.
Enter Roderigo, solus. Rod. MY private Instructions were to pervert, and
enlarge the Kingdom of Darkness: Nor have I been Idle. -- I thought Marone
might have given me some pains; but he was mine at first, and has engaged to
me, for his Brothers of the Bank. -- But this Montalto, -- I much doubt, or
rather fear him.

Enter Marone. My Friend! -- welcome my better half, -- we are now concerned,
Body, Soul, Interest.


Mar. And when I fail ye, I Will turn a new Leaf, and build Hospitals. -- But,
what progress have ye made with Montalto?


Rod. He Is rugged, and will neither lead nor drive, but his own way; and
therefore I question, whether we had not better let him alone.


Mar. But he is poor and lofty, -- despair him not. -- This Gold! -- 'twill
make a Man do any thing. -- I never yet found Man or Woman that withstood it
long.


Rod. I would you would feel his pulse, and I Will advance the money.


Mar. That shall be least in the Case. -- And I Would willingly undertake it, but
that (as you know) there is no kindness between us: And for me (but so much as
to appear in it) may render it suspected; -- whereas from you, -- his
Brother-in-Law, -- his Friend, -- it cannot but pass.


Rod. I yield. -- It shall be so.


Mar. Then, if you find him cold, I Will discover it my self. -- Tell me of's
Virtue! -- A Rattle for Children; -- I hate it perfectly, -- and him for it. --
Why should any man pretend to more than comes to his share?


Rod. Now let me hug my Genius! -- and whom I love so well, that were I not
sped already, I Would go no farther than your Family.


Mar. Between our selves, -- give her a Fig, -- and see if I don't fit ye, to
your Wish.


Rod. O by no means, -- you run too fast.


Mar. You need not be ashamed of her, -- we are descended from Marius, and have
had some Crowned Heads of the House; though, I confess it, somewhat long since
they have had any Scepter in their Hands.


Rod. I judge it by your self.


Mar. Nor, to tell ye Truth, can every Man say so much; or would perhaps, be
willing to hear all that may be said of his; and that is the Reason, why so many
of the Ancients were descended from the Gods: For, when their Birth was so
obscure, that they were ashamed to own it, the Jade the Mother, or some blind
Poet, found out a God, to Father the Bastard. -- What, I pray', were Bacchus,
Hercules, Romalus and several others? -- Story Lies, or their Fathers were of
the doubtful Gender, and their Mothers of the Common. -- But this, by the by.
-- And, because I hear some Body coming, I Will withdraw, for fear it happen to
be Montalto. [ Exit Marone.


Rod. Devils, do they call us! -- Poor Devils, where have we been bred! -- This
one Marone may shame us all; and had I done no more, is worth my Journey.


Enter Montalto. Health, and his own Wishes, to my Brother.

Mon. The same, and more, (were it possible) to you.

Rod. But I Am half angry, -- angry with my self,
That this Alliance, is not yet made Friendship.

Mon. No Man shall court it more. -- And such a one,
As loves the Man, and not his Fortune -- Such,
As can hide any thing, but his Love -- And whose
Mistakes, shall be of weakness, not design.

Rod. Now how you speak, my Soul! -- This empty World,
Is hollow, -- false, -- ungrateful, -- And Men live
As if 'twere made for them, they, for themselves.

Mon. 'Twas ever so.

Rod. Witness, those mangled Officers,
Maimed Soldiers, wooden-legg'd Artillery-men,
Spies, and Intelligencers out at Heels.
Some, showing their Wounds; -- others, numbering the Battles they have been in,
and the Estates they have lost. -- Some, muttering Libels; -- others, modelling
a Reformation; -- and not the least part of them, studying where to get a meal
upon Reputation.


Mon. And yet, there is not a private Soldier, but glories in his Wounds, as
having received them in Defense of his Country.


Rod. And no doubt but they call 'em, Worthy Deeds. -- But I say, they are
Deeds worthy of Repentance; and such are all Services paid to the Ungrateful.
-- To go no further than you self, -- What have you got by all yours?


Mon. The satisfaction, of having done what I ought. -- Virtue, is Theater
enough unto her self.


Rod. You have said well, and worthily. -- And because, he that is pleased with
another good, increases his own. -- Give me leave, Brother, and now Friend, to
propose to you, an honorable Advantage -- [ Montalto bows to him. But it
requires secrecy, -- and I must have your word for it.


Mon. I know not what it may be.


Rod. You're at your Liberty, if you don't like it.


Mon. You have my word.


[ Imperia is seen peeping in. Rod. Then thus, -- There is a Prince, whose Name
must be as yet concealed, is so sensible of your Merit, and this Republick's
Ingratitude, that he has ordered ye Ten thousand Pistoles, as a small Pledge of
his future Favor; -- and I Will advance the Money.


[Mont. starts. Mon. Ten Thousand Pistols! -- and from a Prince unknown! -- and
what must I do for all this?


Rod. Kings have their Reasons to themselves, too deep for private Men to
fathom. -- Who knows, but he may have a design upon Italy. -- This -- or some
other place; -- and, which is further in my Instructions, -- has pitched on you,
as General for the Expedition.


Mon. How are you sure it has not taken wind?


Rod. Not a Man on this side the Alps, knows it besides our selves.


Mon. Or that your King will keep his Word, more than Genoa has hers?


Rod. I have the money in the House. -- He Is coming.


[Aside. Mon. But is not this to betray my Country?


Rod. Give it another Name, and do it -- Who ever scrupled a safe Revenge? --
Success, will call it Justice.


Mon. Upon my Country?


Rod. But, Ungrateful Country. -- That only is my Country, where I am well. --
And, what think you?


Mon. That you have said too much for me to hear.
I lend a Hand to Slave my Country! -- No;
That will not Montalt', the disobliged Montalt';
Virtue forbid the Thought. -- Though she may 've lost
The affection of a Mother, she is my Mother:
And as she bears that Name, I must, and will
Support her, or lie buried in her Ruins.

Rod. However, I doubt not but I Am safe; -- your Word,
(The great Credential of Mankind) secures me.

Mon. Unlawful Promises oblige to nothing,
But a Repentance. -- And to keep mine, here,
Would be a double Crime; and break those Laws
Of Piety, and Faith, my Country claims.

Rod. Country! -- A Thing of Chance, no Choice of yours:
Your Mother might have dropped ye any where: -- But if
You break your Word, you violate your Honor;
And that is your own.

Mon. Perish for me, that Honor;
Life, Estate, every thing, so she be safe:
And so -- my Sister-in-Law's Husband, no more Friend,
I Will not resolve ye what I Will do. -- But know,
'Twas not within my Word, not to prevent ye.
[Exit.
Rod. Bubbled! -- by this good Light, merely bubbled! -- and, when (one would
have thought) I had him, all to nothing. -- Sure, sure, our Masters lie under a
great mistake; and Mankind were once the ancienter Devils, and invented that
Sham, of their Wives sending them, only to frighten us, from vent'ring among
them. --

Enter Imperia. -- I hope she did not hear me.


Imp. And what (if I may be so bold) have my Wise Brother-in-Law and you, been
projecting? -- When do you set out?


Rod. For what? (my Dear) or whither?


Imp. Why -- for the Indies, in a Cock-boat; -- or France, on a Millstone. -- I
hope you will go by the North-West Passage, and take a Bait by the way, to hear
the Meremaids sing? -- Your Friend, my Sister's Husband, would make a special
General for the Expedition. -- Ten Thousand Pistoles will do no hurt; -- you
have it in the House, and may advance it.


Rod. Betrayed too! -- [Aside.] But why this to me? -- 'Pr'ythee, my Dear. --


Imp. Methinks you're very Familiar. --


[She turns him off. Rod. Nay, -- my best Wife, -- do but hear me.


Imp. Wife, -- Mary! -- You think I cannot read your Thoughts in your Looks. --
You must be plotting, must ye!


Rod. If to raise thee to Grandeur, be ploting, I Am guilty. -- One successful
Work Al-a-mode, is a surer Game, than a Thousand good Works.


Imp. I smell your Design, -- it is to ruin me. -- I was once told by a
Cunning Woman, beggary would be my End; -- and you take the way to it.


Rod. I have enough, -- never fear it.


Imp. Yes, -- and are free enough of it, to every one but me; -- and there --
it goes from your Heart.


Rod. Thou know the contrary; it is but ask and have. -- Do want any thing?


Imp. As if a Woman must have nothing, but what she wants, and asks; -- my
Family were never wont to ask.


Rod. And I Have been kind to them, for your sake. -- I have honorably bestowed
two of your Sisters.


Imp. They could have don't themselves.


Rod. Sent a Brother of yours into the Levant; -- another, for France; -- a
third, into Spain; -- and am now making Provision for a fourth. -- So that, in
effect, I have married a Tribe to Enjoy one.


Imp. Yes, -- to wit me with it. --


Enter Don Hircio. O Signior! -- that you had come a little sooner. -- Our
Spouse and I have been at Jingle-jangle. -- He knows I love him, and that is the
Reason.

Her. Hough! -- Jangle with you! -- I hope, Sir, you did not lift a finger, if
you had --


[He cocks his Hat, and strutts. Imp. I Would given him two for one. --


[She points at him. Rod. And who are you?


Her. Soy hydalgo come Il Re! -- My Name -- Don Hircio Zanzummim, Gogmagog,
lineally descended from the Dukes of Infantado, Trinidado, -- or some Body
else. -- And if you had! --


Imp. No. -- there was nothing like it.


[Rod. startles. Her. I only say, -- if he had, -- my Great, Great, Great,
Great-Grandfather's Ashes (his that gave the Sultan the Lie, and took the Cham
of Tartary by the Whiskers Royal) would blush to see any of his Posterity not
true to Honor. -- You say he did not, -- and I Am satisfied. -- But if he had,
-- or durst but offer't, -- Voto!


Imp. Come, Signior, I Will be his Security,


[Hir. leads Imp. off. Rod. She has her Bravo too! -- Cowardly Devil that I
was, not to draw upon him; yes, and fright my Wife, -- who (which is some sign
of Love) did not aggravate it. -- Well, -- go thy ways, -- thou have thy
Frolicks; -- yet it shall go hard, but I will hit thy Humor.


[Exit. SCENE II. A noble Room in Montalto's House.
Enter Portia, sola. Por. MY Husband is convinced, and so am I,
The Action, in all its Circumstances,
Must be Grimald's; for it can be none's but his;
And yet I Am racked between the two Extremes,
Of Friendship to him, and my just Resentments
To his false Nephew. -- All unknown to us,
The Generous Grimaldi has restored
My Husband's Fortune: His degenerous Nephew
Has taken this occasion, to renew
Enter Fieschi, as at a stand, and gazing on her. His long rejected Love.

Fies. Her Virtue sure
Has wrought Impossibilities, and added
New Graces to her Person, -- as if Infinity,
Could be encreast.

Por. I sent for ye, Fieschi;
But it had been more honorable in you,
Not to have given me cause. -- Your worthy Uncle
Has, to his frequent Obligations,
Added a fresh -- I need not tell ye what.

Fies. And it is his satisfaction, that he wanted
Neither the Will, nor Means of doing it.

Por. Debts are discharged with Payment. -- Benefits,
Pay what we can, there will be still Arrear.
But, -- for his Nephew to profane that Friendship,
I could be angry -- verily I could,
And would, were it not to make an others ill
My own affliction.

Fies. Blame your Virtue then,
Montalto loved it. -- And the self-same cause
That absolves him, absolves Fieschi too.
He rested not in Speculation only;
And shall I turn Philosopher?

Por. I Am his,
And only his; and therefore barred to you.

Fies. But Nature's free, and walks not by restraint,
But choice --

Por. And I have mine. --

Fies. She never Coined
Those Bugbear Words, of Honor, Jealousy;
She never impaled free Woman; or designed
A thing so Excellent for one's Embrace.

Por. Enough -- When that I ever heard ye was as much
Against my will, as the concealing it
Against my Duty -- No -- a Virtuous Woman
Takes no more Liberty than what she ought.

Fies. At least, blame Love, not me. -- I Have often raised.
Your great Idea in my Soul; and (as
A Diamond only cuts a Diamond)
Set your own Virtue against your self, -- yet still
Love gets the upper-ground, and pours upon me:
So weak a Fence is Virtue against Love.

Por. We still excuse our selves. -- The fault lies not
In Virtue, but our Resolutions:
Could we once make our Actions work up to our Intentions, the Work were done.
There -- take your idle whatsoever it be;

[She takes out a long white Box, and throws it toward him. I knew the hand too
well, to open it.
Fies. And will you still torment me with the sight
Of a forbidden Good?

Por. Not good to you,
Because forbidden. -- If you're wise, be gone.

Fies. You Have said it, and I obey.

[He is going off, as forgetting the Box; she kicks it after him; he takes it
up. Exit. Por. But take your Box wi'ye.
Sure I have done some Evil, and the Guilt
Sticks on my Brow. -- It must be so, -- or he
Had never offered this Amor to me.
Be It what it will, this I Am sure, my Will
Had nothing in it; -- yet how poor and cheap
Do even the appearances of Evil make us.

Enter Grimaldi and Montalto hand in hand. Mon. Your repeated Obligations
Deprive me of my Liberty.

Gri. In exchange, take mine.

Por. The only Injury you ever did us:
For it has put us on the Necessity
Of living and dying Ungrateful.

Mon. A Benefit too great to be received.

Gri. Not for a Friend to give. --

Mon. But what return
Could ye propose?

Gri. 'Thas overpaid it self.
To have done well, in hopes of a return,
Is the most sordid Usury. -- Allay
Does but embase the Coin; -- and such a thought
Had derogated from the Majesty
Of Friendship, and been Interest. --

Mon. But does not
Equality make the lasting Friendship?

Gri. Of Minds, I grant it. -- Friendship cannot stand
With Vice or Infamy. -- Degenerous mixtures
Seldom outlive the Birth. -- And as ours was
Founded on Virtue (like a true-built Arch)
May it grow up, until it knit at Top,
And bid Defiance to the Shocks of Fortune.

Por. Thus you overcome us every way. --


Mon. Teach me,
What it is to be a Friend; -- one, without whom,
As a Man cannot be happy, it is not his least
Unhappiness, he never knows his Friend,
But by being Unhappy himself. -- A Friend!
My earthly God! --

Gri. As you are mine, no more.
Come, let us enjoy this Salt of Life, -- this All,
That gives it relish, and without which, Life
Were but a dull Parenthesis of Time;
The World a Wilderness, and Man the Beast.
I Have wanted Company in a Crowd -- Blessed Friendship!
Thou Girdle of the World! -- Had I been Heathen,
I Would Sacrificed unto no other Goddess.

[Exeunt. SCENE III. The First Scene again.
Enter Imperia, Quartilla, Scintilla. Imp. TO say otherwise, were to belie him;
-- and, as all Men have their Faults, the worst of his, that I know, is, that
he loves me too well.


Scin. And such a Fault may be easily born with.


Quar. You Are a mere Chicken, Girl; -- there may be as great a mistake in
loving a Woman too well, as in loving her too little. -- What would I care for
a Man should court my little Finger, look Babies in my Eyes, sit and admire me:
-- That was not the Fashion of my time. -- Men were Men then.


Imp. And there too, he is likely enough. -- Truss and well knit. -- But why
this to me?


Quar. Your Ladyship was wont to allow us this harmless Freedom.


Imp. Or, if I don't, you will take it.


Quar. Without Offense then -- What Diversion have ye?


Imp. As pleases my Husband; -- and I have neither Eye nor Ear to any thing
else.


Scin. And a Friend would study as much to please you.


Imp. I should think one Husband were enough for any modest Woman. -- Are there
naughty Women?


Quar. Mary forbid it! -- Or that they should not be content with one Eye, one
Hand, one Leg.


Imp. But one's Husband though, is the best Friend.


Quar. And the worst Company. -- Fie (Madam) you will ruin the Sex. -- Husband,
say ye! -- A mere Thing, -- a Cover-slut of Custom.


Scin. Has not every Well two Buckets? -- Every Ship two Anchors? -- Or did you
never see two Cocks cruckling about one Hen, and her, all the while picking of
Straws, to make her own Nest?


Quar. Well said, my fine Girl! thou may come to something in time.


Imp. How these Jades hit my humor! -- [Aside.] O -- But -- would a Woman! --
a Virtuous Woman! -- a Woman of Honor! --


Quar. Do any thing, but say her Prayers.


Imp. Besides -- the Injury. --


Scin. To what? Or whom? -- You lose nothing, sell no household Stuff, nor waste
goods.


Quar. Or if the main house fall, do but keep up the dove-coat, and you will
never want Pigeons, till ye damn up the Loover.


Imp. But you know I seldom go Abroad, and for me to receive Visits, would make
my Husband Jealous.


Scin. That all! --


Quar. Or can he be so ill-natured, as when his own Belly's full, to deny a
Beggar his Leavings?


Imp. But People will be apt to talk of a Body.


Quar. For what? -- For going to Church! -- Cannot you pretend a Vow of Devotion
and Chastity, for three Days a Week?


Imp. And suppose he make the like for the other four?


Scin. How willingly now would she be persuaded into her own Desires. --
[Aside.] You're young, -- and the Town's full.


Imp. You could not set-up then with Partridge and Quail, for the Year round?


Scin. No (by my Troth) could I not; and yet I Have but a puling Stomach.


Imp. There Is somewhat in it. -- What Is every thing we do, but a mere Circle of
Variety, or Grand Oleo, disht-up several ways to sweeten the wearisomness of
one Pleasure by another? -- What Is Imagination or Desire, when once attained,
but Surfeit? -- Fish of Four Days old -- away with it.


Quar. Your Ladyship takes it very naturally. -- Don't the Men say of us --
Women -- and Women -- and more Women -- but still Women.


Imp. And shall Woman (Natures last hand, to show what she could do) she alone
walk by her self? -- To one Dark-lanthorn? -- She shut her Windows to the Sun,
to pore over a farthing Candle? -- Which of themselves does it? -- And shall I
--


Scin. No (Madam) if the Men Ring the Changes, I know not why we may not shufle,
and cast Knaves again?


Imp. Welfare honest Mahomet! -- We read of no Couples in his Paradise -- And
yet -- young, juicy Girls, plump -- balmy -- and never above Fifteen.


Quar. Beloved Fifteen!


Imp. And Eyes!


Scin. More sparkling than the Diamond.


Imp. I should have thought the Cows Eye better. -- A demure Look keep its own
Counsel, and a little seeming Innocence cheats a Man into a Fondness. -- The
sparkling Eye may hit a straggling Fool; but it is the melting, it is the dying
Eye, that sweeps whole Ranks. -- Let Us see -- [ To Scintilla.] set thine --
hold -- there -- there was a Look! -- so -- that again.


Enter Fieschi, as consulting somewhat to himself. Fies. What? practicing
against the Ball? I fear me, I may have disturbed ye.


Imp. Not at all, unless it be with your new Gravity. -- But whence? whence
this startch'd Face? or why?


[She beckons off Quar. and Scin. Exeunt. Fies. Besides my former
Disappointments, it is not many hours since I left your Sister Portia. -- But
the same Shaggreen still, -- like the Parthian, she kills by flying.


Imp. Alas, poor Fieschi! -- you are smitten: -- I thought how ye loved me, and
have found it.


Fies. You wrong me; -- there is nothing might have taken in that sullen Fort,
but I Have attempted; -- made all the Approaches, Love, backed with Interest,
could contrive, -- but all in vain.


Imp. The Necklace cost me Twelve Hundred Ducats.


Fies. That you had seen, with what Scorn she kicked it after me.


Imp. That all! -- she shall have a better Jewel.


Fies. To as much purpose. -- A Rock is not more immovable.


Imp. Yet I have known a Rock blown up.


Fies. Her Virtue is as firm, as her Face charming.


Imp. Away ye Fool, -- I have too many Charms of my own, to suspect another;
-- it is not her Beauty, but Virtue, quarrels me. -- That half-fac'd Virtue,
that has its Faults as well as others, but a better way of hiding 'em.


Fies. Be It what it will, 't'as conquered me; and were it not for my prior Love
to you, I must have doted on her.


Imp. False Man. -- And when I think upon the thing I Would Curse, I Will Name
Fieschi.


[She seems to weep. Fies. Be merciful, and kill me, or forgive me. -- I Will yet
attempt her, -- I will, -- but -- she is your Sister.


Imp. What Is that to my command? -- Only conquer her, and wear my self, and
Fortune. -- That Nature had made me a Man! -- Consider, -- I Will return
instantly.


[Exit. Fies. If ever Man had a Wolf by the Ears, I have one now. -- If I
renew my Attempts on Portia, and carry her, I hazard the Friendship between my
Uncle and Montalto! and if I don't, I lose Imperia. -- Of all Devils, defend me
from a Woman's Devil!


[Enter Imperia with Bags of Gold in her Lap, and a Casket of Jewels in her
Hand. Imp. There -- [She drops the Bags, and gives him the Casket. There Is more
Gold, and richer Jewels; -- and, as a farther pledge, this, [ A Ring.] and my
Heart. -- Not yet resolved? -- Away.


[She strokes him. Fies. I was meditating some new Contrivance. -- It Is done.


Imp. There spoke my better Angel.


Fies. But say --


Imp. More but's? -- Has she no She-friend, -- no Woman -- (and while I think
on it, you may trust Bianca) your self no Wit, -- or these no Rhetoric?


[Pointing to the Bags, etc. Fies. Once more, it is done as sure as Fate had
sealed it. -- And if Pansa has wrought up Bianca, as I once designed it, you will
say it your self.


[He leads her off, SCENE IV. Montalto's House.
Enter Pansa, Bianca. Pan. They Are all Abroad then?


Bian. Whether they are or not, you're out of hearing. -- But what does your
Master mean by all this? -- I overheard them, when he was last here; -- but
never let him look to come again.


Pan. Not without thee, Bianca.


Bian. I Have had enough of it already; -- my Lady has not given me a good Look
ever since.


Pan. Patience -- (my Beloved) Time and Patience --


Bian. Will do no good with her. -- Besides you Men are so inconstant, -- if ye
had your Wish to day, you would have another to morrow.


Pan. And are not you Women the same; -- as fond of an old Sweetheart, as a
brisk Widow of her third Husband.


Bian. Even thank your selves that taught us.


Pan. Sick of every thing but a new Face.


Bian. Your own Picture to a Hair.


Pan. And so fickle, fickle, fickle, -- a Man knows not where to have ye.


Bian. Beshrew me now, but that is a Fib; -- where to have you, 's the Question:
-- Once fill your Belly, and ye drop off.


Pan. And there I must confess, you have the 'vantage, -- you stick the closer.
-- And perhaps, though I spoke too soon, -- what have we got here?


[He strokes her Stomacher. Bian. Nothing of yours, -- I Will secure ye. -- I
shall be married a Tuesday next.


Pan. Still my good merry Girl! -- But say he find it?


Bian. You Men think you have all the Wit; -- but I can tell ye, some Women
come two, three, four, and sometimes five Months sooner than ordinary of the
first Child; -- but for the rest as right as others. -- You're all for Nine
Months at least, but I have known a nimble Fellow, not married above Eight
Weeks, and his Wife has brought him a couple, -- and so like the Father too!


Pan. Still the same merry Rogue.


Bian. But hark ye though, -- where are the Books you promised me? -- I cannot
sleep for thinking of 'em.


Pan. And thou shall have them in a day or two.


Bian. O! what a dainty thing it is, to see a Man here to day, and a Thousand
Miles off to morrow; -- mow Giants by the Waste, conquer Armies, ov'r-run
Kingdoms, and all for the Love of some distressed Princess he never saw; whilst
she (poor Lady) apprehending it by instinct, sits bemoaning him in some
Castle-Grate; and if she can borrow so much leisure from her Grief, Records his
doughty Deeds to Posterity, in Window-cushions and Coverlets.


Pan. And then, when over the Heads of Forty or Fifty Thousand Men, all slain
by his own Hand, he cuts his way to her Chamber, O! what Sighs, Looks,
Half-words, and I know not what! till the Lord of the Castle, having reinforced
his Guards, Surprises him ere he can recover Morglay; and from his Lady's Arms
conveys him to a Dungeon, where he is fed with nothing but Horse-bisket and
Puddle-water, till being fortunately released by some Enchanter, his Friend,
he is dropped in an unknown Desert, whence, within Three Days, he becomes Master
of a great Kingdom, and within Four more (by some private mark) proves the
rightful Heir often.


Bian. There were a Man for me! -- I hate your Sots that turn Hermits, and can
live Seven Years together on Nuts, Black-berries, and Acorns. -- They Lovers!
-- O that I were a Man! that I might have been a Knight; or, being as I am, some
little odd Princess.


Pansa. And I have much of thy humor about me; for never had any Man greater
desire of Wealth and Command than my self, and that only to eat well, drink
lustick, care for nothing, and have my Flatterers as other Men. -- But come,
Bianca, though I cannot make thee a Princess, I can put thee in the way, shall
make thee as fine as a Princess. -- Two Hundred Pistoles would do no hurt, I
take it.


Bian. Ay Mary! but where is the Money?


Pan. Thy Master now and then lies at his Country House, and do thou but give
my Master the opportunity of getting into your Lady's Apartment, some such
night, and I Will secure it thee.


Bian. To what purpose? -- I Am sure he will do no good.


Pan. Do thou thy part, he will venture that; -- Two Hundred Pistoles is Money:


Bian. And truly (to speak my Heart) I Have often wondered how she can be so
unkind.


[She hugs him. Pan. Good Nature -- thou must; -- and to let thee see he is in
earnest, he has sent thee Fifty in hand. -- [Gives her a Purse. Come, come,
there are certain Critical minutes, when a Woman can deny nothing.


Bian. But shall I be sure of the rest?


Pan. If thou have it not, never trust Pansa more.


Bian. Well then, -- you speak in a lucky hour, for my Master goes out of Town
to morrow, and an hundred to one, if he return that Night. -- Let your Master,
and you, come about Midnight, and you will find the Street-door unlocked, and me,
ready to receive ye. -- But be sure now --


Pan. That thou should doubt it! --


[ Exeunt hand in hand. ACT III. SCENE I.
Of Roderigo's House.
Enter Crispo and Mingo wiping their Faces. Cris. Here Is a Clutter with all my
heart; -- why sure, this Master of ours is either running mad, or never thinks
of returning.


Min. Here was a Palace, as well furnished as the Duke's it self, -- such
Hangings, Pictures, Carpets, Plate, and every thing suitable; -- but it seems
they were not rich enough; -- we are all new from top to bottom.


Cris. For my part, my Back's almost broke with Luggaging, and I think thine's
not much better. -- Would 'twere her Neck, that has been the cause of all.


Min. Yet, what would not a Man do that Loves his Wife?


Cris. Commend me to our old Home; we have no Wives there: And (I Have observed)
here, those that so gild this Pill of Matrimony, to make it go down the easier,
never take it themselves.


Min. The Truth is, neither of us need be fond of the Sex. -- But every one is
not our Imperia. -- A Wife, if you have Money, will help to get more.


Cris. Or rather spend what you have.


Min. If you're at Home, she will bear you Company.


Cris. Or rather Scold ye out of Doors.


Min. If you're Abroad --


Cris. Perhaps Cuckold ye, ere ye come home. -- But how now Mingo, -- have ye
forgot your Knitting-needles?


Min. Nor your Trap-door -- mere Accidents.


Cris. I tell thee Brother of mine, A Devil of Clouts, would have more Wit; and
I Am afraid, our Master has spoiled thee.


Enter Roderigo. Rod. So, so, ye have done well, -- ye have done more in a few
hours, than a dozen Lazy Block-heads would have done in a Week. -- Yet,
methinks, the Rooms might have been better Perfumed.


Cris. We reserved that, till last.


Rod. Never the worse -- Is the Music come?


Min. They only wait your call.


Rod. Go then, and be sure every thing be in Order. -- [ Ex. Cris. Min. My Wife
and I are Friends again, and to confirm it, I Have promised her a Ball; and cannot
but laugh, to think how she will be pleased, with the Preparation I have made
for it. -- She Is but taking the Air, and cannot be long ere she return.


Enter Imperia. She runs to him. Imp. O my Dear! and am not I a good Wife now?
That thou would been with us at Duke Doria's Garden;
The pretty Contest between Art and Nature:
To see the Wilderness, Grots, Arbours, Ponds,
And in the midst, over a stately Fountain,
The Neptune of the Ligurian Sea,
Andrea Dorea; the Man, who first
Taught Genoa not to serve. -- Then to behold
The curious Waterworks, and wanton Streams
Wind here and there, as if they had forgot
Their Errand to the Sea --

Rod. Thou sett'st off this
So well, I fancy thou would design a fairer.

Imp. Dear Husband try. -- And then again, within
That vast prodigious Cage, to see the Groves
Of Myrtle, Orange, Gessamine, beguile
The winged Quire into a Native-Warble,
And Pride of their restraint -- Then, up and down,
An antiquated Marble, or broken Statue,
Majestic, even in ruin. --

Rod. It pleases me,
To see thee pleased. --

Imp. And such a glorious Palace!
Such Picture! Carving! Furniture! -- my words
Cannot reach half the Splendour. -- And after all,
To see the Sea, fond of the goodly sight,
One while, glide Amorous, and lick her Walls,
As who would say, come follow: But repulst,
Rally its whole Artillery of Waves,
And crowd into a Storm. -- But when ( my Dear)
When will ye fancy me such a Retirement?

Rod. When I, like him that raised it, can command
The Spoils of the rifled Ocean, thou shall.

Imp. Thou'st ever a Fetch for what thou'st no mind to -- How can a Woman love
ye?


Rod. Do but consider -- the House we now live in, is little inferior to a
Palace; and might become my Better.


Imp. A mere Hole -- and that so damp, musty, and raw --


Rod. You never complained of it before; -- however, Fire and Perfumes will
rectify the Air.


Imp. Yes -- to put a Woman into Fits.


Rod. Bating that Palace, there is not a House in Genoa better furnished; -- and
for Picture -- I dare almost vie Italy. -- Come -- and I Will show thee.


[He offers to lead her out. Imp. What? Those in the Gallery? -- I saw 'em as I
came in -- mere Sign-post work.


Rod. How? -- Tuian's Venus! and Sign-post work?


Imp. A downright Country Jone.


Rod. Raphael's Paris, and the Three Goddesses?


Imp. A Bumkin, and his Milk-maids.


Rod. What think thou then of Guido Rheni's Rape of Lucrece? -- Mich'el
Angelo's Leda? -- Or Corregio's Jupiter and Semele?


Imp. Enough to make a modest Woman look through her Fingers.


Rod. Would thou have nobler Actions? -- What say thou to Carrachio's
Perseus and Andromeda? -- Pietro Testa's Iphigenia? -- Or Mola's Curtius?


Imp. What Mr. Dawber pleases.


Rod. Or, if thou like Hunting -- there is Tempesta's Acteon!


Imp. Even keep it to your self; -- for my part, I would not put such an
Affront on my Friends, as to have 'em seen in my House. -- Picture, do you call
'em!


Enter Crispo. Cris. Sir, the Company are now lighting at Door.


Imp. And why not Madam -- Sauce-Box! -- [She strikes him. Your Servants must
disrespect me too? -- Entertain them your self for me.


[She is running off. He stops her. Rod. Nay Wife -- my dear Wife -- what will
our Friends say? For thy own sake, if not mine, be civil.


[She presses to go off. Imp. Say what they will -- shall I humor a Husband
that can deny me any thing. -- You Would as good let me go, or I Will spoil all. --
Let me go I say.


Rod. Thou shall have any thing -- Here -- take the Keys of all I have -- and
please thy self. --


[She takes them grumbling. Imp. You can make me do what you please -- that ye
can.


Rod. I Will wait upon our Friends -- [Enter Persons in Masquerade. Known or
unknown, be pleased -- [They seat themselves. Music begins. Do but observe
this Air. [ To Imp.]


A Dance of all but Rod. and Imp. Imp. Scraping you mean -- I Would 've made as
good on a Gridiron.


Rod. Softly, my Dear --


[The Dance ends. They seat again. Imp. And such a string-halt Dance.


[After a small Intervale, another Music. Enter a Boy. He Sings. WERE I to
take Wife,
(As it is for my Life)
She should be Brisk, Pleasant, and Merry;
A lovely fine Brown,
A Face all her own,
With a Lip, red, and round, as a Cherry.
Not much of the Wise,
Less of the Precise,
Nor over reserved, nor yet flying:
Hard Breasts, a straight Back,
An Eye, full and black,
But languishing, as she were dying.
And then, for her Dress,
Be It more, or be it less,
Not tawdry set out, nor yet meanly:
And one thing beside,
Just, just so much Pride,
As may serve to keep honest, and cleanly.
Imp. Whoo, ho, ho, hoo! -- here is a Voice! -- and a Song, I thank ye -- [A
noise within, as of some Dishes breaking. You Would have you cannot tell what.


Enter Quartilla. Qua. O Madam, your Monkey has got into the next Room, and
overturned all your Cupboard of China.


[She runs off in a Fury. Imp. Or I had don't my self, to spite my Don.


Rod. I beseech ye Gentlemen, let this make no disturbance -- I hope you will
take share of a short Regale.


Omnes. Alas, poor Roderigo!


[Exeunt Maskers. Manet Rod. Rod. Poor Hen-peckt Devil, they might have said.
-- The very Boys will pelt me. -- [ He walks.] But is this Belphegor! -- this,
the once, Generalissimo! -- Yes -- [ He makes a shrug.] but subjected to all
the Conditions of Humanity -- and I must be contented, as well as others -- at
least, till I get my Keys again: For to say Truth, my Ships are longer out than
was expected, and Bills come thick upon me; some of them too, begin to be
importunate. -- My comfort is, they are three rich Cargoes, and any on's return
will pay for all.


[Exi. SCENE II. Of Montalto's House.
Enter Pansa with a dark Lanthorn, conducting Fieschi. Pan. She Is as good as
her word. -- The Door was unlockt.


Fies. And I may trust her?


Pan. My Life ye may -- for she ever made it a matter of Conscience, to take a
Gentleman's Money, and do nothing for it.


Enter Bianca. Bian. What shall we do, Sir? -- our Master's returned -- but in
his own Apartment -- Consider.


Fies. It must be -- And why not now?


Bian. Then follow me close and softly -- and do you Pansa, stay here till I
return.


[ Exeunt Bianca and Fieschi. Pan. And if it hits, I Am made -- and who knows
but I may marry the Jade my self, for all her Tuesday next. -- O but -- but
what? -- To be a Cuckold. -- And how many are there in the World, yet live
contentedly? -- But -- your own Cuckold -- forestal the Market -- antidate your
own Fortune -- And what of that? I am not the first has don't, and sha'n't be
the last. -- This I am sure, I am the less deceived. -- What ere it be, Two
hundred Pistoles, and my Masters Kindness, will make amends for all. [Bianca
returns. Now Bianca, I was thinking, what if thou and I should join Jiblets, in
an honorable Way? -- What think ye of Matrimony Bianca?


Bian. No, Pansa, no -- for though I love ye well enough, you shall never twit me
with any thing of your own Knowledge -- but for old Acquaintance, I Will
recommend ye -- She is!


Pan. The very Mop of Modesty! But what has she?


Bian. Enough for you, and to spare. -- The truth is -- not above Sixteen or
Seventeen Thousand Ducats ready Money, and as much more, after the Death of
her Grannum -- But for Virtue!


Pan. The Lord knows what! -- But say, she will not have me?


Bian. I Will put in a good Word for ye. -- This for your comfort, She Will sip
Verdua -- privately though -- and then -- so good natured.


Pan. That Is half the work: For I never knew the Devil at one end, but his Dam
was at the other.


[A noise within, as of a falling down Stairs. Bian. Here, Pansa, here.


[She puts him in a Closet, takes his Lanthorn, and Exit by one Door. Enter
Fieschi running by another. He falls, and drops his Dagger. Fies. Where am I?
Blind Fortune assist my blinder self.


[He recovers, and exit by the Door he first came in at. Bianca peeps in with
her dark Lanthorn; sees the Dagger, takes it up, and gives both to Pansa, then
likewise peeping. Bian. There -- bolt the Door to ye, while I look out another
way.


[Exit. Enter Montalto with a Case of Pistols (in his Nightgown) by the same
Door Fieschi ran in at. Mon. The last noise lay this way -- within there, Ho!
[He knocks. What Is here! -- methinks I see a faint glimmering of a Light within
that Closet. [ He endeavors to open the Door.] Bolted within too -- nay then
--


[He fires at the Door, Pansa slips the bolt, glares him in the Face with his
dark Lanthorn. Montalto fires at him, and closes with him. Both fall. Pansa
stabs him, and by that means gets from him; but not without the loss of his
Dagger. Exit Pansa by the same Door as his Master: Montalto rises. Enter
Servants (with Lights and Swords) undrest. 1 Ser. Thieves, Thieves! -- 'waken
my Lord, he may be killed in's Bed.


2 Ser. Hold -- where he stands! -- He bleeds -- a Handkercher, to keep the
Wound from Air.


Mon. What needs this noise? -- One of ye stay with me -- another get me a
Surgeon. --


3 Ser. I run, I run.


[Exit. Mon. The rest, look about the House -- it is almost impossible he should
escape.


[Third Servant returns. 3 Ser. The Street Door (my Lord) is open.


[He runs off again. Mon. Nay, then the Bird is flown. -- However, see what
Servants are wanting, or out of Bed. That Men knew when, to put on Arms.


[First Servant sees a Dagger on the floor, takes it up, and gives it Montalto.
He starts. 1 Ser. Here Is some ones Bloody Dagger.


Mon. And I know whose -- I gave it him -- That was unkind.


[He throws it carelessly. Enter Portia in a Nightgown. Por. My Husband Bloody!
-- What have I done, good Heaven! -- Now, pity me -- And press me not with more
than I can bear, or give me strength --


[She staggers; 1 Servant supports her. Mon. Do not thou stab me too --
[ Montalto breaks from the other. It Is but a scratch, and thy Montalto lives:
Stay! stay my Portia! -- yet one minute stay,
And take me with thee.

[He runs to take the Dagger, 2 Ser. prevents him. 2 Ser. She begins to stir,
Sir.

[ Montalto runs to her, and shakes her. Mon. Return, return! at least but give
an Eye,
And see who calls thee back. --

Por. My hovering Soul
Was on the Wing, and nothing, but that voice,
Had checked its flight.

Mon. Do not torment thy self:
Thou may accuse, but can not alter Fate.
Heaven, Earth, all Things, have their Period.

Por. But Portia has resolved, she will be Portia,
In not surviving you.

Mon. Respite till then:
Every Wound is not Mortal; or if 'twere,
Who comes to his last Period, dies old.
If l've lived well, it is enough; if ill, too long:
Life's measured, not by Years, but Actions.

Por. But to be thus rent from me --

Mon. If I must leave the Town, what matter is it
What Port I go out at? Or which way I die?
Death has a Thousand Roads, but all of then
Meet at the Journeys end -- How happy then
Is Man, that he can neither lose his Way,
Nor pass it twice.

[Third Servant returns. 3 Ser. The Surgeons (Sir) are coming.

Mon. Bring them into the next Room -- Come (my Dear) I hope there is no danger
-- However, happen what will, it sha'n't surprise me.


SCENE III. Roderigo's House.
Enter Roderigo, with Letters in his Hand. Rod. IT IS what I feared -- my Levant
Merchant taken by the Turks -- my Frenchman sunk at Sea -- my Spaniard lost at
Dice. -- And what is worse? My Credit is at Stake -- my Cash in my Wife's Hands,
and if she prove cross, there is no more to be said -- I must break.


To him Don Hircio. Her. I am a Gentleman, Sir -- and the King's no more.


[He strusts. Rod. Heaven maintain it, Sir.


Her. Maintain me! -- I have an Estate somewhere beyond the Mountains in my own
Country; and where a Pigeon House once stood; which, were it standing, as it is
now fallen, well-stock'd with Pigeons, and removed to Madrid, might be worth to
me -- a brace of Thousand Mareveds yearly --


Rod. That is to say, about Twenty Shillings English.


Her. Maintain me!


[Cocks and struts. Rod. Your Pardon, Sir.


Her. Yet think it no Dishonor to converse with our Jews in blackhats, here --
Somewhat below me, I must confess -- but I am now and then serviceable to 'em,
and they thank me.


Rod. I remember ye, Sir -- Your commands to me.


Her. That Is as you please -- You are Signior, a Man of Fortune, which makes
them Envy you. -- In short, it is given out, your Ships are miscarried, -- and
now, one taxes this, another that, a third, your Cattamountain, (my Relation)
your Lady.


Rod. Alas, poor Fool! must she suffer too?


Her. I was once about to have made them eat their Words -- but Prudence (as
sometimes it should) interposed. -- Upon the whole, if you pay 'em not Forty
Thousand Ducats, you will be Arrested ere Night.


Rod. Neither my Ships nor that, will much affect me.


Her. The more's my Joy -- But, since they are such Scoundrels, name me the Man
ye do but doubt -- and -- he is dead.


Rod. By no means, Signior -- However, as an acknowledgment of your Respect --
be pleased --


[He gives him a small Purse. Her. I beseech ye, Sir -- what do you mean -- nay
-- [But takes it. Now could I quarrel you my self, in that you dare not trust
my Honor -- but I can take nothing ill from so Noble a Patron; and when you
have any such occasion, let me oblige ye.


[Exit. Rod. Her Relation, he said -- a worthy one! -- And yet it may be true
as he says; and who knows, but he might be sent to set me. -- My last Comfort
is, I have Cash enough in the House, but the Keys of it hang at my Wife's
Girdle.


Enter Imperia. -- Never more welcome, though to unwelcom News.

Imp. Your Ships you mean -- It Is every where.


Rod. I Am happy yet in such a partner of my Cares -- All will do well again --
Lend me thy Keys.


Imp. For what, I wis' -- your Wife (it seems) is not fit to be trusted?


Rod. Thou know the contrary; -- but I have some Bills charged on me, that
require speedy payment, or they will be protested; and then, where am I?


Imp. Even where you please -- But Keys, you get none of me -- the Fool has
more Wit.


Rod. I shall be ruined else.


Imp. Better you than I -- She Will provide for one.


Rod. I have enough to bear Forty such Losses.


Imp. Yes -- in your great Iron Chest. -- Away, you pitiful Don -- with what
Face could ye cheat me with a parcel of Stones and Brick-bats, instead of Coin?
-- Was this the Treasure? These the Doubleoons ye talked of?


Rod. I tell thee, Woman, it is all good Silver; and more Gold than the best of
thy Family, thou so much tatlest, ever saw together.


Imp. My Family, Gentleman! -- I was finely hope up, when all the Pride of
Italy courted me, to marry a Tramontane, -- a beggarly Don, -- Don Roderigo
Castiliano! the first of his House, and the last of his Name. -- Blot my Blood
with your damned Morisco! -- That Moletto Face, might have fore-warned me. --
But, alas, poor me -- I loved.


[She puts finger in eye. Rod. Thou have a Prince Incognito in me.


Imp. The Devil I have! -- Ha, ha, hah!


Rod. Provoke me not, for fear thou find'st me such.


Imp. And what would my poor Pug? -- I have a Charm shall lay ye, good Sir
Devil. -- A Circle, shall cool your Courage.


Rod. Give me my Keys, I say -- [Enter a Woman with a Bandbox. How now -- who is
this?


Imp. Who should she be? -- my Tire-Woman: She brings me Knots, Gloves,
Ribbons, Points, every thing.


Rod. And now and then a Letter in the bottom of the Box. [He puts his hand in
the Box, finds a Letter, she snatches in from him, and throws it back; the
Tire-woman takes it up, and Exit running. Mighty fine! -- And from whom, I
pray'?


Imp. What Is that to you -- Jealous! of my Conscience, Jealous! -- I see a
mousled Hood, rumpled Tippet, or tumbled Petty-coat would not down with you! my
Lord Dick, or my Lord Tom, stick in your stomach. -- Jealous, my Life! Jealous!
-- Know Tramontane, Jealousy is the effect of Weakness; whereas, he that is
Virtuous himself, belives the same of another.


Rod. Give me my Keys, I say again -- and that Letter -- Or --


[He takes her by the sleeve. Imp. But, shall I have 'em again?


Rod. Upon my Honor thou shall -- I Will only take what will serve My present
Occasion.


Imp. Shall I indeed La? [She Embraces him.] And will ye never, be angry with
your Wife again?


Rod. All, all is forgotten.


Imp. Well then -- I Will try for once --

[She whips out his Sword, and beats him about the Stage; and as she hears
Company entering, she drops the Sword, and takes to her Handkerchief. Murder!
Murder! Help! Murder:

Enter Five or Six Women. Sure all Women have not such Husbands.


1 Woman. Now fie upon him for a Villain, beat his Wife!


2 Woe. Draw upon a Woman!


[Third Woman takes up the Sword. All fall upon him, and beat him down; and
having well pomell'd him they go up to Imp. and Exeunt with her. Rod. rises.
Rod. Do but hear me.


3 Woe. That were wise work indeed.


Omnes. I hope you are not hurt. [ To Im.]


Rod. Nor all Men sure such Wives. -- What shall I do? -- Debts, threaten me
Abroad -- my Wife's at Home -- stay here, I cannot -- and return, I dare not --
[He walks.] And live with her Ten Years (if possible) -- That blessed
Parenthesis, if possible.

But yet, to fall thus tamely -- Be outwitted;
And, by a Woman! -- By the drowsy Lethe,
Cocytus, Acheron, or whatever worse,
Than Fables ever feigned, or Fear conceived,
I Will make her know me better; make her know,
What an Italianated Devil can do.
[He gives a Stamp. Hoe! Sacrapant! Adramelech!

Enter Servant, with a Letter. Ser. I am told, Sir, it requires no Answer.


[Exit Servant. He reads. Rod. Your House is beset with Bailiffs -- Consult
your Safety -- Haste, if you're wise. -- How I command, how the dull Slaves
obey.


[Another stamp. A hollow voice between the Scenes. Voice. What would Belphegor?


Rod. Attend me without -- what shall a poor Devil do? -- But -- might not
Friends take up the matter? -- Yes -- and your House beset. -- I Would come to any
Terms, -- but the Letter said, Haste. -- I have a Loop-hool yet -- but never
more to maintain my Figure. -- Haste, was the word; -- but must I leave thee?
-- I will yet stand it. -- Men and their Wives have quarreled, and been
Friends again --

[A noise as of the clatter of a door is heard within. He starts. Runs his Head
against the Wall. Recovers, and Exit. They Are got into the House.
The best often is, I have not far to go.

SCENE IV. A Street.
Enter Crispo and Mingo (by cross doors.) They meet, jostle, and lay their
Hands to their Swords. Min. SIgnior Crispo? -- Mio multo illustre.


[They make their drunken scrapes, and Embrace. Cris. Min' Here Mingo? --
Vestre tres humble. -- That Comerades should know one another no better?


Min. And which becomes us, least of all others. -- Us, that should unite
against the Common Enemy, Mankind.


Cris. You Are right. -- And now, that we are Pot-valiant, what think thou of
a Frolic?


Min. And kill the next we meet.


Cris. My very thought. -- A match -- [They shake hands.] Our Master will not
hear of our return; and if I Am hanged, it is what I would.


Min. And better far, than living under the Dominion of this superdevilified
Imperia.


Cris. Poor Belphegor -- I have known him somewhat in my time, but now, so
sotted on her, he is not himself; and all this to please her, that will be
pleased with nothing.


Min. How one may be mistaken? -- I remember, while he courted her,
Almond-butter would not melt in her mouth -- so innocent, she would have blushed
t'ave seen her own Hand naked -- and a Voice so low, she could not hear her
self. -- But not Three Days married, ere (like an Alarm Clock) the House rang
of her.


Cris. I Am sure I bear her marks. -- Time was, I could have bolted through a
Keyhole; cut Capers on the point of a Needle; given the Double-Somerset on a
Pins-head; felt no more blows than a Sack of Wool; but now she'as beaten me to
mash.


Min. And made me mere Gut-founder'd -- and I Am afraid, our Master (return when
he will) will make but a ragged Account of it.


Cris. My only hopes are, he will be weary in time, and leave her behind him; for
if ere she come among us below, we break up House for certain.


Min. A Lion (they say) runs from a Cock; and well may the Devil from a Crowing
Hen.


Cris. I am glad to see this amendment, Friend Mingo, and hope now, you are not
so matrimonially inclined, as once you were?


Min. I tell thee, Crispo, I know not what to make of 'em. -- Some are so
skittish, no ground will hold 'em. -- Others so resty, one can bring 'em to
nothing. -- And others again (like a Rattle at a Dogs Tail) run where you will,
and it still follows ye.


Cris. When all is done, there is nothing like an honest private Friend: And
(between our selves) I have such a piece.


Min. As mine, I warrant ye -- so loving!


Cris. So careful of her Honor, yet so obliging!


Min. As if I did not know your old Flora -- a mere Rag of a Jade; I wonder
thou durst venture on her, for fear of Navel-gauling.


Cris. And, I think, you have not much reason to brag of your greasy
Tripe-wife* for my part, I hate Bog-trotting.


Min. What need this reservedness among Friends. -- Upon Honor now -- who
shall say first.


Cris. And wound Reputation! -- Fie.


Enter Marone, and a large Watch. Crispo and Mingo run; the Watch follow. Mar.
You may believe Neighbors, there is somewhat more than ordinary, that I am here
in person. -- Every man would not have don't. -- But see, who are those Fellows
running there -- follow, follow. There is a dangerous Plot now brewing, and I
know who has a Finger in it up to the Elbow. -- Follow, follow 'em.


[Exeunt. SCENE V.
Enter Mattheo, Roderigo (as in a Vineyard). Mattheo a Spade in his hand. Mat.
I Have heard of your Quality, and great Losses -- But your Wife say you? Alas,
poor Gentleman! -- I lost mine about a month since, and though I have no great
reason to brag, find a miss of her.


Rod. I Will change with ye; my living Wife, for your dead Wife.


Mat. Not too much of that neither -- I had, had one before; and she was well
enough. -- But this last! -- such a -- I Will tread lightly on her Grave, for
fear she 'wake.


Rod. And what difference found ye' between a good Wife, and a bad one.


Mat. I said not, she was good, but well enough -- though I think the difference
be much the same, as between a wild Rabbet and a tame Rabbet. -- However, at
last, I found the way of beating the Devil out of mine.


Rod. And I should have thought, there was more danger of beating him in. --
But, Sir, you don't consider the Catch-poles; they follow upon a fresh scent;
do but preserve me from 'em, I Will make ye a man for ever.


Mat. Nor shall you repent the putting your self under my Protection -- Look ye
Sir -- [He takes him to the Scenes.] you see those parings of Vines, creep
under them, and I Will cover ye up. -- Rod. creeps, Mat. covers him.] When they
are gone, I Will give you notice. -- A handsome Fellow, and wears good Clothes.
-- If it miscarry, I have little to lose; and if it succeed, I Am made for ever.


Enter Officers, they beat about. -- Pray Gentlemen don't trample my Vines --
Who are ye?

1 Off. We are the States Officers, in quest of a Gentleman we are sure took
this Road.


2 Off. And cannot be far behind him. -- At your Peril be it, if you conceal
him.


Mat. My House is open to ye.


[Third Officer enters, Mat. digs. 1 Off. Pr'y thee be honest to us, and thou
shall snack.


2 Off. We can afford him Forty Ducats -- and that is more than thou wilt get in
haste by diging.


Mat. Forty Ducats Gentlemen, would to me a kindness.


1 Off. And if we take him I Will be thy Play Master -- I Am sure thou know me
-- and I Will be true to thee.


[He gives his Hand. Mat. Signior Bricone, if I mistake not.


1 Off. Thou have me right -- and therefore doubt not thy money.


Mat. Well then -- he is


[ Mat. describes Rod: Person and Clothes. 2 Off. The same -- And if he is about
thy House, show him us, and here is thy money down.


[He pulls out a Bag. Third Officer returns. 3 Off. There Is nothing within.


Mat. I rather wish he were -- But do you see that blind side Road, on the left
hand of my Vineyard, as ye came.


1 Off. And were I to have fled for my Life, I Would have taken't my self.


Mat. There did I see such a Person, and one other with him, ride by, about an
hour since. -- And now I better consider on it -- he was the great Merchant,
that lost some Ships the other day.


Omnes. The same, the same -- To Horse, to Horse.


Mat. Ride hard, and ye cannot but overtake him. [Exeunt Off. running. --
They Are gone, and Roderigo's Wishes follow 'em. -- He told me, he would make me a
man for ever, and (I hope) he will be as good as his word, and not lick himself
whole again, by nonperformance. -- Hoe Signior! the Coast is clear, you may
advance.


Enter Roderigo stalking, and looking about him. Rod. I fancy I hear them
still -- Hark! what was that?


Mat. Nothing but the Wind among the Leaves. -- I have performed formed my
promise, and you're safe: Though (if you overheard us, as you needs must) to my
disadvantage.


Rod. I did, and doubly thank you, nor shall it ever be said, that I forgot
mine. -- But first, it is requisite, that you understand my Condition -- Know
then, I am not what I appear to you -- but in few words -- a very Devil.


Mat. A Devil! [Mat. starts.] and afraid of Bailiffs!


Rod. Yet so it is -- I was sent to Earth by special Command, subject
nevertheless to all the Conditions of Humanity; but more particularly obliged
to marry a Wife.


Mat. Keep your Wife to your self, I have no mind to Cuckold the Devil.


Rod. And now, what with her insulting peevish Humor, my Losses at Sea, my
Correspondence failing, and Creditors pressing, you see to what Condition I Am
brought.


Mat. Is It come to this! -- The Sham wo'n't pass on me -- Come, come -- uncase
-- [ Mat. goes about to strip him.] A man for ever! -- A Devil would ha'been
more honest.


Rod. Have but a minutes patience, and if I don't convince you of what I told
ye, and you don't find me the most ingenuous, grateful, and as Gentleman-like a
Devil, as you could wish, I am contented you deliver me up to my Creditors. --
And, without your consent, part from ye I will not.


Mat. It Is Civil though.


[ Rod. gives a stamp. Rod. Hoe! Sacrapant, Adrameleck, [Musick is heard,
Spirits rise; they Dance an Antic about Mat. and Exeunt. Mat. all the while
trembling. Paganuccio, Fortibrand! -- Fear nothing, they sha'n't hurt ye.


Mat. Fear nothing said ye? -- I Am not yet secure, but my Soul may slip out at
the wrong end.


Rod. I Have shown you what I am; and now consider, what Devil of a Thousand
would not such Circumstances have tried? -- But to my promise -- [A noise
within. He starts.] Huisht, huisht -- my Wife -- that Wife, whom now I dread,
more than ere I doated on her.


Mat. A Tittle tattle of mine; I know her Voice.


Rod. My promise, I was saying -- you know the Lady Ambrosia?


Mat. And what of her? -- She Is rich -- And do you but make a match for me
there, I Will release you your promise.


Rod. I am no go-between; but this I Will do -- as soon as I leave this place,
I Will instantly possess her; and, on the Faith of an obliged Devil, will never
leave her, till you come and force me from my Quarters. -- And so, you know
how, to make the Terms.


Mat. But which way must I go about it?


Rod. Sputter any thing, and that shall do it -- And besides, good brisk
Nonsense, with a little Balderdash, and the Gravity of a graduated Goose, to
set it off, will give ye the Vogue, among the greater number; who, like
Socrates's Children, take more after the Mother than the Father.


Mat. My Noble Patron, I see you are in earnest; and, because you and I must be
better acquainted, your Name (I beseech ye) and Quality in the other World?


Rod. Belphegor; Generalissimo of the Subterranean Forces: But this Condition
of Humanity, has so discomposed me, that I Am ashamed to own what I was.


Mat. Generalissimo! a Friend at Court, may (if he please) stand a man in
stead. -- But pray, Sir, what do ye do below?


Rod. Much after the rate ye do here; ever speaking well of our selves, and ill
of others. -- And for Friendship, as we profess not much, for what we do, we
observe it as little as your selves.


Mat. A wise People! -- But how do men get thither? Have ye no Standing-Porters
to attend the Service.


Rod. By no means -- No man comes thither but of himself, or his Wife's
sending. -- I wo'n't deny, but when a Devil meets a man with his Skates on, he
may give him a push forward. -- But I Am uneasy.


[He looks over his Shoulders. Mat. There Is no danger. -- What kind of People
are ye?


Rod. A Hotch-potch of all Tongues, Nations, and Languages: We speak the Lingua
Franca, keep open House, and never shut our Gates to any, that had either Wit
or Money; and that is the reason we have so many Wits and Usurers among us.


Mat. And no Women? -- For notwithstanding all, I am no professed Enemy to the
Sex.


Rod. They Are the best Customers we have; they seldom come alone, with their
own Lading -- Some bring more, some less; not one in ten without a Liver and a
Gizard; two Friends, at least, besides Followers.


Mat. But have ye no Divines, Physicians, Lawyers? -- What have ye?


Rod. Of that, when we meet next.


Mat. And you will forget -- you will.


Rod. Upon Parole, I wo'n't -- [They shake hands.] With this further -- when
ever you hear of any Lady possessed, be sure it is your Humble Servant, and no
other.


[Exeunt severally. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Of Roderigo's House.
Enter Imperia, Quartilla, Scintilla. Imp. OUR Gentleman (it seems) is gone to
take the Air, and I can look about me now, without asking leave.


Quar. He took so little with him, I wonder we hear nothing of him -- his proud
Spirit will come down in time.


Scin. But to run away in such a hurry!


Imp. That last Note I sent him did the business.


Scin. What made a Gentleman of his Wealth and Credit, go off so soon?


Imp. I was privy to none of his Actions; however, so foresaw it, as to secure
his Estate to my self.


Scin. And (with your Ladiship's leave) are you not bound in Honor to set him
up again?


Quar. If I thought he might not be troublesome, I Would persuade my Lady to take
him home again, and keep him in Pocket-money, for her own Credit.


Imp. No, no -- I Would better remove privately and secure what I have; and that
the rather, for if ever I heard any thing in my Life, I heard his tread in my
Chamber last Night.


Scin. So have I fansied a man in bed with me, but when all came to all, 'twas
nothing but a Nightmare. -- However (Madam) remove where you will, a Man is
some Credit to a House, and ours (methinks) seems naked without him.


Quar. These Girls never consider, we should have him rummaging the next
Bandbox again.


Imp. O thou remembrest me. [She takes out a Letter broken open. Reads. --
Terrachino! -- The Thousand Crowns I formerly presented your Ladyship,
emboldens me -- Ha, ha, hah! -- My Lord Lack-land! -- There -- [She throws away
the Letter.] Tell her, that brought it, I have forgot the Token, and he must
send it again, or't wo'n't do.


[ Quartilla takes up the Letter. Quar. Now out upon him! -- had he the
Impudence to believe other! -- No (Madam) you have it seven Years yet good to
take; and after that, you may truck, barter, or (at worst) give.


Enter Fieschi. Imperia beckons them off. Exeunt Quar. Scin. Imp. Ye may keep
within call -- And now, Fieschi -- we have no more Excuses sure? -- And how? --
Was my Sister Complaisant? -- Has good Nature yet brought her about?


Fies. Judge of me, as you think I deserve. -- I had found all open Approaches
as troublesome as Fruitless, and therefore resolved on Stratagem. -- To this
purpose, I followed the hint you gave me, and engaged her Woman to give me the
opportunity of getting into her Apartment, which (not many Nights since) I
attempted: And though no one knew the House better than my self, yet being in the
dark, it was my Misfortune to mistake his Apartment for hers -- Montalto heard
me, and sprang out; I (as well I might) fled, and by another mistake, fell down
Stairs; He pursued; I, recovered the fall, and got off. --


Imp. As to give ye your due, you had ever the discretion, to save one.


Fies. I thank your Ladyship, -- In short, my Servant, endeavoring to make up
with me, engaged Montalto; wounded him, and got off himself: And (I know not by
what accident) is since, taken; Or you might have been sure, I Would waited on ye
sooner.


Imp. Would thou, were in his room -- A pretty Story! -- And I believe't? --
No, thou silly nothing -- 'Twas thou, that hir'dst thy Servant, to kill
Montalto to make room for thy self -- You were there? -- The same, was I --
I Have heard the Story -- A mere Invention of your own, to excuse your self, and
cheat me.


Fies. You do me wrong -- That my design miscarried, is not my fault.


Imp. You might have laid it better.
Did I command ye to a Night-Adventure?
I, bid ye Murder? -- No -- my spotless Honor,
Cannot be blasted, by a Villain's tongue:
Send me the Jewels, and the Gold I lent ye;
Or you will rue the time, that I send for 'em:
And so -- As far as Honor, still command me;
Further than that -- Your humble Servant.

Exit Imperia. Fies. Hey-day! -- Perfidious Woman! and I the Fool,
To think, there ever was, or could be other:
How, like Egyptian Temples, do they at distance,
Strike Reverence, and Admiration!
How Beautiful! How Glorious! -- Approach 'em,
And view the God -- You find a Cat, or Ape,
A weeping Crocodile, or perhaps a Goat:
Forgive me Virtue, but a just revenge,
And I Will abjure (That fair defect of Nature)
The very Sex; And never think on it more,
But, as men do, of Debts, and Sins, to curse 'em.
[Stamps. And now, for that revenge -- My Servant's in hold, and I know not,
how soon it may be my turn; but that I think him honest, and Montalto (as it is
said) in no great danger -- Help me Invention -- [Enter Quartilla] I have it.


Qua. I thought my Lady had called -- however, I am glad to see your Worship so
well -- I have often tasted of your Bounty, and would be glad; it were in my
power, to deserve it.


Fies. Thou have an honest Face, and I ever found thee trusty.


Qua. And shall (I hope) continue so -- And for my Face; it is all as you see:
Let them, be beholding to slops, that want 'em.


Fies. Nay, there is somewhat in it; for Signior Guido, is so concerned for
thee! thou wilt scarce believe it.


Qua. Indeed Sir! I am beholding to him, for his Well-wishes.


Fies. What will thou say now, if I make it a Match between ye?


Qua. Ha, ha, ha, -- But how shall we live together?


Fies. He has an hundred ways of getting Money: Only (like other Men) an
Hundred and fifty of spending it, besides drinking -- But a Wife, will take him
off, that.


Qua. And a discreet Woman, will bear, with a small Fault.


Fies. Well then -- There is small Job, which thou may, and can (if thou will) do for me: And that once done, Let me alone for thine.


[He chucks her under the Chin. Qua. And if I don't: never trust Woman again,
for my sake.


Fies. Your Lady -- But thou wilt laugh -- And I, are all to pieces.


Qua. Mary forbid it! -- Why, I have known ye play together like two Kittens;
And as often told ye, Playing, commonly ended in earnest -- If that be all, I
bring ye together again; and she will love ye, the better.


Fies. To move it to her, were to set her the father off -- But thus -- Tell
her, there is an Outlandish Prince, new come to Town, and that he is so enamored
of her, that he intends her a rich Damask Bed, and Cup-board of Plate, which
he will send in to Morrow; and wait on her himself at Night: Now, this Prince
will I personate; let me alone for the Disguise.


Qua. Impossible! -- She stands upon her Honor. -- She receive a Night-visit!
From a Stranger! And by her own Consent! -- Besides, your Tongue will betray ye.


Fies. Tell her, the Prince understands no Italian; and therefore, she need not
speak to him; nor take more notice of him, than if he were her Husband -- And
we shall have such laughing next Morning. -- Come -- Thou must.


[He gives her Money. Qua. What contrivances you Men have, to betray poor
Women! -- Well then -- If you will run the hazard; send in your Present to
Morrow; and come your self at Midnight; because we are to remove in a day or
two; for she fancies, the House is haunted.


Fies. I Will venture, that too -- only, do thou thy Part.


Qua. You are resolved; And be it so. -- In the mean time, you shall see how
I Will work her -- We Women, can do much together -- But I Would almost forgot --
What Is you Prince's Name?


Fies. Il Principi Polacco.


Qua. Then say, and hold Polacco -- You Will find me ready.

[ Exit Quar.
Fies. What Fools, a Man must sometimes, be beholding to! -- And if I am not
even with her Ladyship, I Will forgive her -- That once over, I will endeavor,
by some worthy Action, to expiate my past Folly.


SCENE II.
Of Roderigo's House.
Enter Marone, Imperia, Quartilla. Imp. 'Twas a sad accident; and I fear me,
more, than a bare Chance. -- I hear, you took, th'Examinations.


Mar. The Friendship (Madam) I ever owed your Husband, might have commanded
more -- The rest, Signior Grimaldi, has appointed, to be taken here.


Imp. And what d'ye' think? -- Was my poor Sister? -- I love her with my Soul
-- Is there any thing reaches her?


Mar. Directly, nothing; But a single, uncertain Evidence, her Servant Bianca
-- Tho'to deal freely with ye', I suspect it -- Men of my Station, can see day,
at a little hole: Letters, make Words, and Circumstances, Things.


Imp. Alas! Alas! -- Though yet, my private thoughts, don't contradict ye -- What
would she have done, had she had my Beast? -- But, he was my Husband -- And the
more unfortunate me -- I loved him. But pray -- What ground have ye?


Mar. Enough, if not too much. -- Montalto's Estate (however it went in my
Name) was dipped in the Bank, for thirty Thousand Ducats. -- Fieschi, pays the
Money: His Servant, gave Montalto his Wound: And whether, your Sister, and
Fieschi, were absolute Strangers -- I leave it to your Ladyship.


Imp. I am afraid, you have gone too deep.


Mar. I Will not give a rush for that Man, that cannot pick any thing out of
nothing -- At least, bring it in, by an Innuendo. -- Men of Business (Madam)
are not so much to seek, as the World takes them.


Imp. And truly, I tremble, while I speak it -- I wish there were no design, of
taking off, a Husband, to make room, for a Gallant.


Mar. My Conscience, tells me, you have hit the Nail.


Imp. And shall I own that Sister? Virtue, forbid it!


Enter Grimaldi, and Portia. Grim. According to my appointment, I am come --
Yet thought it, not altogether unfit, that this Lady, who is most concerned,
should hear the matter.


Mar. And pray Sir, how goes it with our Friend, Montalto? Is there no hopes?


Grim. Yes truly: and as far as I conjecture, the greatest danger of his Wound,
lies in the Chirurgeon's hard words -- All of them agree, it fortunately
slanted, on a Rib.


Por. This worthy person informed me, it was his desire, the Examinations might
be taken here, which made me willing, to come my self.


Imp. And that (perhaps) too soon, for somebodies credit.


Por. Whose ever it be, I can hear it with more grief, than trouble.


Imp. Peradventure your own, or some ones else; who knows.


Grim. I beseech you, Madam -- ( To Imperia) What mean ye?


Por. How ill, this had become another?


Imp. If any modest Woman, might have resented, an Husband's injuries, I, ought
not to have sat down, with Roderigo's to me -- But when I considered, he was my
Husband, that Name soon covered all -- I prayed, no Gallant's Aid.


Grim. What Is here! The Devil washing his Face! O Woman! What can thou not!


[Aside. Por. What virtuous Woman ever did?


Imp. Recollect your self -- I never doubted your Wit.


Por. Add Patience, to my Innocence good Heaven!


Grim. No more I beseech ye -- And pray (Sir) how do you find it?


Mar. I met a person the other night Incognito; whom (not giving me a good
account of himself) I committed: He Is now without.


Grim. And being informed; that Bianca was found in her Clothes, at that late
hour, when this accident happened, I thought fit to examine her; and all I
could get from her, was, there were other-guise persons concerned, than Thieves
-- I sent her to ye.


Mar. The same, she says to me: And more -- She Is without too:


Grim. Let Us have her in.


[An Officer enters, and Exit again. Mar. Within there! Bring in Bianca -- But
were not convenient that Portia withdrew?


Por. She can say nothing, shall shame me to hear.


[Returns with Bianca. Grim. Now Bianca -- you remember what yo've said. -- Who
were those other-guise Persons?


Bian. My Lady will be angry.


Por. Speak boldly Woman -- Let Truth come out, though I perish.


Bian. Fieschi, and my Lady, had made an Assignation, and I was privy to it --
But it seems my Master sitting up later than ordinary, and Fieschi making some
noise, my Master rusht upon him, and in the Scuffle, received that Wound, from
him.


Gri. Fieschi! -- I Will cut him from my Blood.


Imp. My Sister! Her Virtue sure, knew better things!


Por. And does, Imperia -- My Innocence, is above Scandal.


Gri. And no one with him, but himself?


Bian. Not that I saw, or heard.


Mar. Take her back again --

[Exeunt Officers, with Bianca. The other (perhaps) may tell you more -- I Have
kept them asunder, and neither knows, of the others being apprehended.


Gri. It was discreetly managed -- Bring him in -- Fieschi! -- Villain! -- Whom
shall a Man put Faith in!


[Enter by another Door, an Officer with Pansa. -- His Servant too! -- What
mischief (Sirrah) have your Master, and you, been contriving?

Pan. None, I yet hope -- However, 'come what will of me, I will declare the
Truth -- About three Nights since, Bianca and I, had appointed a Meeting, at
her Master's House, when stealing by his Appartment, it was my misfortune, to
make a stumble; he hears me; I fled; He pursued; I got into a Closet; He sees a
Glympse of my Lanthorn, and fires through it; I got out, and glar'd him in the
Face; He fires a second Pistol, and closed with me; and having no other
possibility of escaping, I was forced, to that unfortunate Stab, which yet, I
put not so home, but that he wrench'd my dagger from me.


Gri. This agrees word for word, with what Montalto told me -- I wish though, I
could have seen the Dagger.


Pan. It was my Master's, who having left it carelessly on his Table, and I,
considering there might be danger in the Streets, put it in my Pocket -- And
with that Dagger, made the Blow.


Imp. Where was your Master?


Pan. Had he been there, it is not to be thought, I Would take another guilt upon
my self.


Gri. This Cloud will break by degrees, and I am glad, we are got so far into it
-- Take off your Prisoner.


Mar. Or rather, confront him with Bianca.


Gri. Well thought of -- bring her in again -- [She is brought in again. You
said ere while, that you saw no one but Fieschi, -- And Pansa says 'twas
himself only, and that by appointment between you two.


Pan. By this token, that she, hearing the noise, put me into the Closet, and
bid me bolt it on the inside.


[Bianca stutters. Bian. If thou have a mind to hang thy self do -- Yes -- he was
there -- And I believe with a design of robbing the House.


Gri. Pry'thee speak Truth -- Whoever was there, Did your Lady, know any thing
of it?


[She stands confused. At last kneels. Bian. Good (Madam) forgive me -- You're
innocent.


[She howls. Gri. Take them away, and keep them severally.


[Exeunt Officers, with the Prisoners. Por. And now Sister judge favorably of
me:
Poor me, whom, nothing, but a quiet Conscience,
Had kept from sinking -- This, is the true joy;
And this, we give our selves; This makes us bear,
A mind, above our Sex: Fortune may clear,
The Visage, only this, can fill the Soul.

Mar. Your Servant Sir, and occasion offers, I Will wait on ye.


[ Exeunt Grimaldi, leading Portia, by one door. Marone and Imperia by another.
Manet, Quartilla. Qua. And now, when all is done, Fieschi, for my Money -- He Is
scarce half rid of a Surfeit, and yet vent'ring, on the same dish again -- He
has a passion for her, that is certain, or otherwise, A Love-fit at this time,
were inexcusable -- Well -- his Present is sent in, and that, so noble, I am
afraid, he does not intend, to come often.


[Imperia reenters. Imp. What Is all that Luggage in the other Room?


Qua. A Damask Bed, with massy Fringe, and every thing suitable! besides, a
rich Cupboard of Plate! And no other name for it, but Luggage? -- I wish your
Ladyship had such another to Morrow, we'd find it House-room.


Imp. I must confess it noble -- But whence came it?


Qua. No Terrachino, I dare warrant ye -- It is the humble Present of the
Outlandish Prince, new come to Town; Il Signior Principi Polacco -- Your
Ladyship, understands the rest -- But did ye know, how I enhanc'd the affair --
Husband -- Relations -- Reputation -- Honor -- And to all this, your utter
averseness -- You Would say, I was no Fool


Imp. Is he handsome.


Qua. What matters that? his Present, is -- However, to satisfy ye -- He Is as
handsome a Man, as the best of us need wish, to lie Board, and Board by -- for
my part, I could sink by his side.


Imp. When will he be here?


Qua. At Midnight -- And you will be asleep.


Imp. But, to a Man I never saw? How shall I look next Morning?


Qua. Just as you did before -- Or you may, if you think fit, cry out, your
Woman has betrayed ye -- No body will hear ye. -- though yet, if ye should, he
understands no Italian.


Imp. Thou shall supply my place -- All Petticoats, are Sisters in the dark.


Qua. I would it were not, to wrong your Ladyship -- come (Madam) no more
Words: Do you but leave him one side of your Bed, he will find, the rest, himself.


Imp. Well -- we'll further consider it, within.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
The Vineyard.
Enter Mattheo solus [In a black Velvet Coat. A tipped Cane, turning up his
Mustachios. Strutting, and viewing himself. IT is the same -- Of a better
Edition though -- And truly (to give the Devil his due) He has shown himself,
much a Gentleman; which is more, than I Will say of every Man -- I have already
dislodged him, from two great Ladies; and if it holds, but one Year, how shall
I dispose of this good Fortune? -- My Boy -- An arrant Crack-rope; Fathers own
Son -- I Will breed him, to my own new Trade; and send him abroad, to take his
Degree -- My Daughter -- Let me see -- she shall Marry -- some Count, or other.
--

Enter Grimaldi. But hold -- who knows, but here may be another Customer -- and
if so, I must stand off, to raise the Price.

[Aside. Gri. Our Duke (Sir) is so well assured, of your more than ordinary
faculty, at Exorcism, that (the Lady Julia) a Neice of ours, being at this
time, a Demoniack, he sent me, to pray your help, and further, assure you, of
as large a Reward, as your self could wish, or the obliging a Prince may merit.


[ Mattheo, puts on a starcht gravity. Mat. I shall be proud, Signior, if my
poor Talent, might contribute any thing, to his Serenities, or your Service --
How far have you proceeded?


Gri. Tried all, that Religion, or Physic could propose.


Mat. Have ye erected a Scheme, to know, under what direction, the Lady lies;
and what kind of Devil it is, that possesses her?


Gri. I think, not.


Mat. The reason I ask ye, is, Because there are diversities of Devils -- some,
so easy, gentle, quiet, ye may do what ye will with 'em -- Others again, so
sullen, refractary, cross-grained, that neither Threats, Enchantments, nor
Devotion it self, will do any good on 'em.


Gri. I leave it wholly to ye.


Mat. Then the first thing I Will do, shall be to erect one; both, as to the
Horary Question, and the matter it self; And when I Have done that, I Will make a
step to the Lady (as Incognito) and give ye, my Judgment of it.


Gri. And, credit me, it shall be gratefully acknowledged.


[Exit. Mat. So so; here is more Money coming -- A Count, did I say. -- We'll
better consider it.


[Enter Roderigo behind him, and gives him a tap on the Shoulder. -- Thy Fist
my Mephestophilus! And what? Thou'st left the Lady Julia asleep, to see a
Friend?

Rod. Thy self, thou mean -- But how came thou to know it?


Mat. You see, how I improve, by your Acquaintance -- 'twas kindly done -- And
now, your Parole -- What sort of People have ye, in the other World?


Rod. What not?


Mat. Have ye any Divines among ye?


Rod. Why truly -- we were once afraid of 'em; And were ever and anon, making
Laws against'em: 'till at last finding, we were more afraid, than hurt; we left
them at their Liberty, to come, or go -- But for the Schoolmen, we ever
shackle them, for fear they make as much disturbance there, as they have
already done, here.


Mat. Any Physicians?


Rod. And they too (for several Years together) had sent us so many on their
Errand, that we grew jealous of them, as that, they designed a Party: 'till
coming to a better understanding, we have ever since, not denied 'em
House-room, for past Services.


Mat. Any Lawyers?


Rod. What should they, do there? The poor Devils, have no Money, and the Rich,
will part with none -- And yet we want not their, Company too -- But (alas!)
Let 'em get what Estate soever here, they bring not a Groat with 'em, as not
doubting, but to raise another, among us: But there, the case is altered.


Mat. Have ye any Poets?


Rod. Of Pretenders, not the least Number: And even there too, some few, who
(regarding Glory, more than Profit) in studying, to divert others, slipped their
Opportunities, and lost themselves.


Mat. Have you any Philosophers?


Rod. What -- They sell Hawks-Bells, and Rattles?


Mat. The same.


Rod. We are, with them (like Rome of old, with their Figure-flingers) ever
banishing 'em, but never rid of 'em -- However, we reckon them, among the
Vutuosi.


Mat. What are those Virtuosi?


Rod. They study Nature -- As why a Fly, should have six Legs; and a Dromedary
but four -- Why a Cat, when she is pleased, holds her Tail an end; And a Dog
wags his -- Why Crabs go backward; and the like.


Mat. And very useful Enquiries -- What Painters have ye?


Rod. The Truth is, we had once banished 'em, for painting us, more ugly than we
are; 'till Michael Angelo's Day of Judgment, complemented us, with a Master of
the Ceremonies; and Parmasano, and Carrachi, with their Improvements upon
Aretine: Pieces (I assure ye) of as much Service to us, as their others of
Devotion, had like to have done us mischief.


Mat. But what becomes of Tyrants, and others, those common Pests of Mankind? A
sort of Men, we read of, in old Story, though I think the Race, be wholly run
out now.


Rod. 'Twould make ye laugh, to see 'em -- One, cobling of old Shoes; another,
heeling of Stockings; a third, rubbing the Sweat in Hot-houses.


Mat. Have ye, the Pox, there too?


Rod. Millions, of Millions: For they that bring it not with them, are sure to
get it, on their first Landing.


Mat. Well, you are a merry Devil; and I must say, an honest Devil. -- But
hark ye -- I must beat up your Quarters once more.


Rod. What? never have done?


Mat. You know I delivered ye from the Talons of the Law, and then, you told
me, what a grateful, Gentleman Devil, you would prove. -- Prithee oblige me, this
once, in quitting the Lady Julia, And I release thee of all demands whatever.


Rod. And I have paid ye sufficiently.


Mat. But I Am concerned in this, beyond a Retreat -- Prithee, this once or I
must say too, thou art not, that grateful Devil I expected.


Rod. How Sirrah! Tax me with Ingratitude! -- Have ye forgot, 'twas I that made
your Fortune? I that gave ye the occasion, of that Aphorismatical Cane? And
reformed your greasy Shamois, into Silks, and Sattins? -- And are ye now grown
Insolent? I Will make ye know, I can take back, as well as give: or otherwise,
call me the most pitiful, poor-Spirited Rascal of a Devil --


Mat. Nay, let us not part in Anger: A word, with ye.


Rod. As many words as you please; but no more stark Love, and Kindness.


[They whisper. Matheo takes him by the Collar. Mat. Now Sirrah too -- And
since, nothing else will do it, I Will even return ye to your Wife. -- They
struggle, Rod. sinks under him, and leaves a dead Body.


Now shall I be hanged for killing this Rascal -- There Is no more to be done,
but cut of his Head, and bury him; and then (perhaps) wanting a Retreat, he may
quit the Lady, of himself -- I Will run for a Hatchet, and do it.

[Exit Mattheo. Rod. springs up with a hollow Laugh. Rod. Hoh -- Hoh -- Hoh --


[ Rod. runs. Beelzebub rises with horror. Mat. returns with an Hatchet,
trembles, drops it, and crowds himself up to the Wall. Belz. Whither Belphegor!
Hold!


Rod. My old Colleague, and Friend, Beelzebub!


Belz. Which, I, abjure -- we have heard of ye; Thou poor,
Thou pitiful, Hen-hearted, sneaking Devil!
Thou, General! A Scandal to the name:
Where Is all that Fable of the Giants War,
Thou have so often boasted, as thy Story?

Rod. And it is my Glory yet.


Belz. In Chimney-Corners:
Thou, ever threw'st Ossa, on Pelion!
Away, thou changeling! -- No -- thy best Pretense,
Is the degenerate Offspring, of their Gore;
Their, Earth-born Gore: And all thy former Soul,
Is dwindled, to a Gloe-worm -- Thou, a Devil!
A very Shame, t'us all.

Rod. The Inclination,
Follows the temper of the Body; And I,
Was out, in mine.

Belz. Thou might have chosen better:
How many brave Bandits, were there hanged, yearly,
That durst have trod, the utmost Brink of Space;
Have fought the Devil, on a Precipice;
Braved Fate; And stood, a second, and third Thunder.
And thou, to take, such a tame, sniveling Slave!

Rod Men have no Windows in their Breast; and what
Could I, judge of a Carcass? -- He was handsome,
And so, a step, to get a Wife; which you well know,
Was the first thing, I was obliged to do.

Belz. And thou have, got one, with a Vengeance!

Mistaken Fool! As if Women knew not, what a Smock-face meant? -- They take
him, for one of themselves; only, that Nature, mistook him in the Coineage --
if ever they, loved any thing, it was a rough-hewn Fellow, that knew, what was
fit for 'em, and let 'em have it -- But never, their Wills -- If they once get
that Bitt between their Teeth, they run away with ye.


Rod. I was to become, in all things, as a Man; And did not more than what
other Men did -- and, if your, Grand Cabal, knew 'em so well, why was I sent
hither?


Belz. As an honorable Spy -- Thou had the World before thee; Every Lap, was
thy Chapel of Ease; nor were thou bound, to Residence.


Rod. And yet, to marry, One?


Belz. As, those other Men; for fashion-sake -- You may easily believe, we
designed no Breed -- But where lay the obligation of loving her, more than
other Men, their Wives? -- But to dote on her! it is thy Eternal Blot.


Rod. There had been no quiet without it.


Belz. Unthinking Sot! Could there be any, with it? -- If so, what makes thee,
shifting thus? -- What Is become of your Million of Ducats?


Rod. My Wife has either spent, or cheated me of 'em.


Belz. Beast of a Devil! -- Must we, torment the Bowels of the Earth, Or from
our Treasure of the Ocean, the spoils of Wracks and Tempests, furnish thee? Thy
Folly, or thy Wife's, never to be satisfied -- I know not what?


Rod. Ye left me to my self; and I, was guided by others -- What Counsel ever
drew his own Conveyance?


Belz. But thou, contrary, to all Rules of Practice, have given thy self,
Physic.


[ Rod. steps forward to him. Rod. As his Penance then, even take the Doctor.


Belz. Stand off, -- thou less than Man, and unworthy, the name, of Devil. -- I
hate a Trimming* Devil -- keep off.


Rod. You, are no competent Judge; you, were never Married, your self -- I
submit all to Lucifer.


Belz. And when your time's expired, you shall be heard.


Rod. But if either my Wife, or Creditors catch me in the mean time, I must,
and will return, at all adventures.


Belz. That, at your Peril -- And remember, I tell it ye.


[Sinks. [ Rod. goes up to Math. yet trembling, and takes up the Hatchet, and
lifts it at him. Rod. Now Sirrah, remember for what, you brought this Hatchet
-- But I Am a Gentleman -- Live -- And trouble me no more.


[Exit with it. Mat. A fair Escape -- But what shall I say to Grimaldi though
-- Why -- he is a noble Person, and if I tell him the Truth, he may (perhaps) be
satisfied; at least, for a while -- And if I don't out-wit my Devil, at last, I
give him leave to brain me.


[Exit. SCENE IV. Of Grimaldi's House.
Enter Grimaldi, Marone. Mar. IT IS the most I can gather -- Pansa, stands firm,
to his first Examination; and Bianca, more and more, clears her Lady.


Gri. Nor can any thing please me better, but that, my Friend's getting up again.


Mar. Would I could say as much, of Roderigo.


Gri. For why Man?


Mar. He Is broke; and run away.


Gri. What? he that darkened all our Stars! -- Impossible!


Mar. Too true. --


Gri. Yet, how you magnified him!


Mar. His great dealings, and punctual Payments, might have cheated any Man, as
well as me.


Gri. Was the Sum considerable?


Mar. Two hundred thousand Ducats at least.


Gri. It Is a wonder, no more follow him: for it is often with Merchants, as
Nine-Pins; Hit but your first, and second right, and it is odds but two Parts in
three, tumble.


Mar. That (I Am afraid) shall I, for one -- He owes me, ten thousand Ducats;
And when I went to his Lady this Morning, she told me, he had left her, a
Beggar.


Gri. And yet you know, he was Wise, Prudent, Virtuous, -- and once, your
Glory, he called ye Friend -- and shall a little Dirt part ye? -- Come -- your
Credit, will set him up again.


Mar. If it would to the Gallows, l'd venture as much more.


Gri. Your Friend -- you would not sure?


Mar. My Friend -- A very Rogue: A mere cheating, beggarly, bankrupt Rascal.


[Enter a Servant to Marone. Ser. Roderigo (Sir) attempting to have got home
last night, in a disguise, was met by the Bailiffs, who secured him; and coming
to him this Morning, found him dead.


Mar. Nay then, farewell my ten thousand Ducats, if yet, that were all.


Ser. And there were found in his Pocket, some Papers purporting a design, of
betraying this City, wherein you seem concerned; upon which, the Senate have
issued Warrants against you, and seized your House, and Goods, for Moneys (as
it is said) due to the Bank.


[ Marone starts, and tears his Hair. Mar. Roderigo! my Papers! the Bank! --
What shall I do?


Gri. Consult your Virtue -- A Virtuous Man, is ever present to himself; and
proof, against the worst, of Fortune.


Mar. Virtue! -- Cold comfort.


[He runs off. Rod. meets him. Rod. I was at your House, to have adjusted, some
Accounts between us, and they directed me hither.


[ Marone embraces him. Mar. Roderigo! -- I Am o'er-joyed -- They Have belied my
Friend -- We'll never part.


Rod. Content.


[ Rod. takes him in his Arms, and sinks with him. Gri. Defend me Heaven! --
What Is this? [He walks. Enter Serve. -- 't has half bereft me of my self.


Ser. A Gentleman (Sir) they call him, the Devil-Doctor desires to speak with
you.


Gri. I would he had come sooner -- Bring him in. -- [ Exit Servant. Sure
Hell's broke loose, this year. [Enter Math. His Head broken. -- The dreadful
Object's not yet digested.


Mat. I was with the Lady according to my promise, but (like a Dog by a Gloyer)
the Devil smelt me out from all the Company -- Ecce signum.


[He points to his Head. Gri. I Am sorry for it -- But the Duke, will send ye, a
healing Plaster.


Mat. And I, more sorry, that the Lady, lies under such an ill direction. --
Strange Configurations -- The Planets in their Detriment, Retrograde, and
Malevolent; nor do I remember, to have seen, a worse Aspect of Heaven --
Saturn, and Jupiter, Sir. --


Gri. No Canting I beseech ye -- I believe it.


Mat. And for the Spirit, that possesses her -- There has not such an
illcontriv'd, capricious, hectoring Devil, broke-loose, these three last
Centuries; I believe the Fathers are sensible of it.


Gri. The truth is, they have had a hard tug with him.


Mat. He is perversus Haereticus, -- Bell, Book, and Candle! He danced a Jigg
to it -- And for Holy Water! he made no more of it, than I Would have done, of a
Bottle of Montefiasco -- upon the whole matter; I judge him some Devil of
Quality; and then, I have no Power over him: All mine, are poor Devils.


Gri. This will not do -- If you please to free her, it will be well accepted,
and better rewarded -- If not, be sure, the Duke will have ye in the
Inquisition, and make ye set forth, by what new way, unkown to the Church, you
have delivered the two former. -- Or (who knows) Inquire de Vita, and moribus,
and hang your self.


Mat. Will ye then hear me, without canting, and I Will discover all?


Gri. Hear ye, I will; but promise, nothing.


Mat. I ask no more -- And who do you think this Devil is? even Roderigo, our
late, great Merchant.


Gri. Convince me of that, and thou say somewhat.


Mat. The Story is too large, to tell you now; but thus, in short -- 't as by
compact between us for a prior Service, of which I Will give ye an account anon
-- and on that score, and no other, was it, that I freed those Ladies of him.


Gri. Then thou may the better do this.


Mat. I once, thought it: But since you spoke to me, we met; and I proposed to
him, the quitting the Lady Julia, as the last kindness I Would demand of him; and
he not only refused me, but professed himself my mortal Enemy: And if this,
[pointing to his Head] be the Token of a Friend, I leave it to you.


Gri. I am inclined to believe thee -- for 'twas not a Minute before you came,
but he was here, and gave me that Evidence of what you say, I Will never desire,
to see it again. -- But what shall we do with the Duke?


Mat. Do not despair -- I Have yet a trick, shall do the Business -- Get me a
large Stage, with a full throng of People: Fifes, Flutes, Cornets, Trumpets,
Sackbuts, Drums, Kettle-drums, Hautboys, and Bagpipes; and let the Lady Julia,
be brought on the Stage well attended; and when I throw up my Hat, let 'em all
strike up together, and when I cry Advance, let a Lady in a Veil, whom I Will
appoint for that purpose, enter with another shout: And this, with some other
Ingredients that I have, will (I doubt not) send him packing.


Gri. Appoint your time, and place, all shall be ready.


Mat. I leave that, to your pleasure.


Gri. What think you, of t'Morrow, and the Duke's great hall for th'place


Mat. None better, and I Will attend ye there.


[Exeunt. ACT V. SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Fieschi solus. Fies. IT takes, as right as wish -- Quartilla, was just
to her hour; and in the dark, I shuffled my Signior Principi's, Hand, into
hers, instead of mine; and there is no doubt, but she has put them together --
He Is a brawny Fellow, and like enough, to please her -- But for fear the Jade,
should be fond of him, next Morning, he has his Lesson, not to answer her any
thing, but broken Gibberish -- The Jews sent in the Bed, and Plate on
Roderigo's account, as new furniture for his House, and (as I am told) are
resolved to seize it -- And if my Signior Principi has not deceived me, we
shall have Rabble enough, about the House, presently) -- I Will take a turn or
two, to see the issue.


[He walks. Enter Jews. 1 Jew. I say 'twas your Folly Brother, to send it, hand
over Head.


2 Jew. We have had greater dealings with him, and his payment, was ever good.


1 Jew. But Men, may not be the same, at all times -- It was considerable, and
you should have inquired.


2 Jew. You, knew his Broker: And I, saw the Goods delivered.


1 Jew. But he was broke before.


2 Jew. How could I, know that? Men don't proclaim it.


1 Jew. Had we been bitten by a Snap, 'twere somewhat -- But by a prodigal
Fool! The Town, will laugh at us.


[Enter Officers. 2 Jew. Let Us not make it worse, by talking -- Come Gentlemen,
stand close; and as the door opens, enter.


[He knocks, Fieschi comes up. Fies. 'Morrow Gentlemen; you're early Men.


1 Jew. Business, must not be neglected.


Fies. And if I mistake not, your Attendants, speak where it lies.


2 Jew. It is too late, to conceal it now -- we are miserably cheated.


Fies. What? beaten at your own Weapon! -- Roderigo sure, is a Man of Estate,
and Credit.


1 Jew. Time was, he might have commanded all we have, -- But now -- the Bird
is flown.


2 Jew. Gone, as a Man may say, in fumo!


Fies. He left enough behind, unless his Wife has sold it.


1 Jew. There Is the Danger -- Knock harder.


Another knock. Fies. I have no small concern with him, my self, which brought
me hither too; though not so well provided -- But [He whispers them.] if ye can
-- I Will give ye. --


[Again. 2 Jew. When we have served our selves, we are yours.


Enter Don Hercio. Her. What rude Hand profaned this Sanctuary?


Fies. And who are you?


[ Fieschi takes him byth' Arm, while the rest enter. Her. I Am the righter of
Wrongs, and undoer of Injuries -- Heart of Steel, and Arms of Brass.


Fies. And what Figure do you make in this House?


Her. Only engaged, in Roderigo's absence -- And (like the Dragon of old) I
watch the golden Fruit, 'till his return -- Still, true to Honor, and will
fight her Battles.


Fies. As thus, with that Baboons Snout.


[He wipes him over the Face. Her. Voto! -- Had it been under the Ear, y'ad
measured your length.


Fies. Sirrah! Begone -- And take to your old Trade of knitting Gaps, making
Hair-buttons, Tooth-picks, and false Dice, which you learnt, of your Comerogues
of the Galleys.


[Jews and Officers run out again, Quartilla following with a Paring-Shovel.
Qua. Why Villains! Rogues! Jews! Is there no consideration of a Ladies Honor?


1 Jew. Keep her Honor to her self, and give us, our Goods.


Qua. And thou Polacco! -- Oh me!


[ To Fieschi. Fies. I hope, your Lady had a good Night of it.


Qua. Thou Devil Incarnate!


[Enter Boys, and Rabble, whooping. Boys. Picaro! Picaro! make haste Picaro!
Execution, stays for ye.


Qua. What was that? Picaro!


[ Picaro appears above. Pic. I Am but buttoning my Coat, and will be with ye,
instantly.


Boys. Come down! come down! There will be no Sport, 'till you come.


[Boys hollow, Qua. lays at 'em with her Paring-Shovel. They take it from her
Qua. Ah Rogue! art thou there! -- Have we refused Velasco, Tedesco, di Parphar,
di Laco! --


[She wrings her Hands. Fies. The Devil and all!


Qua. And now, to be shamm'd, by the Common-Hangman!


Enter Picaro, in a white Cap, Sleeves, Apron, tucked round his Waste, and a
large Knife stuck in it. Boys. Picaro! Picaro! Picaro! Picaro!


Qua. Is this your Principi Polacco! -- Poveraccia! Poveraccia, peccatrice me!
-- I could eat thee.


-- [ To Fieschi. Thou a Gentleman! -- You said you would make a Whore of me, too;
but, why don't you Sirrah? why don't ye?

[Clapping her Hands at him, and crying. Fies. The Fool, raves -- And so
Picaro; I hope you liked your Bedfellow?


Pic. So well (Sir) I owe ye another Job; and that, for nothing -- She was such
Flesh and Blood!


Her. And shall I, see Honor thus trampled on, and yet wear trusty Steel, on
Thigh! -- Let me, come at the Rogue -- I Will pinck his Doublet, and make a
Sieve, of's Skin.


[Boys hollow, round him, and twich him behind. He draws. They tie a Cracker to
him. Her. Rogues, Scoundrels, Tatterdemallions!


[He whets his point on the Floor. They, fire the Cracker, and hollow. -- I say
-- Rogues, Dogs in Doublets, -- Were ye more renowned, than Palmerin of
England; or valiant, than his Cousin, D'Oliva: More undaunted, than the twelve
Peers of France; or greater Bullies, than King Arthur's Round-Table Men: More
adventurous, than Valentine and Orson; or Invincible, than Don Bellamis of
Greece: Nay -- were the whole Mirror of Knighthood contracted in ye -- I Would
make ye know --

[As he is ranting, Picaro and another, slip the Paring-Shovel between his
Legs, hoise him on their Shoulder, carry him round the Stage, and Exeunt the
Boys hollowing* Manet Fieschi. Fies. 'Twas somewhat sharp, but just -- Her
Treachery,
Deserved no better from me -- And, now no more,
But a long, long Farewell, to every thing
That looks like Woman; 'till, some worthy Action,
Compound, for my past Folly -- To repent,
Is the next step, to being Innocent.
Men are no Angels -- Somewhat, must be indulged
To Passion, Error, or Mistake: The best,
Are not without their Faults; and the fairest Life,
Has some leaves in it to be read without Favor.
[ Marone is thrown upon the Stage. Fieschi helps him up. Marone sure! -- it is
he -- 'twas said, the Devil had carried him away, and now (be-like) has thrown
him back, as not worth keeping.


Mar. Where am I? -- Or whence, came I? -- O Signior! I have wonders to tell ye
-- Roderigo is a Spirit -- A very Devil.


Fies. And make you, a good use, of your Escape from him.


Mar. I will, I will: And never more, oppress any Man, but having got clear of
the Senate, what I once, said in scorn, I Will now perform, in earnest -- I Will
build an Hospital.


Fies. To lodge those, your self first Beggared.


Mar. Give what I have to Charitable Uses.


Fies. That is to say -- you will sleep upon it, and look out, for another
Mortgage, next Morning -- Charity (you know) begins at home.


Mar. Respite your Censure, 'till you hear my Story -- That I had hearkened to
your good, virtuous Uncle!


Fies. Whom, under my present Circumstances, I Will never see -- If ever Man lost
his reason in a Petticoat, 'twas I, the poor, unfortunate, mistaken Fieschi.


[Exeunt. SCENE II. A great Hall.
Enter Grimaldi, Mattheo. Gri. YOu're a Man of your word.


Mat. And pray believe, I made not those Scruples, out of any repugnancy, or
want of Will to serve ye, but, that in case my endeavors, answer not my
desires, you might judge, the more favorably of me -- Are all things ready?


Gri. They are; and if you, want nothing, I Will go for the Lady.


Mat. I only wait her -- But be sure, you follow the Directions I gave ye.


Gri. They shall be observed.


[ Exit Grimaldi. Mat. And now, assist me thou great Patron of Mankind,
Impudence! -- I have some ends of Latin my self, besides a Bushel of hard
Words, I learnt from others, if I can hit 'em right -- However (like them) I Will
trowl it of boldly, and enough of it: Nor shall that triflng Circumstance, of
Sense, and Pertinence, be any Rub in my way -- Have Not I heard a Man quote the
Books he never read; and cited Authors, that never were? And have not it past? --
What should hinder it?


[ Grimaldi returns with Julia, in an Elbow-Chair, well attended. Jul. Are you,
there? I Will conjure ye -- Unhand me Villains.


Mat. And you too, nor Man, nor Devil: Semibovemque virum, Semivirumque bovem
-- [He whispers her] Belphegor; dear Belphegor; you know I once served ye, at a
dead lift -- Come -- be yet, civil, and depart -- if not -- this, is the last
time of asking.


Jul. I forbid the Banes; both Parties, are not agreed -- Have I, gravelled so
many Doctors, to turn out now, for a pitiful Vinerollo? -- Let me, come at him.


Mat Then know, foul Fiend -- Conjuro, and commando tibi, by St. Hugh's Bones,
St Luke's Face, and venire St. Gri. And by all the occult Qualities, of Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, I once more, command, and conjure ye, that ye make me
direct answer, touching your self, your Tatterdemallions, and Puggs, and
forthwith depart this Lady, with all your Signatures, Tricks, Trinkets, and
Trumperies, from the Crown of her Head, to the Soal of her Foot: Under the
pain, that I releage, and consine ye, to your dismal Lake, for a Thousand
Years, yet more, than were ever decreed ye.


Jul. The Rogue's pleasant; and I Will humor him.


[Aside. Mat. Tell me I say, and conjure ye as before -- What are ye?


Jul. Shame faw him that speers, and kenns sa'wele.


Mat. Your Name I say.


Jul. Monsieur Devile: Don, or Signior Diavolo: Mine Here Tifle: Herenagh mac
Deul; or Sir Duncan, in the Devil's Name.


Mat. What Is here? Philippus, Aureolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, Bombastus of
Hoenhayim? -- How many are there of ye?


Jul. Ten hundred thousand Tun.


Mat. Of what Order!


Jul. Like other Bodies-aggregate; of none, nor ever reducible under any.


Mat. At least, your Superior's Name.


Jul. I never owned any.


Mat. Tell me I say; and Jubeo! -- Is there Absoluta Potentia Asmodei, sive
cujusvis alii; or a vitium Corporis, as say the Learned -- What made ye first,
possess her?


Jul. Look on her, and answer your self: She Is young, and handsome.


Mat. So was your Wife Sirrah: And yet -- [She falls into a Fit. This, will
work, presently -- [ Aside] How long have ye been there.


Jul. Much about the time, you cracked a Commandment, with your Taylor's Wife --
[Mat. starts.] Are ye concerned Gentlemen! Ha, hah!


Mat. Bring me the Flagellum Daemonum -- I Will taw ye.


Jul. Or rather, give your self, the first Discipline, and I Will help, to lay it
on -- Ha, hah, ha!


Mat. Once more, I say, turn out -- Or by the Phoberon Phoberotaton; Ton de
Apomeibomenos; And Heautontemorumenos -- Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis,
Chios, Argos, Athenae -- I Will --


Jul. What? my new Conjurer, what? Hoh, hoh!


Mat. I lead ye about the Country, like a Bear by the Nose; make ye turn Spits,
like a Dog in a Wheel: And if that will not do it* have ye Chained, like a Flea, in
a Box -- And therefore, dispatch; and let me know, what sign, you will give of
your departure.


Jul. Thunder, Thunder, Thunder, as thus, Rascal.


[She flies on him. Mat. I Will have ye bound over, for Bloodshed, and Battery.


Jnl. I fear no Justice, under Heaven.


Mat. I Will bring ye into the Spiritual Court, and have ye Excommunicated.


Jul. I am no Member of your Church: Or if I were, have no Money, to pay Fees.


Mat. I Will have ye burnt in Effigy, with Brimstone, Galbanum, Aristolochia,
Hypericon, and Rue; in a more terrible Cap, and painted Coat, than the
Inquisition, yet ever thought of -- And if all this fail; I Will send ye back, to
your Wife.


Jul. You told me so, once before; but now (I hope) you will stay, 'till you
catch me -- Yet, I don't like the Rogue.


[Aside. Mat. Then I Will bring her to you.


[He throws up his Hat. Wind-Musick is heard, with a Shout, without Jul. What
would this Peasant be at? -- I have more than once, viewed all the Pomp of
Heaven, nor am I ignorant, of what is most formidable in Hell: But what means
this? -- Prithee, Matheo, what is it?


Mat. Are ye come to your Prithee, Sirrah? -- Either march off civilly, or
know; that Will, or Nil, you shall -- Alas poor Roderigo; your Wife's in chase
of ye, and is just coming up stairs -- Advance Imperia! --


[The same Music is heard. A Lady in a Veil enters, with shouting. Julia
springs at him, and falls, as dead. It thunders. All startle Jul. It Is she,
she'as found me out.


Mat. Fear nothing; the Work is done -- and now take care of the Lady.


Gri. I Will see it done: And having made the Duke laugh, it shall be my next
business, to see you gratified. [ Julia is carried off. Exeunt, all, but Matheo.


Mat. And if I get no more, it is no great matter -- I have lined my self,
pretty well, already: And now, all things considered, I think my self, happy
enough, that I have 'scap'd Hanging, at last: And if in spite of my Stars, I
set up for a Doctor, who can help it.


[Exit. SCENE Vltima. Montalto's House.
Enter. Montalto ( in a Nightgown) Marone, Portia. Attendants. MOn. I heard it
from my Friend; and must confess,
Not without some surprise: I Have here, and there,
Read of the Devil's Power, to condense
A Cloud; t'assume, and actuate a Body;
But never came near the Experiment, till now:
Where were ye, in that absence?

Mar. I remember
No more of that, than how, I was thrown back.

Mon. You would do well to make a Scrutiny
Into your self, and where you guess the Cause,
Unlearn that, first.

Por. And if you chance to find,
You have oppressed the Poor; make restitution;
And by what is past, correct, what is to come.

Mar. I Would once, such thoughts: But, when I considered,
I only took, what Law, had given me,
I thought, there was no such great haste, or need.

Por* The greater the Oppression, when Law,
Is made the Stale to it. -- This of Roderigo.
For ought you know, was given ye, as a Caution.

Mar. And had there been no Malice of his own,
I should have thought so: But, he owed me Money;
Ten thousand Ducats; And, of my Conscience,
Thought to have frightened me, to a Release;
And, if I Have given him one, I Will plead, per dures.
However, this I Am resolved -- That, and other, the like Debts, I Will give 'em
all, to Pious Uses -- But for Restitution -- Alas, my Estate's but small, and I
cannot.


[Montalto smiles. Mon. That is, you will not -- Nor (perhaps) repent,
The late intended Treachery to your Country:
A Virtuous Man (like Sceva in the Breach)
Combats an Army, singly, for her, safety;
Inseparably they stand, and fall together:
Cato, would not survive, his Countries Liberty;
Nor did that Liberty, outlive Cato.
Make me think better of ye -- yet, begin;
Delay, is just so much time lost.
[ Enter Grimaldi, Matheo.
Gri. My Doctor here, has given him a third remove.

Mat. And I hope, there will be no occasion, of Shooing him round.

Gri. He Will tell ye the Story within; and, not unworth your hearing --
In the mean, I cannot, too often congratulate, your recovery.

Mon. Nor I, acknowledge, your Friendship.
I Will tell ye News -- Good News (for there is nothing,
We must not share) -- Methinks, I am become
Another Man; And this small quiet, pleases,
Beyond the noise, of Crowds -- Now, I can see,
The great ones, heave like Moles, and at next turn,
Heave out themselves; Another (Mushrome like)
Spring in a Night, and cropp'd ere Noon; A third,
Snatch at a Booty, which, a fourth, strikes from him,
And unconcerned, my self.

Gri. True happiness,
Lies not in Greatness, but an honest Mind,
Not framed, of Accidents, nor subject to 'em.
A serene Breast; and such a life, as is not
Ashamed to live, nor yet afraid, to die.

Por. And yet, how does the World, turmoil it self!
How do they play away their days! and trifle,
Their time in parts, 'till they have slipped the whole!
One business breeds another; Hope, desire;
And that, makes room for more: How they afflict
Themselves, and envy others! Restless in War,
And even in peace unquiet! Compass with Care,
What they possess, with more Anxiety!

Mon. To them that love it, be it -- I neither, like,
The Merchandise, nor price, -- What is it to him,
That cannot dissemble? Him, that cannot flatter?
That Is not ambitious, by Indignities,
To rise to Dignities, and lose himself?
Whereas Retirement, as it costs us nothing,
Is much the shorter cut, to Heaven it self.

Enter Imperia and Quartilla as Distracted. Imp. Help, Help me, Sister! -- Can
ye forgive me -- you cannot, you cannot -- Whither shall I run -- He Will ha'me,
he will ha'me.


Por. You never injured me, or if you had, I have (as I ought) forgot it.


Qua. Our House is more than haunted.


Imp. Sister -- Sister -- I Have married the Devil -- See! where he stands!


Por. Bless the poor miserable Woman, good Heaven!


Qua. His Eyes, as big as Pumpkins. [ She starts.] And a Mouth, like any
Baker's Oven -- Let me alone good Devil, and take my Lady -- she is younger
Flesh.


[She starts up and down, and shrieks. Imp. See -- See -- The House cracks --
The Walls, are coming together -- That Beam, was shot at me.


Qua. I Am your old Servant Quartilla -- good Devil.


Imp. There too -- The Ground opens -- I Will at him though -- Do thou yet brave
me -- Time was, thou fear'dst me more -- I Will give ye back, your Keys -- Do
thou yet -- yet --


Por. I see nothing, Sister -- pray walk in with me -- my Innocence, dares
speak to him.


Imp. There, there, the greater Devil, Fieschi!


Por. Poor afflicted Woman -- Her hurt Imagination, conceives any thing -- Pray
go in with me; I Will bear ye Company.


Imp. No no, -- I Will out, at that Window.


[Ent. Rod. All are surpised. Imp. and Quart. shriek, and run off. Portia
follows. Rod. makes up to Marone, He gets behind Montalto. Mon. steps out. Mon.
Horror! -- Be Man, or Devil, I Will know what thou art.


[ Rod. gives back. Rod. Thy Virtue is beyond the Power of Hell -- Be safe --
And if you have not heard my Story, there is one [ He points to Math.] can tell
it ye -- And so, my Embassy is at an end, per-force.


Mat. And your Creditors, may speak to ye, upon even terms.


Rod. No more of that -- On what account, I first assumed this Body, you [ To
Matheo.] know -- how I lived among ye, ye all know -- And why, I went off so
soon, my Wife, best knows -- In short, I have found Earth the greater Hell, and
being obliged to no more than my own Experience, must declare, that Men's Souls,
are in the right, and it is their Wives, that send them thither. -- And for my
self, promise ye, I Will never again repent me, at so dear a rate.


[Exit. Mon. Stupendous! -- And the more I consider it, the more, I Am at a
loss -- My first surprise, is now, astonishment.


Gri. I Am of Opinion, his two Servants, that were taken up the other night, may
be the same, as their Master, and therefore I ordered Picaro, to bring them
hither, as if they were to be put upon the Rack: Perhaps, they will tell ye more.


Mon. It can be no hurt; though, nothing yet appears against em.


Gri. I would, I could say as much of my unfortunate Nephew, that was; and
whom, Imperia's last words, unwillingly brought to my Memory -- Can ye, as I
have, and ever will, forget him.


Mon. And more than that -- I have forgiven him; do you the same -- He is not,
naturally, Vicious, and who knows, what his future actions may be -- whatever
were the Injury designed, it was to me -- My Portia is safe and I Am revenged
enough -- The dismal Object once again!


[Enter Rod. plodding. All the Company again surprised. Rod. But stay --
suppose --


Mat. Are you, come again! -- Nay then advance Bailiffs!


[ Rod. starts. Recovers it, and goes up, ruffling to him. Rod. Beware sirrah,
how you fool, once too much -- Suppose I say (my Term, being not a full third
part expired) they will not receive me below? -- Why -- I must find somewhere, to
put my Head -- For the Women, I bar 'em, Bye, and Main: Who knows, but I may
have better luck among the Men? -- I have (I must confess) learned some Wit
among ye; and according to your frank, open, wonted Simplicity, I Will tell ye my
design; cross-bite it, if you can.


Mat. That could I, sirrah, if I durst.


[From behind Montalto. Rod. I Will buz Fears, and Jealousies, among Citizens --
Factions, among Country Gentlemen -- Grumblings, among Younger Brothers --
Heartburnings, among Courtiers -- And Sedition, among the Common People. --
But, suppose again, my Citizens Wife, work her Husband, into a good Trade? --
My Country-Gentleman, be made a Justice of the Peace? -- My Younger Brother,
become an Elder Brother? -- My Courtier, stumble on a good Office; or, be taken
off, with a Feather in his Cap? -- The common People, get another Opinion by
the end? -- And at last Necessity force every Man, to comply, with what he is?
Then am I but where I was. -- And (as I said before) in the greater Hell -- And
therefore Gentlemen, 'till we meet again, Buconos Nochios.


[He sinks on the Stage. Mon. It yet, amazes me.


Mat. Do not believe him, -- it is not the first time he has shown me, that
trick.


Enter Picaro, with Crispo, and Mingo, manacled. Pic. I have brought them (Sir)
according to your commands: But, if I may be believed, in my own Trade; the
first stretch, will pull 'em in pieces.


Gri. However, give 'em the Question -- What are ye?


Cris. The same our Master was -- And since (as I see) he has given us the
slip; what have I to do, but follow him?


Min. The same will trusty Mingo. -- Tell us of Racks! As I, came whole among
ye, be assured, I Will not hazard, a Joint, to satisfy, a World-Ev'n take 'em
all together.


Cris. And mine to boot.


[ Cris. and Min. drop, and leave dead Bodies. Gri. It Is what I thought --
Those Bodies, were assumed -- See if you know 'em; perhaps, they may have past
your hand.


[ To Picaro. Pic. As likely, as not; [He turns them) -- Why truly Sir, it is
no Country Work, and whoever did it, need not be ashamed often -- Once more --
The Knot, is in the right place; and now I better consider, it it is all my own
work; this Roderigo -- I remember him -- his name, was Scabbalucchio, a
Neapolitan Bandit; I made his Passport for the other World, about four Years
since -- But a more cowardly Rogue, I never saw -- He hung an Arse, more than a
Bear, going to a Stake; and was three quarters dead, ere he got half the
Ladder. -- But for the other two, I know no more of them, but that it was my
Work too; and for Plain-Work, I dare justify it.


Gri. Well, take them off, and throw 'em together, into some hole or other.


[They are dragged off. Mar. And let 'em lie, 'till I enquire after them.


Gri. And beware you, how ye venture another trip, to Terra damnata.


Mar. But the Mob (I Am told) are got into my House, and rifling, what the Bank
has left.


Gri. It Is natural to 'em, when they cannot cudgel the Ass, to vent their rage
against the Pack-Saddle -- Go, make your Peace with the Senate, and for the
rest, time may obliterate your Oppressions, and the next Age forget, their
Fathers were undone by ye.


[ Portia reenters. Por. Poor comfortless Woman; she is fallen asleep at last.


Mon. I think 'twould do well, to send her, and all the Women, to the
Convertiti.


Gri. And for Pansa, I Will secure him, the Galleys. -- And now Sir, give me
leave to tell ye in private, what yet, I have in charge from the Senate. -- Our
Duke, having absolved his two Years Government, the Senate, is at last become
so sensible of your Merit, that they have elected you, Duke, in his room: -- A
more solemn Message, will suddenly attend ye.


Mon. Tempt not your Friend, with a fair gilded Pill.
All bitterness within: I am content,
And what can Providence add more.
Caesar himself, The Master of so many,
Is yet, the Servant of more.

Por. And why should my Montalto seek elsewhere,
What he may give himself? -- If ever Ambition
Were justifiable, it is the Ambition,
Of being rather good, than great.

Gri. Let Snakes, and Worms (the Emblems of Self-Love)
Circle themselves, into themselves; while Nature
Minds more, the Preservation of the whole,
Than any single Birth -- Your Country calls,
And you must once more, serve her.

Mon. Why should I waste my small remain of Life,
In blind pursuit, of what, can only serve me,
To furnish out, an Epitaph? Yet must,
Subject me, to the World, and lash of Fortune.

Por. Fortune. Who'd trust her, that has ever heard,
A Triumph, turned into a Sacrifice?
Or a swollen Favorite, whom the same day,
Saw worshipped, by the Senate, and ere night,
Torn piecemeal, by the People.

Mon. No Portia,
We'll find some nobler Object; one, on which
She has no Empire.

Por. There, spoke Montalto!
And let the World, from his Example, learn.
Crimes may be fortunate, while Virtue creeps;
And (like a Flower, oppressed with Morning Dew)
Droops its neglected Head; but it will, rise;
Rise, under the dead weight; when to others shall
(Like mighty Ruins) break themselves, on what they fall.

[Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE. Spoken by IMPERIA.
ALL is not done: There Is yet, a word or two,
For the Author; And (Fair Ladies) first to you:
You, who are the making, or the marring Powers,
(For most Men's Watches ever went by yours)
From you, he hopes he need not fear a frown,
For what is Portia's Virtue, but your own?
Your own transcribed: and what (if ye must know
The truth) he only copied off from you.
But for my self: For once, even let me pass;
And though the face may not please ye, spareth' Glass;
Ye cannot but say, I made the Devil an Ass:
Contraries, by their contraries appear;
Were you all 'like, where were the Good, or Fair?
There were no Fund for Wit, were all Men Wise,
And Fools, would want their Representatives.
Faith (Ladies) take it favorably; and then,
He thinks he is more than half-secure of the Men:
For you, that have good Wives, cannot disapprove
That in another, which in them, ye love:
And you, that have got bad ones, cannot call
The Copy ill, that hits the Original:
What, though at home, ye dare scarce tread, for fear;
You Are out of hearing now, and may laugh, here:
And you, that never had any of your own,
May view the Ground, before the Match be run.
Sure, some of ye will be pleased: And if so,
Give me your hands upon it: And seal it you
(Fair Ladies) with a Smile, 'twill clear the Air,
Make it a starry Evening, and all, fair.
FINIS.

