THE CHEATS. A COMEDY.

Written in the Year, M.DC.LXII.

Hor. Sermon. 1. -- Ridentem dicere verum,
Quis vetat? --
IMPRIMATUR, Nov. 5. 1663.

Roger L'estrange.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the Middle-Temple-Gate; And
Cha. Adams at the Talbott, over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
1664.

The Author, TO The Reader.
Petron. Arbiter. -- Non omnibus unum est
Quod placet; Hic, Spinas colligit, ille, Rosas.

I Have ever had so little Faith for Apologies, that I rather believed they did
more hurt than good; and for the most part, left things in a worse condition
than they found them: The sense of this, made me pass some late censures in
silence; and perhaps, might have obliged me to the same still, had I not found
a dust raised, and believed it my concern to blow it off, at least, endeavor
it: -- To come to the matter; This Comedy was lately Acted, and (as it fares
with things of this nature) variously received; Nor could I well have expected
other; It were too much fondness (not to say worse) to tax that freedom in
another, which I should think hard, to be denied my self: -- No -- this is
nothing of the point; All that I take notice of, is this, How justly it may
have deserved all that has been said upon it; unless People would have it dealt
with like Don Quixot's Library, some burnt for the Curate's sake, other for the
Barber's, and not the least for the good Woman's: -- Not to detain you longer in
the Porch, I have at present, but this short request, That it may speak for it
self: -- And first, (to take the parts as they lie) I shall begin with Bilboe,
and Titere Tu; the one, usurping the name of a Major, the other, of a Captain,
whereas in truth (and as may be gathered from their discourse) they never were
either, or scarcely, any thing like it: -- A humor that can be no wise
strange, to any man that knew this Town, between the years 46, and 50, and
being so understood; will be as unlikely to prove an occasion of scandal, to
any person of Honor; For if I have shown the odd practices of two vain
persons, pretending to what they were not, I think I have sufficiently
justified the Brave man, even by this Reason, That the Exception proves the
Rule: -- And further, if there be any thing in their language, that may seem
loose, be pleased to consider who they are that speak it; and then I hope
you will thus far absolve me, as to say, I had as ill brought 'um in, with a pair
of Beads at their Girdle, as my Puritan Constable, with a Feather in's Cap: --
But secondly, for the Second Scene, I am confident I may pass it, and come to
the Third, where (and in other parts of the Play) if you meet with a small
pretender to Astrology, Physic, the Rosy-crucian humor, Fortune-telling, and
I know not what; or in the fifth Act, Qualiacunque voles vendentem somnia, -- I
shall, instead of plea to it, only enlarge my request, That you would but run
over the late Adventures of that kind, the sad effects of which, may be well
feared to live among the people, when the persons that writ'um, may be either
dead, or forgotten: -- Nor do I think I ought to ask pardon, that I have taken
a Levite, to this Teraphim, since whoever shall give himself the trouble of
enquiry, will (without the least force upon the Text) easily find, that both
alike have spoken vanity: -- But fourthly, for what concerns Runter, though I
think I might have let that pass too, yet, because I would not be
mis-understood, give me leave to believe, That no wise man can conceive either
Profession, viz. Common, or Civil Law, could be intended in it: -- For as to
the first, those that know my way of education, will be ready to excuse me thus
far, That had I designed that, I must necessarily have laid it another way, and
perhaps too, might have been able to have don't; -- Or if I had struck at the
latter, That I was not so altogether a stranger to it, as not to have run it
higher; -- Let this suffice to both, That I made use of no more, than what
served to my purpose, and so I leave it to a favorable interpretation, and
come to the fifth Scene, viz. Mr. Scruple, where, if any man shall say, I have
trod too near upon Religion, I hope, upon his second thoughts, I may trust my
cause with him; when, if he shall rightly understand it, he will easily
perceive, That I have only shown how that venerable Name has been abused, and
that best Thing, made Bawd to the worst actions: -- Lastly, to any man that
shall say, such or such humors have either been in the Town before, or
formerly writ upon, give me leave to offer this to the first, That Comedy,
either is, or should be, the true Picture of Virtue, or Vice; yet so drawn, as
to show a man how to follow the one, and avoid the other; in doing which, if I
had framed any thing that was not, I had not only belied the Town, but wronged
my self: -- Does not Martial say of his Epigrams, Dictavit auditor? And was not
Quicquid agant homines -- Horace's farrago? -- As to the second, If it has been
said so long since, That there is nothing which has not been before, I hope (if
I may have bordered upon any one that has gone before) I am thus far excusable,
that I have purposely declined both his matter, and his way: -- To which, if
the contrary shall chance to be objected, I think it enough at present to say,
That I am in Possession, and a bare They say, without showing, and comparing
the place, will not be sufficient to evict me out of it: -- To be short, were
there nothing more, even this were enough, That there is hardly any thing left
to write upon, but what either the Ancients or Moderns have some way or other
touched on; -- Did not Apulejus take the rise of his Golden Ass, from Lucian's
Lucius? and Erasmus, his Alcumistica, from Chaucer's Canons Yeomans Tale? and
Ben. Johnson, his more happy Alchymist, from both? -- The Argument were
everlasting -- Sed Cynthius aurem Vellit, and admonuit -- And therefore upon
the whole matter, whoever may have seen the Play, or shall happen to read this,
I have but two things more to beg of him, -- the one, That by a new Comment,
he pick not out any ill meaning, which I never intended: Improbe facit, qui in
alieno libro ingeniosus est: -- The other, That he remember that of the
Tragedian, Si judicas, cognosce: -- And then perhaps, I may have deserved his
thanks, That I thus hung out the Buoy, to discover the Rock, and drew the
Curtain from an old Cheat, to no other end, but to prevent a new. -- Farewell.

NOVEMBER 16. 1663.
The Persons.
VVhitebroth. An Alderman. Runter. A Civilian. Afterwitt. A Gentleman Suitor to
Bea. Jolly. His Friend. Tyro. A young 'Squire, Pretender to Bea. Scruple. A
Nonconformist. Mopus. An Astrological Physician. Bilboe. Two Hectors; The one,
usurping the Name of a Major; The other, of a Captain.
Titere Tu.
Double-Diligence. A Puritan Constable. Timothy. The Alderman's Servant.
Mrs. VVhitebroth. The Alderman's Wife. Mrs. Mopus. The Astrologer's Wife. Mrs.
Double-Diligence. The Constable's Wife. Beatrice. The Aldermau's Daughter. Cis.
The Alderman's Maid.
THE SCENE, London.

THE PROLOGUE.
Custom prevails, and somewhat must be said,
To tie your Hands, and save the Author's head;
It Is a new Play you will cry -- What then? -- 'Twere too
Too much to find you meat, and stomachs too:
But since it must -- Expect no Bill of fare,
No -- I shall only tell ye, What Is not here:
We Have no Sententious Sir -- No grave Sir Poll;
No little Pugge, nor Devil -- Bless us All!
No tedious Sieges to the Musick-room;
Nor frisks abroad -- No -- Our Scene's all at home:
But if you ask me, How? -- 'Troth, I Have forgot;
And now I think on it; -- It may spoil the Plot,
To give't you before hand -- What e're it be,
Have but a little Patience, and you will see.
ANOTHER, Intended, upon the revival of the Play, but not spoken.
SAD News my Masters; And too true, I fear,
For us -- Scruple's a silenced Minister;
Would ye the Cause? -- The Brethren snivle, and say,
It Is scandalous that any Cheat, but they:
Well -- To be short; H'as been before the Tryers,
And (by good Fortune) is got out of the Briars;
Where, if he lost a Limb to save the rest,
No hurt -- Here Is yet enough, to know the Beast:
Nor let the sisters pule -- (I ll tell y' a thing)
He may be libb'd, and yet have left, a string.
The Cheats.
ACT. I. SCE. 1.
Enter Bilboe, and Titere Tu, as meeting. T. T. HOh! Major! -- Quibus Hector,
etc.


Bil. Why faith the old Trade still; Here, and there, and every where: -- But
how now Captain! -- Latin! Latin! -- Send us fair weather; -- From small
Beer, and ends of Latin; -- Deliver me.


T. T. Troth Iriss with as little often this morning, as the rest of my
Neighbors: And yet once to day, 'twas a measuring cast, whither I had English
enough left me, to carry me to bed.


Bil. For why my man of Memphis? -- New adventures?


T. T. Small Game: -- However, it is better than idleness. -- A man would pick
straws, rather than not keep his hand in ure: -- Anything good Major in an
honest way.


Bil. You Are in the right Boy: -- But hark you -- Did'he bite?


T. T. Yes: -- And I Have struck him too.


Bil. A Squire? -- Another Squire?


T. T. He may be one in time: -- But for the present, he is only a small
Bachelor of the Law, new come to Town, to learn breeding.


Bil. I Will say this -- And a fig for thee -- He has as hopeful a Tutor, as a
man need have raked Hell for.


T. T. Mean you me Sir, or Runter the Civilian to whose care, his father by his
last will committed him?


Bil. Never a Barrel better Herring -- Runter! -- Hah! Hah!


T. T. Why, he thinks himself a learned Man; And it is some sign that others are
of the same opinion -- I can assure you, he mist the Chancellorship of
Dunstable, as narrowly, as ever any man did, that went without it.


Bil. Nay -- nay -- nay -- The Gentleman will be well bred, there is no doubt of
't: -- But what is the business?


T. T. Compositions Major -- Compositions -- A small Collation to save the
effusion of Christian blood: -- Ah that thou had seen him, while the
Prudential, and my Second were discoursing the business -- He looked so like
dead a Horse, he would neither eat, nor drink, before he knew, whither he
should live, or dye: -- But, as soon as the sum was agreed, and we had shaken
hands upon it --. Whip says Jethro! -- He was got drunk, ere I could wet my
Whistle.


Bil. But are the Pence numbered? -- Do they cry Chink in thy Pocket? -- How
many yellow Boys (Rogue) How many yellow Boys?


T. T. Why faith Major, none; -- But we are to take up a 100 l. together, which
will be all one.


Bil. But who must lay it down Captain? who must lay it down?


T. T. I have a small Broker, that for 40, or 50 l. has undertaken to procure
it.


Bil. That may do well -- But hark you -- Where does your Horse stand? -- I
hear of a Purchase, and I must out to Night.


T. T. No more good Major --. No more of that doleful Tune; -- The very
remembrance of 't puts me into a cold sweat.


Bil. 'Twas a pretty Nag -- Thou have not sold him?


T. T. Would 'twere no worse.


Bil. He is not stoll'n? -- No Rogues among our selves I hope?


T. T. Neither.


Bil. Or is he dead?


T. T. In Law, I think he be: -- I was out the other Night upon the Randan, and
who should I meet with but our old Gang, some of St. Nicholas's Clerks; Pad was
the word; The Booty set by the Chamberlain; We took it, and shared it; But
coming home, were all snap't by a Hue, and Cry, for another business, wherein
I was not concerned; which Mr. Constable perceiving, and imaging me as very a
Rogue as the rest, and that I would be glad to escape upon any terms; He takes
me aside, and tells me, That though I was not in this, yet there were others,
wherein I had been; And therefore (because I looked like a civil Gentleman,
merely drawn in by ill Company) if I would give him my Horse, he would let me
escape: -- You may easily believe, he did not speak to a deaf Man, or one that
had no mind to understand him -- I closed with him, got me to my Company, made
'um dead drunk, and when they were fast asleep, fairly marched off.


Bil. That is to say -- Ran away.


T. T. And a good shift too: -- You are put to none of these hazards Major --
You lie as safe in the Constable's house, as a Thief in a Mill; -- Or (to use a
more familiar expression) some of our friends in Newgate.


Bil. Yes -- I could have better accomodations abroad, but he is my loving
friend.


T. T. His Wife you mean.


Bil. Why -- She Is a good Girl -- And now you talk of these Trumperies, What Is
become of your small Cockatrice, the Astrologer Mopus his Wife?


T. T. I have not seen her since my last mischance; I must even to her for new
riggings; -- I hope her Husband has had a good Term often; I Would live like a
Prince, if I could perform the tenth part of what his Bills promise: -- But see
Major! Enter Double Diligence, and his Wife. yonder is your Pinnace sailing by
-- Ah how she booms! -- Prithee hail her Man: Would I Would the furling of her Main
Sail.


Bil. Landlord! Well met -- How now Landlady -- This is better than wish; -- I
must give you a Barrel of Oysters, and a Bottle or two of Wine, ere we part,
Honest Landlord! Bilboe huggs him.


D. D. O -- good Major -- Another time; we are going to exercise now.


Bil. But dear Landlord -- Captain, Advance, and know this Gentleman my friend,
and Landlord; -- He is the honestest fellow, and the best natured thing --


D. D. Thank you good Major -- I have always your good word.


M. D. I indeed Husband that you have; and more behind your back, than ever I
told you of. T. T. Comes up and salutes D. D.


T. T. Worthy Sir, your servants humble servant.


D. D. Alas good Captain -- Indeed and truly -- sweet Sir -- The Major and I
are old friends.


T. T. And may you long continue so.


D. D. I thank you Sir: -- Come my Joy, shall's walk? I should be loath to have
Mr. Alderman there before us.


M. D. I my Dear -- I stay for thee. Exit D. D.


Bil. But hark you Hussy: -- He whispers her back.

Where shall you and I exercise? -- Cannot you drop him, or give him the slip,
for an hour or two?


M. D. Oh -- No -- No -- We are to be at Repetition at Mr. Alderman's -- It Is
Friday Night -- But I shall see you anon: Farewell good Major -- Your servant
Sir. Exit.


T. T. Your servant Lady.


Bil. Captain -- Prithee let us meet to morrow in the Afternoon, at Mother
Formalls the Midwife's; and bring your small Harlotry with you, -- we'll be
merry.


T. T. A match -- A match -- Exuent.


ACT. I. SCE. 2.
Enter Jolly, Afterwitt. Aft. You are so Wise: -- I have observed, This World
Dwells most abroad, seldom, or never at home;
Most men can counsel others, few, themselves.

Jol. Hah! Sentences! -- There Is somewhat troubles you;
What is it? -- And can you call me friend, and yet
Not let me bear my part? Friends should be one;
Breath, Hope, Fear, Will, and Nill the same, in common.

Aft. Why -- What were you the better if you knew?
You cannot give me ease. --

Jol. However try;
A handsome Fellow! And a fair Estate!
And wit at will! -- Thou may command the Town;
Leave off this fooling: --

Aft. I Am beholding to you;
Can you with all your wisdom tell me now
Where this shoe wrings me?

Jol. No: --

Aft Then pray believe
I know; and if you are my friend, forbear
A further scrutiny: --

Jol. My life, in Love!
Not past that Boys disease? That troublesome itch?
Come -- We'll be Jovial, and divert the humor.

Aft. Suppose I were? -- Is not the World the same?
Love is the Bond of Nature, and without it,
The Universe, were but a Besome unbound,
Sand, without Lime: --

Jol. I need no further Symptoms
To make the Crisis; -- Hah! -- And you believe,
This dainty Phylosophical Poultis,
Will work the Cure? -- If I have any skill,
There were a better Remedy: --

Aft. For shame
Thou Infidel to all that is good, or lovely;
May thou dye in thy Heresy, and never know
What a good Woman means; -- unless perhaps,
For thy conversion: --

Jol. This was intended
For a small Curse: -- But I must thank my friend;
And if he were not turned Bigott, I think,
Might satisfy him: You're in love forsooth!
All in good time -- But have you yet considered
What it is? How much more misery beyond it,
Then on this side of 't? -- you may fancy Castles,
And forty I know not what is, But they are of Snow,
Come one good shower, and farewell my sine Guegaw*

Aft. You Are a strange Fellow: -- What do think of those
Have gone before us, and commend it too?

Jol. One Woodcock makes no Winter: -- But I pray,
What are the persons? Are they not concerned?
These married Men, are like Boys in the water,
Ask 'um how 't goes, Oh! wondrous hot they cry,
When yet their Teeth chatter for very cold;
If you must love, love on; But go no further;
Women enjoyed, like Rivers in the Sea,
Lose both their Taste, and Name; suppose 'um Junoes
In the pursuit, they 're Clouds in the enjoyment.

Aft. Thou 'rt like the Fox, that having lost his Tail,
Would fain persuade the rest to make 't a fashion:
Prithee give over: --

Jol. Troth I Have scarce begun;
Suppose her handsome; She Is a Honey-pot
In The Sun; If otherwise; you will never endure her;
If honest; Insolent, though never so ugly;
She thinks, you are beholding to her for 't;
And yet, who knows how long she may be so:
Is she the Map of Modesty? perhaps
It Is but your own Opinion; Love is blind;
There Is many pass for such, whose Husbands yet,
Could, if they durst, tell you another Tale.
Is she a Housewife? Can she make a Band?
Order a Dairy? Cure a broken Shin?
Examine your Accounts, and at Years end,
Pray tell me what you have saved: -- Is she high born?
Twenty to one, She Is proud, and quickly scorns you:
What are you better for those doughty Acts
My Lord, Her great great Grandfather performed,
The Lord knows where? Or t'ave her Portion paid you
In Genealogies, Gilt Spurs, and Cantons.

Aft. Come -- I can hold no longer -- Have you done?

Jol. With your good patience, a word -- Consider,
It Is like a Battle, to be fought but once;
And therefore, if it must be so, Be sure
She be your Equal, and, if possible, Virtuous;
At least, not tainted with her Mothers Vices:
And now, if after this, thou dare be wiving,
The art a bold Fellow, and that is all I Will say;
Heaven keep thee yet within the power of Heleboure.

Aft. Prithee be n't so severe: -- Thou art my friend,
And I Will deal plainly with thee -- That Estate
Which you believe so fair (And were 't not for
My father's Debts, and some small slips of mine,
Might have looked somewhat like it) is at present,
At that low Ebb, That if I don't look to it,
In time, 'twill be quite past Recovery:
Come -- The Red Petticoat must piece up all:

Jol. 'T 'as a half-face of Reason: -- As you say,
Desperate Causes, must have desperate Cures:
But what is he, has got this hank upon 't?

Aft. Did you never hear of Alderman Whitebroth?

Jol. I, there is a Jew indeed -- I Will tell thee what,
He has a Daughter, Thou shall have her too,
Though it be but to be revenged of him.

Aft. There spoke my friend: -- O -- but her father: --

Jol. What?

Aft. -- Will never give consent: --

Jol. To choose; -- She Will make
The better Wife, to justify her folly.

Aft. Prithee be serious: --

Jol. Good faith I am;
And if thou have her not, one way, or other,
I Will be thy Bondsman: -- We'll about it straight. Exuent.

ACT. I. SCE. 3.
Enter Mopus Solus with a Book, etc. Mo. Saturn, and Jupiter, come to a Trine
in Taurus, and Capricorn -- Huh -- We shall have strangers come to Town, and
their Wives never miss 'um in the Country: -- Next Month they all meet in the
house of Mercury, he being Lord thereof, and Significator of Speech; It may
intend, Advocates, Cryers of Courts, Splitters of Causes, Oysters Wives, and
Broom Men: -- Hold -- Saturn -- (nothing but this malevolent Planet) in the
sign Virgo, in conjunction with Venus, in her detriment: -- Beware Women, of
green Gowns; Great men, of Stone, and Colic, and Costermongers, of rotten
Pippins: -- Again -- Pars torturae, coupled with the Catabibason, That is to
say, The Dragons Tail: -- Huh -- Huh -- Children shall be subject to
Convulsion sits, young Wenches to the Falling Evil, and old Women to Cough out
their Teeth: -- [He makes a pause.] But all this is no Money: -- Many an honest
man has but one House, and maintains his Family very well; But I am such an
unlucky Rogue, the whole 12, will hardly pay my Rent: -- Now a Pox take these
Citizens, and then a Man may get some money by 'um; They are so hidebound,
there is no living by 'um; So Clunchfisted, a man would swear the Gout were got
out of their feet, into their hands, it is death to 'um, to pluck 'um out of
their pockets: -- I am sure my Bills bid as high, as the proudest (They Cure
all Diseases, and Resolve all Astrological Questions) and yet they will hardly
quit cost, for pasting 'um up: -- Here dwells an Astrological Physician, Reads
one; -- And there let him, till I trouble him, Answers another; -- His
Majesty's most excellent Operator, says one -- Yes -- upon a Post quoth
another: And thus you see, how an Artist is valued: -- O Ignorance! Ignorance!
Well may thou be the Mother of Devotion, but I am sure thou art the Stepdame
of Art: -- If it were not for the good Women with their Groats, and their
Vinegar Bottles, and now and then a young Wench to enquire of her Sweetheart,
I might even hang my self; Nay (which were worse) my wife would cry her Trade
were the better of the two: -- But, Hushed! -- I hear some body coming -- Ten to
one but it is my young Squire, with his Mercers Wife to have her Fortune read --
I could with less trouble, and more certainty have told her Husband's: -- I
hear 'um -- Hushed -- My Wife understood their meaning well edough, shemight
have put 'um together without troubling me: -- [Enter Mrs. Mopus.] Oh -- is it
you? -- How goes all Causes?


M. M. But ill enough I Am sure -- I wonder what I Am the better for a Husband in
you! -- Here you sit moping, and moping all day upon a Book, and at Night,
you're as sleepy as a gib'd Cat.


Mo. Oh ho -- I Am in thy debt, but thou shall be paid it altogether: -- Is it
not better to receive a 100 l. at one payment, than to dribble't out by
shilling, and shilling?


M. M. But you would be loath though, if your Wife had an occasion, that she should
borrow, though 'twere but sixpence.


Mo. Thou say right -- But I dare trust thee further: Prithee go in, and
look after the House; we shall have some or other, come popping in presently.


M. M. To mighty purpose -- It Is well you get so much: -- Methinks Trading is
grown extreme dead: -- Time was, when your honest Citizen's Wives, and no
ordinary Madams, and their Gallants, would come and be merry here; -- But now
--


Mo. A little patience good Wife; 't'as been a long Vexation, the Gentry are
not come to Town yet; -- and yet we have some doings too.


M. M. Yes -- A Company of Fribbles, enough to discredit any honest House in
the World: -- No, I Would have you to know, I am for none of your Skip-Jacks; --
No; -- Give me your Persons of Quality, there is somewhat to be got by them:
Besides, a Woman need not be ashamed to sit Jig by Joule, with the best of the
Parish, and who dare say, Black is her eye?


Mo. Prithee be quiet -- I expected a young Squire, and his Mistress; but I
believe she could not get out, her Husband is so jealous of her.


M. M. Now out upon her -- Could she not have took another Woman out with her?
He has been a good one himself (I warrant you) that shall offer to suspect two
Women together: -- Marry hang these jealous-headed Coxcombs, these
Ass-Cuckolds, that believe their Ears to be Horns; And such have you been in
your time too -- That you have.


Mo. Well -- Well -- Go in -- All shall be mended -- Prithee in.


M. M. No indeed, I don't intend it; I must have some money first: -- Do you
think I can go always in one Gown? -- Pray don't mistake yourself: -- Besides,
I must buy the Child a new Coat; and Mr. Scruple expects I should carry him
something for his pains amongst us: -- Indeed Husband, he is a precious, able
man.


Mo. Yes -- He is able -- Able to speak more with ease, than another man can
hear with patience: -- Away you fool.


M. M. Nay good Husband -- How do you think a Woman can love you, if you will
not let her do as the rest of her Neighbors? -- I warrant you for them, not
one of them mist the meeting to day, and I hope you have found, that they are
not the worst Customers we have: -- Marry come up here -- [She strikes the Book
out of his hand.] It Is a fine thing that a Woman can have no money, but what
she mustask her Husband for, and then too, to have all this Clutter about it:
-- Give me some money, or I Will make my complaint to Mr. Scruple.


Mo. Be quiet, and thou shall't have any thing: -- I must even stop her mouth,
to be rid of her -- [This, and the next, aside.] If once she set up her Clack,
the Cataracts of Nile, are but still Music to it: -- Come, we'll in, and see
what may be done. Exeunt.


ACT. 1 SCE. 4.
Enter Runter, Tyro. Ru. INdeed your father was my old acquaintance, and very
good friend -- Ah! How it tickles my Lungs, to think how many mad Frolicks we
have had, at Robbing of Orchards, and stealing Pudding-pyes -- I hope I may
take it for granted, that you visited the University: -- Pray which of 'um? and
what College?


Ty. Gotam College Sir, in the University of Rumford.


Ru. My Fellow Collegiate! -- You and I must be acquainted: -- Pray how goes
the old difference between the Scholars, and the Townsmen? Is the breach so
wide, that you believe it irreconcilable?


Ty. Indeed I cannot tell -- But it is thought, 'twill hardly be composed,
unless the Rams would forbear marrying.


Ru. The more's the pity: -- A Graduate I hope Sir.


Ty. Yes Sir -- A small one -- A Bachelor of the Law -- I went out Bachelor,
last Horse-fair.


Ru. And I Doctor, in the Throng: -- We must be better acquainted: -- You're
come up to study?


Ty. Yes Sir -- My Mother would have it so.


Ru. Then let me advise you -- Study both Laws, but chiefly, the Civil: -- You
would not think what an advantage it is, to be a general man.


Ty. Sir, I shall follow your directions.


Ru. Then, when you come to practice; you must get you a good brass Towel, and
a steel Countenance; and ever carry in your green Bag, so much patience, as not
to be discouraged at any thing; for I am to tell you a great Truth, That our
Profession Rotts at the wrong end, The young ones dye, and the old ones live,
But how I pray? Even like Bawds, and Medlars, never Ripe, till Rotten; That is
to say, seldom or never get money, till they are past the use of 't; And then
(perhaps) what with a little favor, and a great deal of money, they may chance
to arrive at last to the height of sleeping out a Cause.


Ty. I thank you Sir, and I hope I shall be able to remember it.


Ru. Then you must ever be obsequious to great men; not that you expect any
good from 'um, but (as the Chinese worship the Devil) that they do you no
hurt: -- Then, be sure to keep your Chamber, it will keep you; I kept mine many
a long year, and nothing came; But at last (Thanks to my Stars, and these good
Times) it came to the purpose.


Ty. Yes Sir, I know this to be true, for my Mother would be continually
preaching this Lesson to my Father.


Ru. Then you must never examine your Cause, whither it be good, or bad; If it
be good, and of no great concernment, it will carry it self, If bad, there is
your Masterpiece, to help it out; Every Fool can manage a good Cause, but He Is
your Man, can set the Nose to which side he pleases, and make something, out of
nothing.


Ty. I hope I shall have the grace to put it in practice; and wish, my Father
were alive to thank you.


Ru. Then if at any time, you find you have the worst end of the staff; Leave
your Cause, and fall upon the person of your Adversary; Put it out boldly, and
enough of 't, and somewhat must stick; No matter how true, or false, it begets
a prejudice to the person, and many times forjudges the Cause: -- For Example
now, to give you an instance in a Gentleman, a friend of mine, a great Master
of this way of pleading: -- A Gentleman with a long comely beard, demurrs to
his Clients Bill; My friend, takes him at first hop, and demurrs to his beard;
calls it a Vow-beard, and that he had made an Oath not to cut it till the King
came in; And hark you, had he had Twenty Arguments, he might have better
spared the other Nineteen, than that One: -- I could tell you of as good a one
of my own, and upon as great a Person as any this day in Europe -- (Ah! how I
firk't him up, with -- a Chip of the old Block, and Twenty as good --) But
enough of this now -- The thing is sufficiently known, and it ill becomes a man
to set out his own Virtues; -- But try this, and do it boldly, and never doubt
of Clients: -- A modest Lawyer! -- A silent Woman! -- A Paradox in Nature.


Ty. I can but thank you still Sir.


Ru. I had almost forgot one thing, and no way inferior to any of the rest: --
If you find any Commotion in the State, be sure to strike in with the first; If
you get nothing -- Cantabit vacuus -- You Will pass in the Crowd; If you do,
you will have money enough to purchase your pardon, and perhaps too, get in to be
some great man's Advocate: -- Chew the Cud upon this for the present, and as I
find you growing up to it, I shall instruct you farther. Exeunt.


ACT. I. SCE. 5.
Enter Whitebroth (Coughing) Mrs. Whitebroth, Beatrice, Cis, Timothy, laden
with Books. Wh. I Do profess, this Mr. Scruple is a singular man.


M. W. I indeed is he: -- I never edified under any man like him: -- But how
do you my Lamb? How do you?


Tim. A vengeance over grown one; -- I have seen many a Ram in my time, has not
been so big by the head and the horns. [Aside -- Whitebroth Coughs all the
while.]


Bea. How do you Sir? -- You don't look well.


Wh. Nothing but a Cold my Child -- nothing but a Cold: I hope' twill away
again: -- [He Coughs again.]


M. W. Cis -- Cis -- A stick of Licoras Cis. [Enter D. D. and his wife.]


Cis. I have some Candid Ginger forsooth.


M. W. Here Chick -- prithee bite a bit often -- it is the most sovereign thing
(next a Pepper posset) as can be.


D. D. Save your good Worship -- It fell in an ill time -- I am afraid it may
beget an obstruction of justice, by hindering your Worships sitting on the Bench.


Wh. How d' you Neighbors both? How do you? -- you're welcome, -- [Coughs] -- I
am afraid I sat a little too long in the cold -- [Again] Come Neighbor
Diligence, you and I Will walk in, and leave the Women to entertain Mr. Scruple.


D. D. I wait upon your Worship. Exeunt Wh. D. D.


M. W. Timothy.


Tim. Madam.


M. W. Quickly good Timothy, quickly -- Run in, and get the Towels ready: --
After good Cis, after him, and see they be through warm: -- Exeunt Tim. Cis.
Enter Scruple.

Oh Mr. Scruple, Mr. Scruple! -- Alas good man how he sweats! -- Tim. Tim. Tim.
-- A Towel Tim, a Towel -- quick -- quick -- quick. Enter Tim.


Tim. Here forsooth.


M. D. Now blessing of your heart good Mr. Scruple, you have taken a great deal
of pains to day.


Tim. Or his Lungs have, which is all one. [Aside.]


M. W. Truly, and indeed, a great Pains-taker: -- [They pull him down into a
low Chair, and rub him.] Come Mr. Scruple -- You have stood long to day -- Pray
sit down -- We must Rule you here. -- Will you have a Caudle Sir? -- Alas poor
man! How wet the Collar of his Shirt is? -- Feel Diligence -- I prithee feel.


M. D. Now beshrew me, but't 'as work't quite through his Doublet, Coat, Cloak
and all.


Sc. Hum -- I am refreshed -- yea in good sooth I am.


M. W. Will you have a Lemmon Posset Sir?


Sc. I fear me it is too cold.


M. W. Will you go to Bed Sir? -- Or have a fresh Shirt? -- How do you Sir?


Tim. Troth very ill, upon a Text. [Aside.]


Sc. I am well enough -- only a qualm -- a qualm.


M. W. What say you to your Collar of S'. S. then?


Sc. That would not be amiss -- There Is no false Latin in it.


M. W. Quickly Tim, quickly: -- A Pint of Sack, a Quart of Sider, and a
handful, or two, of Sugar, and put 'um into the great Bowl -- Run Timothy,
Run: -- Dear Child, do thou help him.


Tim. Call you me this, his Collar of S'. S? -- [Aside.] -- You shall have it
presently. Exeunt Tim. and Bea.


M. D. I am afraid you are not well Sir.


Sc. Yes -- I am so, so: -- You would not think how't has recovered me, one
would hardly believe, what a rejoicing to my spirit it is, to see you thus
eager, and, as it were, hungry for your food: -- Ah-Be the same still you
cannot lay out your selves, nor I my self forth enough, in these ways -- Pray
mark it; -- We cannot lay out our selves forth enough one to another: -- These
often Duties put us into a spiritual posture of War -- Ah -- It is best
fighting together -- Ah -- What a precious thing it is, when we are both
concerned together, and -- Ah -- Ah -- as a man may say, wrapped up in one
common Cause and Interest: -- Ah -- Good sisterly women, consider it, and lay
it upon your hearts. [The women answer him in a long drawn sigh -- Hui -- ] But
how does Mr. Alderman? Methought I heard him Cough ere while: -- How does he?


M. W. Now indeed, I think he sat a little too long in the cold: -- He has
gotten a heavy Cough of 't.


Sc. To see the frailty of man's Nature! -- How weary of every thing that is
good! How irksom it is unto us! -- I dare undertake, he should have sat at a
lewd Stage Play, a whole Afternoon: -- Nay, with his Hat off too -- and -- Ah
-- been never the worse.


M. W. But are these Stage Plays, such lewd things as you make them?


Sc. Why truly you are my bosome-sisters -- And I may speak Truth to you; --
Nay -- They are not -- For you will find good moral things in them, As Vice
deprest, Virtue encouraged, and the like; However, we have thought it fit, to
rail at'um, for fear the people should set their hearts upon 'um, and
consequently, undo us: -- I have often Lectur'd at'um, in a morning, and yet in
the afternoon, stoll'n behind a Pillar, to hear 'um. -- Enter Tim. -- But see,
here comes Timothy: -- [He starts.] -- Avaunt -- This Bowl is scandalous -- It
looks like a Wasshail: [Timothy offers to go out.] -- Nay hold Timothy --
Though the Bowl be scandalous, it is pity the good creature should be spoiled:
-- Pray, next time, let me have the great Tankard, I am of opinion too, it
holds somewhat more: -- [He drinks.] The Casuists, speak comfortably in this
point -- A man may eat, and drink abundantly, without any necessity, but merely
for his pleasure; Nay, he may; usque ad vomitum ingurgitare, provided always,
he do not prejudice his health thereby; Because it is allowable in the natural
appetite, to be taken up with those actions, that are proper thereunto: -- We
must deny our selves, we may not deny the creature -- Pray observe it -- I say,
we may not deny the creature, it being given us, not for our sustentation only,
but contentation also -- Timothy -- Prithee once more good Timothy.


Tim. Here Sir. [Sc. drinks again.]


M. W. Now much good may do it your heart good Mr. Scruple.


M. D. Indeed he deserves a good thing, he makes so much of it, when he has it.


Sc. This is napping Geer, and well encouraged: -- But pray no more of this
Bowl -- Pray no more often: -- For this time, it may pass: -- Now trust me, it
has such a pleasant farewell, it invites a man to drink often of it: -- Timothy
--


Tim. Here Sir. [Sc. drinks again.]


Sc. I do assure ye, special stuff, and too good for the wicked; it may
strengthen them in their Enormities: -- But come -- Let Us go visit Mr.
Alderman: -- Timothy -- Is all out?


Tim. Yes Sir -- Not a drop left.


Sc. Then pray speak to Ruth, to dress up the great Tankard, and bring it into
Mr. Alderman's Chamber.


Tim. It shall be done Sir. Exeunt.


ACT. II. SCE. 1.
Enter Timothy Solus. Tim. HUh! He grows worse, and worse: -- I have been with
the Doctor, and he will be here presently: -- Precions Mr. Scruple is departed,
but so like a Dog out-lawed, that unless the Devil owes me a mischief, I may be
troubled with a mourning Cloak; -- I am sure I have deserved it: -- I am the
general Officer of this house; Like my Mistresses Silver-sack-posset-bason;
Screw a handle to it, and it is her Bed-pan; put a Cover to that, her
Warming-pan; Take off both, it serves to wash her hands in the morning, and for
a Sack-posset, at Supper: -- In the Stable, I am Groom; In the Garden, Gardner;
At Market, Caterer; In the Cellar, Butler; upon all Visits, her
Gentleman Usher; And above Stairs, his Valet de Chamber. [Enter Mopus.] Oh! my
noble Doctor -- you are a man of your word.


Mo. How does your Master?


Tim. Alack Sir! I thought you could have told that by the Stars; -- I have
heard say, That learned men know every thing.


Mo. Yes -- I could have erected a Scheme -- But I thought it unnecessary: --
How does he take his rest?


Tim. But ill; And complains of heats, and gripings.


Mo. I Will set him right again -- unless the Stars --


Tim. What good Sir?


Mo. Have predecree'd the contrary -- And if so -- We must submit; -- Will you
let your Mistress know I am here?


Tim. I shall Sir. Exit Tim.


Mo. So -- There Is half the disease; I shall easily pick the rest, out of the
good woman: -- It all things hit right, this Alderman may prove a good milch
Cow: -- [Enter Mrs. Whitebroth.] Madam! your humble Servant: --


M. W. You're welcome Sir -- Nay, what d' you mean? [She does this to make Mo.
put on his Hat.] -- Pray Sir -- Indeed there is no body expects it; -- Pray be
pleased -- I can assure you no; -- In truth I do not -- Pray Sir. --


Mo. O -- your servant. -- Have you saved the Alderman's water, as I ordered?
Enter Cis. and Tim.


M. W. Yes Sir: -- Cis, Cis; Thy Masters state.


Cis. O Tim, Tim, 'twas in the silver Tankard, and the Cat overthrew it. [This,
and the next, to be spoke aside.]


Tim. There stands some dead Ale upon the Table, put that in the Urinal; --
He Will tell as much by one, as the other. Exeunt Tim. and Cis.


Mo. A most fortunate face: -- I never met with more lucky lines: -- You Will
live, to bury the Alderman -- and -- shall marry -- let me see; -- a Lord.


M. Wh. Indeed Sir? -- I believe you can tell.


Mo. Nay, I am certain of it: -- Hereafter, I may chance to tell you his name;
-- But for the present, be sure he is a Vicount, at least.


M. Wh. This -- [She gives him money.] and my thanks. A Vicountess! -- I Will
promise you, I Will take it no longer as I have done. Enter Cis with an Urinal.


Mo. Oh -- let me see it -- High colored -- His blood's enflamed: -- Feavourish
-- Feavourish. [At every stop, he shakes the Urinal.]


M. Wh. Indeed Sir he burns like fire.


Mo. Sick -- sick -- sick -- He cannot rest.


M. Wh. I indeed; -- you are as right --


Mo. Sometimes up, and sometimes down.


M. Wh. Truly he has not been out of his Bed, since he first took his Cold,
till just now.


Mo. Huh -- a Cold: -- [Aside.] -- Pains in his limbs; Coughing, and now and
then, wind; -- This froth, and feather in the water, is a certain token.


M. Wh. Now bless me Sir! -- How is it possible you should hit things so right?


Mo. How do you hit your mouth in the dark? -- One's as easy as the other: --
That is to say; to a man of Art; -- I could tell you a Thousand things -- But
time is precious with me: -- May I not see the Alderman?


M. Wh. O by all means; -- I hear him coming: -- Ent. Whit. O my Deat -- Here Is
a Gentleman has told me all your distemper, as right -- Whit. Coughs.


Wh. And what does he think of it?


Mo Pray bend your wrist Sir. -- [He feels his pulse.] All will do well again:
-- A Purge, and a Vomit -- A Purge, and a Vomit: -- Gi' me a Pen, and Ink: --
He writes.


M. Wh. Would not some Parma City do him good? Truly I would be loath, he
should want any thing.


Mo. You do well: -- Let me see -- What says the College? -- Sperma Caeti,
Confectioquaedam -- Pox on it -- I have forgot the rest: -- Sperma Caeti! --
Sperma Cocks-comb -- They Are a Company of quacking Fools; -- It Is Parmacitty,
and takes its name, from the City of Parma: Hang this foisting: -- I Will trust
never a Doctor of them all: -- [He tears the paper.]

Have a little patience Madam, and I Will send you a preparation of my own: -- In
the mean time your servant: -- I am staid for at present. Exit.


M. Wh. Farewell good Doctor: -- Come my heart -- rest thy self within. Exeunt
Wh. Coughing.


ACT. II. SCE. 2.
Enter Jolly, Afterwitt. Jol. AND how d' you like her now? --


Aft. Could I like Heaven, If I were there? -- 'Prithee forbear these Questions.


Jol. And much good may she do thee: -- Thou shall have her; I Have laid the
Plot, and I am sure 'twill take.


Aft. As how my Jolly?


Jol. Not so hasty: -- I have an odd humor in my pocket will strike fair to it.
He pulls out a printed Bill.


Aft. What Is here? A printed Bill? -- Prithee lets hear't.


Jol. In the Name of God, Through the light of the Son, By the Revelation of
the Spirit, I cure these Diseases, perfectly, and speedily, without any
annoyance to the body, which commonly happens through College Bills, and
Apothecaries Medicines, with which, the Devil has deceived the World, these
many Hundreds of Years.

The new Disease (otherwise called the Great POX) with all its Appendices, in
few days; with Herbs which I gather in the Woods, and Gums of Trees. -- Agues
of all sorts, in three fits: -- Gout, whither-knotted, or running, in four or
five dressings: -- Dropsy -- Timpany -- Rickets -- Spleen -- Convulsion --
Yellow, and black Jaundies -- Stone -- St^angury -- and Chollick, in six hours:
-- All kinds of Fluxes; -- Most distempers of the Head -- Shortness of Breath,
and Ptisick, at first sight: -- And have ever by me a most approved Remedy,
against Green Sickness -- Barrenness -- And fits of the Mother.


Aft. 'Twas fairly vied: -- Who bids more?


Jol. He comes again -- As also (To let the World see, how wide of their mark,
they are like to run, That as boldly, as ignorantly, dare adventure on Physic,
without the knowledge of Astrology) I resolve, these ensuing Astrological
Questions.

-- The sick, whither they shall recover, or not: -- The party absent, whither
living, or dead -- How many Husbands, or Children, a Woman shall have: --
Whither one shall marry the party desired, or whom else: -- Whither a Woman has
her Maidenhead or not -- Or shall be honest after Marriage -- Or her portion
well paid: -- If a man be wise, or a fool; -- Whither it be good to put on new
Clothes: -- If Dreams, be for good, or evil; -- Whither a Child be the reputed
fathers; or shall be fortunate, or not: -- Ships at Sea, whither safe, or not:
-- Of Lawsuits, which side shall have the better: -- And generally all
Astrological Questions whatever.

Iatros Iatrophilus Mopus, A Servant of God, and Secretary of Nature.


Aft. Hah Boys! -- If this wo'n't take 'um, The Devil take 'um: -- But what
are those hard words?


Jol. Oh -- A Physician, a friend to Physicians: -- The only true thing in all
his Bill; -- These Quacks, are the best friends Physicians have, they make work
for 'um: What dost' think is come into my head?


Aft How is it possible I should know? -- I am no Oedipus.


Jol. Why -- This Fellow must be a Cheat, and I am confident, with a little
help, would be able to do your business: -- 'Prithee lets to him: -- [Enter
Bea. and Cis.] But see! -- your Mistress; -- To her: --


Aft. This is such fortune, I forgive my stars
All their unkindness.

Bea. Is this Natural? Or do you carry set-forms about you, to be used as
occasion shall serve?


Aft. Faith neither -- So much Excellence, must needs inform a Statue, and make
a very Post Rhetorical.


Bea. Demonstrations? -- Why how now Mr. Afterwitt?


Aft. Just as you see: -- How d' you like him?


Jol. Well said: -- To her again: -- If I can make no sport,
I Will mar none: -- How now Cis?

Cis. The better for your asking, I thank you Sir.


Jol. Hark you: -- A word: -- [Jol. and Cis, walk aside.]


Aft. So fair, and so unkind! -- Sure Nature dotes,
She twists such contradictions, or what is worse,
Has lost her wits, and would have all, like her.

Bea. Whence this new fury? --


Aft. Can you read your self,
And ask that question? Were you made thus lovely,
To make me miserable? -- Would you would less
Divinity, or more Humanity.

Bea. Then you're in Love it seems? Or at least would
Make me believe it: -- Don't I know, you Men
Speak anything? -- Women are fools, and cannot
For shame, but credit it: --

Aft. You wrong my Truth:
By all that is good. --

Bea. No more: -- Admitting yet,
What I can scarce believe; -- Why must you crop
That flower, which as it grows, may peradventure
Look fair, and lovely, but, once gathered, withers?
Give me a Love refined; A Love, that flames
Upon it self, not fed with grosser fuel;
A Love, that loves the Virtue, not the Sex.

Aft. And such is mine: -- But fancy not this new
Philosophy of immaterial flames;
Hearts may meet Hearts, and Souls, piquere with Souls;
But if they come no nearer than the Eyes,
For want of matter to maintain 'um, dye.

Bea. Be judge your self: -- Who but the needy pray?
Once fill your belly, yo've no more to say,

Aft. Yes -- to give thanks, and ruminate upon
Those blessings, which grow faster, than we reap um:
Come, come, be wise, and trifle not away
That youth, would make an Emperor too happy;
All seek their like; And like the Needle, tremble,
And never settle, till it reach that North:
I Would rather be an Owl, than Phaenix,
If I must live alone: --

Bea. These Morals Sir,
Might have been better spent; But since you will needs
Make me believe you love me -- Court my father;
For, notwithstanding the Respect I bear you,
I must declare. I Have neither eyes, nor ears,
To any thing, but what he shall direct.

Jol. You need say no more: -- Mind what I told you, and leave the rest to me.
[He speaks this to Cis.] What? have you done yet? -- A good Soldier now, would
have carried the Town, with half this do: -- Have done your Grace for shame, and
fall to your meat.


Aft. Sure my father went to Heaven, I am so unfortunate; -- Well; be it as
'twill, I love you; and were I to speak seven year, I could but say the same
thing. -- Come -- I Will wait on you.


Exeunt. ACT. II. SCE. 3.
Enter Scruple, Mrs. Whitebroth. Sc. I Cannot away with it; -- unfeignedly, I
cannot. -- A man may profess; it is lawful -- Yea, assuredly it is; And
therefore I say, I profess, If any of my flock, shall so much as straggle into
his pastures, I say, I profess, I shall not only turn them out of my fold, for
rotten sheep, but they shall for ever be to me, as Publicans; That is to say,
As the Learned have most ingeniously observed; Publicanus, quasi, publicus
canis.


M. W. Why good Mr. Scruple -- A Member should not be cut off for one failing.


Sc. Good me no goods, Good Mrs. Whitebroth; -- I tell thee here (sister of
mine) it is a wilful failing; -- A very wilful failing.


M. W. For why I pray? -- The man is learned: -- I am sure he told me all my
Husband's distemper, before he so much as saw him.


Sc. Told ye! -- I, there is the point -- And I must tell you too, he must needs
use some unlawful means.


M. W. Alas -- It cannot be: -- His Wife (good woman) is one of us; And do you
think, if he were such, he would ever sufferit?


Sc. Why there is the blind: -- The woman, is a good sisterlie woman, and an
often frequenter; which, he allows of, only to deceive the World, as if he were
--! Well -- well -- Mark what I say -- If he has not made some secret, express
contract, with Satan, I Will be your Teacher no longer; -- If you had ever read
Doctor Faustus, this would not be so strange to you.


M. W. Now goodness defend it!


Sc. Come, come, -- It Is great pity, it is not looked into: -- I dare
undertake, had this Fellow set up in Spain, he had been in the Inquisition long
ere this -- But we; The more light we have, the less we see; -- We are
wilfully, stiff-neckedly blind; Indeed we are.


M. W. Be not too rash: -- Many a good body's wronged, or many of our Brethren,
and sisters, are not what they should be.


Sc. Yes -- That was always the malice of the Devil, and his instruments; --
But this Fellow, is a professed Reprobate; -- I have read his Bills, and spoken
with several, that have been with him, And they tell me, he has a Globe, ever
standing upon his Table, and never answers any question proposed, without first
turning that; -- And why may not the Devil be in that Globe, as well as in the
Pummel of Paracelsus's Sword, and Dr. Dee's Crystal? -- D' you mark me that
Gentlewoman? -- Answer me that.


M. W. Nay, pray Mr. Scruple -- I must go: -- All that he told me, was without
his Globe: -- I mean no hurt.


Sc. That may be something in the case: -- Let me see -- what say the Casuists?
-- If any thing help you, it must be the intention; And that, we are forced to
make use of in many cases; especially, such as we cannot hinder, and correct
the viciousness of the means, by the purity of the end: -- For example now --
If a Woman, great with Child, long for another man, besides her Husband, and
this Husband will not give consent; In this case we say, (and so we generally
agree) that she may follow her natural inclination; Provided always, she have
no intention of sin, but only to satisfy her longing; -- For, Actus, non facit
reum, nisi men's sit rea: --


M. W. Now blessing on you good Sir -- I always thought so.


Sc. In like manner -- If a young woman, of a godly Parentage, do fall into a
holy Fornication (not out of Lust, but Love) and thereupon prove with Child; In
such case we say, That it may be lawful to procure Abortion, provided always,
it be not done, with an intention of Murder, but only to save Life, or
Reputation: -- Nay further, lest the Profession should be scandal'd by it; we
hold it better, to trust Providence, by forswearing the Fact, than to fall into
the hands of men, by confessing the infirmity of the flesh: -- And in this (as
many other things) we agree with some Gentlemen ^broad; And truly, where we do
differ, the difference between ^s, is so fine, and nice, we can hardly perceive
it our selves: -- There is (as the Schoolmen term it) an Identificadunity of
Principles, common to us both. -- They have their private shrifts, so we: --
They call it a venial sin with a sister, and in case of necessity can forgive a
Neighbors Wife, so we: -- They allow regulating by Tumults, so we: -- And
lastly, They deny all this in plain words, but grant it in effects, so we.


M. W. But what is this to me? -- May not I go? -- Good Mr. Scruple.


Sc. If your intention be right, you may: -- However, for fear of the worst, I
will go with you; I should be loath to lose one of the best sheep in my flock,
for want of a little care: -- Come Mrs. Whitebroth, I did not think to have
done so much; -- But you have such a winning way with you -- Such a power upon
me, I can deny you nothing -- Indeed I cannot: -- Come -- We must now and then
comply with one another weakness. He leads her off.


M. W. It Is a good hearing Sir: -- I thank you. Exeunt.


ACT. II. SCE. 4.
Enter Bilboe, leading Mrs. Double Diligence; Titere Tu, leading Mrs. Mopus.
Bil. COme Gypsy; -- How came you tolight on this house? -- It Is a rare
convenience.


M. D. Oh! she is our Midwife.


T. T. And faith, they are good necessary things; and generally tractable,
before they grow rich.


M. M. How do you know? -- I never met you here before.


T. T. Time enough now.


M. D. But pray Major, is this Gentleman married?


Bil. Hang him Rogue; -- Every man's Boots serve his turn.


T. T. And better so, than going barefoot: -- I am not married (sweet Lady)
but a Lover still.


M. D. A pretty Gentleman.


M. M. He was, you would have said, had you known him, when I knew him first:
-- But now --


T. T. As good as ever my Girl: -- Dear Mopus! [He huggs her.]


M. M. Away Captain: -- You do so mousle one.


Bil. Nay, have a care of him -- I say no more.


M. M. Marry -- I hope you are not in earnest.


T. T. And thou have no more wit, than to believe him! As sound as a Bell wench
-- As sound as a Bell. He Capers.


M. M. Indeed Captain, I hope the best: -- But sure there is somewhat in it, he
does not fine up himself, as he was wont.


T. T. I seldom regard fashions -- Any thing serves me; -- Drape de Berry in
the Summer, keeps out the heat; and Stuff in the Winter, lets it in: -- I must
confess, I have three or four as rich Suits, for Flanders Lace, Gimp, and
Embroydery, as any in the Town.


M. M. But where are they good Captain? Where are they?


T. T. Why faith, I have had'um all in my head, this Twelvemonth, but could
never yet get one of 'um upon my back.


M. M. Troth Captain, 'twould not be amiss at this time, if you opened your
head, and took one of 'um out.


T. T. The Jade's too hard for me: -- Hark you: -- [He picks her pocket.]


M. M. O good Captain -- It must buy the Child a new Coat.


T. T. Hang him Brat; -- One of thy old Petticoats will serve: -- Bestow money
upon Puppy-Dogs!


M. M. You always serve me thus: -- Pray Captain -- Give me some often again.
[He leads her aside, and whispers.]


T. T. Not a Cross by this good light; -- D' you hear me?


Bil. And must thy Major have no Hatchments? -- 'Prithee disburse, disburse; --
Dear Landlady: -- [He huggs her.]


M. D. Indeed I have no money: -- One would think your Meat, Drink, Lodging,
Washing, and Wringing, were worth somewhat.


Bil. Irish Beef, By this good Tilbury -- Nothing but Sheeps Heads, and Irish
Beef.


M. D. It Is but too good for you, unless you were more thankful: -- Many an
honest Gentleman would be glad of your Orts.


Bil. 'Prithee -- My best Landlady: -- Let the small Gem, or the superstuous
Petticoat march.


M. D. I will not always endure this; -- For once -- But shall we be merry
then? [She plucks out a piece wrapped up.]


Bil. As merry as thou will my Joe: -- Hang pinching, we'll never pine our
selves, though our Heirs smart for it.


M. D. Here Major -- Here Is an old Elizabeth, has not seen light these seven
years.


Bil. And even let her go -- She has been Prisoner long enough of all
conscience: -- Come Captain, let us be merry.


T. T. By this hand it is true: -- [Speaking to Mrs. Mopus.]

I love thee above all flesh alive: -- Fear nothing -- All Is well, and as right
as my Leg.


Bil. And that is crooked to my knowledge.


M. M. Nay good Sir; -- You do but jest?


T. T. Hang him -- Hang him -- I have said enough -- And now I Am for you: -- Be
true Cuckolds, Be true, Be true, etc.

[He sings.]
M. M. Hoop Holyday! -- That Is old.


T. T. You are for new faces too! -- Pray Major, Will you oblige this Lady?


Bil. Who I? -- With all my heart -- But I Have got so strange a Cold, and drunk
so much French Wine of late, that (by this old Companion of my side) 'twill be
but once removed from howling.


M. D. However -- Pray venture -- I never knew a good voice, without an excuse:
-- Pray try.


Bil. My Landlady might command me any thing -- But I Am so out of Tune -- Ta --
La. La. La. -- Hanged.


T. T. Let him alone, and you will not be rid of him -- He Is like the blind
Beggars of Bolonia, a man must give 'um a Halfpenny to sing, and Twopence to
hold their tongues.


BILBOE SINGS. 1.
Come give me the Wench that is mellow;
And a Pox take all Fools that are yellow:
It Is the Horn, the Horn,
The advancing of the Horn,
Dubbs a Cuckold, an Aldermans Fellow.
2.
Let no man disorder his rest.
By believing Bulls feathers in's Crest;
When yo've said what you can,
A Cuckold, is a man,
Or most of our Fathers were Beasts.
3.
Then let us sing At it, and At it;
And let every one catch, that car
All Opinions agree,
In one of these Three,
The Horn, the Pot, or the Plaquet.

Bil. La' you now -- Did not I tell you as much? -- I Will have my Pipes cleared,
against we meet next.


M. D. But when shall that be?


Bil. When you will, provided it be for all Night, and out of Town.


M. D. That Is impossible.


Jol. Not at all -- You may leave word, you are gone to a Woman's Labor.


M. D. Hah! Hah! -- But her Husband --


Bil. What?


M. D. -- Will discover the contrary.


M. M. Puh -- Puh! -- Never let that trouble you: -- His knowledge, does not
lie that way: -- You know Captain, I have slipped a man into his Tables ere now,
and he not a farthing the wiser.


T. T. I that thou have, I Will be sworn.


Bil. Come, come, let us in, and discourse it further: -- A Bottle, and a
Fiddle; and then, Good Night.


T. T. A match, a match: -- Lead up before Major.


Exeunt. ACT. II SCE. 5.
Enter Runter, Tyro. Ru. W(...) you of it? -- She is a handsome Gentlewoman,
and her Fathers Heir.


Ty. Think, do you say? -- I Will promise you, my stomach wambles at her already.


Ru. Leave it to me: -- I will not do with you, as I do with my Clerk, Snip
half-profits -- But you know Sir -- Somewhat ought to be done -- Danda est offa.


Ty. Whatever you please Sir: -- If this take, I will down into the Country,
get me an able Clerk, and turn Justice of Peace.


Ru. And so you may: -- The Alderman is gone to take the Air, and ten to one
but he makes this way homeward; I did once at distance, propose such a thing,
and now I perceive you relish it, I Will present you to him: -- But to pass the
time till he comes -- You say you are a Bachelor of Law, I Will try your wit: --
I have a Case here, referred to me, pray observe it, and give me your opinion
in it; -- I take it, it runs through the whole 24 Letters: -- These common
Lawyers, are our younger Brothers, but they have given us the start; They never
let any thing come to us, but what they can make nothing of, themselves.


Ty. Pray Sir let me hear't.


Ru. You shall -- It Is thus. [He reads.] Abigal, a feme sole, seized in tail,
of the Manor of Blackacre, makes a Feoffment in Fee to Cuttbeard, upon
condition, that if Daniel, shall release Emanuel, of, and from all Actions
relating to Ferdinand, that then Gregory, shall satisfy Humphrey, of, and for
all Marriage-portions, intended by Jeromy, to be given Knipperdoling, with his
Wifes daughter Lettice; which, Maximilian perceiving, and believing that
Nicholas, had a more than ordinary influence, upon Oliver, procures Peter, to
discharge Quintilian, and engage Rowland, to estate his Wife Susan, in the
capital Message of Toungwell (with a certain Salt-marsh, and Underwoods,
thereunto belonging) and stop his daughter Urselas mouth, with a Windmill, and
a Water-mill, left her, by her Mother; whereupon Winifred, having lately
recovered in a praecontract, against Xenophon, makes a Lease to Younker, who
releases to Zachary, who enters upon Abigal, who reenters upon him, and
ejecting him out of the Premises, burns his principal Evidences. -- And now
Sir, What think you? -- Where has this man his Remedy?


Ty. I should think Sir, he were gone at common Law.


Ru. You are always hankering after the common Law; -- How shall we hedge in
the Jurisdiction of 't?


Ty. Indeed I cannot tell -- But they say, here is a learned Astrologer, that
undertakes to tell such things, by the Stars; perhaps it might not be amiss to
consult him.


Ru. Hark you -- I dare trust you: -- He knows no more of Law, than you, or I
do: -- Now by my Troth, but it is a difficult Case; and I have given my opinion
in it, both ways -- The Devil is in it, if one of 'um be n't right: -- But, as I
told you, the Alderman: -- [Enter Whitebroth, and Double Diligence.] His
Constable, and he, are a little private, about some Affairs of the Peace;
They Will have done presently.


Wh. How do you say it was?


D. D. Why thus, an't please you: -- I had (according to the duty of my office)
just walked my Round, when lo! About the first of the morning, we perceived a
kind of glimmering, as of Guido Faux's Lanthorn; And we said unto it -- Stand
-- And what art thou? And what means that light, at this unseasonable hour of
the Night? when presently a voice answered -- Nay, But what are ye? And we said
-- The Watch; And to our seeming, it said again -- Harm watch, harm catch --
And there fell a shower, as it had been of Chamber-pots, and we were most
lewdly bepist, and some Pates broken.


Wh. A plain case -- The King's Majesty's Authority affronted; in the
representative person, of my Neighbor Double Diligence, the Constable: --
Bring 'um before me, I Will make 'um know, what is what.


D. D. Will it please your Worship to grant me your Warrant? I had one from
Mistresses Worship, during your sickness, but could make no body obey it.


Wh. How? -- Not obey her Warrant? -- I Would have 'um to know, she is (in my
absence) as good a Justice of Peace, as my self; Are not Man and Wife, one
person in Law? -- Not obey her Warrant! -- Let me see who dares deny't! -- Come
Neighbor, come -- I smell a Rat; -- What would you say now, if this should
prove, to be a Bull from the Pope? -- I say no more:

[Ru. and Ty. come up.]
Ru. Save you Mr. Alderman! -- I am glad to see you so well abroad again.


Wh. Doctor Runter! My loving Friend, and Neighbor -- Well met.


Ru. This is the Gentleman Sir, I told you of: -- He is a thriving young man,
and you may do what you will with him.


Wh. I shall be glad to be acquainted with you Sir.


Ty. I hope the Doctor will oblige me in it.


Wh. Methinks the Air is somewhat sharp: -- Come Doctor, Take your friend with
you. Exeunt.


ACT. III. SCE. 1.
Enter Jolly, Afterwitt, Boy. Boy. BE pleased Gentlemen, to take a Turn or two,
in this Room; -- My father is a little private at present, with a person of
Honor, but will be with you presently. Exit.


Jol. Where are we now? -- Nor better, nor worse, but a downright Astrological
Bawdy House: -- The Devil of any thing could I see in to other Room, but two or
three Chairs, broke in the back, half a dozen empty Gally-pots, and a
Deaths-head, between two Syringes.


Aft. You may guess Forty times, ere you hit so right again: I believe him a
better Artist at Bawdry; than Conjuring.


Jol. Not a jot the worse instrument: -- Do but hear him, and you will quickly
judge: And if you love me, pray let me manage the Conference: -- He Is somewhat
long -- Where is this man of learning? Enter Mopus.


Mo. Here Sir -- A poor old man; -- One or other, will never let him be quiet,
till he is in his Grave: -- Your Commands Gentlemen.


Jol. Why faith, this Gentleman, and my self, have received so large a
character of you, that we are come to wait on you, in the behalf of a friend of
ours.


Mo. I have done somewhat in my time; and hope I shall never be too old to do
good.


Jol. You say well: -- There is a friend of ours (that for the present shall be
nameless) has got a small mischance: -- You may guess what I mean.


Mo. Well Sir -- I apprehend you, and will set him right again.


Jol. Then you take it for granted, it must be a Man: -- Suppose it be a Woman?
Does that alter the case?


Mo. Sir, I Will deal plainly with you -- If your friend be a Man, I Will cure him
for Five Pieces; but if a Woman, I shall not take her in hand under Twenty.


Jol. Why this great difference?


Mo. O Sir, not without Reason: -- The sooner you cure a Man, the sooner you
have him again -- He Is a constant Termor -- But a Woman -- Ah Sir, she brings
Grist to Mill; -- Cure her once, and she grows cunning, you will hardly ever hear
of her more; -- I shall not bate any thing of Twenty Pieces to cure her: But
this I Will do with you, I Will patch her up against Term, for Forty Shillings.


Jol. Hah! Hah! -- Let this satisfy you, it is a Man: -- [He gives him money.]
I Will send him to you. --


Mo. Pray do -- And leave him to me: -- And if there be any virtue, in Sassa,
Guajacum, or Turpentine, you need not fear him.


Aft. A rare Rogue. [Aside.]


Jol. Well Sir -- I shall: -- But this is not all our business -- We are well
satisfied, that you are a person of occult learning -- Pray Sir will you oblige
us.


Mo. You look like Gentlemen, and I am confident are so -- I Will be free with
you: -- I could discover a Secret of Nature to you, and for the expense of a
brace of hundred pounds, put you in possession often: -- It will give you the
knowledge of all things past, present, and to come; And long life, health,
youth, blessedness, wisdom, and virtue, shall be added to it.


Aft. As Paper, and Pack-thread. [Aside.]


Mo. But -- If you should not make a right use of it, by living soberly,
temperately, and enjoying it, as if you had it not; but shall misimploy it, in
swaggering, Gluttony, worldly pride, and sensuality; you shall not only lose it
for the present, but be out of all hopes of finding it again for the future --
And this is that which we call, Our Magisterium, Elixar, or Rosy -- crucian
Pantarva: -- The father of it, is the Sun, the mother of it, the Moon, its
brothers, and sisters, the rest of the Planets, the wind carries it in its
belly, and the Nurse thereof, is the Earth.


Jol. Pray Sir proceed, and disclose this Son of Gold.


Mo. Hermetically, I shall: -- It is situated in the Center of the Earth, and
yet falls neither within Center, nor Circumference; small, and yet great;
Earthly, and yet watery; Airy, and yet very fire; Invisible, yet easily found;
Soft as down, yet hard above measure; Far off, and yet near at hand: -- That,
that is inferior, is as that which is superior; and that which is superior,
is as that which is inferior: -- Separate the combustible, from the
incombustible; the Earth, from the fire; the fluid, from the viscous; the hot,
from the cold; the moist, from the dry; the hard, from the soft; the subtle,
from the thick; sweetly, and with a great deal of judgment, Per minima, in the
Cavernes of the Earth; And thou shall see it ascend to Heaven, and descend to
Earth, and receive the powers of superiors, and inferiors: -- Comprehend
this, and be happy: -- Thou have discovered the Balsom of Sulphur the Humidum
radicale of Metals, the Sanctuary of Nature, and there is little, or nothing,
between thee, and the Mountain of Diamonds, and all the Spirits, of Astromancy,
Geomancy, and Coschinomancy, are at your command.


Jol. Pray Sir, How call you that? That last again.


Mo. Coschinomancy Sir: That is to say, The most mysterious Art, of Sieve, and
Sheers: -- I must confess, I was once of the mind, to have obliged the World,
with a Discourse upon this Subject; but since that, the World, and I, have been
better acquainted, and I find it base, and unworthy.


Jol. Troth Sir, it is great pity, but you went on; Such a Quixotism in
Philosophy, must needs please every man; for my own part, I date promise you,
you shall want neither money, nor coals, as long as this Gentleman's purse, and
mine, can supply you.


Mo. Why truly Sir, encouragement may do much: -- I am neither Mede, nor
Persian, upon good demonstrative Reasons, I may be persuaded: -- [A Bell Rings
within.] What pity it is, (That Beast of Mankind, that Goth to all good
Literature, for he deserves no better expressions from me) Dioclesian, burnt
all the Books of this Art, and for no other Reason, but that he feared
(forsooth) they would make Gold too common: A wise Fellow, another Lycurgus, to
avoid drunkenness, cut down the Vines: -- You see by this, he confessed it
feasible. [Enter Boy.]


Boy. Sir, I must needs speak a word with you in haste.


Mo. Gentlemen, I Will wait on you again, instantly.


Jol. By no means -- We shall have further business to you, and will see you
again: -- We follow you. [Exit. Mo.] What say you now? Is not this a special
Rogue?


Aft. As ever breathed: -- But to my business: -- I am afraid, I shall want
present money; I could never find any wheels move merrily, without greasing.


Jol. Nor I neither -- And therefore to prevent the worst, try to get the other
1000 l. of the Alderman; and cross-bite him, with his own money.


Aft. And that I can; He has offered it me.


Jol. And do it: -- If a man must break, a 1000 l. will signify little in the
Sum: -- Come, mind your business, and you cannot miscarry if you would. Exeunt.


ACT. III. SCE. 2.
Enter Whitebroth, Timothy. Tim. I Am glad to see your Worship tread so lusty,
and strong again; -- I hope, you will be the better for it.


Wh. I Tim. 'Twould have vex'ta man, to have just got an Estate, and strait
pipt over the Perch, e're he had time to look upon it: -- Mr. Scruple put
diverse things, very home to me, and 'twas ten to one, but all had come out, but
that I thought with myself, there was no such need yet; -- Come Tim. leave
that, and let us see how Affairs stand at present: -- How have you done with
your rotten Raisons -- Did they yield well?


Tim. Troth Sir, the Wine-coopers have done their part; They have made you at
least 60 Pipes of Wine out of 'um -- But they advise your Worship, to get your
money for 'um, before they stir out of your Cellar; for however they may be
palatable enough, as long as they lie there, yet, as soon as you stir'um,
they will kick up their Heels.


Wh. Good enough to be pist against a Wall, an' they were worse: -- And now I
think on it, you remember the Country Vintner, that bought the Pipe of Canarie
on Shipboard, and gave it the Rascal mark, to cheat the Custom-house -- See it
be Cran'd off into another Pipe, and filled up again, with your New, what do you
call it? -- It Is good enough for sinners; -- If he discover it, you may tell
him, it is his own mark.


Tim. It shall be done Sir: -- But Sir, Mr. Spendall was to have waited on you
yesterday, touching a Bond of his of 500 l. which he says is paid, and you
promis't to deliver up.


Wh. O Ho! Let me see -- Here it is -- [He reads.]

If the said Spendall shall content, satisfy or pay, etc. Why see -- The
condition of the obligation (which is made for his benefit, and not mine)
says, If he shall content: Pray tell him, (notwithstanding the payment of the
money) his Bond is forfeited; for I am not contented; -- Does he think I can be
content with 6. per Cent? -- I have no more to say to him -- I Will take my
course -- Pray mind your own business -- Have you received the Jews money? and
sent him the Pack of Left Handed Gloves, I order d you?


Tim. Yes Sir -- It Is done.


Wh. Put tricks upon me! -- Make me buy a round parcel of Gloves, and now you
know I have 'um by me, if I will not bate a third part of the money, you have
occasion but for half of 'um, and be hanged: -- I Will Jew you, with a Horse-pox
-- I have received half your money, and you shall have half the Gloves (that is
to say) all the Left Handed ones -- You may chance to truck 'um off, with
maimed Soldiers, if not, I Will make you pay sauce for the other. -- Reach me that
Book -- And while I remember it, go into my Chamber, and upon the Table you will
find a 1000 l. in Half-crowns; Pray weigh 'um, one by one, and lay by such as
are over weight, and see 'um melted down; -- It Is a hard World, and fit every
man make the most of his own: -- [The Bell rings.] See, Who Is at door. --
[Exit. Tim. Wh. reads.] Taken up on Bottomary, upon the good Ship called the
Mary, to be paid with interest, after the rate of 30 l. per Cent. within ten
days after her coming to Anchor in the River of Thames -- 1700 l. -- So, so,
That Is paid, All got; -- She Is sunk at New found-land: -- Besides, I have
ensur'd a 1000 l. upon her, my self -- How wealth trowles in, upon an honest
man! -- The Master deserves a 100 l. extraordinary for this, and shall have it;
This is the fifth Ship, he has sunk for me. -- Item, paid the Irish Army, in
Peru Dollers -- I! there is a sweet business! -- [Enter Tim.] Who Is that?


Tim. Sir, Mr. Afterwitt desires to see you.


Wh. Stay him a while without, I Will be for him presently: -- Here Is a Squire
too, will be worth me somewhat: Let me see his account -- Lent his father, upon
judgment -- 4000 l. -- Item -- More upon a Statute -- 3000 l. Item, upon
Mortgage -- 2500 l. -- Item, upon his own Account; upon Bond -- 500 l. -- Item,
more -- 300 l. Item, bound to me for other men -- 1000 l. -- Pox of these
Bonds, I must persuade him to take another 1000 l. and hedge all, into one good
Mortgage: -- To see how this World goes round: -- My Great-Grandfather was a
wealthy Citizen, and left my Grandfather, a Gentleman forsooth! But what
between my Father, and him, they so ordered the business, that they left me,
never a Groat. -- This Fellows Grandfather, was a Law-driver, and swallowed my
Father up; His Father set the Estate a moving, and this, will set it quite
away: -- His first Ancestor, cheated mine, and I hope I shall be able, to
require his love, upon his posterity: -- Thus you see, the wheel comes round,
to the same point again -- This City, is like the Sea; few Estates, but ran
often at first, and will run into 't at last: -- Timothy! [Enter Tim.] -- Desire
my friend to walk in. [Enter Afterwitt.] Mr. Afterwitt! The welcomest man alive
-- You were wont to come and sit with me; But now -- You're grown such a
Courtier, you forget your old friends -- 'On my Conscience you want money, or I
had not seen you now -- Away with it -- It Is all but dirt -- You shall not want
1000 l, as long as I can help you; Nay, 'an twere 10000. to do you good -- The
son of my old friend!


Ast. I thank you Sir, and shall make use of you; -- But I Will promise you, this
was purely visit. [The Waytes play within.]


Wh. I am the more beholding to you: -- Hark Tim! Beat out those Rogues --
What would they have?


Tim. They are the Waytes Sir -- They bid you good morrow every morning, and
are now come to congratulate your Worships Recovery.


Wh. I Will give 'um nothing -- They are the cause of more Beggars, and Bastards
-- When a man would sleep quietly, they wake him, and be hanged; And then the
good Woman plucks him by the Sleeve, and cries -- Hark Husband -- Hark -- The
Waytes -- Hark! -- Come Mr. Afterwitt, we'll out of the noise; -- It Is as
dreadful to me, as the last Trump. Exeunt.


ACT. III SCE. 3.
Enter Scruple, Mrs Whitebroth, conducted by a Boy. Sc. It Is a fine Child --
I Will try his Wit -- How far have you learnt Youth?


Boy. Sententiae Pueriles, Sir.


Sc. A good Boy! You may in time come to your Genus, and Species.


Boy. I am past that already -- Quae genus, aut flexum variant, quocunque
novato Ritu deficiunt, superantve, Heteroclita sunto.


Sc. A most emphatical description of us (sister Whitebroth) -- We are a kind
of Heteroclites, and oftentimes saved, even contrary to Rules: -- A witty Child
-- Let Us see -- Byssus, Abyssus -- How render you that?


Boy. Byssus, A bottomless Pit; Abyssus, A more bottomless Pit.


Sc. A -- Child, Thou art in the right; There is a Great -- great -- great
Bottomless bottom; -- Indeed there is.


Boy. Please you to give me leave to ask you one word.


Sc. With all my heart Child -- What is 't?


Boy. What Is the English of Adolescentior?


Sc. Adolescentior! -- Hum! Adolescentior! -- Haw! -- Adolescentior -- I --
That is as much as to say -- Adolescentior: -- (Now fie Child! Ask questions
with that dirty face! -- Go wash it Child -- Go wash it: -- Fie Child! fie!)


Boy. It signifies a Ladder; Adolescens, a Lad; Adolescentior, a Lad-der.


Sc. I profess, I did not observe it: -- I see a man may live, and learn every
day: -- Go Child, wash your face, and let your father know I am here.


Boy. Yes Sir -- I shall. Exit Boy.


Sc. Now indeed Mrs. Whiteborth, this is your fault; -- I am present in body,
but absent in mind: -- I could chide you now -- But I hear him coming -- [Enter
Mopus, as from his study.]

Did not I tell you of that Globe? -- It Is well I did not venture you, by your
self: -- I Will sist him.


Mo. Worthy Sir, and you good Madam, most welcome: -- Be pleased to let me know
your Commands, and you shall see, I am so great a Reverencer of your Coat, that
my whole Art shall lie at your feet.


Sc. He speaks like other men: -- [Aside.] -- You call it right; It is a Coat
indeed, no Cassock, but a good, plain, honest, distinguishing Jump; -- But to
our business; -- I have heard Sir, That you are a man of Art, and therefore, I
would fain know of you, what you conceive, of this notable Conjunction, in
October next, which, the Learned to be the forerunner of Doomsday, if not the
thing it self.


Mo. You mean Sir, that of the two superior Planets, Saturn, and Jupiter, in
Sagittarius?


Sc. The same; What may it portend? -- Good; or Evil?


Mo. Much good no doubt; --. Wherein, though I dare not be too positive, yet,
as far as Trismegistus, Albohazen, Haly; -- Messahala, Zael, Rabbi Abraham; --
Albubater, Avenezra, Albumacer; -- Guido, Bonetus, Hispalensis, Firmius, --
Alchindus, Proclus, Monteregius; -- Albertus Teutonicus, Averrois, -- And the
most ancient Chaldeans, Egyptians, Moors, Jews, or Arabians, have discourst,
either this, or the like, I shall give you my opinion.


Sc. I profess, a great red Man!


Mo. And here, we are to observe, which of the two Planets, Saturn, and Jupiter
(This, the very best, That, the very worst) is strongest, at the time of his
Conjunction, for according to his nature, will the effects follow.


Sc. In truth, learnedly -- Pray Sir on.


Mo. The last Conjunction of these two Planets, happened --


Sc. Pray Sir, no chance, or happening: -- Was, I pray.


Mo. Then, Was, in February, 1643, in 25 Degrees of Pisces, a sign of the
watrie Triplicitie (not known in nature before) which produced those monstrous
Actions, not heard of in the World before; And now, forasmuch as this
Conjunction is in Sagittary, the Day-house, and Triplicitie of Jupiter, we may
conclude, it is the more considerable, in regard they have wholly left the
Aquatick Trigon, and will for many Years make their Conjunction, in the fiery
Tranquillity: For when any alteration, from one Trigon, to his contrary,
happens --


Sc. Good Sir, no happening -- Let me beseech you -- for look you, d you see,
as this -- Good Sir -- Things come not by hap, or chance.


Mo. Well, what you please -- It is impossible, but that some admirable
effects, quite opposite to the former, must needs follow: -- And of this
opinion, is the learned Haly, and generally, all the Ancients, and Moderns.


Sc. But suppose it should be otherwise?


Mo. Then we are mistaken; And that is very unlikelie amongst so many learned
men: -- As we ordinarily converse in the world, we may be mistaken; but in
Cathedra (That is to say, our studies) it is impossible.


Sc. A pretty word for a Study -- Cathedra, quasi Cathedra: -- But pray Sir,
what effect do you conceive, this Conjunction may have, upon the Whore of
Babylon?


Mo. Why truly, that is somewhat uncertain; in regard it will depend so much,
upon that great Eclipse, of Sol, in Cancer, in the house of the Moon, the 22.
day of June, 1666. and will appear, almost Total, at Rome; for my part, I
expect, some or other should marry her up, and make an honest woman of her, or
otherwise (as Mr. Brightman, upon his pair Royal of Sixes, has most
excellently observed) she is likely to get such a Clap, she will hardly claw it
off again in haste.


Ru. I do profess, you have handled the point, notably -- I am convinced --
There Is (...)il in this Globe.


M. W. La' you now Mr. Scruple! -- You Will trust me another time, will not you?


Sc. Reproach not my good meaning: -- Certainly Sir, you must needs have added
some rare Collections, to your own observation.


Mo. Yes, I have some Toys (for so the world esteems 'um) however to me, they
are Jewels.


Sc. As what good Sir?


Mo. Many, many -- In particular, a Treatise of the Philosophers stone,
written originallie by Janboshar, Adam's Tutor, whom likewise you find recorded
in the Indian Books, written by Isazarith, about a hundred Years before his
time.


Sc. I thought Letters had not been so ancient.


Mo. Alas! There were diverse very good Authors, writ before the Flood; I have
some half a dozen of'um within, if I could tell where to find'um: -- Men of my
profession, cannot well be without'um: -- When I see you next, I Will show you
the very Antographum, by which Seth, drew his Pillars.


Sc. Yes, that were worth the seeing: -- And now I find you so near the flood,
give me leave to try your learning: -- Give me the exact time, and the language
of that time and I Will say you're a Scholar.


Mo. For the time; It was (according to our latter computation) the 5th, day of
June, in the 1656. Year of the world, one Month, and 17. days, nor more, nor
less; And by all good Tokens, upon a Friday, Sol in Gemini, the Dominical
letter of that Year, D, fifteen minutes preciselie after Sunsetting.


Sc. I see, you're very exact.


Mo. Alas! We must be so; Half a minutes loss, so maine Years ago, had been the
Lord knows what by this time: -- Then for the language; notwithstanding any
thing that has been said, to prove it High dutch, I am clearlie of opinion, it
was Hebrew, or some other Jargon.


Sc. Nay there, you must bate mean Ace; for though I look upon it as obscure,
as the head of Nile, yet as far as it may be lawful to pry, into unreveal'd
mysteries, I dare boldly pronounce it to have been, Welsh.


Mo. Welsh! -- Afedrwch chwi Gymeraege?


Sc. Why truly no; But I have a little looked into the learning of the Tongue,
and that for two Reasons: The one, for the honor of my Nurse; for I am to tell
you, I sucked a Welch-nurse, and so by a Synecdoche, [He pronounces it long.]
may be called a Welchman; -- The other, That I have observed, it makes an
excellent sound in a Countrey-Church, and consequently, is Tant -- a -- mount,
to all the Eastern languages, and I Will promise you, as Guttural (that is to
say, Throateral) -- Y Cradog, Crugog, Crogwch, Y Gwan-wr hull fu began (r) hwch.


Mo. Of My word there is more than Kawse Pobi, in this; -- Pray Sir, how do you
English it?


Sc. It matters not; Or if it did, it is not the custom; -- But I had almost
lost the Argument, I say 'twas Welsh, and thus I prove it: -- It Is confessed of
all hands, That before the confusion of Tongues, there was but one language;
which being so, it is more than probable, That Gomer, the first Grandchild of
Noah, and first Ancestor of the Welchmen, spoke the same language, that his
Grandfather did, and that from him, by a continued succession, it has been
derived to them: -- For Example; -- Ask a Welchman at this day, what
Countryman he is, he will answer, Cymro glan, A true Welchman; That is to
say, Gomera glan: -- In like manner, for his language, Gymeraege, quasi
Gomeraege, both from Gomer: -- And truly, I take the Cimbrians, to be much the
same; Cimbri, quasi Cambri, quasi Cymri, quasi Gomeri; -- And again, Mumgumry,
quasi Mount Gomery, the very seat, of Gomer himself.


Mo. This is, Draper, Diaper; Napkin, Nipkin; Pipkin, King Pepin.


Sc. Most excellent, I see you have studied Etymolo gy; -- I might yet further,
and (I think) without much difficulty, make it out, That the Mountains of
Ararat, were Penmenmaure in Wales; And the most ancient Egyptians, originally
Welsh, as may be more than suspected, from their Deification of Leeks: -- But I
had rather come nearer home -- What pray, were the Galli Senones, that sacked
Rome? Welchmen, no doubt; The very name speaks it: Gallus -- Guallus, or Wallus
-- A Welchman; -- In like manner, the Gallo-Graecians, under Brennus; The same;
Brennus -- Brenn, or Brenning -- A King in Welsh: -- But what do I go about to
prove that, which no body dares deny? -- I ll give you but one smart parting
blow -- The red streakt Apple, which makes such excellent Sider, what was it
originallie, but the welsh Crab?


Mo. Sir, you have shown your self a person, of no ordinary learning; And
because I see, you are a virtuoso, Be pleased to walk in with me, and I may
chance to show you some Rarities, not unworthy your perusal: -- And you Madam,
if you have any commands for me, I Will receive 'um there.


Sc. We'll follow you Sir. Exeunt.


ACT. III. SCE. 4.
Enter Whitebroth, Tyro, Timothy. Wh. YOu're welcome Sir; And I have heard so
well of you, from the Doctor, our friend, That I Will show you fair Play; --
Catch her, and take her: -- Timothy.


Tim. Your pleasure Sir.


Wh. Go bid my Daughter come hither. -- [Exit. Tim.]

It Is a good Girl, and will make a good Wife; And I hope, who ever marries
her, will be a good Husband to her: -- She will deserve it, though I say it.


Ty. Never fear it Sir; If ever I kill her, 'twill be with kindness; -- My
mother would always say, [Enter Beatrice.] I was the best natured thing!


Wh. Come hither Beatrice: -- I am going abroad, and will leave you to
entertain this Gentleman, till I come again.


Bea. I shall obey you Sir. [Tyro, goes backward, scraping.]


Wh. Nay to her man; Never fall into the Rear, when you should charge.


Ty. I warrant you Sir for one: [Exit Whit.] [Tyro strutts.]


Bea. What (in the name of Goodness) have we here? -- By my Father's last
words, it should be a Sweetheart (forsooth) -- how it strutts, like a Crow in a
Gutter! -- I have a great mind to hear it speak. [All this aside.]


Ty. Methinks (Madam) this is a very fine Room.


Bea. It cannot be otherwise Sir, while you are in it.


Ty. A -- las good Madam -- It Is your Goodness -- Truly -- Pray what a Clock do
you count it?


Bea. He has a mind to show his Watch; But I Will prevent him: [Aside.] It Is much
about four Sir.


Ty. I have a thing in my Pocket, corrects the Sun. [He pulls out, a large
brass Watch.


Bea. How do you call it good Sir?


Ty. The Vulgar, call it a Watch; but according to the learned, it is a
Trochleal Horadeixe.


Bea. He that made it, was as little sparing of his stuff, as the other of his
breath, that New-christen'd it, by so stubborn a Name.


Ty. Will your Ladyship be pleased to accept it? -- I assure you, it is at your
service; It shall be part of your Parafernalia.


Bea. By no means Sir: -- You speak in Phrase.


Ty. Alas (Madam) it is the way of the learned; -- Term, is three quarters of
the Art: -- Here Is this now -- [He points to a wooden Standish.] I warrant you,
you would have called it an Inkbox; or at best, a Standish.


Bea. It appears no other to me at present.


Ty. Nor yet to me: -- But the word's too common; a Butcher would have said as
much -- Oh no -- It Is a ligneous Pixid, accomodated with two plumbeous
Receptacles, or stanueous Repositories, for Ink, and Sand; -- Or, more
Laconically -- An Escritoire.


Bea. You're very learned Sir!


Ty. Thanks to a good Tutor, some small foundation: -- I must present you
something -- [He takes out a Flagilett.] What say you to this? Your better sort
of Gentlemen, seldom go without one of 'um in their Pocket.


Aft. A Suitor say thou! It Is a Puppet: -- [As Tyro plays, Enter Aft.
speaking to Tim.]


Tim. You may be too confident Sir.


Aft. There -- [He gives Tim. money.] -- And if your Master come to hear of it,
tell him, I was drunk.


Tim. I shall Sir. [Exit Tim. -- Aft. reels.]


Aft. How now? -- Where Is this Alderman? -- What have we got here? A
Glister-pipe? -- [He strikes off Tyro's Hat, and kicks him.]


Bea. Forbear Sir -- Know where you are.


Ty. The Hat cost more money, than to be made a Football.


Aft. Ha! Reply? -- Madam, your Fan.


Ty. Murder -- Murder -- Murder -- [Exit Tyro, and runs against a Post.]


Bea. Was there ever such rudeness? [She offers to go out.]


Aft. Nay -- You shall only stay, to see I am not drunk; -- I thought this, the
best disguise I could use, to keep your father from believing, I made any
pretenses to you: -- Well (Madam) I love you, and you know it; -- You may be
proud: -- Farewell. Exit.


Bea. A mad Wooer! -- However, would my Father liked him. Ex.


ACT. III. SCE. 5.
Enter Whitebroth, Runter, Timothy, Double Diligence; All the Women: And
Scruple, leading two of them. Ru. GOod Mr. Scruple, satisfy my Conscience: --
An Oath adds no legality to the Action; If I swear to kill a man, must I do it?


Sc. Why thus: -- Hum -- Haw -- [He grows pettish.] Conscience me, no
Conscience; I came not hither to resolve any man's Conscience; It is not my way
-- Truly I hope Neighbors, -- [He alters his voice.] I may not only hope, but
dare say, That you are all so well satisfied, of what I have delivered to you,
that you are really convinced, that they are Truths not to be questioned: --
You know I meddle not with Conscience, I came to teach ye: -- [He raises his
voice.] Did I for this, preach up the Holy Covenant? Told you, you must deny
Learning, and Reason, and give the Good Cause, a lift? -- Was it for this,
That, that zealous Son of Thunder, Mas' Andrew, told you, That he came to you
with a Commission, to bid you subscribe, That it was a spiritual Contract in
letters of flesh; and that he came a wooing to you, for him that had
commissionated him, and therefore called upon you, to come, and be handfasted,
by subscribing the Contract? Did I for this, convince you, of the lawfulness of
the thing, and, as it were, compel you to the Wedding? And will you call that
Holy Violence, a Spanish Inquisition? -- Have I done all this? And will you now
fall back? -- Shall our old Lease run out? -- And the Land be sowed with
Cockles again? -- Ah -- Ha --

[The Women answer him, with a long drawn -- Hui.


Ru. This is not the point; -- I cannot deny, but that I took it my self; But
then, was then, and now, is now.


Sc. Ah -- Be steadfast, and do not believe I speak this out of any particular
Egoitism, or fond Iishness, to my self -- Ah -- No -- This thing of
selfishness, is a very nothingness -- A mere -- mere. -- Ah -- do but consider
it -- [He is out, and turns it off.] (And pray Neighbors there, leave your
whispering, and mind the matter in hand.) -- Hum -- I* say -- Hum -- Do but
consider, what acting, wonder-working, advancing, and Christian-comforting
times, these were: -- How the rebuke of the poor, belied, slandered people, was
taken away, and their Reputation cleared! -- Ah -- Ah -- What great things were
wrought upon the spirits of men, even through the bowels of difficulty! -- Aa
-- Antichrist was dying in his limbs, nay, dying upwards; And this Kingdom that
was once so given up to it, that it was called, The Popes Ass -- Ah -- How was
it become (as the Assembly most happily found it out) the chief of the Ten
Horns, that were to gore the Whore: -- Ah -- Aa -- Good people, do not fear --
There are more Assemblies coming, and more Purses opening, to carry on, the
work -- Aa -- Comfort your selves, That though these Landdestroying sins of
Superstition, Innovation, and Idolatry, were sins in the Kingdom, they were not
sins of the Kingdom; And a Nation was never destroyed, without National sins:
-- Mark that Beloved, pray mark that: -- [The women again. -- Hui -- ] Aa --
Rouse up your selves, and let this beget in you (as it were) -- Hum -- Haw --
new-spiritual-mouth: waterings; -- Let it not be said of you, That you began
well, but gave it over, when there was most need of you -- Aa -- No -- If we
must perish, it is better to perish in hope, than fear -- Aa -- We must be a
doing people, as well as a saying people: -- [The women again. -- Hui -- ] It
is not enough that you have done well already, but you must press forward, and
like the Grecian, that when his hands were cut off, clapped hold with his teeth:
-- Ah -- Aa -- Do you but stand in the Gap, and there is a Block in the way; It
cannot be got over; The Nation cannot be destroyed, as long as you are in it: --
Ah -- Then, do not despond in this day of Trial, this day of treading down, and
not building up -- Aa -- Give not up this Good Old Cause, which you have so
long contended for, with so much precious blood, and so much precious Treasure
-- Aa -- forsake it not, lest the Malignants rejoice, lest the Malignant, and
disaffected, say, You Have fought to much purpose: -- Aa -- Bear it yet but a
little, and you will see Dagon totter, and when he is once running down hill,
he will not stop, till he come to the bottom: -- [Here he sinks his voice.] In
the mean time -- Ah -- What remains? But that (forasmuch as the Sword is yet
out of our hands) -- Ah -- But that we as it were descend from our selves, in
petitioning for Toleration, and preservation of our mortal bodies, against the
rude Enemy; And that we promise, to be their Servants in every thing, that we
shall judge to be righteous. [Here, All -- Hui. -- ]


Ru. There, I hold with you, good Mr. Scruple; And the Codes, are of the same
opinion -- Tempori, aptare decet: -- Come let us in, and consult the Form.


Sc. I am for no Form: -- Yea, I hate the name, I abominate it: -- Forma, bonum
fragile est. Exeunt.


ACT. IV. SCE. 1.
Enter Bilboe, and Titere Tu, fighting; Bilboe drives Titere Tu, round the
Stage. Bil. I Will make a Rogue of you, Sirrah!


T. T. Why Major -- Nay, good Major -- Have a care.


Bil. Thou Son of a Woman; -- Do think men are Bulls, and get their money by
roaring? -- Cheat me of my share, you Dog? -- [T. T. has one leg over.] Are you
earthing, you Rogue? -- I Will unkennel you.


T. T. Nay Major -- Major -- What do you mean? -- Nay -- Nay -- Nay -- Flesh,
and blood is not able to endure this: -- [He takes his Sword in both hands,
winks, and runs at the other; Bilboe runs off: -- ] Nay, I am bound to follow no
man; -- Do you think I Am obliged, to fight you by the Mile? [Bilboe peeps in.]


Bil. The Rogue's afraid, or he had mischieft me: -- [He comes on again.] -- Sa
-- Sa -- Sa -- Sa --


T. T. Hold, Major, hold; -- before George, you might have spoiled a man so.


Bil. Why Sirrah -- You stinking, lousie, Totterdemallion; you Raggamuffin,
Tanarag Rogue -- Who made you a Captain? -- Was it not I? -- Speak.


T. T. No troth was it not; -- 'Twas even the Box-keeper of the three Kings,
and the Fleece Link-boyes, made us both: -- You, a Major, and me, a Capitain.


Bil. Why thou Rotterdam Villain -- Deny it if thou can; -- Did not I pick
thee up, at a three-penny Ordinary, brought you into Gentlemen's company; Dubbed
you a Knight of the Blade; Taught you the method of making new plots, and
borrowing half a Crown of your Landlady, upon the hopes of 'um; And after all
this, signed your Certificate, to make you capable, of those Arrears, you never
fought for; And do you now forget your Patroon, sirrah? Do you forget your
Patroon?


T. T. And good Major, recollect your self too, if you please -- Do'nt you
know, that I know, That you were never above a Corporal, in all your life; And
that too, not till fighting was quite out of fashion? -- Bow the stick on
the other side, and 'twill be strait.


Bil. I must kill the Rogue: -- (They fight again, as before.)

'Twas bravely fought: -- Thou have acquitted thee like a man of mettle? --
Let Us breath.


T. T. Did not I (if you are yet cool enough to hear truth) teach you, your
Top, your Palm, and your Slur? -- Showed you the mystery, of your Jack in a
Box, and the frail Dye? -- Taught you the use of Up-hills, Down-hills, and
Petarrs? -- The Waxt, the Engraved, the Slipped, the Goad, the Fullam, the Flat,
the Bristle, the Bar; And generally, instructed you from Prick-penny, to Long
Lawrence? And is the question now, Who is beholding?


Bil. That ever friends, should fall out about trisles! (They drop their
Swords, and embrace.) 'Prithee let us discourse the business quietly, between
our selves; And since it is gone so far, as to be taken notice of in the Town,
Cross, and Pile between us, who shall wear his Arm in a Scarf.


T. T. Agreed -- But hold -- The Devil a Cross have I.


Bil. Or I: -- Then knots, and slats -- Our Swords shall serve; -- This knots
-- That, slats; -- Joy knots.


T. T. And I flats; -- 'Twirle up: -- (Bil twirles up his Sword.) It Is flats;
-- It Is yours Major -- All thine own Boy!


Bil. Well -- It cannot be helped -- A man's never the worse man, for a
mischance: -- But hark you Captain -- Upon Honor, no talking.


T. T. No -- No -- No -- First blood, first blood: -- And now Major, you think
I cheated you: -- By this good Morglay! The Rogue was resolv'e to fight, and I
had no reason but to suffer it to be taken up: -- I Will be sworn, I got not so
much, as a Reconciliation Supper by it.


Bil. This is it, when men must manage their business by themselves: -- All
cover, and all lose: -- You think you are well enough, if you can but say your
Gamut by Rote, though you are not able to prove a Note often: -- Come, come, I
must tell you, there is more required, to be a Rogue, than to say, I will be a
Rogue: -- A man would have thought, one of your Years, and Education, might
have easily guest, who would fight, and who not.


T. T. Pox on it, it is past: -- (Enter Tyro.) 'Prithee let us hear No more often:
-- See! -- Here comes my Squire, I told you of: -- Noble Squire! -- Your
servant; -- Pray Major, be pleased to know my friend. (Bilboe and Tyro salutes.)


Ty. Oh Captain, I have been all about to look you: -- Not fighting, I hope?


T. T. No -- The Major, and I, have been only measuring blades -- Here Is the
pretty'st thing, you ever handled -- Hey dash -- (He soines at Tyro: --)
Toledo, to an inch -- right Thomas de Ayala; -- Upon my credit, but two of 'um
came over in three Ships: -- Do but see how finely it is mounted! -- Sa -- Sa --
Observe -- how true it bends! -- Ah! for a pass in Flanconade now -- (At Tyro
again. --) It Is a trusty steel, and has been the death of --


Bil. A thousand Froggs. (A side.)


T. T. -- More than I Will speak of; or, to tell you truth, dare: -- But hark
you Squire, have thou any noble Archievements for thy man of Mars? Must the
great Turk dye? -- Speak; -- His breath, hangs upon thy lips.


Ty. Why truly Captain, I came to ask your Advice: -- I have been most
lamentably abused; Nay, in the presence of my Mistress too.


T. T. Send him a Chartel Boy, send him a Chartel, and I Will carry it: -- Is he
of mortal Race?


Ty. Why truly Captain I cannot well tell what he is; -- But this I am sure,
he had a good material hand, and hoof.


Bil. How Captain! -- This Gentleman is your friend?


T. T. He is; And I Am engaged in honor to see him righted.


Bil. 'Twas bravely spoke; -- And pray think of no Second, but my self: --
Good Sir -- (To Tyro. --) Set forth the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth; it may be matter of life.


Ty. Then -- So't please you, thus -- I was entertaining my Mistress, with this
little bauble -- (He shows the Flagilett.)


Bil. It Is somewhat beneath the standard, I must confess: -- But pray on.


Ty. -- When of a sudden, a rude, roaring, Roister --


Bil. His name good Sir.


Ty. Truly I could not learn that: -- It being in the City, it is probable, it
was some Merchant or other, got drunk.


Bil. Not unlikelie -- proceed.


Ty. I say then, this rude Fellow, without scarce saying a word, gives me a
good sound box --


Bil. Not to interrupt you Sir -- Was it the Bucketoon, or the Bucketadoe? --
Logicallie, or Rhetoricallie? -- That is to say, with the Clunch-fist, or open
Palm?


Ty. Why truly, neither: -- But as near as I can remember, it was with the
back of the hand, upon the Cheek; for with the same motion, he struck off my
Hat -- Thus Major -- (He strikes off Bilboes Hat; Bilboe stoops, takes it up,
and rubs it.)


Bil. O Ho; -- The De rere main; -- Why then the question will be singlie this
-- Whither a blow, with the back of the hand, upon the Cheek, may be called, a
box on the ear; -- For my part, I am clearlie of opinion -- not.


T. T. To take it literallie, I grant it you; -- But then answer me, whither it
were not a probable box of the ear; I take it, 'twas.


Bil. So far I agree with you Captain -- But pray Sir, the rest.


Ty. Then, as if his foot, had kept time with his hand, he gave me such a kick
in Ano, that to avoid him, I had almost beaten out my brains against a post.


Bil. This last of the Post, was your own Act, and may by no means be called
his: -- However, upon the whole matter, you are wronged, and we'll see you
righted.


Ty. Thank you good Major -- I am beholding to you.


T. T. D' you hear me -- Squire -- You see what pains the Major has taken in
your business -- You must present him.


Ty. It Is my intention -- Pray let us meet here about an hour hence, and we'll
further consider of 't.


T. T. We'll attend you -- Your servant. -- (Exeunt severally.


ACT. IV. SCE. 2.
Enter Mopus, Solus. Mo. SO, so, the Trade goes merrily on: -- Let it hold but
one seven years, and I shall go near to fine for Alderman. Enter his wife.


M. M. O Mopus! Mopus! -- Here Is the Constables wife to have her Fortune read
-- She had a Bastard before she was married -- Has had two Husbands, and one
Daughter, by this: -- One Major Bilboe is her Sweetheart; and I more than
believe, our Alderman has a finger in the pie too. Exit Mrs. Mopus.


Mo. The Devil's in it, if I miss her Fortune; I shall be Conjurer, whither I
will or no. (Enter Mrs. D. D.) Save you Gentlewoman -- Your business with me?


M. D. Indeed Sir, I have heard, you're a cunning man, and can tell a woman
any thing.


Mo. Such things have been done, and may again: -- Let me see your hand: --
(She gives him her hand; he pores on it.) -- Three Husbands -- The first, dead
-- The second, living -- A man of Authority.


M. D. Now indeed Sir, he is a Constable: -- Bless me!


Mo. Your third, shall be very rich; A Common-counsel man at least; and you
shall have Children by him.


M. D. How many have I had already?


Mo. Let me see -- One Daughter -- And no more -- That is -- since you were
married.


M. D. To see what learning can do!


Mo. Ah Mistress; I traveled hard for it -- I have been, where never any man
was before me, or since -- I Will speak a bold word, -- I have been so far, that
I might have put my finger, in the very Hole, where the wind came out; -- And
all this, for a little knowledge.


M. D. Methinks it is a great deal -- Pray, a little more.


Mo. You should have three diseases; -- And if you 'scape the first, and
second, you may arrive to the third: -- You shall bury all three Husbands, and
be very fortunate, toward your latter end: -- You were born -- [He turns his
Globe.] under Cancer: -- And have received a hurt, by fire -- Hot-water -- Or
some other way.


M. D. Now truly, but I burnt my hand with a smoothing Iron; And all to be
scaled my foot, with taking down the pot one day, when my Maid was gone abroad,
with her Sweetheart.


Mo. You have a natural mark, before, or behind, or somewhere about you,
between your head, and your heel.


M. D. That Is more then I know; But I Will have my Husband look, to morrow
morning.


Mo. You are pretty neat in your house; somewhat nimble, witty, subtle; --
And a good Bedfellow.


M. D. Indeed Sir (I know not why) but I Have been told so.


Mo. Double-minded -- Often changing your resolution -- Prone to be angry, but
quickly gone -- And now and then, love a bit in a corner.


M. D. It Is best eating, when one's a hungry.


Mo. Your good days, are Monday -- Wednesday -- Friday -- Your evil, Tuesday,
and Thursday -- Saturday, indifferent: -- Your good Fortune lies -- South, and
by Nor'th; and therefore direct your Affairs that way, and place your
Chamber Door, and Bed, to that side.


M. D. Now beshrew me Sir, but I Will observe your directions.


Mo. Once more your hand -- Your Mons Ventris is exalted -- You love -- I
marry that you do.


M. D. Nay, now Sir! What do you mean? I love nothing, but what all women do --
their Husbands.


Mo. Two strange thwarting lines, across the Cingulum -- You have a Sweetheart,
or two, besides your Husband.


M. D. Who I Sir? -- I Would have you know I am no such: -- I am as honest a woman,
as any in the Parish -- I scorn your words.


Mo. No doubt of it: -- Let me see how your hand agrees with my Globe: -- He is
-- [He turns his Globe, and describes Bil.] Suppose I should name him to you;
-- B-I-L-Bilboe; -- He belongs to the Sword.


M. D. Oh Sir, have a care -- If my Husband should hear you, he would run
Horn-mad, and knock both our brains out, with his staff of Authority.


Mo. To show you more of my Art -- You had a Bastard, before you were married
-- And there is an old Fellow that haunts you. -- [He describes the Alderman.]
What say you?


M. D. O good Sir -- If you discover me, I am undone. [Enter Boy.]


Boy. Sir, there are two Gentlemen below, desire to speak with you.


Mo. I Will wait on 'um presently. -- [Exit Boy. -- ] Never fear me -- We are
obliged by our Order of the Rosy Cross, to keep all confessions secret: --
It Is our Alderman, that is more.


M. D. If you should betray me now: --


Mo. I will not -- I will not: -- But hark you -- Upon condition still, you
give me a bit too. [He colls her.]


M. D. O Sir, it is impossible -- Your wife's in the other Room -- The Gentlemen
stay for you below -- Somebody's coming up -- Mrs. Mopus -- Mrs. Mopus! [She
speaks it, as if she would not be heard.]


Mo. Hang her Jade -- (As Mopus kisses, and pulls her, Enter Jolly, and
Afterwitt behind them.)


Aft. See -- See -- See -- In Faith Mr. Doctor! -- Is this your living soberlie,
temperatelie, and enjoying it, as if you had it not? (M. D. skuttles away.)


Jol. Is this your Magisterium -- Elixar -- or Rosy Crucian -- Pantarva? -- No
firrah -- The father of this is the Devil, the mother, his Dam, its brothers,
and sisters, the Tribe of Whore-hoppers, the wind carries it, from Bawdy house,
to Bawdy House; and the Nurse thereof, is a suburb Tantrum.


Mo. A plague of this Boy -- Undone for ever! -- (Aside.)


Jol. Are you so hot? -- I Will cool you: -- D' ye hear me -- give the next
Porter half a Crown, and let him fetch Double Diligence the Constable -- I am
mistaken, or the woman we found here, was his wife.


Aft. Keep him in the mean time.


Jol. I warrant you, he stirs not. (Afterwitt offers to go out.)


Mo. Gentlemen -- Good Gentlemen -- As you are men -- You undo me for ever --
Study wherein I may serve you.


Jol. Stay a little -- (To Afterwitt. --) Confess, and you shall see what we'll
say to you: -- Art not thou a damned cheating Rogue? -- How have thou the
impudence to believe that any thing but fools, should come near thee?


Mo. Nor would I, by my good will, deal with other; -- Do you take the wise
men, and give me the fools, and then see, who will have the most practice: --
There are but two sorts of people in the World, Aut qui captant, aut qui
captantur; -- Aut Corvi qui lacerant, aut Cadavera, quaelacerantur; which, the
great Albumazar, has most significantlie rendered, by Cheators, and Cheatees --
If it were not for fools Sir, how should Knaves live?


Jol. An ingenious beginning; If it hold, much may be said.


Mo. You are Gentlemen; -- And I see, understand -- I Will be plain with you --
Examine the World, and you will find three quarters often, downright fools; And
for the rest, six parts in seven, are little, besides band, and beard, and yet
they make a great bussle in the World, and pass for shrewd men: -- And can you
blame me then? -- Did you ever hear a Fish-wife cry stinking Makarel? Or a
Citizen, gum'd Velvet? -- No -- The best in the Town, though the worst in his
Shop: -- Here, we have a learned consultation, whither my Lady may eat Butter
with her Eggs, or have her Posset turned with Lemon, or Ale: -- Yonder, another
keeps a sputter, with his New -- New -- New -- The Wall-ey'd Mare, and the
crop't slea-bitten -- A Book with a hard Title -- A new found language in
Ireland -- Turk, and Pope -- The Flesh-office -- My Ladies Dog -- The safest
way of cutting of Corns -- A bag of Writings -- A house of the Bank-side -- The
Christning of another Turk -- A Franciscan Proselyte -- Gentlemen-ushers, and
Maidservants -- Dentifrices, and Lozenges: -- Another, dawbs you whole
Volumes, with the difference between sufficient, and efficacious: -- Another,
whither the lining of Aaron's Ephod, were Sky-colour'd, or Seagreen; And hack,
and hew so desperately about their Goats wool, a man would bless himself to
see such piles of elaborate Nonsense: -- And now Gentlemen -- Am I the only
man in fault? -- The worst you can say, is, The people, have so little wit, as
to give me money; and I, am so mad, as to pocket the injury: -- Does this
satisfy?


Aft. Rogue enough -- But is it not possible to make thee honest?


Mo. Try me -- I have a Wife, and three Children: -- The Devil take my Wife,
and two of them, if ever I fail you.


Aft. A safe wish -- But suppose I should order it so, that a young Lady come
to you, could you so read her fortune, as to make her marry me? -- You know
how to play your part, if you please.


Mo. And if I don't, to your advantage, Cut my throat.


Aft. He must know it at last -- I had as good tell him the person. (To Jolly.)


Jol. So you may; -- And do.


Aft. Hold up thy hand -- To make thee honest, here is twenty Pieces for thee;
and if thou do the business, I Will give thee two hundred more; -- What say
thou?


Mo. If I betray you, or do not my best, be seven years in killing me.


Aft. You know Alderman Whitebroth?


Mo. Know him? -- Why -- I am his Doctor.


Aft. It Is his Daughter -- You know your work.


Mo. And if I don't do it -- I Will run my Country: -- And now Gentlemen, you
shall say I am honest -- You observed the woman, that was here when you came in?


Aft. Yes, what of her?


Mo. Why -- She is the Constables wife, whom (to be short) the Alderman
Cuckolds.


Jol. Ha! Are you sure of it?


Mo. By the help of this Globe, I made her confess, That the Alderman, and one
Bilboe, play Level de coile with her: -- But (I may tell it you now) my wife,
gave me the first hint often.


Jol. Hah! hah! -- Thou art honest: -- Bilboe -- A Hector -- He lies in the
Constables house?


Mo. The same: -- Make the best use of it you can, and I Will promise you, to
follow your directions.


Aft. This was better than wish -- Come, We'll lay our heads together, and you
shall hear of us again suddenly. Exeunt.


ACT. IV. SCE. 3.
Enter Whitebroth, Runter, Timothy, Beatrice, Scruple, leading Mrs. Whitebroth.
Wh. WAs he so drunk do you say?


Tim. As ten thousand Beggars.


Wh. So, so; -- his money is jogging already: -- Alas Mr. Runter, you hear
what he says -- He was drunk.


Tim. Indeed Sir, I was never but half so bad, in all my life, and then, I was
Maudlen, for a whole Month after.


Sc. And well it became you -- Compunction is good Timothy.


Ru. What say you Sir -- Mr. Tyro is a civil, hopeful Gentleman, and I am sure,
loves your Daughter.


Wh. Nay speak to her -- there she is.


Bea. Love me! -- It Is more than ever he told me yet.


Sc. He is a littlemodest -- Ingenui vultus puer, ingenuique pudoris. Truly I
think you could not have chosen better.


Bea. I chosen Sir! -- You will not persuade me I hope, that I am in love? --
If I am, I can assure you, it is not with him.


M. W. How Child! -- Not be ruled by your father? -- Indeed Husband, it would
be worth your while, to have an eye upon her.


Wh. And your own too, good Wife.


Sc. It should be both your care -- You must provide a Husband for her in time,
or she will provide one for her self.


Wh. Come, leave this discourse to another time; you know we have business.
Exeunt. [Manet Tim.]


Tim. What pity it is, that this Mounsieur Le Coxcomb, Tyro, should have my
young Mistress -- A fool, that knows not the use of money, but to play at
Bob-fatthing, and Span-counter: -- Afterwitt has most right to her, for his
Estates sake -- Come, come, he is a Gentleman, and if things hit right, -- Thou
shall have her Boy.


Exit. ACT. IV. SCE. 4.
Enter Bilboe (his Arm in a Scarf) and Titere Tu, at one door; Tyro, at
another. Ty. ALas Major! Your Arm in a Scarf?


Bil. Why faith -- A small badge of Honor; -- And I was dressed up in haste,
that I might not fail you.


Ty. How was it good Major?


Bil. Nothing, nothing, but a small brush about the wall; and I know not why,
but I fancied he might be the person that had affronted you: -- To be short, he
made me this pass, in second, and I returned it so nimbly in Tierce, that I
made the Sun, shine clean through him.


T. T. Lightning by this hand -- Lightning -- Well -- [He claps Bilboe on the
back.]


Bil. Uh -- Have a care Captain. [Bilboe shrinks.]


T. T. -- Go thy ways -- And if thou take a swing in Quart for it, there
hangs as brave a Fellow, as has hung there these forty years.


Ty. No murder I hope good Major?


Bil. Let him look to that -- I neither know, nor care. -- Do not be troubled
Boy! -- I have an Arm yet left to fight thy Battles.


Ty. I thank you Sir -- Be pleased -- [He gives Bilboe money.]


Bil. O Sir, -- your love --


T. T. Never doubt him Squire -- I Would as liefe have him upon his stumps, as
twenty others upon no legs.


Ty. Well Gentlemen, Courage -- For my own part, I fear no flesh alive -- No
upon my life and soul don't I, and I believe the the same of you -- You may
fight, you are men of the Sword: -- But for me -- A man of the Law! -- How say
you Captain?


T. T. By no means Squire.


Bil. Say no more -- He Is dead.


Ty. Nay good Major have a care -- No more murder.


Bil. What you please -- I Will promise you, I Will use him the better for your
sake. Enter Afterwitt.


Ty. See Captain -- This is he.


T. T. Pray Sir withdraw, and hazard not your self: -- It may prove dangetous.
Exit Tyro.


Aft. I have out-staid my time -- [To himself.] With your favor Sir, what is a
Clock?


T. T. Look upon the Dyal. [T. T. turns up his breech to him. Afterwitt kicks
him on his face, takes away his Sword, and sets one foot on him.]


Aft. It wants a Gnomon. [Bilboe steps in.]


Bil. Hold thy Death-threatning hand -- He is a Captain -- Let him dye fairlie:
-- You do well to presume upon this Scarf -- I have not been wont, to see such
things, and carry my hands in my pocket: -- [Enter Jolly.] But --


Jol. Thou art not mad man? -- Hold.


Aft. The Rogue has affronted me, for speaking kindly to him -- Be quick --
And let me know the cause, or I Will nail thee to the ground, for an example to
others.


Bil. You have injured a worthy friend of ours -- Squire Tyro.


Aft. If that be all -- Rise -- There Is your Sword.


Bil. By no means Sir -- [Bilboe claps between 'um.] It Is against the law of
Arms, to hold a Sword against any man, has had our life at his mercy.


Jol. Major Bilboe I think.


Bil. The same Sir -- I should know that face too! -- Certain Sir, I have had
the honor, to be drunk in your Company ere now.


Jol. And not unlikelie -- We must not part with dry lips, now; -- Afterwitt --
Our friend -- Do not remember, we were merry together, at --


Aft. Oh -- Your servant Sir; [They salute.]


Jol. Come -- All friends -- Well Major (to renew our acquaintance) I have the
best humor for you -- 'Twill get you the Pence, and all of us, mirth.


Bil. And what may it be?


Jol. Dismiss your friend to the next Tavern, and I Will tell you. [Bilboe
whispers T. T.]


T. T. Methinks, I find a dislocation in my Crupper; -- Your servant Gentlemen.
[Titere Tu goes limping off.]


Bil. Your servant you Rogue -- Your servant: -- Now Sir, your Commands?


Jol. To the point then -- If you are honest to us, it may be worth you 500 l.
-- If not, we are two to one, persons unstained in our Reputation; and if we
deny, your affirmation, will signify little -- Will you be trusty?


Bil. As steel my Boy -- What is 't?


Jol. You lie at Double Diligence the Constables house?


Bil. I do -- What then?


Jol. And now, and then (for diversion) with your Landladie?


Bil. No wounding of Reputation, good Gentlemen: -- She Is a pretty Flie-boat,
two men will not sink her.


Aft. Nor three, I warrant you.


Bil. It may be not -- Have you a mind Gentlemen?


Jol. O -- No Sir -- I hope, Alderman Whitebroth visits you pretty often?


Bil. For his Rent, or so.


Jol. Then we, know more than you -- He has a lick at her too; -- Will you
assist us in a design?


Bil. By the faith of a Soldate, and a man of Arms, I will.


Aft. To engage you then, here is twenty Pieces for you -- You must Trepan him
with the Constables Wife; -- If you find her shye, you may bring in her Husband
for a share -- My Neck on it, you square him out of a 1000 l. at least -- He Will
do any thing, rather than have it known.


Bil. Do It? -- I, and thank you too -- The Bed-pad, is the safest Pad; --
Here Is my hand, I Will be honest to you.


Jol. Well, see you are, and let us hear from you again, as soon as you can --
In the mean time, do you two go to the Captain; -- You know whither I am going;
-- Farewell. Exeunt severally.


ACT. IV. SCE 5.
Enter Cis, Sola. Cis. THat I could meet with Mr. Afterwitt now; -- He Will never
get such another opportunity -- And at home, it is vain to think it. Enter
Jolly.


Jol. Oh! Cis! -- Well met -- It Is my good Girl. [He calls, and kisses her.]


Cis. Nay pish -- Stand away -- Come; -- Do what you will, but don't you rumple
my Handkercher.


Jol. Alas poor thing -- I warrant, you much-minded, what I spoke to you of
last: -- Have you ever said any thing to your Mistress about it?


Cis. Yes that I have -- And she likes him well enough; -- But she will never
marry, without her fathers consent -- She loves him well, but her fathers
Estate better.


Jol. A good crafty wench -- Let us but secure her, I Will warrant her the
Estate: -- And if thou do it Cis -- I Will promise thee a good portion, and a
better husband.


Cis. What would you have me do?


Jol. Lose no opportunity of commending Mr. Afterwitt to her: -- A Gentleman
-- A fine man -- A handsome man -- A proper man -- And you dare warrant, a good
woman's man: -- And hark you, you may tell her, how Tyro, had hired a couple of
Fellows, to Hector him, and that he came off bravely: -- And all this for he.


Cis. Ineeed Sir, I will not fail you in a tittle.


Jol. But were 't not possible, to get her to Mopus's, to have her fortune read?


Cis. Suppose I should? -- What then?


Jol. The work were done.


Cis. Then trouble not your self -- She made me steal out before, and is just
following me to that purpose: -- But hang him; -- He knows as much as my Horse
-- I had almost told her, how Tim. and I cheated him, with some dead Ale in a
Urinal, instead of my Masters water; but that Mr. Scruple, and my old Mistress,
have so cried him up.


Jol. Have a care of stories -- They may spoil all -- The Fellow is ignorant
enough, there is no doubt of 't -- But yet as long as they believe him knowing,
will be easily able, to do my friend's business; -- 'Prithee desire her to
make him show her, her husbands face in a glass; -- Doubt nothing, but follow
your instructions -- I must to Afterwitt, and let him know, whither his
Mistress is going.


Cis. Well -- Trust to me -- Be gone -- I hear her coming. [Exit Jolly at one
door; Enter Beatrice, at another.]


Bea. O Cis -- I am stoll'n out, with much ado -- Shall we go? -- What do
think of him?


Cis. Truly, I take him for a huge cunning man -- He has told, all the Maids
of the Parish, the strangest things! -- And they say, can show one, ones
Sweethearts face in a glass.


Bea. If he can do that -- I Will believe him -- I am so strangely troubled with
dreams, it passes --


Cis. And so have I been too -- And thought several times, to tell you of a
strange thing in our house, but that I was afraid, you would laugh at me.


Bea. But tell me -- What was 't?


Cis. Why last New Years Eve, when all the house were in Bed, I swept up the
Hearth, and smoothed the Ashes, and next morning, found the print of a Wedding
Ring, and a Grave upon them -- I am confident we shall have a Wedding and a
Burial, out of our house this year -- My old Master dye, and my young Mistress
married.


Bea. Away fool -- If I marry -- I promise you it shall not be Tyro -- It Is
such a piece of Ginger-bread!


Cis. Marry hang him -- It Is all the News, that he hired a couple of Fellows,
to murder Mr. Afterwitt; But he has paid 'um, to the purpose: -- And they say,
the quarrel was about you.


Bea. Then in short time I shall be Town-talk, and work for Knights
Adventurers: -- I should be sorry, he were hurt: -- I would -- But come, I
long to hear, what this Fellow will tell me. Exeunt.


ACT. V. SCE. 1.
Enter Mopus, Jolly, Afterwitt. Jol. MAkehaste -- I left 'um coming -- [The
Bell rings.] Here they are.


Mo. Then do you step into the next Room -- And when you hear me cry -- Jubeo
-- Take the small stool in your hand, and come in, and stand upon it behind her
Chair, and look upon the glass -- But be sure, when you have done, to take the
stool away with you.


Jol. I must be gone -- I have appointed Runter -- Have you prepared the
Aldermans Dose?


Mo. It Is here -- [He shows a small Viol. -- ] And as soon as I have dispatched
you, I am resolved to visit him, and give him half a score drops of it in
somewhat or other; but so qualified, it shall only distemper him, but do him
no further hurt -- A glass of stomach water, will fetch him again, while you
say what is this. [Enter Boy.


Boy. Sir, there is a Gentlewoman or two at door, desire to speak with you.


Mo. Desire them to walk in: -- Here, here -- This way -- And you there: --
[Exeunt Jolly, Afterwitt, Boy, severally.] So, if this take, I shall save my
Credit, and get good money to boot: -- [Enter Beatrice, Cis.] Madam -- Your
servant -- What service have you for me?


Bea. I have heard my mother so talk of you, I could not be quiet, till I came
to you too.


Mo. I am nor wont to make my Art common -- But do you propose what you will,
and I Will do my best, to resolve you.


Bea. Then truly Sir, I have been extremely troubled with dreams, and would
fain know, what they mean.


Mo. And shall (Madam) if Art can do it -- Dreams, are certain motions, or
fictions, of the Soul, signifying, some good or evil to come; wherein
notwithstanding, we chiefly regard, how the Moon stands affected: -- What were
yours?


Bea. Methought, my father was chosen Lord Mayor, and that Cis, and I, were
pounding Spices, to make an entertainment -- And at last, methought, we fell
together by the ears in our smock sleeves.


Mo. For the first, 'twas an ill sign -- A sign of your fathers death -- For
Death, is like the Mayor of a Town within his own Corporation; Subject to none,
and has no Companions: -- Then, as to your pounding of spices -- That betokens
Matrimony -- For the Pestle, represents the man, and the Mortar, the'woman: --
Lastly, as to your fighting -- Infalliblie the same; And that, the rather, the
persons being stripped, as you say they were: -- Have you more?


Bea. Yes Sir -- Methought I was married to a man, with a great Jolt-head.


Mo. A sign of Dignity: -- If there had been a brazen face to it, the better;
for it is the first step to it.


Bea. There were diverse others -- But I have forgot 'um; Pray be pleased to
give me some general hints, that I may the better observe' um for the future.


Mo. Any thing (good Madam) to serve you: -- To dream of loss of eyes,
betokens help; For most men help the blind; -- If but one eye, but half of what
was expected: -- For a married woman to dream of beheading; Loss of her
Husband; -- To a Maid; Loss of her Maidenhead: -- Of Leeks, and Cheese; that
she shall marry a Welchman; -- Of hanging; Matrimome; for they both go, by one
destiny.


Bea. Pretty indeed -- Pray Sir some more,


Mo. To dream of loss of fingers, betokens, want of employment, to a Lawyer; --
Of broken Pates; good luck, to Chyrurgions: -- Of cutting high Capers, hanging,
to a Thief: -- Of a Midwife; revealing of secrets: -- Of Grass-hoppers, and
Crickets; more words, than performance: -- Of a Post, and Pillars; a Mayor, and
Aldermen: -- Of a Calves head, and Purtenants; a Foreman, and his Fellows! --
Of being a Bed with a handsome Lady; ill luck, because it is not true: -- Of
having a true friend --


Bea. I, What sign's that?


Mo. A sign he is mistaken: -- But enough of this -- Good Madam, your hand.


Bea. Here -- And pray tell me my Fortune.


Mo. I cannot make it better, or worse; But such as it is, you shall know
presently. -- [He pores on her hand. -- ] A fair Table -- The line of riches
well extended -- Very large wheels of fortune -- You will be a good
Housekeeper -- Rich -- And fortunate: -- These lines, betoken, Husbands; --
You will have -- Let me see -- If your first Husband dies before the mark's out
of your mouth; A second -- And then perhaps, a third: -- These Interfarings;
Children; -- You will have -- Some half a dozen; more, or less: -- Yet once
again -- Pray let me see how your hand agrees with my Books. [He steps to the
Table, and turns his Book and Globe.]


Bea. What think thou of him Cis?


Cis. No doubt but it is all true. -- They say, he can show ones Sweethearts
face in a glass; good Madam remember to try him.


Mo. You shall have a Husband, in a very short time: -- As to his person -- He
is, etc. [He describes Afterwitt.] He has some encumbrances upon his Estate at
present, but shall recover them all, and be very happy, fortunate, and
honorable.


Bea. But does he love me?


Mo. I am sure he does -- And without him, you will be very unhappy: -- He is a
most excellent person -- He receives his knowledge, from Mercury, in Virgo --
His compleatness of body, from Caput Draconis, in Gemini -- Saturn and Venus,
in Libra, direct him to the light of nature -- Fortuna Major, and Populus,
figures of Geomancy, give him health -- And Puella, befriends him: -- Mars in
Cancer, is his Enemy -- Jupiter in Capricorn, somewhat uncertain, and two
Ideas of Geomancy, conspire against him -- But he shall receive Treasures from
the Sun, and Jewels from the Moon, and his Guardian Angel shall defend him, and
make the spightful Dragon, bite his Tail, in Sagittarius, because he cannot be
revenged of him.


Bea. But is it not possible to see this excellent person?


Mo. It Is a thing, I rarely do -- I seldom practice beyond the stars -- But if
you will promise me to sit quiet, and not talk it abroad, I will for once, show
you the height of Art.


Bea. Well Sir -- I promise -- But pray, no noise.


Mo. No -- He shall rise with Music: Boy -- [Enter Boy.]

My glass; And the enchanted Chair: [Exit Boy. Mopus draws a Circle.]


Bea. Oh -- Good Sir have a care!


Mo. Be still -- The Spirit knows my meaning, and I dare not baulk him: -- Fear
not, you are as safe, as if you were in your fathers house: -- [Enter Boy, with
a Glass, and groaning Chair.] Here Madam -- Sit down; And you, Sweethearr, at
your Mistresses feet: -- Sirrah -- [He speaks aside to the Boy. -- ] Take your
Lute, and when you see the Gentleman preparing to come in, play a Lesson, or
two [Exit Boy.] Now Madam, sit still -- And fear nothing. [He takes his Book,
waves his Rod, and reads. MAZAL TOB. Bombomachides Cluninstaridysarchides, qui
Praepositus ^s Utopiae, and Terram incognitam solus delineasti -- Conjuro, and
confirmo te, and superte (O nihilum Potens!) Per nomen Stellae, quae est sine
nomine -- Per Solstitium Solis, and Lunae Dodecatimarion -- Per Tiberii
Spintrium, and Claudii Apocolocuntheosin -- Per Cingulum Veneris, and
Garragantuae (...) -- Per Alpha -- Beta-Gamma -- Delta -- Caph -- Resch --
Schin -- Tau -- Per omnia Praedicta, and alia ubicunque, quae nunquam fucrunt,
nec usquam futura sunt -- Conjuro super to, Bombomachides (occulta qualitas,
and tamen magne) quod relictis Agris Gurgustidoniis, and Gogmagogorum
antiquissima sede, in instanti venias, pro me labores, and perimpleas omnem
petitionem bujus Dominae, juxta velle, and votum suum -- Veni-Veni -- Veni --
Per omnia Praedicta -- Jubeo -- Veni. [The Lute plays -- Enter Afterwitt,
looks over her Chair, as directed; and after a little time, Exit.] [Beatrice
and Cis rise, and look behind the Chair.]

Now Madam, you have seen the Ne plus ultra of Art; And if I might advise you,
I would have you complie with your destiny; -- without it, you will be
miserable.


Bea. And perhaps with it: -- Do you know the Gentleman?


Mo. I never saw him in my life, till now -- But, methought, he had a promising
aspect, and agreed in every thing, with what I told you before -- Do you know
the face?


Bea. Yes -- And if my father were consenting to it, it should be the first
thing I would.


Mo. I can but wish you well -- Yet one thing I Will do -- it is yet in my power
-- If you have no mind to him, avoid seeing him, before you have slept, and let
me know it, before Sunrising to morrow, and I may prevent it: -- If otherwise,
it is past the Art of man.


Bea. I thank you Sir -- [She gives him money. -- ] O Cis, What shall I do --
Is there no back way? -- If I can but miss him now, I Am well enough.


Cis. Have a good heart Madam -- What must be, will be.


Mo. You had best let my Boy conduct you: Boy! [Enter Boy.] You know the back
way to the Aldermans -- Show it this Lady, and wait on her, as far as she
pleases to command you. [Exeunt Beatrice, Cis, Boy. -- ] Your servant -- So,
so, things go as they should -- Where are you Sir? [Enter Afterwitt.] Your
work's as good as done: -- She Is gone the back way -- You will easily get
before her, upon the turn of the street -- Now Is your opportunity -- Make
haste and meet her, and she cannot refuse you.


Aft. 'Twas well contrived -- Your servant. Exeunt.


ACT. V. SCE. 2.
Enter Bilboe, Mrs. D. Diligence. Bil. I Thought what you were -- Is this your
going to Repetition? -- I Will tell my Landlord.


M. D. Indeed I could not help it -- I could never be rid of him -- But I am
sure, I always loved you best -- I hope you will not undo a woman.


Bil. Nay -- Nay -- That Is nothing to me -- I am resolved -- Unless you engage
to do one thing.


M. D. Any thing good Mr. Bilboe, that I can -- What is it?


Bil. When will the Alderman be here?


M. D. At Night, after the Watch is set -- What then?


Bil. Why -- You must join with me to Trepan him, -- It may be worth us a 1000
l.


M. D. It Is impossible -- No one will believe him to be such a man.


Bil. They Will never know it: -- He Will be hanged ere he let the business come
upon the stage.


M. D. I Will never yield to it: -- You shall have what money you will --


Bil. Hang money -- Fly Brass, the Devil's a Tinker. [Enter Double Diligence.
-- ] Honest Landlord! -- I see you're for the Watch -- Twenty to one but I beat
up your quarters -- I Will make you run in faith.


D. D. Yes -- After you Major -- I have done it forty times.


Bil. Why how now man? -- Melancholy? -- Thou look as if thy head were full
of Accounts.


D. D. And truly you are right -- I was just considering how to patch up my
Account with Mr. Alderman -- Indeed he ties me to hard meat -- I cannot take a
Rat, but he makes me account to him, for half-profits; and yet, I allow him as
good as 40 l. a year, for the keeping of one poor Gate; -- Would I were once
Overseer of the Poor, or Churchwarden, there were somewhat to be got by that
-- I Am sure, this will hardly keep life, and soul together.


Bil. Hang care -- I Will tell thee what -- Thou have the honestest woman to thy
wife, this day in the Parish: -- Poor soul, how she is been plagued by this
Alderman!


M. D. Nay Major -- What d' you mean? [She pulls him by the Elbow.] -- You
will not, I hope? -- Major --


Bil. She was ashamed to tell you't her self, and would not be quiet till I had
promis't to do it -- This old Goat, is perpetually soliciting her -- Would one
think it? -- Troth I should have guest him fuller of Mercury, than Venus; But
-- A man may be deceived.


D. D. How! -- The Alderman? -- See what it is to have an honest woman to ones
wife -- I warrant you now had she been right, (as they say) she had never
discovered it: -- Now my dear Chick, how I love thee!


Bil. Leave your slobbering, and consider what to do: -- My advice is, that we
Trepan him -- The Thief is rich, and will bleed well.


D. D. That would be somewhat! -- But how is it to be done?


Bil. He will be here by that time the Watch is set; -- The Captain, and I,
will do it.


D. D. If we could get a good round Sum between us, 'twould do no hurt -- You
may compound with the Captain for a small matter.


Bil. Let me alone with him; -- He Is hard at hand -- I Will fetch him; -- Don't
you be out of the way. [Exit Bil.]


D. D. Indeed wise, this is a Providence, and may do us good: -- 'Grant we may
make a right use of 't. [Enter Whitebroth.]


Wh. Not gone yet! -- I must rattle him: -- [Aside to himself.]


D. D. Save your good Worship Sir.


Wh. Alas Mr. Double Diligence! That you should be thus negligent of the peace
of the Kingdom! -- Don't you know there are a number of dangerous people
abroad, and your Watch not set yet! -- Now truly but you are too blame, and I
could find in my heart to have you complained of.


D. D. I was just going -- Your Worship sees I am ready.


Wh. Pray keep your Watch together, and walk your Round in person -- you cannot
be too secure: -- Here -- Here Is somewhat for your Watch to drink -- I have
given 'um nothing a great while.


D. D. It Is a Four-pence-half-penny Sir -- Will your Worship be pleased to have
the odd halfpenny again.


Wh. No no -- No matter -- Let it go for a Crust.


D. D. We thank your Worship. [Exit Double Diligence.]


Wh. I just met my Doctor, and he has given me the rarest Cordial -- Methinks I
am so flippant! -- Now my little Mouse! -- How do you? -- Shall we walk in?


M. D. Indeed Sir, I am somewhat ill. [He colls her.]


Wh. 'Prithee leave these excuses -- Thou know I love thee.


Bil. See Captain -- See! -- [Bilboe, and Titere Tit, peep in.]


T. T. Ah the old Rogue!


Wh. Come, come -- You must -- I Have had no Rent a good while.


M. D. Indeed Sir we have a hard bargain often: -- I hope your Worship will
consider us against next quarter.


Wh. Why? -- You pay me no money -- You know I take it out, (as they say.)


M. D. I but Mr. Scruple's very hard upon my Husband, and will not believe, but he
has a double Lease.


Wh. I Will order that hereafter -- 'Prithee come -- The Cuckold is secure --
Good faith you shall.


M. D. I cannot; -- Nor will I -- Pray unhand me. [They struggle: Enter Bilboe,
and Titere Tu, with their Swords drawn.]


Bil. How Is this? -- My Landlady! -- Cuckold my honest Landlord! -- Kill him --
Kill him -- [They both lay at him with the flat of their Swords.]


Wh. Good Gentlemen -- Spare my life -- Oh -- Oh --


T. T. Hold -- Hold -- Better geld him.


Bil. Agreed -- Agreed. [M. D. runs in.]


Wh. O good Gentlemen -- 'Twill break my wifes heart -- Good Gentlemen -- I am
an Alderman.


Bil. Thou an Alderman? -- I Will undertake he stole this Chain -- Gi'me't. --
[Bilboe takes it off, and pockets it.] I Will find out the truth.


T. T. Come Brother -- Uncase -- Uncase. [They strip him to his Canvas Doublet,
and Satin Skirts. Eneer Double Diligence.]


D. D. I had forgot my Nightcap -- How now! -- What Is here? -- Stand -- I
require you in His Majesty's Name to keep the peace. -- Stand -- What are you?
-- Thieves -- Thieves -- Down with 'um -- Mr. Alderman! -- Alas good Sir, what
makes your Worship in this condition?


Bil. Landlord -- I am confident this is no Alderman -- The Rogue has served my
Landlady, a man would not serve a Dog so.


D. D. How! -- Stick a Bulls feather in my Cap! -- Make me a Knight of the
forked Order! -- Is this true Mr. Alderman? Is this true?


Wh. Failings brother Diligence, failings -- Pray let the business be ended
between our selves, and I will patiently submit to a Churchrebuke.


D. D. One good Action, is worth two Rebukes, and three Chastisements; -- Pray
Gentlemen keep him here, till I fetch the Watch: -- I will have it recorded to
my own honor, the example of all succeeding Constables, and terror of
Justices, That a Constable once in his time, laid a Justice of Peace, by the
heels: -- I Will be with you instantly. (He offers to go out, Whitebroth stops
him.)


Wh. Good Neighbor -- This will be as great a scandal to our fellowship, as
that abomination of the Elders Maid in Bellyard.


Bil. Hold Landlord -- Is he an Alderman in earnest?


D. D. Yes, yes -- But I Will Alderman him. (Bil. holds him.)


Bil. By no means -- Stay -- The old Gentleman may take cold -- Pray Sir put on
your Clothes -- 'Twas well I ask't the question -- I would not have it go
further for 5000 l. -- An Alderman!


Wh. Thank you good Sir -- Pray take up the business.


Bil. Come Landlord -- Hanged -- It Is done, and cannot be helped. -- He shall
give you a 1000 l.


D. D. A thousand pound -- Out upon it --


Wh. A 1000 l. Sir -- Alas, I thought 10 l. or so.


Bil. How! -- 10 l. -- 'Send we make him accept a 1000. -- It Is a foul
business, the more you stir, the worse 'twill be -- Will you refer't to me? --
I hope to deserve a 100 l. of you my self.


Wh. What you will -- But pray beat it as low as you can.


Bil. Come Landlord -- What say you? -- The Gentleman's willing to give you a
1000 l.


Wh. Oh -- Undone -- I Am a poor man.


D. D. Tell me of a thousand pound!


T. T. Nay now Mr. Constable, you're unreasonable.


D. D. Well then, let him throw in the Lease of my house too -- And (for your
sake Major) I Will do it.


Bil. He shall -- He shall -- Burn it; -- it is but an old house -- giv't him --
Troth I was afraid we should not have got him so low -- You heard what he said,
'twas for my sake too -- I hope you will consider it.


Wh. Well -- If it must be so -- No more words often -- I Will end y ou a 1000 l.
to morrow, and conveigh over the house, when you please: -- Oh -- Oh -- An
undone man.


Bil. In the mean time, a Bond (as you use to say) for mortalities sake, would
do not hurt.


Wh. What you will -- I must obey.


Bil. Be not troubled -- The flesh, was good flesh, and worth the money.


Wh. But the sauce though, was Devilish dear.


Bil. Hark you Landlord -- Run to your Neighbor Squeeze the Scrivener, for a
couple of blank Bonds -- Make haste -- And when the work's done, we'll drink
abundantly, and remember the Founder.


D. D. Truly I like it well; -- Exceeding well -- It is good to be thankful: --
Pray take the Alderman in, and I Will be with you instantly. Exeunt severally.


ACT. V. SCE. 3.
Enter Afterwitt, Beatrice, Cis. Aft. NOW you see Madam to how little purpose,
We cross our Stars: --

Bea. Had you but mist me now,
I should have ventured that, and perhaps stav'd,
That misery, which always follows rashness.

Aft. Trust me: -- I warrant you things will go right:
Now for a small hedge Priest to make the knot,
We'll tie it faster, as we have better leisure. [Enter Run. Jol.]
Keep back a little -- I would not have them see us yet. [Exeunt Aft. Bea.]

Run. Indeed I wont -- You have been large to me already -- [Jolly would press
money upon him.] You must excuse me.


Jol. Upon one condition I may.


Run. What Is that good Sir?


Jol. That you will give me leave to put it in the Diurnal --


Run. I must confess I should be loath to be the Author of so ill a president:
-- But if I should take it; how shall I be able to serve your friend?


Jol. I have told you.


Run. Hah -- But such an opportunity will never happen.


Jol. I am certainly informed he is now upon it: -- For being taken very ill of a
sudden, he has resolved to publish that draught, which you made for him, and
has lain in your hands ever since his last sickness: Now instead of that, let
him seal and deliver this settlement upon my friend, in consideration of
Marriage, with his Daughter, and the work's done: -- Besides, if he should
discover it, I have him so sure upon other Accounts, he dares not mutter: --
[Runter peruses the Deed.]


Ru. You are a notable Gentleman -- You have done extreme prudently, in leaving
a blank for the first words, This Indenture, etc. And that the parchment is
plain at top: -- I will fill it up, with In Nomine Domini, for fear some one
may look over my shoulder while it is doing; when once it is over, it is easy
indenting it, and scraping out, In Nomine Domini; and instead thereof, putting
in, This Indenture made, etc. Trust me with it.


Jol. Shall my friend depend upon you?


Ru. D' you think me a Knave -- A word's enough: -- Yet if you would be ruled
by me, I would advise you to engage Mr. Scruple in the business; He will be
able to do much in it.


Jol. Will a Parsonage of 300 l. a year do it? -- If it will, my friend has such
a one newly fallen, and given me order (as I see occasion) to present it him --
But do you think he will conform?


Ru. I warrant you he does both -- Leave it to me to make him -- I must confess
he has been somewhat violent heretofore, but of late, I can assure you, very
instrumental: -- [Enter Scruple.] Here he comes -- Pray leave us not, there
will be little said, but what you may be privy to: -- Save you Mr. Scruple.


Sc. And your Worship too: -- I have been looking you every where -- Mr.
Alderman presents you with that health he wants himself, and desires you to
come to him, and bring with you, that draught of his Will, which was engrost
when he was last sick -- I left that learned Artist Dr. Mopus with him, who
shakes his head, and wonders at this sudden alteration -- He says, they drank
a glass of Ale together but few hours before; But truly now, he doubts him.


Ru. Why? what is the matter?


Sc. The Doctor had a hard word for it, but I have quite forgot it: -- He is
taken with a strange scouring, and vomiting: The Doctor knows not what to make
of him: -- Death is in's face.


Ru. Alas poor Gentleman -- I Will wait on him immediately: -- That things should
fall so cross! -- His Daughter is just married.


Sc. How! Married? -- I am sure he knows nothing of it -- For his intention of
sending for you, was, That he might so dispose his Estate, that the Court of
Aldermen might not have the fingring of it.


Ru. It cannot be helped, it is done -- But hark you -- It Is to a worthy
Gentleman, and one that has so great an esteem for you, That having a Parsonage
of 300 l. a year in his gift, and now void, he is resolved to dispose it to no
one, till you have refused it.


Jol. This is true, I can assure you Sir; And by me, has made the offer to this
Gentleman in your behalf; who, I think, knows me too well, to doubt the truth
of 't.


Ru. Indeed I do -- I Will take care your Presentation shall be dispatched out of
hand: -- But -- You must Conform.


Sc. Well -- Well -- That shall break no squares -- 300 l. a year -- I do
assure you, a worthy Gentleman. [Enter Afterwitt, Beatrice, and Cis.]


Jol. He comes himself, and his fair Bride. -- Madam! All Joy.


Bea. Of what? -- Will you persuade me into it?


Sc. Indeed Mrs. Beatrice, give you much joy -- In truth a very worthy
Gentleman -- I am sorry it was not my good fortune to have yoak't you together.


Aft. Perhaps it may not be too late yet -- You know wise men always marry
their Daughters both ways -- It is not impossible but that Mr. Alderman and
myself may be made friends -- His Daughter is still alive -- How says my Dear?


Bea. Nay pish --


Aft. I shall be glad Sir to be better known to you; And hope my friend has
made you a small Present from me; Had it been better, your worth deserves it.


Sc. Alas -- Sweet Sir -- I thank your love -- I have accepted That, already --
You are an obliging person.


Ru. Come Madam -- You're melancholy -- Be cheary -- All will do well -- Mr.
Scruple; A word -- I think it were not amiss if you went before, and let him
know, I am coming.


Sc. With all my heart -- Have you any thing further, wherein I may serve this
worthy person, and his Lady.


Ru. Why truly -- Yes -- You will do well to keep him in the same mind of
making his Will -- Since the young couple are together, and it is too late now,
to part them, we must do something to secure them an Estate,


Sc. You say well -- And I will join with you in any thing; -- Provided
always, you carry it prudently, for fear of scandal: -- A blot, is no blot,
till it be hit.


Ru. You must have a care that no one be in the Room, but our selves: -- Not so
much as his wife.


Sc. By no means -- If they should, I will cause 'um to withdraw, upon pretense
of giving him some ghostly counsel, or the like: -- Farewell -- You Will find me
there.


Ru. Not a word -- Make haste -- And be sure to break the Marriage to the good
woman, before the Alderman comes to know it -- Watch your time.


Sc. I warrant you. Exit Scruple.


Ru. Madam, your father has sent for me, and I must leave you for the present;
but you shall be sure to hear from me suddenly: -- In the mean time, if you
please to repose your selves at my house, you shall be welcome: -- You cannot be
safer, nor nearer, if any occasion should be.


Omnes. With all our hearts. Exeunt.


ACT. V. SCE. 4.
Enter Scruple, discoursing to himself. Sc. THree hundred pounds a year, and
conform: -- A fair opportunity, and if I slip it, may I never have another: --
But hark you Mr. Scruple -- You must subscribe: -- Well -- And I will do it: --
But what will the Brethren say? -- How will the sisters take it, when it shall
be told 'um, Vir gregis, Ipse caper decrraverat? -- Why -- 'Twas an Act of my
hand, not an Act of my heart: -- But stay -- What need this? -- Has not the
direction of the intention, a faculty to null promises? -- I take it, it has;
-- What say the Casuists? -- If a man promises, and had no intention to perform
-- when he made it, he is not obliged, unless there be an Oath, or Contract in
the case; For, when a man says simply, I will do thus, or thus, it shall be
conceived, he meant, if his mind did not alter; for otherwise, were to deprive
him of his natural liberty: -- But there is an Oath in the case (friend
Scruple) There is an Oath -- How will you do now? -- Well -- Suppose there be
two: -- I take it, the case has been determined long since -- I may take it
proforma, by a previous protestation nevertheless, that it shall not be
prejudicial to me, in any thing that I shall act to the contrary, hereafter; --
If not -- Our Brethren are clear in the point -- Equivocation, in cases of
necessity, may be lawful; -- It Is a Pia fraus: -- I Am sure, at worst, it is a
probable opinion, and all probable opinions are equally safe in themselves: --
But hold ye brother -- Are not Oaths to be taken according to the meaning of
the Exactor of the Oath? -- Perhaps they are; -- What then? Suppose I bring a
probable opinion for the meaning of the taker: -- The extremes are wide -- But
I have found an Expedient (and yet not mine, but our Brethrens still) The
Swearer is not bound to the meaning of the Prescriber of the Oath, or his own
meaning -- How then? -- Sweetly: -- To the reality of the thing sworn: -- I
think the hair is split: -- But who shall be Judge of that? -- Of that
hereafter: -- In the mean time -- Here is 300 l. a year, and a goodly house
upon 't: -- I will Conform, Reform, Transform, Perform, Deform, Inform, any
Form: -- Form -- Form -- [Enter Mrs. Whitebroth, and Mrs. Mopus.] It Is but one
syllable, and has no very ill sound -- It may be swallowed.


M. W. Now bless the good man! --. What Is that he says? Form -- Form -- Marry
I hope you don't intend to Conform?


Sc. Form is a good word -- A very good word -- Forma dat esse rei -- And
without it (sister of mine) you could be neither seen, felt, heard, nor
understood.


M. M. Now goodness defend him -- In the Highway to Egypt again.


Sc. Mistake me not -- I am neither for Highwayes, nor Highplaces: -- But --


M. W. But what? -- I hope you are not in earnest -- Will you forsake the Good
old Cause?


M. M. Mr. Scruple Spew up the Holy Covenant?


Sc. It forsook me, and not I, it.


M. W. What will the vile Cavalier say?


M. M. How will the despisers of the Brethren bristle?


M. W. How will the old Enemy erect himself?


M. M. And the holy sisters be humbled?


M. W. Who shall carry on the great work?


M. M. Or perfect that, which you have begun?


M. W. Mr. Scruple transmogrifie?


M. M. Ah no -- [Both of them. -- Hui. -- ]


Sc. You say right -- You are my workmanship -- I have been working you these
twenty years, and you are wrought: -- But alas (I speak not this to you) There
are a number of dissenting Brethren, and I have tried 'um this way, and that
way, and the other way, and (to say Truth) every way, but never the nearer; And
therefore, I Am even resolved, to try what the old way will do.


M. W. Ah Mr. Scruple! -- Do you know what you say? -- The old way!


M. M. The old Whore! [Both -- Hui. -- ]


Sc. Yes -- The old way, though no old Whore; -- Wherein notwithstanding, I do
no more than what ever was, is now, and ever will be: -- Mark what I say, and
observe it; -- our Brother Fox, that had so little wit, as to write his Book of
Martyrs, had yet enough, to keep himself, from being one of the number.


M. W. Ah -- What will become of the stock?


M. M. And the little Lambs, how shall they play?


M. W. Who shall destroy the Chicken of the Wolf?


M. M. And break the Leviathan's Eggs, in the shell?


Sc. Come (sisters of mine) you live on the blind side of the World; -- I find
the Cause, and its interest, deserted by most people, unless it be some few,
That having found how sweet a thing it is to head a Faction, make use of us, as
the Monkey did of the Cats Paw, to scrape the Nuts out of the fire: -- I need
say no more, unless it be, That I have a fair opportunity of 300 l. a year
offered me.


M. W. I -- do -- do -- And see who will repent it first: -- Never expect more
Friday Night Suppers.


M. M. Nor the sweet society of Brethren, and sisters.


M. W. What fellowship is therein Stock Fish, and Oil?


M. M. Or, instead of Gellies, to be swill'd with Frummetrie?


M. W. To exchange your Venison, for Red Herrings, and Mustard?


M. M. And Virgin Pullets, for Ling, and Haberdine? [Scruple shakes his head,
and sighs. Huh. -- ]


M. W. Who will be gainers now?


M. M. Or whose the loss, when this happens?


M. W. When the Benevolence shall dwindle to an Easter penny.


M. M. And purifying Dinners, into cracked Groats.


M. W. When you're at charge of a Gown, for Sundays, and Holidays.


M. M. And the Cassock, comes out of your own Pocket.


M. W. When the Boys cry after you, it grows too fast.


M. M. And the knot of your Sussingle sits in the wrong place. [Again, but
louder. -- Huh -- Hu -- ]


M. W. And will you then leave us? Let not 300 l. a year be any thing in the
case; we will allow you four: -- Pray consider, Did we ever forsake you? What
have you lost by throwing your self on your friends? -- If the worst come to
the worst, rather than lose you, we will forsake our carnal Husbands, and
carnal Children, and march off, to New England together.


Sc. Now cannot I forbear, but I must accept your 400 l. a year: -- Let a man
strive never so much against it, natural affection will return upon him --
Comfort your selves, That is to say, Be comforted, I will not forsake you --
Conclusum est contra, etc. I will not Conform -- Nay, verily I will not.


M. W. Aa -- Mr. Scruple! [They both hang on him.] Cough within.


Sc. Hark! -- I hear the Alderman -- Run in -- Run in -- I Will follow you
instantly. [Exeunt Mrs. Whitebroth, and Mrs. Mopus.] So -- Now it is 400 l. a
year, and not Conform: -- The women are good comfortable women, and I ought not
in Conscience to leave 'um: -- But hear me Brother -- What will you do with
your new Parsonage? -- Why -- I -- will -- get -- some or other instituted, and
inducted into 't, to save a Lapse, and take a Bond of 500 l. of him, to resign
at six Months; which, he will forfeit of course, as not doubting but to be
relieved against it, as Simoniacal: -- So -- There Is 500 l. got too -- He Is
gone every way: -- At common Law, it is his own Bond; In equity, he might have
resigned: -- But why so fast friend Scruple? Had not you as good sell it
outright to avoid dispute? -- I cannot tell -- But now I remember me, The
Casuists take a notable difference, that is to say, between money given
(provalore Beneficii) as the full price, and (tanquam motivum ad resignandum)
for your good will, or so; -- The first, they generally agree to be Simony; but
for the latter, they leave it as a controverted point, positivelie denied by
very few, but such as have no money to give. [Enter Whitebroth, led by Mopus
and Timothy, Whitebroth Coughs.] Alas good Sir! -- How does your Worship? --
Pray Sir how do you like him?


Mo. Troth but ill; I Am half afraid of him.


Wh. Who Is that? Mr. Scruple?


Sc. Yes Sir -- How do you?


Wh. Uh -- Uh -- Very ill -- Is the Doctor coming?


Sc. He Will be here immediately -- Poor man! He was half distracted when I
brought him the News -- [Enter Runter.] He Is come: -- How he sweats with haste!


Ru. My dear Friend, how do you?


Wh. Oh -- Oh -- ill, ill: -- Uh -- Uh -- Uh -- Have you brought my old Will
with you? -- Let me see it. Uh -- Uh -- Uh --


Ru. Yes Sir, here it is. [Runter gives it Whitebroth, he peruses it.]


Sc. Indeed Sir it is piouslie, and discreetlie done, to settle Affairs so, that
there may be no wrangling, in case you should do otherwise than well.


Mo. I wonder my Boy comes not -- I have sent him for a Rosy-Crucian
preparation, has fetched a man again, after he has been dead a day, and half: --
I hope it may do good; However, for fear of the worst, you do well to settle
your Estate, it may ease your head.


Wb. Uh -- Uh -- Uh -- Here Doctor -- Put some wax to it; -- Set the Table
nearer -- And give me my Seal -- [Runter in putting on the wax, puts the change
upon him; he signs and seals the false Deed, and Coughs all the while.]


Ru. Sir you are weak: -- Do you deliver this as your Act and Deed?


Wh. Yes -- I do -- Pray Gentlemen be Witnesses to it. [Enter Boy. They witness
it.]


Mo. Oh -- Are you come at last -- Here Sir -- Here Is the most sovereign
Cordial in all the World -- I was seven years, in making one poor pint, and
half often.


Wh. I thank you Sir -- He drinks -- Uh -- Uh -- It warms me strangely -- Uh
-- Uh --


Mo. Pray forbear Coughing, -- you are weak -- How do you feel your self now?


Wh. I cannot tell -- But methinks it does me good.


Mo. I see by this sudden operation, 'twill do the work: -- You were best to
walk in, and rest your self in your Couch awhile, before the fire.


Ru. I must run home a little, upon some urgent occasions, but will see you
again presently. Exeunt severally.


ACT. V. SCE. 5.
Enter D. Diligence, and his wife; Bil. T. T. The men, drunk. Bil. WHy Captain
-- What? All a mort?


T. T. Faith I was contemplating upon the pence.


Bil. And thou shal't have 'um Boy -- See here my Bully! -- [He pulls out
Whitebroth's Chain. -- ] Here Is that will fetch 'um.


M. D. Dear Major give it me.


Bil. Thou shal't have any thing my Jo: -- Captain, Courage! We'll be merry
to Night, and have a Wedding, though it be but a Westminster one.


T. T. What you will.


D. D. Well said Major: -- Ah for a Fiddle now: -- Odds nigs!


Bil. I hate those Puritan Oaths -- If thou must swear, swear like a man of
Office.


D. D. The old Boy still -- Now could I Caper through the Moon: -- Hey Toss --
Hang one Fiddle, we'll have a whole Kennel: -- Come you Jade -- Dance.


M. D. Alas Major -- How pitifully my Husband is cut! -- He Will be so sick
tomorrow morning.


Bil. Yes faith; -- He has got a Rattle as big as a Drum.


D. D. Major! -- A word -- Do you think my Wife's a Whore?


Bil. Such another word -- And -- By all the bones of my back --


D. D. Nay good Major -- I was once a little jealous, till she told you of the
Aldernian -- But now, I dare trust her to Lecture by her self.


M. D. What Is that you say of me? [Enter Afterwitt, Beatrice, Jolly, Runter,
Cis.]


D. D. Stand -- Who comes there? -- Knock 'um down? -- What are you? -- I am
the Constable.


Aft. The Fellow's mad.


M. D. No Sir, he is only a little overtaken as they say.


D. D. Stand off -- Down with 'um -- Stand -- Treason -- I command you to
apprehend one another.


Jol. Maine a good time, has this Fellows head been broke, to keep the peace
whole -- 'Prithee take him away.


Bil. Landlord -- They Are friends.


D. D. Which -- Where -- Here I could have 'um, and there I could have 'um: --
[He fences with his staff: -- ] Mr. Runter! -- I profess I knew you not.


Ru. Then ha'done now -- Come Gentlemen, What say you? The business must be
discovered first or last, and as good now (and perhaps better) than another
time.


Aft. I like it well -- But think it were not amiss to lessen the Company -- We
will not appear all at once.


Ru. However let 'um be within call.


Jol. Pray Gentlemen keep together -- We shall have occasion to use you
presently.


Bil. You see my Arm's in a Scarf -- Much cannot be expected from me: -- But
for a dead lift, we'll make a shift to change hands: -- Gi' the word of command
there, faces about, etc.


Jol. And hear me Major -- Lend me your Chain: -- And let it be you care to
provide some abominable Music: -- We'll bring him to our Bow, or run him to
death with Fiddlers: --


Bil. I warrant you -- Here -- [He gives him the Chain. Exeunt all, but Jolly.
Aft. Bea. -- To them, Enter Scr. Mrs. Whitebroth.]


M. W. How! Married? O my Child -- My Child!


Sc. You might have believed me sooner -- How often have I told you, she was in
her Teenes? -- And you know Teene, quasi Teeming: -- I may be a little free
with you -- Young Girls are like Nuts, you must gather them when they begin to
be brown at bottom, or they will fall of themselves.


M. W. But truly, I hope it is not so plain as you make it.


Sc. How think you? [Afterwitt and Beatrice, come up and kneel.]


M. W. O my Child, my Child -- Thy father is pretty hoddie again, but this
will break his heart quite -- O my Child -- Has he not hurt thee? [Enter
Whitebroth, Mopus, Timothy, After them, Mrs. Mopus.]


Aft. No great sign of death Mother.


Wh. What Is all this clutter? -- Here Is a noise for a sick man, with all my
heart! -- [Afterwitt and Beatrice kneel to him.] How Is this?


Sc. Nothing but Matrimony Sir, and Conjugal Love.


Wh. And were you Pimp to it? -- I hope you have made sure of her portion -- I
can assure you her Grandfather left her not so much as a gray Groat.


Aft. I have enough in her.


Wh. Much good may't do you.


Bea. Good Sir forgive me.


Wh. Out of my doors -- The wench is pretty handsome, and will be able to get
her own living, if the Parish will but keep the Children.


Aft. I must not hear this language -- Know you this -- A good honest
settlement upon my self. [He shows the Deed.] And your Daughter in
consideration of marriage.


Wh. Ha! Settlement! And in consideration of Marriage! -- I was not drunk sure!
-- When was this done?


Aft. Only a little Crop sick -- Very lately.


Sc. Indeed Sir, you desired this Gentleman, and my self, to be Witnesses to it
-- I know my hand again.


Mo. I saw you sign, seal, and deliver it.


Wh. I published only my Will.


Mo. I know not what your meaning was; but you delivered it as your Act, and
Deed.


Wh. Timothy -- Fetch me the Constable.


Jol. Sir, he will save you that trouble; I met him just coming to you, about a
suspicious person, whom he apprehended with This Chain in his pocket. [He shows
the Chain.] You cannot imagine whose it should be? [Whitebroth makes no answer,
but holds up his hands, and walks: -- Enter full but upon him, Bilboe, Double
Diligence, Titere Tu, and Mrs. Double Diligence.]


Wh. Cheated -- Cheated -- As I Am an Alderman, purelie Cheated.


Aft. How can that be -- you have the Reputation, of as shrewd a man, as any
upon the Bench.


Wh. Ah -- Rogues all -- Rogues all -- [He walks again.]


Jol. What say you Sir? Here Is the Constable now: -- Come, come, be wise: --
Your Daughter has married a Gentleman: -- Is not this better, than a Smithfield
bargain? -- Give me so much money, and my Horse shall leap your Mare.


Wh. Don't worrie me with words -- I Will consider often.


Sc. Good Sir -- Marriages are made in Heaven.


Wh. Then I Will be sworn, I had never a friend there.


Cis. Truly nor I neither -- For indeed, methinks they are very long in
coming down. [Aside.]


Sc. Now verily Sir, but this is a just judgment upon you, for hoarding up
your moneys, and suffering the Good Old Cause to starve.


Wh. Seriech-owle: -- But where is my Doctor?


Jol. Why troth Sir (you cannot blame him) he is somewhat loath to appear, till
he see how things are like to go: -- Come, pray Sir --


Wh. Well Sir -- I see by this Chain, the Major and you, understand one another
-- Let Us have no more words -- All parties shall be satisfied -- Give me't.


Jol. There -- And may you long live to wear't: -- You may come down -- All Is
well -- [To Runter, peeping above.]


Wh. Come Son and Daughter, the business is done, and I forgive you both -- And
if that settlement be not large enough, I Will make you a new one upon demand --
You shall have your own Estate back, in present, and as you love your Wife, the
rest after our deaths: -- And so, you have my blessing.


Aft. Bea. [Kneel.] We thank you Sir.


Wh. Come, let us be merry -- And as late as it is send for the Music -- We
must have a Dance, at least.


Jol. See what it is to forecast a man's business right; -- They are gone for,
and will be here instantly.


Wh. But we forget the main thing, the Posset: -- Quickly Cis, and get one
ready. Exit Cis.


M. W. How Is this? Music! Dancing! Posset! -- Are they lawful good Mr.
Scruple?


M. M. Are they not, Rags of the Whore?


Sc. Thereafter as they may be used -- I will consider it a little, and give
you my opinion -- [He walks. Enter Runter.]


Wh. O my Doctor -- You're a fine Gentleman -- Good faith you are.


Ru. Who I? -- I care not if all my faults were writ in my forehead: -- [Enter
Tyro.]


Wh It must be in short hand then, or there will want room.


Jol. Here Is Tyro, too -- Your even come time enough to dance at your
Mistresses Wedding!


Ty. How! My Mistresses Wedding?


T. T. Even so -- Alas that I had but known of this before!


Ru. Women will have their wills -- Let her go -- I have another guess thing,
in chase for you.


Ty. And shall I have her?


Ru. Thou shall -- And hark you -- [Runter having whispered him, he shruggs,
and scratches his elbow.]


Sc. Hum -- I am full; and shall discourse 'um graduallie: -- And first, of the
first -- Music; -- Yes certainly, it is lawful -- But, what Music? That Is
the question: -- We'll examine it a little -- Cimbals, they are Jewish, -- The
Harp, malignant, and Irish; -- Organs, Antichristian; -- The Fluit, a mere
Horn-pipe; -- The Fiddle, Out upon it! Most abominable, it ushers in Revels, and
May-poles: -- What then? -- Why truly I agree with the Assembly -- Bag-pipes;
-- A harmless, innocent Music, and most agreeable, to the Discipline, and
practice, of our Brethren of the Kirk: -- Besides, it has (as the Learned
observe) a specific quality, to mollify, and soften the most brutal natures
-- Witness, the Bears -- Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. -- But secondly,
for Dancing -- Why truly, that may be lawful too -- But here too, the point
will be the same; -- What Dancing? -- Country Dances; they are Pagan; --
French Dances; Fie, Fie, Antic; -- Our ordinary dancing; villainous; it is
mixed, and promiscuous, a very Nicolait^^ism: -- The Benchers measures; I must
confess they come somewhat near, were they not superstitious: -- What then? --
Why -- The men may dance in one Room, and the women in the other: -- Lastly, for
the Posset -- And truly here, I Am in a great Wood -- But not to dwell upon the
Letter, whither Posset, or P-osset, I shall take it as it lies before me --
Posset -- And truly that may be lawful too: -- Lemon Posset, is cooling --
Carduus Posset, Benedictus -- And Sack-Posset, comfortable -- But Wedding --
Sack -- Posset -- There Is the point; -- Truly, I half doubt it, and that for
fifteen Reasons -- Hum --


Jol. A plague of these Fiddlers -- We shall be murdered ere they come.


Sc. I say for fifteen Reasons: -- First, from the name of the thing; Posset,
from Posse, To be able; And from that fond supposition, first brought into
VVeddings, An invention, merely carnal: -- But secondly, for that it ministers
abundance of unsavory discourse: -- Thirdly, for that the Grace before it, is
none at all, and the Grace after it, lewd: -- Fourthly, That it is eaten (by
the parties chiefly concerned) only in spite: -- Fithly, -- Hum -- Haw -- I
say fifthly -- [Enter Fiddles.]


Jol. Servavit Apollo! -- Strike up, strike up -- One noise best drowns another.


Sc. A wholesome observation lost.


Jol. 'Twill keep cold for another time.


Wh. Come Gentlemen -- One Dance, and then for the Posset, [They dance. Tyro
pipes.] Why so -- VVe're all friends -- And now, you that are for the Posset,
follow me.


Jol. Well moved -- Well moved -- The Bride begins to be sleepy.


Bil. Lead on before there -- I Will bring up the Rear -- Come Landlord -- Bear
up for the Bar of Chester; And since we have had so good fortune to day, we'll
henceforth boil our Beef in Sack, and make the Beggars drunk with the
Porridge. Exeunt.


THE END.
ERRATA.
THese, and such other literal mistakes, as you may chance to meet with, be
pleased to correct. -- Page 2. line 10. for, dead a Horse -- read -- a dead
Horse. Page 36. lin. 26. -- for, quocunque -- read Quaecunque. Page 37. lin.
38. -- for, a great red man -- read, a great read man. And so for the rest,
etc.

THE EPILOGUE:
SPOKEN BY MOPUS.
I Had almost forgot -- Let Us see -- What weather?
Nor fair; -- Nor foul; -- Indifferent; -- Both together,
Clear, if no Clouds, nor misling; -- If there should,
It shall proceed from former Causes: -- Good:
So much for Doctrine -- To Apply it now;
Yo've had A Play, But, whither good, or No,
It Is past my Globe, -- yet guess, the weather will
Prove fair enough, unless you make it ill.
It Is you must make the Play, or stand, or fall;
Therefore, By me, To you, and you, and All,
The Author bows -- And perhaps reason for 't;
Some Men the Judge, others, the Jury Court;
The one, more Just, if unconcerned; The other,
More Pitiful; If he claps both together,
He means no hurt; For in a common Hall,
Noise carries it -- He fain would please you All:
Yo've had for Pit, for Box, for Gallery too;
Keep your own Posts, and he is well enou':
But -- If you must lash out, And think you cannot
Be wits your selves, unless you pique, and rant;
At your own Peril be it, And further know,
Who gives a Character, in one, gives two:
He hopes the best -- Nor will we, be perplexed;
Laugh hearty now, and he shall fix you next.
FINIS.

