PANALETHA plastolga.

Or the DEPLUMATION OF Mrs Anne Gibbs, Of those furtivous perfections whereof
She was supposed a Proprietary, By Envious Fame.

Deplored by her (once) Admirer, R. W.

And. Ep. Lib. 1. Forma tibi famam peperit, sed filia matrem
Occidit, formam, non bona fama, bonam.
Thy beauty got thee fame, but the daughter spoiled
The Mother, thy ill name thy face has soiled.
Printed Anno Virginis parturientis, 1662.

From his Umbrello As he sat Fishing, 8bris 9. 1662.
Panletha Plastolga.
Down by those batfull Banks I sat erewhile,
Where Royal Thames old Thorney did in-isle.
But barred his ancient road the amorous youth
Ran round about to know the real truth
Of what his mother Isis heard, while she
Was entertained by the Gowned Company.
Which was that LUCRECE for both mind and face
Surpassed all with whom she came in place.
So he, Flumina senserunt ipsa quid esset Amor. Ovid.
inflamed by the rumor, did repair
To match hers with his parent's famous I sidis (...) a Poetis veteribus
usitatum.
hair;
But b'ing arrived on that Fertilis a multis si terra vocata ferendis,
Fertilis est, multos nam -- tulit.
And.
fertile Strand,
Where Elineor's Obelisk did stand,
He heard Fame's trumpet sound a quick retreat,
Extenuating what she once proclaimed so great
Therefore he would not stay, but went before
To meet old Walbrook his sly paramour.
To whom I heard him in a fume rehearse
What he had heard; but this my Tragic verse
Shall speak another passion, all this while
I was projecting in what mournful style
I should articulate my woes, what Muse
For this grave expedition I should choose.
I called the Sisters nine, but could not find
One sad enough to personate my mind.
Want of gravity they pretended all,
Melpomene was too too Comicall.
Wherefore I meant my silence not to break,
But pass that over which I could not speak.
But 'lass I found this burden worse than the first,
And that the cask, if 't did not leak, would burst.
So thence I migrated and now reside
Amongst Feck'nhams faunes by murmuring Arro's side,
To whom I told my grievance, and he sought
Quick means for to redress it, for he brought
One of his Naiads to me, who had long
In solitude complained of the wrong
Old Feck'nhams Satyrs did her since his fall,
Sculking in caverns 'bout her Master's Hall.
And after Catalogues of griefs again,
The sable Nymph thus dictates to my pen.
Let none henceforth explode that Sophister who said
The Snow was black, to what may not sense be missed?
What falsities may'n't Demonstration lead us to,
When that great rule of Reason A Teutonico Gar omnis and Trude veritas
Significatione Graeco panletha consonans.
Gartrude proves untrue?
Now Barbara, once thought absolute, amongst the rest,
Logicians shall account but Topical at best.
Tell me no more of Claudia who Poets dream
Drew Cybele's image up royal Tyber's Stream.
Tell me no more of Artemisia, nor her
Who took up water in a porous Colander.
Britona, Teuca, Penelope, Claelia,
Baldraca, Pero, Alceste, Cornelia,
Euridice, Vesta, Evadn', Alcyone,
Hypsecratea, Pandora, Rhodigune,
Aemilia, Valeria, whose names of yore
Were celebrated with such Eulogyes, no more
Shall be thought worthy so great honor, but suspended
Until this Grand Inquest of chastity be ended.
For how can virtue by such Petits be embraced,
When their superlative LUCRETIA proves unchaste?
Once did I think her chastity as free from stain
As the Chrystalized Ice within the frozen Main,
Or the Castisick Emerald, and did prefer
Her Name to the first Rubric in my Calendar.
But now her Innocence alas is blurred by Fame,
And with a blacker cole I must ingross her Name.
This said she flung her self upon the Stream
Abruptly leaving this unweildy Theme;
And hasts to Arro's Nuptials, who was willing
TO espouse fair Alne, the Woodland's clearskin'd dilling.
Leaving my passions to gether by the ears,
And me to speak the residue in tears.
FINIS.

