A Plain EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS-PRAYER.
By GRINDAL WILSON, Minister in Glocestershire.

OUR This shows we must pray for others: we are all Brothers under one Father;
therefore we must pray for all. Father in the Hebrew is, (...) from (...) one
that wills all good, and delights to do it to his Sons.
Father, Lo, how he encourages thee! Will not a Father hear? Three ways he is
a Father; by Creation, Redemption and Regneration. May a wicked man thus pray?
Yea, God is his Father by Creation, and Christ died for him: this must be an
encouraging step to go higher. His wants should not hinder, but move him to
ask; especially, when the things are offered. Pray he can outwardly; but what
he cannot do, must not hinder him from what he can do: One Talent must be
improved, as well as Five. Veryfew but have some desires after God, and
Deliverance; those that fully resolve to reject Pardon and Duty, are incapable
of the Question which art in Heaven This is to move us to Reverence, Humility
and Confidence. He that rules there by right of Creation in that place of
unspotted Purity, seeing all the thoughts of Angels, gloriously pouring out his
Mercy and Goodness, must needs be higher than the Heavens, Infinite, Eternal,
Just, Merciful, Omnipotent, Omniscient, and have in himself eminently, and
unconceivably all other Titles, which the Scriptures manifest. Hallowed be thy
Name Nomen of ^osco to know, because things are Known by Names.
. Name here stands for God manifested in his Attributes, Word, and Works.
Hallowed, that is, made holy. A thing may be made Holy two ways. 1 st, By
receiving something within it self; but we must abhor to think thus of He is a
pure Act of all perfection, and receives nothing.
God. 2 dly, A thing may be made Holy by another, and that by a right knowledge
of it, and a holy Disposition to Act upon, and for the sake of it, according to
this knowldg Sanctifiare De^est farere, quod san^tas ejus postulat.
. This is Regeneration, which we desire God to work in us. The Position may
dearly be understood in this form; Lord, let the Knowledge of Thee, and thy
Will, and a Holy Disposition of Soul and Body to Act according to this
Knowledge, upon, and for the s^ke of Thee, be wrought in us by thy Almighty
Power. Thy Kingdom come, The Kingdom of God, is the sending of the Son from the
begeninng ol the World, to ordain Ministers, by them to gather a Church, Rule
it by his Word and Spirit, Defend and Preserve it from Enemies, cut off all
that are implacable, raise us from Death, Jude Angels and Men, and at List
glorify his Church, that God may be all in all. Thy will be done in Earth as
it is in heaven, You may see Gods Will in his Precepts. But can we do his Will
as the Angels? It Is Answered Secundum (...) non secundum gradum
, According to the same kind, tho not according to the same degree. I humbly
add, In continued Acts, a perfect The Hebrews express a thing, in facto
(perfectly done) when it is fieri (a doing) Jo. 3.36.
completion may be prayed for in a particular place and time, including what
God will work in us then, and there, of his rich Mercy; yet not excluding the
perfection of this hereafter. In the following Petition all our earthly
comforts are begged on a particular day. What is objected by Mr. Cartwright
against that cause in the Liturgy ( keep us this day without Sin) will here
vanish. A perfect Freedom from Sin is promised; but we speed on by degrees.
Give us this day our daily bread, Bread is put for all things that we need in
this Life. Daily, Sufficient for the days of our Life. It Is said this day,
that we may depend upon him, and ask for it every day. Forgive us our
trespastes as we forgive them that trespass against us, (...)
Our Sins in the Original are called Debts; because they make us Deb^ors to God
in Obedience and Punishment. Did Paul forgive Alexander, when he said, The Lord
reward him? Yea, he did not satisfy any private Revenge, Wrath, or Envy of his
own, bur he prayed for Gods glory, for he knew that he would implacably
persist. Lead us not into Temptation, but Deliver us from evil, The Devil tried
to know whether Christ was God, as well as to draw him to Sin.
Temptation properly signifies, A trying to find out any thing unknown; whether
it is, or may be done. The means which discover this, are called Trials; which
are either from God, for his Glory, man's amendment; or the discovery of man to
himself, or others. This we pray not against * (...), Jam. 1. 2. (...) Psalm.
26. 2.
, but for. Here it signifies a Trial that causes Sin. Lead us not, that is,
suffer us not to fall into (...) of the form. H phil. which signifies not
always (...), (an affirmative) but (...) (a negative) do not suffer.
; so the Greek word imports. God cannot tempt us to Evil; the Devil, the Flesh,
and wicked Men do. But deliver us from evil. This, with the other part, makes
but one Petition, and asks Affirmatively, what the other does Negatively. Some
curiously refer this to the time present, that to the time to come; but to be
sure, we beg that Temptation may not draw us into Sin, that in our fall God
would raise us up, never leave us, but make us Conquerors through him that
loved us. For thine is the kingdom, the power and the Glory, for ever and ever,
Take heart, my Brother; he He that makes Prayers, will hear Prayers.
teaches how we may overcome him with Arguments. Will not our heavenly King be
bouniful? Is not his Power Infinite? Will he suffer his excellency to be
obscured? to which is due all Praise and Admiration. Amen. In this the Soul
breathes out her Faith and Desire.

A PRAYER According to the EXPOSITION.
O Eternal and ever merciful God, thou art our Father by Creation, and to all
that withstand not thy great Love, byeffectual Redemption and Regeneration. Thy
Son tasted Death, and merited Grace for every man, and thou cryest to the poor
Sinner to come and take part in him, that thou may thus rejoice over him;
This my Son was dead, but he is now alive again; he was lost, but now found.
Where should poor Children go, but unto their Fathers house? If the men of this
World know how to give good gifts unto their Children; how much more will our
Father which is in Heaven, give good things unto us that ask him! He that
spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with
him also freely give us all things? Thou art in Heaven, God over all, glorious
in holiness, looking down upon all our ways, pouring out there abundantly thy
Goodness and Mercies; but lo, the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee. How
poor and beggarly are those glorified Cherubims, to thy self, to whom the World
is nothing, yea, less then nothing? We desire therefore to draw nigh with Fear,
Humility, and Reverence; and yet with a Holy Boldness and Confidence in thy
Mercy. Hallowed be thy Name. Make us to know thee as thou art revealed in thy
Attributes, Word and Works; to Believe, Admire, Joy, Trust, and be ravished
with thee; and for the sake of thy glorious Beauty, Sweetness and Excellency;
let us praise and declare thee openly, both in Word and Works, that others may
glorify thee. Our Father which art in Heaven. Thy Kingdom come. Give us a
saving interest in thy Son, send forth faithful Laborers into thy Harvest;
carry such Stars in thy right band, bring in lost Sinners, kill Sin daily, and
incrcase the Graces of thy People, make Kings Nursing Fathers to thy Church,
Queens Nursirg Mothers, and all great ones seekers of the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness; rule us by thy Word and Spirit, Defend and Preserve us from
all our Enemies, cut off all that are Implacably Obstinate; take these Souls
when our Bodies fall; raise us from Death; Sentence the Sheep on thy right
hand, the Goats on thy left, and at last glorify Body and Soul in thy heavenly
Kingdom. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Enable us to do our
Duty toward God, and our Duty toward Man; to have no other Gods but thee, to
Worship thee in holy Manner, Reverence thee in thy Name, Word, and Works;
remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, to obey our Parents, the King as Supreme
and all that are in Authority under him; to preserve the Life, Chastity, Goods
and good Name of our Selves and Neighboured not so much as covet that which is
his; and tho we cannot perfect thy Will as the Angels; yet let us do it like
them, Sincerely, Readily, Cheerfully, and Speedily; more and more perfect us,
till we keep pace with Angels. Give us this day our daily bread. All things
needful for this natural Life, Health, Strength, Peace, Prosperity, a happy
Government, Food and Raiment, and thy blessing with all these, that we may use
them for the good of us and others; our heavenly Father knows that we have
need of these things. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trepass against us. Our Sins fearfully cry in thine Ears; but hearken to thy
Sons precious Blood, which was offered up without spot to thy self; purge us
with his Merits and Satisfaction, that our black Souls may be whiter than Snow.
Pour out thy Mercies on our Enemies, forgive their Sins, season them with thy
Grace, provide for their Bodies, wipe all Revenge and Hatred out of our hearts
toward them, that we may be forgiven of thee, who have said by thine own Son,
That if we forgive not men their Trespasses, thou our heavenly Father wilt not
forgive us. Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil. Give us
strength according to the trials which we are exercised with, or else eminently
appear in our weakness, that we fall not into sin, and darken thy Glory. Let
neither pleasure, our evil Hearts, Trouble, Pains, Hunger and Nakedness,
neither Life, nor Death, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, things
present, nor things to come, nor any other Creature, draw us from thy self, who
art the very Life of all, and the true rest of our Souls. Raise us up in our
falls, never leave us until we are more than Conquerors through him that loved
us. For thine is the Kindgom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Thou
art our King, therefore Defend, Preserve, and do richly for thy Subjects. Thine
is the Power, nothing is too hard for thee; thou art mightier than our Enemies,
able to deliver us out of the depth of Misery, and bring us unto the top of
Happiness, and in the end to Rivers of Joy, and never-cloying Pleasures. Thine
is the Glory. This thou art tender of, what will thou do for thy great Name?
Fill us with the Knowledge of thy self, work mightily upon our Wills, give us
abundance of Grace, that we may show forth much of thy Glory, who has called
us out of Darkness into the mavelous Light. Hear us, for thou art our Kimg
for ever; thine is for ever the Power, whose hand cannot be shortened; and thine
is for ever the Glory: Thou art worthy of all Praise and Admiration from
everlasting to everlasting. Amen. We desire, we believe, help our unbelief;
which we beg, and all other things, in that Prayer which Christ has taught us.

London: Printed for the Author, and Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in
Newgate-street. 1684.


