INFIDELITY UNMASKED OR THE CONFVTATION OF A BOOK PVBLISHED BY Mr. WILLIAM
CHILLINGWORTH UNDER THIS TITLE THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS A SAFE WAY TO
SALVATION.

I would thou were cold, or hot, but because thou art lukewarm I will begin
to vomitt the out of my mouth. Apocal: (C:3. V. 15. 16.) Printed in GANT. By
MAXIMILIAN GRAET. Ao. Dni. M. DC. LII. Permissu superiorum.

TO THE READER.
1. THe first thing that I am to request of thee (good Reader) is, to read
this Preface, before thou adress thyself to peruse the Book: And then not to
read, irregularly, beginning, with the end, or at the middle, or with what
shall be offered by mere chance; but to take the following Introduction, and
Chapters, as they come in order; that so the former, may be a preparation to
the latter, and the latter may receive light, and strength from the former.
For, the matters being connected of themselves, will grow to be either
unintelligible, or obscure, or confused; if their right Consequences, and
orderly sequeles, be neglected, or inverted, and will certainly come by that
means, to be perverted, and mistaken.

2. I cannot doubt, but that an Answer to Mr: Chillingworths Book, has been
expected, long since. But they who are acquainted, with the many, and long, and
great, and insuperable obstacles of voyages to remote countries; long,
frequent, and great sicknesses; and unavoidable employments (imposed by
Authority, which I ought not to resist, though some can witness, that even in
that, I strayned obedience, more than I should have adventured to do upon any
other occasion) which have crossed my earnest, and constant desires, will not
so much marvel, that this Work has been long in doing, as that finally it is
done. This one thing is evident: That not any difficulty, to answer, could
have been cause of so long, delay: since whosoever can answer now, could have
done it much sooner, if extrinsecall impediments had been removed.

3. As for that unfortunate man, whom I confute, Truth obliges me to declare,
that, beside his most contemning, disdaining, proud, bitter, and even bloody,
way of answering, by seeking to make odious, both the Religion, and persons of
Catholics (as will appear by what I note in due place) I must insist upon
this; that in reality his Book is no Confutation of Charity Maintained, who
answered Dr: Potter according to the grounds of Protestants, not of Socinians,
or any other new Sect. And therefore Mr: Chillingworth, flying to new
Principles, has abandoned Dr: Potter, and all the elder kind of Protestants,
and left his Adversary in possession, of being unanswered; agreably to his
ingenuous acknowledgment, when time was, that Charity Maintained, could not be
defeated by any forces of Protestants, and that he had a way to confute him.
See, the Judgment of an vniversity-man (Page: 68, Sect: 16.)
Miserable Protestancy! That could find no Advocate, except an Enemy to it and
all Christianity, who took this occasion, only to vent new Heresies, no less
repugnant to Protestants, than to Catholics. Did not Protestants foretell,
and in f^ct prophecy, their own ruin, in preferring this unhappy man, before
all England, to be Defender of their Faith? Who can wonder, to behold that
Nation swimming in desolation, and blood, which indures to behold a Book
published, approved, applauded, which purposely, and directly teaches,
Christian Faith not to be infallibly true, and consequently, that whatsoever
Christians have hitherto believed, of Scripture, of Christ, of all Christian
verityes, may (for ought they can certainly know to the contrary) prove
fabulous, false, or no better than dreams. If he who omitted to enact any Law,
or decree any punishment for Paricides, gave the reason thereof, by asking,
whether there could possibly be any such Crime: Much more Charity Maintained
had no reason to fetch from Hell, this Antichristian doctrine, never imagining,
that any Christian would profess to maintain so wicked a Tenet, the contrary
whereof even Dr: Potter delivers, not as a thing disputable, or which needed
any proof, but as a first Principle, to be supposed among Christians.

4. Presently upon the publication of Mr: Chillingworths Book, he was by
diverse printed Treatises; charged with this, and other unchristian Doctrines,
and expressly conjured to clear himself, under pain of being esteemed guilty,
if he were silent; as by the Church Conquerant over humane wit: The total
sum; The judgment of an vniversity-man; Christianity Maintained; but never
could be induced, to answer for himself, in any one particular; which silence,
in a matter of this nature, could proceed only from guiltiness, as he was
expressly forwarned, in the Direction to N. N. (Chap: 3.)

5. If any undertake a Confutation of my Book, he will do himself manifest
wrong, unless he do me so much right, as not to pretend an Answer to me, if
he abandon Mr: Chillingworth, and forsake his grounds, and so oppose me by new
Principles, as Mr: Chillingworth injuriously dealt with Charity Maintained. Or
if he will profess, not to defend the particular Tenets, or debates of Mr:
Chillingworth; I must exact of him, that by declaring so much, the world may
know, that Mr: Chillingworth has been confuted; whom, whosoever forsakes, he
cannot be judged to answer my Book, but to commence, a new suite, or begin a
new Work, of which I shall not esteame myself obliged to take any notice. For,
as Charity Maintained confuted Protestants, not Socinians; so I confute Mr:
Chillingworths Book, and not the Principles of other Men, or Sects, disagreeing
from him.

6. It is also desired, that he follow not Mr: Chillingworth, in seeking to
draw his Adversary, to handle particular Points, nothing pertinent to our
present general Controversy: That he cite the places of those Authors, whose
Authorityes he alleges, which Mr: Chillingworth frequently omitts to do: That
he propose my Arguments without fraud, disguise, or disadvantage; as I have
been so very careful, and even scrupulous, to relate with all sincerity Mr:
Chillingworths Opinions, Reasons, and Words, that not seldom I had recourse to
the Errata, noted in the end of his Book, holding it an unjust thing, to charge
him, with any over sight of the Print; though he has not dealt so fairly with
Charity Maintained, whom he impugnes, even in things placed among the Errata of
the Printer, and corrected.

7. I profess with all sincerity, and seriousness, that I have not wittingly
omitted to answer any one Point in my Adversaries whole Book, either
particularly, and explicitly, or else in Principles, which involue an Answer to
all particulars when they shall be proposed. I am necessitated to repeete the
same things, either to answer my Adversary in his repetitions, or for the
connection of the matters, which require it; or because it is to be feared,
that not every Reader will remember, or know, how to apply what is past. I am
not ignorant, that in answering Mr: Chillingworth, I confute an Academy of
Socinians, to whom he owes the matter, and substance of his Book, though it
appear under his name only. But Truth is Truth, and will be such, in despite
of Heresy, Sophistry, and wit. One favor I must acknowledge to receive from
Mr: Chillingworth (though I owe him no thanks for it) that his Contradictions
are so frequent, as they alone are enough to confute himself: Whereof I give no
examples here, in regard, they perpetually offer themselves, through his whole
Book, as the Reader will perceive, and, if I be not deceived, not without
wonder that a man so cried up by some other, should so patently be decryed by
himself, not upon any sense of humility, but by the fate (as I may say) of
falsehood, which cannot be long constant to itself. Anastasius Synaita (Cap: 15.
odegou) Sunt qui nihil peusi habent, etiamsi inconsequenter loquantur, aut in
praecipitia, se ingerant, dummodo Adversatijs recte sentientibus creent
molestiam.
And this must needs appear credible, if we consider, that those Books, which
were first published against him, agree in the same judgment of his
Contradictions, though I am very certain, they could not borrow their
censure, from one an other.

8. As for the bulk of my Book; I must acknowledge, that it might have been
comprised in a lesser compass, if I could in wisdom have measured the conceypts
of men, by the matter, which certainly did oftentimes not require, or deserve
any Answer. But we are debtors sapientibus and insipientibus, to all sorts of
persons, and many will be apt to Judge, and proclaim, all that to be
unanswerable, which is not actually answered to their hand. Nevertheless, upon
exact account, though Mr: Chillingworth answer one Part only of Charity
Maintained, yet you see it is no small volume, but is more than three times
greater than the Part answered. And so one half of Charity Maintained temaines
till this day unanswered.

9. I meddle not with Mr: Chillingworths Answer, by way of Preface, to a little
Work, entitled, A Direction to N. N.; because presently upon the publishing of
his Book, that Preface of his, was in such manner confuted, by a witty,
erudite, and solid Book, with this Title (The judgment of an Vniversity-man
concerning Mr: William Chillingworth his late Pamphlet, in Answer to Charity
Maintained) that He was much troubled thereat, but yet thought fit to digest
his vexation by silence.

10. But the maine Point, which I must propose here, and which I confide,
every indifferent Reader, will find to be clearly evinced, even out of Mr:
Chillingworths own words, is this: That whereas he gives this Title to his
Book (The Religion of Protestants a safe way to salvation) he might (and ought)
in stead thereof either to have said, (The Religion of Protestants not a safe
way to salvation) Or, (The Religion of Roman Catholics a safe way to
salvation) Or finally, (Christian Religion not a safe way to salvation.) For,

11. First; He confesses that some Protestants must be in errors, and proves
it, because they hold Propositions contradictorie one to an other; and besides,
he teaches, that millions of them err damnably; in these words, (Page: 21.) If
any Protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept in any Error, by any sin
of his will (as it is to be feared many millions are) such Error is, as the
cause of it, sinful and damnable: Yet not exclusive of all hope of salvation,
but perdonable, if discovered, upon a particular explicit repentance; if not
discovered, upon a general and implicit repentance for all sins known and
unknown. To which words if we add what he says (Page: 16. N. 21.) The very
saying they were pardonable, implies they needed pardon, and therefore in
themselves were damnable; The Conclusion will be; that the errors of
Protestants are damnable in themselves: Otherwise they needed no pardon or
repentance, nor could it be a sin to he betrayed into, or kept in them. And
(Page: 19. and 20.) he says; If they fail to use such a measure of industry
in finding truth, as humane prudence and ordinary discretion shall advise them
unto, in a matter of such consequence, then their errors, begin to be
malignant, and justly imputable, as offenses aganst God, and that love of his
truth which he requires in us. And he in the same place expressly affirms, that
the far greater part of Protestants are in this case. So that now, he sends
to Hell, the greater part of Protestants, for the errors which they hold; and
yet makes no scruple to delude them, with a verbal Mock-Title, that the
Religion of Protestants is a safe way to salvation. But this is not all. He
says (Page: 218. N. 49.) I would not be so mistaken, as if I thought the
errors even of some Protestants vnconsiderable things, and matters of no
moment. For the truth is, I am very fearful, that some of their opioions,
either as they are, or as they are apt to be mistaken, (though not of
themselves so damnable, but that good and holy men, may be saved with them,
yet) are too frequent occasions of our remisnes, and slacknesse, in running the
race of Christian Perfection, of our deferring Repentance and conversion to
God, of our frequent relapses into sin, and not seldom of security in
sinning, and consequently, though not certain causes, yet too frequent
occasions of men^ Damnation. All these be his express words. And how can that
Religion be a safe way to salvation, which, not accidentally, but even by the
Doctrine thereof, gives so frequent occasions of me^^ Damnation? And (Page: 387.
N. 4.) he grants, that Charity Maintained has Something that has some
probability to persuade some Protestants to forsake some of their opinions, or
other to leave their Communion. From which words it necessarily follows, that
all Protestants are in state of sin, and damnation, either because they
themselves hold errors, or by reason, they leave not the Communion of those
who hold them. And (P. 280. N. 95.) he says to us Though Protestants have some
Errors, yet they are not so great as yours; which last, though it were true (as
it is most false) yet it is impertinent; yea it makes against Protestants, by
granting, that their errors are damnable (though not so damnable as ours) and
consequently, that their Religion cannot be a safe way to salvation. And it is
to be observed, that he writes the said words, (that Protestants baue some
Errors) in conformity to what Dr: Potter confesses (Page: 69.) that errors and
corruptions, are not perfectly taken away among Protestants, nor every where
alike. And what a safe way can that Sect be, which by the Professors, and
Defenders thereof is confessed to be guilty of Errors against Faith, and
damnable in themselves? He speaks also fully to my purpose, when he says
(Page: 306. N. 106.) For our continuing in their Communion (he speaks of
Protestants) notwithstanding their errors, the justification hereof, is not so
much, that their errors are not damnable: As that they require not the belief
and profession of these errors, among the conditions of their Communion: Which
excuse of his, does not extenuate, but aggravate the sin of Protestants, who
do not only err, but also communicate with others who err, from which
Communion, we have heard him confess, that Charity Maintained has some
probability to dissuade men. In the eyes of vulgar people, this mixture of
different Sects, under one name of Protestancy, may seem a kind of good thing,
as bearing a show of Charity, yet indeed, to wise men, such communicants must
appear, to be as little zealous, constant, and firm in their own Religion, as
they affect to be esteemed charitable to others. And to every such Protestant
do fully agree those excellent words of glorious S. Austine (de Civit: Dei
Lib: 21. Cap: 17.) He does err so much the more absurdly, and against the word
of God more perversely, by how much he seems to himself to Judge more
charitably.

12. Neither in this Discourse, do we rely upon his wordsonly, but on his
Tenets, and Grounds, and such Truths, as both he often delivers, and must be
granted by all Christians; namely, that it is damnable, to deny any least Truth
sufficiently propounded, to a man, as revealed by God; and therefore seeing
Protestants disagree about such Truths, some of them must of necessity err
damnably. And so, he ought to alter the Title of his Book, into the direct
contradictorie, and say, The Religion of Protestants not a safe way to
salvation. For, bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocunque defectu; and as we
cannot affirm, that Action to be virtuous, which fails in any one moral
circumstance; so Protestants being confessedly guilty of damnable errors, he
must give this Title to his Book, Protestancy not a safe way to salvation, but
(unrepented) a certain way to damnation.

13. Or if he be resolved, not to chang his Title; upon this Ground, That
albeit Protestants err damnably, yet they may be saved, because they err not
in Fundamental Articles, absolutely, and indispensably, necessary to
constitute one a member of the Church, and in that regard, may be either
excused by Ignorance, or pardoned by Repentance: Then,

14. I prove my second Proposition; That, for the very same reason he must
say, and might have put for the Title of his Book: The Religion of Roman
Catholics a safe way to salvation: seeing he expressly and purposely teaches
through his whole Book, that we err not in fundamental points, and that we
may be saved by ignorance, or Repentance. That our Errors be not Fundamental,
he declares in plain terms. For Ch: Ma: in his preface to the Reader (N. 13.)
having said: Since he will be forced to grant that there can be assigned no
visible true Church of Christ, distinct from the Church of Rome, and such
Churches as agreed with her, when Luther first appeared, whether it do not
follow, that she has not erred fundamentally; because every such error
destroys the nature and being of the Church, and so our Savior should have
had no visible Church on earth? To which demand Mr. Chillingworth answers in
these words: (Page: 16. N. 20.) I say in our sense of the word Fundamental, it
does follow. For if it be true, that there was then no Church distinct from the
Roman, then it must be, either because there was no Church at all, which we
deny. Or because the Roman Church was the whole Church, which we also deny: Or
because she was a part of the Whole, which we grant. And if she were a true
part of the Church, then she retained those Truths which were simply necessary
to salvation, and held no errors which were inevitably and vnpardonably
destructive of it. For this is precisely necessary to constiture any man or any
Church a member of the Church Catholic. In our sense therefore of the word
Fundamental, I hope she erred not Fundamentally: but in your sense of the
word, I fear she did. That is, she held something to be Divine Revelation,
which was not; something not to be, which was. Behold how he frees us from all
Fundamental errors, though he fears we are guilty of errors, which he calls
damnable, that is, repugnant to some Divine Revelation, whereas he professes as
a thing evident that some Protestants must err fundamentally in that sense,
because they hold Contradictories, of which both parts cannot be true. And so
even this for consideration, he must say: The Religion of Roman Catholics a
safer way to salvation, than Protestancy: seeing he can not prove that we err,
by Reason of any contradiction among ourselves in matters of Faith, as it is
manifest that one Protestant is contrary to an other; especially if we
reflect, that not only, one particular or single person contradicts an other,
but whole Sects are at variance, and contrariety, as Lutherans, Calvinists,
Anabaptists, new Arians, Socinians etc: The first point then it is clear he
confesses; I mean, that our supposed errors are not Fundamental; which is so
true, that whereas in several occasions he writes, or rather declaimes against
us, for denying the cup, to laymen, and officiating in an unknown tongue, as
being, in his opinion, points directly contrary to evident Revelation, yet
(Page: 137. N. 21.) he hopes that the denial of them shall not be laid to our
charge, no otherwise then as building hay and stubble on the foundations, not
overthrowing the foundation itself.

15. But for the second; does he hold that we may be excused by ignorance, or
saved by Repentance, as he says Protestants may? Hear what he speaks to
Catholics (Page: 34. N. 5.) I can very hardly persuade myself so much as in my
most secret consideration to divest you of these so needful qualifications of
ignorancce and Repentance. But whenever your errors come into my mind, my
only comfort is amidest these agori^s, that the Doctrine and practice too of
Repantance, is yet remaining in your Church. And this he teaches, through all
his Book, together with Dr. Potter; and they universally affirm, that those
Catholics may be saved, who in simplicity of heart believe what they profess;
as they may be sure English Catholics do* who might be begged for fools, or
sent to Bedlam if they did not believe that Faith, and Religion, be be true,
for the truth whereof, they have endured so long, and grievous persecution.
Besides it being evident, that many learned Protestants in the chiefest points
controverted between them and us, agree with us, against their pretended
Brethren as is specified, and proved hereafter, and is manifest by evidence of
fact) the Religion of Protestants cannot be safe, or free from damnable
Opinions, unless our Religion be also such. For I hope they will not say, that
the self same Assertions, taken in the same sense, are true in the mouth of
Protestants, and false in ours. We must therefore conclude, that if he will
make good his title; The Religion, of Protestants a safe way to salvation, he
must say the same of us Catholics, who^ he acknowledges not to err in
fundamental points, and to be capable of inculpable Ignorance, or Repentance,
for which selfsame respects he pretends The Religion of Protestants to be a
safe way to salvation.

16. But what if Mr. Chilling worth divest Protestants of that so needful
qualification by ignorance, which he denies not to us? I will faithfully relate
his words, and leave others to judge what a champion Protestants have chosen.
Ch: Ma: (part. 1. Cap 5. N. 32.) objects to Protestants, that their departure
from the Roman Church upon pretense of error could not be excused, seeing by
leaving her they could not hope, to avoid the like vnfundamentall, nor be
secured from Fundamental, errors. To this, Mr. Chillingworth (Page: 290. N.
87.) answers; that Protestants are so far from acknowledging, that they have
no hope to avoid errors of the like nature and quality with ours (which he
confesses to be vnfundamentall) that they proclaim to all the world, that it
is most easy and prove to so, to do all those that fear God and love the
Truth, and hardly possible for them to do otherwise, without supine
negligence, and extreme impiety. I will not insist here how strange, and even
ridiculous, it is, in him, to say, that it is most prone and easy for
Protestants not to fall into errors, at least not Fundamental, yea that it is
hardly possible for them not to avoid such errors; seeing they disagree so
irreconciliably among themselves, and diverse of them fall into those
(pretended) errors, which we maintain against Protestants; all which one
would think, could not happen, if it were most prone and easy for Protestants
to avoid such errors, and hardly possible for them to do otherwise (that is,
not to avoid them) without supine negligence and extreme impiety. But that
which I say now, is; That seeing de facto he confesses Protestants to hold
errors (yea, millions, even the greater part of them, to be in error by their
own fault, as we have seen above) it follows, that in his judgment, they are
actually guilty of ^upine negligence, and extreme impiety, which vices,
certainly cannot stand with invincible, or probable ignorance; and so all
erring Protestants are excluded from Mr. Chillingworths Excuse, or Sanctuary of
ignorance.

17. Nay, what if he hold the errors of Protestants to be unpardonable? Sure I
am, he says (Page: 275. N. 58.) God is infinitely just, tod therefore as it ^^
to be feared will not pardon them, who might easily have come to the knowledge
of the Truth, and either through prid^, or obstinacy, or negligence would not.
Now, we have heard him avouch, that it is easy for Protestants to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; and hardly possible for them to do otherwise without
supine negligence and extreme impiety, and therefore it is to be feared, God
will not pardon them, even in the opinion of Mr. Chil: their selected Advocate,
though for ends of his own, he thought fit, to publish his Book under this
Title; the Religion of Protestants a safe way to salvation.

18. I said in the third place; That unless he confess the Religion of Roman
Catholics to be a safe way to salvation, he must not only affirm, The
Religion of Protestants not to be a safe way, but also; that, Christian
Religion is not a safe way to salvation. And the Reason is clear, out of what
has been said already. For seeing he holds it not necessary, that any Church
be free from errors vnfundamentall, and that the whole Church, before Luther
was infected with such errors, and that at this day Protestants err damnably,
I wonder of what Christian church, he can say with Reason; it is a safe way to
salvation, if he deny it to the Roman Church, which he confesses not to err
fundamentally? And therefore if any Christian Church be a safe way, we are safe
even in the Principles of Chil: and Potter. And what greater security can be
desired, than when all sides, both friends, and Adversaries confess our
possibility to be saved, whereas we cannot, with truth, give any such hope to
Protestants without Repentance, and retractation of their errors. Maximus hom.
1. in Festo Palchae; validis absque dubio uititur privilegijs, qui causam de
adversarijs assent instrumentis. Speciosa victoria est, contrariam partem
chartulis suis, velue proprijs, laqueis irretire, and testimoniorum suorum
vocibus confurare, and aemulum telis suis evincere vt pugnatoris tur argumenta
tuis probentur vtilitatibus militare.


19. I will say no more by way of Preface, but only signify, in a word, for the
Readers necessary knowledge, or remembrace; that there having been printed a
little, elegant, and pithy Treatise, with this Title: Charity Mistaken, with the
want whereof, Catholics are unjustly charged, for affirming, that Protestancy
unrepented destroies salvation: And this Treatise having been answered by Dr:
Potter; the Doctors Answer was confuted, by a Reply, entitled: Mercy, and
Truth, Or, Charity Maintained by Catholics. To this Reply Mr: Chillingworth
published an Answer, with this Title; the Religion of Protestants a safe way to
salvation; against which diverse little Treatises were presently put forth, as I
said above; and now I have endeavored to answer it at large. By Cha: Mi: I
shall hereafter understand, Charity Mistaken, and by Ch: Ma: Charity
Maintained. I cite the Second Edition of Dr: Potters Book, and the Oxford
Edition of Mr: Chillingworths (which only I have, or could procure when, and
where, I was to write this Answer;) and, for brevityes sake, speak to him, as
if he were Living: As still he lives in his profane Book, and his Book lives
in the vain esteem of men, who yet pretend to be Christians.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
An Introduction. Touching the necessity of Divine Grace for all works of
Christian Piety. Page: 1. Chap: 1. Christian Faith necessary to Salvation, is
infallibly true Page: 37. Chap: 2. All things necessary to be believed, are not
in particular, evidently contained in Scripture alone. Page: 122. Chap: 3. A
Confutation of Mr: Chillingworths errors against Holy Scripture. Page: 279.
Chap: 4. A Living infallible Judge is necessary for deciding Controversyes in
Matters of Faith. Page: 352. Chap: 5. In what manner and order we prove the
infallibility of the Church. Page: 426. Chap: 6. About Fundamental and not
Fundamental Points of Faith. Page: 440. Chap: 7. Protestants are guilty of the
sin of Schism. Page: 458. Chap: 8. Mr: Chillingworrths errors concerning
Repentance, are examined, and confuted. Page: 596. Chap: 9. The answer to the
Preface of Charity Maintained is examined. Page: 623. Chap: 10. The answer to
his first Chapter, about the state of the Question: and whether amongst men of
different Religions one side only can be saved. Page: 630. Chap: 11. The answer
to his Second Chapter concerning the means whereby the revealed Truths of God
are conveyed to our understanding, and which must determine Controversyes in
Faith and Religion. Page: 648. Chap: 12. The answer to his third Chapter, about
Fundamental and not Fundamental Points. Page: 707. Chap: 13. That the Creed
contaynes not all Points necessary to be believed: in answer to his fourth
Chapter. Page: 788. Chap: 14. The answer to his fifth Chapter about Schism.
Page: 846. Chap: 15. The answer to his sixth Chapter about Heresy- Page: 884.
Chap: 16. The answer to his seventh Chapter; that Protestants are not bound by
the Charity which they owe to themselves, to reunite themselves to the Roman
Church. Page: 932.
Touching the necessity of divine Grace for all works of Christian Piety.
I. THe necessity I find of premisinge this Introduction, gives me just cause
to begin with those sad passages of the Prophet Jeremy ( c. 9.1.) Who will
give water to my head, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears? and v. 18. Let
our eyes shed tears, and our eye liddes run down with waters. And c. 13. v.
17. My soul shall weep because of the pride. S. Aug. l. 2. de peccatorum
meritis and remiss. cap. 18. says: Ipsa ratio quemlibet nostrum quaetentem
vehementer angustat, ne ^ic defendamus gratiam, vt liberum arbitrium auferre
videamur: rurlus, ne liberum sic asseramus arbittium, vt SVPERBA IMPIETATE,
ingrati Dei gratiae indicemur.
O England, what greater pride then to make humane reason the measure of
Christian faith; and to believe Faith to be only a probable assent, because
Reason cannot with euidency comprehend how it should be infallibly true! O
souls, deny not the satisfaction of Christ our Lord for our sins, and his
Merit of supernatural Grace, to enable our nature toward works of Piety! Be
not elevated (Jerem: 13.16.17.) but Give you glory to our Lord your God before
it wax dark, and before your feet stumble at the dark mountains: Otherwise,
you shall look for light, and he will turn it into the shadow of death and
into darkness. But if you will not hear this, in secret my soul shall weep
because of the pride. S. Anselmus ad illud 1. Cor. 4. Quid habes quod non
accepisti? says: Fecit Deus vt esses, and tu fecisti vt bonus esses: absit. Si
enim Deus dedit vt esses, and alius tibi dare potuit ut bonus esses, melior est
ille qui dedit ut bonus esses, quam ille qui dedit ut esses: Sed nullus Deo
melior: igitur a Deo accepisti and esse, and bonum esse.
Thus says our Lord: let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, but he that
gloryeth, let him glory in this, because I am the Lord that do mercy. For it
is not (Romans 9.16.) of the willer, nor of the runner, but of God that shows
Mercy, by freely offeringe Pardon, Grace, and Glory. Let us not, o let us not
make vain the Life, Sufferings, Death, Satisfaction and Merit of God
incarnate, by setting up an idol of reason: but let us say with the Apostole
(Galat. 2.21.). I cast not away the Grace of God. For if justice by the Law
(of Moses; if Faith by reason) then Christ dyed in vain

II. But here some will not fail to ask the reason, why I should treat this
(seeming far fetchd) matter, in this occasion.

The Answer to this demand cannot be so fitly and fully delivered by me in this
place, as it will of it self appear in several occasions through this whole
work. For the present, I say, that the necessity of supernatural grace being
once established; the most substantial parts of M. Chillingworths book, will
remain confuted. For, jf Divine faith be the Gift of God, infused into our
souls, and that we cannot exercise any one Act thereof, without the particular
grace and motion of the Holy Ghost, it follows immediately and clearly (against
his fundamental and capital heresy) that Christian Faith must be infallible,
and exempt from all possibility of error, or falsehood. It being an evident,
and certain truth, that the supreme and Prime. Ueritie cannot by his special
supernatural motion inspire a falsehood S. John's advise (1. Joan: 4.1.) is,
Believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits if they be of God. But if we
find our spirit to be of God, and yet maintain, that it may be stained with
error, what further trial can we make? must we raise up the spirit of man,
and rely on the strength of reason, to try, and so perhaps to check, and
reject the spirit of God, though known, and acknowledged, to be his spirit? We
read in holy Scripture (Deuter: c. 18.21.22.) If in secret cogitation thou
answer: How shall I understand the word, that our Lord spoke not? This sign
thou shall have: That which the same Prophet foretells in the name of the
Lord and comes not to pass, that our Lord has not spoken, but by the
arrogance of his mind the Prophet has forged it. Which yet were no good or
infallible sign, if the spirit of God, who spoke by the Prophets, could
inspire a falsehood.

III. This truth is granted even by sectaryes themselves, who will not deny to
be true what Calvin (Jnstit. l. 1. c. 7.) says. Testimonium spiritus omni
ratione praestantius esse respondeo. I answer that the testimony of the spirit
is to be preferred before all reason. And even Chillingworth (Page 145 n. 33.)
says that Potter ascribes to the Apostles the Spirits guidance, and
consequently infallibility, in a more high and absolute manner then any since
them. Where we see he proportionates infallibility to the guidance of the
Spirit.

IV. Besides, if the Theological virtues of Hope, and Charity be- the Gifts of
God, and their Acts require supernatural assistance, Faith also, by which they
are directed, must be supernatural and require Gods particular Grace, which
excludes all falsehood. Jf Faith, Hope, and Charity be Gifts infused by God, not
acquired by Acts proceeding from our natural forces, and for that reason we
can not be assured of their presence by sensible experience, as we may be of
acquired natural Habits; Jf they be Powers to enable, not mere Habits, to
facilitate us in order to Actions of Piety; we must infer, that they are not
to be increased or diminishd, lost, conserved, or acquired, or measured,
according to the rate of natural Habits. Which truth being once granted, his
doctrine that Repentance consists in the rooting out of all vicious habits;
That Charity may consist with deadly sin; and Faith with heresy, and the like
Tenets, instantly fall to the ground, their whole foundation being an imaginary
paritie. or rather identity, of infused and natural Habits, or Gifts; as will
appear when such particular points shall offer themselves to be examined.

V. Here I cannot forbear to reflect, in what manner they who have once
withdrawn their belief and obedience from Gods Church, and an jnfallible
living judge in matters belonging to Faith, do run into extremes. Some of
them, to maintain the necessity of Grace, deny freewill: others in direct
opposition to these, give all to freewill, and deny the necessity of Grace.
Some reject inherent Justice though infused by God; yea they teach that the
guilt of sin still remaining, does stayne all our actions, which therefore are
in themselves deadly sins. Some grant inherent Justice or sanctity, not
infused by God, but acquired by the natural forces of man's Freewill. But
Catholics hold the mean; and acknowledge true inherent Justice and sanctity,
infused by the Holy Ghost, not acquired by any acts of ours: They maintain
Actions of piety proceeding from our will, assisted by grace, or from grace
with the cooperation of our will; and so they are moral, and free, as
proceeding from our will; and yet supernatural, pious, and meritorious,
because they are dignifyed and produced by grace. Thus S. Bernard (lib. de
Gratia) says elegantly; Liberum ar^itrium nos fa^it volentes, gratia
beneuolos: ex ipso nobis est velle, ex ipsa honum velle. From our Freedom
proceeds that we will; from Grace, that we will what is good.

VI. To allege for the necessity of grace, Fathers, and Counsels, were as
easy, as it is both needless, (none being ignorant of what the Fathers have
written, and Counsels defined against Pelagius and his associates) and
fruitless; in regard that such men despise all Authority, except that of
Scripture, which alone they pretend to follow. Only I thought fit to set down,
what the sacred general Council of Trent, has defined in this matter of
Grace; not to prove the truth of our Assertions, since our Adversaries reject
it, but to lay open the falsehood of the frequent calumnies, which Protestants
are wont to lay upon us, as if we hoped to be saved by our own, and not by the
merits of Christ our Lord, who purchased for us divine grace, without which we
are not able to think, speak, or perform, any least action of christian
Piety; and so all our merits being by us believed and acknowledged to be God's
gifts, we come to say with the Angels; Glory in the highest to God, and in
earth peace to men of good will; which good will being the gift of God, all
glory is due to him alone.

VII. Be pleased then, indifferent Reader, to hear what the Council defines,
and then judge whether our doctrine be not most orthodox, and holy, and the
calumnyes of our Adversaries most untrue, and unjust.

VIII. The Council Sess: 6. Can: 1. says. If any shall say that man can be
justified before God by his own works, which can be wrought either by the
force of humane nature, or by the doctrine of the law without Gods grace by
Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. And Can. 3. If any man shall say, that
without the prevenient jnspiration and Help of the Holy Ghost, a man may
believe, hope, love, or repent as he ought that the grace of justification be
given him: be he accursed. And in the same place, Cap. 5. The sacred council
declares, that the beginning of justification in men who are come the the use
of reason, is to be taken from the prevenient grace of God by Christ Jesus,
that is, from his calling, by which they are called without any merits of their
own, that they who by sin were averted from God, by his exciting and helping
grace may be disposed to convert themselves to their justification, by freely
assenting and cooperating with the same grace, so that God touching the heart of
man by the illumination of the Holy Ghost, neither man himself does nothing at
all, receiuinge that inspiration, since it is in his power to reject it;
neither yet can he with his own freewill move him self to justice in the
sight of God without his Grace. And therefore when the Holy Scripture says:
Convert to me, and I will convert to you: we are put in mind of our freewill.
When we answer: Convert us o Lord tothee, and we shall be converted, we
acknowledge our selves to be prevented by Gods' grace. And Chap. 6. They are
disposed to justice it self, while by being excited and helped by Divine
grace, conceavinge faith by hearing, they are freely moved to God, beleeuinge
those things to be true which are revealed and promised by God; and
particularly this, that God iustifyes a sinner by his grace, by the redemption
which is in Christ Jesus.

Chap 7. Although none can be just except he to whom the merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ are communicated, yet in this justification of a sinner, that is
done while by the merit of the same most sacred Passion, the charity of God by
the Holy Ghost is diffused, and is inherent in the hearts of those who are
justified. Chap. 16. Neither is our justice maintained as of our selves,
neither is the justice of God either unknown, or rejected: for that which is
said to be our justice, because we are justified by it inherent in us, the
self same is the justice of God, because by him it is infused into us by the
merits of Christ. Neither is it to be omitted, that although in Holy Scripture
so great reckoninge be made of good works, that Christ has promised that he
shall not be deprived of his reward who shall give to one of his little ones a
cup of cold water. And the Apostle witnesses, that our tribulation which
presently is momentary and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal
weight of glory in us: yet far be it from a christian man to confide or glory
in himself and not in our Lord, whose goodness toward men is so great, that
he will have those to be their merits, which are his own gifts. Chap. 8. We
are justified gratis, because nothing which goes before justification, whether
it be faith or works, does merit the grace of justification: for if it be
grace, then not of works: otherwise, as the Apostle says, Grace is not Grace.
Chap. 11. Almighty God commands no^ things impossible, but by commanding
admonishes, both to do what thou can, and to ask, what thou can not, and
helps thee, that thou may be able to do it. Whose commandments are not
heavy; whose yoke is sweet, and burden light. For they who are the sons of
God, love Christ; and they who love him, as he witnesses, do keep his words:
which surely they may do with the help of God.

Chap. 13. Men ought to fear, knowing that they are regenerated to the hope of
glory, and not yet to glory it self, from the combat which remaynes with the
flesh, world, and devil: wherein they cannot be victorious, unless with the
grace of God they obey the Apostle, saying, we are debtors, not to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh. Chap. 16. Christ Jesus daily gives virtue to
the justified, as the head to the members, and the vine to the vine-branches:
which virtue does always go before, accompany, and follow their good works,
and without which they could not in any wise be grateful to God, and
meritorious. Lastly, the council defines: If any shall say, that a man
justified, either can without the especial help of God persevere in the
justice he has received, or that with it he cannot: be he accursed.

IX. More might be alleged out of the Council, but this may suffice to
demonstrate the Doctrine of Catholics concerning the necessity of God's
Grace, to believe; Hope; Love God; Keep his commandments; Merit; Repent;
Overcome temptations; and persevere to the end. All which is not inconsistent
with, free will which is assisted, and elevated, not hindered or impeached by
grace; as it is wont to be said. Grace does not destroy, but perfect nature. Our
adversaryes grant that Adam in the state of innocence was endued with freewill,
and yet grace was then necessary for the exercise of every supernatural Act,
with which humane nature can have no sufficient proportion, (otherwise
supernatural were not supernatural, but natural or due to nature) and
therefore it is clear that the necessity and concurrence of God's grace agrees
very well with man's freewill. Thus all difficultyes are cleared, and Holy
Scripture declared not to imply any contradiction, while it teaches both the
freedom of our will, and the necessity of Grace.

X. By this occasion I cannot choose but beg of all who are desirous to know
what Catholics teach, not to hear and trust the clamors, and calumnyes of
their Preachers, Ministers, or other either misinformed or disaffected, or
passionate, or partially interessed persons; but that they would for the good
of their own souls, and love to truth, read the Council of Trent, to which
all Catholics in matters of Faith subscribe; and I dare confidently promise,
they will observe such gravity in the style, such piety in the matter, such
grounds from Scripture, such consonancy with Antiquity, such clearness and
reasonableness in the Definitions, that they shall never repent themselves of
a few hours spent in that search, but will find to be true what I have always
thought, and often spoken, that to set down our Doctrines as they are believed
by us, (and not as our Adversaries falsify, or disguise them) or rightly to
state the Question, would be a sufficient defense of our Assertions, and
confutation of all the contraty Objections.

XI But I return to the matter it self; intendinge to prove out of express
words of holy Scripture, the necessity of grace, First, for all works of piety
in general. 2. For Faith. 3. For Hope, 4. For Charity. 5. For keepinge the
commandments; and ouercoming temptations. 6. For repentance. 7. For
perseverance. These heads for better method we will distinguish into several
Sections

SECTION I. The necessity of Grace for all actions of Christian Piety, in
general.
XII. THe Necessity of Grace appears sufficiently by the diverse ways and
metaphors under which holy Scripture labors (jf so I may say) to declare it
unto us, as some Divines have well observed: as by a metaphor taken from him
who knocks at the door, ( Apoc. 3.) Behold I stand at the door and knock: Of
one who awakes us from sleep, ( Ephesians. 5.) Arise thou that sleep and arise
from the dead; and Christ will illuminate thee: of a calling, ( Matthew. 20.)
Many are called, and few are chosen: of Light, ( Job 29.) when his lamp shined
over my head, and I walked by his light in darkness: of Preuentinge and having
mercy on us, (Psalm. 58.) His mercy shall prevent me. Other expressions of the
same Grace will appear in the places, which shall be alleged, out of Holy
Scripture. In the Concell of Trent (as we have seen above) Grace is declared,
under diverse names; as of Vocation, Illumination, Inspiration, Excitation,
Touching, and Motion.

XIII. Let us now allege particular Texts of Holy Scripture Ps. 58. His mercy
shall prevent me: Ezech. c. 36.2.26 I will give you a new heart, and put a new
spirit in the midst of you; and, I will take away the stony heart out of your
Flesh, and will give you a fleshy heart; and I will put my spirit in the midst
of you: and I will make that you walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments
and do them. Chap. 18.31. Make to your selves a new heart and a new spirit.
(Behold in these Texts the possibility of keeping the Commandments; the
Necessity of Grace; and the consistency of Grace with freewill; which are three
principal doctrines believed by Catholicques) Isaiae 54.13. All thy children
taught of out Lord. Matt. 20. v. 16, Many be called, but few elect. Joan. 15.
v. 5. Without me, you can do nothing. Romans 8. v. 26. The spirit helps our
infirmity, For what we should pray, as we ought, we know not: but the spirit
him self requesteth for us with groanings unspeakable. Romans 3. v. 24.
Justified gratis by his Grace, by the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Rom:
9. v. 16. It is not of the willer, nor of the runner, but God that shows
mercy. Rom: 11. v. 6. If by Grace, not of works, otherwise Grace now is not
Grace. And v. 35. Who has first given to him, and retribution shall be made
him? 1. Cor. 4. v. 7. Who discerns thee, or what have thou that thou have not
received. 1. Cor. 15. v. 10. By the Grace of God Iam that I am; and his Grace
in me has not bin void, but I have labored more abundantly then all they;
yet not I, but the Grace of God with me. v. 57. Thanks be to God that has
given to us the victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 3. v. 5. Not that we
be sufficient to think any thing of our selves as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. Epehs. 1. v. 6.7. Unto the praise of the glory of his
Grace wherein he has gratifyed us in his beloved son, in whom we have
redemption by his blood, (the remission of sins) according to the riches of
his Grace. Philip. v. 6. He which has begun in you a good work, will perfect
it unto the day of Christ Jesus. Philip: 2. v. 13. For it is God that works
in you both to will and to accomplish, according to his good will. Apoc. 3.
v. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man shall hear my voice,
and open to me the gate, I will enter in to him, and will sup with him and he
with me. Behold again the force of Grace in knockinge at the door, and the
cooperation of free will in hearing the voice of God, and opening to him the
gate.

XIV. I need add no more Texts of Holy Scripture, for this point of the
Necessity of Grace, to all works of Piety in general, since the same will
also be proved by demonstrating the Necessity thereof, for the particulars of
Believing, Hoping, etc. As also what we have proved in general, infers the
Necessity for the same particulars, of Faith, Hope, etc: Yea while we prove
the Necessity of Grace for any particular, for example, Faith, the same
remaynes proved for all other points belonging to Piety, by reason of the same
ground, and parity for all. And indeed since eternal Bliss in Heaven, to
which men are ordained, is supernatural^, it is clear of it self rhat it
cannot be attained by the forces of nature, but by the particular Grace and
assistance of Gods Holy Spirit.

This Necessity of Grace is so fundamental a point, so prime a principle in
Christian Divinity, so intrinsecall and essential to Christianity, so fully,
effectually, and frequently declared and urged in Holy Scripture, that the
greatest enemies of Gods grace, Pelagius, and his fellows, were forced to
acknowledge it in words, though dissemblingly.

XV. The same necessity of Grace, is taught by the Protestant Church of England
(once so styled) in the 10. Article of the 39. in these words: The condition
of man after the fall of Ad^m is such, that he cannon turn and prepare
himself by his own natural strength and good works to Faith and calling upon
God, wherefore we have no power to d^e good works pleasant and acceptable to
God, without the Grace of Ged by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good
will, and working with us when we have that good will. If any say, these
Articles are now of small account, and little less then disarticled: I answer;
they have this specious title: Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and
Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London in the year 1562. For avoiding diversities of opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion. If now they carry so small
authority, their Title should have bin, (directly contrary to what it is)
Articles agreed upon for the establishing diuersityes of opinions, and for the
avoiding of consent touching true Religion. As these Atticles are now despised,
so what soever shall ever be proposed, or set down by any other will never be
to any purpose, for the establishing of consent in matters of Faith, and
Religion, till England return to the root from which it has divided it
self, and seriously reflect into what precipices it is fallen, by forsaking
Rome, and rejecting an jnfallible living judge of controversyes: for who can
give any man of judgment a satisfactory reason, why so many pretended Bishops
were not of as good credit as others, or wy others are not as much to be
believed, as those Bishops. I beseech every one to whom the salvation of his
soul is dear, to ponder in good earnest this consideration; and then to obey
S. ^hons saying, ( Apoc. 2.5:) Be myndfull from whence thou art fallen, and do
penance.

SECTION II. The Necessity of Grace to Believe.
XVI. FAith being, as the Apostle says ( Hebr. c. 11.1.) the substance of
things to be hoped for, and foundation of our spiritual life; if it proceed
from our natural forces, or reason; the whole edifice of our salvation must
be ascribed to our selves; which were a most proud and luciferian conceypt;
and yet I read in M. Chillingworth ( Page 375. n. 55.) these words: Neither do
we follow any private me^, but only the Scripture the word of God, as our rule,
and REASON which is also the gist of God given to direct us in all our actions,
in the use of this rule. And through his whole book speaking of that Faith
which God requires of all men as their duty, he teaches that it is only such
as is proportionable to humane probable Inducements, or a Conclusion by
rational discourse evidently deduced from such probable Premises; Pa. 36. n.
9. He speaks of jnfusion as of a particular favor above the ordinary measure
of Faith. And, ( n. 8.) God desires only that we believe the conclusion as much
as the Premises deserve. And, ( Page 212. n. 154.) Neither God does, nor man
may require of us, as our duty, to give a greater assent to the Conclusion then
the Premises deserve; to build an infallible Faith upon Motives that are only
highly credible, and not infallible. And, Pa. 381. n. 74. He speaking of our
Catholic Faith, which he denies not, to be, for substantial fundamental
points, true faith, (for he holds that true faith of some points, may stand
with damnable errors in other) says: I desire to know, what sense there is in
pretending that your persuasion is, not in regard of the object only and cause
of it, but in nature or essence of it supernatural? which demand were very
impertinent, if he did believe that divine supernatural Grace were necessary,
for every act of true Christian faith. For, if it be not supernatural in
essence, how can the special motion, and grace of God be necessarily required
to it in all occasions, though no particular temptatation, or difficulty offer
it self? And he speaks very inconsequently in asking how we know that our
faith is, not in regard of the object only and cause of it, but in nature and
essence of it, supernatural, since it is clear, that if the cause be
necessarily, and universally, supernatural, the effect also must be such; and
therefore he is convinced to believe indeed that neither the cause, nor essence
of faith is supernatural. I grant that ( Pa. 409. lin. 3. ante finem) he
would persuade us that he has no cause to differ from Dr. Potter concerning
the supernaturality of Faith, which (says he) I know and believe, as well as
you, to be the gift of God, and that flesh and blood reueald it not unto us,
but our Father which is in Heaven. But even in this we can gather only that he
admits the necessity of some grace, consisting in external Revelation, or
Proposition of the objects or mysteryes of Christian, faith, (which Pelagius
did admit) but not the necessity of internal Grace, or motion of the Holy
Ghost, for enabling our understanding to believe supernatural Objects, with
an infallible divine Faith: yea it is evident that he requires no such
internal grace, seeing he expressly requires no stronger assent by faith then
evidently follows from probable Arguments of credibility, that is, only a
probable belief or persuasion; vvheras if beside the proposition of the
object, he did require a supernatural motion of grace, eleuating our
understanding above its natural forces, and measure of humane discourse it
were very inconsequent to limit the assent of faith to the probability of
jnducements, or Arguments of Credibility: And yet he restraines our assent to
such probability, expressly because in rational and natural discourse, the
conclusion cannot exceed the premises, and therefore must be only probable,
when the Premises are such.

XVII. For which cause when he speaks of particular Grace given to some above
the ordinary course, he confesses, that it gives them a certainty of adherence
beyond their certainty of evidence; as he expressly delivers page 37. n. 9.
Which certainty in good consequence he could not deny to every Act of divine
faith, if he did believe that every such Act, does of it self; necessarily
require particular internal Grace of God, above the forces of nature, and
beside the external proposition of the objects, or Mysteries of Christian
belief. Neither can it be denied but that an Object of it self supernatural,
may be believed by the natural forces of our Understanding, with some probable
natural assent, for Arguments evidently proposed; as Miracles, comparing of
Historyes, and the like reasons, for which men believe other matters of
tradition: since therefore he teaches, that Christian Faith is only a probable
assent, he must affirm, that it does not necessarily require the peculiar
supernatural assistance of the Holy Ghost. But why do J use any proof, since
we have his own express words in the same Page 37. n, 9. Some experience makes
me fear that considering and discoursing men, being possessed with this false
principle, that it is in vain to believe the Gospel of Christ with such a
kind or degree of assent, as they yield to other matters of tradition: And
finding that their faith of it, is to them indiscernable from the belief they
give to the truth of other stories; are in danger not to believe at all, or
else to cast themselves into wretched agonyes and perplexityes, as fearing they
have not that, without which it is impossible to please God, and obtain
eternal happiness. Do not these words declare, that faith sufficient to please
God, and obtain eternal happiness, is of the same kind and degree of assent as
men yield to other matters of Tradition, and truth of other stories, for the
belief of which no man did ever say that a special motion, or grace of the
Holy Ghost, was always necessary? And it is to be observed, that he speaks of
considering and discoursing me^, as still reducing Faith to Reason, whereas
contralily experience teaches, that oftentimes simple persons, believe with
humility and devotion when the wisest me of the world turn fools in matters
belonging to God; or if they embrace the Faith of Christ, they do it not
always, with such strength of belief, as many unlearned people do: which
shows that Faith relies on some more high, and divine foundation, then the
only forces of natural Reason.

XVIII, To this we may add, what he teaches ( Page 62. n. 24.) That our
assurance that the Scripture has been preserved from any material alteration,
and that any other book is incorrupted, is of the same kind and condition,
both moral assurances. And, Page 141. No 27. For the incorruption of
Scripture, I know no other rational assurance we can have of it, then such as
we have of the incorruption of otherr ancient books: such I mean, for the
kind, though it be far greater for the degree of it. And if the spirit of God
give any man any oath assurance here of, this is not rational and discoursiue,
but supernatural and infused. Mark how still he requires as necessary, only a
rational discourse for the incorruption and preservation of Scripture from any
material alteration, (and yet Protestants acknowledging Scripture to be the
only rule of Faith and belief of all Christian Mysteryes, can be no more
certain of such mysteryes, then they are assured of Scripture it self) and
still speaks of supernatural infusea assurance, as of an extraordinary thing
And yet further ( Page 116, No 159.) he says: We have, I believe, as great
reason to believe, there was such a man as Henry the eight, King of England, as
that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. I suppose he will not say,
that a special grace of the Holy Ghost is necessary to believe, that there was
such a man as Henry the eight; Therefore he will, and must, say the same of the
Article of our Faith, that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, since he
says, there is as much reason for the one, as the other. Which yet is made
more apparent by what he says ( Page 327. No 5.) in these words: Men may talk
their pleasure of an absolute and most infallible certainty, but did they
generally believe that obedience to Christ were the only way to present, and
eternal felicity, but as much as Caesar's Commentaryes, or the History of
Salust, I believe the lives of most men, both Papists and Protestants, would be
better then they are. By which words it is clear, that either most Papists and
Protestants want true Faith, necessary to salvation, or that Faith sufficient
to salvation need be no greater, concerning the Mysteryes of Christian Faith,
then the belief we yield to profane Hystoryes; and certainly this requires no
special Grace, or motion of the Holy Ghost. To conclude, since he professes,
that Christian Faith is of the same kind with rational discourse, and belief
of other matters of Tradition, and humane Historyes, it clearly follows, that
it is in its essence natural, and in kind different from supernatural: and
therefore cannot universally require the particular motion, and assistance of
divine Grace.

XIX. But les us confute this proud Heresy, by Holy Scripture. S. Ihon. C. 6.
V. 29. says. This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has
sent. V. 44. No man ca^ come unto me, except the Father that sent me, draw him:
and afterward he expourds what it is to come unto him, namely, to believe. V.
64.65. There be certain of you that believe not. Therefore did I say, that no
man can come unto me unless it be given him of my Father. V. 45. Every one that
has heard of the Father, and has learned comes to me. Mat. 11.25.26. Thou
have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
little ones. Yea Father; for so has it well pleased thee. And C. 16. V. 17.
Blessed art thou Simon Barjona; because flesh and blood has not revealed it to
thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. Which Text must be understood of
internal Grace, and not only of the external Revelation, or Proposition of
the Object, which was made to the wise and prudent, as well as to little ones,
and to many other beside S. Peter, who yet were not therefore blessed as S. Peter
was declared to be. Isai. 54.12. All thy children taught of our Lord. Act.
13.48. There believed as many as were preordinated to life everlasting. And
Act. 16.14.15. A certain woman called Lidia, a seller of purple, of the city
of the Thyatirians, one that worshipped God, did hear: whose heart our Lord
opened to atted to those thinghs which were said of Paul. And when she was
babtized etc. Romans 5.2. By whom (Christ) also we have access through faith into
the grace wherein we stand, and glory, in the hope of the glory of the sons
of God. If by faith we have access to the hope of glory, which is
supernatural, Faith it self must also be supernatural, and require the
special motion of the Holy Ghost. Romans 8.26. The spirit helps our infirmity.
For what we should pray, as we ought, we know not; but the spirit himself
requesteth for us with groanings unspeakable. Romans 12.3. To every one as God
has divided the measure of faith. 1. Cor. 12.3. No man can say our Lord Jesus,
but in the Holy Ghost. V. 9. To anoter faith in the same spirit. 2. Cor. 3. Not
that we be sufficient to think any thing of our selves as of our selves; but
our sufficiency is of God. 2. Cor. 4.6. Because God that has commanded light
to shine of darkness, he has shined in our hearts to the illumination of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus. Galat. 5.22.23. The
fruit of the spirit is Faith. Ephesians. 1.16.17.18. I cease not to give thanks
for you, making a memory of you in my prayers. That God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of glory, give you the spirit of wisdom and of revelation,
in the knowledge of him, the eyes of your heart illuminated, that you may know
what the hope is of his vocation, and what are the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. Ephesians. 2.8. For by Grace you are saved with Faith;
and that not of yourselves; for it is the gist of God. Ephesians. 6.23. Peace to
the Brethren, and charity with faith from God the father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. Philipp. 1.29. To you it is given for Christ, not only that you believe
in him, but also that you suffer for him. Colos: 1.2. Giving thanks to God the
Father, who has made us worthy unto the part of the lot of the Saints in the
light. 2. Pet. 1.21. The holy men of God spoke inspired with the Holy Ghost.

XX, More Texts of Scripture might be alleged, but it is needles, since eue^
all Sectaryes, except Pelagius, and such as follow him, believe Grace to be
necessary for faith; and in particular, D. Potter, (to whom Chilling: is in
this main point directly opposite) as is evident by these his express words (
Page 135.) Faith is said to be divine and supernatural, in regard of the
author or efficient cause of the act and habit of divine faith, which is the
special grace of God preparing, enabling, and assisting the soul to believe.
For faith is the gist of God alone (1. Cor. 12.34.) 2. In regard of the object
or things believed, which are above ( Philipp. 1.29.) the reach and
comprehe^sion of mere nature and reason, Philip. 1.29. Thus D. Potter; and
adds; that of these two respects there is no controversy; he means, between
Catholics, and Protestants. For by the eue^t it is clear, that there is a
controversy between him, and the Socinians, and in particular with Chilling
worth, his champion. But necessity has no law. Charity Maintained could not
with any show be answered in the grounds of Protestants, who therefore chose
rather to destroy their own grounds, and the doctrine of all good Christians,
then to confess the truth of our Catholic faith, though convicted by evident
reasons. Besides, Page 140. D. Potter says: Humane authority, consent, and
proof may produce an humane or acquired faith, but the assent of divine faith
is absolutely divine: in which words he distinguishes acquired faith, from
divine; and consequently holds, that this is not acquired, but infused. Page
141. That Scripture is of divine authority the belieuer sees by many internal
arguments found in the letter it self though found by the help and direction
of the Church without, and of grace within. Mark how besides the external
proposition of the object by the Church, he requires internal grace. Page 142.
There is in the Scripture it self, light sufficient, which the eye of reason
cleared by grace, and assisted by the many motives which the Church uses for
enforcing of her instructions, may discover to be divine, descended from the
father and fountain of light. Page 143. he teaches, that by the ministry of
the church in preaching and expounding, the Holy Ghost begets a divine faith in
us. And in the same place he terms the act of faith supernatural, as also
we have heard him term it so page 135. and it is a plain contradiction, that
it should be supernatural, or above nature, and yet be produced by the forces
of nature, which were to make it above, and not above nature,

XXI. By the way it is to be noted, that D. Potter delivers a very untrue
doctrine in saying (in this page 135.) that the efficient cause of the act and
habit of divine faith is the special grace of God. For, the special actual
grace of God is not the efficient cause of the habit of our faith, which is
infused by God alone, as our natural acts of understanding, or willing, do not
produce the Powers of our understanding, or will; and supernatural Habits of
Faith, Hope etc. are given us not to facilitate, but to enable us to exercise
Acts of Faith, Hope, etc: For which cause, they are compared to supernatural
Acts, as the natural faculties or Powers of our soul are compared to their
natural Acts, which they produce, and are not produced by them. I omit his
improper speech, that the special grace of God is the author of an act of
faith.

SECTION III. The necessity of Grace to Hope as we ought for salvation.
XXII. IF Grace be necessary for every work of Christian Piety, and in
particular for faith, as we have proved, it will be needles to stand long upon
proving that it is necessary for hoping, which is a work of Piety proceeding
from a Theological Virtue, to which Faith is referrd, and of which, mortal
men, considering the sublimity of eternal Happynes and guiltynes of their own
means, frailty, and sins, stand in need, for raising up their souls toward
so supernatural an Object, and preserving them from dejection, pusilanimity,
and despair; yet we will not omit to allege some particular Texts of
Scripture, in proof of this Truth. Rom 5.2. By whom (Christ) we have access
through Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and glory, in the hope of the
glory of the sons of God. Where it is clear, that the Apostle places hope
amongst the gifts of the children of God, which we receive by Christ, Chap. 15.
V. 4.5. That by the patience and consolation of the Scriptures we may have
hope, and the God of patience give you to be of one mind. Which words declare,
that God is the author of those gifts. 1. Cor. 13.13. And now there remain
Faith, Hope, Charity. Where it appears, that these three Virtues are specially
numbered together, as belonging to the same rank and order, Psalm. 18.49. Be
myndefull of thy word to thy servant, wherein thou have given me hope. Thessa^
5.8. But we that are of the day, are sober; having on, the breast plate of
faith, and charity, and a helmet, the hope of salvation. Where we see the
apostle ioynes Hope with Faith, and Charity: and V. 9.10. declares that it is
given for Christ, and is ordaynd, and conduces to a supernatural end, saying;
for God has not appointed us unto wrath, but unto the purchasing of salvation
by our Lord Jesus Christ who died for us. 1. Pet. 3.4.5. Blessed be God, and
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy has
regenerated us, unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead; unto an inheritance incorruptible, and incontaminate, and that cannot
fade, conserved in the heavens in you, who in the virtue of God are kept by
faith unto salvation.

SECTION IV. Grace necessary for Charity.
XXIII. IF Grace be necessary for faith and hope, much more is it necessary for
Charity, which by the Apostle is preferrd before those other two virtues. 1.
Cor. 13.13, Now there remain Faith, Hope, Charity, these three, but the
greater of these is Charity. Besides, Charity being the fulfilling of the law,
if we cannot keep the commandments without grace, (as we will prove in the
next Section) it follows that without grace we cannot Love as we ought for
attaining salvation. But yet let us allege some places of Scripture, wherein
this truth is set down. 1. Joan: 4.7. Charity is of God, and every one that
loves, is borne of God, and knows God Joan. 14.23.24. If any love me, he
will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and
will make abode with him. He that loves me not, keeps not my words. Who dare
ascribe to a love acquired by humane forces, these privileges of keeping Gods
word, in so supernatural a way, as that the B. Trinity will come, and remain
with him? Romans 5.5: The charity of God is powered forth in our hearts, by the
holy Ghost which is given us. Romans 13.8. He that loves his neighbor, has
fulfilled the law. V. 10. Love therefore is the fullness of the law. Galat.
5.22. The fruit of the spirit is charity. Ephesians. 6.23.24. Peace to the
brethren, and charity with faith from God the father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. Grace with all that love our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruption.

XXIV. Even Chilling, (Page 20.) says: what can hinder, but that the
consideration of Gods most infinite Goodness to them (Protestants) and their
own almost infinite wickedness against him, Gods spirit cooperating with them,
may raise them to a true and sincere, and a cordial love of God? In which
words he may seem to require the particular grace of the holy Ghost, for
exercising an Act of love or charity. I say, he may seem; because it is no
nevves for him to dissemble, or disguise his true meaning, under some show of
words used by good Christians, though it cost him a contradiction with
himself, and his own Grounds. Howsoever it be, at least his manner of
speech shows how christians must not deny this truth.

SECTION V. The Necessity of Grace for keeping the Commandments, and
ouercoming temptations.
XXV. THis point gives me again just occasion to observe, how they who deny a
living jnfallible judge of controversies, cannot avoid running into pernicious
extremes.

Some hold, that Christians are not bound in conscience to keep the
Commandments; Vide Bellarm: de justificatione l. 4. Cap. 1.
in so much as Luther is not afraid, nor ashamed to say: In Commentario ad Cap:
2 ad Galatas.
When it is taught, that indeed faith in Christ iustifies, but yet so as we
ought to keep the commandments, because it is written, if thou will enter
into life, keep the co^mandeme^ts there Christ is instantly denied* and faith
abolished. And elsewhere In Sermon de nouo Testamento, si^e de M^ssa.
Let us take heed of sins, but much more of laws, and good works; Let us
attend only to the promise of God and faith. I wonder how a man can take heed
of sin, and jointly take heed of good works. Shall he be still doing, and
yet do neither good, nor badd? Some teach, that it is impossible to keep the
commandments, even with the assistance of divine grace. Others, that they may
be kept by the force of nature, and that the assistance of Gods grace is not
necessary, except only to keep them with greater ease or facility.

XXVI. The true Catholic doctrine is, that we may keep the commandments, and
overcome temptations by the grace of God, not by our own natural forces:
which is manifestly declared in Holy Scripture.

EZechiel 36.26. I will give you a new heart, and put a new spirit in midst of
you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a
fleshie heart. And I will put my spirit in the midst of you: and I will make
that you walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them. 1. Joan.
5.3. This is the charity of God, that we keep his commandments. Joan.
14.23.24. If any love me, he will keep my word, and my father will love him,
and we will come to him and will make abode with him. He that loves me not,
keeps not my words. Behold, loving or not loving; keeping or not keeping the
commandments, go together: But we have proved, that Grace is necessary to
love God; it is therefore necessary to keep his commandments. Romans 8.3. For,
that which was impossible to the law, in that it was weakened by the flesh: God
sending his son in the flesh of sin, even of sin damnes sin in the flesh.
That the justification of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 1. Cor. 7.7. The
Apostle teaches, that not only the continency of virgins, and widows, but
married people also, is the gift of God, saying: Every one has a proper gift
of God, one so, and another so. Sap. 8.21. And as I knew that I could not
otherwise be continent, unless God gave it, this very thing also was wisdom, to
know whose this gift was; I went to our Lord* and besought him. Romans 2.13. Not
the hearers of the Law are just with God; but the doers of the Law shall be
justified. And yet the same Apostle says Galat: 2, 21. If justice by the Law,
then Christ dyed in vain. And we may say in the same manner, If justice by
nature, and not by Grace, Christ died in vain. S. James 3.8. The tongue no man
can tame. Romans 5.20.21. The Law entered in that sin might abound, and where
sin abounded, grace did more abound; that as sin reigned to death: so also
grace may reign by justice to life everlasting through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Which words declare, that grace is so necessary for fulfilling the Law, that
without it the Law was occasion of death, by reason of humane frailty, and
corruption. Romans 4.15. The Law works wrath. Romans 7. V. 23.24.25. I see
another Law in my members, repugning to the law of my mind, and captiuing me in
the law of sin, that is in my members. Unhappy man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God by Jesus Christ our
Lord. 1. Cor. 15.56 57. The power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God
that has given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 10.13. God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able:
but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to sustain.
Psalm. 17.30. In thee I shallbe delivered from temptation. Psa. 26.9. Be thou
my helper, forsake me not. Psalm. 29.7.8. I said in my abundance, I will not
be moved for ever. Thou have turned away thy face from me, and I became
troubled. Psalm, 117.13. Being thrust I was ouerturned to fall, and our Lord
received me. 1. Pet. 5. V. 8.9. Be sober and watch: because your adversary the
Devil as a roaring lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist
ye, strong in faith. Not in natural reason, humane discourse, orwitt, wherein
the Devil would be too hard for mortal men, not assisted by Gods holy Grace.

SECTION VI. Grace Necessary for true Repentance
XXVII. TRue Repentance being the immediate disposition to justifying Grace,
and Grace being, as divines call it, Semen gloriae, the seed of glory, which
in Heaven shall be bestowed on whosoever dies in the state of grace, if
Repentance were an effect of nature, grace and glory should proceed from
nature: and it would not be said, Psalm. 83.12. Gratiam and Gloriam dabit
Dominus: Our Lord will give grace and glory to man; but man by his own sole
forces will merit and offer the^ to God.

XXVIII. Besides perfect Repentance or Contrition proceeding from Love, and
Attrition from Hope; since we have proved that grace is necessary to Love, and
Hope, it must also be necessary for both those kinds of repentance. Thus we
read Hierem. 31.18.19. Convert me, and I shall be converted. After that thou
did convert me, I did penance: and after thou did show unto me I struck
my thigh: Thren. 5.21. Convert us, o Lord, unto thee, and we shall be
converted. Ezech. 36.26. I will give you a new heart, and put a new spirit in
the mids of you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and
will give you a fleshy heart. And I will put my spirit in the mids of you: and
I will make that you walk in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do
them. Psalm. 79. V. 4 O God convert us, and show thy face, and we shall be
saved. And V. 8. O God of Hosts, convert us, and show thy face, and we shall be
saved. Psalm: 84. Convert us, o Lord our savior Psalm. 76. V. 11. I said, now
have I begun: this is the cha^g of the right hand of the Highest. Psalm. 118.
V. 176. I Have strayed as a sheep that is lost; seek thy servant, because I
have not forgotten thy commandments. Luc. 22, S. Peter wept not till our
savior looked upon him. Act. 5.31. This Prince and Savior God has exalted
with his right hand, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins 2.
Timot. 2.24.25.26. The servant of our Lord must not wra^gle: but be mild toward
all men, apt to teach, patient, with modesty admonishing them that resist the
truth: least sometime God give them repentance to know the truth: and they
recover themselves from the snares of the devil, of whom they are held captive
at his will.

SECTION VII. Grace is necessary for perseverance.
XXIX. WE need not insist in proving this truth. For if grace be necessary for
Faith, Hope, Charity, Keeping the commandments, and ouercommig temptations,
much more is it necessary to persevere in the state of grace, which requires all
those gifts of faith, hope, etc. And places a man in security for salvation,
according to that of S. Matt. 10.22. He that shall persevere unto the end, he
shall be saved: so that to say: Grace is not necessary to persevere, is to
affirm, that Grace is not necessary for salvation,

XXX. This truth we read in S. Io. 15.16. I have appointed you that you go and
bring fruit, and your fruit abide. And Heb. 3.12.13.14. Beware brethren,
least perhaps there be in some of you an evil heart of incredulity, to depart
from the living God. But exhort yourselues every day, whiles to day is named,
none of you be obdurate with the fallacy of sin. For we be made partakers of
Christ: yet so if we keep the beginning of his substance firm unto the end.
And. Philip. 1.6. trusting this same thing, that he which has begu^ne in you a
good work will perfect it unto the day of Christ Jesus. Philip. 2.12.13. With
fear and trembling work your salvation. For it is God that works in you both
to will and to accomplish, according to his good will.

XXXI. The reason of this truth, is clear; because justifying Grace takes not
away ignorance in our understanding; freedom and inconstancy in our will;
rebellion in the Appetite; which are the roots and causes of sin; and
therefore we need both external Protection to remove extrinsecall impediments
of virtue; and occasions of evil; and internal Helps, effectualy assisting,
and constantly moving us to good.

SECTION VIII That Habitual or justifying Grace is necessary to keep the
commandments.
XXXII THat there is inherent in the souls of just men a real quality or
gift, whereby they are grateful to god, we will prove hereafter; for as much as
may belong to our purpose in this work, referringe the Reader for a full and
exact proof thereof, to the many learned Books of catholic Divines.

XXXIII. Now, to the former Heads concerning the Necessity of Actual Grace, I
add this about habitual; to confute more and more the ancient and modern
Pelagians in general, and some Tenets of Chilling worth in particular; as will
appear when we come to examine his Chimericall doctrine about repentance.

XXXIV. That Habitual Grace is necessary for keeping the commandments, we may
prove, in order to the more moderate Protestants, out of the Mileuitan
Council, which was celebrated within the compass of years which they
acknowledge for Orthodox, (namely Anno 416.) wherein can, 3. we read these words:
Whosoever shall say, that the Grace of God wherein we are justified by Jesus
Christ our Lord, auailes only for remission of sins already committed, and
not also for Help not to commit them; be he accursed. Therefore he who is not
in state of Grace, wants some grace and help to avoid sin. And in Concilio
Arausicano (Anno 529.) Can. 13. it is defined: Man's freewill weakened in the
first man, cannot be repaired but by the Grace of Baptism: But the grace
conferred in Batisme is habitual, and permanent: Therefore the weakness of our
freewill is renewed, or the strength of it is restored by habitual Grace.

XXXV. The reason of this is; because God gives not particular protection and
special helps of grace, on which the observation of the commandments depends,
except to men in state of grace. For one deadly sin draws after it another,
so much the more as a man remains longer in that bad state, like to ponderous
waights, which mend their pace, the longer their motion lasts: and so David
says, ( Psalm: 37.5.) Mine iniquityes are gone over my head: and as a heavy
burden are become heavy upon me. If venial transgressions neglected, dispose
to mortal, what can be expected from a voluntary abiding in deadly sin? Thus
we read Hierem. 23.11, 12. The Prophet and the Priest are polluted. Therefore
their way shall be as slippery ground in the dark: for they shall be driven on,
and fall therein. And Thren. 1.8. Jerusalem has sinned a sin, therefore is
she made unstable.

XXXVI. For which moral point we can alledg none more fitly then S. Gregory
the Great, whom the world acknowledges to be a most profound master of spirit.
This holy Father ( Homil. 11. in EZechiel:) has these remarkable words; If
sin be not speedily wiped away by repentance, Almighty God in his just
judgment permitts the soul of the sinner to fall into another sin, that he
who by weeping and correcting himself would not wash away what he had
committed, may begin to heap sin upon sin. The sin therefore which is
not washed away with the sorrow of repentance, is both a sin and cause of
sin; because from it procedes that, whereby the soul of the sinner is more
deeply entangled: But the sin which follows out of another sin, is both a
sin, and a punishment of sin: because blindness, increasing, in punishment
of the former fault, it falls out, that increase in vice, is as it were a
kind of punishment in such a sinner. For the most part one and the self same
sin, is both a sin, and the punishment and cause of sin. These last words
he has also in, Job lib. 25. C. 13. Agreeable to this, is the saying of the
Author Operis imperfecti in Matthaeum C. 21. As when the stern is broken, the
ship is carried whersoeuer the storm drives it: so a sinner having by his
sin lost the assistance of divine Grace, does not what he will, but what the
devil wills.

XXXVII. The same truth is also delivered by the Apostle Romans 8.5. They that
are according to the flesh, are affected to things that are of the flesh; but
they that are according to the spirit, are affected to the things that are of
the spirit: and V. 8. concludes; they that are in flesh, cannot please God. But
all they who want the spirit and grace of God are in flesh, according to the
same Apostle V. 9. You are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, yet if the
spirit of God dwell in you: Therefore they that want the spirit or grace of God,
cannot please him, which is done only by keeping the commandments. Thus we
find verefyed by daily experience, That he who is once fallen into deadly
sin, does not easily abstain from committing more, unless he speedily rise
again And in this, Gods holy will is most just, not giving those helps to his
enemies, which he bestows on his friends, whose souls, as his temples, he
often visits, enlightens, inflames, and effectually strengthens, to keep his
commandments.

XXXVIII. It is the true doctrine of Divines, that an infidel cannot abstain
from deadly sin, so long as one endued with Faith: He therefore who has not
Charity, cannot avoid mortal sin, so long as he who is in state of grace
and charity, and receyues those particular helps which are connaturall to that
blessed condition. S. Thomas (1.2. q. 109. A. 8. corp. gives, as he is wont, a
solid reason hereof As, says he, the inferior appetite ought to be subject to
reason, so reason ought to be subordinate to God. As therefore there cannot but
arise disordinate motions in the se^sitiue apetite, if it be not perfectly
subject to reason; so if reason be not perfectly subject to God, there cannot
but happen many disorders in the reasonable portion of our soul. For when man
has nor his heart settled in God (as in the last end of all his actions) many
things offer themselves for the obtaining, or avoiding of which, he forsakes
God by breaking his commandments, unless his disordered will be speedily
reduced to due order by grace. And indeed, he who wittingly and willingly
perseuers in sin, is not drawn from it either by considering that it is an
offense against God, since he out of deliberate choice and election remains in
such an offense; or for the infinite, and innumerable evils which arise from
sin; all which he has considered, and knows that they, or the danger of
falling into them, are incurred already, and yet is supposed not to forsake
that damnable state: And custom in evil is apt to breed either a secret, or
open despair of amendment, or else a pernicious insensibility, security, and
presumption, laying the soul open to accept all impressions of spiritual
enemies; as in the barren season of winter, hedges are broken, enclosures
become commons, and are turned to high ways for all passengers.

But now it is time to perform what we promised in the beginning of this
Section; that besides Actual grace, there is also a permanent quality, or gift
inherent in our soul, whereby we are called, and are indeed just, and Sons,
and Heirs, to God, and Coheires to Christ our Lord.

SECTION IX. Of Habitual, or justifying Grace in it self.
XXXIX. HItherto we have spoken of Actual grace, necessary to works of
Christian Piety, Faith, Hope etc. Or of Habitual, in order to the keeping of
the commandments. Now we cannot omit to say, something of habitual and
permanent justifying supernatural Grace, in it self. Concerning which,
heretics, as their manner is, fall upon contrary Extremes: Pelagius, teaching
that we may be saved by the forces of nature, consequently must deny, that any
infused inherent supernatural Gift was necessary to salvation, but that some
natural ^nherent quality was sufficient. Contrary to which, is the doctrine of
Calvin ( Lib. 3. jnstit: C. 11. Number: 23. That man is not just by any justice
inherent in himself, but only because the justice of Christ is imputed to him.
Catholics, avoiding both these extremes, believe, that we are truly just in,
not, by our selves, or our natural forces, but by supernatural Grace infused
into our souls, for the merits of our Savior Christ, as the sacred Council
of Trent ( Sess. 6. C. 7.) and ( Can. 11. has defined.

XL. This is that divine gift which makes men holy in this life, and happy in
the next. Amicus To: 3. disp. 29. n. 119.
Other infused Habits are particular participations of Divine operations,
namely, Charity, and Hope (respectively) of that love whereby God loves
himself, and other things: Faith, of that infallible knowledge which God has
of himself, and all creatures. The light of glory, (lumen gloriae) of that
sight which God has of his proper essence; the moral infused Virtues, of
those actions, which God exercises toward his creature: But Grace is a Gift
immediately participating of the whole Divine nature, as it can be
intellectually participated by an intellectual creature As in our natural
life, our soul is the root of its powers, which it requires as propertyes,
and is more eminent than they: so in our spiritual life, this Grace is the
root of all supernatural Habits, and far exceedes them in perfection.

XLI. Of this, in a most singular, manner are verifyed the Elogiums which holy
Fathers give of grace; Amicus To: 3. Proem: ante Disp: 26.
which according to ( S. Gregory, Homil. 27.) is the root of good works; which
according to S: Chrysostom Homil 7.2. ad Thimoth: and 1. au Corinth: Hom. 40
takes away the rust of sin, makes the soul resplendent and fiery; which
according to S. Augustine Libro de Spiritu and littera Capite 30. and Libro ad
Simpitcianum quaest. secunda, enables us to work aright; which according to S.
Hierome Lib. 1. aduersus Pelagianos Capite tertio, does whiten; which according
to S. Gregory NaZianZen Orat. in sanctum Lava^rum: does cast its beams upon
us, and make us liketo God; which according to N. Austin Epist: 85. is the
beauty of the internal man, and the brightness of man's mind; which according
to S. Ambrose Lib. 6. Hexameren Cap. 8. is the picture of God; which according
to S. Irenaeus lib. 5. aduersus haereses Cap. 8. is the image of God; which
according to Macarius de libero arbitrio, is the garment of heavenly beauty;
which according to S. Greg. Nyssen de perfecta hominis forma, is purity derived
from Christ, as the river from the fountain; which according to S. Hierome,
Lib: 3. aduersus Pelagianos, is the First stole and heavenly dew; which
according to S. Gregory Nyssen, Homil. 4. in Cantica, is the riches of the
Divine essence; which according to S. Austin de spiritu and litera Cap. 28. is
the stamp of God; which according to S. Isidore in primum Regum C. 10. is the
milk of a mother.

XLII. But if we consult holy Scripture; this truth, that we are just by true
inherent justice, is so frequently, and so clearly delivered therein, that it
may seem a wonder, how it can be so much as called in question, by any who
believe the Scripture. Let us alledg some few Texts of the many which might be
produced Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners;
so also by the obedience of one, many shall be made just. Since therefore none
can deny but that we are sinners by sin or. injustice truly and really
inexistent in our souls, it follows that we are just by true inherent
Justice. And V. 17. If in the offense of one, death reigned by one; much more
they that receive the abundance of Grace, and of donation and of justice,
shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. But death, though proceeding from,
and by one (Adam) was truly participated by all, and not merely imputed to
them: Therefore the abundance of Grace, justice, and life is really in all,
though by one, Jesus Christ. Joan. 4.14. The water which I will give him, shall
become a fountain of water springing up unto life everlasting. And that this
fountain is the Holy Ghost dwelling in us by Grace, or Grace given by the Holy
Ghost dwelling in us, appears in the 7. Chap: v. 38. of the same Evangelist,
where our Savior having said: He that believes in me, as the Scripture says,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, adds; and this he said of
the spirit that they should receive which believed in him. S. Cyrill also (
Lib. 2. in Joan: Cap. 82) and Theophilact in cap. 4. Joan. call this fountain
of living water, the grace of the Holy Ghost. S. Hierome in Cap. 55. Isaiae,
and S. Chrysostom Hom. 31. in Joan: Sometime call it the Holy Ghost, sometime
the grace of the Holy Ghost; neither can any man doubt but that a fountain
signifyes a thing stable and permanent, Romans 5.5. The charity of God is powered
forth in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given us. 1. Joan: 4.7. Every
one that loves, is of God, V. 16. God is charity, and he that abides in
charity, abides in God, and God in him. Galat: 3.29. You are all the children
of God by Faith in Christ Jesus: In which words, that the Apostle speaks of a
living faith, appears by the Chap: 5. where having said: V 4. you are
euacuated from Christ, that are justified in the law: you are fallen from grace
V. 6. he explicates what that grace is, saying: in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails ought, nor uncircumcision; but faith that works by
charity. And Chap. 6. v. 15. this lively faith he calls a new creature, saying:
In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails ought, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature, 1. Cor. 6.15.16.17.18. Know you not, that your bodies are the
members of Christ? Taking the members of Christ, shall I make them the members
of an harlot? God forbid. Or know you not that he which cleaves to an harlot,
is made one body? For they shall be, says he, two in one flesh. But he that
cleaves to our Lord, is one spirit. Fly fornication. What then shall we say of
them who blasphemously join the spirit of God with the spirit of satan; the
spirit of fornication; and all other vices?

XLIII. 1. Joan: 4.13. In this we know that we abide in him, and he in us,
because he of his spirit has given to us. Joan: C. 15.5. He that abides in
me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit. Behold a permanency or abiding,
before fruit, or good works. 1. Joan; 3. v. 9. Every one that is borne of
God, commits not sin; because his seed abides in him v. 24. He that
keeps his Commandments, abides in him, and he in him. And in this we know
that he abides in us by the spirit which he has given us. Tit: 3.5.6.7. He
has saved us by the Lauer of regeneration and renouation of the Holy Ghost,
which he powered upon us abundantly by Jesus Christ our Savior. That being
justified by his grace we may be heirs according to the hope of life
everlasting. All these words clearly signify a supernatural thing permanent
and inherent in us, 2. Cor. 1.21.22. He that anointed us, God who also has
sealed us, and given the pledge of Spirit in our hearts. 1. Joan:. 2.27. The
unction which you have received from him, let it abide in you. 2. Pet. 1.4. By
whom he has given us most great and precious promises, that by these you may
be made partakers of the divine nature. Joan: 15.15. Now I call you not
servants, but you I have called friends. 2. Cor. 5.18. If then any be in Christ
a new creature. 1. Cor. 15.49. As we have borne the image of the earthly, let
us bear also the image of the heavenly. Joan. 14. v. 16.17. I will ask the
Father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for
ever, the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him
not, neither knows him; but you shall know him: because he shall abide with
you, and shall be in you. v. 23. If any love me, he will keep my word, and my
Father will love him, and we will come to him, and will make aboade with him.
1. Joan. 3.1. See what manner of charity the Father has given us, that we
should be named, and be the sons of God. Romans 8.14. Whosoever are led by the
spirit of God, are the sons of God. V: 15.17. If sons, heirs also: heirs
truly of God, and coheyres of Christ. Joan. 1.12.13. As many as received him,
he gave them power to be made the sons of God. to those that believe in his
name: who not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God are borne. Ephesians. 1.4. As he chose us in him before the constitution of
the world, that we should be holy and immaculate in his sight in charity; and
V. 13.14. In whom you also, when you had heard the word of truth (the Gospel of
your salvation) in which also believing, you were signed with the holy Spirit
of promise, which is the pledge of our inheritance. (This promise is made to
us, and so we being the Creditours, the pledge must remain with us; and signed
signifies a thing both permanent and intrinsecall.) Like to this we read
Ephesians. 4.23.24. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man
which according to God is created in justice, and holiness of the truth: and V.
30. contristate not the holy spirit of God; in which you are signed unto the
day of redemption. And 2. Cor: 1.21. He that anointed us, God, who also has
sealed us, given the pledge of spirit in our hearts. Romans 6.23. The stipends of
sin, death; but the grace of God life everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 8.14. Whosoever are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God. 1.
Cor: 3.16.17. Know you not that you are the temple of God; and the spirit of
God dwells in you? The temple of God is holy, which you are 2. Cor: 6.16. You
are the temple of the living God; as God says because I will dwell and walk
in them. Ephesians: 2.21.22. In whom all building framed together grows into a
holy Temple in our Lord: in whom you also are built together into an
habitation of God in the Holy Ghost. 2. Timoth: 1.14. Keep the good depositum
by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. Joan: 6.57. As the living Father has
sent me, and I live by the Father, and he that eats me, the same shall live
by me. (Who can deny but that life signifyes an intrinsecall permanent thing?)

XLIV. To these authorityes of holy Scripture, which clearly prove that just
men are such by a gift inherent, and not due to nature, but supernatural: we
might add conuincing Reasons, grounded in principles of faith, if it were my
purpose to treat this matter at large. But I will content my self with one,
taken from the many Texts of holy Scripture which we have alleged (and many
more might be brought) in this manner: God concurres to certain Actions, (v.
g. Believing hoping etc.) with a particular influence above the natural
exigence of humane nature; therefore such Actions are both Good and
Supernatural: Good, because it were impiety to say that God does, or can, by
special motion, produce an ill, and sinful Action: Supernatural, because no
natural cause alone can produce them, nor has any natural exigence that they
be produced by some more high and powerful cause: as, though our soul cannot
be produced by any natural Cause or Agent, yet there is an exigence in nature
that it be created by God, when sufficient dispositions are preexistent in the
Body. Now it being once granted, that there are good and supernatural Actions,
it follows that there must be in our soul some supernatural powers, or
facultyes, as connaturall Principles, or Causes of such Actions: therefore such
Powers must be granted, as in themselves are supernatural, and absolutely
good, without any tincture or stain, or inclination to sinfulness. Which
sequeles are so clear, that protestants not deny them, but grant at least the
supernatural Habits of the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, which is sufficient for our present purpose (though I know not any
general ground or doctrine of theirs for which they do, or must, deny the
supernatural infused Habits of Moral Virtues) but they deny, that either by
these, or any other quality, or Gift we are just in such manner, as that we do
not still remain stained with habitual deadly sin: which heresy is clearly
confuted by the Elogiums of the Fathers, and Texts of Scripture, alleged in
this, and the former Sections.

XLV. For if deadly sin still remain, how does Grace take away the rust of
sin, make the soul resplendent; whiten it; enlighten, and make us like to
God? is it the beauty and brightness of our mind; the picture and image of
God; the garment of heavenly beauty; purity derived from Christ; the first
stole; the riches of the divine essence; the mark of God; since deadly sin
is of a direct opposite nature, and produces contrary effects?

XLVI. How shall holy Scripture be verifyed in saying; that, as by the
disobedience of one man, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one,
many shall be made just, if we remain truly sinners by the disobedience of
Adam, but not truly just by the obedience of Christ, who merited for us justice
and grace? How is it true, that if in the offense of one, Death reigned by one,
much more they that receive the abundance of grace and of donation and of
justice, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ? For if sin remain, Death
also remains, with which. Life cannot reign. How can the holy Ghost be given
us while we persist in sin? How can he abide in God, and God in him, in whom
sin and satan abides? How can Faith work by charity in him who is
voluntarily possesd by deadly sin; than which nothing is more repugnant to
charity, whose inseparable effect is, effectually to detest all mortal sin;
how is he a new creature, who is in state of sin, which alone makes one a
child of Adam or the old man, not of Christ; How does he cleave to God, and is
one spirit with him, who cleaves to sin, and is one spirit with it unless men
have a mind to blaspheme and say, that, the spirit of sin, and the spirit of
God is all one; how can he who abides in God, and God in him bear much fruit,
if jointly he abide in sin, and sin in him; Yea for this very cause that
sin still abides in man, these heretics teach, that all our works, or
fruits, are deadly sins: so far are they from being fruits of Gods abiding
in us! And how does this agree with that saying, 1. Joan. 3.9. Every one that
is borne of God, commits not sin, because his seed abides in him; seeing
sin the seed of the serpent abides in him? Or how does the continual breach
of Gods commandments agree with what is said, V. 24. He that keeps his
commandments, abides in him? How can regeneration and renouation of the holy
Ghost powered upon us abundantly, stand with deadly sin. which is directy
opposite to regeneration and renouation? How is the seal and pledge of spirit
in our hearts, together with the seal and pledge of the devil? How can the
unction which we have received from him, abide in us in company of deadly
sin? How are men partakers of the Divine nature, while they remain in sin,
which is most opposite to God and all the Divine perfections; How ca^ we be
called friends, being deadly enemies: How can we perform that exhortation of
the Apostle. As we have borne the image of the earthly, let us bear also the
jmage of the heavenly; if we neither are, nor can be free from the jmage of the
earthly, which is sin? How does the Father give us another Paraclete to abide
with us for ever, the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive; seeing, if
all men be in state of deadly sin, they are all comprehended under the name
of the world, and so cannot receive the Paraclete, the spirit of truth; How can
men be named, and be, the sons of God, heirs of God, and coheyres of Christ,
and in the mean time be sons of Satan, heirs to him, and coheyres to damned
ghosts How are any borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the
will of man, if all remain overwhelmed in the will of the flesh, and will of
man, in sin, and corruption; How are we both holy and immaculate in his
sight, and in his sight wicked and polluted; How can we be renewed in the
spirit of our mind, and put on the new man, which according to God is created,
in justice and holiness of the truth, being in state of deadly sin, which is
contrary to renouation of spirit, to the new man created in justice and holy
ness; How are we signed in the holy spirit of God, while we are signed with the
wicked spirit of Gods enemies; How are the stipends of sin death, but the
Grace of God life everlasting, if there be no Grace of God without sin, and
so no Grace that can be life everlasting; How are men the holy Temple of God;
how does he dwell and walk in them; how are they his habitation, how do we
live by him, if they be still the Temple and habitation of satan, and live in
him?

XLVII. Certainly, if any do heartily believe Scripture, and consider
impartially these and the like Texts, and what is said of our Saviors
Satisfaction, and Merit for mankind, and nothing of humane Reason, or forces of
nature, except to declare the weakness of them, (contrary to the speeches of
Chillingworth) it is inpossible for him, to believe, that men are justified
either by any natural Act, or Habit, (which were to euacuate our Saviors
Death) or that we have no inherent true supernatural justice at all, but
remain still ugly and defiled in the sight of God, which is to turn both
Earth and Heaven (notwithstanding, that, of Heaven it is said Apoc. 21.27.
There shall not enter into it any polluted thing) to Hell, in which the worst
thing is not the endless pain, but those sins, for which the damned merited
that just punishment. For if the torments in Hell were only pains and not
punishments, that is, the effect and wages of sin, they were nor so much to
be abhorred and avoided, as any least sin or offense of God: Yea, innumerable
Saints in Heaven, by this doctrine, are greater sinners than diverse who live
on earth, or burn in Hell; because many are saved, who were once guilty of
sins, more for number, and greater in quality than some other who are damned. o
doctrine deserving all detestation!

XLVIII. Besides, it is a true Axiom, Bonum est ex integra causa, malum ex
quocumque defectu. One defect is sufficient to make a thing be absolutely ill,
but good must be good in all respects, both for substance, and circumstance.
How then can holy Scripture so often call men holy, immaculate, just etc. if
indeed they be not perfectly so, but full of the impiety, and stains of sin?
Holy Scripture describing the happy fruits, and divine effects of our B.
Saviors Merits, amongst the rest, says: ( Isaia 35.7.) In the dens wherein
dragons dwelt before, shall spring up the green^esse of reed and bulrush; that
is, in the souls of Gentiles, which once were the dens or receptacles of
Devils, and vices, there shall arise the greenesse of Grace, and Virtue; But
that in the dens wherein dragons not only dwelt for the time past, but dwell
for the present, there should spring the greenesse of reed and bulrush, no
scripture does set down as a benefit. For to couple Grace with sin, were,
not to destroy sin, but deforme Grace; which to do, cannot be any effect of
the Messiah his coming, and our Redemption.

XLIX. We must therefore conclude, that just men are endued with a supernatural
Gift, which is the nature, and soul of a spiritual man as such; and with
which the infused supernatural Habits of Faith etc: are conjoined by jnfusion
of the Holy Ghost, and are not produced by our, even supernatural, Acts. Thus
glorious S. Austine teaches that these words ( Psalm: 118.) I have done
judgment and justice, are to be understood of the Act, and not of the Virtue of
justice; because, says he, none produces in man this Virtue of Justice, but he
who justifyes a sinner, and makes him from unjust become just.

L. From this ground, that the infusd Virtues and Habits of Faith, Hope etc:
are not produced by any Act of ours, but immediately by the Holy Ghost, and that
they give us not a facility, but an ability, to produce Acts of Believing,
Hoping etc: it further follows, that, we cannot by any, as it were, sensible
feeling, or experience, know that we have such Habits; because, as S. Thomas
profoundly says [1.2. Q. 65. A. 3. ad 3. of the infused Habits, even of Moral
Virtues, Habitus moralium virtutum infusarum patiuntur interdum difficultatem
etc: The Habits of the Moral infused Virtues somtymes find difficulty in their
operations, by reason of contrary dispositions remaining of the former Acts,
(of vices) which difficulty is not found in moral acquired virtues, in regard
that by the exercise of Acts by which they are acquired, the contrary
dispositions (for example, Passions, indisposition of corporal organs, and the
like) are taken away.

LI Now these things being so, in vain would Chilling: prove, that the virtue
of Charity may stand with deadly sin, or Faith with Heresy, (as I touched
above) by reason men find facility in some seeming Acts of Charity, or Faith,
though they be guilty of deadly sins, or Heresy. Because, as I said, the
infusd virtues, cannot be prooud by experience, but the said facility may
proceed from some other reason, as for example, from acquired Habits of Faith,
Charity etc. or from the remouall of impediments, Passions, disposition of the
material organs of our body, and the like: and much less can we gather that
we have, or want; or have in a more intense, or remiss degree, the infused
supernatural Habits, by our having, or wanting, or possessing in a greater, or
less measure or number, Habits acquired by exercise of natural acts, seeing
natural and supernatural habits are in nature and kind wholly different.

LII. This I hope, may suffice for what I intended for proving the necessity of
grace, and weakness of nature in matters belonging to heaven; As also for
showing the vtility and necessity of this Introduction.

LIII. Let us now come to handle the matter it self: for which I know, and
acknowledge the necessity of grace: and therefore renouncing all confidence in
humane reason, and force of nature, with profoundest humility beg of the
Eternal Father, for the Merits of his only son Christ Jesus, true God and true
Man, the assistance of the holy Ghost, and his divine spirit of Wisdom,
Understanding, Counsel, Strength, Knowledge, Piety, and above all, the spirit
of the Fear of our Lord, moving and assisting me willingly to suffer death,
rather than wittingly utter any least falsehood, or conceal any truth in
matters concerning Faith and Religion; and so prostrate in soul and body, I
pray with the Wiseman Sap. 9 4.10. O Lord of mercy, give me wisdom the
assistant of thy seats: send her from thy holy Heavens, and from the seat of
thy greatness, that she may be with me, and may labor with me, that so my
labors, of themselves most weak, may by Grace tend, first to the Glory of the
most blessed Trinity, and next, to the eternal good of souls.

CHAP I. CHRISTIAN FAITH, NECESSARY TO SALVATION, IS INFALLIBLY TRVE.
1. AS all Catholics have reason to grieve, that we were necessitated, to
prove the necessity of Gods grace, against our modern Pelagians; so every
Christian, yea every one who professes any Faith, Religion, or worship of a
God, may wonder that dealing with one who pretends to the name of Christian, I
should be forced to prove the Certainty, and Infallibility of Christian Faith,
which M. Chillingworth not only denies, but deeply censures (Page 328 No 6.)
as a Doctrine most presumptuous and vnchariatble; and Page 325. N. 3. as a
great error, and of dangerous and pernicious consequence: and takes much
pains to prove the contraay. that is, the fallibility of Christian Faith. A
strange undertaking! whereby he is sure to loose by winning, and by all his
Arguments to gain only this Conclusion, that his Faith in Christ, of
Scripture, and all the mysteryes contained therein, may prove fabulous and
false. And yet I confess it to be a thing very certain and evident, that the
denial of jnfallibility in Gods Church, for deciding controuersyes of Faith,
must ineuitably cast me^ Upon this desperate, unchristian, and Antichristian
doctrine: and while Protestants mayntaine the Church to be fallible, they
cannot avoid this sequel, that their doctrine may be false; since without
jnfallibility in the Church, they cannot be absolutely certain, that Scripture
is the word of God. O what a scandal do these men cast on Christian Religion,
by either directly acknowledging, or laying grounds from which they must yield
Christian Faith not to be jnfallibly true; while Jews, Turks, Paga^s and all
who profess any religion, hold their belief to be jnfallible, and may justly
vpbraide us, that even Christians confess themselves not to be certain that
they are in the right, and have, with approbation of greatest men in a famous
Uniuersity, published to the world such their sense and belief! In the mean
time, in this occasion, as in diverse others, I cannot but observe, that
Heretics always walk in extremes. This man teaches Christian Faith in
general, and the very grounds thereof not to be infallibly certain. Others
affirm, Faith to be certain even as it is applied to particular persons, whom
they hold to be justified by an absolute certain belief, that they are just.

2. But now let us come to prove this truth: Christian Faith is absolutely and
infallibly true, and not subject to any least falsehood. wherein although I
maintain the cause of all Christians, and of all men, and mankind, who by the
very instinct of nature, conceive the true Religion to signify a thing
certain, as proceeding from God, and upon which men may, and ought securely to
rely, without possibility of being deceived; and that for this reason the whole
world ought to join with me against a common adversary: yet even for this
very reason, I know not whether to esteem it a more dissicile task, or
lamentable necessity, that we are, in a matter of this moment and quality, to
prove Principles, or a Truth which ought to be no less certain, then any
Argument that can be brought to prove it; as hitherto all good Christians have
believed, nothing to be more certainly believed by Christian Faith, than that
it self is most certain. Yet confiding in his Grace, whose Gift we acknowledge
Faith to be, I will endeavor to prove and defend this most Christian and
fundamental truth, against the pride of humane wit, and all presumption upon
natural forces.

3. Our first reason may be taken from that which we have touched already of
the joint conceypt, unanimous concent, and inbred sense of men, who conceive
Divine Faith and Religion to imply a certainty of Truth: and if they did once
entertayne a contrary persuasion, they would sooner be carried to embrace no
religion at all, than weary their thoughts in election of one rather than
another, being prepossessed, that the best can bring with it no absolute
certainty. Thus by the universal agreement of men we prove that there is a
God, and from thence conclude, that the belief of a Deity proceeds from the
light of nature; which also assures us that God has a providence over all
things, and cannot want means to communicate himself with reasonable
creatures by way of some light, and knowledge exempt from fear, or possibility
of fraud or falsehood; especially since Rational nature is of it self (...)
truth and Religion or worship of a God. This consideration is excellently
pondered and delivered by S. Austin. (de vtilitate credendi, Cap. 16.) in these
words. Authority alone is that which incites ignorant persons, that they make
have to wisdom. Till we can of our selves understand the truth, it is a
miserable thing to be deceyved by Authority: yet more miserable it is not to be
moved therewith. For if the Divine providence do not command humane things, no
care is to be taken of Religion. But if the beauty of all things, which,
without doubt, we are to believe to flow from some fountain of most true
pulcritude, by a certain internal feeling does publikly and privately exhort
all best souls to seek and serve God: We cannot despair, that by the same
God there is appointed some Authority, on which we relying, as upon an
infallible stepp, may be elevated to God. Behold a means to attain certainty
in belief by some infallible authority appointed by God, which can be none but
the Church, from which we are most certain, what is the written, or vnwritte^,
word of God

4. M. Chillingworth professes to receive Scripture from the universal
Tradition of all Churches, (though yet there is scarcely any book of
Scripture, which has not been questioned or rejected by some) much more
therefore ought all Christian to believe, Christian Faith to be jnfallible, as
being the most universal judgment and Tradition of all Christians, for their
Christians belief, and of all men for their several Professions in point of
Religion. And as men ought not to be removed from believing that there is a
God, though to our weak vndestandings, there be presented Arguments touching
his Nature, Freedom of will, Providence, Preuision, and the like, of far
greater difficulty to be answered, than can be objected against the
jnfallibility of Faith; so, ought we not to deny the jnfallible Truth of
Christian Faith, notwithstanding those poor objections, which this man and his
Associates with equal impiety and boldness make against it. And therefore both
in the belief of a God, and certainty of Faith, Religion, and worship of him,
we are to follow the certain instinct of Nature, and conduct of Piety, not the
uncertainty of our weak understanding, or liberty of will.

5. For this cause, as I said, not only all Catholics with a most Unanimous
consent believe, profess, and proclaim this truth, (in so much as S.
Bouaue^ture in 3. Did. 24. Art. ^. Q. 1. avouches Faith to be as jnfallible,
as the Prescience of God; and H^^ensis 3. P. Q. 68. memb. 7. affirms, that
Faith can be no more subject to falsehood, than the Prime Uerity) but
Protestants also, and in particular, D. Potter, who Page 143. speaks clearly,
thus: The chief principle or ground on which Faith rests, and for which it
firmly assents unto those truths which the Church propounds, is divine
Revelation made in the Scripture. Nothing less than this, nothing but this, can
erect or qualify an act of supernatural Faith which must be absolutely
undoubted and certain; and without this, Faith is but opinion, or at the most,
an acquired humane belief. And (Page 140.) Humane authority, consent, and
proof may produce an humane or acquired Faith, and infallibly (in some sort)
assure the mind of the truth of that which is so witnessed, but the assent of
divine Faith is absolutely divine, which requires an object, and motive so
infallibly true, as that it neither has, nor can possibly admit of any mixture
of error or falsehood. Behold how he affirms, that Christian Faith does more
than only, in some sort, assure us of the truth, (as Chillingworth will say it
does by an assent highly probable) but that it must be absolutely divine, which
he contradistinguishes from humane Faith, making this, not that, absolutely
certain And indeed to little purpose should Potter, and all other Divines
require an Objest and Motive jnfallibly true, if likewise our assent to it be
not jnfallible. What auayles it, that Divine Authority be certain and
jnfallible in it self, if in the mean time it remayme uncertain, whether
such a Divine and jnfallible Authority interpose it self, or witness any thing.

6. But nothing can be imagined more effectual and express against
Chillingworth, who ( Page 325. N. 3.) says; That there is required of us a
knowledge of the Articles of our Faith, and adherence to them, as certain as
that of sense, or science, is a great error, and of dangerous and pernicious
consequence; Nothing, I say, can be more clear against this pernicious
doctrine of Chillingworth, than these words of Potter Page 199. Though the
assent of Faith be more certain (if it be possible) than that of sense, or
science, or demonstration; because it rests on divine Authority, which cannot
possibly deceive: yet it is also an assent ineuident and obscure both in regard
of the object, which are things that do not appear, [Hebr. 11.1.] And in
respect of the subject, the eye of Faith, in this state of mortality, being
dim, and apprehending heavenly things as through a glass darkly. [1. Cor.
13.12.] What could have been spoken more directly of the certainty, and yet
ineuidency, of Faith against Chillingworth, who both denies that Faith is
absolutely certain and that certainty ca^ be without euidency, as may be seen
Page 330. N. 7.] D, Lawd [ Page 227.] says, As for moral certainty, that's not
strong enough in points of Faith. and [ Page 360.] he directly affirms, that
an jnfallible certainty is necessary for that one faith which is necessary to
salvation: which is the very same with our Title of this Chapter. And Page 142.
he says: That falsehood, may be the subject of the Catholic Faith were no
less then blasphemy to affirm; and yet Mr. Chillingworths Book where in this
blasphemy is purposely taught, is expressly approud as agreeable to the Doctrine
of the Church of England, by every one of the three Approbators, who can best
give account, by whose Authority they were induced to so pernicious, and foul
a fact.

7. But why do I alledg particular Persons: This of the fallibility of faith is
opposd by all Protestants; and particularly they who teach that we know the
Scripture to be the word of God, by the spirit or instinct of the Holy Ghost,
hold Faith to be infallibly true. Thus Calvin (Lib. 1. jnstit: C. 7. Sect. 4.]
says: Petenda est haec persuasio ab arcano spiritus testimonio: This belief
(that Scripture is the word of God) is taken from a secret testimony of the
spirit. And afterward; Testimonium spiritus omni ratione praestantius esse
respondeo; I answer that the testimony of the spirit is to be preferrd before
all reason.

8. And here is to be observed, that Chillingworth, disagreeing from
Protestants in this maine, general, transcendentall point, differs from them
for every particular, in an essential attribute or perfection of Faith; seeing
an assent only probable, is essentially distinguished from an assent absolutely
and infallibly certain; and so he opposes them in a higher degree, then if he
did contradict them in one, or more chiefest particular Articles of faith; or
rather he cuts of at one blow all the true belief of Christians, by making it
not certain; whereby men become no Christians, as not believing in Christ with
divine certain faith. His tenet [ Page 367. N: 49.] that he who disbelieues
one Article, may yet believe an other with true divine faith, is in no wise to
be approoud but this his doctrine, that Faith is fallible, is far worse, as
disbelieuing all, and positiuely denying that certainty which is essential to
divine Faith, and distinguishes it from Opinyon, or humane belief.

9. This fundamental truth, that faith is absolutely certain, is very clearly
delivered in Holy Scripture. S. Paul says, [ Hebr. 11.1.] Faith is the
substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing: or,
as the Protestants English translation has, The substance, (and in the
margin,) the ground or confidence of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. All which signifyes a firm, certain, and, as I may say,
substantial faith, stronger than any assent only probable. Thus holy S.
Bernard [Ep. 190.] disputing against Abailardus, who taught that Faith was but
Opinion, says. Audis substantiam? non licet tibi in fide putare, vel disputare
pro libitu etc Do thou hear the name of substance? it is not lawful for
thee in Faith to think or dispute at thy pleasure, nor wander hither and
thither, through the emptynes of opinions, or strayings, of errors. By the
name of substance something certain and settled is appointed thee. Thou art
shut up within certain bounds, and confined within limits which are certain,
for faith is not an Opinion, but a certainty. But concerning this Text of S.
Paul, more shall be said herafter out of excellent words of S. Chrysostom. The
same Apostle, [ Heb. 6. V. 17. 18. 19.] says: God meaning more abundantly to
show to the heirs of the promise the stability of his counsel, he interposed
an Oath. That by two things immovable, whereby it is impossible for God to
lie, we may have a most strong comfort, who have fled to hold fast the hope
proposed, which we have as an anchor of the soul, sure and firm. But how can
we have a most strong comfort, an anchor of the soul, sure and sirme; or how
does he show to the heirs of his promise the stability of his counsel, if the
faith of Christians be reduced to probabilityes, which are not stable, but, of
themselves, subject to change, and falsehood, and for ought we know, may finally
prove to be such, as long as we have no other certainty to the contrary? Or
how can we be assured of that concerning which, God interposed an Oath, if we
be not sure that he ever interposed an Oath, or ever witnessed, or revealed any
thing? [1. Thessall. 2.12.] We give thanks to God without intermission,
because when you had received of us the word of the hearing of God, you
received it not as the word of men, but (as it is indeed) the word of God;
which must signify, that they received it by an Assent proportionable to such
an Authority, Motive, and Formal Object, and therefore, certain, infallible,
and above all humane faith, opynion, and probability. For this cause the
Apostle gives thanks to God, because when they had receyved the word of God,
they received it as such, declaring that they believed with an assent requiring
Gods special Grace, (for which, thanks are to be given) eleuating the soul
above the forces of nature to a super natural certain Act proportionable, as
I said, to so sublime an Authority. [2. Tim. 1.12.] I know whom I have
believed, and I am sure that he is able to keep my depositum unto that day:
Where S. Paul speaks of God as a judge, and of the day of judgment, and reward
of the just, which are Articles of Christian Faith, not known by the light of
reason. This Text is alleged by S. Bernard [ Ep. 190.] to this very purpose,
saying: Scio cui credidi, and certus sum, clamat Apostolus, and tu mihi
subsibilas, Fides est aestimatio; tu mihi ambiguum garris, quo nihil est
certius; The Apostle cries out, I know whom I have believed, and I am certain;
and do thou whisper, Faith is opinion; do thou prate as of a doubtful
thing, concerning that, than which nothing is more certain? [ Act. 2.36.] Let
all the house of Israel know most certainly (not only probably) that God has
made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus, whom you have crucified. (2. Pet.
1.19.) We have the prophetical word more sure: which you do well attending
unto, as to a ca^del shining in a dark place. In which words the Apostle
compares the saying of the Prophets (which we believe by faith) concerning
Christ our Savior, with the sight of the eyes, and hearing of the ears of the
Apostles on Mount Thabor, when they saw our Saviors glory, and heard the
voice of his Father, saying, This is my beloved Son, and yet says, that the
Prophetical word is more sure. And by this place we also gather, that faith,
though it be jnfallible and certain, yet is ineuident and obscure, like to a
candle in a dark place which obscures the light of the candle: against the
doctrine of Chillingworth, that certainty and obscurity are incompatible. (
Luke. 21.33.) Heaven and Earth shall pass; but my words shall not pass.
Surely, if his words were believed by us only with a probable assent, we could
not in good reason think they were more stable than heaven and earth, which by
evidence of sinse, and reason, we see to be constant, firm, and permanent. (1.
Joan. 5.) If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater,
But as I said above, what imports it that the testimony of God is greater in it
self, if we can assent to it no more firmly than the Arguments of
Credibility, or history, and humane tradition, and testimony of men enable us?
For by this means we shall finally be brought as low as humane faith. (1. Cor.
2.5.) That your faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God. The contrary whereof we must affirm in his principles, who reduces
Christian Faith to the Power (or rather jmpotency) of humane tradition, and
reason. Which last Texts do clearly overthrow his doctrine, that we believe the
Scripture for humane fallible Tradition, and testimony of men, not for the
jnfallible Authority of Gods Church. 2. Pet. 1.21. For, not by man's will was
prophecy brought at any time: but the holy men of God spoke, inspired with the
Holy Ghost. What need of divine inspiration for assenting probably to a
Conclusion, evidently deduced from premises evidently probables or how can the
Holy Ghost inspire an assent which may prove false? [1. Pet. 5.9.] Whom resist
ye, strong in Faith. [ Tob. 3.21.] This has every one for certain, that
worshippeth thee, that his life, if it be in probation, shall be crowned. [
Joan. 10.35.] If he called them Gods, to whom the word of God was made, and
the Scripture cannot be broken. May not the Scriptures be broken in order to
us, if, for ought we certainly know, their Authority is not divine, nor the
points they contain, true? [ Act. 2.24.] Whom God has raised up loosing the
sorrows of Hell, according as it was impossible that he should be holden of
it. Now, if our belief of Scripture and contents thereof, be only probable, we
cannot be certain that the contrary assertions or objects are impossible, or
that it was impossible he should be holden of it: since possibility of being
true is excluded only by a contrary certainty: and whosoever belieues any point
only with probability, has in his understanding no disposition, which of it
self, is repugnant to probability, and much less to possibility, for the
contrary part. Coloss. 1. V. 21. 22. 23. And you, whereas you were sometime
alienated, and enemies in sense, in evil works: yet now he has reconciled in
the body of his flesh by death, to present you holy and immaculate and
blameless before him; if you continue in the Faith, grounded and stable, and
immovable from the Gospel which you have heard, which is preached among all
creatures that are under Heaven. Observe, that the Apostle not only speaks of
a Faith which is stable, and ground of immobility, but also declares that such
a Faith is necessary to be reconciled to God from being alienated and enemies,
and to be presented holy and immaculate, and blameless before him, that is,
such a faith as is absolutely necessary to salvation, which is that which
Chilling: expressly and purposely denies. See of this place what I alledg
afterward out of S. Chrysostom. Gal. 1.8.9. Although we, or an Angel from
Heaven, euangelize to you, beside that which we have euangelized to you, be he
Anathema. As we have said before, so now I say again; if any euangelize to
you, beside that which you have received, be he Anathema. Certainly if our
Faith be but probable, it were against reason not to believe an Angel from
Heaven auouching the contrary. But of this Text more hereafter. Now let us see
what is the sense of the holy Fathers for this point.

10. S. Dionysius Areopagita [ Cap: 7. de Divine: Nomin:] says: Eum qui in
veritate credit iuxta Scripturae fidem, nihil remouebit a verae fidei auctore
in quo constantiam immobilis atque immutabilis habebit. Nouit enim penitus is,
etc. Him, who in truth belieues according to the faith of Scripture, nothing
will remove from the author of true faith, in whom he being immovable and
immutable will have constancy. For well knows he who is joined unto truth, how
well he is, albeit many reprehend him as a mad man and distracted, S. Basil. [
Ep. 43.] ad Gregor. Nyssenum. Even as in those things which appear to the eye,
experience seems to go further than the reason of the cause; so in sublime
matters of doctrine, faith it self is of more account tha^ the reach of
discourses. And [ in a Sermon. upon the 115. Psalm.] Let faith go before and
guide speeches concerning God. Faith, and not Demonstration, Faith which draws
the soul unto assent, above rational methodes. (Faith above logic
discourses, and above Demonstration.) In Regulis moralib: Regula 80. Faith is a
most certain satisfaction of the mind concerning the truth of divine words. [
S: Chrysostom Hom: 21. in Ep: ad Hebr.] upon those words Cap: 11. Est autem
Fides sperandarum substantia rerum, argumentum eorum quae non videntur, says:
O how admirable a word used he, saying: An Argument of those things which are
not seen. For it is an Argument in things very hidden: Faith therefore is
(says he) a seeing of things which appear not, and it leads unto the same
certainty, to which those also lead which are seen. Therefore neither can it be
called credulity or incredulity of those things which are seen; nor again can
it be called faith, but when one shall have certainty concerning those things
which are not seen, more than concerning those things which are seen. And
Hom: 4. in Ep: ad Coloss. upon those words Coloss. C. 1. Siquidem permanseritis
Fide fundati, ac stabiles, and non dimoti in Spe Euangely: he says: He did not
absolutely say; shall persist. For it may come to pass that he persist also
who wauereth and disagrees. He also may stand and remain who wanders up and
down and errs: but if (says he) ye shall persist grounded and stable, and
not moved. What could be spoken more clearly for the stable infallibility of
Faith against the probable floating faith of Chillingworth; as if this Saint
had purposely impugned him out of holy Scripture, so many ages before he
appeared; And ( Hom. 8. in Epist. ad Rom.) he so declares the sublimity and
difficulty of Faith, and necessity of a great strength for ouercoming
temptations against it, that it clearly appears he requires an other kind of
Faith, then only a probable Assent. For speaking of one who belieues, he says.
This man has God a debtor, and a debtor not of vulgar matters, but of great
and high ones. Moroeuer having showed the sublimity and spiritual thought of
such a man's mind, he did not absolutely say, (credenti: to him that belieues,
sed credenti in eum qui justificat impium: but to him that belieues in him who
justifyes the wicked) For think with thy self, how great a matter this is,
namely, to believe, and to conceive a certain persuasion that God can on a
sudden not only free from deserved punishment him who has spent his life in
jmpiety, but also make him just, and furthermore bestow on him immortal
honors. And upon these words: Sed robustus factus est side. But he (Abraham)
was made strong in faith, he says; Seeing that he treated both of those who
perform works, and of those also who believe, he showed that he who belieues,
does a greater work than the other, and has need of greater fortitude and
strength. And he showed, that not he only who exercises temperance, or some
other like virtue, but he also who belieueth needs very great strength and
power. For, even as he has need of great strength for resisting the assaults
of intemperancie; so likewise this man must have great courage to resist and
keep himself from thoughts of disbelief. Wherein then did he prove himself to be
strong; he committed (says he) the matter to Faith, not unto conjectures.
Otherwise he would have fayld and lost courage. Neither said he (S. Paul of
Abraham) merely believing, but having conceived a certain persuasion, (our
vulgar has plenissime sciens, Rhemes Testament, most fully knowing.) For such
a manner of thing Faith is, to wit, more open, and more manifest than that
demonstration which is begotten by the discoursing of a considering mind, and
therefore has greater force in persuading. For it wauereth not if perhaps some
other thought do present it self. For he that lies open to the discourses of a
mind moved hither and thither, may verily also alter his judgment. But one that
firmly settles himself by Faith, shuts his hearing and fortifyeth it as it
were with a trench, against hurtful thoughts. These words of this holy
Doctor do not only affirm, but prove the necessity of an jnfallible Faith,
unless we will be always in perplexityes, doubts, and danger of denying
Christian Religion. (S. Ambrose. Enarratione in Psalm. 40.) As there are some
who have eyes, and see not; so there be some who not seeing with their eyes,
are believed to see more. Whence also Prophets were called Seers, even those
who did not see with their eyes. (S. Hierome. Ep. 61. ad Pammachium. C. 3.)
will you know, how great the fervor is of those who believe aright? Give
ear to the Apostle. Although we, or an Angel from heaven should euangelize
otherwise unto you, be he accursed. And, (in Cap. 1. Ep. ad Galat.) the
Apostle shows the firmeness of his faith, saying. I know, that neither death,
nor life, etc. And contralily, if Faith were not most certainly true, who
could be obliged to die for auerringe the truth thereof; which is the argument
brought by S. Bernard against Abailardus, saying. (Ep. 190.) Fools therefore
were our Martyrs suffering so grievous punishments for uncertain things, not
doubting through a hard passage to suffer a long banishment for a doubtful
revvard. (S. Austine, Tom. 10. de verbis Dom. Sermon. 63.) Speaking of an Article
of Christian Faith, says. Albeit we see not this with our eyes, nor with
our heart, as long as we are cleansed by Faith, yet do we believe it by faith
most rightly and most strongly. (Surely this signifyes more than to believe
only with probability.) [Richardus de S. Victore, 1. de Trinit. Cap. 2.] As
many of us as are truly faithful, hold nothing with more certainty, than that
which we believe by faith.

11. What we have proved by Authority, we now will convince by Theological
Reasons and Arguments.

First; we have demonstrated out of holy Scripture, that Faith is an especial
Gift of God, and that the Act or Assent thereof proceeds from a particular
Grace, Motion, Prevention, and Supernatural assistance of the Holy Ghost:
Therefore it cannot be but true; otherwise we might distrust the Truth of
Scriptures, and the predictions of the Prophets, though we did believe those to
have been written, and these to have been spoken, by the direction and instinct
of God himself. And what more satisfying assurance can there be given to any
Christian, yea to any reasonable creature, than this; God leads me this way
therefore it cannot be but right, neither can I err in follovving it, and every
way contrary to this must be wrong, and erroneous Chilling, [ Page 258. N.
16.] confesses that a thing untrue cannot be foreseen by the Prophets. Which
he could not affirm, if God could move men to believe a falsehood. And [ Page
36. N. 8.) he says. We cannot possibly by natural means be more certain of
the conclusion than of the weaker of the Premises, which supposes that by
supernatural means we may be more certain: And [ N. 9.] he doubts not but
that the spirit of God may and will advance his servants, and give them a
certainty of adherence, beyond their certainty of evidence. Since therefore
every Act of Faith proceeds from the particular motion and spirit of God, we
must say, that his supposition concerning some, is actuated in all who believe
by a true Act of Christian Faith, that is, we must say, that even according to
Chillingworth, all true Christians believe with absolute certainty, and with
an assent higher than that which we yield to probable premises.

12. And out of this most certain and Christian truth, that Faith is the gift
of God, and requires his particular assistance above the force of nature, it
follows also by evidence of Reason, that it must be an Assent above all
Probabilityes, or Arguments of Credibility. For abstracting from some
accidental impediment, or temptation, our Understanding is able of it self,
to draw a probable Conclusion from evident probable premises. And therefore
seeing we can never by natural forces exercise an Act of true Christian Faith,
it follows clearly, that it must be an Assent more than probable, and raised
above all arguments of credibility. Chilling. says [ Page 116. N. 159.] We
have, I believe, as great reason to believe there was such a man as Henry the
eight King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. But
as I noted above, no man in his wits will say, that we cannot by natural
forces of humane reason believe that there was such a man as Henry the eight,
Therefore no man ought to say, that with the same forces of humane Reason we
cannot believe that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, if Faith be
only such a probable Assent.

13. Beside, if Faith do not exceed the force of nature, seeing Faith is the
first beginning of Obedience, Merit and Salvation, the beginning of all these
should be attributed to nature, and not to Grace; yea if one can believe by the
force of nature, so also he may Hope, and Love, and attain Beatitude by the
same. And how shall Beatitude it self be Supernatural, if the means to
attain it, be natural? Thus the maine ground of Chilling. That Faith is a
Conclusion or Assent drawn from probable Premises, and proportioned to them,
being ouerthrovvue, all his Reasons relying on this ground, vanish into nothing.

But yet let us more and more prove this truth, and turn the weapons of our
Adversaries against themselves, by demonstrating that Christian Faith must
raise us above the Arguments of Credibility; which I do in this manner.

14. If Faith exceed not the assent which we give to the probable motives of
Credibility, there could be no captiuating of our understanding, nor Obedience
or Freedom of will in believing the Articles of Faith. But we are to captiuate
our understanding, and exercise free obedience of our will in believing the
Articles of Faith; Therefore Faith must raise us above the Arguments of
Credibility. The mayor is clear. For where there is evidence and necessity to
assent, there is no place for captiuating or submitting our understanding, or
free and voluntary obedience of our will, which Chilling: confesses (Page 329.
N. 7.) where speaking of obedience in Faith, he says: which can hardly have
place where there is no possibility of disobedience, as there is not where the
vtderstanding does all, and the will nothing. Neither can it avail him to say,
as he says in the same place, that the Faith of Protestants implies an act of
obedience, because it is not pretended to have the absolute evidence of sense
or demo^stration. For this is nothing to the purpose, as long as he belieues
the Articles of Faith, with no higher tha^ a probable asse^t, proportionable to
probable Arguments, and rises not to a certainty of sense, demonstration, or
any other, above these probable Motives; because his fallible, and only
probable faith has the certanty and evidence of demonstration for such a
degree of probability; it being no more certain and evident, that a Conclusion
drawn from necessary Premises, is necessary; than that a Conclusion rightly
deduced from probable Premises, is probable; which is all he requires for an
assent of faith, as he expressly affirms (Page 36. N. 8.) saying: God desires
only that we believe the Conclusion as much as the Premises deserve; and (N.
9.) God requires of all, that their faith should be proportionable to the
motives enforcing to it; mark enforcing, and Page 112. N 154. Neither God does,
nor man may require of us as our duty (observe what obedience and duty he
requires) to give a greater assent to the Conclusion than the Premises deserve.
And finally, this is his maine ground to prove, that Christian Faith is not
infallible, but only probable, that is, such only as he holds the Premises and
Arguments of Credibility to be: whereby it is evident that in his way there is
left no place for captiuating our understanding, by a voluntary free
submission, and obedience to Christ and his doctrine.

15. Which yet to be necessary (as I assumed in my Minor proposition) cannot be
denied by any who belieues Holy Scripture; as appears (2. Cor. 10.5.) B
ringing into captivity all understanding unto the obedience of Christ. (Romans
1.5.) By whom (Jesus Christ) we received grace and Apostleship for obedience to
the Faith in all nations for the name of him. (Philip. 2.17.18.) But if I be
immolated upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith, I rejoice and
congratulate with you all. And the selfsame thing do you also rejoice, and
congratulate with me. What great sacrifice, service, or obedience is a faith
only probable, and necessarily inferrd from probable Premises*

16. Morouer, that Faith does not necessitate our understanding, but is free
and voluntary even quoad specificationem, as Divines speak, that is, in such
manner, as it is in our will to believe the contrary of what we believe by
Faith, and for that cause requires Gods particular assistance, and a pious
affection in the will, and a submitting, or captiuating of our understanding,
is gathered out of divine Scriptures, that upon the same preaching of the
Ghospel, some believed, and some believed not, as we read (Act. 17.32.34.)
Certain mocked, but certain said; we will hear thee again concerning this
point. But certain men joining unto him, did believe. (Marc 16.15.16.) Going
into the whole world preach the Gospel to all creatures. He that belieueth
and is baptized shall be saved; but he that belieueth not shall be condemned.
(V. 14.) he exprobated their incredulity. Which shows, that jnfidelity is a
sin; and sin supposes liberty to the contrary. (Romans 10.16. But all do not
obey the Ghospel. This supposes that some believe not, and that some other
believe, and in believing exercise a free Act of obedience Genesis 15.) Abraham
believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice. [Heb. 11.] it is said
that God prepared for the Fathers an everlasting city, and that they got a
repromission by Faith. [Ioan. 20.] Blessed are they, who have not seen, and
have believed. [Luc. 2.] Blessed art thou who have believed. But a meritorious
act, or deserving such praises, must be free. Now Chillingworths faith is such
as necessitates the understanding to assent, (at least that it cannot assent to
the contrary) as has been showed; Therefore his Faith is not that Christian
belief, which Holy Scripture commands, that is, a free Assent, captiuating our
understanding, and raising it above all the Motives of Credibility or
Probability, and consequently, absolutely certain and infallible; whereby we
voluntarily submit, and perfectly subject our soul to God, and his supreme
authority. For whereas we may distinguish four sorts of Knowledge; whereof the
First is Experimental or of senses. 2. Scientificall. 3. Humane Faith. 4.
Divine Faith; Man ought to be subject to God by a voluntary knowledge, and such
the first and second sort is not. The third is imperfect, as the authority on
which it relyes, is subject to error. The fourth then remaynes, as it were
Religion, or highest worship, called latria, or the greatest submission, whereby
the will perfectly subject unto God, subjecteth unto him the other powers,
which are subordinate unto it self; and it is great impiety to believe, that
God has not enabled Christians, to offer to their creator, and Redeemer, a
service or Obedience, connaturall to the Divine Authority, Perfection, and
Testimony.

17. This reason drawn from Obedience, exercised in the act of Christian
Faith, is further enforced thus. The command of the will, or Pious affection
which Divines require in Faith, produces in the understanding a more firm
assent, than would be produced without Vide Card: Lugo de Fide Disp. 10. Sect.
2. N. 19.
it, as we see by experience, that men obstinate in error, or strongly
affected to some truth, produce by their will a more firm assent than
otherwise it would have been: yea the command of the will, affection, passion,
and the like, move men to assent to that, unto which otherwise they would not
assent, or from which perhaps they would dissent. Therefore seeing the will can
move the understanding to produce the substance of an act, much more may it
determine us to produce more degrees of assent, or dissent, than otherwise it
would. Although therefore it were granted, that a Conclusion formally as such,
can have no greater strength than it receyues from the Premises, yet the same
conclusion, or object taken materially, may receive greater strength, from some
other cause, than it did receive from the Premises, as such; as the same
material truth, which, being inferred from probable Premises, is only
probable, may grow to be certain, if it be deduced from demonstratiue
arguments. Therefore Chillingworths ground, that the Assent of Faith, being a
Conclusion drawn from probable Premises, can be noe more than probable; is
either false; if it be understood, that by no other means it can be made more
than probable; or impertinent, if he mean, that it cannot exceed probability,
precisely and formally as it is a Conclusion inferd from probable Premises; it
being sufficient for our purpose, that it be improued to a certainty by some
other means. Yea since he grants that our Assent of Faith receyues from the
Arguments of Credibility the highest degree of probability, and that indeed it
receyues a further perfection from the Pious Affection, and prudent command of
the will, we must conclude, that it is raised above the highest degree, of a
probable to a certain Assent: Which yet is more and more euinced by this
following consideration.

18. It is impossible that Christian Faith can retain the highest degree of
probability (as Chilling. pretends) if it have no greater perfection, than it
receyues from the sole probable Arguments of Credibility. Therefore we must find
some other ground on which, Christian Faith relyes, than merely such arguments.
The antecedent I prove thus: For (to omit what some perhaps will say, that at
least the Assent of Faith, which he says is a Conclusion, is not so probable
as the Premises on which it depends, and so is not probable in the highest
degree) although it were granted, that the Motives of Credibility, considered
alone, may move the understanding to the highest degree of probability, and
such as one cannot entertayne without a prudent doubt of the contrary; yet if
they be compard and confronted with very great difficultyes objected against
them, by reason that the Mysteryes of Christian Faith, which really are
superior, and seemingly are contrary to natural Reason, and Philosophy; that
supposed highest pitch of probability must needs be abated, and lessened, and
come to some lower than the highest. As althongh the will do necessarily love
an object which appears good, when it attends not to any reason or formality
of some evil, nevertheless it is not necessarily carried to love that object,
when it perceyueth any evil therein; so the understanding, so long as truth is
proposd without any thing offered to the contrary, necessarily, or easily yelds
assent; but if contrary difficultyes be represented, it is apt to pause, and
consider, and perhaps doubt, or fear, and must needs fall somewhat from its
former confidence, adhesion, and assent, if it be left to it self, and not
assisted with greater strength, than can arise from mere probabilityes,
encountered, and balanced with contrary seeming strong reasons. And as Chilling.
speaking to Catholics, says (Page 113. N. 154.) I hope you will give us
leave to consider whether the motives to your Church be not impeached, and
opposed with compulsiues and enforcements from it: so others will say of the
Motives to Christian Religion; that they are impeached with contrary
compulsiues from it, besides the sublimity of the Misteryes themselves above
humane Reason, which is apt to doubt of whatsoever it does not ynderstand; as
we fear not only bad, but also unknown paths, and as to our eye the clearest
sky, if it be almost beyond our kenning, seems to be a kind of darkness. Thus
then the probability of Chillingworths faith, being brought down from the
highest pretended degree of probability, becomes compatible with good, and
great probability of the contrary side; (as heat and cold, if neither of them
be in the most intense degree, may stand together) and consequently, the
understanding may conceive not only a possibility, but a probability also, and
a fear that the Christian Religion is false. For avoiding which wicked
sequel, there is no other remedy, except to acknowledge Faith to be an Assent
certain and infallible, above all probability of humane Motives, or arguments
of Credibility.

19. And in this occasion we may observe, that the examples usually alleged
to prove, that we can no more doubt of the Conclusion drawn from the Arguments
of Credibility, than a man doubts whether such an one be his father, and the
like; do not urge, but rather may be retorted. For in such cases, it is
supposed, that there are many good reasons for one side, for example, that such
a man is father to such a child etc. and none to the contrary. But it happens
otherwise in our case: there being many and hards objections obuious to humane
reason, against the Mysteryes of Faith, which may diminish that degree of
assent, which otherwise might be grounded upon the Arguments of Credibility, if
they were considered alone; as one could not believe such a man to be his
father, if he had some very probable proofs for the contrary, with the same
firm persuasion, as he would do, in case no such proofs did offer
themselves: and so, as I said, this and the like Arguments and examples, may be
retorted againist those who bring them: and still we must conclude, that we
cannot believe Christian Religion as we ought, without an absolute, certain,
and jnfallible Assent; which will more appear by the Reason following.

20. These very Motives of Credibility manuduce and send us up to an Authority,
which is able to transfuse greater perfection to our Assent, than they
themselves can give. Because they tell us of Objects to be believed for Divine
Revelation, and so proclaim themselves to be only Dispositions and
Preparations, which being supposed, God affords his particular Grace for
producing an Act proportionable to his Divine Testimony, as, with some
proportion, by hearing or reading spiritual things, the species are excited,
and God by that occasion gives inspiration for Faith, Hope, Charity etc. above
the natural power of the external words; and as Experimental knowledge by
sense, is a Disposition to Scientificall knowledge, which yet takes not its
nature, essence, and perfection from the senses.

21. From hence it follows, that men are obliged to believe Christian
Religion, not in what manner soever, but as a Doctrine delivered and revealed
by God, and therefore to be embraced above all; that is, above all contrary
objects or objections, and not to be altered upon any occasion, supposition, or
authority of men or Angels, as S. Paul teaches us by an impossible
supposition, to express the matter home. Galat 1.8. Although we, or an Angel
from Heaven euangelize to you, beside that which we have euangelized to you, be
he anathema. This admonition or denuntiation of S. Paul, must needs suppose
Christian Faith to be above all probability. For it is evidently against
reason, to join together these two judgments, or Assertions: This doctrine is
only probable, and grounded only in probable and credible Arguments, and yet;
That it is reasonable, or necessary, or even possible to assent to it in such
manner, as never to believe the contrary, though reasons, seeming, upon the
best examination a man can make, better than the former, should offer
themselves against it; seeing it is certain that he cannot be certain, that
better reasons cannot possibly be offered. For if he be certain that better
reasons for the contrary are not possible; his assent is not probable, but
certain. Therefore since we are not to forsake Christian Religion for whatsoever
possible motive, or Reason, or Authority of Men, or Angels, we must give it
absolute certainty, and not only probability.

22. And because this kind of Argument, is of greater moment than perhaps
appears at first sight, I will dilate it by saying further; that according to
his Assertion about the probability of faith, no Christian, yea no man can be
settled in any Religion; since he must be ready to chang whenever better
reasons shall be presented against it; neither can he be certain that he may not
sooner, or later find some such reason. For, a faith only probable is a
perpetual Temptation to it self; and we may truly say, Accedens tentator
dicit, in the present Tense, seeing Probability does not exclude some fear that
the contrary may be true. Nay every consideration about Faith, to such men as
Chill., who love to be esteemed considering and discoursing men, is more than a
Temptation; it is a yielding, or consent against Faith, inuoluing this
judgment; Perhaps that which I believe, is false, and the contrary true.

23. Yea this vast absurdity does not only flow from this doctrine, but it is
in effect acknowledged by him in express words [Pag. 380. N. 72.] Where he
deeply taxes all Catholics, because they either out of idleness refuse the
trouble of a scuere trial of their Religion, or out of superstition fear the
event of such a trial, that they may be scrupled, and staggered, and
disquieted by it; and therefore for the most part do it not at all; or if they
do it, they do it without indifference, without liberty of judgment, without
a resolution to leave it if it prove apparentily false. My own experience
assures me, that in this imputation I do you [Catholiques] no injury: but it
is very apparent to all men from your ranking doubting of any part of your
Doctrine among mortal sins. For from hence it follows, that seeing every man
must resolve he will never commit mortal sin, that he must never examine the
grounds of it at all, for stare he should be moved to doubt: or if he do, he
must resolve that no motives, be they never so strong, shall move him to doubt,
but that with his will and resolution he will uphold himself in affirm belief
of your religion. Does not it appear by these words, that he must have no such
resolution as he reprehends in us, but must be ready to doubt, or to leave his,
and all Christian Religion? [And Page 326. N. 4.] he endeauours to prove, that
Faith cannot be absolutely certain, because if it were so, any least doubting
would destroy it; which shows, that doubting may well consist with his kind of
probable faith; which is that very absurdity which we inferrd, as impious
against true Religion, of which we must resolve never to doubt, though per
jmpossible an Apostle, or Angel should move us thereto, (as we have heard out of
S. Paul) and yet the Authority of an Apostle, or persuasion of an Angel
should in all reason be preferrd before Faith, if it be only probable.

24. This inconstancy in Religion appears further by what he confesses of
himself (Page 389. N. 7.) where speaking of a command of obedience to the
Roman Church, he has these words: sure I am, for my part, that I have done my
true endeavor to find it true, and am still willing to do so, but the more I
seek, the further I am from findinge etc. Behold, how after so long time, so
much deliberation, so many changes of Religion, even after the writing of his
Book, he is still willing to find and embrace a Religion different and
contrary to that which he professed. Also (P. 184. N. 90.) he says: Show us
any way, and do not say but prove it to have come frrm Christ and his Apostles
down to us, and we are ready to followit. Neither do we expect Demonstration
hereof, but such reasons as may make this more probable than the contrary.
Agreeable to this is his professing, (Preface N. 2.) that he had a travelers
indifferency, most apt and most willing to be led by reason to any way, or from
it. And (N. 5.) he professes, that his constancy in Religion consisted in
following that way to Heaven which for the present seemed to him the most
probable. A poor comfort and miserable faith, only probable, and of no longer
continuance than for the time present! I willingly omit, that his deeds were
agreeable to his words, changing, first from Protestants to Catholic, then
from Catholic to Protestant, and about again to Catholic, till at last he
became neither Precisian, nor Subscriber to the (39. Articles,) nor confessed
Socinian, nor any thing unless that mhich S. Bernard says of Abailardus, (Ep:
193.) Homo sibi dissimilis est, totus ambiguus. He is a man who disagrees even
from himself, wholly compounded of doubts. I willingly leave out his middle
words, Intus Herodes, for is Ioannes; inwatdly a Herod outwardly a John. If
the Apostles be to be believed only in that which they delivered constantly as
a certain divine truth, as he teaches (Page 144. N. 31.) surely this man, and
his fellow Socinians, ought not to be believed in any thing, seeing according to
their doctrine that faith is fallible, and but probable, they neither are, nor
can be constant in any point they deliver: and so we cannot say so much of them
as of the Scribes and Pharisees (Matt: 23.2.) whatsoever they shall say unto
you, do, but according to their works, do not: but, do neither what they
shall say, nor according to their works. And here I beseech, and even beg of
the Reader, if he have any care to save his soul, that he will consider how
far the faith of this man, and his Associates, is from true Christian Faith, of
which we have heard S. Paul saying: Although we, or an Angel from Heaven
euangelize to you beside that which we have euangelized, be he an Anathema.

25. But this is not all that strongly offers it self in this point. For, not
only his Faith cannot affoard any rest or satisfaction, whereby a man may cease
from further inquiry, but leaves him with a strict obligation to be incessantly
examining his Religion, and seeking whether he can find some more probable, and
better grounded. This sequel seems clear. Because the true Faith and Religion
being absolutely necessary to salvation, charity toward ones self obliges
every man, to seek the safer way, and the most certain Religion. And seeing
he is not certain, that the Religion, or way to Heaven which for the present
seems to him most probable (as we have heard him speak) is indeed the right
way; what remaynes, but that men are obliged to be continually busied, and
perplexed in the search of the true Faith necessary to salvation? This my
inference seems to be acknowledged by him. For beside what has been already
cited, he says of himself, P. 278. N. 61.] If I did not put away idleness,
and prejudice, and worldly affections, and so examine to the bottom all my
opinions of divine matters, being prepared in mind to fellow God, and God only,
which way sceuer he shall lead me; if I did not hope, that I either do, or
endeavor to d^e these things, certainly I should have little hope of obtaining
salvation. Lo here little hope of salvation, unless a man be still examining
to the bottom his opinions, and be prepared in mind to follow, etc. But in
Vain it is to seek that rest, which will never be found, except in a Faith,
and Religion, acknowledged to be absolutely certain and infallible, which
alone can put an end to all further inquiry. Finally, [Pag. 376. N. 57.] he
says: This is the Religion which I have chosen after a long deliberation, and
I am verily persuaded that I have chosen wisely. Ponder, verily persuaded: And
were not you verily persuaded in those your changes which you acknowledge [Pag.
303. N. 103.] from a moderate Protestant to a Papist, from a doubting Papist to
a confirmed Protestant, were you not, I say, verily persuaded that you did
choose wisely? Yea you expressly tell us in the same [Pag. 303.] that, of a
moderate Protestant you turned a Papist, and that, the day that you did so, you
were convicted in conscience that, your yesterdayes opinion (that is,
Protestantisme) was an error. By all which appears, how inconstant you were,
and must be in matters of Faith and Religion, till you acknowledge an infallible
Faith, taken from an infallible living Guide, which is Gods true Church.

26. From this liberty of Belief, what can follow but liberty of life? Seeing
his belief of Heaven and Hell, is but an opinion concerning things of an other
world; whereas worldly pleasures are in present possession, and certain. If the
absolute certainty wherewith all Christians hitherto have believed their Faith
to abound, has not been able to stop the course of men's licentiousness; what
can we now expect, but that they who before did run, will now fly after the
Idols of whatsoever may appear to their souls or bodies, objects of profit,
or delight? (Page 326. N. 4.) he teaches, that, if faith be infallible, no
Christian could committ any deliberate sin, yea and must be perfect in
Charity; because Faith is the victory which ouercomes the world, and Charity
is the effect of Faith. If this be so, we may say on thecontrary side, that, if
faith be weak, or only probable, what victory, what perfection in Charity can
be hoped from it? But let us now come to some other kind of Argument.

27. Hitherto Christians have believed, that true Christian Faith is a
Theological virtue, that is, it has for its Formal object and Motive God, as
he is infinitely Wise, and True; as Hope respects Him, as infinitely Powerful;
and Charity, as infinitely Good. But the Faith of these men cannot be a
Theological virtue: Therefore their faith is no true Christian Faith. The Minor
cannot be denied in the grounds of this man. For, although they will pretend to
believe the Articles of Christian Religion, because God has revealed them; yet
the Arguments of Credibility, or humane testimonies are the only formal object
or Motive of this Assent, God has revealed the Mysteryes of Christian
Religion. They are, I say, Premises from which the said Conclusion or act and
assent of Faith is deduced, and according to which it is to be measured, and
not only Preparations or Dispositions to it, (as Catholic Divines teach) so
that the infallible Divine Revelation comes to be only a material object,
believed for another fallible Motive, or Formal Object, infinitely beneath the
Testimony of God, which alone is able to constitute a Theological virtue. Thus
he plainly says (Page: 36. N. 8.) God desires only that we believe the
Conclusion as much as the Premises deserve, that the strength of our faith be
equal or proportionable to the credibility of the Motives to it. and most
expressly he says in the same place: Our faith is an assent to this Conclusion,
that the Doctrine of Christianity is true, which being deduced from a Thesis,
which is metaphysically certain, and from an Hypothesis, whereof we can have
but a moral certainty, we cannot possibly by natural means be more certain
of it then of the weaker of the Premises. You see he holds the Assent of Faith
to be a Conclusion, not proportioned to Divine Revelation, which is most
infallible and strong, but measured by the weaker of the Premises, grounded
upon humane inducements, which cannot give Species or nature and essence to a
Theological virtue: and so his probable Faith, is no more than an humane
Opinion. For, even as he who concludes out of Mathematical Principles known
only probably, has not knowledge but opinion; so he that belieues out of
Principles not certain, a Revelation of its nature certain, has not certain
knowledge, but only opinion. And therefore his saying (Page: 35. N. 7.) that he
conveyues Faith to be an assent to Divine Revelations upon the authoty of the
Renealer, will in no wise free him from the just imputation of turning Divine
Faith into Opinion; since his assent to Divine Revelation is grounded, and
measured, and receyues its essence, from testimonies and Principles only
probable and humane, and not from the Divine Revelation, without which, even
Dr. Potter (Page 143.) expressly says: Faith is but Opinion, or persuasion, or
at the most, an acquired humane belief. And it is to be observed, that the
Doctor speaks expressly of the Authority of the Church, which he says can
beget only an Opinion, and yet Chillingworth resolves our belief of the
Scripture into the Tradition and teaching of the Church, and therefore his belief
of the Scripture cannot pass the degree of Opinion, or humane belief.

28. Children are taught in their Catechismes, that, Faith, Hope, and Charity
are virtues, and all Divines agree that Faith is a virtue infused, and seeing it
resides in the understanding, it must be a Virtue of the understanding, which
of its nature cannot produce any but true acts, because virtue, out of S.
Austine, Lib 2. de Libero arbitrio, is a quality which by no man is used ill.
And, virtue, as Divines teach together with Aristotle, disposes the Power to
that which is best. Wherefore the virtue of the will disposes it unto Good,
which is the wills good, and an intellectual virtue must dispose the
understanding to that which is True, which is the intellectiue Powers greatest
Good. Since therefore Faith is of its own essence an intellectual virtue, it
must have an intrinsecall reference and tie unto true Acts, and an incapacity
and repugnance unto false ones and errors.

29. Besides; Faith is the first Power of supernatural Being, and ought not to
be inferior to Habitus Principiorum in our natural Being, which Habits cannot
incline to any false assent. And whence comes it that the Habit of Faith for
producing an Act, requires Gods special help, which cannot move unto
falsehood, but that such a Habit is determinated to Truth? Or how is it given us
as a fit, sufficient, and secure means, whereby to captiuate our understanding
with great considence to the obedience of Faith, and of God, if it be not
determined to truth, without all danger of error? Will he deny that it exceeds
Gods Power to produce such a Habit, or to concur with our understanding to
such an Act, as shall be incapable of errrour? Or what imaginable reason can
there be, to deny that Faith is such, in which concur, Divine Revelation; a
Pious Affection, and command of the will; and the special Grace of the Holy
Ghost? What? A supernatural End of eternal Happyness; a supernatural Habit;
a supernatural Grace; a supernatural Act; an infinite Authority or formal
Object; and all to end in mere weak Probabilityes? Does water rise as high as
the source from which it flows, and shall not all these divine and
supernatural fountaynes, raise us higher than Opinion; Good Christians can
correct natural Reason, in points which to Philosophers seemed evident truths
and Principles, as in the Creation, against that Axiom (Ex nihilo nihil fit, of
nothing nothing is made) In the Resurrection, against; (From privation there is
not admitted a retourning back to the former Being;) In the incarnation,
against (A substance is that which exists by it self; and yet our Saviors
sacred Humanity exists in the Eternal Word) in the Mystery of the B. Trinity,
against, (Those things which are the same with a third, are the same amongst
themselves; and, not to allege more particulars, all miracles wrought by our
Savior above the strength of all natural causes, seemed in humane reason, to
imply a contradiction, or impossibility; and whatsoever is believed above
Reason, would seem false and against it, if we did not correct Reason by
Faith; which could not be done, unless we did judge the light of Faith, to be
more certain, than the light of Reason, or the Principles thereof. And this,
Chilling: must either grant, and so yield faith to be infallible; or else must
be content to acknowledge a plain contradiction to himself. This appears by
these words, [Pag. 376. N. 56.] Propose me any thing out of this book, (the
Bible) and require whether I believe it or no, and seem it never so
incomprehensible to humane reason, I will subscribe it with hand and heart, as
knowing, no demonstration can be stronger then this, God has said so, therefore
it is true. And in the Conclusion of his Book ( And whereas) he professes that
he will not believe any thing contrary to any Verity revealed in the Word of
God, though never so improhable or incomprehensible to Natural Reason. For if
his Faith be, to his understanding, only probable, how can he in prudence
prefer it before the contrary thereof, which to his understanding seems
evident, and certain? Or how can an assent, which I judge to be only probable,
enable me to believe that which I judge to be evidently improbable? And it is in
vain for him to tell us of the certainty of Gods Revelation, since we do not
compare Natural Reason with Gods Revelation, but with those Motives, for which
we believe the divine Revelation; which being to him only probable, and
esteemed such, and no more, must yeald to appearance of certainty of the
contrary: and therefore he must either confess that he contradicts him self, or
yield that Faith is infallible and more certain tha^ natural reason.

30. To speak truth, if we consider well, this Socinian Faith, can have no
other use or effect, except only to damn men by contenting themselves with a
faith of probability, when they may, and ought to attain a certainty. He
himself, [Pag. 36. N. 9.] doubts not but that the spirit of God being implored
by devout and humble prayer, and sincere obedience, may and will by degrees
advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence, beyond
their certainty of evidence. And those that believe and live according to their
faith, he gives by degree the spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which
makes them know (though how, they know not) what, they did but believe: And to
be as fully and resolutely assured of the Gospel of Christ, as those which
heard it from Christ himself with their ears, which looked upon it, and whose
hands handled the word of life. Now if some men may arrive to so absolute an
assurance; why may not others: why must not all? Are not all bound to live
according to their Faith, and to observe the laws of charity, and obedience,
which doing, you say, they shall arrive to a full and resolute assurance, even
above that which you call faith? You say (Page 227. N. 61.) Gods assistance is
always ready to promote the Church farther; on condition she does implore it.
And, (Page 175. N. 75.) You grant the spirit of truth shall be given, and will
abide with those that love God and keep his Commandments. Yea since true
Faith is always the Gift of God, raising us up by Grace above the strength of
nature: And that every one is obliged to have true Christian Faith, it is
consequent, that de facto all are bound to believe with a Faith, produced by
Grace, above the forces of nature, and consequently infallibly certain. For
here that excellent saying of S. Leo (Sermon. 16. de Pass. Domini) has place:
Just Deus instat praecepto, quia praecurrit auxilio. He may well exact of us,
an infallible Act of Faith, seeing he gives us sufficient Grace to perform what
he exacts. And (Page 34. N, 6.) you say, The essential character of Charity is
to judge and hope the best, by which you are obliged to judge and hope (unless
the contrary be manifest) that every one lives according to his belief, by
observing the Commandments; and so in fact is arrived to a certain and
infallible Faith. Since therefore you grant, that the faith of those who live
according to their Belief, is not to be regulated by the Laws of Logic, and
forms of Syllogismes; with what shadow of reason would you make men believe,
that the Faith of all Christians, necessary to salvation, which is a special
infused Gift of God, must be subject to such Rules; as if it were a mere
Conclusion, following only the weaker of the Premises, and not measured by the
special Grace and Motion of the Holy Ghost, above all Logic. Thus all your
Objections against the infallible Faith of Christians, must be answered by your
self, as false and sophistical, and consequently all Christians may, and ought
in despite of such paralogismes, to assert and believe the necessity of an
infallible Faith. And, as I said, the contrary doctrine can serve only to
delude, and damn those unhappy souls, who will be harkninge to such
noueltyes; I say, to damn souls, even though it were falsely supposed, that
his doctrine were true. For, all Christians, beside this man and such as he,
sirmely believing, Christian Faith necessary to salvation to be infallibly
true, and he acknowledging all points of Christian Faith to be but probable,
(and surely he will not be so shamlesse as to say, he belieues this particular
fancy, wherein he disagrees both from Catholics and Protestants, to be more
certain than all other Articles of Faith) it cannot be denied, but that men
are bound to believe with an infallible Assent; because, as I sayd^ in matters
absolutely necessary to salvation, we are bound by the Law of God, and Charity
to our selves, to embrace the safer way by means of an infallible Faith, which
he confesses may be obtained, by prayer, and obedience to Gods commandments.
And so upon one account or other, all are obliged under pain of damnation, to
believe with an infallible Faith.

31. As it is very true, that there is no greater, nor more foolish sin, than
the sin of Desperation, irreuocably bringing damnation, which might have been
avoided by Hope, for which Gods Grace is never wanting, if we cooperate; so we
may say, that this fallible Faith infallibly dispatches men to Hell; which
mischief all may avoid by endeavoring to raise their faith to certainty, as
he confesses they may do, by obeying and praying, which endeauours the Grace
of God puts in their power, and will; and if they reject it, to none more
justly then to this unfortunate man and his fellows may be applyd these words
of the Prophet Ezechiel, (C. 18. V. 31.32) Why will ye die; return and live.
Which that they may do either with more ease, or become inexcusable, if they
do it not; we will more and more confute that Ground, on which he does in a
manner wholly rely; That the Conclusion following the weaker of the Premises,
one of which is in our case but probable, the Conclusion can be no more than
probable.

32. For, First I would for disputation sake, ask of him, whether he mean,
that the Conclusion does so follow the weaker of the Premises, that it receyues
no strength or perfection from the fellowship of a better Premise than it self
is; If he answer, that it receyues no strength; then one will infer, that one
Premise containing the Testimony, or Revelation of God, an other the testimony
of men, could produce no stronger conclusion, than if both Premises did
contain only the testimony of men; and so he must confess, that de facto he
belieues the Articles of Christian Faith, no more than if by probable
arguments, they were proved to be testified by men alone. If he answer, that
the stronger Premise, may eleuate the weaker, to produce a Conclusion stronger
than it self, he should not have spoken so rawly as if one strong and another
weaker premise had no greater influe^ce into the Conclusion, than if both the
premises were weak.

33. But to omit this; he should have declared, whether a conclusion, deduced
from one certain and another probable premise, although precisely and formally
and Reduplicatiue as it is a conclusion can beget only a probable assent, yet,
I say, whether such a conclusion taken materially, and Specificatine, may not
be sufficient to bring our understanding to an infallible Act of Faith, not by
it self, but by applying the Divine Revelation, which growing by that means
and application, to be the immediate and formal Object of our understanding
may move it to an Assent proportionable to such an Object and Authority, that
is, absolutely certain and infallible; as he who applies fire to a combustible
subject, is occasion that heat is produced by the fire immediately applied, and
not by him who applied it; or as a Preacher, or Pastor, whose testimonies are
humane and fallible, when they declare to their hearers, or subjects, that some
Truth is witnessed by Gods word, are occasion that those people may produce a
true infallible Act of Faith, depending immediately upon Divine Revelation
applied by the said means. This if he had declared, (as he should have done
not to deceive his Reader) his main argument, that the conclusion follows the
weaker premise, had been answered, and confuted by himself.

34. And this same ground and consideration, wholly euacuates the examples which
he alleges (page 36. N, 8.) That a man cannot go or stand strongly, if
either of his legs be weak. That a building cannot be stable, if any one of
the necessary pillars thereof be infirm and instable: That, if a message be
brought me from a man of absolute credit with me, but by a messenger that is
not so, my considence of the truth of the Revelation, cannot but be rebated and
lessened by my diffidence in the Relatour. For in our Case, humane testimonies
are not the legs on which Faith stands: nor the pillars which uphold it; nor
the message or messenger for which we believe; but it is only the Divine
Revelation on which the Act of Faith relyes, and from which it receives
perfection, nature, and essence, and which alone is strong enough for that end.

35. If you object, that perhaps, that humane authority is false, and proposes
to my understanding, Divine Revelation when God does not reveal; Therefore I
cannot upon humane testimony, representing or applying Divine Revelation,
exercise an infallible Act of Faith. I answer: it is one thing, whether by a
reflex Act I am absolutely certain, that I exercise an infallible act of Faith;
and an other, whether indeed and in actu exercito I produce such an Act. Of the
former I have said nothing, neither makes it to our present purpose. Of the
latter, I affirm that when indeed humane testimony is true, and so, applies a
divine revelation which really exists; in such case, I may believe by a true
infallible Assent of Christian Faith. The reason of this seems clear, because
although a truth which I know only by a probable assent, is not certain to me;
yet in it self it is most immovable and certain, in regard that while a
thing is, it cannot but be for that time in which it is, and so it implies
contradiction that, Divine revelation should not exist, when by a true judgment
I affirm it to exist; which certain existance once supposed, it is able to
tansfuse certainty and infallibility to that Act of which it alone, and not any
precedent thing is the Formal Object and Motive; Neither will God be wanting
to concur on the belieuers part, with his special Grace, necessary for
producing a supernatural Act of Christian Faith. And so his argument, (ibidem)
that a river will not rise higher than the fountain from whence it flows,
turns against himself; and proves, that our Assent flowing from Divine and
infallible causes, Will rise as high, as those fountains; to a supernatural
infallible Assent. This is sufficient to show, how the probability of a
Conclusion taken specificatiue does not hinder, but that by means thereof, I
may come afterward to an infalliblity in my Assent derived, not immediately
from that Conclusion, but from the Divine Revelation: Whereby his chiefest
Ground is overthrown, That it is universally impossible, to exercise an
infallible Act of Faith, unless the existence of Divine Revelation, be
certainly foreknowne in one of the Premises.

36. But yet further; if we consider all the other Causes of Christian Faith,
they do euince that it is certain and infallible, as I have touched before:
For beside the object of infinite Authority on the belieuers part, God does
infuse the Habit of Faith: He gives a particular Actual Motion of Grace for
exercising the Act thereof; He effectually moves the will by a Pious assection
and Command, to determine the understanding to a firm assent of Faith, above
the precedent Arguments of Credibility. If a better understanding conceive the
same Object, with more perfection than another of less capacity, what stint
can we put to that understanding, which is directed and strengthened by rays
from the light quae illuminat omnem hominem? Which enlightneth every man?

37. Alas! how perniciously foolish will men needs be toward their own
perdition? All things eue^ by the instinct and strength of nature pass from an
imperfect to a perfect state: from the outward senses to the inward, which ca^
correct the errors of our outward, from which it took its first notions; from
them to the understanding: and finally by probable Arguments is prepared to
find out Demonstrations. And yet men will not understand how we may rise from
arguments of Credibility, to a certainty in Faith, though assisted with Divine
Grace.

38. To what has been said for the infalliblity of Faith, I add this
consideration. If Faith require not absolute certainty, it were sufficient to
believe, that the authority of Scripture is only probable, or that it is on ly
probable that God ca^ neither deceive, nor be deceued. For, this were
sufficient to ground a probable assent, that Christian Faith is true: Because
according to his Principles, that, Faith is a Conclusion, and that the
Conclusion follows the fallible and weaker Premise, what difference is there
to believe that Scripture is fallible, or to affirm that we do but probably
and fallibly believe that it is infallible, or the word of God. (in his
Principles: or what imports it for attaining certainty, that Gods Revelation is
in it self infallible, if I do but fauibly know, that he has revealed any
thing* And yet S. Paul ( Heb: 6), grounds Christian Faith upon this, that it
is impossible For God to lie: Therefore he did suppose that Christian Faith is
infallible.

39. But what if (...): himself pretend to believe, that Christian Faith is
infallible? I do not say he belieues it to be such, yet he has words which I
propose to the Reader, who may either see by this, the disposition of the man
and his contradiction to himself, or gather how the infallibility of Faith, is
as it were the natural sense of Christians, since he who so much impugnes it,
cannot choose but make ashew of defending it. (Page 410.) he says: For
Arguments tending to prove an impossibility of all Divine, supernatural,
jnfallible Faith and Religion, I assure my self, that if you were ten times
more a spider than you are, you could suck no such poison from them. My heart, I
am sure is innocent of any such intention; and the searcher of all hearts
knows, that I had no other end in writing this Book, but to confirm to the
uttermost of my ability the truth of the Divine and jnfallible Religion of our
dear, lord and Saujour Christ Jesus. If this be true, surely the Book which
goes under his name, is supposititious or a changeling, telling us, that the
Conclusion follows the weaker of the Premises, of which one is but probable,
whereas now you hear him auouching, that Christian Faith and Religion is
supernatural; Divine; and infallible. To this I will add what he has (Page:
357. N. 38.) Certainly I know, [and with all your Sophistry you cannot make me
doubt of what I know) that I do believe the Gospel of Christ (as it is
delivered in the un loubted Books of Canonical Scripture) as verily as that it
is now day; that I see the light; that I am now writing: and I believe it upon
this Motive, because I conceive it sufficiently, abundantly, superabundantly
proved to be Divine Revelation. And yet in this, I do not depend upon any
succession of men that have always believed it without any mixture of Error;
nay I am fully persuaded there has been no such succession, and yet do not
find my self any way weakened in my faith by the want of it, but so fully
assured of the truth of it, that though an Angel from Heaven should gainsay it
or any part of it, I persuade my self that I should not be moved. This I say,
and this I am sure is true. The Reader may make of those words, as verily as
that it is now day: That I see the sight, etc: What he pleases: I will only
say, that if Christian Faith be only probable, it is either foolery, or
hypocrify in him, to tell the world that he would not be moved though an
Angel from Heaven should gainsay it, or any part of it. For who would not
sooner believe an Angel from Heaven, than the confessed fallible testimonies
of men on earth? And therefore if he speak as he thinks, he must either
acknowledge Christian (...) be infallible, (and so no authority gainsaying it
can be by lived or else he cannot avoyde a non sense in preferring (...)
probability, before an Angel from Heaven.

40. Whatsoever his words, and Do^^^^ be against the infallibility of Faith, I
am sure that in deeds none does bring better proof for it, than he, by
pleading against it, with Reasons and Arguments, which may be so clearly
answered, as that every one cannot but give sentence for the Possession of
Divine infallible Faith, seeing no new Argument of worth or weight, is produced
to impugn it

41 That I may not seem only to say, and not prove this, I must crave pardon,
if in answering his Objections, I may perhaps seem long, and might justly be
censured for tedious, unless my desire and intention were not only to answer,
but by Gods holy assistence to confute and retort his Arguments, and so prove
the Truth: as also incidently to treat some material points, which will offer
themselves, by occasion of his Objections, and for themselves should not have
been omitted. And so I hope this length, will bring with it a fourfold
commodity. This being done, Christian Faith will keep its Right to
infallibility; without any other positive Reason to prove it (though I have
brought diverse, and many more might be alleged) and some who are said to cry
up Chillingworths Arguments, will, I hope, see how flat and low they will be
found to lie, by being impartially considered, and duly examined.

42. His first and chiefest Objection, which only has any show of dissiculty
(namely, that, The Motives of Credibility being only probable, Faith it self
cannot be certain) he took from Catholic Divines, but dissembled their
Answers, and wanted humility to captiuate his understanding unto the obedience
of Faith, as they did, and all good Christians ought to do, though never so
many difficultyes should offer themselves to the contrary. But this Objection I
have answered at large, and turned it upon himself in several ways and
occasions needless to be repeated: and therefore I come to his other Objection.

43. Object 2. page 326. N. 4. Every text of Scripture which makes mention of
any that were weak, or of any that were strong in Faith; of any that were of
little, or any that were of great faith; of any that abounded, or any that were
rich in Faith: of increasing, growing, rooting, grounding, establishing,
confirming in Faith: Every such text is a demonstratiue refutation of this
vain fancy, proving that Faith, even true and saving Faith, is not a thing
consisting in such an indivisible point of perfection as you make it, but
capable of augmentation and diminution: Every prayer to God to increase your
Faith (or if you conceive such a prayer derogatory from the perfection of your
Faith) the Apostles praying to Christ to increase their Faith, is a conuincing
argument of the same conclusion.

44. Answer: Not to take notice of his improper speech of augmentation and
diminution in Faith, which are appropriated to Quantity, as intension and
remission are propertyes of Quality: the grouud and supposition on which this
whole objection goes, is manifestly untrue, namely, that we make Faith to be a
thing consisting in an indivisible point of perfection, whereas all Catholic
Divines teach that it has degrees of perfection and intension, no less then
Hope, and Charity, and that de facto it receyues increase by every meritorious
act, together with justifying Grace. The Holy Council of Trent ( Sess. 6. C.
10.) gives this Title to that Chapter. Of the merease of justification already
received etc. And concludes it with these words; Hoc justitiae incrementum
petit Sancta Ecclesia (Dominica 13. post Pentecosten) cum orat: Da nobis
Domine, Fidei, Spei, and Caritatis augmentum. This increase of justice the Holy
Church does ask, when she prays; Give us, o Lord, increase of Faith, Hope, and
Charity. You see we think it not derogatory from the perfection of our Faith
(as you are pleased to speak) to pray for increase thereof. Who is ignorant,
that in Qualityes, We are to distinguish, between their essence (which consists
as it were in an indivisible point) and degrees of intension, which may be
increased within the compass of the same Essence; otherwise it were not
intension, but the production of another Species or Essence, as we experience
in heat, light, and other such qualityes; and know in scientificall
Demonstrations; and believe in Hope, and Charity. Is not the same truth known
with more evidence (and consequently with more certainty, according to his
grounds) by a perspicatious understanding, than by one more dull? Which argues
that there are degrees in certainty. What is more known, than that Axiom of
Aristotle, Propter quod vnumquodque tale, illud and magis tale; That, for which
every thing is such is it self much more such? Chilling: himself (Page 377. N.
59.) Says, we must be surer of the proof, then of the thing proved, otherwise
it is no proof. If then the conclusion be certain by virtue of the Proof, or
Premises, these must be more certain; which supposes different degrees of
perfection, even in certain and infallible acts of our understanding; and then
why not in Faith, though it be certain and infallible? And his objection, that
according to us, all true Faith must be most certain, and the most perfect
that is, cannot be more than most certain, has no more strength than it
receyues from ignorance. For, when Faith is said to be most certain the
comparison goes not between different degrees of graduall perfection in Faith
it self, but between Faith, and natural knowledge: Or else Faith is said to be
most certain for its essence; because with every degree of true Faith, we must
believe articles revealed, with an assent super omnia, above all, essentially
excluding all doubt, or dissent from such articles; as Hope relyes Upon God
super omnia, above all, and essentially refuses to admit any voluntary act of
desperation; and Charity essentially loves God above all things appretiatine,
choosing to loose all things, rather than to offend God, and therefore
effectually moueing us not to consent unto any deadly sin. In these
essential perfections there is an indivisibility, and a most or greatest
perfection, which being taken away, the Virtue is destroyed; but it passes not
so in Graduall perfections of Faith, Hope, Charity, and other Virtues, either
infused, or acquired.

45. What knowledge is so certain, evident, and perfect, as the Beatificall
Vision? which may truly be called most perfect: but how? In respect of other
knowledge, terminated only to created Objects: but in respect to it self, in
order to Graduall perfection, it consists not in an indivisible point, because
one Angel, or Saint beholds God intuitiue, with more perfection, than another.
Thus even your probable Faith, must essentially exclude all Doubt. Taken in the
most proper sense, that is, not as it signifyes formidinem oppositi, some fear
least the contrary be true; but as it is taken for a suspension of our assent
to either side, which cannot possibly consist with a probable possitiue assent
to one part; and in this essential notion of excluding all such Doubt, all
probable judgments must agree, and yet you will not deny but there are
different Graduall degrees in probable assents, and in particular in your
probable Faith, which you prove to be but probable, that so you may, as you
pretend, agree with Scripture, mentioning different degrees of Faith.

46. Not in this instance only, but in others also, I convince you by your own
assertions. [Pag. 36. N. 9.] you say; The spirit of God, being implored by
devout and humble prayers, and sincere obedience, may and will by degrees
advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence, beyend
their certainty of evidence. And; To those that believe, and live accordingly
to their faith, he gives by degrees the spirit of obsignation and confirmation,
which makes them know (though how, they know not) what they did but believe;
And be as fully and resolutely assured of the Gospel of Christ, as those which
heard it from Christ himself with their ears, which saw it with their eyes,
which looked upon it, and whose hands handled the Word of life. Here you
speak of certain persons, arriving by degrees to an absolute certainty; and I
hope you will not deny but that there might be disserent degrees of perfection
among them, according to the degrees of their devout and humble prayers and
sincere obedience; and that the same man might by degrees be advanced above
himself; as also that they might pray for such increase. Therefore there are
degres in certainty, for attaining of which one may pray, as in your objection
you alledg the Apostles pr^ing to Christ to increase their Faith: which is
directly for us against your self. For, [Pag. 329. N. 7.] you teach, that the
Apostles for some points had absolute certainty in their faith, or an assent
which was not pure and proper and mere faith, but somewhat more: an assent
containing faith, but superadding to it. Therefore certainty may be increased,
and this increase may be prayed for, as the Apostles did: and among the
Apostles who doubts but that one might believe with more certainty than an
other Surely you will be content that S. Paul enter into the number of those
who living as they believe, attain an absolute certainty, and yet he made
progress in charity, as himself witnesses [1. Tim: 4. V. 6.7.8.] I am even
now to be sacrificed, and the time of my resolution is at and. I have fought a
good fight, I have consummate my course; I have kept the Faith. Concerning the
rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our Lord will render
to me in that day, a just judge. You see this blessed Apostle, not long before
his death speaks of a crown due for his Faith, and good works or Charity,
without exception of any time wherein his Faith was fallible, which indeed was
always most certain and infallible, by the particular appearing of our
Savior to him, and most express revelation: which certainty had been no
favor, but a great harm, if it had deprived him of all increase in charity,
notwithstanding his continual exercise of heroical good works, and a death
glorious by martyrdom, the highest pitch of Charity and perfection; and yet he
said Phil. 3.12. Non quod jam perfectus sim, not that I now am perfect. And the
like might I say of all the Apostles, and other Saints, who lived as they
believed, and were eminent in Prayer, Obedience and all sanctity.

47. But this is not all that may be alleged against you, out of your own
doctrine, [Pag. 330. N. 8.] You say: that we are to believe the Religion of
Christ, we are and may be infallibly certain; and this you endeavor to prove
by some arguments which you style certain, and then conclude from all these
premises, this conclusion evidently follows, that it is infallibly certain
that we are firmly to believe the truth of Christian Religo^. Now it cannot be
denied, but that in this assent, ( It is infallibly certain that we are
firmily to believe the truth of Christian Religion,) there may be degrees of
certainty or perfection, both in different persons at the same time, and in the
same person at different times, as he may more and more ponder the Reasons
which prove the truth of Christian Religion above all other; and consequently
that men may pray for the conservation and increase of that infallible assent,
from which we see diverse do fall, and others would do so without Gods special
Grace: for which therefore we may and ought to pray. (Here by a parenthesis, it
may be asked, what you mean in saying: that we are to believe the Christian
Religion we are and may be certain, as if any were actually certain, and yet
could not be certain. Ab esse ad posse surely is a known good argument. It had
been better said, we may be, and are certain) Men have a certain assent that
there is a God, and yet some believe this certainty with more perfection than
others, an all may pray God to increase it, since we see so many turn
Atheists. Lastly this very Objection, (wherein you measure the perfection of
charity by the perfection of Faith, and thence infer, that, if Faith be
perfect and infallible, Charity must be perfect, and that no man could possibly
make any progress in it) I retort upon your self. For, seeing charity may be
increased by prayer and obedience, while we live upon earth, according to that
in the Apocalips [21. V. 11.] He who is just, let him be justified yet: Faith
also must be capable of greater intension and increase in all sorts of persons,
even in those who you say by degrees may arrive to a certainty in belief.
Therefore still we infer from your own tenets, that absolute certainty consists
not in an indivisible poyat, but may be increased, and persited.

48. By what has been said, I conceive your objection to be not only
sufficiently answered, but also confuted, and demonstrated to make against your
self. Yet, by way of supererogation, I must add two considerations. First; The
Apostles praying to Christ to increase their Faith, Domine adauge nobis Fidem.
[Luc. 17.5.] Lord, increase faith in us, makes nothing to the purpose, of
proving any thing at all touching Faith necessary to salvation; because that
prayer of the Apostles did concern fides miraculorum, the Faith of working
miracles, as is manifest by the same Text of S. Luke, compared with S. Matthew
[C. 17. V. 19.] Where to the Disciples asking why they could not cast out the
devil, our Saujour answered: Propter incrednatatem Vestram, By reason of your
incredulity; and yet it were impious to think, that the Apostles under such a
Master, were ignorant of Articles necessary to salvation in those times, and
therefore their want was only of Faith required to work miracles: and accordingly
our Savior in both those Euangeitsts took that occasion to speak of the
faith of miracles, whereby they would be able to remove mountains: Therefore
this your proof, taken from the prayers of the Apostles for increase of their
faith, is manifestly nothing to the purpose: as neither is the Argument which
you bring [Pag: 37. N. 9.] out of those words, Lord I believe, help my
unbelief, which concerns only faith of miracles, of delivering that man's son
from a deaf and dumb devil. [Marc: 9.23.] Woe be to Protestants if faith of
working miracles, be necessary to Salvation! In the mean time, you were wise
enough not to set down the particular places of Scripture, which, you say,
speak of a weak, strongh; little, great faith etc: least upon examination,
they might have been found subject to this, or some such clear exception.

49. My second consideration is: that, whereas he says: (Every Text of
Scripture which makes mention of any that were weak, or of any that were
strong in faith; of any that were of little, or any that were of great faith:
Every such Text is a demonstratiue refutation of this vain fancy) all this
proves nothing at all, unless when mention is made of a weak and little faith,
he had proved, such a weak faith to be sufficient for Salvation; or that such a
faith, though strong in it self, yet be not called weak in comparison of a
stronger; as Divines teach, Faith to be obscure compared with some more evident
natural, or supernatural knowledge, though it self be a great light,
according to that; To a candel shining in a dark place [2. Pet: 1.19.] and all
true Acts of the understanding are lights. Our Savior said: [Marc. 10.18.]
None is good but one, God; because all created Goodness, though in it self it
be truly good, yet compared to God, is as if it were not. In this comparatiue
way, some may be said to be weak in supernatural Hope, or Charity, and yet
every least degree of those virtues is in it self very great and strong, as I
explicated above. I suppose you will not affirm every weak kind of faith to
be sufficient for salvation; since [Pag. 37. N. 9.] you say: God will accept of
the weakest and lowest degree of faith, if it be living and effectual unto
true obedience; which supposes, that some faith may be so weak, that it will
not be accepted; and therefore when the Scripture mentions a weak faith, you
must prove that such a faith is sufficient to salvation; or if it be
sufficient, you must then show, that by a weak faith is understood a faith
only probable and fallible in it self, and not only compared to another
stronger faith: otherwise you will be found to say no more to the purpose, than
when your Objection spoke of faith of miracles, in stead of Faith necessary to
salvation. And yet we must take such proofs as these for demonstratiue
refutations and conuincing arguments; for so you style these your reasons.

50. No better than these, is your Argument [Pag. 37. N. 9.] where you say: He
commands us to receive them, who are weak in faith, and thereby declares that
he receives them. I know not what command of our Savior you mean, unless it
be that of which S. Pauie speaks (Romans 14.1.) Insirmum in side assumite, non
in disceptationibus cogitationum: Take to you the infirm in faith, not in
disputations of cogitations. Which Protestants translate, Him that is weak in
faith, receive you, but not in doubtful disputations: And in the margent; or,
not to judge his doubtful thoughts: And in the argument before this Chapter:
men may not contemn nor condemn one an other for things indifferent. All
which show, that the Apostle speaks not of Christian Faith, necessary to
salvation, which cannot be esteemed a thing indifferent, but of some other
matter, as indeed he does; namely, of a doubt amongst Christians at that time,
about eating certain meats, once forbidden to the jews, which some made a
scruple to do, others not; and so weakness in faith signifyes only a scruple,
or tenderness of conscience, for this particular case; and therefore the Apostle
in the next verse mentions the contrary persuasion of others: One belieueth
that he may eat all things, that is, is not troubled with scruple of
conscience in this matter. What is this to our question, about faith, and
belief, of Articles necessary to be believed by all Christians? Or how does
this prove, that, Faith common to all Christians, is sufficient to salvation,
though it be but probable, and not certain? I beseech you consider what you
say. In the matter of which the Apostle speaks, the comparison was not,
between a strong and weak faith, or belief of the same thing, as our case
goes, but the question was of contrary persuasions, one part judging that to be
lawful, which the other held to be unlawful. And therefore if you will have
your Objection rightly applied, or not to be clearly impertinent, a man weak
in Faith must be he, who belieues Christian Faith not to be true, nor the
practice of it lawful: And do you believe such a weak Faith to be sufficient
to salvation? or that the Apostle will have us receive them who are weak in
Faith in that sense, that is, who believe errors contrary to Christian Faith?
Your passing from Faith necessary to salvation, to Faith of Miracles, was an
inpertinency: but this your substituting to Christian Faith, errors contrary
to it, has too much of the Impious.

51. Object: 3. (Page 326. N. 4.) You go forward in impugning the
infallibility of Faith, in this manner: If this doctrine were true: then seeing
not any the least doubting can consist with a most infallible certainty, it
will follow, that every least doubting in any matter of Faith, though resisted
and inuoluntary, is a damnable sin, absolu tely destructive, so long as it
lasts, of all true and saving Faith: which you are so far from granting, that
you make it no sin at all; but only an occasion of merit.

52. Answer: First, Your self must answer this objection: In those, whom,
(Page 36. N. 9.) you say Gods spirit, may, and will advance beyond the
certainty of evidence to the spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which
makes them know what they did not believe: And to be as fully and resolutely
assured of the Gospel of Christ, as those which heard it from Christ him self
with their ears etc. In the Apostles; to whom you grant (P. 329. N. 7.) an
absolute Certainty in respect of the things of which they were eyewitnesses:
In those who believe (as you Page 330. N. 8. pretend to do) that it is
infallibly Certain, that we are firmety to believe the truth of Christian
Religion: In those who have an absolute Certainty of this Thesis, All which God
reueales for truth, is true, which (Page 36. N. 8.) You say is a proposition
evidently demonstrable, or rather evident of it self: In those who denying
Christian Faith to be certain, yet pretend to be certain that it is probable,
as you and your fellow Socinians do: In all these Certaintyes, I say, you
must answer, what you object against us. For, seeing as you say, not any the
least doubting can consist with Certainty, it will follow, that every least
doubting in the rehearsed truths (all which concern matter of Faith) though
resisted and involuntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long
as it lasts, of the belief of the Gospel; and particularly of that part, of
which the Apostles were eyewitnesses; of the certainty that it is infallibly
certain that we are firmi^y to believe the truth of Christan Religion; of the
assent to this truth, All which God reueales for truth, is true (which is a
most fundamental article of Faith*) of certainty, that Christian Religion is
probable: all which I conceive you will be far from granting, seeing that even
according to the Doctrine of Socinians, there can be no actual sins merely
involuntary.

53. But this is not all. It must follow by your argument, that every Doubt
taken properly, though resisted and involuntary, is a damnable sin,
absolutely destructive, so long as it lasts, even of the Probability of
Christian Faith, which being destroyed, there remaynes no belief at all (either
certain, or probable) of Christian Religion. I said, every doubt taken
properly, which is, when our understanding finding not sufficient reason to
believe one side, more than another, can only doubt of both, without a positive
assent to either, as contrarily it happens in a probableact, which assents
determinatly to one part, though not without fear that the contrary is true.
For, it is clear, that such a doubt which abstracts from a positive assent to
either part, is absolutely incompossible with a probable persuasion, which
positiuely determines to one side, (it being a manifest contradiction, for the
same act to abstract from both parts, and yet to determine us to one) and so
every such Doubt, must be, as you said against us, a Deadly sin. But why do I
seek after other instances, than this most obvious and common to all
Christians, even to Socinians? You pretend to believe that Christian Religion
is true, and consequently cannot judge, at the same time, that it is false:
Therefore this judgment, Christian Religion is false, though resisted and
involuntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long as it lasts,
of all faith where by you believe Christian Religion to be true. And so in
vain you said, no least Doubt could consist with the contrary certainty, as if
your objection did touch only our infallibility of Faith, whereas it overthrows
even your belief that Christian Faith is true. I do therefore end as I began,
and say, you (yea all Christians) must answer your objection.

54. Secondly; directly to your Objection of a doubt resisted and involuntary,
and yet destructive of infallible Faith, because any the least Doubting cannot
consist with certainty: I answer: If he who doubts, conceive his doubt to be
against that which he belieues by Faith, and yet does not resist, such a doubt
is voluntary, and destroys true Faith, but makes nothing for your purpose, who
speak of a doubt resisted, and not voluntary. If he resist, then he rejects
the Doubt, and so doubts not, but retains his former undoubted assent, with
advantage of a new victory against the temptation to doubt; and it is nonsense,
or implicatio in adjecto, to talk of doubting, and resisting, at the same
time. For if it be resisted, it is not accepted, nor is it a doubtful assent,
or secunda operatio intellectus, which affirms or denies by way of judgment,
but is a mere apprehensio, or prima operatio of our understanding,
representing to our mind a doubt, which by resistance is stopped from passing to
a judgment; as when David said [Psalm. 52.1.] The foolish man said in his heart;
there is no God; these words, there is no God, affirmed by the foolish man,
were in respect of the Prophet, represented only by way of apprehension, and
not of judgment, or affirmation that it was so: And Aristotle teaches, that men
may perhaps think they believe express contradictions, when indeed they only
apprehend them without any assent, or belief. How easy then is it to conceive,
that a doubt offered, but resisted, neither is, nor can be destructive of
infallible Faith, seeing the resistance is cause that we do not doubt? But now,
if we suppose that such a doubt is not perceyved to be repugnant to our Faith,
one may assent to it, because one may believe contradictions, not understood to
be such, as daily experience teaches; but then that doubt is not voluntary as
it stands in opposition with Faith, (in regard that no such opposition is
represended to our understanding) and so it is no way destructive of Faith.

55. I need not say any more for confutation of this Objection. Yet I deem not
this an unprofitable Demand; upon what ground you say, Every least doubting in
any matter of Faith (if it be infallible) though resisted and inuoluntary, is a
damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long as it lasts, of true and saving
Faith? For, one act formally excludes only that which is naturally opposite to
it; and therefore why should One involuntary and inculpable Act be destructive of
all saving Faith? If the Doubt be voluntary and culpable, it destroys, I
grant, all true Faith, both Habitual, and actual: though even in this case of
sinful error you must say the contrary, and so overthrow your own argument:
you, I say, who [Pag. 368. N. 49.] teach, that a voluntary and sinful error
against one Article of Faith may stand with true Faith, and belief of other
Points, and the contrary doctrine you term a vain and groundless fancy; and
therefore in your Principles one may believe with absolute certainty some Points,
(V. G. that there is a God, or that Christian Religion is probable, which you
pretend to believe with certainty; or the other examples which I specifyd above
out of your own doctrine) and yet doubt of euidency in some other point of
Faith; and so you must grant, that every inuoluntary doubt is not destructive
of all infallible and certain Faith, as you assumed in your Objection, which
now your self must answer.

56. Beside, you speak very confusedly in affirming, that every least
doubting, though resisted, would be destructive so long as it lasts, of all
true and saving Faith, without declaring, whether you speak of Habitual or
actual Faith, or of both. Acts, if we speak naturally, and Philosophically,
do not directly and immediately destroy the contrary Habit, and therefore there is
no reason why an involuntary doubt, should destroy the Habit of Faith. But you
will say; At least every Doubt is destructive of the Act of Faith. because we
cannot at the same time doubt of that thing which we believe with Certainty,
whether such a doubt be voluntary, or inuoluntary. I Answer: I have said
already, that an inuoluntary doubt, or a doubt resisted, is not received in our
understanding, and therefore cannot exclude the contrary certain Act of Faith.
Yet if for declaring the matter, we will make an impossile supposition, that an
error inuoluntary, and consequently no sin, is received in our
understanding, I say, in that case it will not destroy the act of Divine Faith,
morally; but only physically (by a natural in compossibility, or
incompatibility in the same subject, or understanding) it hinders the exercise
thereof; which may happen, not only by such a doubt as we speak of, but also by
other lawful occasions, as sleep, serious application to some business
requiring a perfect attention, or by a resolution not to exercise an Act of
Faith in some circumstances, wherein one knows he is not obliged thereto; and
yet these things, and the like, which for the time exclude an Act of faith,
must according to your Objection, be damnable sins, as destructive of all
both infallible and probable Faith, because they are incompatible with the
actual exercise of any either certain, or only probable Assent. In how many
respects is your Objection proved to be weak, and contradictory to your self?

57. Object: 4. In the same Page 326. N. 4. you say: The same is invincibly
confirmed by every deliberate sin that any Christian committs; by any
progress in charity that he makes. For, seeing as S. John assures us, our faith
is the victory which ouercomes the world, certainly if the faith of all true
belieuers were perfect, (and if true faith be canable of no imperfection, if
all faith be a knowledge most certain and infallible, all faith must be
perfect; for, the most imperfect that is, according to your doctrine, if it be
true, must be most certain, and sure the most perfect that is, cannot be more
than most certain) then certainly their victory over the world, and therefore
over the flesh, and therefore over sin, must of necessity be perfect; and so it
should be impossible for any true believer to committ any deliberate sin; and
therefore he that committs any sin, must not think himself a true believer.
Besides, seeing faith works by Charity, and Charity is the effect of faith:
Certainly if the cause were perfect, the effect would be perfect, and
consequently as you make no degrees in faith, so there would be none in
Charity, and so no man could possibly make any progress in it, but all true
believers should be equally in Charity, as in faith you make them equal: and
from thence it would follow vnavoidably, that whosoever finds in himself any
true faith, must presently persuade himself that he is perfect in Charity: and
whosoever discovers in his Charity any imperfection, must not believe that he
has any true faith.

58. Answer: I have had the patience to set down your Objection at large,
(though the full substance thereof might have been expressed in very few words)
notwithstanding your repetitions, inferences, and inuolutions, which I will
endeavor to unfold by degrees, and lay open the weakness of your Argument, in
these following reflections. (...), In conformity to your own Argument, you
must grant, that your victory over the world, the flesh, and sin, as also
your Charity, cannot be perfect, because your faith being acknowledged to be
only probable, is supposed by your self to be imperfect, since you say, we
must hold that our faith is perfect, because we believe it to be certain. And
who would not detest such an imperfect faith, if it were but for this cause,
that your Charity cannot be perfect with it, if your own Argument be good? And
here you put me upon a necessity to add a new Argument for the infallibility
of Faith, to all the reasons alleged above. For, seeing men may by Gods
assistance overcome the world, and be perfect in Charity, both which according
to you, are measured by Faith, it follows that they may have perfect faith;
and if you can say, as you do; If the cause were perfect, the effect would be
perfect, much more I may say; if the cause be imperfect, the effect (which
never exceeds the perfection of the cause) must be imperfect; and so if your
faith, which you say is cause of our victory, and of Charity, be imperfect, the
effect must be imperfect. And therefore, seeing the effect of victory, and
Charity in Christians, may be, and in many de facto is perfect, it follows
clearly, that they have not a mere probable, but an infallible perfect faith.

59. Secondly, your Objection still goes upon that ground, that there are no
Degrees of perfection in Faith; which I have demonstrated to be evidently
false, and that all Faith is of the same kind, but not of the same Degree;
besides that it has the imperfection of obseurity, and for that cause does not
so convince the understanding, but that it may be resisted, and the contrary
believed: And therefore you cannot infer upon equality of faith in all true
Belieuers, that our victory of the world must be equally perfect in all.

60. Thirdly, if you had cited the testimony of S. John as you ought, the
weakness and impertinency of your Argument would have clearly appeared. His
words are; [1. Joan: 5. V. 3.4.5.] This is the Charity of God, that ye keep
his commandments, and his commandments are not heavy. Because all that is
borne of God, ouercomes the world: and this is the victory that ouercomes the
world, our faith. Who is it that ouercomes the world, but he that belieues that
Jesus is the son of God? Where it is clear, that S. John speaks of faith with
Charity, which is called by Divines Fides formata, faith informed with Charity,
by which we keep the commamdements, as he says [V. 3.] This is the Charity of
God, that ye keep his commandments. And [V. 4.] All that is borne of God,
ouercomes the world: Now we are borne or regenerated to a new life, or Being,
by justifying Grace, and the Gifts which are given with it, of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; and therefore he adds; This is the victory which ouercomes the world,
our faith, that is, such a faith as the Regenerate, or they who receive a new
life, have, or a living faith working by Charity.

61. Fourthly, according to this true sense, your Objection is wholly
impertinent, as speaking of a naked faith taken alone as it goes before
Charity; as like wise it does not prove that such a naked faith does
necessarily bring with it Charity, and so is the victory over the world. For,
what consequence is it to say? Faith as informed with Charity, cannot be
without Charity, or is the victory over the world. Therefore Faith taken by it
self, and considered only according to its own nature and essence, and
abstracting from Charity, is inseparable from Charity, and the victory over the
world. An Argument, no better than this: The Body with the soul, lives and
makes a man: Therefore the Body of it self lives and makes a man; which is
directly against S. James [C. 2. V. 26.] saying: Even as the body without the
spirit, is dead; so also faith without works, is dead. This appears also by
what S. John says (V. 5.) Who is he that ouercometh the world, but he that
belieueth that Jesus is the son of God? Which must be understood of him who so
belieues in our Savior, as that he loves him, and keeps his comma^dements.
For, merely to believe Christ is the son of God, is but that Faith, which
Protestants call Historical, and unanimously teach that it does not justify,
nor is inseparable from Charity, nor is the victory over the world. And therefore
interpreters understand this Text of a living Faith, or joined with Charity.
And so this place makes against you, and proves that Faith of it self (though
never so infallible) is not the victory over the world. But the weakness of
this man's Socinian probable Faith forces him to reele from faith to faith; From
Historical, to Faith of working Miracles; From justifying faith to
Historical; From both to a No-faith, that is, to a faith so weak, that by it
a man may believe Christian Faith not to be true, as we noted against you by
occasion of the text of S. Paul about receiving him who is Weak in faith.

62. Fistly, the whole force of your Argument must rely upon the truth of this
Proposition; Whatsoever the understanding proposes to the will with absolute
certainty, as a thing to be done, the will cannot but follow the prescript of
the understanding; and therefore if Christian Faith be infallible certain, our
will must embrace what it proposes, and so overcome the world and sin, and be
perfect in Charity, which Principle to be palpably false, is evident by Reason,
Experience, Faith, and by the Doctrine of all Protestants, at least for as much
as concerns that kind of Faith whereof we speak, that is, Historical Faith.
Reason dictates, that notwithstanding the certainty of Faith, the understanding
may propose profitable, and delightful objects. For these things have no
repugnance, but do consist together: It is certain that this object is
honest, and that the same object is unpleasant, repugnant to sense, honor,
profit, etc: and therefore the will placed between these different motives, the
understanding, which proposes them all, has no power to necessitate the will
to any of them, it being represented with as great certainty, that such an
object is difficult, unpleasant, or unprofitable, as it appears honest and
Virtuous. Neither does certainty in the understanding, necessitate us more to
embrace it as honest, than the like certainty does necessitate us to fly from
it as unpleasant; especially considering that Faith is obscure, and alluring
objects are clear, even to sense; Faith respects things to come, or else above
the reach of our understanding; humane objections and objects are of things
present, or not far of. Befides, if certainty did impose a necessity, it must
follow, that at the same time we must effectually embrace the same object as
honest, and fly from it as unpleasant, which is impossible. We must therefore
say, that it remaynes in the will, to determine it self to which part it
pleases, having sufficient direction from the understanding for either side.
Sins were wont to be divided into sins of Ignorance, and of Knowledge, that
is, committed by Ignorance, or with knowledge: but now if certain knowledge of
good necessitate our will to embrace it, no sin can consist with certain
Knowledge of good, and so all sins are sins of ignorance: and that old
distinction of Philosophers, and Divines, must be corrected by this your new
Philosophy and Divinity.

63. As for Experience, who knows not, or rather who teeles not, that vulgar
saying: Video meliora, proboque; Deteriora sequor. I see that which is better,
and like it well, but follow that which is worse.

64. Lastly, Faith teaches, that we are endued with Free Will, which may
embrace, or reject, what is proposed by the understanding: Wherein all
Protestants, for our present purpose, agree with Catholics, both in regard
that they yeald Freedom of will to Angels, and Adam before their fall, who yet
believed by an infallible assent, that there was a God, and other mysteryes
revealed to them; as also because they profess that Historical Faith (and of
that Faith we speak) does not justify, nor infallibly bring with it Charity.
Therefore it does not necessitate our will. Yea even those Protestants who deny
Free Will, hold not that the will is necessitated by the Act of Faith which
directs, but by the effectual particular motion of Grace, which irresistably
draws it. Therefore from certainty of Faith, we cannot infer a necessary
cooperation of the will, or perfection of Charity. You pre^^^d to believe, or
know, wit^ (...) to be obayed in all things, and co^^^equently, that the wo^^d
(...) overcome; you may know with certainty, that the moral (...) ^ments,
forbidding Actions repugnant to the light, and law of natura^^eason, are to be
kept: You cannot but know certainly, in general, that all sin is to be
avoided: You teach, that men even by evidence of reason, are to believe with
infallible certainty, that they are firmly to believe the truth of Christian
Religion, and consequently that all the commands of that Religion are to be
observed: These things, I say, you believe, or know with certainty: and yet I
hope you will not grant, that you cannot but obey God in all things, and so
overcome the world; that you cannot but keep all the moral commandments;
that you cannot but avoid all sin; that you cannot but observe what is
commanded in Christian Religion: Therefore you must yield, that certainty in the
understanding, does not infer a necessity in the will; and so still be forced
to answer your own argument.

65. In the mean time, I cannot but note, how many damnable Heresies you here
join together, though contrary one to an other, and even to your self. For
example, of Pelagianisme, that the will may perform whatsoever the
understanding certainly judges ought to be done, which takes away the
necessity of Grace, or motion of the Holy Ghost. I said, that the will may
perform; but whereas you teach further, that it must of necessity do so, you
fall from Pelagianisme to a contrary extreme, by taking away Freewill (which
the very Socinians defend so far, that, to make men free, they make themselves
sacrilegious, in denying that God can see the future free Acts of our will)
(...) you take it away in a worse manner than Caluinists do, who conceive it
to be taken away by supernatural efficacious Grace, or by infused justifying
Faith: but your doctrine must take it away, by every certain knowledge, though
it be but natural, or by Historical fallible Faith, and historical Faith
according to Caluinists, is common to all Christians. And yet in another
respect, you fall into the very quintessence of Caluinisme, and puritanisme,
that. Faith once had, can never be lost: which is against moderate Protestants,
and yourselfe; with Socinians. For, if Faith necessarily give us perfect
Charity, and the victory over the world and sin, Faith it self which cannot
be lost without sin, is absolutely secured.

66. Neither can you answer, that your Objection goes not against all Faith,
but only impugneth an infallible Faith. For you grant certainty of faith to
diverse, as we have observed above, concerning them who are advanced to
certainty, and spirit of obsignation, or Confirmation, which are as many
according to you, who live as they believe; as also (...) ^postles, and those
who heard our Savior preaching, or (...) miracles; yea whosoever only belieues
or knows with certainty, that there is a God, and that he is to be obeyed,
must of necessity, work according to his knowledge, which if he do, he cannot
loose the belief of God, nor ever become an Atheist, which, I fear, is too
much against experience. You must also agree with Calvinists in their Doctrine,
that only Faith justifyes, seeing as they, so you, teach, that it necessarily
brings with it charity, and good works. And to this same purpose, I still urge
your own assertio, concerning those to whom you granta Certainty in Faith, and
I suppose you will not grant that such men are justified by faith only, and
other Christians by some other means, V. g. justifyng inherent Grace, or with
Faith, Hope, and Charity: and therefore you must deny, that perfect Charity must
necessarily flow from an fallible Faith.

67. Sixthly you speak very imperfectly in saying* Charing is the effect of
Faith, if therefore the cause Were terfect, the effect would be perfect. For, the
Habit of Charity, being infused immediately by the Holy Ghost, is not the effect
of Faith, or of any Acts of our will, no nor of the Acts of Charity it self.
But if you speak of the Acts of Charity, they proceed from the Habit of
Charity; from the particular help and assistance of the Holy Ghost and from
our will elevated by such assistance, which is freely offered by God, and
freely accepted by the will, but in no wise proceeds necessarily from Faith,
whose office is only to direct and show the object, without any necessitating
influence. S. Paul says [1. Cor: 13.13.] The greater of these is Charity, and
who ever heard that the effect can be more perfect than the cause? Or if you
say, that Faith is not the total, but only a partial cause of Charity, which
therefore may be more noble than Faith it self, then, by what logike can you
infer, that Charity must be perfect because it is the effect of a partial
cause, less perfect than it self? Rather according to your discourse, joined
with the words of S. Paul, that, Faith is less perfect than Chatity, we must
say thus: Charity is the effect of Faith, and therefore feing the cause is
imperfect, the effect must be imperfect; which is directly opposite to your
inference, and intent. Besides, from what Philosophy can you learn, that when
some cause, or condition, concurrs to the production of an effect, not by it
self, but necessarily requires the company and cooperation of other causes,
that such a cause, or condition, can by it self alone produce such an effect?
But let us suppose Faith to be the cause of Charity, and by it self alone
sufficient for moving our will to Acts of Charity, does it follow, that it must
do so irresistibly, and in such manner as that it remain not in the power of
our will either to exercise no act at all, or to produce a more or less
perfect one? Remember your own distinction and words to Char: Maintained, in
your Page: 172. N. 71. That, a man may fall into some error, even contrary to
the truth which is taught him, if it be taught him only sufficiently, and not
irr-sistibly, so that he may learn it if be will, not so that he must and
shall vh^ther he will or no. N^w who can a sertaine me that the spirits
teaching is not of this nature? Or how can you po^^^y (...) it with your
d^^tr^ne of free w^ll in beti^uing, if it be ^ot of (...) nature? And you
having endeavored to prove this out of diverse places of Scripture, conclude;
God may teach, and the Church not learn; God may lead, and the Church be
resrachry and not follow,

68. Now I retort this Argument, and ask, why a man may not fall into some
error contrary to the truth which he was taught, and which once he believed,
and committ some sin which Faith dictates not to be committed, if Faith teach
him only sufficiently and not irresistibly; and who can assertaine me, that the
direction of Faith is not of this nature? and so faith may teach and lead, and
man be refractory, and not follow, and faith remain without perfect Charity.

69. Seventhly, you say Page: 329. N. 7.] that, the Apostles believed with
certainty, and [P. 37. N. 9.] you grant that they who live as they believe,
will be advanced to as great a certainty, as those which heard the Gospel from
Christ himself, which saw with their eyes etc: and yet I suppose you will not
deny, but that the Apostles, and those other, might increase in Charity, and
that, Faith in their vnderstaning did not impeach the freedom of their will,
without which there can be no obedience, which as your self teach [Pag. 329.
N. 7.] can hardly have place where there is not possibility of disboedience, as
there is not when the vnstandin? does all, and the will nothing: Therefore
certainty of belief, stands well with freedom to exercise Acts of Charity with
great or little perfection, or to committ deliberate sins.

70. But let us suppose, that Certainty in Faith, brings with it a necessity of
Charity: what will follow, but that such necessitated acts shall not be capable
of praise, or reprehension, which can only belong to free Actions: and then how
can Charity here be perfect, if upon just account, and due consideration, it
be not so much as laudable? Or how can any be commended for not committing a
deliberate sin, which he cannot committ; I sind in holy Scripture praise
given, and eternal glory assured to him, who could transgress, and did not
transgress; do evil, and did it not. [Eccli: 31. V. 9.10.] but who will
commend one, qui non potuit transgredi and non est transgressus, non potuit
facere mala, and non fecit; Who could not transgress, and did not transgress,
could not committ evil, and did not committ it? From whence follows, that
your Assertion (if faith were infallible, Charity must needs be perfect) is so
far from being true, that it should not be so much as laudable, that is, the
Habit of Charity, could not produce any Actions capable of praise: or if such
Actions be free, then it is in the power of the will to exercise perfect, or
remiss ones, or to reject Gods Grace, and abstain from all such Acts, and so
Charity shall not necessarily be perfect. Thus your Principles, and sequels,
plainly destroy themselves.

71. Eighthly, you teach, That, if faith were infallible, it should be
impossible for any true be^^euer to committ any d^^ikerate sin, and that in
such a man, Charity must be perfect, and as we make no degrees in faith, so
there would be none in Charity, and so none could possibly make any progress in
it, but all true belieuer's should be equally in Charity. In which words I find
such a connection, as in true language should be called a manifold
contradiction. First, in saying that such a man could not committ any
deliberate sin, you seem to suppose that he may committ indeliberate sins,
which being sins, must be voluntary and free, (though not always so perfectly
voluntary, as those which are committed with full deliberation or reflection)
and worthly of blame, and punishment, and he who committs, them in that
respect, loves God with less perfection than an other, who is more vigilant,
and committs such sins more seldom, and so all true belieuers should not be
equal in Charity. 2. If infallible faith take away freewill, it depriues men
of power or possibility to committ any sin at all, though never so
indeliberate: Or if it leave them with freewill, they may committ deliberate
sins. Therefore the difference, in this place, of deliberate and indeliberate
sins, is destructive of it self. 3. Whereas you say, that as we make no
degrees in faith, so there would be none in Charity: I answer; you should have
said the direct contrary; namely, that seeing you are not ignorant of our
Doctrine, that there be degrees in Charity, it must follow that we also believe
that there are degrees in faith, the Habit whereof is increased by every Act of
of Charity; as you also [Pag: 37. N. 9. teach, that faith is increased by
devout and humble prayer, and sincere obedience. But this point puts me upon a
demonstratiue Argument against you, in this manner. You teach, that if one live
as he belieues, the spirit of God will advance him to a certainty in faith. Now
let us propose two persons: th^one endued with infallible Faith, who according
to your Objection, must therefore be so perfect in Charity, that he can make no
progress therein, nor committ any deliberate sin: th^other with your probable
fallible faith, who yet by humble and devout prayers, and sincere obedience,
makes continual progress in Faith and Charity, and therefore will at length
arrive to a degree of Faith, and Charity, equal to him, whom we at first
supposed to be endued with infallible Faith, and perfect Charity, which being
not insinite, the other by daily improuement of faith, and Charity, may and
must at length arrive to the same degree of perfection; And then all your
Objections against us for our infallible Faith, do instantly fall heavy upon
your self, who will be demanded, whether such a man can committ any deliberate
sin, or make any progress in Charity? If he cannot do either of these, why do
you infer^ as absured in us, the very same sequel which your self must grant?
If he can do both these things, that is, committ deliberate sins, and make
progress in Charity, why do you say that he cannot do so? I do not see, how
you can avoid this Dilemma, and contradiction with your self.

72. Ninthly, you say: Whosoever fynds in himself any true faith, must
presently persuade himself that he is perfect in Charity: and whosoever
discouers in his Charity any imperfection, must not believe that he has any
true faith. But these or like sequeles, follow from your own, not from any
doctrine of ours. For, seeing on the one side you teach, that by Prayer,
progress in Charity, and obedience, men will arrive to the spirit of
obsignation and perfect faith; and on the other, that, faith is the cause and
measure of Charity, it follows, that whosoever fynds in himself such a
perfect faith, (which he must have, because he is obliged to live as he
belieues) must presently persuade himself, that he is perfect in Charity: and
whosoever discouers in his Charity any imperfection, must not believe that he
has such a faith, as he should have. Every one therefore is obliged to have a
perfect faith, both because he is obliged to live as he belieues, and to make
progress in Charity, which will be the cause of a perfect faith; as also
because Faith, according to you, is the cause of Charity, and so because we are
bound to keep the commandments, and to have Charity, which is the effect, we
must have faith, which is the cause: and so upon a double account, we are
obliged to a perfect faith, both as Charity, or living as we ought, is the
cause of faith, and as faith is the cause of Charity, to which all being
obliged, they are by consequence obliged to procure the cause thereof, which you
say is faith. Wherefore upon the whole matter, your probable faith, remains only
to such, as keep not the Commandments, nor live as they believe; which if
they did, God would raise them higher to a certainty. For, thus you say, [Pag:
37. N. 9.] God will accept of the weakest and lowest degree of faith, if it be
truing, and effectual to true obedience; and; rhat for sincere obedience God
may and will raise men higher to a Certainty. Therefore a primo ad vltimum, the
weakest Faith, if it be effectual to obedience, will bring men to certainty:
Therefore none de facto want such a certainty, except they whose faith is not
living nor effectual to obedience. And further; seeing you confess yours not to
be certain, it must follow, that it is not effectual to true obedience;
otherwise it would be improued to a Certainty.

73. But this is not all, that occurrs to be said in this point. Remember your
doctrine [Pag: 379. N. 70.] and elsewhere, that repentance necessary to
salvation, requires effectual dereliction and mortification of all vi^es, and
the effectual practice of all Christian v^rtues, which whosoever performs,
exercises very perfect obedience, and shall not fail of being raised higher to
a Certainty of faith. Therefore your fallible faith will remain only in sinners.
For, if one either give himself to sincere obedience, and so fall not into
great sin, or truly repent by your kind of repentance, he must pass to a
certainty of Faith, and so all in state of salvation, both Saints, that is, who
have not sinned mortally, and repentant sinners, cannot want the spirit of
Obsignation, as you call it, and certain Faith. Why then do you deceive the
world, and delude poor souls, with a fallible faith, or persuasion, and not
absolutely proclaim to the world, that infallible Faith is necessary, since
even according to your grounds, it is necessary for all sorts of people;

74. Now all your Objections, and my Answers, being impartially considered, let
any man judge whether your Arguments deserve such epithetons as you give them,
of demonstratiue, conuincing, invincible, clear, and the like; and what reason
you had to say [P. 326. N. 4.] These, you see, are strange, and portentuous
consequences, and yet the deduction of them from your doctrine is clear and
apparent, which shows this doctrine of yours, which you would fame have true,
that there might be some necessity of your Churches infallibility, to be indeed
plainly repugnant not only to Truth, but even to all Religion and Piety, sit
for nothing but to make men negligent of making any progress in faith or
Charity. And therefore I must entreat and adjure you, either to discover unto me
(which I take God to witness I cannot perceive) some fallacy in my reasons
against it, or never herafter to open your mouth in defense of it.

75. I answer: S. Paul had good reason to say, Scientia inflat: [1. Cor: 8.1.
Knowledge puffs up; it is a poisonous quality, making the person swell, his
Arguments, and all that he does or says, swell; and emptyness appear
greatness; it is a multiplying glass, that stirrs up in men's fancyes, strange
and huge apparitions, from nothing. But Sir, remember that your Objectio^s make
no more against Us Catholics, than Pictesta^ts, who profess Christian Religion
to be infallible, and, I believe, will not believe your bare word, that these
consequences are clear: Christian Historical Faith is infallibly true:
Therefore it must be lost by any least doubting, though resisted, (that is, by a
no-doubt, as I have showed) it must be incompatible with any deliberate sin:
it must bring with it Charity so perfect, that we can make no progress therein.
For my part, I do in no wise understand such deductions, nor how any man of
understanding should take them for good, as I have showed more than
sufficiently; though yet I must add, that though the consequences which you
pretend to deduce from our doctrine, be strange and portentuous in themselves,
yet to you they ought not to seem so or at least ought not to be publikly
avouched by you for such. For, besides that the very same consequences, which
you deduce from our doctrine, follow from your own assertions, (as I have
proved) answer, I beseech you these few Demands. 1. Whether it be more
convenient, that true Divine Faith should be inconsistent with an involuntary
Doubt, (which you infer against us as a great absurdity) or, that it should be
compatible with a voluntary, sinful, damnable, not only Doubt, but positive
assertive Error; as you teach (Page 368. N. 49.) and call the contrary
doctrine a vain and groundless fancy, as I observed above; or that it may
stand with an assent, that probably it may be false; or, with a preparation of
mind to forsake it, if seeming better reasons offer themselves against it, tha^
you conceive your self to have for it, which, for ought you know, may happen,
as I showed above. 2. Whether it be worse, that all should of necessity be
perfect in charity, by an Infallible Faith, or that none can be perfect; as it
ineuitably follows out of your Tenets put together; That, Faith is only
probable and fallible, and yet that the measure of our victory over the world,
and of our charity, must be taken from Faith, which you say is the cause of
charity, and the effect cannot be more perfect than the cause. Besides, your
brethren the Calvinists believe, that men are justified by a sirme and certain
Faith that they are just, and that charity and good works are inseparable from
such a Faith: and then seeing according to your own words, if the cause be
perfect, the effect must be perfect, and that the cause of charity is (in their
opinion) perfect, that is a sirme and certain Faith, it follows, that their
charity must of necessity be perfect, and that no just man can make any
progress therein. 3. Whether it be more absurd, to hold an impossibility of
committing any deliberate sin; or to believe that all our best actions are
deadly sins. Or whether it be worse to teach, that one cannot break the
commandments, which you, against all truth, impute to us, Or, that he cannot
keep them, even with the assistance of Gods grace, which is the common
doctrine of Protestants. Thus then, it is not our doctrine, but the errors of
you and your brethren, that must in many respects make men negligent of making
any progress in Faith or charity. And what a Paradoxe is this? A weak and
fallible Faith makes men diligent in making Progress in charity, and a strong
infallible Faith is fit for nothing but to make men negligent of making any
progress in Faith or Charity, as yon are pleased strangly to speak, directly
against the admonition of S. Peter, (1. Pet: 5.) cui resistite fortes in Fide,
whom resist, strong in Faith: Not weak in Faith, as he should have spoken
according to your portentuous Divinity. Morover, since you object against us,
that, if Faith be infallible, men cannot increase in charity, and yet
yourselfe, (Page 36. N, 9.) Teach, that the spirit of God being implored by
devout and humble prayer and sincere obedience, may and will by degrees advance
his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence beyond their
certainty of evidence, and make them know what they did but believe, (Which
certainty, according to your Objection against us, must be cause that they
cannot increase in charity) what will follow, but that, men will be not only
careless, but fearful to pray, to be obedient, and exercise acts of charity,
least by degrees they be advanced to a certainty of knowledge, and loss of
freewill, and a period in charity, and be as it were settled in termino, while
they are in via, or without possibility to grow better by any endeavor of
their own, or exhortations or others; And thus their obedience and charity
being cause of such a certainty in Faith, and this certainty hindering all
progress in charity, we must infer a primo ad vltimum, that charity is most
prejudicial and pernicious to charity itself. These are the fruits of your
Doctrine, and consequences of your Objections against us.

76. Object 5. To prove that Faith cannot be certain, if it be obscure, you
spend many words (Page 329. N. 7.) but bring no reason besides a mere resolute
assirmation, that it is so. And (Page 330 N 7.) you say, Look what degree of
assent is infused into the understanding, at least the same degree of evidence
must be infused into the object. And for you to require a strength of credit
beyond the appearance of the objectes credibility, is all one as if you should
require me to go ten miles an hour upon a horse that will go but five; to
discern a man certainty through a mist or cloud that makes him not certainly
discernable; to hear a sound more clearly than it is andible; to understand a
thing more fully than it is intelligib^e: and be that does so, I may well
expect that his next injunction will be, that I must see something that is
invisible, hear something mandible, understand something that is ^holly
unintelligible. And; That I should believe the truth of any thing, the truth
whereof cannot be made evident with an evidence proportionable to the degree of
Faith requirea of me, this, I say, far any man to be bound to, is unjust, and
unreasonable, because to do it is impossible. And N. 8. I deny that it is
required of us to be certain in the highest degree, infallibly certain of the
truth of the things which we believe; for this were to know, and not believe,
neither is it tessible unless our evidence of it, be it natural, or
supernatural, were of the highest degree. And Page 371: N. 51. The evidence of
the thing assented to, be it more, or lesie, is the reason and cause of the
assent in the understanding. Here you see what he affirms, without so much as
offering to give any reason or proof And therefore.

77. I Answer: as you object by merely affirming, so I might answer, by simply
denying. But I will allege a proof above all exception; which is, your own
doctrine delivered more tha^ once. (Page: 36. 37. N. 9. The spirit of God may
and will advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence
beyond their certainty of evidence. And: P. 112 N. 154. Gods spirit, if he
please, may work more, a certainty of adherence beyond a certainty of
evidence. Behold a certainty of adherence beyond the certainty of evidence.
(And, Page 37. N. 9.) To those that believe, and live according to their Faith,
God gives by degrees the spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which makes
them know (though how, they know not) what they did but believe. If these men
know, (though how, they know not,) why do you impugn divine Faith, which is
the Gift of Gods Spirit, and all good Christians believe, and in a manner feel
to be infallible, because you do not understand or know the how, or manner
thereof? Why do you not say: I believe infallibly; and though I know not how,
yet it is sufficient that I know my Faith is from God, who by his particular
Grace, can do more than I can comprehend? Why are you not as reasonable to the
old infallible Faith, taught, and believed by all Christians, as you are to
your new proselytes, who, you say, will be advanced to a certainty above
evidence? And whereas you say, that this were to require you, to go ten miles
upon a horse that will go but sive; to hear a sound more clearly then it is
audible; to understand a thing more fully than it is intelligible, in stead of
proving, you do but beg the question, and suppose that nothing is certainly
intelligible or credible, unless it be evident, which is the very point
controverted, and we affirm, that our understanding, may in this sense go ten
miles, though in dark; may intellectually hear a found which is audible, and
understand a thing intelligible, though not evident. And in this manner your
self must say, and answer for those who you believe may attain a certainty
beyond evidence; and yet you will not yield that they understand a thing more
fully, than it is intelligible. And then you must retract what you said, that,
to believe a thing, the truth whereof cannot be made evident with an evidence
proportionable to the degree of Faith required of me, is unjust, because to do
it is impossible. S. Paul defines Faith to be Argumentum non apparentium, an
Argument of things which appear not: Therefore things not evident, must be
believed: and to say, that they cannot be believed with certainty, though they
do not appear with evidence, is injurious to Gods Power, as if he could not by
his special supernatural Grace and motion, which is required to every Act of
Faith, supply the want of evidence, Neither can there be showed, any such
essential conjunction, between evidence, and certainty, that this may not
consist without that. There may at first sight appear some show of repugnance,
between evidence and obscurity; certainty, (which seems to exclude all
possibility of fear that the contrary be true) and probability (which of it
self excludes not such fear) and yet your self say (page: 25. N. 29.) whether
knowledge and Opinion touching the same thing, may stand together, is made a
Question in the schools: and it is very commonly held, that they may stand
together, in the same understanding: neither are there wanting very learned
men who think they may be consistent in the same Act. If then evidence and
obscurity, certainty and probability, may stand together, what ground can you
bring to prove an incompatibility between Certainty, and Obscurity, which carry
no show of repugnance, in any kind of those Oppositions, which Logicians have
set down? Perhaps you have an erroncous imagination, as if the obscurity of
Faith ought to be compared with the evidence of science, or Demonstration, as a
privation with the opposite form, as darknees with light, or as ignorance or
Error with knowledge; and so conceive it impossible, that such obscurity can
sland with certainty, which must needs bring with it some intellectual light.
Which imagination you seem to discover (Page: 325. N. 2.) where you say, That
Science and knowledge properly taken are synonym^us terms, and that a knowledge
of a thing absolutely unknown is a plain implica^cy I th^nke are things so
plain, that you will not require any proof of the^. In which words you must
suppose, that the objects of faith are absolutely unknown, as if Faith were a
privation of all light or knowledge: and yet with little consequence to your
own words, (Page: 25. N. 29. you say:) whether knowand Opinyon touching the
same thing, may stand together, is made a Question in Schools: which
according to you, could be no question, if opinion had no knowledge or light at
all, because the knowledge of a thing absolutely unknown, is, say you, a plain
implicancy. Which words, as I said of Faith, seem to suppose, that Opinion is
a privation, or negation of knowledge, or evidence. But in this, you are much
mistaken. For the obscurity of Faith, ought not to be compared with the light
of science, as a privation which the form opposite to it: But as a thing less
perfect, with an other more perfect, or as a small light with a greater. Every
Act of our understanding, which is the eye of our soul, must involve some
light, or clearness, as every, even imperfect sight of our corporal eye, is
endued with some evidence, which, in comparison of a more perfect sight, or act
of seeing, may be termed obscure, though in it self, it has both some
clearness, and an absolute certainty, that it sees that object which it sees,
though dimly, and as it were through a mist, or in some darkish place. As S.
Peter (Ep: 2. C. 1.19.) compares Faith to a candel shining in a dark place.
Which words do excellently express, both the shining or light, and also the
obscurity of Faith. Since then Faith is endued with some light, or evidence, no
reason can be given, why such a light may not be joined with certainty by the
most prudent command of the will, which keeps our understanding steadfast to
the Object, and the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which elevates, and enables it to
an Act proportionable to the Divine Revelation, and Testimony. Nay rather,
abstracting from that which we find by usual, and natural course of things,
or experience, (which ought not to be put in balance with Gods Omnipotency, it
is harder, to give a reason, why they may not stand together naturally, than
to imagine with any color of reason, that they are incompossible, by a
supernatural assistance, and grace of the holy Ghost. And therefore Divines with
the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas only say, that our understanding without
evidence, is like to a stone out of its center, but not that it cannot possibly
be made sure of any truth without it.

78. But, you say, [P. 330. N. 7.] Whatsoever effect is wrought merely by
means, must be are proportion to, and cannot exceed the virtue of the means
by which it is whrought: as nothing by water can be made more cold than water,
nor by fire more hot than fire, nor by honey more sweet than honey, nor by
gall, more bitter than gall,

79. The Answer to this Objection is very easy, by granting all that you
infer, if you mean that the Assent which we give merely for the Arguments of
Credibility, considered in themselves, is no stronger than those Arguments can
make it. This we willingly grant, but absolutely deny, that Divine Faith is
measured by those Arguments, and not by Divine Revelation, and Gods
supernatural Grace. And so your example of sire, water, honey, and gall prove
only, that Christian Faith cannot be stronger than Gods Testimony, and Grace,
which are the causes of Faith; which no man denies. This Answer is easy and
clear; but yet by way of supererogation, I will add these considerations,
which will show that your examples make against your self. First: A thing by
water may be made more cold than water etc: if water, or fire be elevated by
Divine Power, to work above their own natural forces, and produce in an
other subject, more intense cold or heat, than they have in themselves. For,
as by miracle fire may be hindered from producing any heat, or other natural
effect, so it may be enabled to produce more perfect effects, than it could
have done by its own power. Thus all your instances may be applied against
your self; That as fire may be elevated to effects above it self, so our
understanding may be raised above the assent, which it can receive from the
Arguments of Credibility, by a pious and prudent command of the will, and
particular motion of the Holy Ghost. 2. Although the heat of fire, coldness of
water etc: considered in themselves, cannot make any thing more cold, or hot,
than themselves, yet if they be taken as propertyes of water or fire, ordained
to make way to introduce the substance of fire and water in to other subjects,
they concur as dispositions to the production of things more perfect than
themselves, that is, the substantial forms of water and sire, in such sort as
those forms cannot but follow those dispositions: and in this sense, a thing
by heat may be made more hot than the heat it self, in regard that such a
heat, necessarily introduces fire which is the fountain, and eminently more
hot, than any particular heat proceeding from it. Now in proportion to this
your example. I say, that, as such Accidents as are dispositions to a
substantial form, concur to an effect more noble than themselves; so
Arguments of Credibility, as they point at Divine Revelation (as S. John showed
a greater Authority than his own, by bearing witness of our Savior) may
dispose us to an Assent of Christian Faith, whereby they may truly be said to
exceed themselves, as they are merely considered in themselves, without further
relation to a more noble Form, or Assent, to which they prepare us; because
they informing our understanding, that there is good reason, and obligation, to
believe some Truths as witnessed by God, the will is obliged, under pain of
damnation, effectually to move the understanding, to the belief of such
Articles, with an Assent proportionable to that supreme Authority, which the
understanding not being able to do by its own forces, and God commanding
nothing impossible, there cannot be wanting the necessary concurrence and
special Grace of the Holy Ghost, for producing an Act of Divine,
supernatural, infallible Faith.

80. Your self say, [Pag: 331. N. 9.] There is abundance of Arguments
exceedingly credible, inducing men to believe the truth of Christianity: I say,
so credible, that though they cannot make us evidently see what we believe, yet
they evidently convince that in true wisdom and prudence, the Articles of it
deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as things revealed by God, and
therefore, say I, with an Assent more certain than can proceed from humane
Authority, or mere Arguments of Credibility. 3. Diverse great Philosophers
hold, that Accidents are not only dispositions to the substantial Form, but
real causes thereof, immediately producing it, as they are instruments of the
Principal substantial Agents, and make up as it were one total Cause with
them. According to this Philosophy, your instances make against your self, and
do confirm the Doctrine of some grave Divines, that if we consider the
Arguments of Credibility, not as they are mere inducements, precedent, and
disposing to Faith, only showing the object thereof, but as they integrate the
Formal object, or Divine Revelation, we must say, that they are elevated and
raised up to be part of the object, and immediately causes of the Assent of
Faith, not of their own force or taken alone, but joined with, and conveying
to our understanding the Divine Revelation, whereby they grow to be the voice
and testimony, or as it were real letters of God speaking to men by them. For
which cause, S. Paul [Heb: 2.4.] affirms miracles to be a certain speech of
God, saying: God withal witnessing by signs and wonders: where Theodoretus
says, that God by miracles gives a testimony to preaching Miracles therefore are
in some manner the very voice of God. Whence, S. Austine [Ep: 49. Quaest. 6.]
absolutely says: God speaks by wonderful works. And [Marc: vlt:] it is God
cooperating, and by signs confirming what they spoke. And [Ioan 10.] Christ
our Lord said concerning his own works; They give testimony of me. Therefore,
say these Divines, Arguments of Credibility, may be raised above themselves;
And so your examples, and instances make nothing against us, but do confute
your self. Which contradicting of your self, as in many other occasions, so
here also forces me to stay yet a little, in observing a couple of your
contraryetyes, or contradictions.

81. The one is in these words, [Pag: 329. and 330.] If you speak of an
acquired, rational, discursive faith, these Reasons which make the object
seem credible, must be the cause of it. If you speak of a supernatural
infused faith, then you either suppose it infused by the former means, and
then that which was said, must be said again, etc: Do not these words distroy
themselves? Or what sense can they bear? An acquired, rational, discursive
faith caused by Reasons which make the object credible, and a supernatural
infused faith, infused by the former means, that is, by the Reasons which make
the object seem credible? If an acquired, rational, discursive faith be
caused by the Reasons which make the Object credible, and a supernatural
infused faith be caused by the same means and Reasons, how do you distinguish
a faith so acquired, from a faith in the same manner infused? Or rather, how
can it be a supernatural infused Faith, if it be caused by the same means, by
which an acquired discursive faith is caused? In a word how is the same faith
acquired, and supernaturally infused.

82. Your other contradiction, I find (Page: 36. and 37. N. 9.) And (Page: 112.
N. 154.) in both which places, you grant to some a certainty of adherence
beyond a certainty of evidence, and yet in the former places you say of such
men, that the spirit of obsignation or confirmation makes them know what they
did but believe. Now if they know that they did but believe, how is their
certainty of adherence beyond their certainty of evidence, seeing you put such a
knowledge as is more than Faith, which implies obscurity, and consequently such
a knowledge is endued with evidence; and yourselfe (Page: 325. N. 2.) say: He
that does barely and merely believe, does never know, and that science and
knowledge are synonymous terms. Therefore you speak of an evident knowledge; and
then I say how comes their certainty of adhesion to be beyond their certainty
of evidence; Or how can you speak of a certainty of adhesion beyond the
certainty of evidence. Who (Page: 330. N. 7.) say, That power which infuseth
into the understanding assent, must also infuse Evidence into the object: and
look what degree of assent is infused into the understanding at least the same
degree of evidence, must be infused into the object; If at least the same
degree of evidence must be infused into the object which is in the Assent, how
can the Assent be beyond the evidence of the object?

83. To these your contradictions, I add your saying [Pag: 37. N. 9.] What God
gives as a reward to believers, is one thing: and what he requires of all men,
as their duty is an other: and what he will accept of, out of grace and favor,
is yet an other. To those that believe, and live according to their faith, he
gives by degrees the spirit of Obsignation and confirmation, which makes them
know (though how, they know not) what they did but believe. He requires of all
that their faith should be proportionable to the Motives and Reasons enforcing
to it: he will accept of the weakest and lowest degree of faith, if it be
living and effectual unto true obedience. In which words, you distinguish
three sorts of persons, (which yet according to your own words, must fall to
be the same) First of them who believe and live according to their faith; 2. of
those who perform what is required of them as their duty; and 3. of them whose
faith God will accept out of grace and favor. For, to believe, and live
according to their faith; to have a faith effectual to obedience, and working
by love, is required of all as their duty; such a faith, I say, is required,
and will be accepted by the law which God has prescribed [Matt: 19. V. 17.] If
thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, and no less will be
accepted out of Grace and Favor; Otherwise it should be, and not be required:
and so your triple distinction of persons destroys it self, and ends in one
only sort.

84. I would gladly go forward to your other Objections; but first you must
give me leave to confute and turn against your self a saying, which has too
much of the insolent and injourious against true Christian Faith, in these
words, (Page 329. N. 7.) Your Faith, if you please to have it so, let it be a
free, necessitated, certain, uncertain, evident, obscure, prudent, and
folish, natural and supernatural unnatural assent.

85. All this groundless insulting, I will retort against your self, eve^ out
of your own grounds, and jointly will show that it belongs nothing at all to
our Faith. First, your Faith is free, and necessitated. Free, if you will stand
to your own express words (Page: 329. N. 7.) that there is obedience in it,
which you say can hardly have place where there is no possibility of
dis^b^dience* as there is not where the understanding dres all, and the will
nothing. And yet that it is Necessitated, is a clear truth; since you profess
to believe with no more certainty, than is evidently deduced from evident
Premises, and the understanding is no less necessitated to give assent to a
probable conclusion, drawn evide^tly from known probable Premises, than it is
forced to an assent of a certain Conclusion deduced from demonstratiue
Premises. (Page: 331. N. 8.) having set down some Principles, which you judge
to be evident and certain, you conclude thus; From all these Premises, this
Conclusion evidently follows, that it is infallibly certain that we are firmly
to believe the truth of Christian Religion. And in the same (Page 331. N. 9.)
There is an abundance of Arguments exceedingly credible, inducing men to
believe the truth of Christianity: I say, so credible, that though they cannot
make us evidently see what we believe, yet they evidently convince that in true
wisdom and prudence the Articles of it deserve credit, and ought so be
accepted as things revealed by God. therefore there is convincing evidence for
the truth of Christian Articles, as far as you believe them. And (Page: 36. N.
9.) you affirm that God requires of all, that their Faith should be
proportionable to the motives and Reasons enforcing to it. If the Reasons
enforce to the Conclusion, how is it not necessitated; Therefore your Faith is
both free according to your own words, and necessitated according to truth in
your grounds; which is also convinced by your saying, that certainty cannot be
without evidence: And therefore the Faith of your choice elevated people, which
you say is certain, must be evident, and consequently not free. But our Faith
raising us above the evident Arguments of Credibility, remains free, and is in
no sense necessitated.

86. II. For your epithetons, of being certain and uncertain: we profess and
believe nothing more certainly, than that our Faith is certain, and not
capable either of falsehood, or uncertainty. But your Book is Chiefly employed
to prove your Faith not to be certain, and we are well content it be so. Yet
if you remember what you say of your choysest persons and best Believers, that
they have a certainty beyond evidence, and yet expressly teach, that certainty
cannot be greater than the evidence of the Object, (as I showed above) it
follows clearly, that you give them a certainty which your self hold
impossible fot any to have, and so you give them certainty and not certainty,
that is a mere contradiction, or nothing.

87. III. For the denominations of Evident; Obscure; They agree not to our
Faith, which we believe to be Obscure, not evident, as I have explicated
elsewhere. But for your Faith, according to your grounds it must be both evident
and obscure, Evident, because you believe with no greater assent than you
receyve by evident Arguments; and accordingly you say (Page: 329. N. 7.) Nothing
is more repugnant, than that a man should be required to give most certain
credit unto that which cannot be made appear most certainly credible: And if
it appear to him to be so, then it is not obscure that it is so. According to
which, we must say, that nothing is more unreasonable, than that a man should
be required to give probable credit, unto that which cannot be made appear
probably credible; and if it appear to him to be so, then it is not obscure
that it is so. Therefore in your grounds, you must believe nothing to be true,
but according to the evidence which you have thereof; And therefore (Page 330. N.
7.) you say in express terms: That I should believe the truth of any thing,
the truth whereof cannot be made evident with an evidence proportionable to the
degree of Faith required of me, this, I say, for any man to be bound to, is
unjust and unreasonable, because to do it is impossible. Therefore your Faith is
evident in respect of the truth which you believe, according to the measure of
your belief thereof. If you did believe with certainty, a truth for which you
have only probable arguments, such a truth I grant were not evident in
proportion to your assent; but since you believe the truth of Christian
Religion, only with a probable assent, and that you have evidence of those
Reasons, which cause your assent to such a truth, it is clear that your Faith
is evident to you as far as your belief goes. And yet you must hold it to be
obscure; otherwise it could not be capable of obedience; as you pretend it to
be; because you say there can be no obedience where the understanding do all,
and the will nothing.

88 Fourthly: You say, our Faith is prudent and foolish. That our Faith is
prudent, and yours imprudent, Charity Maintained has proved (Chap. 6.) and yet
since you will say, that yours is prudent, it will remain imprudent indeed,
and prudent in your words. And indeed none but an enemy to Christianity, can
affirm our Faith and Religion to be imprudent, if he consider well, what a
deadly wound he gives to Christian Religion, by saying so. For, take from us
the Marks of a true Religion which are conspicuous in our Church only, you
depriv^ Christianity of Motives or Arguments of Credibility, sufficient to move
or oblige men to embrace it; where, I pray, except in our Church, can be found
Antiquity, perpetual Existence, and Visibility, Universality of Time, and
Place, Succession of Pastors, Unity, and effectual means to conserve it,
Sanctity, Miracles, Efficacy in the conversion of Gentiles, (which the Ancient
Fathers urge as a strong argument to prove the truth of Christian Religion,
against the Jews) Amplitude, and Glory of Christ's Kingdom, fortold by the
Prophets: The very name Catholic, with other Notes of the true Church, which
evidently agree to Our Church, and are manifestly wanting to Protestants,
unless they beg or usurp them from us, as the careful Reader must confess,
if he do but severally reflect on them. While therefore you blaspheme, the Faith
of our Church to be foolish, you do in fact lay the same imputation on
Christian Religion. Seeing then you cannot without prejudice to Christian
Religion, affirm our Faith to be imprudent, and foolish, you must in good
consequence be content that your own bear that denomination. Besides, (Page
331. N. 10.) you say. Charity maintained was mistaken in making prudence not
only a commendation of a believer, and a justification of his Faith, but also
essential to it, and part of the definition of it, and did as if one being to
say what a man is, should define him a reasonable creature that has skill in
Astronomy. For as all Astronomers are men, but all men are not Astr^nomers, and
therefore Astronomy ought not to be put into the definition of men, where nothing
should have place but what agrees to all men: So though all that are truly
wise, (that is, wise for eternity) will believe aright, yet many may believe
aright which are not wise. By which words you give us to understand, that it
would not be very much prejudicall to your Faith to be imprude^t; as it is
nothing against the difinition of a man, that he is not an Astronomer. And who
would be of that Religion, and Faith, which confessedly may be imprudent and
foolish, whereas true Christian Faith must needs be prudent. And you were too
forward [to say no worse] in saying so freely, that Charit: Maintained was
mistaken therein. For, if Prudence be required to every true act of moral
virtue, shall we say, that true Faith may be imprudent? But you speak
according to your skill in Socinia^ and Pelagian Heresy, which denies that
every act of true Faith is essentially supernatural, and requires the
supernatural motion of the Holy Ghost, for the production thereof. For how can
an act supernatural in essence, be imprudent, since this is always a defect
only of man, and can never be a special effect of God, as all things
supernatural in essence are? Or how can the Holy Ghost particularly move, and
inspire us, to an inprudence, and lightnes^ of h^rt, the Holy Scripture saying,
[Eccles. 19.4.] He who soon believes, is light of hurt? We may, I grant,
think, that to proceed from the Holy Ghost, and to be a true act of Faith,
which is not such; but that a belief (all things considered) imprudent, should
be indeed a true act of Faith, produced by the Habit of Faith, and particular
impulsion of the Holy Ghost, you have not prooved, notwithstanding your
confident avouching that questionless your Adversary was mistaken; whereas
yourself was much mistaken in your example of having skill in Astronomy, which
is a quality wholly impertinent and unnecessary to a man, as prudence is not to
the acts of our Faith: Though yet indeed you will find, that Char: Maintained
[Part. 1. Chap: 6. N. 8.) Where he gives the Definition of Faith, does not so
much as mention Prudence.

89. But what do you answer to the argument of Char: Maintained, (Chap:.6 N.
32.) That the Faith of Protestants being imprudent and rash, cannot proceed
from Divine motion and grace. Nothing, but that by this reason all they that
believe our Religion, and cannot give a wise and sufficient reason for it, must
be condemned to have no supernatural Faith. Thus you, (Page 381. N. 74.) which
is nothing to our purpose. For we speak not of ability, to explicate or declare
to others the reason of our belief, which belongs to gratias gratis datas, but
of gratia gratum faciente, or prudence in order to the accepting Faith for
ourselves, which has a great latitude, and that which to one may be prudent,
would not be so to another, endued with more knowledge natural, or
supernatural, God judging of every one according to his particular
disposition, and readiness to embrace the object of Faith in the measure of
understanding communicated to him. But if indeed, all thing considered, we
suppose him to proceed imprudently, his assent shall not be a true Act of
Faith, for the reasons I a^^edgd, though such an assent, whereby the ice is as
it were broken in order to such an object, may Facilitate toward a true act of
Faith, when circumstances being altered, a prudent judgment may take up the
place of the former imprudent persuasion, and so God concur with his Grace to
a true assent of Faith. Neither does it import, that he who proceeds
imprudently, cannot discover in himself any difference between a prudent, and
imprudent assent; because in these hidden intellectual acts, we must proceed
by Reason, not by experience; as when a Pastor or Prelate proposes to his
subject two objects as matters of Faith, whereof one is indeed revealed, the
other not; the subject with equal prudence assents to both, without
experiencing any difference in those assents, and yet that which respects the
object not truly revealed, cannot be an act of Faith, but the other may be
such. And by this is answered what you have (Page: 331. N. 10.) of this same
point.

90. But now, that the Faith, even of your most select believers is imprudent,
appears by your own Principle, that, certainty in assent cannot be without
proportionable evidence in the Object. and yet you say, they have certainty
beyond evidence. Therefore they have a Faith in an impossible manner, and so are
imprudent in an eminent degree.

91. Your common probable Faith to be imprudent, I have proved hertofore,
because it being only probable, yet you pretend to prefer it be fore any
reason to the contrary, though seeming never so certain and convincinge, which
certain is against all reason. Therefore your Faith is imprudent; and seeing you
hold it to be prudent the conclusion must be, that it is prudent, imprudent.

92. Before I leave this point, I must ask you two little questions or Doubts.
First; what you mean in these words: Though all that are truly wise,) that is,
wise for eternity) will believe aright, yet many may believe aright which are
not wise. If they be truly wise who are wise for eternity, and whosoever
believe aright, are wise for eternity, (for as much as concerns their belief)
we must conclude, that all who believe aright, are truly wise; How say you then
that many who believe aright, are not wise. Secondly, I reflect a little on
your words (Page: 381. N. 74.) I have proved the Faith of Protestants as
certain and as prudent as the Faith of Papists; and therefore if these be
certain grounds of supernaturality, our Faith may have it as well as yours.
But I beseech you, where did Cha: Maintained say, that certainty and prudence
are grounds of supernaturality? He said only, that, if Faith be imprudent and
rash, it cannot proceed from Divine Motion and grace. Is it all one to say, if
an Action be prudent, it must be supernatural [which if it be taken in
general, is false, since an action may be prudent, and not supernaturall] and;
it cannot be supernatural if it be not prudent? What Logic teaches an
universal Affirmative Proposition to be simply converted, and from this, All
supernatural Acts are prudent, to infer; Therefore all prudent Acts are
supernatural: just as we have heard you saying. (Page: 331. N. 10.) All
Astronomers are men, but all men are not Astronomers. But it is more than time
that I go forward.

93. Fifthly: you calumniate our Faith, as a natural and supernatural
unnatural Assent. I answer, Our Faith is supernatural, not natural or
unnatural (though I wish you had explicated what you mean by unnatural)
because we acknowledge it to be Donum Dei, the Gift of God. But your faith is
indeed natural, being but a probable Conclusion evidently deduced from evident
probable Premises, as I have declared hertofore; and yet in words you pretend
that it is supernatural, [Pag. 409. ] And though; where you seek to vindicate
yourself from being guilty of taking away supernatural Faith; and (Page: 325.
N. 2.) where you will seem to admit the necessity of a supernatural belief;
though in truth you do not, but with Socinians deny that our Savior has
merited any thing for mankind, and so we receive no Grace by Christ; which was
that which the Holy Fathers, and General Councelles did detest and condemn in
wicked Pelagians Whereby it appears, that your Faith is indeed natural and yet
being pretended to be supernatural, comes to be natural, and supernatural.
And further, I pray you remember, what I observed above, concerning an
imaginary Faith of yours. (Page: 329, and 330. N. 7.) acquired and infused,
which is in effect natural, and supernatural. I must therefore conclude, that
not our, but your Faith is a free, necessitated; certain, uncertain; evident,
obscure; prudent and folish; natural, and supernatural assent.

94. Object: 6. [Pag: 37. N. 9.] As nothing availes with God but faith which
works by love: so any faith, if it be but as a grain of must araseed, if it
work by love, shall certain^y avail with him, and be accepted of him. Therefore
a faith absolutely certain is not necessary to salvation.

95. Answer. First: To work by love, is to keep Gods Commandments, of which
one is, that we believe as we ought. And for you to suppose, that we believe as
we ought, by a faith only probable, is a mere begging of the Question which you
should prove. For, although we should suppose that God had commanded no works
at all, (as we distinguish works from Faith) yet there would remain a most
strict command, under pain of damnation, to believe whatsoever is sufficiently
proposed as a truth revealed by God, with an Assent proportionable to the
Supreme Authority, and above all other Assents, that is, with an infallible and
immovable Assent. And indeed of this Precept of Faith, we may truly say; This
is the first Commandment; the performance whereof is the first step to all
merit, Obedience, Salvation; And as in the eating of the forbidden Apple,
though the matter in it self might seem small, yet the transgression was a
grievous sin, because that command was imposed by God to testify his Supreme
Dominion over man; so this Precept of Faith, exacting the Obedience of our
understanding, which is the first Power of our soul, does of it self oblige
in a most severe manner, even abstracting from all further works proceeding
from the will by direction of the understanding by Faith. For, God is Lord of
our understanding, and exacts obedience of it, no less than of our will.

96. Secondly, what you say of faith, if it be but as a grain of mustardseed;
is both impertinent, and against yourself. For, as I noted already, those Texts
of Holy Scripture clearly speak of Faith of Miracles* as of removing a
mountain into the sea; and not of Christian Faith necessary to salvation.
Neither by a faith like to a grain of mustardseed, is understood a weak,
probable, and fallible faith, like yours, but rather a very great and
effectual belief, able to remove mountains, and trees, as appears [Matt:
17.20. Luc: 17.6.] And S. Paul [1. Cor: 13.] shows, that this faith of
Miracles is very perfect, saying, If I should have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains etc: And our Savior declares that it is firm and certain,
(Matthew: 21. V. 21.) If you shall have faith, and stagger not, not only that of
the figtree shall you do, but and if you shall say to this mountain, Take up
and throw thy self into the sea, it shall be done. And (Matt: 13. V. 31.32.)
The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a mustardseed, which a man took and sowed in
his field. Which is the least surely of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is
greater then all herbs, and is made a tree, so that the fowls of the air
come, and dwell in the branches thereof. Where, learned interpreters say, that,
A mustard seed, especially in Syria, grows to be a tree, so that the birds of
the air do dwell in the branches thereof. This shows, that as faith is
compared to a grain of mustardseed, because it is little to sight, so also it
is compared to it for Vigor, Virtue, Acrimony and Strength, and in no wise for
Weakness, or any similitude with your fallible belief. Which yet appears more
clear, by the demand of the Apostles, (Matthew: 17. V. 8.) Why could we not cast
him out? And our Saviors answer N. 19. by reason of your incredulity; and then
brings that similitude of a mustardseed, as contraposed to their faith which
was but little: and so the Arabicus has, propter parvitatem sidei vestrae, by
reason of the littleness of your faith. But it cannot be doubted that the
Apostles had some faith, as you pretend to have, otherwise they would not have
attempted to cast out the Devil; Therefore the Faith which our Savior compares
to a mustardseed, and opposes to theirs, must be great and strong in it self,
though small in appearance, or little in comparison of some higher degree of
Faith. All which confutes your fallible faith, and shows not only that you
bring this example of a grain of mustardseed impertinently, but also that it
makes clearly against yourself, even though it were understood of Faith
necessary to salvation; in as much as it signifyes a great strength of Faith,
as far different from your Faith, as Certainty is distinguished from mere
Probability. Besides I pray you consider, that Faith of Mirakles, is not that
Faith which works by love, and so according to your own words, cannot avayle
with God, and can avayle with Men only to show how weak, impertinent, and
contradictorious to yourself your Arguments are, whereby you would prove, that a
weak Faith is sufficient for salvation, when a strong Faith of the same kind
(that is, of Miracles) is insufficient. This Answer serves for your other
instance of Him that cried, Lord I believe, help my incredulity. [Mar. 9.24.]
Where it is manifest, that He spoke of Faith of Miracles, namely, of having his
son dispossessed of the Devil.

97. Now if your probable Faith be not sufficient to work by Love, and fulfill
other commandments; which you cannot deny, who measure Charity by Faith, as
the effect is measured by the cause, and as you say, (Page 326. Nus 4.) Seeing,
as S. John assures us, our Faith is the victory which overcomes the world, if
the Faith of all true believers were perfect, then their victory over the world
and over sin, must of necessity be perfect: Much more we must say, according
to your ground; seeing Faith is the victory which overcomes the world, if your
Faith be not sufficient for salvation, your victory over the world and sin
cannot be sufficient for that end. This according to your principles.

98. But in true Divinity, I say; seeing God has so ordained, that Faith should
be the root and beginning of all Obedience, and Merit, if it self be not a
Faith sufficient for salvation, how shall it be the beginning of Obedience or
keeping all the other Commandments? God proceeds with order, and gives not
Charity, where he finds not Faith. I proved in the Introduction, that the
Commandments are not kept without Gods particular efficacious Grace, which
will not constantly be given to him who wants true Christian Faith. Nay, if
justifying Grace be necessary for keeping the Commandments for long time (as I
proved there) much more true Faith must be required to do it. Morover, besides
our obligation to keep the moral law, or of Nature, there are precepts
binding us to the exercise of supernatural Acts of infused virtues; for
example, Hope, and Charity: and how shall our will exercise supernatural Acts,
without a proportionable supernatural direction in our understanding? And if
the direction be supernatural it cannot be erroneous, but infallibly true, and
essentially different from your fallible assent, as I have been forced often to
repeat. But why do I endeavor to prove this point? I cannot doubt but if you
did believe that Christian Faith necessary to salvation, must be in it self
infallible, by the particular precept of faith, you would not say, a Faith only
probable could be sufficient to work by Love, and keep the other
Commandments. For, if it be supposed; not, be a true Faith, how can it work
by Love, or live, it self being more than dead, that is, an Assent which never
lived the life, or nature, or essence of divine Faith. Surely, if a Faith
believed to be infallible, does not restrain the wills and Passions of men,
what liberty would they take, if their thoughts could tell them, that Christian
Religion may prove not true, as in your doctrine it may?

99. Object: 7. (Page 37. N. 9.) Some experience makes me fear, that the Faith
of considering and discoursing men is like to be cracked with too much
strayning: and that being possessed with this false principle, that it is in
vain to belteue the Gospel of Christ, with such a kind or degree of assent,
as they yield to other matters of Tradition: And fynding that their Faith of it,
is to them indiscernable from the belief they give to the truth of other
stories, are in danger either not to believe at all, thinking not at all as
good as to no purpose, or else, though indeed they do believe it, yet to think
they do not, and to cast themselves into wretched agonyes and perplexityes, as
fearing they have not that without which it is impossible to please God and
obtain etern all happyness.

100 Answer: Blessed be our Lord, who has given us his Holy Grace, not to
follow our own fancyes, nor be tossed with every wind of Doctrine, but to rely
on the Rock of the Catholic Church, where I never knew any such men as you
talk of, nor do think any such can be found amongst Christians no; nor
amongst any who profess any Religion, (which all men conceyve to signify a true
and certain way of worshipping God) And who would make choice of a Religion
which he did not certainly believe to be true? unless he be first tempted and
tainted with Socinianisme, whereby being by his mere probable belief placed
betwee^ the certainty of Catholic Faith, and the No-religion of Atheists, is
in evident danger, or rather in a voluntary necessity to fall into Atheism,
unless he raise himself to our Catholic Certainty, as he may do by the
assistance of Gods Holy Grace, which is never wanting to us, if we be not
wanting to it. Do not yourself teach, that if one live as he believes (and
every one ought to live as he belieues) he shall be raised by the spirit of God
to a certainty? If then every one may, and ought to make his belief sure by a
certainty, what place remaynes for agonyes, and perplexityes? Contrarily, by
resting in a probable Faith, he has manifest, and necessary cause of
perplexity, and most just fear, least he want that which Catholics,
Protestants, and all who profess any Religion, hold most certainly necessary to
salvation; and that it is a grievous sin, even to deny such a necessity,
especially the contrary pernicious error being maintained by a few, who dare
not openly declare of what Sect they are. Men, in the question concerning
Eternity, of Happiness, or Misery, are obliged to seek and embrace the safer
way, of which, by mere probability, they cannot be assured, but must be still
seeking further and further; and never finding Certainty in their naked
probabilityes, are deservedly, by their own fault, cast into most reasonable
agonyes, and perplexityes. Not then our belief of the certainty of Christian
Faith, but your contrary Heresy, puts men in danger not to believe at all,
thinking not at all as good as to no purpose. For since, as it were by the
instinct of nature, men conceive Religion to be a certainly true, and right
worship of God, you, who would persuade them, that no such certainty is
possible, cast them with good reason upon a necessity of believing nothing at
all; wherein as every body will detest your impiety, so I cannot but wonder at
your inconsequence to yourself in the other part of these your words; (or else
though indeed they do believe it, yet to think they do not, and to cast
themselves into wretched agonyes and perplexityds,) seeing. Page 357. N. 38. you
resolutely say (to Charity Maintained) of your self: I certainly know, (and
with all your Sophistry you cannot make me doubt of what I know) that I do
believe the Gospel of Christ, as verily, as that it is now day, that I see the
light, that I am now writing: and I believe it upon this Motive, because I
conceive it sufficiently, abundantly superabundant^y proved to be Div^ne
Revelation. And after a few lines you say in general; If no man can err
concerning what he believes, then you mu^^ give me leave to assure myself that
I do believe. Do not all these words, and more to be read in the same place,
declare, that, in your opinyon, whosoever belieues with certainty, is certain
that he belieues with certainty, yea and (which is more) he is certain upon
what Motive he belieues? How then do you say; They are in danger, though indeed
they believe, yet to think they do not, and to cast themselves into wretched,
etc: By the way; it is to be observed, that here you profess to believe the
Divine Revelation not for it self (as the Formal Object of Faith should be
believed) but for precedent Inducements, which therefore are the Formal Object
of our Faith, and so it is no Theological virtue, nor a Divine Assent, as I
said hertofore.

101. But above all, who can endure your saying, that considering and
discoursing men find their faith of the Gospel of Christ to be to them
indiscernable from the belief they give to the truth of other stories, and yet
you suppose, and labor to prove, that such a faith is sufficient to salvation?
I appeal to the conscience of every Christian, whether he fynds not in his
soul, an assent to what he reads in Holy Scripture, far different, and of
another kind, and higher nature, and greater strength, than the credit he gives
to other stories. If your considering and discoursing men, have not such a
feeling of Scripture, and the Gospel of Christ, they are no Christians; nor
ought we to forbear, the declaring how necessary infallible Faith is, for any
panicall fear of this Pharisaicall scandal. Rather, we are obliged to declare
the truth, least we become accessory to their perdition, which none can avoid
who deny the certainty of Christian Faith and Religion, and rest in the false
confidence of fallible probable faith, of the same kind with the belief which
they give to the truth of other storyer. I know you rely much upon that Axiom,
that the Conclusion follows the weaker Premise, but I did not imagine (as I
touched hertofore) you would so far betray yourselfe, as to hold, that, If one
have probable Motives to believe that some Man did testify a truth, and have
equal Motives that God reveals, or witnesserh the same thing, his assent to
that truth, as it is witnessed by God, is not greater than his belief thereof,
as it is witnessed by man, if the Reasons for which I believe it is witnessed
by God, and by Man, be of equal strength; and yet you must say so, if with
your considering men, you believe the Scripture and Gospel of Christ with the
same kind of belief which they give to the truth of other stories. Wherein I
confess you would do, as all Heretics are wont, pass from ill, to worse.
For, [Pag: 141. N. 27.] you say: For the incorruption of Scripture, I know no
other rational assurance we can have of it, then such as we have of the
incorruption of other ancient Books, that is, the consent of ancient Copyes:
such I mean for the kind, though it be far greater for the degree of it. And
[Pag: 62. N. 24.] speaking also of the incorruption of Scripture, you say: I
know no other means to be assured hereof, than I have that any other Book is
incorrupted. For, though I have a greater degree of rational and humane
Assurance of that than this, in regard of diverse considerations which make it
more credible, That the Scripture has been preserved from any material
alteration; yet my assurance of both is of the same kind and condition, both
Moral assurances, and neither Physical or Mathematical. But now you are very
careful, that the faith of considering men, be not cracked by too much
straining, but be left to believe the Gospel of Christ with such a kind of
assent as they yeald to other matters of tradition, and is indiscernable from
the belief they give to the truth of other stories. Unhappy men, who relying on
their considering, and discoursing, forget, that Christian Faith is a Gift
infused by the Holy Ghost, and not to be measured by mere humane Motives, or
Rules of logic. I will not loose time in telling you, that a thing may be
cracked by too much strayning, not only by excess, (as you unjustly accuse us)
but also by way of Defect, such as your weak faith is in order to the true
saving Faith of Christians, which being reduced to probability, loses its
very Essence and Kind.

102. Object: 8. Against these words of Charity Maintained Chap: 6. N. 2.]
(Allmighty God having ordained man to a supernatural End of Beatitude by
supernatural means, it was requisite, that his understanding should be
enabled to apprehend that End, and means by a supernatural knowledge. And
because if such a knowledge were no more than probable, it could not be able
sufficiently to overbeare our will, and encounter with humane probabilityes,
being backed with the strength of flesh and blood; it was further necessary,
that this supernatural knowledge should be most certain and infallible; and
that Faith should believe nothing more certainly, then that it self is a most
certain Belief; and so be able to bear down all gay probabilityes of humane
Opinyon:) You argue thus, [Pag: 327. N. 5.] Who sees not that many millions in
the world forgo many times their present ease and pleasure, undergo great and
toyisome labors, encounter great difficultyes, adventure upon great dangers,
and all this, not upon any certain expectation, but upon a probable hope of
some future gain and commodity, and that not infinite and eternal, but finite
and temporal? Who sees not, that many men abstain from many things they
exceedingly desire, not upon any certain assurance, but a probable fear of
danger that may come after? What man ever was there so madly in love with a
present penny, but that he would willingly spend it upon a little hope that by
doing so be might gain a hundred thousand pound! and I would feign know what
gay probabilityes you could devise to dissuade him from this Rosolution? And if
you can devise none, what reason then or sense is there, but that a probable
hope of infinite and eternal happyness provided for all those that obey Christ
Jesus, and much more a firm faith, though not so certain, in some fort, as
sense or science, may be able to sway our will to obedience, and encounter with
all those temptations which Flesh and Blood can suggest to avert us from it?
Men may therefore talk their pleasure of an absolute and most infallible
certainty, but did they generally believe that obedience to Christ were the
only way to present and eternal felicity, but as firmly and undoubtedly as
that there is such a City as Constaninople, nay but as much as Caesar's
Commentaryes, or the History of Salust, I believe the life of most men both
Papists and Protestants would be better than they are. Thus therefore out of your
own words I argue against you: He that requires to true faith, an absolute and
infallible certainty, for this only Reason because any less degree could not be
able to overbeare our will etc: imports, that if a less degree of faith were
able to do this, then a less degree of faith may be true and divine and saving
faith: But experience shows, and Reason confirms, that a firm faith, though
not so certain as sense or science, may be able to encounter and overcome our
will and affections: And therefore it follows from your own reason, that faith
which is not a most certain and infallible knowledge, may be true, and divine
and saving faith.

103. Answer. First; when Charity Maintained wrote against D. Potter, who, with
other Protestants, and Catholics maintaynes the infallibility of Christian
Faith, he never dreamed of any necessity to prove such an infallibility; and
therefore he touched that point incidently, and not of purpose, as a thing
presupposed, not to be proved. And therefore what you object against us, is to be
answered by those whom you call Brethren.

104. Secondly; I might speedily and easily answer in one word; That, your
Objection does not so much as touch the Argument of Char: Maintained, which
was, that unless Faith were infallible, it would not be able to bear down all
probabilityes of humane Opinyon, offering themselves against it, that is, it
could not be constant and permanent; and therefore must either be infallible, or
end in none at all. Now your Objection tends only to prove, that a probable
faith may be sufficient to sway our will to obedience, in respect of other
Precepts concerning Works or Manners: all which though we did grant, yet such
a faith could not be sufficient to salvation, which cannot be obtained without
performance of the Precepts, both of living well, and believing aright.

105. Thirdly; that a probable belief is not such a faith as we are commanded
to have, I have proved already; and it is clear enough of it self; if it be
remembered, that we are obliged to believe the Articles of Christian Faith, by
an Assent immovable, notwithstanding whatsoever temptations, impulsions, or
reasons to the contrary, which cannot possibly agree to a probable assent. For,
nothing but Certainty, can produce an immobility in the understanding, and a
prudent settled resolution never to alter for what reason soever: and to say
the contrary, is to turn mere probability into absolute certainty. What is
more vulgarly known than that Probability is essentially the root of fear
least the contrary may be true, and involves an aptitude to be changed, if
better reason present it self. We may well compare Probability in the
understanding, with Passions in the Appetite, which are a source of prepetuall
motion. Active and Passive, to move, and to be moved. Or it is like the humors
in our body, which destroy it, and themselves. For, Probability by the fear it
has adjoined, is still in actu primo, in a disposition, and readness to
destroy it self. And we may say: Qui sibi nequam est cui bonus erit? He that
is wicked to himself, to what other man will he be good? If Probability cannot
conserve it self, being left to it self; how will it encounter with
accidental temptations, arising from the Devil, World, Flesh, Passions,
fears, Hope, Love, Aversion, Obstinacy, Animosity, Pusillanimity, Education,
and the like? If you were to give a reason, of your so many changes in
Religion, you must referr it to the nature of Probability, which in reason must
yield to better reason; and so Preface [N. 5.] you profess that your constancy
in Religion consisted in following that way to Heaven which for the present
seemed most probable. And Page: 303.] you say of yourself, that, of a moderate
Protestant you turned Papist, and the day that you did so, you were convicted
in conscience that your yesterdayes opinion was an error: That afterward upon
better consideration, you became a doubting Papist, and of a doubting Papist a
confirmed Protestant. (you might with truth have acknowledged more alterations
in Religion, than here you specify: as, that you passed the second time from
Protestancy to us; and how then were you a confirmed Protestant?) And in the
same [N. 103. Page: 304.] That you do not yield your weakness altogether
without apology, seeing your deductions were rational. Behold the ground of
your alterations Rational and probable deductions! which ground will remain
without end, till one be settled by certainty. A fearful state, wherein one
may, yea ought, at the hour of death to chang his Religion, if seeming better
reasons, do then present themselves against, than he has, for, it! whereby he
may come to die of no Religion at all. Socinians are wont to talk much of
Reason, of considering and discoursing men. But alas, what else is Reason, or
consideration, or Discourse, destitute of submission to God by an infallible
Assent, except a perpetual and incessant offer, or a temptation, to alter
their faith, and pull down their former Religion, before they have time to
build, or resolve of a new one. Besides, Christian Faith being obscure, and
evidence the natural center of our understanding (without which, it is like a
stone violently held from falling) no wonder if the strength of Certainty be
necessary, to bear us up, above the inclination we have to be placed in the
center and light of Evidence; whereby it falls out, that humane reasons against
Faith, being connaturall, and as it were level with our understanding, are
easily and eagerly accepted; especially since the Mysteryes of Christian Faith
seem contrary to Reason, because indeed they are above it.

106. Morover, if we reflect on the Essicient Cause of your probable faith,
which I have proved to be only strength of nature, how weak and changeable
must it be? If Holy Job could say of Man, nunquam in eodem statu permanet, he
never remaynes in the same state: Job 14. V. 2.] much more may we say the same
of the weakest belief in the soul of man, which is mere probability, produced
by the only forces of him who never remains in the same state, Lamentable
experience has taught us, how many of great wits, yea of zeal, and piety,
who stood as Cedars of Libanus, and shined like beacons to enlighten others,
have fallen into damnable, and somtymes, even foolish Heresies, though once
they believed the contrary Truths, and Articles of our Faith, with absolute
certainty: Such is the imbecility of nature; And then what can be expected of
a belief, which expressly tells it self, that it is not certain; and which
believes no point of faith with certainty, except that Faith it self is not
certain? Holy Scripture assures us, that, he who loves danger, shall perish
therein. [Eccli: 3. V. 27.] It is in every man's power by Divine assistance, to
arrive to a certain true belief, as I showed even out of Chillingworth
himself; and this he is obliged to do by the immediate Precept of Faith, and
by the obligation of Charity to ones self, which binds us to choose the safer
part in a matter of so great moment; and therefore let no man please himself in a
probable Faith, and put himself, not only in danger, but in certainty of
perishing by such a weak, probable, and changeable Assent.

107. And now I hope it appears, that the Reason which Chari: Maintained gave
for the infallibility of Christian Faith, remains very good, and solid,
though delivered by him incidently, not imagining that any would call in
question the certainty of Christian Faith against D. Potter, who expressly
avouches it, and against all Protestants. As well might it have been expected
of Char: Maintained, to prove the Mystery of the most Blessed Trinity, of the
incarnation of the second Divine Person, his Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension, the eternal reward of Saints in Heaven, and punishment of sinners
in Hell, or any other Article of Christian belief, common to Catholics and
Protestants, as this truth, that Christian Faith is certainly true. The truth
is, that Chill: does so far dissent from Protestants, that I cannot be thought
to write against him, or to confute any defense he makes for Potter, but to
handle a new subject, and argument, against new Heresies which Potter, and
other Protestants will profess to detest: and it were no wonder, arguments
should chance not to hitt that mark, at which they never aimed, nor confute
those, against whom they were never intended. Yet in fact this argument which
here you impugn, does rightly prove the necessity of an infallible certain
Faith, as I have showed; as also that your Objection and endeavor to prove,
that a fallible Faith is sufficient for the exercise of good works, is nothing
to the purpose, since Char: Maintained spoke of sufficiency to observe the
precepts of Faith, and if you believe S. John Chrysostom cited above, that
according to S. Paul it is a harder matter to believe the high mysteries of
our Faith, than to exercise good works, you will easily infer, that although
you could prove a probable Faith to be sufficient in order to Obedience, or
exercise of good works, yet it would not therefore remain proved to be
sufficient for believing, as we ought. And S. Chrysostom saying, that it is so
hard a thing to believe, supposes Christian Faith to be more than probable.

108. Fourthly, I say, That although the words of Char: Maintained, be taken in
the sense, which you would put upon them, yet your Arguments are of no force to
confute them, or to prove that a fallible Faith is able to overcome our will,
and encounter with humane probabilityes, backed with the strength of flesh and
blood. And; First I must entreat you, not to cosen your Reader as a Minister
foold his Auditors, who after he had spoken much of Gods Commandments, in the
close of his discourse, desired not to be mistaken, as if he believed that
those Commandments, of which he had spoken, could be kept; for, it was very
certain they could not: which if he had told them in the beginning, he might
have spared his own pains, and the exercise of their patience in hearing his
prating, and praising an impossible thing. Our Savior said; if thou will enter
into life, keep the comma^deme^ts: (Matthew: 19.17.) These men tell us; if thou will enter into life, believe firmily as a matter of Faith, that thou can not
keep the commandments. But to our purpose: least Mr Chilling, loose his
labor, and deceive his Hearers, I must beseech him to deal plainly, and
before he goes about to move their wills, he would in form their
understandings by letting them know; that he is to speak of infinite and
eternal happyness, provided for all those that obey Christ Jesus: and of
unspeakable, eternal torments to be inflicted on all such as break his
commandments; but withal he must assure them, that although both Papists and
Protestants teach, that all must believe with absolute certainty, there is a
Heaven, a Hell, Eternal rewards, and punishments; a Savior, a Resurection,
working of miracles, and the like, yet that with men considering, discoursing,
and using rational deductions, according to the never failing rules of Logic
(which are his words in several parts of his Book) such as He, and his
fellows are; the matter passes far otherwise. For they believe, that the
teaching a necessity of such a certain Faith, is a Doctrine most presumptuous
and uncharitable. (Page 328. N. 6.) and a great error, and of dangerous and
pernicious consequence (Page 325. N. 3) And that indeed the Articles which all
Christians believe. may (for ought they know Certainly to the contrary) in the
end prove false, and no better than dreams. Thus I must entreat him to
prepare his Auditors, and then let us hear how he will go about to persuade,
yea oblige them under pain of eternal damnation, to the observance of things
most difficult, and repugnant to humane principles, natural inclinations,
flesh and blood, self-loue, and in a word, which are To the Gentiles,
foolishness; to the Jews a scandal [1. Cor: 1.23.] and besides, are not
present, and within sight, as things of this life are, but remote, and of an
other world. Let us the^ hear him, preaching rather, than proving in the words
which I cited in the Objection, who sees not, that many millions etc:

109. To which your loose kind of disputing, diverse would give different
answers. Perhaps some, hearing from others your so many changes of Religion,
and from your self, that your present belief is but probable; they would take
time for trial, how long you would persever in your sect, of a late Date for
time, and strange for the nouelty, as being contrary both to Protestans, with
whom you lived so long time, and against Catholics, to whom you joynd your
self, not by any force, (for who, or what, except evidence of truth, could
force you to a Religion, lying under the burden of a long, and cruel
persecution?) but upon due consideration of Reasons on all sides, and not
taking things at a second hand, or upon credit, but by examination made
immediately by your self, or by conference with others, who gave you all
freedom, and encouragement to propose your difficultyes. And for this their
delay in resolvinge, they might perhaps make use of a saying of your own, Page:
(330. N. 7. He who requires, that I should see things farther than they are
visible, requires I should see something invisible, and apply it to this sense:
That you, who flitted from a Faith, which you believed then to be certain, to
a belief confessedly not certain, and persuade others to do the same, may in
time pass from a non-certainty, to a nonentity, or nonexistence of all
Faith, and so by degrees bring your proselytes to plain infidelity.

110. Others will answer; That indeed if men were once infaliibly certain, of
the great promises, and threats you mention, of Heaven, Hell, Resurrection from
death etc. They could excogitate no satisfying reason, to avoid Obedience, and
keeping the commandments: Yet while we suppose them to be deliberating about
the election of their Faith, and actually enjoying, or in a way, or
possibility, and freedom to enjoy things of profit, and pleasure in this world,
which are present and certain, and proportionable to their natural
inclinations, and powers of Body and soul, and the^ hear you telling the^,
that no Religion is certain, and talking of things to come; a far of; and in
another world which to humane reason, not assisted by certainty of Faith, look
like the spatia imaginaria before the world was created; you ought not to
wonder, if (notwithstanding all the fair words in your Objection) men would be
apt to plead, the possession of their Freedom, and liberty, which they will
not easily bring under so strict obligation, and seeming heavy yoke, merely
upon a belief, concerning which your self profess to have only this certainty,
that it is not certain. Christians firmly believe by Faith, know evidently by
reason, see daily by experience, that dye they must, they hear all men say,
and themselves believe, Death to be Omnium terribilium terribilissimum, the
most dreadful of all dreadful things, and yet we see, they more apprehend the
danger of wetting their clothes, by a gentle shower threatened instantly to
fall, than death it self. And why? because the one is apprehended as almost
present, the other is looked on as far of for space of time, as the vast body
of the sun seems to be a small thing, by the great distance of place. Besides,
divine and supernatural Objects, hold so great disproportion with humane
Reason, and contrariety with our natural inclinations, that they appear
either hard, or impossible, and no more apprehensible by possession, than
comprehensible by reason. I beseech you, tell me sincerely, what you think
would have been the Success of S. Paul's preaching, to the Athenians against
their false Gods, and for the true Messiah, and Resurrection of the dead* if he
had told them clearly, that they could have no certainty of those, or any other
Mysteryes of Christianity?

111. Upon these grounds it appears, that your Objections are of no force; and
in particular that which you did propose as unanswerable, What man say you, was
there ever so madly in love with a present penny, but that he would willingly
spend it upon any little hope that by doing so, he might gain an hundred
thousand pround? This, I say, proves nothing at all, because as you nakedly
deliver it, it proves too much, and yourself, and all Protestants, and all
Christians must answer it, as being manifestly repugnant to the experience of
all men, who surely find greater difficulty (naturally speaking) to keep the
commandments, to forgive, and do good to their deadly enemies, to suffer
persecution, to bear their Cross, to deny themselves etc. then they could even
possibly find in spending a single penny, in the case you propose, divested of
any accidental difficulty, or aggravating circumstance, only considering the
disproportion betwee^ a penny, and so many thousand pounds, which is so vast
and evident to sense and reason, that the will remaynes determined, and in a
manner necessitated to give so little, for so much; and a man greedy of gain,
would in some sort find as great difficulty in such a case, not to give a penny
for so many pounds, as to give so many pounds for a penny, which, in respect of
those thousands, looks like nothing compared to something. But the difference
between earthly, and heavenly things, though it be in it self incomparably
greater, than any disproportion can be conceyved between worldly objects
compared amongst themselves, yet to us it appears not with evidence to be so,
and therefore our understanding and will, need the support, and certainty of a
high, and Divine rank, to supply the evidence of reason, or sense, and resist
all kind of temptations. For which cause, Faith is called the substance of
things hoped for, and an Argument of things not seen: which therefore in order
to us, who by nature are strangers to mysteryes so sublime, must receive being,
existence, and subsistence, from a firm and certain belief And now Sir, is it
indeed as easy to keep the commandments (which many of those whom you call
Brethren, hold impossble to be kept, and Catholics believe it cannot be done,
without Gods special Grace) as it is to spend a penny for gayning so many
pounds because our Savior has so revealed, that to give a cup of could water
[which is not worth a penny for his sake, shall not want a reward i^sinitely
greater, not only than millions of pounds, but of millions of worlds, and yet
we see, men are not so liberal to the poor, as they must needs be, if your
objection were of force, and that there were the same proportion, between
earthly and heavenly things, as there is between earthly things, compared with
one another. If keeping the Commandments be as easy as to spend a penny for
gaining thousands of pounds, how comes it, that so few keep, and so many
break them, which scarcely any Christian would, yea in some sense, could do,
if your case did hold no less in heave^ly things the^earthly? How could the
special Grace of the Holy Ghost, be necessary for keeping the commandments
(as in the introduction we showed, if it be as easy to keep them, as to spend
a penny, for gayning thousands of pounds? How comes that pious woman in the
Gospel to be so highly commended by God incarnate, for offering a mite, if it
be so very easy to forgo things present, upon hope of a reward after this
life?.

112, But let us alter your case a little, and vest it with some particular
circumstances; For example, that you had but one, or very few pence, and
apprehended them to be necessary for present expenses, [as worldly men conceive
all they have, to be too little for their occasions] that your life, or health
depended on it, as Esau apprehended of the mease of potage, for which he sold
his inheritance; that it must not be given once only, but every day and hour,
as it happens in our endeavor to keep the Commandments: For, The life of man
upon earth is a warfare, [Iob, 7.1.] let us, I say, confider your case, with
these or the like, circumstances, and then answer whether it would appear so
easy as you made it? Or can you prove by it so stated, that any faith, or any
hope will serve to keep the commandments, which are hard to flesh and blood;
which must continually be kept; and therefore require an incessant Vigilance and
solicitude; which oblige us to loose fortunes, health, and life rather then
committ any one sin? You cannot but see the weakness of your Argument, and the
necessity yourselfe, and all Christians have to answer it.

113. But there remaynes yet an Argument of higher consideration, against you
who discourse like yourselfe, that is, a Socinian and Pelagian, as if the
Commandments could be kept by the strength, ordirection of reason alone; or,
as if the will could of it self perform, or avoyde whatsoever the
understanding dictates to be performed or avoided, without particular Grace,
conferred for the sacred Merits of our Blessed Savior; which is a Luciferian
pride evacuating the fruit of his life and Death: Whereas all Orthodox
Christians, who believe the special Grace of the Holy Ghost, to be necessary
for true Obedience, are thereby assured, that the will has not of it self
force to follow, or fly whatsoever the understanding proposes to be embraced,
or avoided; and consequently it is no good Argument: The understanding directs
us to do this, Therefore our will may do it without the particular Grace of God;
which if it be necessary to the will for working, it must also be necessary in
the understanding for Believing with a supernatural Divine Assent, without
which, God does not give Grace to the will, for keeping the Commandments;
which holds particularly in your Principle, that Faith is the cause of Charity,
and then if the effect be above the force of nature, much more the cause must
be so. Morover, if Faith be but probable, and consequently only natural (which
sequel I have proved above) it cannot be a proportionable means to
supernatural Eternal Happiness; and so you must hold, that even the
Beatificall Vision is but natural: which if it be; how will you move men with
your specious, but empty, words, to keep hard ways, [Psam: 16. V. 4.] for an
End merely natural and proportioned to a probable and changeable faith, which
may prove false, and the Beatude which it propose, a Fiction, and Nothing.

114. Whereas you say: who sees not, that many millyons in the world forgo many
times their present ease and pleasure, undergo great and toylesome labors
etc: upon a probable hope of some future gain and commodity? I answer, as
above, that such gains are of the same kind with the labors and pains: I
mean, they are all natural things, and neither above the forces of our
understanding to apprehended, nor of our will to desire and embrace, but
connaturall, and in continual use amongst men, who have not much difficulty to
do what they see done by others, and done by instinct, and command of nature.
For, if we sift into the root of such toils, labors, and adventures as you
speak of, we shall find it to be that innate and inbred desire, which every
creature has to conserve it self in Being, actuated by such means and
industryes, as it is best able to lay hold on. If to forgo ease and pleasure;
and undergo great and toylesome labors, and adventure upon great dangers, be
apprehended necessary for the said end, it is no wonder, if they be embraced as
less evils; which is no more than we see in irrational creatures. And, to
affirm, that it is as easy to keep the Commandments, and obey the Gospel of
Christ our Lord, as to perform Actions proceeding from the common instinct of
Nature, is most injurious to the Grace, and Merits of our Blessed Savior. And
yet, even in this, your Objection, upon due reflection, makes for us against
yourself: because the common instinct of Nature to preserve it self, is a
thing Certain and invariable, proceeding from God the Author of nature, and is
the ground of that most reasonable and certain Axiom, that it is lawful to
resist force with force. In which Respect, he is not guilty of murder who did
no more, tha^ was necessary for his own defe^se: according to which
consideration, your Argument proves, that* Faith necessary for all Christians,
and which is the Root of all Piety, Justice, and Salvation, must be constant,
certain, and invariable, as is the common Instinct of nature, or Root of all
endeavors of creatures to preserve their being.

115. I hope your Objection is fully answered by the former considerations. Now
I must ask with what ingenuity can you say of your Adversary: He that requires
to true Faith an absolute certainty for this only Reason, because any less
degree could not be able to overcome our will, etc. Since he says no such
thing, as, that that was the only Reason, which might be given to prove the
said Truth; for he gave that only incidently, not excluding others, and you see
I have given many more, and amongst the rest, that there is an obligation to
believe with an infallible supernatural Assent, abstracting from any relation
to good works, or victory over our will and affections: And therefore that only,
is only your own fiction.

116. I need not answer your examples, of believing, there is such a City as
Constantinople, of giving credit to Caesar's Commentaries, or Salusts History;
which, beside the impiety, are impertinent; since I have proved, that true
Divine Faith being of a higher rank, is infallible, supernatural, and not
producible but by Gods Special Grace. which Epithetons do not agree to the
said Examples; to omit other Reasons alleged hertofore. In the mean time,
what a miserable thing do you make the Faith of Christians, in being less
strong and effectual, tha^ the belief of profane stories. Whereas if the
necessity of an infallible Faith be once believed, men will seek it, and by
degrees of Obedience shall by sure to find it, even according to your own
Assertions.

117. Lastly I will add; That, although it were supposed, (but in no wise
granted) that some particular person, in some extraordinary circumstances,
might perform by a probable faith, all that, of which you have preached; yet
since that would be but a rare, and extraordinary Case, and that the generality
of mankind, would perish for want of an infallible, steadfast Faith; it were
injurious to Gods infinite Providence, to imagine, that he gives not to the
generality of men, Grace sufficient for such a Belief. And this being once
supposed, I say further, that I must de facto take away the supposition which I
made, and affirm, that sufficient Grace being denied to none, and every one
being obliged to choose the safer part, in matters of this nature, the
Conclusion must be^, that every one is obliged under pain of damnation, to
believe the Articles of Christian Religion, with an infallible certain Faith.

118. Which having been proved, by Scripture; Fathers; the consent of all who
believe any Religion to be true; the express confession of D. Potter; the
doctrine of other Protestants; the absurdityes, and pernicious consequences of
the contrary Heresy; the necessity of loosinge all Faith and Religion, if Faith
be not infallible; the nature of Divine Christian Faith; the Obedience it
implies; the necessity of Gods special Grace to produce it; the captivating of
our understanding unto it; the manifest insufficiency of his Arguments against
it; the turning his own Objections and Reasons against himself; his frequent,
and in a manner continual contradictions; his multiplied changes of Religion,
caused by this his Doctrine; the infallibility of Faith, I say, having been
proved by these and other convincing Reasons; the next Demand will be, what
means, Rule, or judge, our Blessed Savior has left us, on which this
infallibility of Faith must be grounded. And because Protestants pretend to
agree in no point, more, than that Scripture alone is the sole Rule of Faith,
as containing evidently all things necessary to be believed, the next Chapter
shall be employed, in confutation of that assertion; that so, by degrees, we
may come to what indeed is that Authority, upon which Christian Faith must rely
in order to us.

CHAP. II. ALL THINGS NECESSARY to be believed, ARE NOT IN PARTICVLAR,
Evidently contained in Scripture alone.
1. IN no one Doctrine, Protestants would seem more unanimously to agree, than
in this: That, all things necessary to salvation, are contained evidently in
Scripture. And yet it is certain, that they prove no point more slenderly, nor
declare more confusedly, than this, which they hold as the only foundation of
the whole structure of their Faith and Religion. For proof of this my
Assertion, we need only put them to their proofs, and desire them to state the
Question aright: which being done, I dare confidently avouch, that no judicious
Reader, will not instantly discover the impossibility, of proving all things
necessary, to be contained evidently in Scripture taken alone. This will
appear by explicating two capital words, as I may term them, of my Title,
and their Tenet, Necessary, and Evident.

2. For the performing whereof, we are to take as a thing granted by all, who
pretend to the name of Christian, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
purchased by the effusion of his sacred blood [Act: 20.28.] a Church on earth,
endued with all things necessary for the whole Community, or mystical Body;
For every State or Degree; For every single Person or Member thereof. And
therefore to maintain, that, Scripture alone contaynes all points necessary to
be believed, must imply, that in, or from Scripture alone, we may evidently
learn, what is necessary to be believed of all; according to the triple
mentioned consideration, or distinction of Persons: which Distinction we will
here only touch cursarily, and precisely as far as is necessary for our
present purpose.

3. The Church, as it signifyes one Community or mystical Body, necessarily
requires some kind of Governors or Pastors; Means, and Manner to provide for
a Succession of them; Power to enact laws, and to punish offenders by
spiritual Censures; some undoubtedly lawful Liturgy, or public worship of
God; Sacraments, and (to omit other things) in particular, some certain
infallible Means, to know this very Point; whether Scripture alone contain
evidently all things necessary to Salvation; without certain knowledge whereof,
there can be no certainty in the Faith of Protestants.

4. But now for different Degrees or Officers in the Church, more or less
knowledge is necessary, according to their several obligations, and Duties, as
for Bishops, Pastors, Priests; etc: who, for example, are obliged to teach
others, Ordain Priests, conficere, and administer Sacraments etc:

5. Lastly, for every particular Person, or member of the Church, some things
are absolutely necessary, in the judgment both of Catholics and Protestants;
as v. g. Faith, True and Divine for essence, and sufficient for Extension for
all points absolutely necessary to be expressly believed; and Repentance after
deadly sin committed; and according to Catholics, Baptism in Re for children,
and in Re, or Voto for Adulti; as also the Sacrament of Penance, after the
committing of Actual sin, if it be deadly; and finally the keeping, and
consequently knowing of the Commandments.

6. For explication of the word evident; I note, that, to be contained
evidently in Scripture, may be understood in three manner of ways. First, that
some Point be contained in particular, and so evidently, that no man, who
understands the language, can doubt what it signifyes according to the usual
signification of the word, and that in such a Text it is taken in such a common
signification, and not in some figurative, or mystical, or moral sense, as
diverse times it happens. For if it be capable of such a sense, I must have some
certainty, that it is not taken so, before I can ground upon it an infallible
Assent of Faith; and therefore I must have more than only probable (that is, some
certain and infallible) means to know whether it be taken in the common
signification, or, if it have more usual or common significations than one, in
which of them it is taken. Which depending on the Free will of God, can be
known only by Revelation, that is, according to Protestants, by some other
evident Text of Scripture, and so without end, unless they can find some Text,
necessarily determined to one only sense.

7. Secondly: evident may signify, that some point be indeed contained in
Scripture in it self, or in particular, but not so, as to be understood
clearly, and certainly by Virtue of the words taken alone, without the help of
some interpreter, to whom, if antecedently we give credit, that will become
evident to us by his interpretation, which before was obscure: as the words of
the Prophet Isay became evident to the Eunuch by the Declaration of S. Philip,
whom he took for a true interpreter. Act. 8. V. 35.

8. Thirdly; A thing may be evident in Holy Scripture, not in particular, or in
it self; but in some general Means, or Authority, expressly and clearly
delivered, and recommended to us by Scripture; which being once believed, and
accepted with a firm Assent, whatsoever such a Means, or Authority, does
evidently propose, may be said to be evidently contained in Scripture, not in
it self, but in that general Means, expressly recommended by Scripture. In
this manner S. Augustine speaking of Rebaptization of such as were baptized by
Heretics, says De vnitate Eccle: Cap: 22. This is neither openly nor
evidently read, neither by you, nor by me: Yet if there were any wise man of
whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should be consulted in this
question, we should make no doubt to perform what he should say, least we
might seem to gainsay not him so much as Christ, by whose testimony he was
recommended. Now Christ bears witness to his Church. And a little after:
whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church, does resist our
Savior himself, who, by his testimony, recommends the Church. And Lib 1.
cont. Crescon: Cap: 32. and 33. We follow indeed, in this matter, even the most
certain authority of Canonical Scriptures. But how? Consider his words:
Although verily there be brought no example for this point out of Canonical
Scriptures, yet even in this point the truth of the same Scriptures is held by
us, while we do that, which the authority of Scriptures does recommend, that
so, because the Holy Scripture cannot deceive us, whosoever is afraid to be
deceived by the obscurity of this question, must have recourse to the same
Church concerning it, which without any ambiguity the Holy Scripture does
demonstrate to us.

9. In one of these two latter senses, Catholic Authors may truly affirm, all
things necessary to be evidently contaynd in Scripture. But Protestants, who
reject the infallibility of the Church, must understand it in the first sense
only, according to which, they remain obliged to a very hard task of proving,
First; in general, out of evident Scripture, that all things necessary to be
believed, are evident in Scripture; 2. of proving every particular Point of
Faith out of Scripture immediately, or by certain and clear deductions from
it, and not by topicall Arguments of their own fancy, which they will needs be
calling or rather miscalling, Reason; 3. of proving every Point out of evident
Scripture, and so evident, that it be certain the words de facto are not taken
in some sense of which they are capable, different from their usual, common,
obvious, and, as I may say, most litterall signification, (as Protestants
interpret the words* This is my Body.) For, since the words concerning which
the Question arises, are still the same, their meaning must be taken from some
other evident Text, as I said above, and so without end, unless they can
allege some words, which certainly cannot be taken in any sense but one,
though of themselves they be capable of more; and though even diverse chief
learned Protestants teach, that one Text of Scripture may have diverse
litterall senses. Nay, here is not an end of their labors. For, since the word
Evident, may be fitly taken in three senses, of which that only which I put in
the first place, is accepted by Protestants, they must prove by some Evident
Text, that all things necessary are evidently contained in Scripture in that
first sense, and by an evidence of the Text alone, without dependence, or
relation to any other thing, (for example, the Church, or Tradition) which
particulars, surely the Scripture never expresses. I beseech the Reader to
consider this, and mark to what an impossible task Protestants are engaged.
Yet this is not all. It will still remain doubtful whether that Text which
did say, that all things are evidently contained in Scripture, be understood
universally of all things necessary to be believed, or only of things necessary
to be believed, and written: which if you will needs have to be all one, or of
the same extent, you beg the Question, in supposing, that all things necessary
to be believed, are necessarily to be written in the Holy Scripture.

10. These reflections being premised about the Meaning of the words Necessary
and Evident, I believe, any man who, as I said, shall think well before he
speak, and then speak as he thinks, will hold it a very impossible thing to
prove evidently out of Scripture all things necessary, for the Church, as one
Mystical Body; For every Degree; and for every particular Member thereof,
according to the first Meaning of Evidence, and other prescriptions which I
have declared. Let us therefore look back a little upon those three different
sorts of Persons.

11. First: for Government and Governors of the Church, if we abstract from
the Authority, Practice, Tradition, and interpretation of Gods Church, I wonder
who will go about to prove with certainty out of evident Scripture, what
Episcopus must signify in Scripture; a Bishop, Superintendent, or Overseer, or
any who has a charge or superiority, according to the fashion of Protestants,
who love to take words according to Grammatical derivation, not according to
the Ecclesiastical Ancient use of them. Even Protestants grant that the words
Presbyter and Episcopus are in Scripture taken for the same: and Dr: Jer:
Tailor in his Defense of Episcopacy, [. 23. Page: 128.] says expressly: The
first thing done in Christendom, upon the death of the Apostles in this matter
of Episcopacy, is the distinguishing of Names which before were common. If they
will translate Presbyter to signify an Elder, what Certainty can they receyve
from that word, whether it ought to be taken for elder in Age, or greater in
Dignity? And it is no better than ridiculous, that Protestants should first
deny unwritten Traditions, and Authority of the Church for interpreting
Scriptures, and deciding Controversyes in Faith; and then take great pains to
prove out of evident Scripture alone, that Bishops are de Jure Divino: and the
same I say of any other particular Form of Ecclesiastical Government, and of
the Quality, and Extent of Authority in any such Form; whether they can
inflict Ecclesiastical Censures, and of what kind: concerning which, and other
such Points necessary to be known in the Church, Protestants in vain and
without end, will be sighting for an impossibility, till they acknowledge some
other Rule or judge of Controversyes, than Scripture alone.

12. Besides, how will they learn out of Scripture alone, the Form of
Ordination of Priests, and other Orders; the Matter and Form of other
Sacraments, which some in the Church are to administer by Office, and others to
receive, (of which I shall speak more particularly hereafter) with diverse
other such Points necessary for the Church in general?

13. Secondly: For diverse Degrees or States in the Church; no man can choose
but see how hard it is to learn evidently out of Scripture alone, what in
particular belongs to every one both for Belief and Practice.

14. Thirdly: For every particular Person: How can a Protestant prove evidently
out of Scripture the Nature of Faith, since one Sect of them denies Christian
Faith to be infallibly true, against the rest of their fellows; and an other
affirms, that justifying Faith is that whereby one firmly believes that he is
just, which kind of Faith others deny: or the necessary Extent of their Faith,
seeing Chilling: holds that there cannot be given a Catalogue of Points
necessary to be believed explicitly by all, and therefore every one, must either
remain uncertain, whether he believe all that is absolutely necessary, or
else be obliged under damnation, to know explicitly all clear passages of
Scripture (which are innumerable) least otherwise he put himself in danger, of
wanting what is indispensably necessary to salvation; which is a burden, no
less unreasonable than intolerable, even to men not unlearned, and much more
to vulgar Persons.

15. Neither is there less dissiculty concerning Penance or true Repentance,
than Faith; since Protestants do not agree in what Repentance consist, and
Chilling: has a conceypt different from the rest, that true Repentance
requires the effectual mortification of the Habits of all vices, which being a
work of difficulty and time, cannot be performed in an instant, as he writes
[Pag. 392. N. 8.] and therefore even that most perfect kind of sorrow, which
Divines call Contrition, and is conceyved against sin for the love of God, will
not serve at the hour of ones death, because, says he, Repentance is a work
of difficulty and time.

16. Morover, it is impossible for Protestants to prove evidently out of
Scripture, that the Sacraments of Baptism, and Penance are not necessary for
salvation. For where find they any such Text? If they say we must hold them not
necessary, because we find no such necessity evidently expressed in Scripture,
they do but beg the Question, and suppose that all things necessary are
contained in Scripture; besides, that we have Scripture for both Nisi quis
renatu^ fuerit etc: vntess one shall be borne again, etc: [Ioan: 3.5.] And,
whose sins you retain, they are retained: [Ioan. 20.23.] and it is
impossible for any man to show evidently out of Scripture, that those Texts are
not de facto understood as we understand them, since it is most evident, that
the words are capable of such a sense; and consequently we cannot be certain
but that such is their meaning, unless they can bring some evident Text to the
contrary; especially since that even diverse chief learned Protestants teach the
necessity of Baptism for children of the Faithful, as I show herafter. And
certainly if Scripture were evident against this Doctrine of Catholics, so
many learned Protestants could not but have seen it.

17. The same I say of the Sacrament of Penance, which diverse learned
Protestants hold to be so necessary, as some say that; It is a wicked thing to
take away private Absolution: And that, They who contemn it, do not understand
what is Remission of sins, or the power of the keys: And, that it is an
Error to affirm, that Confession made before God, does suffice: And that,
Private Confession being taken away, Christ gave the keys in vain (vide
Triple Cord, Chap. 24. Page 613.) And, vitae Lutheri Autore Gasparo Vienbergio
Lippiensi, [Cap. 30.] it is said: Osiander primus ex ministris Norinbergae
Confessionem privatam vrgebat velut necessariam. Osiander was the first
Minister at Norinberg, who required private Confession as a thing necessary.

18. Now I argue in this manner. Some points in the Opinion, both of
Catholics, and Protestants are necessary to salvation for every particular
Person: for example, Faith; and Repentance after deadly sin; And yet we see
that, Protestants differ both from Catholics, and disagree amongst themselves,
about the nature of Faith, and Repentance, and disagree so, as that both sides
cannot have true Faith, and Repentance. For, if true Faith must be infallible;
Chilling: and his Associates, cannot be saved, both because they believe and
teach so capital an Error, and because they practice it, being satisfied with
a probable fallible Faith. The like I say of that justifiyng Faith which
Calvinists hold necessary for justification, and salvation, against Catholics
and all other Protestants, even Socinians who believe it to be a mere
pernicious and presumptuous fancy. As also the same may be said of Baptism,
and the sacrament of Penance, which according to all Catholics and diverse
Protestants, are necessary to salvation, against many other Protestants.
Therefore Protestants must confess that all things necessary to salvation, are
not evident in Scripture, unless they will pronounce an inevitable sentence of
damnation against those, whom they call Brethren, as Teaching an Error in
matters necessary to salvation, and practicing in conformity to their error,
either by omitting themselves, or being cause by their Doctrine, that others
Neglect, or ommit things absolutely necessary to salvation: which judgment, I
believe, they will not be hasty to frame against their Brethren, but rather
will pretend to conceyve of these particular points of which we speak, as
Chilling: (Page: 41. N. 13.) speaks in general of persons contrary in belief,
which may be concerning points wherein Scripture may with sogreat probability be
alleged on both sides (which is a sure note of a point not necessary) that men
of honest and upright hearts, true lovers of God and truth, such as desire,
above all things, to know Gods will and to do it, may without any fault at
all, some go one way, and some another: which kind of opinion if they think
fit to frame of their brethren, as being men of honest and upright hearts, true
lovers of God and truth etc: they must give me leave to infer, that scripture
is not evident in all points, even where there is question of Articles
absolutely necessary to salvation.

19. Which reason taken from their mutual disagreements in necessary matters,
does prove that they are not evident in scripture, according to Chilling:
saying (Page, 61. N. 24.) The thing is not evident of it self; which is
evident, because many do not believe it.

20. Nay, further I must infer, that, seeing in points absolutely necessary to
salvation, Charitas propria, the virtue of Charity as it respects our selves,
obliges every one to choose the safer part, and that Protestants cannot find
any evident scripture that the Sacraments of Baptism, and penance are not
necessary for salvation, (not only all Catholics, but diverse chief Protestants
holding them to be necessary) it follows, that prorestants are obliged to
believe them to be necessary, and accordingly to frame their practice. Neither
can they be excused by Chilling worths saying that it is a sure note of a
point not necessary, that scripture may with great probability be alleged on
both sides; because this excuse implies a begging of the Question, as if there
were no means, to be assured of what is necessary to salvation, except
scripture alone; yea rather he ought, from the difficulty which he apprehends
in scripture for these matters of so great moment, necessarily to infer, that
the written word taken alone, contaynes not evidently all necessary points.

21. Thus even in this first entrance it appears, how not only untrue, but
unreasonable also, this common Tenet of Protestants is.

22. Which will yet be more manifest, if we consider, that, whatsoever is
necessary for the Curch immediately, as it is one community, or body, the same
must be mediate necessary for every particular member: as in a natural body,
whatsoever is necessary for preserving the whole, is consequently necessary for
every part, which would be destroyed by the destruction of the whole, as also
the destruction of all the parts collectives is the destruction of the whole.
And so if the scripture be nor evide^t in points necessary to salvation for
every part immediate, it would follow mediate, that it is not evide^t for all
points necessary for the whole, eve^ though it wa^ted nothing immediately
necessary forth whole, as governors etc: and there is in this, a necessary
connectio^ between these considerations of the whole and every part. It is
true, every man is not obliged to be Bishop, or a Clergy man; to absolve from
sins, to consecrate the Eucharist; jnflict consurs; to Govern; make Laws;
Administer Sacraments; set down a Liturgy, or public worship of God, and the
like; yet it is necessary for every one to be a member of the true Church, in
which all these advantages must be found; it being the first principle a among
Christians, that remission of sins, and salvation, cannot be hoped for, out of
thetrue church, nor many grievous sins avoided if one be a member of a body
governed by unlawful superiors, guyded by unjust Laws, destitute of power to
punish offenders, fed with false Sacramemts, tied to a superstitious or
sacrilegious Liturgi etc: And therefore as it is impossible to prove out of
evident scripture, all the points which concern immediately the whole body of
the Church, so we must even for that same reason infer, that it is not possible
to prove out of evident Scripture, whatsoever is necessary for every particular
person.

23. I have stayed longer in this entrance, than I intented; yet I hope, not
unprofitably; since I have already proved, as it were by a general view, the
improbability and impossibility, that all things necessary should be contained
evidently in scripture taken alone. Which by Gods holy assistance I hope to
evince more in particular by the reasons following.

24. First: seeing protestants will have nothing believed as matter of Faith,
which is not evident in scripture; this very principle of theirs, That all
things necessary are evidently contained in Scripture, must be evidently proved
out of scriptures, as the foundation of all their Faith: it must, I say, be
proved by some Text, evidently affirming, not only that all points of Faith are
contained in scripture, but that they are contained evidently. Othetwise, if it
be but obscure, we cannot have that certainty which is necessary to Faith. For,
this being a point not evident to natural Reason, but depending on Gods free
Determination, we must only know it by Revelation, or the Testimony, and word
of God, that is [according to protestants] only by scripture. Now they are not
able to produce any such evident Text. Which will appear by answering, and
evidently confuting their objections out of scripture. And therefore they cannot
with certainty believe the said principle. Your self say Page 61. N. 23.] If our
Savior had intended that all Controversyes in Religion should be by some
visible judge finally determined, who can doubt but in plain terms he would
have expressed himself about this matter? And may not we turn the same
argument against you, and say; If our Savior had intended, that all points of
Faith and religion should be evident in scripture, without relation to any
visible judge, church, or vnwrtiten Tradition, who can doubt but in plain
terms he would have expressed himself in this matter? And my retortion is
stronger than your Argument can be; because true Catholic Doctrine belieues
not only scripture, or the written word of God, but tradition also, or the word
of God not written, which all grant to have been before scripture, and from
which you confess we receive scripture it self. And so although nothing were
said in scripture, of a visibse judge to determine controversyes in Religion:
yet universal tradition; sense of all Christians; and practice of Gods church,
in determining and defining matters of Faith, were sufficient to assure us
thereof. But Protestants must either alledg evident scripture, or nothing at
all. This I say, not as if we wanted evident scripture, for the necessity of a
visible judge of controversyes, but only to show, that we have not that
necessity of alleging scripture, for this, and every other particular point,
which Protestants have.

25. Secondly: I prove our assertion thus: we are to suppose, that Allmighty
God, having ordained Man to a supernatural End, cannot fail to provide, on
his part, means sufficient for attaining thereof. Since then Faith is necessary
for ariving to that End, if it cannot be learned except by scripture alone, no
doubt but he would have obliged the Apostles to write, as he obliged them to
preach, and Christians to hear the Gospel. For if he left it to their
freedom, it is clear that he did not esteem writing to be necessary; which
yet must be most necessary if we can attain Faith, and salvation only by
scripture. But Protestants, even for this cause, that they are to believe
nothing which is not expressed in scripture, cannot affirm that our Savior
gave any such command to his Apostles, seeing it is evident no such thing is
expressed in scripture. Therefore they cannot avouch any such command. But, for
preaching, we read, (Marc: 16. V. 15.) Going into the whole world, preach ye
the Gospel to all creatures. And in obedience to this command, it is recorded
(V. 20.) But they going forth, preached every where. And our Savior living on
earth, sent his Apostles abroad with this injunction, (Matthew: 10.7.) Euntes
praedicate, Go preach. The Apostle says: (Rom: 10.17.) Faith is by hearing.
And (V. 18.) have they not heard? And certes into all the earth has the sound
of them gone forth: and unto the ends of the whole earth the words of them:
where we hear, of hearing and speaking, but not of writing or reading: of a
sound conveyed to the ears of the whole world, not of any book or writing,
set before their eyes. Thus we see, that only two of the Apostles have also
made themselves Evangelists by writing the Gospel, though all were Evangelists
by preaching it. Chill: and his fellows think, they can demonstrate out of S.
Luke more clearly than out of any other Evangelist, that his Gospel contaynes
all points necessary to salvation, and yet He is so far from producing any
command he had to write, [which had been the most clear, effectual, and
necessary cause that could have been alledged] that contrarily he shows that
it was done by free election, saying, (Luc: 1.1. and 3.) because many have gone
about, etc. It seemed good also to me to write, etc. Neither does any one of
all the Canonical writers alledg a command for writing. S. Paul says (1.
Cor: 9.16) If I evangelize, it is no glory to me: for necessity lies upon me:
for woe is to me if I evangelize not. But he says not, woe to me if I write
not; and accordingly we see some of the canonical writers differred writing a
long time after our B. Saviors Ascension, and did not write but on several
incident occasions, as Bellarmine de verbo Dei [L. 4. C. 4.] demonstrates out
of Eusebius. If then it was not judged necessary, that scripture should be
written, but that the Church had other means to beget and conserve true Faith
and religion, as S. Paul [1. Cor: 15.1.] expressly says: I do you to
understand the Gospel which I preached unto you, which also you received, in
the which also you stand. And (V. 11.) So we preach, and so you have believed.
What can be more unreasonable, than to believe it to be necessary, that all
things necessary be evidently contained in scripture alone, without dependence
on tradition, or the church? Or who can believe that the Saints Paul, James,
Jude, John, in their Epistles written upon several occasions, or to private
persons, intended to write a Catechism, or specify all necessary points of
Faith? Hence it is that Eusebius, (Histor: Eccles: L. 3. C. 24.) affirms, that
S. John was said to have preached the Gospel even almost to the end of his
life without notice of any scripture; and in general, that the Apostles were
not sollicitous to write much. And the same is observed by S. Chrysostom (Hom:
1. in Act. Apost.) If then Protestants cannot prove by evident scripture, that
all Canonical writers receyved a command to write, how will they prove that
they were bound to publish their writings, whereof (as I said) some were
directed to private persons, or that, others were, or are bound to publish
them; or to read them being published? And if they can show no command for
these things, how can they maintain, that there is no means to know matters
of Faith, except by scripture?

26. Thirdly: you teach; That all necessary points are evident in scripture,
though there be many points evident which are not necessary: that we cannot
precisely determine what points in particular be necessary: that such a
determination or distinction is needless. For all necessary points being
evident in scripture, whosoever believes all evident points, is sure to know
all necessary points, and more. This is your chiefest ground in this matter.
But it is evidently refuted by willing you to reflect, that by this means, all
must be obliged to know all the clear or evident texts of scripture: otherwise
he cannot be sure that he knows all necessary points, since you give him the
assurance of knowing all necessary points, only by this means of knowing all
points that are evident. Therefore if he be not sure, that he knows all evident
points, he cannot be sure that he knows all such as are necessary. Yea every
one will be obliged* to know every text, or period of scripture; and to
examine, whether it be evident or obscure, least, that if upon examination it
appear to be evident, he might perhaps have failed in some necessary point, if
the text had proved to be evident, and yet unknown to him for want of such
examination. Neither can it be answered, that if a text be evident, it will
appear to be such. For, a thing upon due examination and study, may appear
evident, or obscure, which at first sight did not seem to be such. And for
this same reason, every one must learn to read the bible, or at least procure
that every text thereof be read to him, that so he may be sure to know all
evident, and consequently all necessary texts of scripture; it being clear
that he cannot have sufficient assurance, that he knows every particular text,
only by hearing sermons, or ordinary casvall discourses, or the like. And this
care every one shall be obliged to use, even for those books of scripture,
which are receyved by some Protestants, and rejected by others; least if indeed
they be Canonical, and he remain ignorant of any one point evidently
contained in them, he put himself in danger, of wanting the knowledge of some
thing necessary to be believed, You teach (Page: 23. N. 27.) that, to make a
catalogue of fundamental points had been to no purpose, there being, as
matters now stand, as great necessity of believing those truths of scripture,
which are not fundamental, as th^se that are. But it is necessary for every
one, learned, or unlearned, to know explicitly all fundamental truths: Therefore
it is necessary for every one to know explicitly all truths, though not
fundamental. Now who sees not, that these are ridiculous, unreasonable, and
intolerable precepts, and burdens, imposed upon men's consciences without any
ground, except an obstinate resolution to defend your opinion, that all things
necessary are evident in scripture? And yet I do not perceive how Protestants
can avoid these sequeles, if they will stand to those principles. For whosoever
is obliged to attain an End, is obliged to use that means which is necessary
for that End. Your self (Page: 194. N. 4.) hold it for an absurdity, that it
should be a damnable sin, in any learned man (and I may say much more in any
unlearned person) actually to disbelieue any one particular Historical verity
contained in Scripture, or to believe the contradiction of it, though be know
it not to be there con^^^ed. Now I say, according to this your Doctrine, every
one must know every truth in scripture: and not only not contradict it, but he
must explicitly know it, least otherwise he may chance to omit the belief of
some point necessary to be expressiy believed: Which is a greater absurdity
than only to say, every one is obliged not to contradict any truth contained in
scripture, though he know it not to be there contained. And as for our present
purpose, you clearly suppose, that every man, though he be learned, is not
obliged to know every truth contained in Scripture: and therefore your Doctrine
which necessarily infers this obligation, must be absurd, and contradictory to
yourself.

27. Fourthly: in Holy scripture two things are to be considered. The words,
and sense, or meaning of them. The words are clear in scripture, as in other
books, to such as understand the language. But for the sense; it may be
affirmed with much truth,, that, abstracting from extrinsecall help, or
authority, even in matters of greatest moment, proper to Christian religion, it
is hard to find any one point so clear of it self, as to convince, that it
must needs be understood in this, or thar determinate sense. For, though the
words may seem clearly to signify such a thing in objects proportionate to our
natural reason: yet the hardness, and height, of Christian belief is apt to
withdraw our understanding from yiedling a firm assent to points which truly
are above, and in show seem to be against reason. For this I will alledg your
self, who (Page: 215. N. 46.) speak thus: They which do captivate their
understandings to the belief of those things which to their understanding seem
irreconsiable Contradictions, may as well believe real contraditions. Since
then no man can believe real contradictions appearing such, it follows
according to your own assertion, that none can believe those points which to
his understanding seem contradictions; and then he will be seeking some other
by-sense of such words as taken in the obvious common signification, may seem
in his way of understanding, to imply contradiction. Which yet appears more
clearly out of other words of yours (Page: 216.217. N. 46.) where having set
down diverse contradictions (as you untruly apprehend) in our catholic
doctrine concerning the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist, you conclude, that if
Char: Maintained cannot compose their repugnance, and that after an
intelligible manner, then we must give him leave to believe that either we do
not believe Transubstantiation, or else that it is no contradiction that men
should subjugate their understandings to the belief of contradictions. Which
words declare, how willing a man's understanding, or reason is to be at peace
with it self, and to believe nothing, wherein it cannot Compose all repugnance;
and that after an intelligible manner. Seeing then, all Christians, must believe
the words of scripture to be true, and yet find difficulty in composing all
repugnance to reason after an intelligible manner, they are easily drawn, to
entertayne some interpretation, agreeable to their understanding, though
contrary to the signifitation, which the words of themselves do clearly import,
and perhaps was intended by the Holy Ghost.

28. From this fountain arise so many, and so different, and contrary heresies
concerning the chiefest articles of Christian Faith; the difficulty of the
objects, and disproportion to our natural reason, first diverting, and then
averting our understanding, from that which it sees not cleared after an
intelligible manner, and the loss of the first evidence, and usual
signification of the words bringing men to a loss in the pursuit of the true
sense of them. For this cause, the particular Grace of the Holy Ghost is
necessary to believe as we ought; insomuch as Fulk (against Rhem: Testam: in 2
Petr: 3. Page: 821.) says; As concerning the Argument and matter of the
Scripture, we confess that for the most and chiefest matters, it is not only
hard, but impossible to be understood of the natural man. Besides which
difficulty, arising from the Objects, or Mysteryes in themselves, there is
another proceeding from the subject, or Believer, when one has already taken a
Point for true, and for that cause will be willing to seek, and glad to find,
some sense of Scripture agreeable to his foreconceyved opinion, though not
without violence to the letter, or words.

29. And yet to these dissicultyes, flowing from the Object, and Sabject, we
may add another, ex Adjunctis; when one place of Scripture seeming clear
enough of it self, grows to be hard, by being compared with the obvious sense
of that other Text, as we have heard out of Chilling: [Pag: 41. N. 13.] that
Scripture may with so great probability be alleged on both sides, that men of
upright hearts may some go one way, and some another.

30. What words more clear, than those of our B Savior [Matth: 26. V. 26.]
This is my Body? Insomuch as Luther in his Book Defensio verborum Coenae,
says against the Sacramentaryes, who deny the Real presence: This Heresy does
not impugn doubtful opinyons and doubtful Testimonies of Scripture, but
plain and express sentences of Scripture, yet many Protestants deny this
Mystery of the Real presence, upon pretense that other Texts of Scripture are
contrary to it, and in particular that, in S. John's Gospel [Cap: 6. V. 63.]
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. Which is a
strange kind of interpreting words most clear, by a Text very obscure. But God
in his holy Providence, permits these men to fall upon such impertinences for
their own confutation; as happens in this occasion. For as they deny the Real
presence of our Saviors Body in the Eucharist, so they deny, or elude, the
real Presence, or Descent of his soul into Hell, interpreting those words of
the Acts 2.27. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, Non relenques cadaver meum
in sepulchro; Thou will not leave my dead Body in the sepulcher. So Beza upon
that place. And Vorstius in Antibellarm: [Pag: 42.] Nihil vetat, per Animam
synecdochice intelligere ipsum corpus, and quidem jam mortuum. We may well by a
synecdoche understand by the soul the body even the dead body. Serranus contra
Hayum, says, that per animam (Act: 2. V. 27.) non intelligitur anima, (mark,
soul, not the soul) sed mortuus homo, sieve cadaver, but a dead man, or a dead
body. And (which is strange) he assirmes, that this interpretation is clear.
For the present I will not examine this strange interpretation of an Article of
our Creed, Descendit ad inferos, He descended unto Hell: (Of which, Potter
[Pag: 240.] says: The words are so plame, they bear their meaning before
them) nor will I observe, even by this example, how far Scripture is from being
evident, to these men who feign such glosses, upon words so clear, and yet say
that their interpretation is clear. But I will only say; if the soul, which
is a spirit, may signify flesh, and flesh be taken for the soul or spirit,
those words, Spiritus est qui vivificat, caro non prodest quicquam, It is the
spirit that quickens, the flesh prositeth nothing, may be inverted and taken
thus against themselves, caro est quae vivificat, spiritus non prodest
quicquam: It is the flesh which quickens, the spirit profits nothing. For
if the soul may signify the body, why may not the body signify the soul, by
the same new kind or Figure? In the mean time, these men should consider, that
their own Divines assirme, S. John in that sixth Chapter not to speak of the
Sacrament: and it is a strange kind of proof, to argue out of Scripture for
that, of which that Scripture is confessed (even by him who so argues) not to
speak. But because many examples, or instances may be alleged to prove the
difficulty of Scripture, even in the most Principal, and Fundamental Articles
of our Faith, we will touch some in the next Reason; for to speak of all, would
be endless.

31. Fifthly. The same is demonstrated by these particulars. What can be more
clear to prove the Consubstantiality of the son of God with his Eternal
Father, than, Ego and Pater vnum sumus Joan: 10. V. 13.] I and the Father are
one? And yet the old, and new Arians with Chilling: and other Socinians deny
it, pretending (falsely) that it is against Reason, and contrary to other. Text
of Scripture. What can be more expressly delivered, if we respect the bare
word, than that there is one God, Creator of Heaven and Earth? And yet for the
signification of the words (to omit old Heretics, as the Simoniani,
Menandriani, Basilidiani, Valentinistae, Marcionistae, Manichaei, and the whole
rabble of the Gnostici, who taught that there is not one God Omnipotent,
Creator of Heaven and Earth) have we not in our days Socinians, who indeed
destroy the true God, by making him a Subject of Accidents, and depriving him
of his Immensity, Omniscience of futura Crellius Lib: 1. de vera Religione,
Cap: 24.
Contingentia, or the future Actions which are to proceed from Freewill?
although nothing be more clear in Scripture, than that, God is every where,
filling Heaven and Earth, and that, one distinction of the true God from false
ones, is, that he can infallibly foretell things to come, and that he inspired
Prophets, to prophecy with absolute certainty, things remote, for Time and
Place: which being denied, the books of the Prophets must be rent from the
Bible as deluding men, and worse than Apocriphall. Tertullian Lib: 2. cont:
Marcion: Cap: 5. ait, Deum, quot facit Prophetas, tot habere testes suae
praescientiae. God has as many witnesses of his Prescience, as are the
Prophets whom he makes. Does not Calvin deprive God of Mercy and Justice, in
teaching that he predestinates men, to eternal damnation, and punishes them
for sins to which they were necessitated by the same God? What can be more
clear in our Creed, and scripture, than that Christ was conceyved of the Holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary, suffered, dyed, rose again, and ascended into
Heaven, if we look upon the words? And yet for the sense, (which is the life
and soul of scripture) there are most different, and contrary doctrines,
concerning these Points. I let pass those Heretics, who taught that Christ
suffered not really, but only in appearance or show. (And why might not they as
well say, that the words, he was crucified and dyed, are not to be taken
literally, as our Sacramentaryes teach the words, This is my body, are to be
understood figuratively?) But these I let pass, and only reflect, that for the
thing signified by those words, according to our modern Sectaryes, there is
neither certainty, who he is that was borne, suffered, dyed, rose again etc:
nor of the End for which he was borne, suffered, and dyed; nor of the Effect
and Fruit of his life and Death. For, Socinians deny that he who was borne,
suffered etc: was true God and Man: or that the End for which he suffered, was
to redeem us, by satisfying, and paying the ransom of our sins, but only by
way of instructing, or giving us example. And Calvinists teach, that, the
Effect or Fruit of our Saviors Actions, and sufferings, is not any true
remission, or washing away our sins, but only a not imputing them, their guilt
and deformity still remaining, as Calvin [in 2. Corinthians: 5. V. 21.] declares
Quomodo justi coram Deo sumus? Qualiter scilicet Christus fuit peccator. How
are we just before God? in such manner as Christ was a sinner. O injury to men,
as if none were otherwise just than Christ was a sinner (of whom it is said: It
was seemly that we should have such a high Priest, holy, innocent, impolluted,
separated from sinners, (Heb: 7. V. 26.) O blasphemy against Christ our Lord,
as if he had been truly a sinner as just men are truly just; of whom we read
evident texts that they are renewed in the spirit of their mind, and have put
on the new man which according to God is created in justice, and holiness of
the truth [Ephes: 4.23.24.] (not of a falsehood or disguise of truth) that they
are regenerated and Renewed of the Holy Ghost; (Tit: 3.3.) that their sins are
taken away [1. Paral: 21.8.] that clear water is powered upon them, and they
cleansed from all their contaminations. [Ezech, 36.25.] that they shall be
sprinkled with hyssope, cleansed, washed and made whyter than snow, [Psalm. 50,
9.] that their sins shall be sought, and shall not be found. [Psalm. 9.5.] that
their sins are purged. (Prove. 19.27.) that they are all fair, and there is not
a spot in them. (Cant. 4.7.) If thy sins shall be as scarlet, they shall be made
white as snow: and if they be red as vermelion, they shall be white as wool.
(Isay. 1.18.) they have washed their robes, and have made them white in the
blood of the lamb. (Apoc. 7.14.) With sundry other evident texts, which I cited
in the Introduction, Sect. 9. And yet our Sectaryes will have just men and
Saints to be still in sin, and so Calvinian saints are eternally stained with
that, which is the most detestable thing in the very Devils, namely deadly
sin. The Apostle says, (Romans 5.18.) As by the disobedience of one man, many
were made sinners: so also by the Obedience of one many shall be made just. Will
Calvin say, that we were made sinners only by imputation, and not by true sin
inexistent in our soul? And how then can he deny, but that men are just by
true inherent Justice? And if it be so, how dare he blaspheme, that Christ was
a sinner, as just men are just; which is to say, that he was a sinner by
inherent sin, or injustice, as other sinners are? But this is the fruit of
relying on scripture alone, that is indeed, of following their own fancy. What
can be more evident and in more express words delivered in scripture, than,
that without the special Grace of God, merited by our Saviors Life and Death,
we cannot do any work, or speak any words, or think any thought avayling
toward eternal salvation; and yet Pelagians taught the contrary; and
Socinians hold, that we merit all for our selves, and Christ nothing for us: as
contrarily, Protestants commonly say, that Christ merited all for us, and we
nothing for our selves. So contrary Heresies arise, when once men despise the
Authority of Gods Church! What Point more clear in scripture, and more
purposely and carefully proved by S. Paul, than that Article of our Creed, the
Resurrection from Death, and yet the Socinians teach that in Heaven we shall
have, I know not what celestial body, essentially different from that which
was buried in the grave. Vid: Volkel, de vera Relig: Lib: 3. Cap: 35.
Besides, do not those Lutherans, who defend the Vbiquity of our Saviors
Humanity, understand evident words, or do they want skill in lang uages? And
yet, it is manifest, that they destroy all the Mysteryes, of the Nativity,
Ascension etc: of our Savior Christ. For who can come, or go, or ascend, or
descend from one place to another, who is presupposed to be in all places no
less then God is according to his Deity, who therefore cannot be moved from one
place to another?

32. Sixthly. These things considered: the Reader may justly wonder at Chilling.
who expressly specifyes the said Mysteryes of our Savior Christ for instances,
that the Scripture is evident concerning them? His words [Pag: 101. N. 127]
are: If any one should deny, that, God is Omnipotent, Omniscient, good, just,
true, merciful, a rewarder of them that seek him, a punisher of those that
obstinately offend him; that, Jesus Christ is the senne of God, and Savior of
the world, that it is he by Obedience to whom, men must look to be saved: If
any man should deny either his Birth, or Pa^sion, or Resurrection, or
Ascension, or sitting at the right hand of God; his having all power given him
in Heaven and Earth; That it is he whom God has appointed to be judge of the
quick and the dead: that all men shall rise again at the last day: That they
which believe and repent, shall be saved; That they which do not believe or
repent, shall be damned; If a man should hold that either the keeping of the
mosaicall Law is necessary to Salvation: or that good works are not necessary
to Salvation: In a word, if any man should obstinately contradict the truth of
any thing plainly delivered in Scripture, who does not see, that every one who
believes the Scripture, has a sufficient means to discover, and condemn and
avoid that Heresy, without any need of an infallible guide? Thus he. But by his
leave, who does not see both by Reason and Experience, the contrary of that of
which he says, who does not see? And how hard is it to distinguish and judge
what is, or is not plainly delivered in Scripture, if we respect the sense, and
not the words only; And if we consider not one text alone, but co^^ are it with
other passages which seem to signify a different, or even contrary thing;
especially if he add the great disserence, and contrariety of opinions, amongst
his Brethren the Protestants, concerning such points, some of them judging,
that to be plain and evident in scripture, which others believe not only to be
obscure, but the contrary to be true, and all this out of evident scripture, as
they apprehend; as appears by these very examples, which he picks out for
Truths plainly delivered in scripture, as we have already demonstrated. For Gods
Omniptency; the scripture says plainly Matthew: 3.9. God is able of these stones
to raise up children to Abraham. And, Matthew: 20.53. Think thou, that I
cannot ask my Father, and he will give me presently more then twelve legions
of Angels? (Luc: 1.36.) there shall not be impossible with God any word. And
yet Calvin in several occasions impugnes the distinction, of Catholic
Divines, of Potentia Dei ordinaria, and absoluta, of Gods ordinary Power, and
his absolute power, and rejects that which they call Potentia absoluta. We have
showed already, that Gods Omniscience is denied by the Socinians, whom
Chilling: highly esteems for learning, and piety also, as appears in what he
says in his Answer to the Direction to N.N. N. 29.) and yet they did well
understand the learned languages, and the words of scripture, for the
Grammatical signification.

33. With what modesty can He say, that it is evident in scripture, that,
Jesus Christ is the son of God, Savior of the world, and sits at the right
hand of God, and has all power give^ him in heaven and earth He, I say, who
with Arians, and other old and modern condemned Heretics, denies Christ to
be the son of God, and consubstantiall to his Father; as also his Merit and
satisfaction for mankind, whereby he is the Savior of the world? The like I say
of his resurrection, and that all men shall arise again at the last day, seeing
Socinians teach, as I said above, that we shall have bodies in Heaven, in
nature, substance, and essence, different from our bodies on earth. Against
whom, these words of S. John Chrysostom (Hom: 65. in Ioannem post medium) are
very effectual, as they were against some others who said, Corpora non
resurgent, our bodies shall not rise again. Nonne audiunt Paulum etc: Do they
not hear S. Paul saying; For this corruptible must do on incorruption. (1.
Cor: 15.53.) Neither can he mean the soul, seeing it is not corrupted: and
Resurrection must belong to that which is dead, which was the body only. And
Sermon: de Ascensione Domini, To: 3. Let us consider, who he is (...) whom it was
said, sit on my right hand: what nature that is, to whom God said, be partaker
of my seat. It is that nature which heard, thou art earth, and shald return
to ^arth. And; Learn who ascended, and what nature was elevated. For I
willingly stay in this subject, that by consideration of mankind we may with
all admiration learn the divine clemency, which has bestowed so great honor
and glory on our nature, which this day is exalted above all things. This day
Angels behold our nature shining with immortal glory in the divine Throne. And
S. Austine, sermon: 3. de Ascensione, says to the same purpose; an earthly body
is seated above the highest Heaven: bones ere while shut up in a narrow grave,
are placed in the company of Angels; a mortal nature is placed in the bosom
of immortality. And in the same place he says; If our savior did not rise
again in our body, he gave nothing to our condition by rising again.
Whosoever says this, does not understand the reason of the flesh which he
assumed, but confounds the order, and evacuates the profit thereof. I acnowledge
to be mine that which fell, that that may be mine which rose. I acknowledge that
to be mine, which lay in the grave, that that may be mine which ascended into
Heaven. From this Secinian Heresy it also follows, that indeed they deny his
true Ascension since they give him, and us, not his and our nature, but another
essentially different. But indeed is the Resurrection of the dead so clear in
scripture, for the sense, without any help of Gods Church? How then does Dr.
Potter (Page 122.) say in behalf of Hookers and M. Mortons opinion; A learned
man was anciently made a Bishop of the Catholic Church, though he did
professedly doubt of the last Resurrection of our Bodies. Was he a learned man?
Then surely he understood the Grammatical signification of the words, and yet
he erred in the sense; as also many others did, who denied Resurrection, as
Basilidiani, Saturniani, Carpocratiani, Valentiniani, Severiani, Hieracitae,
and others; which shows the necessity of a living judge, beside the letter, or
bare word of scripture. Which appears also, by the other example which you
alledg as clear: That, They which believe and repent, shall be saved: That, they
which do not believe or repent, shall be damned. For how is this clear for the
sense of the words, if it be not clear what that Faith and Repentance is
without which none can be saved? And yet you teach a Faith and a repentance,
wholly different from that which hitherto both Catholics, and Protestants have
believed and taught; as also Calvinists tell us of a Faith, justifying after a
new fashion; different both from Catholics and from Socinians: and yet what is
more necessary to salvation than true Faith, and repentance?

34. Neither are you more fortunate in your example, that, it is clearly
against Scripture, that the keeping of the Mosaicall Law is necessary to
salvation. Yea this instance makes against your self, and proves the necessity
of a living judge. For the first determination concerning that point, was made
in the Council of the Apostles (Act. 15. V. 28.) and the Scripture only
relates, what their definition was; and so this proves only, that the voice of
the Church, or Councels, may be clear, both for the words and sense; Or that it
may be declared by the Church of succeding ages, if it grow in time to be
obscure, which happens in this very Council. For, though no doubt but
Christians of that time, understood fully the meaning of the Council, by the
declaration of the Apostles, yet the contents thereof, were afterward to be
declared, to all posterity, by the Church how they were to be understood, and
practiced. The Council said, (Act. 15. V. 28. 29.) It has seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon you than these necessary
things; that you abstain from the things immolated to Idols, and blood, and
that which is strangled. Does not this rather seem contrary, than clearly in
favor of your affirmation, that it is clear in Scripture that the Mosaicall
Law is not necessary? For, one part, and practice, and Law obliging the Jews,
was, to abstain from blood, and that which is strangled (though I grant it was
also commanded before, but not to last always, as the practice of Christ's
Church declares) and yet in the council it is said to be necessary. And for
the other point; that you abstain from the things immolated to Idols, S. Paul
teaches, that, abstracting from an erroneous conscience, it is not necessary to
abstain from them, and yet in that Council it is enjoined as a thing
necessary. How then is this point so clear, if we look on scripture alone,
without reference to any declaration, or practice of Gods church?

35. Besides, for Circumcision; (which as the Apostle says, brings with it an
obligation to observe the whole Mosaicall Law, which observation is, you say
clearly not necessary) although if we take some words, or text of Scripture
alone, without any further reflection or consideration, it may seem clear,
that it is not only not necessary, but hurtful, S. Paul saying (Gal. 5.2.) If
you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: yet if we also call to
mind, the fact of the same Apostle (Act 16. V. 3) saying, taking him, he
circumcided him, (Timothy) that other text, If you be circumcised, Christ will
profit you nothing, which seemed clear and universal, will seem difficult,
and to be understood with some explication or restraint. For who will imagine,
that S. Paul would be author of that, whereby Timothy should be deprived of all
the good, he could expect from the Savior of the world? And the difficulty
will be increased, if we add that S. Paul caused Timothy to be circumcised,
propter Iudaeos etc. For the Jews who were in those places; for they knew all
of them, that his father was a Gentile; whereby one would apprehend, that S.
Paul judged it necessary (at least per accidens, because all knew that his
father was a gentil) that Timothy should be circumcised; and yet contrarily,
(Gal. 2. N. 3.) it is said; but neither Titus, whereas he was a Gentil, was
compelled to be circumcised. It is therefore very clear that this Point which
you alledg as clearly expressed in Scripture, ought rather to be numbered
amongst difficult, and obscure places, and (directly against your inference
that there is no need of an infallible guide) shows the necessity of such a
guide; because this determination, about the Mosaicall Law, was a Definition of
a Counsel, and must be declared by the practice of Gods church, as being
concerning some things, not to be always observed, but intended to be ordered
by the said Church; without whose authority, how should we know when, and in
what manner, the keeping of the Mosaicall Law became both unnecessary, and
damnable; mortua and mortifera, dead and deadly: since we see some part thereof
observed by the Apostles after our Saviors ascension, and sending the Holy
Ghost?

36. But at least, though you have erred in the first part of your example,
concerning the evidence of Scripture, that the keeping of the Mosaicall Law is
not necessary to salvation; yet you have undoubtedly proved your purpose in the
other part, That good works are necessary to salvation.

37. To this I answer: It is strange you should hold this point of the necessity
of good works to salvation, to be so evident in Scripture, that every one who
believes the Scripture has sufficient means to discover, and condemn the
contrary heresy; seeing you know the common Tenet of Protestants, that it is
impossible to keep the commandments, and the doctrine of many of them, that
all our actions are sins. Can the breach of the commandments, be a good
work? Or can sinful works be necessary to salvation? That is, can it be
necessary to do that which is necessary for us not to do, as every one is
obliged not to sin? How then can you say, the Scripture is clear in this
point, since so many of your chiefest brethren must maintain the contrary, and
diverse of them do in express terms deny good works to be necessary, yea and
call it a Papisticall error, yea worse than is the Papists Doctrine; as is
exactly set down in Brierly (Tract. 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 10. subdivis. 4.) And
see in the same Author, (Tract. 3. Sect. 7. N. 7.) The necessity of good works
contradicted for new Papistry, as pernicious as the old, by Illyricus in
Praefat. ad Romans and many others, And all this they pretend to do upon the
warrant of evident scripture?

37. And here I am to observe, that (Page, 157. N. 50.) you having alleged some
points as clearly contained in scripture (and in particular, concerning Faith,
Repentance, and Resurrection of the body, which we have demonstrated not to be
clear without assistance from Gods Church, and to be controverted even amongst
Protestants) add these remarkable words: These we conceive both true, because
the Scripture says so, and Truths Fundamental, because they are necessary
parts of the Gospel, whereof our Savior says, Qui non crediderit damnabitur.
Therefore say I, scripture alone is not clear, even in Fundamental points,
which directly overthrowes the whole Foundation of Protestants religion. And
because here you name expressly the Resurrection of the Body, and not only that
all men shall rise again at the last day, as you spoake (Page 101. N. 127.) I
would gladly know how it is a Resurrection of the Body which never rises
again, but another celestial body is created to succeed it? And what
reckoning do you make of the (39. Articles) of the English Church? since (Art
4.) it is said: Christ did truly rise rgaine from death, and took again his
body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's
nature, where with he ascended into Heaven, and there sits until he return
to judge all men at the last day.

38. You see then, that he has produced Fundamental points as clear in
scripture, which are proved not to be so. Of points not Foundamentall, he
chooses in the same place one example, so pregnant and certain in his
conceypt, that he hopes we will grant it to be such: namely, that Abraham begat
Isaac. But this text is not so clear, as he supposes. For how will he be sure
(if we take those words alone) that Abraham was Isaacs Father, and not
grandfather, or yet higher? We read in S. Matthew, (1.8.) Ioram begat Ozias:
three Kings being left out. For Ioram immediately begat Ochozias Ochozias begat
Ioas, Ioas begat Amazias Amazias begat Azarias or Ozias (for he had two names)
as is manifest (1. Paral. 3.11. and 12. and 2. Paral. 22.9. and seqq.) he
therefore left out three to wit, Ochosias, Ioas, and Amazias. as also (Matthew.
1.12.) frequently in the Latin copy one generation is left out: for with S.
Epiphanius and others, it is thus to be supplied and read: Josias begat
Jeconias and his brethren: and Jeconias begat Jechonias in the transmigration
of Babylon. For now we have only; Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren in
the transmigration of Babylon. On the contrary; where (Genes. 11. V. 12.) it is
said; Arphaxad begat Sale, as the Hebrew and Caldaean text have, both in this
place, and also (1. Paral. 1.18. and 24.) the Septuaginta both here, and there
put Cainan between. For they say; Arphaxad begat Cainan, and Cainan begat
Sale. S. Luke rollowes the Septuagint, (Chap. 36.) saying: Who was of Sale, who
was of Cainan, who was of Arphaxad. Besides all this, what will he understand
by genuit, he begat, or, fuit Filius, he was the Son, which may have diverse
significations, as Luc. (3.38.) Who was of Henos, who was of Seth, who was of
Adam, who was of God? Where we see, Filius a son must be taken in a different
sense, as it is referred to Henos, Seth, and Adam, and as it is referred to
God, whose natural son Adam was not. But I may seem to have said too much,
of such a matter as this, unless it did show clearly, the difficulty of
scripture, even in texts, which scarcely seem capable of difficulty.

39. Sixthly: whatsoever effect Protestants yield to Sacraments, at least it is
necessary they be maintained and not quite abolished, and taken from the true
Church, of which, Protestants teach the right administration of Sacraments, to
be an Essential Note. Yea, seeing there want not learned Protestants who hold
Baptism to be necessary to salvation, if the scripture be not clear in what
concerns this Sacrament, it is not clear in a necessary point as I said. Now
the very word Sacrament (taken in this sense) according to Protestants is not
found in scripture; yea Socinians teach, that it is an abuse of the word
Sacrament to apply it to holy rites. Volkelius Lib. 4: Cap. 22.
And in the definition thereof, Protestants cannot agree amongst themselves, nor
with us Catholics. Socinians go further, and deny Baptism to be a
Sacrament, and teach that all are not obliged to receive it, but that some may
be enrolled amongst the number of Christians without it; That the church may
either leave it of, or at least can compel none to receive it; and in a word,
that it is a thing adiaphorous or indifferent. Volkel: Lib. 6. Cap. 14.
The Eucharist also they hold not to be a Sacrament: Volkel: Lib. 4. C, 22.
that it may be administered by lay persons, Ibidem
and receyved by such as are not baptized. Lib. 7. Cap. 14.
Other Protestants do not agree about the necessity of Baptism.

40. As for the Matter and Form, of those two Sacraments which they admit;
Diverse of them expressly teach, that water is not absolutely necessary in
Baptism, but that some other liquid thing may serve: and yet the scripture
says (Joan: 3. V. 5.) Unless a man be borne again of water and the Holy
Ghost, he cannot enter the Kingdom of God, And (Ephesians: 5.25.26.) Christ loved
the church, and delivered himself for it, that he might sanctify it cleansing
it by the laver in the word of life. And for the Form; there want not that
teach, those words, In the name of the Father etc. not to be necessary. About
the Form of the Eucharist, they agree not; some requiring no words at all;
other requiring words, but in a far different manner, and meaning, one from
another; as may be seen in Bellarm. (Lib. 4. de Sacrament. Eucharistiae, Cap.
12.) And for the Matter; some Protestants, (as Beza, Tilenus, Bucanus,
Hommius), teach that neither bread nor wine is necessary for the Eucharist;
though it be evident in scripture, that our Savior consecrated in bread and
wine. As also Beza (Lib: Quest: and Respons: Vol, 3. Theol: Page: 364.) says;
that it is naevus in Ecclesijs etc. A blemish in those Churches, which use
unleavened bread rather than leavened, and savours of Iuda^sme; and yet he
affirms, that Christ. first blessed unleavened bread, and instituted this
supper at that time when it was not lawful for the Jews to use any but
unleavened bread And Sadeel (ad Artic: 56. abjurat: Page: 511.) says; Christ
indeed used* unleavened bread. Did Christ that which savours of Judaisme?
Christ did institute the Sacraments at supper. By what authority then do they
alter these things, if we must stand to scriprure alone without the churches
tradition and authority? What evident Text can they bring, for these, and the
like alterations, as, not first washing feet etc.? And Volkel: (Lib: 4. C.
22.) affirms, that if one cannot drink wine, he may use water without
changing the substance of the Lord's supper, as he speaks. Montague the
pretended Bishop first of Chichester, then of Norwich in the articles of
visitation Ann: 1631. Tit. Articles concerning Divine service and
administration of the Sacraments, (N. 9.) says thus: Is the wine as it should
be, representing blood, not sack, white wine, water, or some other liquor? but
yet for the further satisfaction of the Reader, I think sit to transcribe the
words of Brereley, who (Tract: 2. Cap. 2. Sect. 10. subdivis. 7.) does to this
purpose cite punctually the opinions of diverse learned Protestants, in these
words: Concerning the form of words requisite to a Sacrament; Luther To: 2:
Wittenberg. Lib: de Captivit: Babylon: Cap: de Baptis: Fol: 75.
affirms Baptism to be good with whatsoever words it be ministered, so the
same be not in the name of man, but of God. Yea he says. I doubt not but if
one receive (Baptism) in the name of God, although the wicked Minister give it
not in the name of God, he is truly baptized in the name of God. Also Brentius
In Catheches: Cap: de Bap:
and Zwinglius To: 2. Lib: de vera and falsa Religione, Cap: de Baptism: sub
finem Fol. 202. And see Zuinglius more plainly To: 2. Lib. de Baptis: Fol: 66
affirm, that no prescript form of words is necessary in Baptism: to omit
that Bullinger: in his Decads, Decad. 5. Ser: 6. Page 969. paulo post med: and
975. and 976. and 974.
does discourse at large against the necessity of any form of words to be
pronounced; And that Bucer (in Matthew. C. 26,) teaches, recital of Christ's
words in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, not to be necessary; one of their own
martyrs John Lassells in his letter Apologeticall recorded for the supposed
worth thereof by M. Fox (in his Acts and mon^ Page: 678.679.) affirms ehat S.
Paul durst not take upon him to say; Hoc est Corpus meum; This is my body, but
omitted those words, affirming yet further, that, The Lord Jesus said it once
for all. Whereupon he makes the necessity to consist, not in any words
pronounced, but in the breaking and giving of bread. Whereunto might be added
the agreeable doctrine of Muscolus in Lo: comm: C. de Caen: Dom: Page: 336.
circa med: and post medium.
, and the like answerable practice of the reformed Church in Scotland. (f)
As appears in the book of the usage of the kirk of Scotland, printed at
Rochell. 1596. (Page 189.190.191.192.193.

41. The same I may say of the Form, Matter, and Manner to be used in the
Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and others Degrees in the church. All which
points being of great importance in Gods church which cannot consist without
true Governors and Sacraments, and yet not being determinable by scripture
alone, as is manifest, both by the thing it self, and by the different and
contrary Opinions of learned Protestants concerning them, we must infer, that
all things necessary are not evidently contained in scripture.

42. Which is so manifest a truth, that Dr. Field one of the greatest Clerks
amongst English Protestants, (L. 4. C. 20.) summeth together diverse traditions
not contained in scripture, saying; we admit first the Books of Canonical
Scriptue as delivered by tradition (what more fundame^tall article than this,
to Protestants who profess to have no Faith but by scripture, which this man
acknowledges to be receyved and believed by traditions?) Secondly: the chief
heads of Christian Doctrine, and distinct explication of many things, somewhat
obscurely contained in Scripture. (Mark, that a point contained obscurely in
scripture may become evident by explication of the church, as I said in the
beginning of this chapter: and mark that he specifyes the chief heads of
christian Doctrine.) Fourthly: the continued practice of such things as are not
expressed in scripture. Fifthly: such observations as are not particularly
commanded in scripture. Amongst which and the former, he numbreth the Fast of
Lent, the Baptism of infants; (of which he says; it is not expressly
delivered in scripture, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, nor any express
precept there found that they should do so) and observation of our Lords day,
and afterward he confesses, that many other things there are, which the
Apostles doubtiess delivered by Tradition. Covell in his Answer to John Burges
( Page: 139.) affirms the moderate use of the Cross to be an Apostolical
Constitution, and in his Examination against the Plea of the innocent, ( Cap. 9
Page 104.) refers the terms of Archishops unto Apostolical Ordination. And
Whitgift in his Defense etc: affirms and proves the Apostles Tradition of
Easter. And Oecolampadiu^ affirms the Baptism of infants not to be taught in
scripture, [ in li^: Epi^tolarum Zu^ngl^i and Occolampa^^] [ Page: 101. and
363.] and so likewise does Zuinglius (To: 1. Lib de Bapt. Fol. 96.) These men
therefore must either confess the authority of Gods church and her infallible
Traditions, or yield to the pernicious Doctrine of Anabaptists. Dr. Tailor in
is Defense of. Episcopacy, is so full to our purpose for the necessity of
Traditions, that I thought sit to transcribe his words as they ly (. 19.) which
are these, [Pag: 100.] Although we had not proved the immediate Divine
institution of Episcopal power over Presbyters, and the whole flock; yet
Episcopacy is not less then an Apostolical ordinance, and delivered to us by
the same authority that the observation of the Lords day is. For, for that in
the new Testament we have no precept, and nothing but the example of the
Primitive Disciples meeting in their Synaxes upon that day, and so also they
did on the saturday in the Jewish Synagogues, but yet (however that at Geneva,
they were once in meditation to have changed it into a Thursday meeting to have
shown their Christian liberty) we should think strangely of those men that
called the Sunday Festival less then an Aposticall ordinance, and necessary
now to be kept holy with such observances as the Church has appointed.

Baptism of infants is most certainly a holy and charitable ordinance, and of
ordinary necessity to all that ever cried, and yet the Church has founded this
rite upon the tradition of the Apostles; and wise men do easily observe that
the Anabaptists can by the same probability of scripture enforce a necessity of
communicating infants upon us, as we do of baptizing infants upon them, if we
speak of immediate Divine institution, or of practice Apostolical recorded in
scripture, and therefore a great Master of Geneva in a book he writ against the
Anabaptists, was forced to fly to Apostolical traditiue ordination, and
therefore the institution of Bishops, must be served first, as having fairer
plea, and clearer evidence in scripture, then the baptizing of infants, and yet
they that deny this, are by the just anathema of the Catholic Church,
confidently condemned for Heretics.

Of the same consideration are diverse other things in Christianity, as the
Presbyters consecrating the Eucharist; for if the Apostles in the first
institution did represent the whole Church, Clergy and Laity, when Christ said
[Hoc facite, Do this] then why may not every Christian man there represented,
do that which the Apostles in the name of all were commanded to do? If the
Apostles did not represent the whole Church, why then do all communicate? Or
what place, or intimation of Christ's saying is there in all the four
Gospells, limiting [Hoc facite, id est, benedicite] to the Clergy, and
extending [Hoc facite, id est, accipite and manducate] to the Laity? This also
rests upon the practice Apostolical and traditive interpretation of H: Church,
and yet cannot be denied that so it ought to be, by any man that would not have
his Christendom suspected.

To these I add the Communion of Women, the distinction of books Apocryphal,
from Canonical, that such books were written by such Evangelists, and
Apostles, the whole tradition of scripture it self, the Apostles Creed, the
feast of Easter (which amongst all men that cry up the Sunday-Festivall for a
Divine institution, must needs prevail as Caput institutionis, it being that
for which the Sunday is commemorated.) These and diverse others of greater
consequence (which I dare not specify for fear of being misunderstood) rely
but upon equal faith with this of Episcopacy (though I should wave all the
arguments for immediate Divine ordinance) and therefore it is but reasonable it
should be ranked amongst the Credenda of Christianity, which the Church has
entertained upon the confidence of that which we call the Faith of a Christian,
whose Master is truth it self. Thus far the Doctor: in whom, beside other
diverse points for our purpose, it is remarkable, that he affirms the denial
of the baptizing of infants to be an Heresy, and yet that the contrary truth is
not contained in scripture; which therefore cannot be said to contain all
necessary points of Faith.

43. Seaventhly: it is a prodigious kind of thing, that Protestants would make
men believe, that all necessary points are evident in scripture, and yet for
understanding scripture prescribe certain necessary Rules or Means which it
is evident few can possibly observe, and no less evident by the confession of
our adversaryes, that being observed, they are not sufficient; and consequently
even by those Means assigned for understanding scripture, we know that
scripture is not evident, in all necessary things; which is a point well to be
noted. Sanchius de sacra scriptura ( Col: 409.) says: The Holy scripture, in
those things which are necessary to be known for salvation, is so clear, that
it may easily he understood of all those who are endued with Gods spirit, and
who read it attentively and daily, and understand the words and phrases
thereof. Easily? Does not this contradict all the former words, which require
knowledge hard to be gotten, and pains not easy to be taken? The scripture
(says this Protestant) is clear in all necessary points, to all that are
endued with the spirit of God. But if they be endued with the spirit of God,
they are presupposed to have true Faith for points necessary to be known; and
then I ask fromwhence had they that Faith, without which, scripture is not
clear? Not from scripture, because it is prerequired to the understanding of
scripture. Therefore from some other means, which certainly can be no other,
but the Church and tradition. Besides this, that is, beside the spirit of God,
yea and true Faith, they must read scripture daily and attentively, and must
penetrate the words and phrases, which is so far from being easy to be done,
that he assigns no fewer tha^ nineteen Rules for doing it, whereof one is,
that we interpret scripture juxta analogiam Fidei, and by the Scriptures
themselves, by diligent conferring of places like to one an other. Is this
easy? And yet we must not forget, that he speaks of points necessary to de
believed. Scharphius assigns twenty Rules (in cursu Theologico de scrip:
controvers: 8. Page: 44.) which unless they be kept, we cannot but err. But
perhaps all these Rules are easy. Judge of the rest by these To know original
languages; also to discuss the words, phrases, and Hebraismes: to conferr the
places which are like, and unlike to one another; to ask advise, and to help
once self with interpreters etc. Is this to make the scripture easy, and
evident? Or is it not to make it evidently true, that it is evident, few can
possibly observe those Rules, without which, these men confess, that scripture
cannot be understood?

44. And now to prove that I also spoake truth, in saying, it is evident that
these Ruls though they were observed, are not sufficient to make scripture
clear and evident, it were abundantly sufficient to reflect on the great, and
irreconciliable disagreements amongst Protestants themselves; which argues,
that, either scripture is not evident, or that they are extremely blind, or
malicious, or dissemble and spea^^ against the belief of their own heart. Does
not Chill. say, (Preface N. 30.) that there is no more certain sign that a
point is not evident, than that honest, and understanding, and indifferent men,
and such as give themselves liberty of judgment after a mature consideration of
the matter, differ about it. But yet I will prove it out of a Protestant, who
in general brings vnaswerable arguments against the pretented evidence of
scripture, and proves in particular, that the Means of Rules assigned by
Protestants, to understand the scripture, are not sufficient to convince or
make evident the the sense thereof. I mean Dr. Jeremy Tailor in a Discourse of
the liberty of Prophesying, printed An: 1647. He sect: 3. endeavors to prove
in general, the difficulty and uncertainty of arguments from scripture, First
by consideration of scripture it self in regard of different copies,
translations etc. By the many senses of scripture when the Grammatical sense
i^ found out: for, there is in very many scriptures a deuble sense, a
litterall, and a spiritual: and both these senses are subdivided. For, the
litterall sense is either natural or Figurative: and the spiritual is
somtymes Allegorical, somtymes Anagogicall; nay, somtymes there are diverse
litterall senses in the same sentence. This, I say, first he proves in
general; and then [Sect: 4.] directly to my purpose, he proves that the means
which are wont to be assigned for interpreting scripture are but uncertain.
Thus he discourses: First, sometime the sense is drawn forth by the context and
connection of parts. It is well when it can be so. But when there is two or
three antecedents, and subjects spoken of; what man, or what Rule shall
as^ertaine me, that I make my reference true, by drawing the relation to such
an antecedent, to which I have a mind to apply it, another has not etc:
Secondly: An other great pretense is the conference of places; which he says
is of so indefinite capacity, that, if there be ambiguity of words, variety of
sense, alteration of circumstances, or difference of style amongst Divine
Writers, then there is nothing which may be more abused by wilful people, or
may more easily deceive the unwary, or that may amuse the most intelligent
Observer. This he proves by some examples, and says, that it is a fallacy a
posse ad esse affirmative: from a possibility of being, to an affirmative
heing: that is, because a word is somtymes used in such a sense, therefore it
must always be taken in that sense; and concludes, that, this is the great way
of answering all the Arguments, that can be brought against any thing, that any
man has a mind to defend: and any man that reads any controversyes of any
side, shall find as many instances of this vanity, almost as he fynds Arguments
from Scripture. This fault was of old noted by S. Austin [ De Doctrina
Christiana. Lib. 3.] for then they had got this trick; and he is angry at it.
Neque enim putare debemus, esse praescriptum, vt, quod in aliquo loco res
aliqua per similitudinem significaverit, hoc etiam semper significare credamus.
Thus the Doctor.

45. And I say in one word: This conferring of diverse places can produce no
certainty, unless you can first give a certain and evident Rule, why, and
when, this word is to be explicated by that, rather than that by this; the
first by the second, rather than the second by the first. But who will dream,
that any such certain Rule can be given?

46. Thirdly: Tailor procedes; Oftentimes Scriptures are pretended to be
expounded by a proportion and Analogy of reason. This he impugnes at large: and
says, it is with reason, as with men's tastes. When a man does speak reason,
it is but reason he should be heard; but though he may have the good fortune,
or the great abilityes to do it, yet he has not a certainty, no regular
infallible assistance, no inspiration of Arguments and deductions: and if he
had, yet because it must be reason that must judge of reason, unless other men's
understandings were of the same air, the same constitution and ability, they
cannot be prescribed unto, by an other man's reason; especially because such
reasonings as usually are in explication of particular places of Scripture,
depend upon minute circumstances and particularityes, in which it is so easy to
be deceyved, and so hard to speak reason regularly and always, that it is the
greater wonder if we be not deceyved. I may say, that, Faith being above
Reason. Reason must submit to Faith, and not Faith be subject to Reason. For,
as S. Bernard excellently says [Ep: 190.] What is more against Reason, than
that one should strive to go beyond Reason by force of Reason?

47. Fourthly: Others pretend to expound Scripture by the analogy of Faith.
This he says is but a chimera, a thing in nubibus, which varyes like the right
hand and left hand of a pillar. For, if by the analogy of Faith be understood
the Rule of Faith, that is, the Creed, were it not a fine devise to go to
expound all the Scripture by the Creed, there being in it so many thousand
places which have no more relation to any Article in Creed than they have to
Tityre tu patulae? But if you extend the analogy of Faith further than that
which is proper to the rule or Symbol of Faith, then every man expounds
Scripture according to the analogy of Faith: but what? His own Faith: which
Faith if it be questioned, I am no more bound to expound according to the
analogy of another man's Faith, then he is to expound according to the analogy
of mine. And this is it that is complained on of all sides ^^at overvalue their
own opinions. Scripture seems so clearly to speak what they beheue, that
they wonder all the world does not see as clear as they do etc: In this he
speaks what we find by daily experience; and the Reason is, because evident or
obscure, probable or improbable, being but extrinsecall Denominations (in
respect of the Objects which are in themselves either so, or not so, Est, or
Non) taken from the Acts of our understanding, which have great dependence on
several complexions, affections, education, and other prejudices, no wonder if
one man judge that to be true and evident, which another conceyves to be obscure
or false.

48. Fifthly. Consulting the Originals, is thought a great matter to
interpretation ^f Scriptures. But this is to small purpose. For indeed it will
expound the Heb ^w and the Greek, and rectify Translations. But I know no man
that says that the Scriptures in Hebrew and Greek are easy and certain to be
understood, and that they are hard in Latin and English. The difficulty is in
the thing however it be expressed, the least in the Language. If the Original
Languages were our mother tongue, Scripture is not much the easyer to us; and a
natural Greek or a Jew can with no more reason, nor authority, obtrude his
interpretations upon other men's consciences, than a man of another Nation.

49. And [Num: 6.] he says in general: That, all these ways of interpreting
Scripture, which of themselves are good helps, are made either by design, or
by our infirmityes, ways of intricating and involving Scriptures in greater
difficulty, because men do not learn their doctrines from Scripture, but come
to the understanding of Scripture with preconceptions and ideas of doctrines of
their own; and then no wonder that Scriptures look like Pictures, wherein
every man in the room believes they look on him only, and that whersoever he
stands, or how often soever he changes his station. So that now, what was
intended for a remedy, becomes the promoter of our disease, and our meat
becomes the matter of sickness: And the mischief is, the wit of man cannot
find a remedy for it; for there is no rule, no limit, no certain Principle by
which all men may be guided to a certain and so infallible an interpretation,
that he can with any equity prescribe to others to believe his interpretations
in places of controversy or ambiguity. Osiander in his confutation of the Book
which Melancton wrote against him, observes, that there are twenty several
opinions concerning justification, all drawn from the Scriptures by the men
only of the Augustan Confession. There are sixteen several opinions concerning
original sin; and as many definitions of the Sacraments as there are sects of
men that disagree about them. This makes good what I said above, that the
Protestants cannot agree in the very definition of Sacraments.

50. Lastly, (Number: 8.) he concludes thus. Since, those ordinary means of
expounding scripture, as seurching the Originalls, conference of places, parity
of Reason, and analogy of Faith, are all dubious, uncertain, and veryfallibe:
He that is the wisest, and by consequence the likelyest to expound truest in
all probability of reason, will be very far from confidence; because every one
of these a^dmany more are like so many degrees of improbability and uncertainty
all depressing our certainty of fynding out truth in such mysteries and amidst
so many difficultyes.

51. I have thought good to set down this discourse, as being unanswerable, and
making directly for us against the tenet of Protestants, that, the Scripture is
evident in all things necessary to be believed; I say, even in things
necessary. For although he give to his Third Section this Title (Of the
difficulty and uncertainty of Arguments from Scripture, in Questions not simply
necessary, not literally determined) yet it is minifest thathis reasons either
prove universally of all articles, or prove nothing at all: especially if we
consider, that the most necessary mysteryes of Christian Faith, are also most
sublime: and therefore no wonder, if having in the title to his Third Section,
mentioned the difficulty and uncertainty of arguments from scripture in
questio^ns not simply necessary, in the proofs and prosecution of his reasons,
he is silent of any such distinction, and shows not in all, or any one of his
reasons of the difficulty and uncertainty of the sense of scripture, any
difference between necessary and unnecessary points, nor is any man able to do
it, upon any solid ground, as will appear to any one who will severally
consider his reasons. And when in the same Title he mentions Questions not
literally determined, I cannot imagine what he would say; since according to
his reasons, no Question can literally be determined in such manner, as still
there will not remain difficulty and uncertainty, unless he were content to
acknowledge the authority of the Church for determining some particular meaning
of Scripture, as the literal sense thereof. Besides, unless he can give us a
catalogue of questions simply necessary (which Chilling: says, is impossible
to be done, and those Protestants who have gone about to do it, could never
agree amongst themselves, nor is it possible they should etc:) how shall we
know that they are literally determined, or that Scripture in them is evident?

52. He said, the difficulty arises from diversity of editions, translations,
senses, literal or spiritual, natural or figurative; the insufficiency of
conferring places; of parity of reason; analogy of faith; consulting the
originalls. And who can deny, but that these reasons hold, as well in
necessary, as unnecessary points? Where will he find any text of scripture
(evident, and not subject to any one of those difficultyes, which he has urged
to prove the difficulty of scripture) affirming that those means and helps,
are insufficient for unnecessary points, sufficient for necessary? If he
answer: that if they be not clear, they cannot be necessary: I reply; This is
not to prove out of Scripture, but by reason: and he has told us, that it is
with reason as with men's tastes: and in our present question, his reason will be
petitio principij, a supposing, that all necessary points are evidently
contained in Scripture. For if this be not supposed, it will be soon answered,
that we may be obliged to believe articles of Faith, by means of the Church or
tradition, though they be not in particular, evidently contained in scripture.
Does not the prime Prorestant Sanchius by me cited above, affirm, that the
said means, or nineteen Rules prescribed by him, are required for finding out
the sense of Scripture in those things which are necessary for salvation?
Therefore if these means be doubtful and uncertain, we cannot from Scripture
alone receive sufficient certainty, to believe with an act of Faith, even
things necessary to salvation. And indeed, all the means which Protestants
prescribe, being humane actions and endeavors, wherein every man is subject to
error; this only remains certain, that they can yield us no certainty. A
deduction so clear, that Whitaker (de Eccles. Controv. 2. Q. 4. P. 221.) says
plainly. Such as the means are, such of necessity must be the interpretation:
but the means of interpreting dark places are uncertain, doubtful, and
ambiguous, therefore it cannot be, but that the interpretation also must be
uncertain; then it may be false etc.

53. Eighthly: Protestants require for interpretation of Scripture, the spirit
of God, as we have seen above, and [2. Pet. 1. V. 20.21.] it is said; No
prophecy of Scripture is made by private interpretation, but the holy men of
God spoke, inspired with the Holy Ghost. And therefore God has given to his
Church the Gift of interpretation; and I suppose Protestants will not say, that
the spirit of God, the Grace of God, and the Gift of interpretation given by
God, is necessary only for things not necessary, and that we can attain to the
knowledge of points necessary by our own natural forces: which yet we might
do, if reading alone could suffice us for understanding the true meaning of
all necessary Mysteryes of Faith. And it is strange that Dr. Morton should say,
(Apolog. part. 2. Lib. 1. Cap. 19.) That which is questioned, is, whether all
such things as are necessary to salvation, are so very plain, that the most
unlearned believers, by the reading thereof, may be instructed to piety: and
heretics, though not learned, may clearly enough be confuted by them: and he
holds the affirmative part. And so Protestants must either confess themselves
to be Pelagians, if they hold Gods special grace and spirit not to be
necessary for understanding scripture aright; or if they acknowledge the
necessity of such particular Grace, they must yeald, that scripture is not
evident in all things necessary to be known. Which argument may be yet
enforced in this manner.

54. The gift of interpretation is not given to every private person, as we
gather from the words of S. Paul (1. Cor: 12.) To one is given by the spirit,
the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge; to another,
interpretation of languages, to another; prophecy etc: which declare that the
spirit of interpreting is not given to all, in so much as Kemnitius (Exam:
Part: 1. Fol: 63.) teaches that the Gift of Interpretation is not common to
all, no more then is the gift of healing and miracles, and therefore we can only
be certain that it is in the Church, not in any private person. Therefore the
Scripture is not so evident, that we can be sure of the meaning thereof, by the
interpretation of any, but of the Church.

55. Which finally Protestants must either acknowledge, or else pinfold
themselves in an inextricable circle and labyrinth; in this manner: Scripture
is evident only to those who are endued with the spirit of God and seeing S.
John (Joan: 1 Cap: 4. V. 1.) warnes us. believe not every Spirit, but prove the
spirits if they be of God, it follows that Protestants must have some means
to try this spirit, before they can believe it; which means with them must be
only Scripture: and therefore they must know the meaning of the Scripture, before
they can make use of that spirit, by which they are to know the meaning of the
Scripture. Therefore the same spirit is necessary to know the meaning of
Scripture, and Scripture necessary to try the truth of this spirit; and so this
spirit shall be necessary for attayning the meaning of Scripture, which meaning
of Scripture must be attained before we can use this spirit. Therefore this
spirit is necessary, and not necessary for understanding Scripture, which we
must understand before we can try this spirit; and Scripture necessary, and not
necesssary for trying this spirit, which we must know to be from God before we
understand Scripture. And in a word, the spirit must depend on the
understanding of Scripture, and the understanding of Scripture must depend on
the spirit; and the final conclusion will be, that the same thing must depend
on it self, the spirit on spirit, Scripture on Scripture: and so both of them
must exist both before, and after, themselves. Neither is there any means to
avoid this Circle, except by having recourse to Gods visible Church, whose
spirit needs no trial of men; since God himself has given a public
Approbation of Her spirit, by obliging all to obey Her voice, and to receive
even Scripture it self, from Her Authority and Testimony.

56. Ninthly: I now urge more in particular, that which heretofore I touched in
general: that they can alledg no evident Text of Scripture, declaring any
command that we must have recourse to Scripture alone, for knowing the Objects
or Articles of Faith: and yet if the End which is Faith, be necessary, the only
Means (that is Scripture) to attain that End, must also be necessary: nor can
they produce any evident Text, proving that from Scripture alone, we can learn
all points necessary to be believed.

57. The clearest and most effectual way to prove the truth of this my
Assertion, will be to examine such Texts as Protestants are wont to alledg, and
to show how little they make to their purpose. They produce these words (Deuteronomy:
4. V. 2.) You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, neither shall you
take away from it: keep the Commandments of the Lord your God which I command
you. Search the Scriptures. (Joan: 5.39.) these things are written, that ye
may believe. (Joan: 20.31.) And that of the Beraeans: daily searching the
scriptures. (Act: 17. V. 11.) we have the Prophetical word more sure (2. Pet.
1.19.) All Scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to argue, to
correct, to instruct in justice: that the man of God may be perfect, instructed
to every good work. (2. Timoth: 3.16.)

58. Now these Texts, are so far from proving evidently what is intended, that
it is evident, that neither these, nor any other can be alleged, to prove,
that men are obliged to have recourse to scripture alone. The reason is;
because whatsoever can be alleged out of the old testament, cannot be so
understood, as to exclude the living Guides granted to that Church, as Moses,
the Prophets, and writers of Canocall scripture: nor out of the new testament
to exclude the Apostles, and preachers of the Gospel. Therefore no scripture can
be so understood, as to oblige us to consult scripture alone. Nay out of this
ground I further infer, that, seeing at that time Christians wanted not living
infallible Guides, they had no obligation at all to consult scripture, (and
much less scripture alone) and if they had no such obligation, no Canonical
scripture can with truth affirm, that they were so obliged, and consequently
it is an injury to scripture to interpret it in that sense. This my deduction
is confirmed by a doctrine of Chilling. (Page: 116. N. 159.) that, God requires
of us under pain of danatio^ only to believe the verityes therein (in
scripture) contained, and not the divine authority of the Books wherein they
are co^tayn^d. By which assertion, he does not only disoblige me^, from having
recourse to scripture but also from believing it to be the word of God when the
contents thereof ca^ be learned by other means, as they might, while those
visible guides were living. Therefore no text ca^ be brought to prove, that men
were, or are, obliged to have recourse to Scripture for matters of Faith,
though they are bound to believe them to be the infallible word of God, as in
due time I will prove against his pernicious doctrine to the contrary delivered
in this same page and number.

59. But beside this, there is another fundamental ground of Protestants,
which being well pondered, will make it a hard task for them to allege any
text of scripture to the purpose in hand. They teach, that only after the Canon
of scripture was perfited, it became a sufficient Rule of Faith; and
consequently, before that time, we could not be sure that all necessary points
were expressed therein. Therefore, do I infer, no scripture could affirm, that
scripture contaynes all necessary points, except that book, yea text, which was
written last, and did make up the whole Canon; and all precedent parts of
scripture could only speak in the future tense, and as it were by way of
prophecy, that other books of scripture were to be written; and that then the
scripture would be sufficient for all necessary points. For which prophetical
kind of meaning, Protestants do not alledg scripture; as for example, that the
old Testament did prophecy of every book of the New; or, that one part of the
new contaynes a prophecy of the other parts that were to follow; which to
affirm, were groundless and ridiculous. And who can say, that the scripture
which was written last, affirms the sufficiency of scripture alone? If
Protestants have any such assurance, let them show us, in that last book, or
text, the words which evidently contain such a meaning and asseveration. For,
on that last text alone they must rely, for the reasons alleged, that, without
that text the Canon was not complete. Add yet further, that, it being not
certain what part of Canonical scripture was the last, they cannot with
certainty alledg any one text of the whole Bible, to prove their purpose. And
much will be added to their difficulty, if we consider, that Protestants do not
agree, whether some of those scriptures, which were the last, or among the
last, be Canonical, or no; for example, the Apocalips, the second, and third
Epistle of S. John, which, by some Protestants are expressly put out of the
Canon. And then how can they so much as offer us any proof from the old
Testament, since it is impossible to be done out of the new, as has been
proved.

60. Tenthly. Although what I have said, were sufficient to stop all attempts
of Protestants, to alledg any text of scripture for their purpose; yet for the
greater satisfaction of the reader, in a matter of such moment me^t, I will, as
I said above, examine the texts, usually alleged, a^dshew, that they are
neither evide^t, nor probable, nor pertinent. Whereby I shall not only confute
all their proofs, but jointly bring a convincing argument, for us, against
them; whose Doctrine must needs fall, if they be demonstrated, to fail in
their allegation of scripture for this maine point. And it is to be observed,
that Chilling: seems in effect to acknowledge, that it is hard to alledg any
effectual text for his purpose, while he is very sparing in producing
scripture, but makes perpetually use of Topicall arguments and discourses; as
for example, if scripture were not evident in all things necessary, we could
not be obliged to believe them, and the like, being indeed conscious, that the
places of scripture commonly alleged by Protestants, are of small force.

61. To the words objected out of (Deuteronomy: 4.2.) You shall not add to the word,
which I speak to you: I answer; they cannot signify, that all things which the
Jews were obliged to believe, or practice, were contained evidently in
scripture alone, as if the writing of Moses did exclude the ordinary living
Rule, permanent amongst the Jews, to wit the Definition of the Priest, of
which it is said (Deuteronomy: 17.8.) If thou perceive that the judgment with thee be
hard and doubtful, etc: or as if it excluded Moses himself, or the rest of
this veryfourth chapter, out of which the objection is taken; or other
chapters, which he wrote afterward even in that book of Deuteronomy, which has
in all 34. Chapters; or the last Chapter, which could not be written by Moses,
but Esdras, or Iosue, disciple and successor to Moses, as appears by the
same (Chapter, V. 5.6.) where the death and burial of Moses is described and
it is said; (Deuter: 34.6,) no man has known his sepulcre until, this
present day: or the comma^ds which the Prophets sometime gave, as, (1. Reg. 15.)
or some solemnityes or Feast instituted for tha^ksgiving for some benefit: or,
as if after those words of Moses, and after his death no scripture could be
written by Iosue and other Canonical writers, amongst the Jews in the Old, or
Christians in the New Law, for fear of transgressing, You shall not add to the
word which I speak unto you. Therefore ethose words, You shall not add to the
word etc: must have some other meaning, then these me^ would violently give
them against the express words themselves, which are not, You shall not add to
the writing which I write to you, but, to the word which I speak to you; which,
if we respect the letter, signifyes rather unwritten tradition, than any thing
written in scripture. And that the Jews had unwritten traditions, see Brierly
(Tract: 1. sect. 4. subdivis: 6.) citing both ancient Fathers, and Protestant
writers: and so this text makes for tradition; against the objectours
rhemselves. Besides; You shall not add to the word, may signify contrary to it,
by declining to the right, or left hand, as is said [Cap: 5. V. 32.] especially
such as might bring men to the worship of Beelphegor (as it follows V. 3.) or
of some other new Deity or Idol. For, Moses in all this Chapter, and
frequently in deuter: intends to exclude new Gods, and Rites. Thus the Hebrew
al, that is, ad, is taken for contra, (Psalm: 2.2.) and numbers (14.2.) so
(Gal. 1.8.) S. Paul denounces an anathema to those who evangelize aliud praeter
id quod ipse evangelizavit; praeter, beside; that is contra, against: for he
treates of those who went about to yoyne Christianity with judaisme. This
appears in the words of the same verse, you shall not add to the word which I
speak to you; neither shall you take away from it: keep the commandments of
your God, which I command you. Which latter words signify; that to add, or take
away from Gods word, is to break, or do something against his comma^deme^ts,
and not to do something which is not commanded, so it be not forbidden, and
otherwise may tend to Gods glory: Otherwise the Jews added many things to the
Law of God, as, engravings, the ornaments of the temple: Days of lottes,
(Esth. 9.31.) the Feast of fire given; the Feast of the Dedication etc. All
which considered, who does not see what a strange Argument this is: Moses
says to the Jews, thou shall not add to the word which I speak. Therefore
nothing must be believed or practiced by Jews; or Christians, which is not
expressed in writing, or scripture; yea in the scripture of the old Law: and what
is this but to condemn the Law of Christ?

63. Toar those words, search the Scriptures, spoken by our Savior to the
Jews (Joan. 5.39.) I answer: first; if they will have their purpose, they must
add, solas, earch the Scriptures alone, (as Luther, in the Text, where it is
said (Romans 3.28.) We account a man to be justified by Faith without the works
of the Law, in favor of justification by Faith alone, translats, justified by
Faith alone) otherwise they are not to purpose. For the question is only
whether scripture alone contain all things necessary to salvation. 2. Indeed
they cannot add, solas, nor can any understand Search the Scriptures, in that
sense of taking Scriptures alone, since our B, Savior in that Chapter of S.
John, to prove that he was the Messiah, alleges the testimony of S. John
Baptist: and a greater testimony then John, the very works which I do
(miracles) and also the voice of his Father. (Matthew. 3.17.) Therefore our Savior
beside Scriptures, alleges other very powerful means; the voice of John;
the voice of works; the voice of his eternal Father. 3. This Text speaks only
of one Article of Faith, to wit, that Christ was the Messiah, and it is no
good consequence; the scriptures are clear in one point of Faith: rherfor they
are clear in all. 4. Even for this one Point he does not absolutely command
them to search the scriptures, as necessary of themselves, but only ex
hypothesi. For, upon supposition that they did not believe for the other
threefold testimonies, and that they believed scripture to be the word of God,
then it only remained, that they should search the scriptures, and so our
Savior says, search the scriptures, and expressly adds, (Joan. 5.39.) For you
think in them to have life everlasting; showing that he speaks, as it were ad
hominem: seeing you, o Jews, will not believe the testimony of John, of
Miracles, and of my Eternal Father, at least search the scriptures, in which
you think to have life everlasting, and the same are they that give testimony
of me. As we Carholikes may say to Heretics, who reject the Authority of Gods
Church, and Tradition, and admit only scripture; since you will not believe
the voice of the Church, and yet believe scriptures, search the scriptures,
which give testimony of the Church. And yet it were strange, if Protestants
should, from such our daily speech infer, that we believe no other Rule, or
Judge besides scriptnre alone: and I hope Protestants will not deny but that the
testimony of S. John, our Saviors Miracles, and the voice of his Eternal
Father, were sufficient to oblige men to believe that our Savior was the
Messiah, though they had not searched the scriptures; as we see Infidels to be
converted to the Faith of Christ by Miracles, and other Arguments of
Credibility, without help of scripture, which they believe not to be the word
of God, except by force of those Arguments: and I suppose they will grant that
our Saviors Miracles, and those other Arguments which he used, were more
forcible than any can be brought by any Apostolical man, for the conversion of
Gentiles. So that upon the matter, this Text, search the scriptures, pondered,
as it should be, shows not only that scripture alone is not necessary, but
absolutely proves, it is not so, but may be supplied by othermeanes, as S.
Irenaeus witnesses of people that were converted to the Faith of Christ
without knowledge of scripture 5. Protestants cannot prove that scrutamini,
search, is the imperative mood. S. Cyrill: Lib. 3. in Joan: Cap: 4. holds, that
it is of the indicative; and some learned Catholic Divines are of the same
mind; yea Beza says; I agree with Cyrill who clearly wa^nes us that this is to
be understood rather by a verb of the indicative: and so our Savior
reprehends the Jews who did search the scriptures and yet did not believe in
him of whom those scriptures spoke. According to this Opinion, or explication
of this text, our Savior in this place, neither commands, nor forbids,
approves, nor disallowes the reading of scripture, but only signifyes, what
they did, and supposing they did so, blames them for not doing it with such a
heart and disposition of soul, as to find in them the true Messiah. At least,
seeing this exposition cannot be evidently disproved, it is evident, that this
text does not evidently convince, that the scripture alone contaynes evidently
all things necessary to salvation: yea, rather, since those men did read
scripture, and yet not believe in Christ, it is a sign, that scripture alone
is not so very clear, as to necessitate a man's understanding to the true
meaning thereof, without some dispositions on our behalf, of which dispositions,
no man being absolutely and evidently certain, he cannot be certainly assured,
that he has attained the right sense by scripture alone, without some other
help, as was the preaching, and Miracles of our Savior and the Testimony of
s. John, and of his Eternal Father; and as to us, is the Authority, and voice
of Gods Church. But if we will follow the other opinion, that our Savior
commanded those men to read the scriptures, it cannot be understood as an
absolute command (seeing they had other means more than sufficient, and more
effectual than scripture, to beget in their souls a belief that Christ was
the Messiah: to wit, Miracles, voice of his Father etc:) but only, as I said,
upon supposition, that they by their own fault, not making use of those other
means, were obliged to make use of this of scripture; yet so, as they might
free themselves from that hypotheticall and voluntary necessity, by applying
themselves to those other means, for neglect of which, our Savior reprehends
them [V. 38.] His (the Fathers) word you have not remaining in you, because
whom he has sent, him you believe not: (and yet they believed the scripture)
and this reprehension he prosecutes to the end of that Chapter. The obligation
then of searching scripture was voluntary, and the command only to Jews, and
Jews so incredulous, that they would neither believe s. John, nor our Savior
Christ, nor the Eternal Father. And if Protestants will imitate those Jews,
and reject all Authority of a living Guide, and rely only on scripture, they
for finding the true Church, shall be obliged to search scriptures, by a
voluntary culpable necessity, which they ought not to impose upon others, but
contrarily, they ought by all possible means, to free themselves from it, by
submitting to Gods Church, and her Preachers, as so many Nations have done
before they knew scripture, and in that case were obliged to attend to other
Motives and Means; and so thete is a far more universal and necessary command
to Hear the Church, than to search the scriptures. 6. Our Savior spoke only
of the Old Testament. And shall we out of his words infer, that in the old
Testament alone, all Articles of Chrstian Faith are particularly and evidently
contained? This Objection then proves too much, and therefore indeed proves
nothing. 7. Scrutamini, search, signifyes diligence, care, endeavor, labor,
which rather declare the difficulty and obscurity, than the facility and
evidence of Scripture. For, what great pains and industry can be required, to
find out that which is evident? And therefore S. Chrysostom says, that our
Savior remitted the Jews not to a simple and bare reading of the scripture,
but to a very diligent search thereof: For, he did not say; Read the
scriptures, but search. And Euthymius says; He bids them digg more deeply into
them, that they may find out those things which are deeply laid up therein like
a treasure. How then is it evident, that Scrutamini signifyes evidently, that
all things necessary are clear in scripture alone? And yet we must remember,
that our B. Savior, spoke those words, in order to the greatest and most
essential Article of Chritian Faith, to wit, that Jesus Christ is the true
Messiah: about which Point, the Eunuch [Act: 8.34.] had need that Philip should
interpret Esaias unto him: I beseech thee, of whom does the Prophet speak this?
Of himself or of some other? To which purpose, S. Hierome to S. Paulinus says
of this Eunuch: So great a lover of the Law and of divine knowledge was he, that
even in the chariot he read holy scriptures. And yet when he had the book in
his hands, and conceyved our Lords words in his thoughts, repeated them with
his tongue, sounded them with his lips, he was ignorant of him whom he
worshipped unknown, though yet it were he of whom the book did speak. And
[Luk, 24.27.] the disciples stood in need that Christ should interpret unto
them in all scriptures which were concerning him. What greater Mystery than
this concerning Christ himself, and how was it evident in Scripture, when even
the Disciples, who were brought up in the School of Christ, under such a
Master; whose Divine words they heard, and saw his admirable works and
Miracles, did not understand it? How many ways is this Objection against
Protestants, and nothing at all against us?

63. Neither will they gain any more by those words (Joan. 20.31.) which
Chilling. also objects (Page 211. N. 42.) These are written, that you may
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: and that believing, you may have
life in his name. For, First; what makes this to the purpose of proving that we
are obliged to rely on scripture alone, for all matters of Faith? In these
words there is no command even to read S. John's Gospel; but they only declare
the end, and occasion, which moved him to write it, namely, to confute the
Ebionite Heritiks, and prove that Jesus is the son of God; which makes good
what I said hertofore, that the Evangelists did not purposely intend to deliver
all things necessary to salvation, or make a Catechism, but wrote according to
several different occasions, as now we see, that if the Ebionites had not
taught that wicked Heresy, S. John had not written his Gospel. And therefore; 2.
This Text speaks of one Point only, not of all Articles of Faith. 3. S. John
speaks only of his own Gospel, and Chilling. holds it only for probable, that
every one of the Gospells contaynes all necessary Points; and therefore no
certainty can be taken from these words, that Scripture contaynes all things
necessary. 4. Even for this one Point of Faith S. John says not, that his
Gospel is evident, excluding the Authority of Gods Church, and her Pastors;
yea he carefully relates our Saviors words to S. Peter (Joan. 21.17.) Feed my
sheep: and we see, for want of submitting to such Authority, Chilling. and
other Socinians deny that, for which s. John wrote his Gospel, that Jesus is
the true son of God. 5. In the Text; These things are written that you may
believe etc. s. John speaks not of the doctrine taught, but of the Miracles
wrought by our Savior Christ: and therefore we must, if this Objection were of
any force, say, that all things necessary to salvation, are evidently contained
in that part, or those words, and lines of his Gospel, which precisely recount
our Savionrs Miracles: which to imagine, is ridiculous, and absurd. Now that s.
John speaks of our Saviors Miracles, is confessed by Whitaker, as a thing
evident (de scripttur. Q. 5. P. 619.) saying; It is evident that the Evangelist
speaks of the signs and Miracles of Christ, not of his Doctrine. The
Protestant Bible says, Many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of
his Disciples, which are not written in this book. But these are written, that
ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. Where we see, these
are written, is referred to the substantive which went before, that is, signs;
and it appears also by reflecting on the Antithesis which he makes betwee^ not
written, and wtitten: Many are not written, which he says of signs (many
other signs truly did Jesus, which are not written) and then adds: but these
are written. Therefore written and not written fall upon the same thing. But not
written did relate to signs or miracles; Therefore written must be refered to
the same. Chilling: himself [Pag: 211. N. 42.] says; By, These are written,
may be understood, either these things are written, or these signs are
written. And then, what consequence is this; S. John wrote some Miracles of our
Savior Christ, that men might believe him to be the son of God: Therefore all
necessary Points of Faith are evident in scripture, or in S. John's Gospel
taken alone? And he does but play the Sophister, to deceive some simple Reader
when out of S. John's words (in the same Page 211. N. 42.) he infers, that, All
that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, was sufficient to make them believe
that which being believed with lively Faith, would certainly bring them to
Eternal Life. For, a lively Faith, or a Faith working by Charity, must include
not only that one Article, (Jesus is the son of God) but all other Mysteryes of
Faith, together with the keeping of all Commandments belonging to Charity,
and other Virtues; and it may be said of any least Point of Faith, that it
being believed with a lively Faith, will certainly bring the believer to
Eternal life; because a lively Faith, involves all other necessary Points of
Faith, and Manners. And his silent leaping from Faith alone, (yea from one only
Article of Faith alone) to a lively Faith, demonstrates that the believing of
that Point alone, Jesus is the son of God, is not sufficient for salvation,
unless it be joined with the belief of other Points belonging both to Faith,
and Manners, and with observation of the Commandments; which he will never
prove to be evidently contained in the scripture alone, and much less in the
Gospel of S. John alone: whereof more shall be said herafter. In the mean
time, take for your Instruction these wholesome words of S: Austine de unit:
Eccl: Cap: 4. Whosoever believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, yet so
dissent from his Body, which is the Church, as their Communion is not with the
whole wheresoever it is spread, but is found separate in some part, it is
manifest, that they are not in the Catholic Church. Therefore it is not
sufficient for salvation, only to believe, that Christ is the son of God.

64. The example of men of Beroea (Act: 17. V, 11.) who were searching the
scriptures, if these things were so, is of no force, in many respects. First
Here is no least insinuation of any universal precept to read or search the
scriptures, but only a narratio^ of what those me^ did: and if the fact of
some, may be alleged, as a command for all to read the scriptures, why may
not the example of others, who believed only by hearing S. Paul, and the other
Apostles preach, and seeing them work Miracles, and propose excellent reasons
and arguments of Cre^^^bility, be alleged for a command, that men should
believe without delaying their conversion, till they read scriptures?
Secondly; they did not search the scriptures with any intention to find all the
particular Mysteryes of Christian Faith evidently expressed in them, which is
our question, but only that main point which was preached to them by S. Paul,
that this is Jesus Christ whom I preach to you. (V. 3) other particular points,
they would easily learn by further instruction of the Apostles, being once
assured in general, that they were persons worthy of all credit, and
Messengers of God. Thirdly; The scriptures which they did search, were the
Books of the Old testament; in which, all the necessary particular points of
Christian Faith are not evidently contained, since Protestants teach, that all
necessary points are contained in scripture, only after the whole Canon of the
Bible was ended: yea, the word searching, shows, that even that article of the
true Messiah was not evidently contained in the Old testament; but that the
finding of it required labor; as in the like case I showed above out of S.
Chrissostome, and others, about the word scrutamini, search. Fourtly; Although
the search of scriptures, and consonance of them with s. Paul's words, might
help the conversion of those me^, yet who can doubt, but the preaching, and
viva vox, interpretation, and explication of scripture, alleged, urged, and
illustrated by S. Paul, did also cooperate, and operate more then the only
reading of scriptures, which many did read, and yet were not converted? Which
shows their obscurity, even in this Fundamental Article, concerning the
Messiah, as we read (Act. 13.27.) Not knowing him, nor the voices of the
prophets that are read every sabbath. And (Luc. 24.44.45.) it is said. These
are the words which I spoke to you when I was with you, that all things must
needs be fulfilled which are written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets,
and the Psalms of me. Then he opened their understanding, that they might
understand the scriptures. Wherefore the example of the Beroeans is not to the
purpose, unless it can be proved, that they redd the scripture, without the
assistance of such other means, as I have mentioned; and that they found the^
so ^^ident, that they needed no other help; which certainly is wholly impossible
to be proved. Even Cartwright (in whitg. Def. P. 784.) confesses, that Unless
the Lord works miraculously and excraordinarily, the bare reading of the
scriptures, without the preaching, cannot deliver so much as one poor sheep
from destruction; Therefore scripture is not evident in all necessary Points;
otherwise it might deliver men from destruction. Fifthly: I say that not only
those men had no obligation to read the scripture, before they believed S.
Paul, but (as the rhemes testament upon this place wisely observes) they were
bound to believe the Apostle, and obey his word, whether he alleged scripture,
or no; or whether they could read and understand it, or no. Therefore this
example cannot be alleged to prove, that all necessary Points of Faith are
evident in scripture alone. Sixthly: This example is wholly impertine^t, if the
Beroeans did search the scriptures only for their greater comfort and
confirmation in the Faith which they had already embraced by the preaching of
S. Paul, and not by searching the scriptures; as Cornelius a Lapide holds, and
to that purpose alleges the Text itself, which says: (V. 11.) And these were
more noble the^ they that are at Thessalonica, who receyved the word with all
greediness, daily searching the scriptures, if these things were so. Where,
first it is said, they receyved the word, and then, were searching the
scriptures: And this also is the judgment of the Rhemes Testament.

65. Besides the places which I have answered, Protestants are wont to alledg
the words of the Apocalypse (22. V. 18.19.) I testify to every one hearing the
words of the prophecy of this Book, If any man shall add to these things, God
shall add upon him the plagues written in this book. And if any man shall
diminish of the word of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and of these things that be
written in this book. But what is this to the purpose of proving, that we are
obliged to read, and seek out of the Apocalypse alone (for of it only, S. John
expressly declares himself to speak) all necessary Points of Christian Faith;
or that it contaynes evidently all such points in particular? So far was this
sacred book from having been written for a Catechism, or an entire Rule of
Faith, that it is a Prophecy or revelation of things to come, so hidden, and
sublime, and profound, that S. Hierome says; Tot habet Sacrame^ta quot verba;
Every word is a Mystery. The curse which S. John interminates, falls upon such,
as either would add any thing contrary to this book, or corrupt it, by
fathering on it some apocriphall writing, or Revelation, or diminish it by some
part, or, which is worst of all, quite abolish it as not Canonical, as in old
time, Marcionistae, Alogiani, Theodosiani, as witnesses Epiphan: (Lib. 2.
Here Is. 51.) did; And Erasmus, Lutherus, Brentius, and Kemnitius, do. The
Author of the Commentary upon this book, bearing the name of S. Ambrose,
says; that, He curses Heretics that used to add somewhat of their own that was
false, and to take away other things that were contrary to their Heresies. But
God forbid, we should interpret Him to exclude the Authority of the Church and
lawful Pastors, since S. John himself, as long as he lived, was a Living
Rule, or Judge for matters of Faith, besides the word written in the Apocalypse,
or in other Canonical scripture: and so no scripture was then the only Rule of
Faith. Yea, S. John after the said curse, adds two verses more; and Cornel. a
Lapide (Quest. Proaemialib. in Apocalypsim) says: it is clear, that S. John
wrote the Apocalypse before he wrote the Gospel: For, this he wrote being
returned from his banishment of Patmos, (where he wrote the Apocalypse) as S.
Hierome teaches in Catal. script. Ecclesiast. and Eusebius (Lib. 5. Hist. C.
24.) and S. Austine, and Bid, Proaemio in Evangelium S. Ioannis. Kemnitius
also (Exam. Page 202.) confesses that S. John wrote his Gospel after the
Apocalypse. And Cornel. a Lapide (Proaem. in Epist. 1. S. Joannis) speaking of
S. John's three Epistles, says; It seems that he wrote them about the same
time that he wrote the Gospel. By which account, they were written after the
Apocalypse. Therefore that curse in the Apocalypse cannot be so understood, as to
exclude all other writings after it.

66. But the chiefest place which Protestants are wont to alledg for the
sufficiency of scripture alone, is that of S. Paul, (2. Timoth. 3. V. 16.17.)
All scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to
instruct in justice: that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every
good work. I answer: First; Speaking in rigor. Profitable; Necessary;
sufficient; are things both different, and separable. A thing may be
profitable, and not necessary; and a thing may be both profitable, and
necessary for some effect, and yet not sufficient alone to produce it. Every
line in Gods word is profitable, but not every line is either necessary or
sufficient. Our question is, whether scripture alone be sufficient. The text
alleged, says only, that it is profitable; but says not, that it is either,
necessary, or sufficient. Therefore (if we consider this place alone) Faith may
be conceyved without any scripture, because scripture here is not said to be
necessary; and cannot be conceyved by scripture alone, because scripture is not
said to be sufficient. And then the argument comes to be retorted, in this
manner. That which is no more than profitable, is neither necessary, nor
sufficient; but in the text alleged, (which Protestants bring as sufficient to
prove the sufficiency of scripture) scripture is only said to be profitable.
Therefore it is neither necessary, nor sufficient.

67. Secondly. The words precedent to this text, are these: but thou continue
in those things which thou have learned, and are committed to thee: knowing of
whom thou have learned: and because from thine infancy thou have known the
holy scriptures, which can instruct thee to salvation, by the Faith which is in
Christ Jesus. By which words it appears, that the scripture of which S. Paul
speaks, is the Old testament, which alone, Timothy from his infancy had
known, and which could instruct him to salvation. And therefore if this
Objection be good, the Old testament, taken alone, will be sufficient for
salvation: and, if it be a good consequence, scripture is profitable to
instruct; therefore it is necessary, and sufficient: the Old testament, which
could instruct Timothy to salvation, must be necessary and sufficient, even for
these times: or, if they were sufficient for those, but not for these our
times, and that it be clear that S. Paul spoke of those times, and only of the
Old testament, as is confessed by Henoch Clapham, Aretius, Zwinglius, Hooker,
and Ochinus: as may be seen triple Cord. (Chap. 7. Sect, 5.) with what
conscience can they apply that text to us, as if the scripture of which that
text speaks, did signify the scriptures both of the Old, and New testament?
Nay, seeing S. Paul wrote that Epistle to Timothy about forry years before the
Canon of scripture was perfited, and that Protestants affirm that a living
Judge was necessary till the Canon was complete, it follows, that the text
whith they alledg, cannot signify, that at that time, the scripture alone was
either necessary (because there was then a living Judge which could determine
all Controversyes) or sufficient, (because the Canon was not finished) And
therefore although it were granted that the Old Testament (which was perfited)
had alone been evident in all necessary points, and thereby sufficient for the
Jews, yet the scripture of the New Testament, being not perfited when S. Paul
wrote these words, it does not follow, that they can signify their sufficiency
for Christians. As Hooker (Eccles. Polit. First Book, N. 14. Page 43.) says:
When the Apostle affirmed unto Timo thy, that the Old was able to make him wise
to salvation (2. Timoth. 3.15.) it was not his meaning that the Old alone can
do this unto us which live sithence the publication of the New. Mark how this
great man amongst Protestants, affirms, that S. Paul speaks only of the Old
scripture, and that this alone is not sufficient for Christians: which he
proves, because the Apostle says, that those scriptures were able to make
Timothy wise through the Faith which is in Christ. (V. 15.) And this appears
also by the words of S. Paul saying to Timothy in the same Chapter, (V. 10.)
But thou have attained to my doctrine, institution, etc. And afterward: But
thou continue in those things which thou have learned, and are committed to
thee, knowing of whom thou have learned. That is, of S. Paul his Master. Where
we see, that S. Paul did not send his scholar to Scripture alone, but to his
own Institution, Doctrine, and interpretation, and things committed to him by
word of mouth, or to scripture taken together with an infallible Living Judge:
and so the Objection proves what we teach, and overthrowes the doctrine of
Protestants.

68. Thirdly. Protestants must show, that all things necessary are evidently
contained in scripture; and this they must prove, by some evident Text. For, if
it be not evident, the matter will still remain uncertain. But this Text, on
which they chiefly rely, is not evident: Therefore it is not sufficient to prove
that which they intend, and upon which, the whole Fabric of their Faith
depends. The minor (That this Text is not evident) is evidently proved, because
it is impossible to show evidently, that profitable, in this Text, signifyes
necessary; or if that were freely granted, it will remain more than impossble
to prove, that profitable, or necessary, must in this Text, signify sufficient.
For by what Grammar, Logic, or Divinity, can any dream this to be feceable
The like I say of the words; All scripture; which they interpret not to signify
every part, or Book of Scripture; but the whole body of Canonical scripture
taken together* whereas Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, Lib: 4. Cap: 10. says truly: In
the judgment of all that understand latin, that which is said of all scripture
inspired of God, is of said every book which is inspired of God. Beside, the
Apostle by this Universal proposition, that all scripture is inspired by God,
proves, that every particular scripture is profitable, and that the scripture
of the Old Testament, which Timothy had known from his infancy, was profitable
to instruct him to salvation. And therefore as every part of scripture is
inspired, so also is it profitable. And this is more clear according to the
Protestant Englsh Translation (Anno 1611. and 1622.) and Greek Text; All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine etc:
Where we see, that of the same thing, or subject, and by the same word
(scripture) it is said that it is inspired, and that it is prositable. Therefore
as every part of Scripture is inspired, so is it also profitable. And what an
incongruous change of sense were it of the same word, All Scripture, that is,
every part of Scripture is inspired; and, all Scripture, that is, only the
whole body of Scripture is profitable? How then will they be able to prove,
much less to prove evidently, that the words, All Scripture, must be certainly
taken in this sense? And yet till they do this, they have done nothing for
their purpose.

69. Fourthly. We must also consider, to whom S. Paul avoucheth Scripture to be
even profitable: Which is not to every unlearned person, but that the man of
God may be perfect: whereby is to be understood a Doctor, and Bishop, as Corn:
a Lapide affirms upon this place, and (In 1. Timoth: Cap: 6. V. 11. where S.
Timothy is called Homo Dei, the man of God) proves it out of S. Chrisost: and
Theodoret, that men eminently holy, are called men of God: as Prophets are so
called; 4. Reg: 1.11. and 12. Elias is called the man of God and Samuel 1. Reg:
9. The like we see Judic: 12.6. and 3. Reg: 13.1. It is also a title of Kings,
Princes, and Prelates so Moses Deuteronomy: 13.1. is called Homo Dei, man of God; and
David 2. Paral: 8.14. Now, Timothy was a Doctor, Bishop, and Prince of the
Church of Ephesus. This is also the interpretation of Beza. To those then who
are supposed to be already well instructed by other teachers, the Scripture is
very profitable; that is, not Scripture alone, but joined with tradition and
interpretation of Gods Church. A parallel to this of S. Paul, All scripture
inspired of God; is the Text of S. Peter (Ep: 2. C. 1. 20.21.) Understanding
this first, that no prophecy of scripture is made by private interpretation.
For, not of man's will was prophecy brought at any time; but the holy men of God
spoke, inspired with the Holy Ghost. If Heretics did confider and practice
this primum, first, that all prophecy is not made by private interpretation;
For not by man's will, etc: they would not be Heretics, but would see to whom
scripture is profitable; not to those who will admit no Guide, nor
interpretation, but their own wit and will: to whom it becomes (by their only
fault) not profitable, but pernicious, as experience tells us. So far is it
from being necessary or sufficient*

70. Thus their Chiefest proofs out of scripture, being clearly confuted, it
remaynes demonstrated, that they have no solid proof, that Scripture alone
contaynes all things necessary to Salvation. But yet let us alledg some more
Arguments to disprove their Tenet.

71. Eleaventhly. Seeing Protestants cannot prove out of scripture, that
scripture is evident for all necessary points, this alone is sufficient to
overthrow their Assertion and Religion. But for the difficulty and obscurity of
scripture, we have alleged evident scripture, even in a point most necessary
concerning the Messiah, in the example of the Eunuch, and the Apostles
themselves: which difficulty is further most clearly testified by S. Peter, who
expressly writes thus (2. Pet: 3.15.16.) As also our most dear brother Paul
according to the wisdom given him, has written to you. As also in all
Epistles speaking in them of these things, in the which are certain things
hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the
rest of the scriptures to their own perdition. In which words I observe:
First, that as by reason of the hardness of some things in S. Paul's Epistles,
me^ did err, so they did err also in the rest of the scriptures, for the same
reason; which shows, that other scriptures contain things hard to be
understood. Secondly. That those me^ did err in necessary points, seeing their
errors were cause of their destruction. Therefore the scripture is hard and
obscure in necessary matters. For, an error cannot be damnable unless the
contrary truth be necessary. The translatour of the English bible Ann: 1600.
(Preface) avoucheth, that it is, A very hard thing to understand the holy
scriptures; and that diverse errors, sects, and heresies grow daily for lack
of true knowledge thereof. Mark that he speaks of matters of moment, in which to
err, is to fall into Heresy.

72. Twelfthly. I take an Argument from these your own words, (Page 54. N. 4.)
If men did really and sincerly submitt their judgments to Scripture, and that
only, and would require no more of any man but to do so, it were impossible but
that all Controversies, thouching things necessary and very profitable, should
be ended: and if others were continued or increased, it were no matter. In
which words you seem te extend the sole sufficiency and evidence of scripture
to things very profitable. For if these be not evidently contained in
scripture, how can you say, it were impossible but that all controversies
touching them should be ended; since obscurity or want of evidence, is that
which produces all Controversyes? Besides, you say, that if Controversyes in
things not necessary, or not very profitable, were continued, or increased, it
were no matter. Therefore a contrario sensu, it imports that Controversyes about
things very profitable, be ended. But this saying of yours demonstrates, how
little credit you deserve in affirming all things necessary to be evidently
contained in scripture alone, since you teach the same of things very
profitable, which are so far from being all contained evidently in scripture,
that for a convincing Reason for the contrary, we need no other proof then
manifest Experience, and contentions of Protestants among themselves,
concerning many points which they expressly declare to be of great moment; as
for example, the Canon of scripture it self; and, How it is known to be the
word of God; the infallibility of Christian Faith; the Eucharist,
Predestination; Free Will; universal Grace; Repentance; Definition, necessity,
effect of Sacraments; Government of the Church; and other points: and yet in
Charity, whose essential Character is to judge and hope the best, as you say
(Page 34. N 6.) I suppose you will not judge, but that all those your brethren;
at least diverse of them, do really and sincerely submitt their judgments to
scripture, and seeing it is manifest, that they do not agree, I see no remedy
but that you must confess scripture alone not to be evide^t, nor sufficient in
all things very profitable. If then, even according to your own words above
recited, it import that there be some evide^t, and certain means to end
Controversies touching things very profitable, and that this cannot be done by
scripture alone, it must require a living Guide. Besides, what evident text of
scripture can you produce to prove, that it alone is evident in all things very
profitable? And your Reader will be glad to know what you mean by things very
profitable and; whether you intend to distinguish them from things profitable;
and whether your meaning be, that scripture alone, is clear for things very
profitable, but not for points only profitable: and if you answer
affirmatively; then you will be obliged to inform us, how we may be able to
distinguish so evidently between very profitable, and only profitable things,
as that we may certainly know, what must be clearly contained in scripture,
what not. But it is impossible for you to give any such intelligible, solid,
practical distinction, and therefore you cannot affirm, that all very
profitable points, are evident in scripture, but not things only profitable.
Since then, you cannot say, that al profitable things are evident in scripture
(for, that were to affirm that all scripture is clear, there being nothing
revealed by God, which is not profitable, and yet who will deny but that the
scripture is obscure in some points?) you must be content to conclude, that all
very profitable things are not evidently contained in scripture. And further,
whereas you join together things necessary, and things very profitable, and
assign the selfsame means for ending all controversies concerning those two
kinds of things (which is, really and sincerely to submitt their judgments to
scripture, and that only) seeing this means will not serve for ending all
controversies in things very profitable, (as I have showed) it follows, that
it is not sufficient to end all controversies concerning things necessary. And
if in things profitable, and very profitable, that may seem evident to one,
which to another may seem obscure, or even untrue; the same also may happen in
things necessary, in regard that all the Rules, and industryes, which
Protestants assign for finding the true sense of scripture, are no less
fallible in things necessary, than in things very profitable. But whatsoever
your opinion be concerning things very profitable, or profitable, I take thence
a strong argument, and say.

73. 13: Not only for things necessary, but for things profitable also, there
cannot be wanting in Gods Church some means to end controversies touching
them, by declaring them with certainty, and infallibility. For although, if
things profitable be taken in particular, and severally, every one is no more
than profitable; yet speaking of a Community, or a great Mystical body
(especially such a body as the Church of Christ is, instituted by an infinite
wisdom, and ordained to the sublime End of Eternal Happyness; toward the
attayning whereof, every little advantage and help is not to be little esteemed,
and the privation and want thereof, or every error therein, is to be in like
proportion, avoided) things profitable taken as it were in general, ought in
moral consideration to be judged necessary in such a body, which otherwise
would look like a man conceyved with his Essence only, divested of all
accidents, and integrant parts: or like to his body endued with necessary parts
only, for example, heart and brain, without feet, hands, ears, eyes, and
other senses. And therefore it cannot be imagined, but that God has left means
in his Church for declaring truths, and determining Controversyes in profitable
points, as occasion shall require. The scripture of it self is most sacred, and
effectual to the conversion of sinners, and convincing of Heretics, if it be
redd with sobriety, and interpreted with submission of our understanding to
Gods Church. Otherwise, Experience shows, that, men from it (by the fault of
men, not of it) take occasion of implacable and endless contentions, without
any possibility of remedy, till they submitt their judgments, and will, to some
infallible Living Guide. For this cause also their Faith and Religion is
sterill and barren, as being deprived of Gods blessing for the conversion of
nations to Christ, fortold by the Prophets, as a Privilege of the true Church.
Thus, the very name of Christ, preached by some who were out of the Church, was
not efficacious to the casting out of devils, (Act. 19.15.) yea contrarily,
the devil so prevayled against them that they fled out of that house naked and
wounded. (V. 16.) Even so the scripture out of the Church, is neither
effectual for concord among Christians, nor for the conversion of Infidels to
Christ.

74. 14. What I have said about the necessity of profitable things, considered
as it were in general, and consequently, of some means to determine
controversyes concerning them, may be confirmed by a discourse of yours (Page
9. N. 6.) where you say; We are bound by the love of God, and love of Truth,
to be Zealous in the defense of all Truths that are any way profitable, (Mark
any way, and not only Very profitable,) though not simply necessary to
salvation. Or as if any good man could satisfy his conscience without being so
affected and resolved. Our Savior himself having assured us (Matthew. 5.19:)
That he that shall break one of his least Commandments (some whereof you
pretend are concerning venial sins, and consequently the keeping of them not
necessary to salvation) and shall so teach men, shall be called the least in the
kingdom of Heaven. And [Pag: 277. N. 61.] you teach, that, God has promised
such an assistance, as shall lead us, if we be not wanting to it and ourselves,
into all, not only necessary, but very profitable Truth, and guard us from all,
not only destructive, but also hurtful, errors. Which words are directly
against yourself, whom we have heard saying; That, if controversyes touching
things not necessary, or not very profitable, were continued or increased, it
were no matter: Whereas here you say of things any way profitable, that by the
love of God, and love of Truth, and obligation of conscience, and under pain
of being the least in the kingdom of Heaven, (that is, of being excluded from
the kingdom of Heaven, according to S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact, who
interpret minimus, the least, to signify, nullus, none at all) we are bound to
be zealous in the defense of them. A great zeal indeed, to maintain, that, if
debates concerning them, could not be ended, but continued or increased, it
were no matter! Do you not through your whole Book teach, that all errors
against revealed truths, are breaches of Gods command, and are in themselves
damnable, and will effectually prove such, if ignorance do not excuse, or a
general Repentance do not obtain pardon for them? How then is it no matter,
if they remain undecided, or that there be no means to decide them? Is it no
matter whether one by breaking one of Gods commandments, be least in the
kingdom of Heaven? As for your Parenthesis, that we pretend, some of the
commandments to be concerning venial, sins, the keeping whereof is not
necessary to salvation; I say, it is either untrue, or impertinent. For, if you
mean, that we pretend some error against any least revealed Truth,
sufficiently proposed, to be a venial sin, it is very untrue. You know, that
Cha: Ma: does teach the contrary through his whole work, and thereon grounds the
maine scope of his Book: That, of two, disagreeing in Points of Faith, or
Objects revealed by God, and sufficiently propounded, one committs a deadly
sin, and without repentance cannot be saved. If you mean only in general,
that some commands oblige only under a venial sin, your saying is
impertinent to a matter, in which the least sin committed by disbelieving any
Point sufficiently proposed as a divine Revelation, is deadly, as I have
declared, and you often, and purposely grant. Yea further; how can it be said,
that some of the least commandments of which our Savior speaks, are
concerning venial sins? seeing our Savior affirms, that, whosoever shall
break one of his least commandments, and shall so teach men, shall be called the
leastin the kingdom of Heaven, if those words signify an exclusion from
Heaven? Or, if this exposition please you not, but that you will have them
understood of venial sins, then you must explicate, how our Savior could say,
he that shall break one of his Commandments obliging only under a venial sin,
shall be least in the kingdom of Heaven, seeing all men break such commands, by
committing venial sins, and so there shall be no comparison or contradistinction
of least or great, but all must be reckoned amongst the least. Besides; you
must reflect, that our Savior speaks of him that shall break one of his least
commandments, and shall so teach men. Now, though it be but a venial sin to
break a commandment, which obliges only to abstain from a venial sin; yet,
to teach, that it is lawful to break any commandment, even concerning
venial sins, is a great and deadly sin, as being an error against Faith: As
for example, to lie or wittingly to utter an untruth, ossicioce, or jocose,
without prejudice unto any, is but a venial sin: yet to believe, and much more
to profess and teach, that it is no sin to lie, were a grievous deadly sin of
Heresy. To what purpose then do you tell us, of our pretending, that some least
commandments are only concerning venial sins? But the truth is, I conceive it
will be hard to name any writer who does so often cast himself into labyrinths,
and perplexityes, as you do. In the mean time, it appears more and more, how
necessary it is, that there be some living judge for determining Controversyes
of Religion, not only in Articles universally, and absolutely, and in all
cases, necessary; but also for other Points, which by occasion of emergent
Heresies, or for avoiding contentions, and danger of Schisms, or other causes,
may necessarily require to be determined: And that, things profitable, taken as
it were in general, are necessary to be believed in Gods Church, as I have
declared above.

75. Which truth is yet strongly proved by other words of yours in the same
(Page 9. N. 7.) where, about holding errors not necessary, or not
fundamental, you say; It imports very much, though not for the possibility
that you may be saved, yet for the probality that you will be so: because the
holding of these errors, though it did not merit, might yet occasion
damnation. As the doctrine of Indulgences may take away the fear of Purgatory,
and the doctrine of Purgatory the fear of Hell, as you well know it does too
frequently. So that though a godly man might be saved with these errors, yet
by means of them, many are made vicious, and so damned. By them, I say, though
not for them. No godly Layman who is verily persuaded that there is neither
impiety nor superstition in the use of your Latin service, shall be damned, I
hope, for being present at it; yet the want of that devotion which the frequent
hearing the Offices understood, might happily beget in them, the want of that
instruction and edification which is might afford them, may very probably
hinder the salvation of many which otherwise might have been saved. Besides;
though the matter of an Error may be only something profitable, not necessary,
yet the neglect of it may be a damnable sin. As not to regard venial sins,
is in the doctrine of your Schools, mortal. Lastly: as venial sins, you
say, dispose men to mortal; so the erring from some profitable, though lesser,
truth, may dispose a man to errors in greater matters. As, for example: The
belief of the Popes infallibility is, I hope, not vnpardonably damnable to
every one that holds it: yet if it be a falsehood (as most certainly it is) it
puts a man into a very congruous disposition to believe Antichrist, if he
should chance to get into that See. These be your words; to which I may add
what you have (Page 388. N. 6.) where you say to your adversary: Whereas you
say, it is directly against Charity to our selves, to adventure the omitting of
any means necessary to salvation, this is true: but so this also that it is
directly against the same Charity, to adventure the omitting any thing, that
may any way help or conduce to my salvation, that may make the way to it more
secure, or less dangerous. And therefore if the errors of the Roman Church do
but hinder me in this way, or any way endanger it, I am in Charity to my self
bound to forsake them, though they be not destructive of it. And, (Page 278. N.
61.) you say: If I did not find in my self a love and desire of all profitable
truth: If I did not put away idleness, and prejudice, and worldly affections,
and so examine to the bottom all my opinions of divine matters, being prepared
in mind to follow God, and God only, which way soever he shall lead me; if I
did not hope, that I either do, or endeavor to do these things, certainly I
should have little hope of obtaining salvation. What could have been said more
effectually, to prove the necessity of some infallible Means to decide
controversyes eve^ in things only something profitable, (as you speak.) For,
out of these your own words it will be demanded, whether it be no matter, that
such points be declared, since they may import very much, though not for the
possibility that men may be saved, yet for the probability that it will be so,
because the holding of errors in those matters, though it did not merit, might
yet occasion damnation; and by the means of them, many are made vicious, and
so damned: and because the want of that devotion which the truths contrary to
those errors, might happily beget, and the want of that instruction and
edification which they might afford, may very probably, hinder the salvation of
many, which otherwise might have been saved; since also, though the matter of
such errors may be only something profitable, not necessary, yet the neglect of
them may be a damnable sin. (And I pray you, what greater neglect then to
hold and write as you do, that if controversyes concerning them be continued
and increased, it is no matter?) since also erring from some profitable, though
lesser truth (here is no mention of necessary, or very profitable truth) may
dispose a man to error in greater matters; since finally it is against the
virtue of charity to ourselves, not only to adventure the omitting of any
means necessary to salvation, but also the omitting any thing which may any
way help or conduce to our salvation, that may make the way to it more secure
or less dangerous.

76. These demands, I say, will in all reason be made; and since they are but
the very same doctrine which you deliver in the same words, you must grant them
all: and then it is easy for us to infer the necessity of a living infallible
judge, seeing all profitable points cannot, according to Protestants, be proved
evidently out of scripture; both because their Argument holds not in this case;
namely, (That if all things necessary were not evidently contained in
scripture, they could not be necessary, since we speak not of necessary, but
only of profitable, and something profitable, and lesser truths, to use your
words:) And also because experience shows, that Protestants do not agree, nor
have any infallible certain means to bring them to an agreement, concerning
such points.

77. But here is not an end of the advantages you give us against your self,
adding greater strength to this Argument. For, (Page: 277. N. 61.) You teach,
that such an assistance is conditionally promised us as shall lead us, if we be
not wanting to it and ourselves, into all, not only necessary, but very
profitable truth, and guard us from all not only destructive, but also hurtful
Errors. And afterward speaking of a Church which retaynes fundamental truth,
but is regardless of others, you say; Though the simple defect of some truths
profitable only, and not simply necessary, may consist with salvation; yet who
is there that can give her sufficient assurance, that the neglect of such
truths is not damnable? Besides, who is there that can put her in sufficient
caution, that these Errors about profitable matters, may not according to the
usual fecundity of error, bring forth others of a higher quality, such as are
pernicious and pestilent, and undermine by secret consequences the very
foundations of Religion and piety? Who can say, that a Church has sufficiently
discharged her duty to God and man, by avoiding only Fundamental Heresies, if
in the mean time she be negligent of others, which, though they do not plainly
destroy salvation, yet obscure, and hinder, and only not block up the way to
it? Which, though of themselves and immediately they damn no man, yet are
causes and occasions that many men run the race of Christian piety more
remissly, then they should, many defer their repentance, many go on securely
in sins, and so at length are damned by means and occasion of their Errors,
though not for them. And [Pag: 218. N. 49.] you say, I would not be so mistaken
as if I thought the errors even of some Protestants, vnconsiderable things,
and matters of no moment. For, the truth is I am very fearful, that some of
their opinions, either as they are, or as they are apt to be mistaken, (though
not of themselves so damnable, but that good and holy men may be saved with
them, yet) are too frequent occasions of our remissnes and stackness in running
the race of Christian Profession, of our deferring Repentance and Conversion to
God, of our frequent relapses into sin, and not seldom of security, in
sinning; and consequently, though not certain causes, yet too frequent
occasions of many men's damnation. And [Pag: 280 N. 66.] Capital danger may
arise from errors though not fundamental. And how can an inanimate writing
declare, for all variety of circumstances, when such danger is particularly to
be feared?

78. From these your sayings I gather 2. things: the one, how dangerous Errors
are, in matters belonging to Faith, though they concern only profitable
Points. The other: That God has promised an assistance sufficient to lead us
into all, not only necessary, but very profitable truth, if we be not wanting
to it. From the first, I collect, as before, the necessity of some sure Means
to avoid Errors against profitable Truth: And that you speak very
irreligiously in saying, That if controversyes concerning them be continued and
increased, it is no matter. From the second, I frame this demonstratiue
Argument: If God has promised an assistance for attaining the knowledge of
profitable Truths, he has not failed to leave some Means whereby, we using our
best endeavors, may certainly attain that knowledge by those Means. But this
means cannot be scripture alone, the interpretation whereof remaynes
uncertain, even though we use all the Rules prescribed by Protestants, as we
have proved, and they confess. Therefore scripture alone cannot be that Means
whereby, we using our best endeavors, may attain the knowledge of profitable
truths. Therefore we must have recourse to an infallible living judge. And now I
beseech the reader to consider how unreasonable and unconscionable a thing it
is First, to avouch a very great danger of being damned, unless one come to the
knowledge, not only of necessary, but also of profitable points; and that, God
has promised sufficient help and assistance to attain such a knowledge, and
yet. Secondly, that it is impossible for us to find, or use, any certain
means, which God has left for that end of knowing things not only necessary,
but also profitable. This contradiction, or inconvenience, cannot be avoided,
except (as I said) by acknowledging, and submitting to a living judge.

79. Before I leave this point, I must not omit to touch some inconsequent
sayings of yours, and then go forward. You confess (Page: 277. N. 61.) that,
Dr. Potter affirms, that, God has promised absolutely, that there shall be
preserved to the worlds end, such a company of Christians who hold all things
precisely and indispensably necessary to salvation. If this be so, why do you
not object against the Doctor, as you do against us, and ask him; whether
that company of Christians can resist Gods motions, and helps whereby they are
preserved in the belief of things necesary? As also, how do you defend the
Doctor, since you do not hold it absolutely certain, but only hope that there
shall be such a company of Christians to the worlds end; whereas the Doctor
alleges, and relyes on the promise of God, for such a stability of his Church,
and so must hold it for a^ article of Faith, as he professes to do. Surely
this is a point of greatest importance, and more then only profitable, and
scriptures speak clearly enough for the perpetuity of Gods Church, and yet you
two do not agree therein; which shows, how impossible it is to decide
controversyes by scripture alone.

80. Another saying of yours will, I believe, hardly be defended from a
contradiction. For, (Page: 277. N. 61) having spoken of Errors against
profitable truths, and declared how extremely dangerous they are, you say (P.
278.) Those of the Roman Church are worse, even in themselves damnable, and by
accident only pardonable, Now an error to be damnable in it self, must consist
in this, that it opposes some truth revealed by God, which is intrinsece matum,
essentially evil, a deadly sin, against the will and Command of God, and
therefore damnable in it self and by accide^t only excused by ignorance, or
pardonable by repentance. How the^ can you say, that, errors against
profitable points, are not damnable in themselves, and yet that the errors of
the Roman Church are such? But why do I dispute against you by Argument? Hear,
I pray you, your own words, [Pag: 290. N. 88.] where you say: Fundamental
errors may signify, either such as are repugnant to Gods command, and so in
their own nature damnable, though to those which out of invincible ignorance
practice them, not unpardonable; or such as are not only meritoriously, but
remedilessely pernicious and destructive of salvation, etc: Behold the reason
for which, errors are in their nature damnable! namely, because they are
repugnant to Gods command; which certainly is common to all errors against
Divine Revelation, sufficiently proposed, whether the matter be in it self,
great, or small. Besides, it is manifest, that scarcely in any matter of
moment, Protestants do so unanimously disagree from us, as that diverse of them
do not hold with us against their pretended Brethren: and therefore if our
errors, as you call them, (which are indeed Catholic verities) be damnable
in themselves, theirs also must be such, if they be considered in themselves;
which yourselfe do not deny [Pag: 306. N. 106.] saying; For our continuing in
their Communion (you speak of Protestants erring in some Point of Faith)
notwithstanding their errors, the justification hereof, is not so much, that
their errors are not damnable: as that they require not the belief and
profession of these errors, among the conditions of their Communion. Wherefore I
must return to conclude, that, in affirming our errors to be damnable in
themselves, and so, worse than those of Protestants, you manifestly contradict
yourself, and truth, even though we should falsely suppose our Church to be
stained with errors. And here I ask, how you can say, [Pag: 278. N. 61.]
without impiety and contrariety to yourselfe, that, Heresies not fundamental
do of themselves, and immediately, damn no man, seeing you very often profess,
that to oppose a thing, revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed for such, is
a damnable sin?

81. I will end this Point with noting an egregious falsification of yours
about a passage of Ch: Mayntayned, in these your words: [Pag: 306. N. 106.]
directed to Ch: Ma: A sift falsehood is, that we daily do this favor for
Protestants, you must mean (if you speak consequently) to judge they have no
errors, because we judge they have none damnable. Which the world knows to be
most untrue. Thus you. But Ch: Ma: never said, nor dreamed, that Protestants
did judge, that their Brethren had no errors, because they had none damnahle;
but his words are these (Part: 1. Chap. 5. N. 41. Page: 206.) If you grant your
conscience to be erroneous, in judging that you connot be saved in the Roman
Church, by reason of her errors, there is no other remedy but that you must
rectify your erring conscience, by your other judgment, that her errors are
not fundamental, nor damnable. And this is no more charity, then you daily
afford to such other Protestants as you term Brethren, whom you cannot deny to
be in some errors (unless you will hold, that, of contradictory propositions
both may be true) and yet you do not judge it damnable to live in their
communion, because you hold their errors not to be fundamental. Thus Chapter Ma:
And now does he not expressly suppose, affirm, and speak oferring Protestants?
With what modesty then, can you say, that Char. Ma. would have them judged to
have no errors, and not to separate from their pretended Brethren for such
errors as are supposed not to be fundamental? Yea He spoke so clearly, of
some Protestants their communicating with other of their Brethren,
notwithstanding their errors, that you answer as above I have cited you,
saying; For our continuing in their communion notwithstanding their errors,
the justification hereof is not so much, that their errors are not damnable,
as that they require not the belief and profession of these errors, among the
conditions of their communion.

82. No less inexcusably do you falsify His words in the same (Page 306. N.
105.) While you alledg as His, these words; If you erred in thinking that our
Church holds errors, this error or erroneous conscience might be rectifyed
and deposed by judginge those errors not damnable. Which indeed if he had
spoken, were nonsense: but his words are those which I have cited. If you
grant your conscience to be erroneous, in judging that you cannot be saved in
the Roman Church, by reason of her errors, there it no remedy but that you
must rectify your erring conscience, by your other judgment, that her errors
are not fundamental, nor damnable. Is this to say, that Protestants must judge
that our Church has no errors, because the errors are not fundamental? Or
is it not directly contrary, that though they did suppose her to have errors,
yet, even that supposition standing, they might judge that they might be saved
in her communion, because her errors are supposed not to be damnable.

83. In the mean time, it is no small comfort to Catholics, that Protestants
confess they believe errors damnable in themselves; whereas we Catholics are
infallibly certain, that our Church is not subject to any error in matter of
Faith: and though she were, yet even by their confession, we may be saved, by
the same means by which they can hope for salvation, that is, Repentance, or
Ignorance, as you every where confess. And in particular, of our learned men,
who, one would think, could not pretend to be excused by ignorance, you
expressly say here [Pag: 305. N. 105.] To think that all the learned men of
your side are actually convinced of errors in your Church, and will not
forsake the profession of them; this is so great an incharitableness, that I
verily believe Dr. Potter abhors it. If our learned men may be excused, much
more unlearned persons are very safe, and sure to be excused: and so, all sorts
of men in our Church may be saved, even by the Principles and Confession, of
our Adversaryes.

84. But now, although it ought not to be to my purpose, in this occasion, to
answer at large, the particular Instances which you brought to prove, that our
falfly supposed errors in things profitable, may be occasion of danger, and
damnation: Yet, least perhaps some unlearned person, may apprehend them to
contain some great difficulty, I will touch them briefly. The Doctrine of
Indulengces, say you, (Page: 9. N. 7.) may take away the fear of Purgatory: and
the Doctrine of Purgatory, the fear of Hell. But, first; how can you object to
us as an inconvenience, that the doctrine of Indulgences takes away the fear
of Purgatory, since Protestants denying Purgatory, do much more take away all
fear of it? 2. What harm is there, in diminishing in our soul the fear of
Purgatory, by solid and true means, approved by Gods Church, as fasting,
prayer, penance, Indulgences etc: Does not the Apostle admonish us, [2. Pet:
1.10.] to labor the more that by good works you may make sure your vocation?
And what is this, but to diminish in us even the fear of Hell, and increase
our hope of Heaven? For, the greater confidence we have to be saved, the less
fear we conceive of being damned. Does not S. John say (Ep: 1. Cap: 4. V. 18.)
Charity casts out fear? 3. Again, it is to be wondered, that any Protestant
can object to us the Doctrine of Indulgences as overlarge, and taking away the
fear of Purgatory, and so at an easy rate redeeming the temporal punishment,
which remaynes due to our finnes, after the fault or guilt is pardoned, since
they deny, that any such pain remaynes after the sin is forgiven, which in the
opinyon of many of them is forgiven by one Act of Faith, firmly believing that
it is forgiven. 4. So many conditions are required for gayning Indulgences,
that we cannot be certain thereof, without particular Revelation: and so still
we have just cause to fear purgatory, and tremble at the consideration of Gods
secret judgments. To omit diverse other conditions, necessary for gaining
indulgences, one is, that we be in state of Grace; of which none can be sure in
this life, nor, that he has so perfect sorrow, that it is effectual, and
incompatible with any affection to any least Venial sin: and yet the
temporal punishment due to sin, can never be forgiven till the guilt be
perfectly cancelled. I say nothing of the pious and penal works, which are
wont to be appointed for gaining indulgences, as, confessing, communicating,
fasting, praying, visiting Churches, pilgrimages, giving Alms, and other holy
exercises, whereby God is glorified, our neighbor edifyed, and our souls
improved in virtue.

85. So that it is not so easy to obtain the effect of indulgences, nor are
they so cheap, as some, out of ignorance, or malice, are pleased to imagine;
yea and that the Pope gives pardon for all sins, not only past but also to
come; which is a shameless untruth, and falfly lays on us that aspersion,
which truly belongs to Protestants, who teach, that, not only sins past, or
present, but also all sins to come are forgiven by Baptism. Kemmit: (In
Exam: Concill: Part: 2. Tit: de Baptismo Page: 80.) says; Papists have feigned,
that the grace of Baptism avayles only for remission of sins past, or for
remission of those which are found in a man at the time of Baptism. Calvin:
(Instit: L. 4. C. 15.. 3.) We must in no wise believe, that Baptism is conferd
only for time past, so that for new sins into which we fall after Baptism,
there must be sought other new remedies for pardon by I know not what other
Sacraments, as if the force thereof (Baptism) were worn out. But we are to
believe, that whenever we are baptized, we are washed and purged for our whole
life. As often therefore as we shall fall into sin, we must renew the memory of
Bapisme, and by that remembrance, our soul is to be armed, that it be always
certain and secure that our sins are forgiven. And. 4. As if for sooth
Baptism it self were not a Sacrament of repentance. And seeing this
(Repentance) is commanded to us for our whole life, the force also of Baptism
must be extended as far. Perkins (in Serie Causar: Cap: 33.) says: In
Baptism being once administered, remission is give^ not only of sins past, but
also present, and to be committed through the whole time of our life. Sanchius
(in sua Confessione: C. 15.) Baptism is not given for remission only of
Original sin, or sins past, but of all, for our whole life. Is not this every
easy and larg indulgence, and an encouragement to all sin for which so facil a
remedy is prepared, even before they be committed? Does not this indeed take
away the fear, not of Purgatory, but of Hell? Which fear of Hell, you do very
strangely affirm, to be taken away by the Doctrine of Purgatory, but bring not
any reason to prove it; and it is certain no shadow of reason can be brought.
Purgatory is ordained to pay the temporal punishment, due after the guilt of
sin is forgiven. In Hell eternal torments are to be endured for deadly sin,
not repented in this life. Now what consequence is this: One fears the
bitterness of pain to be endured in purgatory, though he be sure of salvation,
if ever he come to that place: Therefore he fears not Hell, the punishment of
deadly sins which he is guilty to have committed, and is not certain whether
they be forgiven, which certainty alone can take away the fear of Hell,
neither can the fear of Purgatory affoard any such certainty. Contrarily one
should rather make and approve this conseque^: He that fears the lesser
punishment or evil, is apt much more to fear the greater. Therefore, he who
fears Purgatory, will much more fear Hell; unless he be sure to die in state of
Grace, of which none can be sure in this life, without some particular
Revelation: and the fear of Purgatory and Hell, may well consist together, as
their Causes or objects have no repugnance; to wit, I may be adjudged to
Purgatory, because I hope to die in state of Grace: And; I am not sure but I
may be condemned to Hell, because I cannot know whether I shall die free from
deadly sin; both which judgments of our understanding, may cause proportionably
just fear in our will, the one of Purgatory, the other of Hell. If a
malefactor be doubtful, whether be shall be condemned to death, or only to
some other milder punishment, for example, the Gallyes, or perpetual
imprisonment, or the like, may he not fear both death and other punishments,
till his doubt be cleared? Which cannot be cleared in this life in order to be
adjudged to Purgatory, or Hell. Protestants are they indeed, who take away all
fear of Purgatory, by denying it; and of Hell, by their pretended certain
Faith, that they are predestinate to eternal Happyness; which certain Faith
must needs exclude all fear of the contrary.

86. The want, you say, of that devotion which the frequent hearing of the
offices understood, might happily beget in them, the want of that instruction
and edification which it might afford them, may very probably hinder the
salvation of many which otherwise might have been saved. But by this manner of
arguing, what may not be proved, or disproved, if first one will beg the
question, and suppose us to be in error, and then upon remote consequences,
rather fetched than found, and wild conjectures and panick fears, infer I
know not what dangers? In such manner, as if men were to lead their life
according to such a way of direction, they could never be free, from
inextricable perplexityes, and run hazard of loosing either their wits, or
souls. We are in matters concerning our souls, to govern our selves by such
Rules, as God has revealed, and not by uncertain, conditional, hidden
events, and which, if we be left to our own conjectures, may be alleged
contrary ways: as for example, you say, that the doctrine of indulgences is
dangerous, because it may take away the fear of Purgatory. And why may not I
say, that the denying of Indulgences (besides the Heresy which is of it self
damnable) is dangerous for the sequeles; because the want of that devotion, and
omission of very many works of many virtues, as repentance, penance, Charity
etc: to which a desire, and endeavor to gain Indulgences, would move us,
would very probably hinder the salvation of many, which otherwise might have
been saved, as you say of hearing the public Offices, celebrated in a tongue
not understood by all. Concerning which instances; I say, That if the doctrine
of Protestants, in this matter be false, (as most certainly it is) then not
very probably, (as you threaten us) but certainly they shall be damned, who in
this particular oppose their judgment, and Practice, against the Belief, and
Practice of the Catholic Church spread over the world, before Luther
appeared. Nay I say more, that though we did suppose (which we can never grant)
the Church to err is this Point, yet godly Laymen, (as you speak) who in
simplicity of heart, and out of Ignorance, obey the Church, by this their
Obedience oblige, as I may say, Allmighty God, never to permit, that their
goodness and godliness, prove to them an occasion of perdition. Rather,
according to your manner of arguing, and according to truth, the defect of
Obedience, Religion, and of other virtues, which they exercise in hearing those
Offices, would hinder the salvatien of many which otherwise might have been
saved. Besides, if the want of devotion, which the frequent hearing the Offices
vnderslood, might happily beget, may very probably binder the salvation of
many, which otherwise might have been saved, why shall not Protestants be
obliged in all their Churches to more frequent Service, daily, and howerly, and
be still receyving their Sacrament, least for want of devotion, which that
frequency might happily beget, the salvation of many be hindered, which
otherwise would have been saved? In the Vniversityes, they have for most days
in the week, their public Service in Latin, which diverse Lay men, who may be
present, cannot understand, and so be deprived of that devotion, the want
whereof may hinder the salvation of many which otherwise might have been saved.
But seeing many Catholic Writers, have handled this Point of public Prayers
in Latin, both copiously and learnedly, it is enough for me to have answered,
and retorted your Objections upon yourself and your Brethren: and it is a great
foolery to deprive men, as you do, of their liberty, by imaginary,
conditional effects, which without end may be turned, on all sides.

87. Your last Example deserves no other Answer, than, that it is grounded on a
wicked supposition, that, to believe the Vicar of Christ to be infallible in
his Definitions could be a congruous disposition to believe Antichrist, or that
Antichrist could get into that See, as you impiously speak. There is no malice
comparable to the malice and blindness of Heresy. But it is time for me to
return from this necessary digression, and to go forward in confuting the
doctrine of the sole-sufficiency of Scripture. And therefore

88. 15. From Protestants themselves I argue in this manner. Most Protestants
hold, that we know Scripture to be the word of God, by the private spirit, or
some quality inherent or internal to Scripture it self; and think it so
evident, that, to ask how we can know Scripture to be the word of God, Calvin
(Lib. 1. Inst. Cap. 7.) says, is all one as to ask, whence we may learn how
to discern light from darkness, white from black, sweet from sour. And the
Scottish Minister Baron (in Apodixi Tract. 9 Q 4. Page 630.) and (Q. 6. Page:
663 Sect 2.) says The Scripture does sufficiently manifest its devineness by
its own internal light, majesty and efficacy. Amesius (de Circulo Pontificio)
says; We believe that the Scriptures do shine by their own light. Whitaker
(De Scriptura Q. 3. Cap: 3. ad 3.) They who have the Holy Ghost, can know Gods
voice even as a friend is wont to know, by the voice, his friend with whom he
has conversed most familiarly a long time. Potter says (Page: 141.) That,
Scripture is of divine authority, the believer sees by that glorious beam of
divine light which shines in Scripture; and by many internal arguments found
in the letter it self. Which words while Chill: interprets to signify only,
that men are strengthened in their belief, by that beam of light which shines
in Scripture, he leaves no means for his client Potter to believe with
certainty the Scripture. For, he says expressly in the same place, that the
Church only presents, disposes, and prepares; which supposed, there is (says
he) in the Scripture it self light sufficient, which (though blind and sensual
men see not, yet) the eye of reason cleared by grace, and assisted by the many
motives which the church uses for enforcing of her instructions, one may
discover to be divine, descended from the Father and fountain of light. But
how come you M. Chilling worth to know, Scripture to be the word of God? We
take it from your own words, [Pag: 69. N. 46.] where you say to your
adversary; The conclusion of your tenth is, that the divinity of a writing
cannot be known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecall authority: which
you need not prove, for no wise man denies it. But then, this authority is that
of universal tradition, not of your church. Behold the agreement of
protestants in this maine point, on which their whole religion depe^ds.
According to Potter, Chill: is a blind and sesuall man, who sees not that
glorious beam of divine light which shines in Scripture. And Potter, Calvin,
Baron, and other Protestants deny that, which in Chilling worths judgment, no
wise man denies. Out of which premises of protestants, it is easy to conclude,
That, seeing so many of them imagine, a clear light to shine in Scripture,
which, others affirm no wise man can imagine, (which is very true: for if
there be such a light evidently shining in Scripture, how is it possible, that
they can disagree about the Canon of Scripture? or how could some books have
once been questioned, which now are receyved for canonical?) We must affirm,
that much more a particular text, may to one seem evide^tly to signify that
which to an other does no way appear, but perhaps directly the contrary. And
therefore although we have heard Calvin saying, that it is as easy to discern
which be true scriptures, as to distinguish betwee^ white and black; yet it
appears by what he writes (L 4 Inst. C. 9. N. 13.) that, for the interpreting
of scripture, more labor, and industry is required; as is also clear by the
many and hard rules which protestants require for interpretation thereof, as we
have seen above: and therefore it is clear eve^ from the doctrines of
protestants, that they have no certain means to judge when scripture is
evide^t, and consequently it alone is not sufficient, to judge evide^tly of all
points necessary to be believed. Nay, seeing they have no evident Ground to know
that scripture is the word of God, they cannot be certain of any one text of
scripture, though we did suppose that the sense thereof were very clear.

89. 16. It is a maine ground with Heretics, that a living judge was necessary
till the whole canon of scripture was perfited: which being done, they say, the
scripture alone is sufficient. But even from this principle of theirs I argue
thus: seeing they believe nothing which cannot be proved out of scripture, they
are obliged to prove out of scripture this very Ground, that the necessity of a
living judge did expire, as soon as scripture was written. This is impossible
for them to do; because no such text is to be found in the whole bible: Therefore
they cannot hold it, even according to their own principles. See what I have
said in my nynth reason, N. 59 to prove that according to their grounds, on
text will serve their turn for our present purpose, unless it be the last book
or text; because they teach, that scripture alone was not sufficient till the
whole Canon was perfited; and yet who will undertake that such a last book, or
text has evidently this Proposition; After the Canon of scripture was
perfited, the necessity of a living judge did cease? To say nothing that it is
not certain, what part of Holy scripture was written last; as also that
Protestants do not agree, whether some of those scriptures which were the last,
or among the last, be Canonical, or no, as I said above.

90. 17. I take an argument from the confession of Protestants themselves;
that, the Ancient Fathers stand for us against them, and that therefore the
Fathers erred. Which could never have happened to Persons so holy, wise,
learned, sincere, laborious, dispassionate, and whom all Christians acknowledge
to have wrought miracles on earth, and to be glorious Saints in heaven, if the
scriptures were so express and evident, as our adversaryes pretend. Or if they
will needs have scripture to be so clear, every man of Conscience and
discretion, will stand for the ancient Fathers, and us, who are acknowledged to
agree with them. Now, that the Fathers are confessed by Protestants, to have
taught the same doctrines which we at this day maintain, is diligently
demonstrated by that judicious, exact, and Faithful Author of the Protestants
Apology for the Roman Church, concerning diverse points, (which the Reader, to
be assured of the truth, and for the Eternal good of his soul, may find in
the Alphabeticall Table, Verb. Fathers, and then examine them impartially) as,
the Real Presence, Transsubstantiation, Reservation of the Sacrament, Mass
and Sacrifice, Sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, Propitiatory
Sacrifice, even for the dead, Purgatory, Free Will, the possibility of keeping
the commandments, justification and Merit of works, invocation of Saints,
Translation of Saints Relics, and their worship, Pilgrimage to holy places,
Grace conferd by Baptism, necessity of Baptism, Chrisme and Confirmation,
Confession of sins, enjoined penance, or satisfaction, Absolution, the Fast
of Lent, other set Fasting daves, Fasting from certain meats, unwritten
Traditions, Hallowing of Alters, Churches, Water, Oil, Bread, Candles etc:
More Sacraments than two, that, Antichrist shall be but one man, the great virtue
of the sign of the Cross, the worshipping of it, Lights in the Church in the
day-tyme, Images in the Church, their Worship, S. Peter's Primacy over the
Apostles, the Popes Primacy above other Bishops, Vowed Chastity, monasteryes of
vowed virgins, their consecration, their religious habit, Moks, that priests
might not marry that Bigamus may not be priest, the inferior orders of
deacons, subdeacons, acolyts, exorcists etc: In so much as in regard of these
(and many, mo like) premises, many of the learned Protestants do deal plainly
in making general disclaim in the Fathers, as may be seen in Brierley,
tract: 1. Subdiv: 14. where, beside other Protestants, he names Whitaker,
Iacobus Acontius, Napper, Fulk, Downham, Melancthon, Peter Martyr, Beza,
Caelivs Secundus Curio, Sebastianus Francus etc: Besides, it cannot be denied,
but that learned Protestants do tax the Fathers of diverse errors (as is
notorious, and may be particularly seen in Brierly ibid:) wherein although they
manifestly wrong those Holy and Ancient Doctors, yet these their Accusers
ought to gather from thence, that scripture is not evident, since men endued
with all ornaments, and helps for attayning the true meaning thereof, were so
much mistaken, as our sectaryes pretend.

91. The same is also clearly demonstrated, by reflecting, that very many of
the most learned Protestants, agree with us in many points against their
Protestant brethren, as Brierley Tract: 3. Sect: 7. lit. M. exactly
demonstrates: For example, the Real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament;
that, Sacraments do not only signify, but also conferr grace; that, Christ
after his corporal death did descend in soul into Hell; that, the Church must
continue visible; concerning Evangelicall Counsels, Viz. that a man may do
more than he is commanded, concerning the universality of Grace, and, that,
Christ dyed for all; that men are not certain of their election, and that he
who is in state of Grace, may finally fall; that, in case of divorce upon
adultery, the innocent party may not marry again; that, to children of the
Faithful dying unbaptized salvation is not promised; Freewill: That in regard
of Christ's Passion and promise, our good works proceeding from Faith, are
meritorious; Temporal punishment reserved by God in justice for sin remitted;
The impugning of the civil Magistrates headship, though but of a particular
Church; Intercession of Angels; Intercession of Saints; invocation of Saints;
vowed chastity; voluntary Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience: prayer for the
dead; purgatory; Limbus Patrum; Images in the Church; worship of Images;
Reverence and bowing at the name of Jesus; the power of priests; not only to
pronounce, but to give remission of sins; private confession of sins to a
priest; distinction of mortal and venial sin in one and the same person; the
indifferency of communion under one, or both kinds; sacrifice of the New
Testament according to the order of Mechisadech: that first motions of our
concupiscence, without our concent thereto, are not sins: that the
commandments are not impossible, Transubstantiation: that the Sacraments of
the old Testament were not in working, and effect equal with ours: The visible
sign of imposition of hands in confirmation, with the grace thereby conferred:
The like visible sign, and grace given in Orders; yea expressly counted a
Sacrament: An indeleble character imprinted by certain Sacraments; The
baptism of women, and lay persons in case of necessity: The known intention
of the church needful to the administration of Sacraments; Seven Sacraments;
implicit Faith: that, Antichrist is yet to come: the patronage and protection
of certain Angels over certain countries and Kingdoms: that the alteration
of the Sabbath from Satterday to Sunday, is not proved by scripture, but is
acknowledged to be an Apostolyque Tradition to be perpetually observed: set
times of Fasting, and from certain meats, appointed not only for politic
order, but for spiritual considerations; the primacy of one, over the Church,
in several Nations and Kingdoms; unwritten traditions, necessary to be
observed; blessing of our meat and forhead with the sign of the cross, and
further use thereof in the public liturgy about which Joannes Creecelius in his
descriptio and refutatio Ceremoniarum Missae, etc: Printed Magdeburgi (An:
1603. Page: 118.) gives testimony of the Lutherans doctrine saying; We do not
disallow the sign of the holy Cross if once or twice without superstition it
be freely used in the Divine Service: yea if in private, our meat and drink
be-signed therewith. For when we go to bed, or rise, we sign our selves with
the Cross according to the institution of Luther and other godly men. And,
Joannes Manlius Luthers Scholar in loc: Commun: (Page: 636.) says, Luther
said, Having made the sign of the Cross, God defend me, etc: As also the
Communion-Booke in the time of King Edward the sixth (penned by advise and
approbation of Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and other Protestant Divines of that
time) printed Ann: 1549. Fol: 116. prescribes the Priests signing of the
Sacrament with the sign of the Cross. And Fol: 131. it prescribes the
Priests like consecrating the Font of Baptism with the sign of the Cross,

92. These Points, and more than these, which I omit, Brierley does punctually
demonstrate, diverse Protestants to hold with us against their own Brethren:
which I have more willingly set down, that Protestants may see, how little
reason they have to esteem the very name of Papists, odious; since many of
their greatest Divines are Papists, in so very many and chiefest Points, and
(which ought not to pass without reflection) even in those particular Doctrines
which to the vulgar sort seem most Superstitious, and for which they are
brought up in contempt and hatred of our Religion, and us. If our Catholic
Religion were as beggarly, as that of Protestants, which is content to call
those Brethren who disagree from them in innumerable Points, we might easily
increase our number, with addition of as many Protestants as we have rehearsed,
and of many more than we can easily reckon. Certain it is, that, Protestants
will scarcely be able to object any Points of moment against us, but that,
jointly they must wound their own Brethren, if indeed they did understand what
they say, and did not think the name of Papists, to be a sufficient cause of
hatred, whatsoever that name does signify, whereof many are very ignorant. But
for my purpose; I conclude, that, Scripture alone cannot be clear, seeing
Protestants, in so many, and so important matters (especially in those very
particulars wherein they pretend to differ from us) are indeed so far divided
among themselves, as that they fall to join with us, with whom nothing but
mere necessity, and force of evident truth could move them to agree. And as
the agreeing of so many Protestants with us, shows that the Scripture is not
clear (at least in behalf of them who are forsaken by their own Brethren) so^
their disagreeing among themselves, does convince the same. For how can men, if
with sinceryty they seek the truth, be so divided, having before their eyes,
one and the same clear and evident Rule, as they pretend scripture to be?

93. If any, for avoiding the premises, adventure to say, that, those learned
protestants who affirm the Ancient Fathers to stand for us, do not understand
the meaning of their words, and that for the same cause, perhaps protestants do
not agree with us, nor differ among themselves, so much as their writings, not
well understood, make show: To this answer, although I might reply with those
words of Tertullian, (in Apologet:) Nemo ad suum dedecus mentitur etc: No man
will lie to his own shame; but rather to his own credit: we sooner believe
the confession of men against themselves, then their denial against
themselves: as also I might say, that the testimonies of protestants for the
said purposes, are so evident, so many, of so different persons, and delivered
not incidently, or by some other occasion, but of set purpose, at large, and
as I may say in cold blood, that they cannot with any modesty be avoided: yet I
will only say (and the Objection deserves no other answer) that if the writings
of me^ which are infinitely beneath the Majesty and sublimity of the Style and
misteryes of holy scripture, and proportioned to the weakness of humane
understanding, be so hard and obscure, we ought, even from this Objection, to
conclude, that scripture alone cannot be evident. Thus the Lutherans do
grievously complain against the Calvinists, Gerardus Gieskenius a Lutheran, in
his Book de veritate Corporis Christi in Coena contra Pezelium Page: 93. so
charges the Calvinists.
because (say they) you allege Luthers words against his meaning. In like
manner, the same Lutheran Charges them, for that they Vbi supra. Page: 77.
endeavored to make the Confession of Augusta (which teaches the Real
presence) to be Zuinglian, that is, against the real presence, exclayming
thereat; if this thing had been done in Arabia, America, Sardinta, or such like
remote Countries, and of former times, this usurpation of fraud and historical
falsehood were more tolerable. But seeing the question is of such things, as be
done in our own times, and in the sight of all men, who with a quiet mind can
endure such lies? In like manner Fulk, ( in his Answer to a counterfaite
Catholic, Artic: 17. Page 61.) is not ashamed to say, that the Lutherans and
the Zuinglians do both consent in this, That the Body of Christ is received
spiritually, not corporally, with the heart, not with mouth; which all the world
knows to be manifestly untrue. Thus also Dr. Field (of the Church L. 3. C. 42.
Page: 170.) says; I dare confidently pronounce, that after due and full
examination of each others meaning, there shall be no difference found touching
the matter of the Sacrament, the Vbiquetary Presence, or the like, between the
Churches reformed by Luthers ministry in Germany, and other places, and those
whom some men's malice call Sacramentaryes. And Dr. Potter [Pag: 90.] is not
afraid to say, that the Lutherans and Calvinists differ rather in form and
phrases of speech, then in substance of Doctrine, even in the maine controversy
between them about Consubstantiation, which after occasioned that of Vbiquity.
The maine truth on both sides is out of Controversy; that Christ is really and
truly exhibited to each faithful communicant, and that in his whole person he
is every where. The doubt is only in the manner, how he is in the symboles, and
how in Heaven and Earth, which is no part of Faith, but a curious nicyty. Is it
all one to be exhibited in figure only, or only by Faith and Apprehension, and
to be really and substantially received? was Christ as really exhibited to the
Jews by their figures of him, as after his Incarnation, by his real
existence? No doubt can be moved concerning the manner of his presence; unless
first he be supposed to be really present, and not only in figure, or bare
Faith, which must presuppose, not make that presence which it believes; and so
the doubt and debate between Lutherans and Sacramentaryes is, whether Christ's
Body be substantially present, not how he is present; of the substance, not of
the manner only. To say, his whole person is every where, makes not to the
purpose; seeing the question is not of his Divine Person, but concerning his
sacred Humanity. Howsoever, if this Reason be good, it will serve for
transubstantiation, at least as well as for Consubstantiation, or vbiquity, of
which, the Protestant Hospinian (in Praefat. de Vbiquitate Lutheranorum Anno
1602.) says Hoc portentum etc. This monster (for it ought not be called a
doctrine, or assertion, or opinion, or even a single Heresy) is repugnant to
scripture, contrary to the Fathers; it overthrowes the whole Creed, it
confoundes the natures of Christ with Eutyches, it rayses from out of Hell
almost all the old Heresies, and lastly, which is strange, it destroys the
Sacrament for the maintayning whereof it was invented. And yet this point is to
Potter only a curious nicity. Is it not intolerable partiality, to excuse
Vbiquity, or Consubstantiation, and yet condemn Transubstantiation? but by
these examples we see, what command Passion has over their understandings and
will. And I must still conclude, that by these enormous differences amongst
Protestants, it appears, that scripture in matters of great moment is not
clear.

94. 18, You have least reason of all other, to defend the sufficiency of
Scripture taken alone, who deliver such Doctrines, concerning the certainty and
infallibility of Scripture it self, that it could not be a^y Rule at all,
although it were snpposed to contain evidently all necessary points. Those
Doctrines of yours I will only touch here, as much as belongs to my present
purpose, intending to speak of them more at large in the next Chapter. First
then; you teach (Page 62. N. 32.) that Scripture is none of the material
objects of our Faith, or Divine verities which Christ revealed to his Apostles,
but only the means of conveying them unto us. And, (Page 116. N. 159.) having
spoken of some barbarous Nations, that believed the Doctrine of Christ, and yet
believed not Scripture to be the word of God, for they never heard of it, and
Faith comes by hearing, you add these words: Neither doubt I but if the Books
of Scripture had been proposed to them by the other parts of the Church, where
they had been before receyved, and had been doubted of, or even rejected by
those barbarous Nations, but still by the bare belief and practice of
Christianity they might be saved, God requiring of us under pain of damnation,
only to believe the verityes therein contained, and not the divine authority of
the Books wherin-they are contained. This Doctrine of yours being supposed,
together with that other principle of Protestants, that, after the Canon of
Scripture was perfited, the only means, which Christians have to know Divine
Verityes revealed by Christ, is the Scripture, (which for that very cause they
say must contain evidently all things necessary to salvation) it follows,
that if Scripture be not a material Object of Faith (that is a thing revealed
by God, and which men are obliged to receive and believe as such) men are not
obliged to believe that means by which alone they can come to the knowledge of
Divine revealed verityes: and then it clearly follows, that they cannot be
obliged to that End which they only know by that means, to the knowledge of
which means you say they are not bound. Neither ca^ you say, that because we
are obliged to know those revealed Truths which can be known only by
Scripture, we are consequently obliged to know and believe the Scripture;
because our supposition is, that we have no knowledge, suspicion, imagination,
or inkling of revealed Truths, except by means of Scripture alone. (For if you
grant any other means, you overthrow your maine ground of relying upon
scripture alone, and admit Tradition.) And therefore antecedently to any
possible obligation to know immediately revealed Truths, we must know that
means which alone proposes them to us, who cannot believe any necessity of
knowing revealed truths, but by believing aforeha^d the scriprure; which if we
be not preobliged to believe we, cannot be obliged to believe the verityes
themselves, which in respect of us shall remain as if they had never been
revealed, like to infinite other truths in the abyss of Gods wisdom, which
shall never be notifyed to Men or Angels: This deduction of mine you cannot
deny, since it is the same with one of your own, (Page 86. N. 93.) where you
say; It was necessary that God by his Providence should preserve the Scripture
from any indiscernable corruption, in those things which he would have known:
otherwise it is apparent, it had not been his will that these things should be
known: the only means of continuing the knowledge of them being perished. Now,
is it not in effect all one to us, whether the scripture have perished in it
self, or, as I may say, to us, while we are not obliged, to believe that is it
the word of God? And the same argument I take from your saying (Page: 116. N.
159.) that we are not bound to believe, scripture to be a Rule of Faith. For
since Protestants hold it to be the only Rule of Faith, if I be not obliged to
believe that it is such a Rule, I cannot be obliged to any act of Faith: But
you say we are not obliged to believe scripture antecedently or for it self;
Therefore we are not bound to believe any revealed Truths; unless you grant some
other means besides scripture for coming to the knowledge of them; and
consequently although we should suppose, scripture to be evident in all points,
yet it alone cannot be sufficient for men who are not bound to take notice of
it, as of the word of God, nor to receive the contens thereof, as divine
revealed truths. In a word. Either God has revealed this truth (scriprure is
the word of God) or he has not revealed it. If he have revealed it, then it is
one of the things which we are to believe, and is a material Object of Faith,
against your particular Tenet. If God has not revealed it, then we have no
obligation to believe it with certainty, as a divine truth, nor consequently
the contents of it, nor can it alone be sufficient to deliver all things
necessary to salvation; against the doctrine of all Protestants. And who can
believe scripture to be a perfect Rule, if he do not believe it to be any Rule
of Faith? Surely, if he believe it to be a perfect Rule he believes it to be a
Rule.

95. Besides this, you deliver another doctrine, which overthrowes the
sufficiency of scripture taken alone. Thus you write (p. 144. N. 31.) The
Apostles doctrine was confirmed by Miracles, therefore it was entirely true, and
in no part either false or uncertain: I say in no part of that which they
delivered constantly, as a certain divine truth, and which had the attestation
of divine Miracles. The falsehood and danger of this doctrine, I will purposely
confute herafter. For the present, I say; that it makes Scripture wholly
uncertain, and unfit to be a sufficient, yea or any Rule of Faith, although it
were never so clear and evident in all necessary points. For if once we yield,
that the Apostles could err in points belonging to Religion, we cannot believe
them with certainty at any other time, or in any other article, as I
demonstrate in the next Chapter: and the thing is manifest of it self. All
Divines, and all men by the light of Reason, require an universal
Infallibility in that Authority for which they must believe with divine Faith;
and if it could err at one time, it might err at another, for ought we could
know: or if it say one thing to day, and the contrary to morrow, what certainty
can we have, to believe rather the one than the other? And indeed we can
believe neither of them with certainty. Besides, you seem to require, that
every part of Christian doctrine be confirmed by miracles, beforwe can be
certain of the truth thereof; which blastes the credit of all scripture. For
how do you know, that the Apostles wrought miracles to prove immediately and in
particular, that, scripture is the word of God; Or how can you believe, that,
miracles were wrought severally in confirmation of every rext of scripture? And
yet we believe every such Text with an assent of divine Faith. Nay whereas
protestants alledg some texts to prove, that scripture contaynes evidently all
necessary points, you must show, that those very texts were confirmed by
miracles, if you will believe them with certainty as entirely true; which I
suppose you will judge to be a Chimericall endeavor: and therefore we must
infer, that by no text of scripture, you can prove it to contain all
necessary points of Faith. Diverse other errors you maintain against holy
scripture, which as in the next chapter I will demonstrate, make it incapable
of being any Rule at all for Christian Faith; and therefore you must either
retract those errors, or renounce the common principle of protestants, that
scripture alone contaynes evidently all points necessarily do to believed.

96. 19. And lastly. I overthrow theit sufficiency of scripture alone, by not
only answering, but also confuting, the arguments, by which they endeavor to
establish it. For, seeing it lie upon them positively to prove their Assertion;
if it be demonstrated, that the arguments which they bring, are either
impertinent, or insufficient, it will remain effectually proved, that they
cannot avouch Scripture alone to contain all things necessary to salvation. I
must therefore of necessity be large in answering their Objections; in performing
whereof, I both Answer and Impugn; Defend the truth, and Confute my Adversary
in one general point, which alone implies, or extends it self to all
particular controversyes in Faith. Your

97. First Objection (Page 109. N. 144.) is taken from a saying of Bellarmin
(de Verb. Dei L. 4. C. 11.) That, all those things were written by the Apostles
which are necessary for all.

98. Answer. First; Bellarmin: even as you allege him, speaks only of things
necessary for all, that is, for every private person, not of things necessary
for the whole Mystical body of the Church, as if all such things were
evidently contained in scripture; yea he expressly declares himself to the
contrary Nota Secundo, affirming that the Apostles were wont to preach some
things only to Prelates, Bishops and Priests, as of the manner of governing the
Church, administering Sacraments, refuting Heretics etc: Secondly, he says
not, that all things which are necessary for all, are writtren evidently (which
only could serve your turn) but only that they are written, which is true,
though they were written, obscurely, as many things are contained in scripture
in particular, and yet obscurely: and much less does he say, that they are
evident without the declaration of the Church, and help of tradition, (which
only were for your purpose) yea that his words can have no such meaning, but
the direct and express contrary, Bellarm: himself will best declare, in that
very Chapter from which your objection is taken, and almost immediately after
the words by you cited. Thus he speaks sed admissa: Dico eorum omnium dogmatum
etc: I say, that there are found in scripture testimonies of all those
Doctrines which belong to the nature of God, and that we may concerning such
Doctrines be fully and plainly instructed out of the scriptures, if we
understand them aright: but that sense of scripture depends on the unwritten
Tradition of the Church. Wherefore Theodoret (L. 1. C. 8.) relates, that
scriptures were alleged on both sides (both by Catholics and Arians) and
when the Arians could not be convinced by them, (scriptures) because they did
expound those selfsame scriptures otherwise then Catholics did, they were
condemned by words not written, but understood according to piety, and no man
ever doubted but that Constantine consented to that condemnation. Could any
thing have been spoken more clearly, solidly, and truly, to show in what sense,
things of greatest moment (as was that article of the Divinity of Christ our
Lord against the wicked Arians, for defense whereof the church suffered so much,
and so many Martyrs shedd their blood) are contaynd fully and plainly in
scripture, that is in those texts which fully and plainly recommend the church
and unwritten tradition, as I noted in the beginning. And yet further in the
same (Lib. 4. Cap. 4. 7.) Necesse est etc. he says, that oftentimes the
scripture is doubtful and intricate, so that it cannot be understood unless it
be interpreted by some who cannot err: therefore it alone is not sufficient;
which are his express words: and then gives diverse examples of some chief
points, even belonging to the nature of God, which all good Christians believe
as matters of Faith, and yet cannot be proved by scripture alone. And (Cap. 7.)
he says, S. Austine said, that, that Question (whether they who were baptized
by Heretics, were to be rebaptized) could not be decided by scripture before
a full Council of the Church, but that after the Council had declared the
doubt and the whole Question, there may be taken assured documents from the
scripture. For, scriptures being explicated by the Council, do firmly and
certainly prove that which they did not firmly prove before. But why do I
stand upon particular passages, since in the same (Lib. 4. Cap. 3.) he speaks
universally, and says, that we Catholics disagree from Heretics, because we
affirm that all necessary doctrine concerning either Faith or Manners, is not
contained expressly in scripture: and, that beside the written word of God,
there is required the unwritten word, that is, Divine and Apostolical
Traditions etc: and (C. 4.) the very title whereof is this; The necessity of
Traditions is proved; in the beginning he says: First we will endeavor to
show, that scripture without Traditions was neither simply necessary, nor
sufficient. Secondly: that there are extant Apostolical Traditions not only
concerning manners, but also Faith. Is it not very strange you should alledg
Bellarmine for the sufficie^cy of scripture alone, who in a whole book,
containing twelve Chapters, professes to teach, and prove the necessity of
Tradition, or Gods unwritten word; and in most clear words (which even now we
alleged) declares how scripture is clear and sufficient, namely together
with Tradition and Interpretation of Gods church? But by this is confirmed what
I said above, how hard it is to find evidence in holy Scripture, the matter and
manner whereof surpasses all natural wit, seeing the words of men are so
confidently alleged, out of those places, wherein they purposely teach,
profess, and prove the direct contrary of that for which they are produced; as
here you say that the words you cite out of Bellarmine, are as you conceive, as
home to your purpose as you could wish them.

99. Object: 2. You say [Pag: 337. N. 20.] S. Luke plainly professes, that his
intent was to write all things necessary. And [Pag: 212. N. 43.] For S. Luke,
that he has written such a perfect Gospel (that is, as you speak, the whole
substance, all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ) in my judgment it
ought to be with them that believe him, no manner of question. And this you
endeavor to prove out of these words of S. Luke in the Introduction to his
Gospel. For as much as many have taken in hand to set forth a declaration of
those things, which are most surely believed amongst us, even as they delivered
unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the
word, it seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of things
from the first, to write to thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou
might know the certainty, of those things wherein thou have been instructed.
To this place you add, the entrance to his history of the Acts of the Apostles:
the former treatise have I made, o Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to
do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up. Therefore, say you, all
things necessary to salvation, are certainly contained in S. Lukes writing
alone.

100. Answer. First, you falsify S. Luke in saying, that he plainly professes,
that his intent was to write all things necessary. For, where do you find those
words, all things necessary? And much less can you find, that he plainly
professes to deliver all things necessary; and least of all, that he plainly
professes to deliver all necessary things plainly, or, evidently. The Question
is not between us, whether all necessary things be contained in scripture
obscurely, or implicitly, or in a general way of referring us to Gods Church,
for diverse particulars; but whether all necessary Points be contained in
scripture, expressly, in particular, evidently, without reference to the
Tradition, Interpretation, or Declaration of the Church: and it is evident,
that S. Luke has no evident words to prove all that I have said you must
prove, if you speak to the matter. Which also appears by considering that not
only Catholics, amongst whom you will not deny but there are many learned,
pious, and desirous to save their souls, but Protestants also see no such
evidence, for proving the sufficiency of S. Lukes Gospel, or any other
Gospel, or particular Book of Scripture, taken alone; seeing their doctrine
is, that, scripture contaynes all things necessary, only after the Canon was
finished; and yet S. Lukes Gospel was written forty years before the whole
scripture was written. For this cause, Protestants interpret Omnis scriptura
vtilis est (2. Tim. 3.16. All scripture is profitable, not distributive, for
every particular part or Book of scripture, but collectiue, for the whole
Bible; and some English Protestant Translation Ann: 1586. has not (All
scripture) but (the whole Bible) is profitable: where by the way is to be
noted, how they can help their errors, by their different Translations, and
how little credit is to be given to their Bibles.) Neither do Protestants
commonly allege these Texts of S. Luke, for the sufficiency of scripture, but
other places, as we have seen above: and who can imagine that they would have
omitted so pregnant a proof; if they were of your mind concerning the evidence
thereof? Remember here, what you say [Pag. 61. N. 24.] The thing is not evident
of it self; which is evident, because many do not believe it. How then can the
words, and meaning of S. Luke be evident of themselves, seeing so many, both
your Brethren, and Adversaryes, neither see, nor believe any such meaning? Call
also to mind, what you write [Pag: 99. N. 119.] How shall I be assured, that
the places have indeed this sense in them? Seeing there is not one Father for
500. years after Christ, that does say in plain terms, the Church of Rome is
infallible. This I retort, and fay; seeing there is not (I say not one Father
for 500. years after Christ, but not) one learned writer for 1500. years
after Christ that interprets this Text as you do, How shall I be assured, that
this place has indeed this sense in it? Yea even by this appears the
necessity of a living judge to declare the true meaning of this, and other Texts
of Scripture, as occasion shall require.

101. 2. S. Luke says, Assecuto omnia, Having had perfect understanding of
All: And; the former Treatise have I made of all that Jesus began both to do
and teach. Of All; All, is a sign of Universality: he that says all, excepts
nothing. If therefore we follow the plain, obvious, usual, Grammatical, and
Logical sense, it must signify, that S. Luke delivered in writing, absolutely
all that our Savior wrought and taught. But this larg notion you cannot admit
without contradicting S. John, (Cap: 21.25.) But there are many other things
which Jesus did: which if they were written in particular, neither the world
itself I think were able to contain those books that should be written. Well
the^, being drive^ from the Logical and seeming evide^t notion of (All,) you
must understand All not in the whole latitude of the word, but with some
restriction. I pray you, show us this particular restriction, not from any
probable, uncertain, topicall discourse of your own, but from some certain,
express, evident Text of Scripture declaring this restriction. But this is
impossible for you to do, as every child will see. Therefore this your argument
is already at an end, for as much as can be proved out of any Text of
Scripture, which to you is the only rule of Faith.

102. Perhaps some will understand All, to signify all things profitable. But
this sense cannot be admitted, since no man can deny, but that the knowledge of
those things which S. John witnesses not to have been written, had been
profitable to us now, as then the performance, or delivering them was to the
beholders, or hearers. It were blasphemy to say that S. Paul exercised an idle
action, or recited unprofitable words, when (Act. 20.35.) he said; you must
remember the word of our Lord Jesus, because he said: it is more a blessed
thing to give rather then to take: which words of our blessed Savior are not
to be found in S. Luke, or the whole bible; but S. Paul receyved them only by
tradition. Those things also which are omitted by S. Luke, but recorded in the
other Gospells, no Christian will deny to be profitable. Therefore by All, we
must not understand All things profitable.

103. Will you understand by All, all things necessary to be written by any?
First, in this sense, this text makes nothing for your purpose, unless first
you beg the Question, and suppose that all things necessary to be believed,
must also necessarily be written; which is the very point in Question between
us. For, if all things necessary to be believed, are not particularly written,
in the bible, then more is necessary to be believed than is necessary to by
written, and consequently, though S. Luke had set down all that is necessary
to be written, yet this would not prove that his Gospel contaynes all things
necessary to be believed. Secondly, your self cannot allow of this sense
without contradicting yourself, who hold, that every Gospel contains all
things necessary to be believed, and therefore S. Luke could not judge it
necessary that he should write all such things, which had been but to repeare,
and write the things, already written more than once. Thirdly: The common
doctrine of Protestants is, that the sole-sufficiency of scripture consists in
the whole Canon, or bible, and therefore S. Luke (according to this supposition)
could not think himself obliged to write every point necessary to be believed,
since he was not ignorant, that before he wrote his Gospel, the Gospels of S.
Matthew, and S. Mark, and some Apostolical Epistles were written, and in them
some points necessaty to be believed, which therefore were not necessary to be
written by him. Wherefore you cannot maintain this sense, as being contradictory
both to your self, and the common doctrine of Protestants.

104. What then remaynes, but that S. Luke understood All that was necessary to
be written by himself, without omission of any such point, according to the
particular purpose and End which he had in writing his Gospel, by the
particular motion, assistance, and direction of the holy Ghost, as we see every
one of the four Evangelists, and other Canonical writers do not deliver all,
the same things, for matter, or manner, as the holy Ghost, for ends known to
his Infinite Wisdom, did move and direct them. This sense is true, and
contaynes both a full Answer, and a clear Confutation, and, as I may say, a
total Destruction of your Objection, for any force it can have against us.
For, now you are obliged to prove, out of some other evident text of scripture,
that the Holy Ghost intended that S. Luke should write in his Gospel, all
things necessary to be believed, before you can assure us, that he, by the word
All, understood all such necessary points: but then you change your Medium, or
Argument, and pass to a new, distinct proof; and clearly confess that the
Objection which you have brought, is of no force, unless antecedently to this
word All, you prove that S. Luke intended to set down in particular all
necessary Points. Yea, though you could prove by some other Argument
independently of the word All, that S. Lukes purpose was to write all necessary
Points of Faith, yet from thence you could only infer, that if All were taken
in that sense, it should contain a truth, but not that it has de facto that
sense, and not some other meaning: because there is no necessity that every
part of scripture contain all truth, though we are infallibly sure, that it
contaynes nothing but truth. How vain then is your bragg of the evidence of
this Text of S. Luke for your purpose? Even yourself show how little you can
gather from the word (All) when [Pag: 210. N. 40.] you say, that every one of
the Evangelists, must be believed to have expressed all necessary Points,
because otherwise how have they complied with their own design, which was, as
the Titles of their Books show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part
of it? Thus you say; and then add these words: By the whole Gospel of Christ,
I understand not the whole History of Christ, but All that makes up the
covenant between God and man. But by what, or whose Commission, do you
understand the whole Gospel with that limitation and declaration? is not all
that is contained in the Gospel of S. Luke, or of the other Evangelists, part
of their Gospells, respectively? And is not this still to beg the Question,
and suppose, or take as granted, that the design of the Evangelists, was to
set down all things necessary to salvation, or, all that makes up the covenant
between God and man? Or do you not by this your voluntary restriction of (All)
bear witness, that you have no other ground for understanding All points, or
the whole Gospel to be understood of all necessary points, except your own
voluntary affirmation, and preconceyved opinion.

105. Thirdly. Of all men in the world, you have least reason to urge this Text
of S. Luke, though it were granted the meaning thereof to be that which you
pretend. My reason is grounded in a doctrine which you deliver (P: 144. N. 32.)
in these words. For those things which the Apostles professed to deliver as the
Dictates of humane reason, and prudence, and not as divine Revelations, why we
should take them as divine revelations I see no reason, nor how we can do so
and not contradict the Apostles, and God himself. Which doctrine, though in it
self very untrue, yet being by you believed to be true, engages you in a very
hard task, of proving, that S. Luke in these words all, and, of all, intended
to deliver a divine Revelation, and not only a Narration of his own. Certainly
if your doctrine could be true in any case, it might with greatest reason be
conceyved to be such, in prefaces, and like occasions, wherein the writer may
seem to declare his own intention, endeavor, and proceeding, rather than
matter of doctrine, Manners, or revelations from God; as we see, S. Luke in the
preface to his Gospel, says; Visum est mihi assecuto omnia; It seemed good to
me; not, Visum est Deo and mihi, It has seemd good to God and me, or Visum est
Spiritui Sancto and mihi: It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and me, as the
Apostles in the first Council said; Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis: It
has seemed good to the holy Ghost and us. Beside, this manner of expression;
It seemed to me also, having had perfect understanding of things from the
first, (or as the Rhemes testament has out of the vulgat, and Greek, having
diligently attained to all things, and as Cornel: a Lap: interprets assecuto
out of the Greek, assectato, and studiose investiganti ideoque assecuto, all
which; may according to your divinity, signify an humane endeavor and
diligence, rather then divine inspiration, Revelation, or infallible assistance
of the Holy Ghost. And this argument may be strongly urged, by calling to mind,
that Calvin (in Antid. Cocil:) seeks to prove, that the writer of the book of
the Machabees cannot be esteemed Canonical, because in his second book,
second Chapter, he says; And to our own selves indeed, which have taken upon
us this work to make an abridgment, we have taken in hand no easy labor, yea
rather a business full of watching and swette. For, Canonical writters did
write not out of their own wit and industry, but by the revelation of the
Holy Ghost. Does not this argument of Calvin, if it be good, (as it is not, yet
as good as Chillingworths Principle, or rather the same in effect) prove also
against S. Lukes both Preface and Gospel, because he affirms that he has
diligently attained to all things, and that he wrote in order taking them from
those who had heard and seen them. Which words according to Calvin's discourse,
signify that S. Luke composed the Gospel after a humane manner, by inquiry, by
diligence, by labor, by following a method, and order, etc. Whereas Sacred
authors wrote not by their own wit and labor, but by revelation of the holy
Ghost. Therefore if once it be granted, as you both grant, and seek to prove,
that the Apostles did sometime deliver not divine Revelations, but the dictates
of humane reason and prudence, where can it happen more probably than in this
our present case? Or what proof can you bring out of some evident Text of
scripture, that in fact it is not so? Thus in steed of prooving out of S. Lukes
Preface to his Gospel, that his Gospel contains all Points necessary to
salvation, you plainly deprive both Preface and Gospel, of all credit due to
them as to the word of God; And therefore you cannot draw Arguments from them for
yourself against us.

106. 4. Since it cannot be denied, but that the Holy Ghost might have used the
pen of S. Luke, to deliver what best pleased his Divine wisdom, and Goodness;
neither can we by humane reason, or topicall and seeming probable discourses,
gather with certainty how far he decreed from Eternity to use the writing of
that holy Evangelist, dare any man presume by the strenthg of wit, or
arguments, to force God himself to decree and perform, what he imagines should
have been done? yourself (Page 102. N. 128.) affirm this ground to be false,
that, That course of dealing with men seems always more fit to Divine
providence which seems most fit to humane reason. And (P. 104. N. 136.) you
say; It is our duty to be humbly thankful for those sufficient, nay abundant
means of salvation which God has of his own Goodness granted us: and not
conclude, he has done that which he has not done, because forsooth in our
vain judgments it seems conveni^nt he should have done so. And (Page 84. N.
85.) Though i^ were convenient for us to have one, (Judge of controversyes) yet
it has pleased God (for reasons best known to himself) not to allow us this
convenience. These passages of yours I relate in this place, as very
considerable, not only for this present occasion, but as a general antidote
against your poisonous manner of proving your opinions, not by authority, or
evide^t texts of scripture, but with some conceypts, or reasons of your own,
which you apprehend as probable. But this humane prudence is but foolishness,
when it is applied to determine, what were the Free Eternal decrees of God,
whose thoughts are raised above our imaginations, more than Heaven above earth.
And to come to our purpose; the Holy Ghost might have decreed to teach the
world by S. Luke, either all things necessary to every man, or necessary to the
perfect constitution of the Church, or mystical Body of Christ; or no things
necessary, but only profitable; or some necessary, and some profitable; leaving
other points necessary, or profitable, to be learned from the other Canonical
writers, or from the Church, and Tradition. In all which cases, the word, All,
had been truly verifyed, because S. Luke had perfectly written All that the
Holy Ghost intended to be written by his means, concerning the words, and
works of our Blessed Savior. For, seeing, as I said above, All cannot be taken
in the most universal sense, which of it self it might bear, the particular
limitation, or restriction thereof must wholly depend on the hidden will, and
Decree of God, which we cannot know with certainty by any humane probable
discourse, but only by Revelation; and consequently, no sound and certain
limitation or explication of the universal particle All can be given, except
that which I have declared, that S. Luke has delivered All according to the
End, prescribed by the Motion and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Otherwise what
certain reason can be given, why all the Evangelists do sometime deliver the
self same Points, and sometime not; yea some one expresses some particular,
which all the rest have omitted? Or why of these millions of words, or deeds,
which all of them have omitted, some were not set down as well as those which
now we read in the^? And so upon due consideration, the expressing the word
All, cannot he of any advantage to you, because it must have been understood
though it had not been expessed, and being expressed signifyes no more then if
it had been only understood, and collected from the nature of Holy Scripture,
and Privilege of Canonical Writers, for whom we may and must most certainly
avouch, that they perfectly set down All things, according to the direction
which they receyved from the Holy Ghost. Yourself teach, (Page 35. N. 7.) that,
Christians have mea^es sufficient to determine, not all controversyes, but all
necessary to be determined; and why should you judge it an incongruity in us to
say, that S. Luke wrote not all the words and works of our Savior, but all
necessary to be written by him; whose purpose, if it had been to make a
Catechism, or Creed, or a Sum of Christian Doctrine, would have required an
other form and method, different from the Historical way which he and other
Evangelists hold. And that S. Luke proposed to himself a far different End,
appears by Eusebius (L. 3. C. 24.) affirming, that S. Luke wrote for this only
reason, that he saw some others had rashly presumed to write things whereof they
had not full knowledge, he intending hereby to withdraw us from others
uncertain narrations. And Cornel. a Lapide upon S. Luke, observes that S. Luke
wrote the Gospel against some idle, ignorant, and perhaps false Evangelists,
who in Syria or Greece, had written the Gospel imperfectly, yea perhaps
lyingly, as S. Luke himself insinuates in the beginning of his Preface, in
saying, that for as much as many had taken in hand to set forth a declaration
etc. it seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of things from
the first, to write to thee in order etc: So Origin, S. Ambrose, Theophylact
here etc. S. Luke therefore taxes Apocryphal Gospells which went about under
the name of Matthias, Thomas, and other Apostles. Whereby it appears, that S.
Luke never thought of making a Catechism, or giving a Catalogue of all points
necessary to be believed, but to secure us from falsehood, errors, uncertainty,
or fables, which indeed might have made the whole Gospel of Christ suspected,
whether the points contained in such apocryphal Writers, be supposed to have
been many or few, necessary, or only profitable etc. And therefore we may say
that as others wrote against false Teachers, so this Holy Evangelists wrote
particularly against false Writers; with which End he declares himself fully to
have complied, by that care and diligence, which he mentions in the Preface to
his Gospel. For, by this necessary industry concerning All things, he was
enabled and secured not to deliver vncertayntyes, or falsehoods, or fictions in
those particular points which afterward he thought fit to write, whether they
were to be many or few; necessary, or only profitable; or some necessary, and
some profitable. Neither was there any necessity, or congruity, that he should
write all that by industry he came to know; as will appear in my next
Consideration. Now what a consequence in this? S. Lukes Intention was, not to
deliver any false or uncertain Narration: Therefore it was necessary he should
expressly set down all things necessary to salvation. The true consequence
should be this, and no more; Therefore to comply with the said intention, it was
necessary he should not set down any thing uncertain, false, or fabulous. And
then, I hope, yourself will not allow this Consequence: It was necessary he
should not set down any thing false or fabulous; therefore it was necessary he
should set down all things necessary to be believed.

107. 5. Considering with attention this place of S. Luke, I observed him to
affirm indeed, that he had (assecutus omnia) attained to the knowledge of all
things, but says not universally, that he had written all things, but only
indefinitely it seemed good unto me to write to thee, Good Theophilus, that
thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have been
instructed. And who can doubt but that S. Luke attained the knowledge of many
particulars, which he vvrote not in his Gospel? Even in the beginning of the
Acts of the Apostles he setts down some particulars, which happened before our
Saviors Ascension, and are omitted in his Gospel: or who dare say, that he
knew not one of all those innumerable things, which S. John affirms not to be
vvitten by any? As also when it is said, that S. Luke vvrote, that Theophilus
might know the truth of those words whereof he had been instructed, it cannot
be doubted, but that Theophilus was instructed in more Points then he could
read in S. Lukes Gospel aone; since, as I said, S. Luke in the Acts expresses
something concerning Christ, which he has not written in his Gospel, and
Theophilus might have redd the Gospells of S. Matthew. and S. Mark, and some
other Canonical scripture, written before the Gospel of S. Luke; and therefore
the knowledge or Faith of S. Luke, and Theophilus extended it self to more
Objects, or Truths, than are written in his Gospel; so that still we see,
that, All cannot be understood of all simply, but with diverse limitations and
degrees. One All may signify absolutely all things that our blessed Savior
spoke or did: Another All, all things which S. Luke believed: another, all,
that vvherin Theophilus was instructed: Another, all that S. Luke intended to
write: and amongst all these and other limitations, you will never be able to
prove, that your All, that is, all things necessary to be believed, is the
meaning of S. Luke.

108. In this Reflection, that S. Luke says he had understood all, but says
not that he wrote all, I was not only confirmed, but settled, when I found it to
have been delivered, above twelve hundred years ago, by S. Ambrose in his
explanation of this preface of S. Luke, in these words: visum est mihi assecuto
omnia a principio etc. It seemed good to me having attained to all things from
the beginning to write to thee in order. He says that he has attained not to
a few things, but to all: and having attained to all, it seemed good to write,
not all things, but some of all things. For he wrote not all, but attained to
all: for, if all those things which (says S. John) Jesus did, were written, I
think the world it self could not contain them. For, you may perceive, that
he purposely omitted those things also, which had been written by others, to
the end that a different grace might shine in the Gospel, and every book
might excel as it were with certain particular miracles of mysteryes and
works. To this we may add, that S. Luke in the entrance to the History of the
Acts of the Apostles, says, that in his Gospel he had written of all that
Jesus began both to do and teach: But it is certain, that he wrote not all
that our Savior Jesus did: Therefore it is not certain, that he set down all
that he taught.

109. 6. Let us suppose, (not grant) that by All, S. Luke vndersta^ds, all
necessary points and the^ I pray you mark how you make him speak; Because may
have gone about to compile a Narratio^ of the things (will you have us add here
necessary, that have been accomplished among us; it seemed good also to me,
having diligently attained to all things necessary from the beginning, to write
to the in order, that thou may know the verity of those necessary words
whereof thou have bee^ instructed. And in like manner, his Preface to the acts,
must go thus; the first speech I made of all things nacessary o Theophilus,
which Jesus began to do and to teach. etc: Let, I say, S. Luke be falfly
supposed to speak thus; and then tell me what good sense will you find in
those words, of all things necessary, which Jesus began to do? And how dare
you limit the contents of S. Lukes Gospel to things necessary, seeing it
contains many things not necessary? Perhaps you think I do you wrong, in
saying you limite the word All, to things necessary: and that you say only,
that (All) must at least imply All things necessary. Thus (Page: 212. N. 43.)
your Nynth demand is, whether in the text (of the Acts) All things which Jesus
began to do and teach, must not at least imply all the principal and
necessary things? be it so; will you then have the Text of S. Luke bear this
sense? It seemed good unto me, having attained at least to all things
necessary, etc. as if the Evangelist himself were doubtful of what kind of
truths he had been informed, or had set down in his Gospel; whether necessary
points only, or both necessary and profitable. Do you not see, into what
labyrinths, you cast yourself, by your voluntary ungrounded limitations, or
interpretations of S. Luke? And how many ways your Objection is evidently both
answered and confuted? and further, how easily the twelve demands which you
make, to prove that S. Lukes Gospel must contain all necessary Points, are
answered? Which I will now do, having first told the Reader, that every one of
your Demands or Proofs, is but a begging of the question, and a supposall of
that which is in Controversy, as will appear in every particular Point.

110. Your Demands (Page 212. N. 43.) are these:

1. Whether S. Luke did not undertake the very same thing which he says many
had taken in hand.^

111. Answer may be given to this Demand, either as the thing is in it self; or
as it relates merely to our present Controversy, to wit, whether S. Luke
undertook, to set down all things necessary to salvation. For which last
consideration or respect, it imports nothing for you, or against us, though it
were granted, that S. Luke did undertake the very same thing, which he says,
many had taken in hand; unless you could prove, that those many did take in
hand, to write a Gospel, containing all things necessary to salvation, which
you will never be able to do, otherwise then by way of imagination, or as in a
dream: especially if we add, that you must do it out of some evident Text of
Scripture, telling us, that those Persons (wholly unknown to us) had such a
particular design: which till you can perform, give me leave, to retort
against you, this Argument. S. Luke (in your supposition, or imagination
undertook the very same thing which he says many had taken in hand* but there
is no imaginable ground to affirm, that those many had taken in hand, to
deliver evidently all particular points necessary to salvation: Therefore there
is no ground to affirm, that S. Luke had any such design.

112. But if we answer your Demand, according as the thing is in it self; I
say, that we must in no case grant that S. Luke undertook the very same thing,
which he says many had taken in hand, but rather the direct contrary; his
purpose having been, after a diligent and faithful search, (wherein those
others failed) to oppose their proceeding, by providing an antidote against
their careless, or false, or uncertain, and apocryphal Narrations. Yet if
your meaning be only in a general way, that as those men purposed, or
pretended, to write the History of our Savior Christ, so S. Luke also had the
same general aim: (although one might deny, or Question this very thing, and
without any great rashness of judgment conceive, that they had some other
sinister End agreeable to the Means they used, of false, or fabulous stories,
yet) I will not stand with you in the denial of this, as being a thing, which
can neither hurt us, nor help you, but is wholly impertinent, till first it be
proved, that those men intended, to set down all necessary Points of Faith;
and then further, that S. Luke agreed with them, in that particular design of
writing all such Points; yea and until you can prove both these things, out of
some evident Text of scripture. Besides, although you could perform an
impossible task, and prove that some of those many, had that design of
specifying all necessary Points: by what dream can any man assure himself,
that we must say the same of all? Rather (if we will discourse according to
mere humane reason or conjectures, without certain authority) they being
many, as S. Luke affirms, it was less needful, that every one should set
down all necessary Points, it being abundantly sufficient, that some, or
diverse, or many of those many, should do it. At least, it is impossible for
you to evince, that of those many, all had such a purpose; as you profess not
to be certain, but only probably persuaded, that every one of the Evangelists,
who yet were but four, should write all things necessary; (and I hope, you
will not pretend to be sure, that all those many intended to do more then some
of the few Evangelists had done.) Now, if some of those many had such an
intention of expressing all necessary truths, and some of them had not, how
could S. Luke undertake the very same thing, which he says many had taken in
hand? Could he undertake contradictoryes, to deliver, and not deliver all
necessary Points? But, as I said, whatsoever you will imagine those men to have
intended in particular, there is no necessity, that S. Luke should be obliged
to do, whatsoever they proposed to perform; as we see, he has not set down
all the particulars, which are recorded by the other three Evangelists. We have
heard S. Ambrose expressly affirming, that S. Luke wrote non omnia, not all,
and that he purposely omitted things written by others; and yet we may say
truly, speaking in general, that all the four Evangelists undertook the same
thing, that is, to write the History or Gospel of our Blessed Savior: and
therefore we might say (if there were any need to say so) that S. Luke may be
said, to undertake the very same thing, which he says, many had taken in hand,
though he did not set down all the particulars, which you may fancy they
intended to write. If S. Ambrose could say (and the thing of itself is clear)
that S. Luke, did not write all that himself with diligence had learned, and
belived; why will you oblige him, to write all that those unknown people had
written, or designed to write? Especially considering that indeed he does not
commend, but rather insinuates a dislike or disallowing of their purpose and
performance, as wanting either necessary care, or sincerity, or both: as has
been showed above out of good Authors. In which respect, I had reason to say,
that we might well deny, that S. Luke agreed, even in the general design,
with those many whom he affirms to have gone about to compile a Narration of
those things which have been accomplished among us. I will therefore conclude,
with putting you in mind, that you beg the Question, in regard your Demand
must go upon a supposition, that all necessary Points are to be contained in
scripture. Otherwise upon what ground can you affirm, that all they who
intended to write the Gospel of Christ, were to set down all particular
Points necessary to be believed? For, if you would be pleased to believe (or at
least for the present to abstract from both parts, and not suppose the
contrary) that beside scripture, there are other Means to propose Divine
Verityes, your Demand looses all force; it being no consequence, that when
there are diverse Means to attain one End, we must either make use
determinately of one means alone, or else not arrive to that End: and therefore
you must first suppose, that there is no means but scripture, to believe
Divine Revelations, before you can make good this consequence; Those many of
whom S. Luke speaks, and S. Luke himself, intended to write the Gospel of
Christ; Therefore they were obliged to write all Points necessary to salvation.
For, you will be instantly, and easily, taken of, and answered; that beside
scripture, there are other means for the said purpose; at least, in your
Argument you must not suppose the contrary, without any proof.

113. 2. You demand; Whether this were not to set forth in order a declaration
of those things which are most surely believed amongst Christians?

114. Answer: to, this I have said already, that it is a Chimera, for you to
feign what in particular those many purposed to set down: as also, why S.
Luke should be obliged, to write the same particulars, which you may dream,
those men should have set down. And your Demand must be answered by yourself,
in regard you cannot deny, but that many things were and are, most certainly
believed among Christians, which are not expressed in S. Lukes Gospel: for
example; those particulars concerning our B. Savior, which S. Luke sets down,
only in the Acts of the Apostles, about his Ascension, Apparition to S.
Stephen, to S. Paul etc: as also those mysteryes, which are omitted by S.
Luke, and written by the other Evangelists; and other points, once believed by
Christians, and written by none of the Evangelists, nor any other Canonical
Writer, as S. John (Cap. 21.) witnesses. You do therefore both beg the
question, in supposing, that those many, of whom S. Luke speaks, must of
necessity, have set down all necessary points; as if all such points must be
written by every one who undertakes to write the Gospel of Christ; and also
deliver a manifest untruth, as if Christians did not most surely believe, many
more Articles, than are set down in S. Lukes Gospel, or in the writings of
those others, if they intended to write the same things which he did.

115. Your 3. Demand is, Whether the whole Gospel of Christ, and every
necessary Doctrine of it, were not surely believed among Christians.

116. Answer: Every Doctrine necessary to salvation, was surely believed by
Christians; but to suppose that every thing believed by Christans, is written
in S. Lukes Gospel, or in the whole Bible, is to beg the question. For you
know it is the thing which we deny. As also it is certain, that many things
surely believed* by Christians, are not written in S. Lukes Gospel, nor in any
of the Gospells, as I showed in answer to your second Demand. You demand

117. 4. Whether they which were eyewitnesses, and Ministers of ^he word from
the beginning, delivered not the whole Gospel of Christ?

118. Answer: you either beg the Question, if you will still suppose, that
they delivered in writing the whole Gospel, that is, all the Doctrine of
Christ; and also utter a falsehood, it being most certain, that they delivered,
and others believed, more then is written, as S. John witnesses: Or else you
speak nothing to the purpose; if you mean only, that they delivered in
writing, some things of the whole Gospel, which no man denies, but you should
prove, that they delivered all necessary Points.

119. 5. You demand, Whether he does not undertake to write in order these
things whereof he had perfect understanding from the first?

120. I answer this, as I did the last: If you mean, that he undertakes to
write in order All things necessary whereof he had perfect vnstanding, you both
beg the question, and say more than is true. If you mean, that he vndertaks
to write only some of these things, whereof he had perfect understanding from
the first, you speak not to the purpose of proving, that he writes all
necessary Points of Faith. You demand

121. 6. Whether he had not perfect understanding of the whole Gospel of
Christ?

122. Answer: Who can assure you that he had perfect understanding of every
Miracle which our Savior wrought? But suppose he had perfect understanding of
the whole Gospel in the largest sense, that you can imagine; upon this if you
will say, that he vvrote all Points of which he had perfect understanding,
you both beg the question, and deliver a manifest untruth, as I have proved.

123. 7. You demand, Whether he does not undertake to write to Theothilus of
all things wherein he had been instructed?

124. Answer: undoubtedly no; and I must still repeat that you beg the
Question by supposing it, and utter an untruth by affirming it. For, to omit
other points, S. Luke himself in the very first Chapter of the Acts, instructed
Theophilus in several things not expressed in his Gospel, for example, of
some circumstances of our B Saviors Ascension: his giving the Faithful at
that time most holy documents; an Angel declaring to them that he was to come
in judgment; a punishment of Judas the Traitor, not expressed in the Gospel;
He burst in the mids, and all his bowels gusshed out; (Act. 1.18.) his
sending the Holy Ghost; to say nothing of other Points contained in the Acts;
in the Gospells of S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. John, and in other Canonical
writings, not expressed by S. Luke in his Gospel; of all which, we cannot
imagine Theophilus, so famous and principal a Christian, to have been ignorant.

125. 8. You demand: Whether he had not been instructed in all the necessary
parts of the Gospel of Christ?

126. Answer: Certainly he was, and in many more Points, than were necessary.
But you beg the Question, if you suppose that S. Luke wrote all things wherein
Theophilus had been instructed, as also utter an untruth, as I have proved, or
speak not to the purpose, if you mean only that he wrote some of those Points.

127. 9. You demand: Whether in the other Text, All things which Jesus began
to do and teach, must not at least imply all the principal and necessary
things?

128. Answer: This were an excellent way of proving, if it were as good, as it
is easy, To prove what you would have, by the only asking whether it be so,
which is indeed nothing but to beg the Question. Our Question is, whether S.
Luke have set down all necessary Points; and you prove it, by only asking
whether it be not so; You know, we say, that neither the Gospel of S. Luke,
nor the whole scripture alone, contains in particular, all Points necessary to
salvation: and as for the word All in S. Luke, it cannot signify universally
and absolutely all things; neither ought you to determine the restriction
without evident scripture, which if you leave, you can bring us no certainty.
For if you fly to reason alone your Faith must floate in vncertaintyes for
things above reason; and what certain reason can you give, that S. Luke should
necessarily set down all necessary points, rather than S. Matthew, and S.
Mark, whom you only probably affirm to have written all things necessary? Yea
seeing those two Evangelists, wrote before S. Luke, they should rather have done
it; especially S. Matthew, who wrote the Gospel before the rest; and so, in
reason it might seem more needful, that he should have written all necessary
points, if indeed your false doctrine were true, that all necessary things must
be written. In the mean time, you must not confound Principal and Necessary
things, as if universally they were all one. Some points may be in themselves
Principal, and not necessary; Others Necessary, and yet in themselves not
principal: Others, both Principal, and Necessary. The manner of the existence
of God; Identity with his attributes; Free Decrees; Infallible Prenotion of all
things; the proceeding of one Divine Person from another, and the like, are in
themselves, and as they appear to Angels and Saints in the Beatificall
vision, most Principal Objects; but for the manner (which is also a most
principal Object) are not universally necessary for all, nor possible to be
known in this mortal life. Contrarily, the Matter and Form of Baptism, and
other Sacraments, and the like, are not principal Points in themselves, or in
their natural perfection and entity; yet they are Necessary to be known. The
Conception of the Son of God in the womb of the most B. Virgin, by power of
the Holy Ghost; his Nativity, Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of his
Father, are Articles both Principal, and necessary, and yet S. Mark (who alone
beginns his Gospel with these words, The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, as part of scripture) does not mention them: and if one should demand
concerning S. Mark (as you do of the Text of S. Luke) whether his words, (The
Gospel of Jesus Christ) must not at least imply all the principal and
necessary things, which Jesus began to do and teach, what would you answer?
Whatsoever can be answered for S. Mark, will serve for answer concerning that
Text of S. Luke. Yea, what will you answer even for S. Lukes Gospel, wherein is
omitted the sending of the Holy Ghost, which is a very Principal and Necessary
Article of Christian Religion? Could he say, All, assecuto omnia, that he had
attained the knowledge of all, and yet omit a Point so principal and
necessary? If so, then you cannot by the particle All in the Acts, understand
all things principal and necessary. Neither will it serve your turn, to say,
that S. Luke makes profession, to deliver all things which Jesus began to do
and teach, which the other Evangelists do not profess. For the sign All in S.
Luke, being not to be understood universally, as I have often said, and is
clear out of S. John, (Cap. 21.) it must admit some limitation, and can
signify no more, than what all the Evangelists did purpose and perform, that
is, to deliver all things which Jesus began to do and teach, as far as was
necessary for the End which they intended, according to the direction and
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that all men should be obliged to receive our
Savior Christ as the true Messiah; or else for confutation of some particular
heresy; or for prevention of false and sictious narrations: in which respect,
every one of the Evangelists, might have used the same word all as in deeds,
they did fully comply with the same duty which S. Luke performed. Which I
confirm by the Protestant Translation Anno 1622. saying in the Preface to S.
Lukes Gospel; It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of
things from the very first. etc. Where there is not the word All, and yet you
will not deny but that it is to be understood, as if it were expressed; and
accordingly the Protestant Translations, or Editions of the Years 1593. 1596.
1602. express that word; It seemed good also to me, as soon as I had searched
out perfectly all things from the beginning. And therefore all the Evangelists,
as I said, might have expressed All, and must be understood in reality to write
all, no less then S. Luke who expresses so much.

129. But here occurrs a difficulty, which moves me also, to make this demand:
whether All in the preface to S. Lukes Gospel (as soon as I had searched out
all things from the beginning) signify the same thing with, All in his preface
or entrance to the Acts of the Apostles (The former treatise have I made of all
that Jesus began to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up?)
You cannot say, that they signify the same thing: because it is certain, that
S. Luke had searched out diverse things concerning our B. Savior, which he did
not committ to writing; as for example, those particulars, which are written by
the other Evangelists, and not by him; as also some of those things, which were
not written by any. Therefore, the word all in S. Luke must have a different
signification, when he says, that he had searched or had notice of all, and
when he says, that he wrote all: and so, by all which even in these two texts,
has a different signification, you cannot possibly learn, that S. Luke wrote
in his Gospel, all things necessary to salvation of those things, which Jesus
began to do and teach, but you must do it out of some other texts of
scripture, declaring that he in the texts of the Acts, by All, understands all
things necessary to salvation, though he understand much more by All in his
Preface before his Gospel, assecuto omnia, having understood all, but no man
in his wits will undertake any such task. You demand

130. 10 Whether this be not the very interpretat ^o^ o your Remish Doctors
in their Annotation upon this place?

131. Answer: why make you not a conscience, to deceive, the Reader, by
alleging Authors against their known meaning? But this shows, as I observed
above, how hard it is to find any Writing so clear, that either by malice or
mistake, is not obnoxious to be misunderstood. And Cha: Ma: (whom you
egregiously wrong in this kind and particularly in fathering on him, that which
through his whole Book he disproves and detests, that a formal Heretic may
be saved without relinquishing his heresy) may comfort himself with what, that
great Dionysius Corinthius, (as we find in Eusebius L. 4. C. 12 Hist: Eccles:)
said: what wonder is it if they have endeavored to falsify the words of holy
scripture, who have corrupted those mean things which we have written? you
know, that, those most pious, zealous, and learned men, who wrote the
Annotations upon the New Testament, firmly believe, and upon all occasions
teach, proclaim, and prove, the necessity of Tradition, and that scripture
alone is not evident, or sufficient without a living judge, and the Gift of
interpretation bequeathed by God to his Church. Do they not, even in their
Annotations upon this very first Chap: of the Acts, 14. and 15. verse,
purposely avouch, and prove the same? When therefore, they say in their short
marginall Note upon these words, all things, (Act: 1.) not all particularly,
but all the principal and most necessary things, it is clear, their meaning
is not, that S. Luke had written all particular points, necessary to be
believed in Gods Church, but only, that he had set down, what was principal
and most necessary for the End at which he aimed; that is, to prove our Savior
to be the messiah, and to oblige men to believe so much; as also, to preserve
us from false or feigned Narrations. And it is certain, S. Luke omitted nothing
that was most necessary for these ends. I might add, that if we examine exactly
those words, All the, principal and most necessary things, they signify not,
all necessary things, but all most necessary, which may be very true, though
some necessary things be ommitted, and left to the other Evangelists, and
Canonical Writers, or to Tradition, and the Declaration of Gods Church: and so
the words of those Doctors, do not make good your demand, which concerned
absolutely all principal and necessary things.

132 Neither does this any way hinder, but that S. Luke and the Evangelists may
be most truly and properly said to write the Gospel and life of Christ while
he lived on earth, in order to the ends which I have declared; as also because
though they wrote not all, but something of all, as S. Ambrose speaks; and we
may say, not singula generum but genera singuloru^; yet every one of them
wrote, of our B. Saviors miracles, of his Doctrine, of his Parables, of his
promises, of his sufferings, of his Death etc: but not every particular, that
might have been recorded under these kinds, or general heads. And this is a
proper and literal explication, both for the words of S. Luke which you
object, and for what you alledg concerning the other three Evangelists, to
prove that every one of the^ must express every necessary point of faith. For
if the Evangelists may be truly said to have written, for example, the Miracles
of our Savior though neither any one, nor all of them together, have written
the twenty thousandth part of them, as we gather out of S. John, much more may
every one of them be truly said, to write the Gospel, or History of Christ,
though they express not every particular point or object of Christian Faith,
taken in the whole latitude thereof. I hope you will not be objecting against
the Evangelists, how can they be said to write the Miracles of Christ, of they
write not the half, nor fourth, nor tenth, no nor the thousandth part thereof;
as you are pleased to object against us, and say, (Page: 210. N. 40.) If every
one of them (Evangelists) have not in them all necessary Doctrines, how have
they complied with their own design which was, as the titles of their Books
show; to write the Gospel of Christ, and not, part of it? Good Sir. are not
the Miracles of our Savior, a part of the Gospel, and is not your
understanding by the whole Gospel (as you declare yourself in the same place)
not the whole History of Christ, but all that makes up the covenant between God
and man, (which signifyes all necessary things) a voluntary understanding, and
a mere begging of the Question? And by what I have said in this occasion, we
may gather, that although scripture should expressly affirm, that it self
contaynes all things necessary, yet without a Living Judge, and authentical
Interpreter, we should remayne^ncertayne, of the meaning of that very Text,
since the Annotations, upon the Rhemes Testament say, that S. Luke wrote all
the principal and most necessary things which Jesus began to do and teach,
and yet yourself know, that those learned Doctors were far from conceyving
that S. Lukes Gospel contains all Points necessary to be believed by
Christians.

133. 11. Whether all these Articles of the Christian Faith, without the belief
whereof, no man can be saved, be not the principal and most necessary things
which I ^sus taught?

134. Answer: Omitting to repeat, what I said about the difference of things
principal and necessary, I grant that the Articles of Faith, without the
belief whereof no man can be saved, are the most necessary things which Jesus
taught: But you are perpetually begging the Question, in supposing, that all
that Jesus taught, concerning the Articles without the belief whereof, no man
can be saved, are particularly, expressly, and evidently written, either by S.
Luke, or any one, or all, of the Canonical Writters; which you know we deny.

135. 12. Whether many things which S. Luke has wrote in his Gospel, be not
less principal, and less necessary then all, and every one of these?

136. Answer: I suppose you would make this Argument: S. Luke has written many
things less principal and less necessary, then those without the belief
whereof, no man can be saved: therefore he has written, all those things without
the belief whereof, no man can be saved. But why do you not say? Not only the
four Evangelists, but all, and every one of the Canonical Writers, have
written many things, which be less principal, and less necessary, then those
without the belief whereof, no man can be saved: therefore they have written all
such necessary things. You should consider, that things may be principal and
necessary, compared to one end, and not principal and necessary in order to
another. S. Luke has not fayld to set down all things necessary, for that
end, which by inspiration of the Holy Ghost he proposed to himself; which was,
beside other causes, ver: great: preventing false Narrations etc: to prove our
Savior to be the Messiah; for attaining of which end, there was no necessity,
of expressing all other Articles of Christian Faith: and therefore you cannot
gather, that he has expressed all necessary Points, because he has written
many things less necessary. For those things less necessary to be believed by
all, may yet be more necessary, in order to some particular end, which the
Canonical Writer, may have prescribed to himself. And therefore as the Writers
of scripture, wrote upon several ocasions, and for different ends, we must not
determine, what they were obliged to set down, by the nature of things in
themselves, but with relation to such diversity of ends: otherwise we must say,
that the Saints Peter, Paul, James, and John must of necessity have expressed
in their Epistles, all Points necessary to be believed, because they delivered
some things less necessary in themselves, than those which they wrote. And who
can deny, but that the Evangelists omitted some Points, more principal in
themselves, then some other which they set down? Therefore we cannot gather
pecisely from the quality of the things in themselves, the necessity of their
being set down in writing.

137. Thus, I hope, your Objections, and Demands set out with so great pomp,
and demonstration of some hidden mystery, only to amuse some unwary Reader, are
answered, and confuted, and demonstrated, to beg the Question, and to contain
either manifest falsehood, or to be wholly impertinent: wherein I have stayed the
longer; because this Argument taken out of S. Luke, is that whereon you most
rely; as also in regard, that what I have said here, will serve a fortiori, to
answer the Reasons, which you bring to prove, that every one of the four
Evangelists, has set down all things necessary to be believed, though you
think it most certain of S. Luke.

138. This you endeavor to prove (Page: 210. N. 40.41.42.43.) though (N. 40.)
you say only, that of all four it is very probable, but of S. Luke, most
apparent; and (N. 43 It is very probable that every one of the four
Evangelists has in his book the whole substance, all the necessary parts of
the Gospel of Christ. But for S. Luke in my judgment, it ought to be no manner
of Question. Now this doubtfulness being acknowledge by you, and your conclusion
pretend to be no more then probable, your reasons can be only probable, and
some topicall congruityes; and then I confute you with your own words (Page:
60. N. 21.) for ending of civil controversyes, who does not see it is
absolutely necessary, that not only judges should be appointed, but that it
should be known, and unquestioned who they are? Otherwise, if it were a
disputable thing, who were these judges and they had no certain warrant for
their Authority, but only some Topicall congruityes, would not any man say,
such judges in all likelihood would rather multiply Controversyes then end
them? If this be true; how will you have us, in matters of Eternity, and of
infinitely higher concernement than civil Controversyes, take for a Rule, or
as Protestants speak, a judge, every one of the four Gospells, since according
to your own Axiom, it is absolutely necessary, that it should be known and
unquestioned that they are such. Otherwise if it be a disputable thing, whether
they be judges, and we have no certain warrant for their Authority, but only
some Topicall congruityes, will not any man say, such judges in all likelihood
will rather multiply Controversyes than end them? Besides, Christian Faith
must rely not upon probable, but on some infallible and undoubted authority,
which that Rule, or judge cannot pretend, whose Authority, they, who are to be
tried by it, and who appeal to it, directly acknowledge not to be such.
Morover, seeing Protestants hold, that scripture is not only the Rule; but the
only Rule of Faith, topicall Arguments or congruityes, which in other matters
might be of some weight, can be of no force with them in this our case. And
therefore your endeavors are in vain, unless you bring some text, yea and some
evide^t text of scripture, to prove this tenet; which since you do not, as will
appear your arguments and has bin confessed by your self, I might well reject
all your proofs drawn only from humane reasons, as insufficie^t and
impertine^t, without any other particular answer. Yet that it may appear, how
weak your proofs are, I will examine every one in particular: and I believe
they will be found no better tha^ a perpetual begging of the question; and to
prove nothing, unless you presuppose that all necessary points must be
particularly set down in holy scripture: and that although you seem to
multiply arguments, yet indeed you do but repeete the same, to wit, that no
reason can be imagined, that any of the Evangelists should omit any thing
necessary, and the like conjectures of your own.

139. That this may appear more clearly, let us propose three Propositions:
First, the doctrine of Catholics, that scripture taken alone, contaynes not
particularly and evidently all things necessary to salvation: then, that it is
doubtful, whether or no, scripture contains all such necessary points:
thirdly, that all things necessary to salvation, are particularly and evidently
contained in scripture, as the Protestants hold. This being premised, I hope to
demonstrate, that, every one of your arguments must either beg the Question,
or at least prove nothing.

140. Page: 210. N. 40. you say: What reason can be imagined, that any of them
should leave ou^ any thing, which he knew to be necessary, and yet put in many
things (as apparently all of them have done) which they knew to be only
profitable, and not necessary? What wise and honest man, that were now to
write the Gospel of Christ, would do so great a work of God after such a
negligent fashion:

141. Answer. First; let us apply to this your Objection, the three
propositions I mentioned. First, then Catholics believe, that all necessary
Points of Faith, are not expressly, and evidently contained in scripture;
therefore no reason can be imagined, that any of the Evangelists, has left out
any thing, which he knew to be necessary. Yourself will not approve of this
consequence; but we must say the contraty: therefore we can have no reason to
believe, that they were obliged to do so, it not being a thing necessary to be
done by them, or any Canonical Writer: and, to retort your own words, what
reason can be imagined, to oblige them thereto? Therefore unless you expressly
presuppose our doctrine (all things necessary are not evide^tly contained in
scrip ture) to be false, and your contrary assertion true, your argument has
no force; and what is this, but still to be begging the question? Do you not
know, that according to the Rules of Logic, the disputant must prove, and that
it is sufficient for the defendant, to stand to his Conclusion, till you can
remove him from it, by force of argument? And yet, for the present, I need not
make use of this Right, but only abstract from the truth or falsehood, of our
most true doctrine in this matter; and therefore; secondly, let us suppose it to
be doubtful whether all things necessary are contained in the whole bible. In
this case it must remain much more doubtful, (and so, not so much as
probable, but only by Imagination) whether every one of the Evangelists has
set down all such things. For, it may be supposed not to be done by every one,
but by all of them, or by all the Canonical Writers, collectiue; as it is the
common opinion of Protestants, who therefore, must sol^e your Objections, no
less tha^ we Catholics 3. Although we suppose your false Doctrine about the
sufficiency of scripture alone, to be positively true, and notonly doubtful;
yet you can only infer from thence, that all necessary points must be contained
in the whole bible, as other Protestants teach: but you cannot gather, that
they must, be contained in all, and much less in every one of the Gospelss.
Contrarily unless you suppose your own tenet, that the scripture alone
contains all things necessary (that is, unless you beg the Question) you
cannot so much as pretend, that every one of the Gospells contaynes all such
points. 4. you hold it only probable, that every one of the Evangelists, has
written all necessary points; therefore you believe it cum formidine oppositi,
and must think it not impossible, but that some good reason may be alleged
(and much more, imagined, which is your word) for the contrary.

142. Secondly. I answer: you ought to remember, that as the Apostles, and
other Canonical Writers, wrote not their own humane sense, but were inspired
and directed by the Holy Ghost, (of whom we must say, Quis Consilarius ejus
fuit? (Rom: 11. V. 34.) Who has been his Counselor? So you must not expect,
that we rely on your Topicall co^gruityes for finding out what in particular^
was fit for them to write: that is, what was the will of God, that they should
write. What reason, I pray you, can be given, why that Holy spirit, did inspire
four Evangelists to write; neither more, nor fewer: Why these men were chosen,
and not others? Why they wrote no sooner? and not all at once, but at very
different times? Why they omit millons of things, and write others, and those
very few in comparison of those which they omitted? and why rather these few in
particular which they wrote, than some few of those which they wrote not? Why
some things are written by all of them, some only by some, and some by one
only? Why other Canonical VVriters, write many profitable, but not all
necessary things? and yet they were wise and honest men, and wrote not in a
negligent fashion? And particularly, what reason can be imagined (according to
your manner of discoursing) why any of the Evangelists, or other writers of
scripture, should leave out any thing necessary for the whole Church, as form
of Government, Matter and form of Sacraments etc: and yet put in many things
which they knew to be only profitable, and not necessary, either for the whole
Church, or every particular person; or had they great care of what is necessary
for particular men, and regarded not what was necessary for the whole Church?
Of this we are very sure, that they complied with that end, for which the Holy
Ghost moved them to write; and the conjectures of such considering men, as you
take pleasure to be styled, cannot be of force with any religious mind, except
to condemn you of presumption, in prescribing to the Holy Ghost, what he
should have moved the Apostles to write under pain of forfeiting the repute of
wise and honest men and of being censured of having done so great a work of
God after such a negligent fashion.

143. Thirdly: I Answer. If you will needs have reasons (though we must not
rely upon our own reason in matters of this nature) jam sure, betterreasons
may be given, to prove that the Evangelists were not obliged, to write all
things necessary, then you can with any least ground, bring them under any such
burden.

144. First: he who, will impose an obligation upon another, in the first place
obliges himself to a positive proof of what he says. For, till that be done,
every one, by the law of nature, enjoys the liberty of which he is possessed:
as on the other side, he who denies an obligation of performing, this, or that,
does sufficiently acquitt himself, by pleading, that no such obligation can be
proved. And this is not a bare word or voluntary affirmation, as if in that
case, both contrary parts had equal reasons, because neither of them seems to
bring any positive proof; but such a denial of an obligation not sufficiently
proved, is a solid and convincing reason, grounded upon positive Axiom, Melior
est conditio possidentis: in vain therefore do you ask, what reason can be
imagined, why any of them should leave out any thing which he knew to be
necessary etc: it being a most sufficient proof that they had no such
obligation, because you can bring no positive proof for the contrary: and if
they were not obliged to do it, how can you accuse them for doing so great a
work of God after such a negligent fashion, merely because they do not that,
which they had no obligation at all to do?

145. A second reason may be not only imagined, but truly deduced, both from
your particular Assertion, and from the general doctrine of Protestants. You
teach, that he who wrote the First Gospel, (S. Matthew) delivered evidently
all things necessary; which to the other Evangelists might be a very sufficient
reason, to hold themselves free, from obligation, of repeeting those things,
which had been delivered already with evidence; and, which they did certainly
know (if the thing were true) to have been so delivered. And this reason vrges
yet more, concerning S. Luke, who vvrote his Gospel after S. Matthew, and S.
Mark had written theirs, and as I said, did know certainly, that they had
written all necessary points, if indeed they had done so. Lastly. S. John,
before he wrote his Gospel, had seen the Gospels of the other three
Evangelists, beside other canonical scriptures, and therefore might with good
reason, think himself disobliged, from doing that which had been done by so
many before him. And that Holy Spirit which directed the first Writer of
scripture, (S. Matthew) foreseeing all future Canonical writings, in which,
many necessary points were to be expressed, might, even according to your
humane discourse, move him to omit so me necessary points, which he saw would
be delivered in other Scripture or tradition, especially if we reflect that a
truth once delivered in scripture, believed to be Gods word, is a much as a
million of times. Now, from the general doctrine of Protestants, that all
necessary things are contained in the whole scripture collectiue, not in every
part thereof, a clear reason may be taken, to disoblige the Evangelists from
vvriting, that which they were sure, could not but be written in other parts
or books of holy scripture, because that Doctrine implies, that the
sole-sufficiency of scripture, is perfectly asserted and maintained, if all
necessary Points be contained in the whole Bible, though they be not all set
down, in any one Part, or book thereof.

146. A third reason may be taken from the End which moved the Evangelists to
write, which, as I have often said, being not to make a Cathechisme, or a Sum
of Christian Doctrine; what reason can be imagined, that any of them, should
think himself obliged to set down in particular all necessary points?

147. Will you have a Fourth reason? Let it be this (which may also serve for a
wholesome and necessary document for you, and such as you are) we have good
reason to believe, that the Holy Ghost thought not fit to express either in
the Gospells, or other Parts of Scriptures all necessary things, that we might
be put upon a wholesome and happy necessity of exercising humility in our
selves, and obedience to Gods Church, and to our Savior himself, who said
(Luke 10.16) He that hears you hears me, and (Matthew. 18.17.) If he hear not
the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen, or Publican; together with a
dependence of one man upon another, as it was said to S. Paul even in that
great vision (Act. 9. V. 7.) Go into the city. And it shall be told thee what
thou art to do; and to him who was cured of the leprosy, (Matthew. 8.4.) Go,
show thy self to the Priest: As also for procuring peace and unity in Religion,
which cannot be conserved, if all controversyes must be tried by scripture
alone, that being in effect, to leave every man to his own wit, will, and
ways, as we see by constant experience, in all those who reject the Authority
of a Living Judge.

148. But what you cannot evince by reason, you endeavor to prove by an
example, in these words. Suppose Xaverius had been to write the Gospel of
Christ for the Indians, think you he would have left out any fundamental
Doctrine of it?

149. Answer. Are these Arguments taken from evident Texts of scripture, as
yours against us ought to be in this point, which is the only foundation of
Protestantisme? If you tell us what you mean in this particular Objection by
the Gospel of Christ, yourself may easily answer for us, out of what has
been said already. We have heard you saying; By the Gospel of Christ, I
understand not the whole History of Christ, but all that makes up the covenant
between God and man. Now then to your example; I Answer: that if S. Xaverivs
had intended to write the Gospel as it signifyes the History of Christ, he had
not been obliged, to write all necessary Points, as neither the Evangelists,
who wrote the Gospel, were obliged to do; and it is strange, that we denying
it of them, you would seek to prove it only by changing the person, as if any
would attribute more to S. Xaverius, than to the Eva^gelists. But if S.
Xauerius had purposed to write, not the History of our B. Savior, as the
Evangelists did, but a Catechism, or sum of Christian doctrine, or the
Gospel as it signifyes (to use your words) all that makes up the Covenant
between God and man, which the Evangelists did not intend, then what you say,
or imagine of S. Xaverius, cannot be applied to the Evangelists, seeing in that
case, their ends in writing, had been very different. Nevertheless, even upon
this supposition, that S. Xaverius had purposed to write a Catechism, we must
consider some particular circumstances, before we can affirm, that he was
obliged to write all necessary points of Faith: for example, if that Saint had
been assured, that in his absence, and for all future times, there would never
be wanting Preachers, Teachers, Prelates, Pastors, and Apostolical men, to
instruct Christians, convert Infidels, and supply abundantly by word of mouth,
and a perpetual Succession, and Tradition, whatsoever was not expressed in
such a Catechism (as de facto we see God in his Goodness has furnished the
Indyes, with so many Pastors, Preachers etc. that no one Cathecisme is
absolutely necessary:) in that case, I say no man can judge, that S. Xaverius
had been obliged to leave in writing, precisely every particularnecessary
Point, but only such as, Time, Place, Persons, and all other particular
circumstances considered, should in prudence seem most for the purpose: and
such a Catechism, together with those other helps, had been a most
sufficient Means for that End, which S. Xaverius had proposed to himself, upon
the said supposition of Pastors etc. Now, this is our case. The Evangelists
were most certain, that Hell-gates could no^ prevail against the Church
(Matthew. 16.) that there should be a perpetual Succession of Pastors; that the
Church is the pillar and ground of truth (1. Timot. 3.) that he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some
Pastors and Doctors etc. that now we be not children wavering, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in craftyness, to
the circumvention of error; (Ephesi. 4.) Where we see, that for avoiding
errors, Scripture alone is not appointed as the only Means, yea is not so
much as mentioned, but Apostles, Pastors, Doctors etc. to the worlds end. To
which purpose; ancient S. Irenaeus (Lib. 3. Cap. 4.) speaks very fully in these
words; What if the Apostles had not left Scriptures? ought we not to have
followed the order and tradition which they delivered to those to whom they
committed the Churches? to which order, many nations yielded assent, who
believe in Christ having salvation written in their hearts by the spirit of God,
without letters, or ink, and diligently keeping ancient Tradition. It is easy
to receive the truth from Gods Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully
deposited in her, as in a rich storehouse, all things belonging to truth. It is
therefore clear, that the Evangelists had no obligation to write all necessary
points in particular: and some may retort your example, thus: the Evangelists
had no reason to do so; therefore, neither S. Xaverivs in the like case and
circumstances, had been obliged thereto; and not argue as you do; S. Xaverius
should have been obliged to do so; therefore we must say the same of the
Apostles. I will not stand here to say, that although S. Xaverius had been
obliged, to set down all Points necessary to be believed, by every private
person, as such: yet, I hope you would not have obliged him, to express all
things necessary for the whole Church, as I said in the beginning; which yet is
a most necessary thing.

150. But here occurs a difficulty, which will show your example of S.
Xaverius, or of any other, to be not only insufficient, or impertinent, but
also impossible and chimericall, and even ridiculous, (in your grounds:) of
which, I believe you did not reflect. You teach, that there cannot be given a
particular Catalogue of fundamental points, but that men may be sure not to
fail in believing all such Articles, if they believe all that is evidently
found in scripture, which clearly contains all necessary things in particular,
and many more. If then S. Xaverius could not know precisely, what points in
particular be fundamental, how will you oblige him, or any other, not to omit
any one such point? Neither I do understand how in your principles, any man can
set down all necessary points, in such manner as he may be sure to omit none,
except by referring them to scripture, or procuring that they have either the
whole bible (according to the common opinion of other Protestants) or at least,
the Gospel of S. Luke, which you hold for certain that it contaynes all
necessary points (for of the other three Evangelists you are doubtful) which
is a strange kind of composing a Catechism; and yet there can be no other
perfect Catechism made, either by Catholics or Protestants, according to
your grounds for the reason which I have given.

151 By what I have said, all your other demands or objections are answered If
(say you) every one of them have not in them all necessary doctrines, how have
they complied with their own design, which was, as the titles of their Books
show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of it? Or how have they
not deceived us in giving them such titles? By the whole Gospel of Christ, I
understand, not the whole History of Christ, but all that makes up the covenant
between God and man.

152. Answer. Here is nothing but begging the Question, in supposing without
any proof, that the design of the Evangelists was to write, not the whole
History of Christ, but all that makes up the Covenant between God and man,
(that is, all things necessary to salvation) which is the very Point in
Question; and a contradicting your self in saying, that the design of the
Evangelists was, as the titles of their Books show, to write the Gospel of
Christ, and not a part of it: and yet you say expressly, that you understand
not the whole History of Christ, but all that which makes up the covenant
between God and man; which is but a part of the Gospel, which contains many
Historyes and truths not necessary to salvation. Yea we see, that S. Matthew
begins his Gospel in an Historical, not a dogmaticall way, saying; The Book
of the Generation of Jesus Christ. S, Mark says: The beginning of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and then passes to the History of the appearing, baptizing,
and preaching of S. John Baptist. S. Luke after the Preface to his Gospel
(which Preface is a brief history or narration) begins his Gospel with
History; There was in the days of Herod the King of Jewrie a certain Priest
named Zachary, etc. S. John indeed begins his Gospel with a sublime point of
doctrine; In the beginning was the word, etc. against Ebion, one of your
progenitors, who denied Christ to be the Son of God, consubstantiall to his
Father; and accordingly says, (Cap: 20.31.) These are written, that you may
believe, that Jesus Christ is the son of God: which shows, that his purpose
was, not to make a Catechism, or set down all points of Faith, but to confute
that particular Heresy: and yet even this blessed Evangelist through diverse
verses of the same first Chapter, relates how S. John gave testimony of our
Savior, to show that his purpose was to write the History of Christ, as the
other three did, and not to make a Catechism, as I said.

153. But then say you, How have they complied with their own design, which
was, as the titles of their Books show to write the Gospel of Christ, and not
a part of it? Or how have they not deceyved us in giving them such titles?

154. Answer. I have often told you, that they have written the whole Gospel,
and not a part of it, for all that was to be written, and written by them, in
order to that End which by instinct of the Holy Ghost, they proposed to
themselves. Neither do the Titles of their Books signify any thing more: and
therefore not the titles deceive you, but you deceive yourself, and wrong the
Holy Evangelists by framing a fictitious and false meaning of true Titles, by
your interpreting them to signify all particular Points necessary to salvation.
Thus S. Luke does fully comply with the Title, Acta Apostolorum, The Acts of
the Apostles, though he speak nothing of some of the Apostles by name, yea
little of any, except of S. Paul, nor all that might have been said of him;
because he sets down all that he intended to write, according to the direction
of the Holy Ghost. And S. Chrysostom about the same Title of The Acts of the
Apostles, (Lib. cont. Gentil.) teaches, that Book to be so called, not that
it contaynes all the Acts, nor of all, but only of one or two, and* even of
those, such as were easy to be set down. Nay if we speak in all rigor, the
word Evangelium, which signifyes, Good tidings, is verifyed, though one write
not all good tidings and so, Evangelium secundum Mattheum, signifyes good
tidings delivered by S. Matthew, or the Book of good tidings written by S.
Matthew, which is literally true, though that Book contain not all necessary
Points. The same I say of the other Evangelists: And this observation does
clearly make void all your Arguments.

155. But in this place also, a difficulty offers it self, which, I bebelieue,
you will not answer, otherwise than by acknowledging some contradiction, and
which turns upon yourself that which you impose upon us, as if it did follow
from our Doctrine, that the Evangelists wrote not the Gospel, but only a part
of it; whereas yourself alone are guilty of such a sequel, where you say; By
the whole Gospel, I understand not the whole history of Christ, but all that
makes up the covenant between God and man. Whereas therefore, the Gospel,
according to your own Division, may signify two things, and contain two
parts, namely, The whole History of Christ; And, all that makes up the Covenant
between God and man, (that is, all things necessary to salvation) you restrain
the Gospel to the second part; and so you must answer your own Objection, How
have they complied with their onwe design, which was, as the Titles of their
Books show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of it? You say
then; they write not the Gospel, but a part of it: And yet you also say, that
their design was to write, the Gospel, and not a part of it; which is a
plain contradiction as I touched above. Again, you and every one must affirm
that the Title, Gospel etc. as it signifyes the History of Christ, is not
taken universally for the whole History of Christ, and then how can you with
any show of probability prove, that the same Title, must be taken universally,
as it is referred to Points necessary to be believed? The titles themselves say
not universally, the whole or all the Gospel of Christ, but indefinitely,
Gospel of Christ; and by what Authority can you draw them unto an universal
signification, and an universal of your own, to wit, of all necessary Points?

156. And here, I make the same Argument, which I made about the word all in S.
Luke; and ask, whether the Gospel of Christ signify absolutely all things
both necessary and profitable; or else only things necessary; or only things
profitable; or lastly, at least all things necessary, as (Page 112. N. 43.) You
demand Whether in the Text (of the Acts) All things which Jesus began to do
and teach must not at least imply all the principal and necessary things? You
cannot say without contradicting S. John, that the Gospel of Christ signifyes
absolutely all things, both necessary and profitable; or only things necessary,
it being manifest, that the Evangelists have written many things not necessary;
and you will not say, that it signifyes only, things only profitable, which
would overthrow your Assertion, that they have written all things necessary:
And therefore it remaynes, according to your manner of discoursing, that it
signifyes, at least all things necessary, which cannot be said without
absurdity, as if the Eva^gelists, and S. Mark in particular, who beginns thus
(The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God,) as part of his
Gospel, had bin doubtful whether they wrote only things necessary, or both
necessary and profitable; and therefore to be sure not to err did add, at least.

157. Before I ptoceed, one thing is to be observed, to wit, that it seems you
are of Opinion, that the Evangelists, themselves gave the titles to their own
Books; For you say: if every one of them have not in them all necessary
doctrines, how have they complied with then own design, which was, as the
Titles of their Books show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of
it? Or how have they not deceyved us, in giving them such Titles?

158. But in this you are mistaken; which beside other reasons, appears
sufficiently by this; that the inscription or Title of all the Gospells, is the
very same, only the name of every patticular Evangelist being changed; and S.
Mark, beside his particular manner of beginning his Gospel, with these words,
(The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God) has also the
same common Title, which is prefixed before the other Gospells, with
difference, only of his name. And it is not likely S. Mark would have repeated
the same words. In Protestant bibles Ann: 1586. 1596. I find this Title; The
holy Gospel of Jesus christ according to Mark: (and the same they say of the
other Gospells, respective) but Ann: 1611. and 1622. they say; The Gospel
according to S. Mark, where we see different words, and some, such as the
Evangelists would not have used, calling themselves Saints, or terming their
own writing, The holy Gospel of Jesus Christ. Do you think, that S. Paul, for
example, for his Epistle to the Romans, gave this Title, The Epistle of Paul
the Apostle to the Romans, over and above that, which he has in the beginning
of the Epistle it self; Paul the servant of Jesus Christ, to all that are at
Rome, the beloved of God called to be Saints. Grace to you: etc:? Or that he
premised this Title; The first, or second, Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians,
beside the particular address which he makes to them in the beginning of the
Epistles themselvest. The same I say of his Epistles to Timothy, the
Corinthians, Thessalonians etc: Or do you believe, that S. John premised before
his (The second Epistle of John) notwitstanding that in the Epistle it self he
says; The Seniour to the lady Elect, and her children; the like I say of the
third? Epistle which, begins, the Seniour to Caius the dearest. If then these
titles were not given by the Evangelists, they have not deceyved you in giving
such titles, which they never gave; nor can it be gathered, as you infer that
they have not complied with their own design, which was, as the Titles of
their Books show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of it; seeing,
as I said, those Titles are not theirs. Besides, if those Titles were not given
by the Evangelists, all your Arguments grounded on them, are no proofs taken
out of Holy Scripture, which alone you ought to bring in the Principles of
Protestants. By the way, I know not whether Protestants reflect, that they have
in their bibles, and read publikly, apocryphal Writings, that is, not Divine
scripture, which yet commonly most of them take to be scripture, I mean, the
Titles of the Gospells, Epistles; and I might add, distinction of Chapters and
Verses etc. And even out of the Premises, I may conclude; that if the meaning
of the Titles of Canonical books (and in particular, that which S: Mark has
in the beginning of his Gospel, which is a part of Scripture) be not clear,
who can believe, that the meaning of the scripture it self is evident?

159. You go forward and say: If this (all that makes up the Covenant between
God and man) be wholly contained in the Gospel of S. Mark, and S. John, every
considering man will be inclinable to believe, that then without doubt it is
contained in the larger Gospells of S. Matthew, and S. Luke.

160. Answer. You know we deny your supposition, that all necessary Points are
written in the Gospells of S. Mark and S. John. And though your supposition or
Antecedent were true, yet your consequence or deduction is so weak, that
without doubt no considering man will be inclinable to approve it. For, what a
poor consequence is this? The Gospells of S. Matthew, and S. Luke are larger
than the Gospells of S. Mark, and S. John; Therefore if these contain all
necessary Points, those also must contain them: As if some, or many, or all
necessary Points might not be set down within a small compass, and none at all
written in a larger Volume. How many large Chapters are there in scripture,
which you will acknowledge, not to contain any one necessary Point of Christian
belief? And yet the Apostles Creed, which Dr. Potter, and you affirm to
contain all necessary Points of Faith, consists not of very many words. It is
likely, you are of opinyon, that all Points absolutely necessary to salvation,
are very few, and might perhaps be contained in a few lines or words; in
comparison of which small compass, one Gospel may be truly said, to be no
larger than another, because every man will be inclinable to believe, that
three lines may be as well contained in a book of three Chapters, as in a
Volume of a great bulk; as ten cubits may be esteemed as larg, as twenty, for
the effect of containing a body of one cubit. In fine, all these your topicall
toys, prove nothing, till first you prove positively and solidly, out of
scripture, that all necessary Points must necessarily be expressed in
scripture, and consequently that that was particularly the intent of the
Evangelists. Let us see what proofs you can bring that S. Mark and S. John,
have written all things necessary to be believed.

161. You say (P: 210. N. 40. and 41) that S. Mark wants no necessary Article
of this covenant, I persume you will not deny, if you believe Irenaeus when he
says, Matthew to the Hebrews in their tongue published the Scripture of the
Gospel, when Peter and Paul did preach the Gospel and founded the Church or a
Church at Rome, or of Rome, and after their departure, Mark the scholar of
Peter, delivered to us in writing, those things which had been preached by
Peter; and Luke, the follower of Paul, compiled in a Book the Gospel which
was preached by him: and afterward, John residing in Asia, in the City of
Ephesus, did himself also set forth a Gospel. Having set down these words of
S. Irenaeus, you urge them thus; (Page: 211. N. 41.) In which words of Irenaeus,
it is remarkable that they are spoken by him against some Heretics, that
pretended (as you know, who do now a days) that some necessary Doctrines of
the Gospel, were unwritten, and that out of the Scriptures, truth (he must
mean, sufficient truth) cannot be found by those which know not tradition.
Against whom to say, that part of the Gospel which was preached by Peter, was
written by S. Mark, and some other necessary parts of it omitted, had been to
speak impertinently, and rather to confirm, than confute their error. It is
plain therefore, that be must mean, as I pretend, that all the necessary
doctrine of the Gospel, which was preached by S. Peter, was written by S.
Mark. Now you will not deny I persume, that S. Peter preached all, therefore you
must not deny, that S. Mark wrote all. In your Margent you cite S. Irenaeus
(Lib. 3. Cap. 2.)

162. Answer: you set nor down the Book or Chapter for the first place which
you cite out of S. Irenaeus: I have found it, and find that your ill dealing is
so very exorbitant, and manifold, that I scarcely know where to begin the
discovery, or how to exaggerate sufficiently your fraud.

163 First: In those words which you cite, (they are Lib. 3. Cap. 1. adversus
Haereses) it is only said, that the four Evangelists wrote their several
Gospells, but it is not so much as insinuated, that every one, or all of them,
wrote all things necessary to salvation, nor any least thing that may seem to
look that way, or to be for your purpose in a^y other respect, as shall
appear anon. But your misery is, that still you suppose that all necessary
things must be expressed in scripture, and in virtue of that begging
supposition, you extend indefinite Propositions, as if they were universal,
and yet did signify not absolutely all, as vniversalls are wont to do, but
determinately for your purpose all things necessary for salvation; whereas S.
Irenaeus has neither the word all, nor the words necessary Articles. Your
chief or only care should have been, to prove positively a necessity, that all
things necessary should have been written, in every one of the Gospells, and
then you might with some more show of reason turn indefinite, into universal,
propositions: but your negative way, or only asking questions, what reason can
be imagined, that any of them should leave out any thing which he knew to be
necessary etc: will not satisfy. S. Irenaeus teaches, that S. Mark delivered
to us in writing, those things which had been preached by Peter; but does he
say, all those things which had been preached by Peter? He neither did, nor
could say so, the thing being in it self manifestly untrue. For, S. Peter
delivered many things by word of mouth, which neither S. Mark, nor any other of
the Evangelists have written, as we may learn from S. John, (Chap. 21.) and S.
Mark omitts diverse things which the other Evangelists and canonical Writers
have written, and can you affirm, that S. Peter delivered none of those
points? And in particular, could he be silent of the Incarnation and birth and
other Mysteryes of our Savior Christ, till his baptism, which yet S. Mark
omitts, as we noted above? It is therefore evident, that S. Irenaeus could not
mean, that S. Mark wrote whatsoever S. Peter delivered, and therefore he wrote
only some, and not all. This then must be your Argument: S. Peter preached all
the necessary doctrine of the Gospel, and much more; but S. Mark wrote only
some, and not all that S. Peter preached, therefore S. Mark wrote all the
necessary doctrine of the Gospel, and more. An Argument like to this: God
knows all things. Mr Chillingworth knows some, but not all things that God
knows therefore Mr. Chillingworth knows all things. Eusebius (Lib. 5. Hist. C.
8.) cites S. Irenaeus thus: Mark the disciple and interpreter of Peter
committed to writing, those things which he had received from him: where we see
no universal, but only an indefinite proposition Neither did it make any thing
to S. Irenaeus. his purpose to treat whether or no, the Evangelists, or other
Canonical VVriters, did set down all necessary points. For, he wrote against
certain absurd Heretics, when denied, that God created Heaven and earth, or
breached some other such pernicious fooleryes, which might be confuted out of
scripture, though it do not contain all other necessary points of Faith: And
it is too much boldness (another would call it impudency) in you, to say, that
in the words of Irenaeus, it is remarkable, that they are spoken by him against
some Heretics, that pretended that some necessary Doctrines of the Gospel
were unwritten, and that out of the Scriptures, truth (he must mean,
sufficient truth) cannot be found by those which know not tradition; and for
this you cite S. Irenaeus (Lib: 3. Cap: 2.) and (Page: 346. N. 30) you say,
Irenaeus had to do with Heretics, who, somewhat like those who would be the
only Catholics, declining a trial by Scripture, as not containing the Truth
of Christ perfectly, and not fit to decide Controversyes without recourse to
Tradition etc: But in this, your fraud is intolerable. For, those Heretics, of
whom S. Irenaeus speaks, when Catholics did allege scripture, excepted not
against it because it did not contain all necessary truths, or not the truth
of Christ perfectly, (which exception could nothing avail them, it being
sufficient for confutation of their particular heresy, if the scripture did
contain as much as was contradictory to their errors, supposing they did
believe it to be the word of God) but their exception was, that it was not well
written, was false, and not agreeing with it self; as may be seen in that very
third Book and second Chapter, which you alledg against us, in the words which
now I have cited out of you; and therefore you cannot pretend ignorance for
excuse of your want of sincerity. Thus then S. Irenaeus in that (Lib: 3. Cap.
2.) (the title of which Chapter is; Quod neque scripturis, neque Traditionibus
obsequantur haeretici: That Heretics obey neither Scripture, nor Traditions.)
beginns that Chapter with these words; When they are convinced out of
Scripture, they fall upon accusing the Scriptures themselves, as if they were
not right, nor of sufficient authority, and that they did vary from
themselves, and that, truth could not be gathered from them by those who are
ignorant of tradition. These very words yourself (Page: 361. N 40.) alledg out
of S. Irenaeus, and say; The Fathers urged tradition against them, who when
they were confuted out of Scripture, fell to accuse Scriptures themselves as if
they were not right, and came not from good authority, as if they were various
one from another, and as if truth could not be found out of them, by those who
know not Tradition, for that it was not delivered in writing (they did mean
say you, wholly) but by word of mouth, and that thereupon Paul also said, we
speak wisdom amongst the perfect. But the word, wholly, in your parenthesis is
wholly your own false gloss, to make those Heretics seem like to us
Catholics; whereas it is plain, as we have heard out of your own confession,
that those Heretics held scripture unfit to prove any truth at all, and not
only unfit to prove all necssary truths; because they held it not to be the
infallible word of God, but to contain falsehoods and contradictions: and your
conscience cannot but bear witness, that we do not deny the sufficiency of
scripture alone, and necessity of tradition, upon any such Atheistical
persuasion as that was.

164. This also appears by S. Irenaeus in the first Chapter of the same Book
which you cited, where he says against those Heretics; Neither is it lawful
to say, that they preached, before they had receyved perfect knowledge, as some
presume to say, boasting that they are correctours of the Apostles. And this
horrible Heresy he confutes, because the Apostles did not preach, till first
they had receyved the Holy Ghost. Where I beseech you, remember with fear and
trembling, your own doctrine, that the Apostles did err, about preaching the
Gospel to Gentiles; and in some things did not deliver divine truths, but the
dictates of humane reason, and all this, after they had receyved the Holy
Ghost; and then consider whether you, or we disagree from S. Irenaeus, and
detract from the sufficiency of scripture, which, if these your doctrines were
true, would be of no greater authority than those absurd Heritiks wickedly
affirmed it to be, with whom therefore you do in this perfectly agree. This also
appears by the words of S. Irenaeus (Lib: 1. Cap: 29) where he says of
Marcion the Heretic; he persuaded his disciples, that his word was more to be
believed, than the Apostles who delivered the Gospel.

165. You could not also but speak against your conscience, while you liken the
Tradition which Catholics believe, to those of the said wicked Heretics, who
indeed agreed with you in the point of denying the Traditions which we defend,
as is fully witnessed by S. Irenaeus in that very Chapter and Book which you
alledg, and therefore you. are inexcusable in laying to our charge the traditions
of those men. For, S. Irenaeus in the same (Lib: 3. Cap: 2.) having said, that
when those Heretics are pressed with scripture, they fly to tradition, he adds;
But when we provoke them to that Tradition which comes from the Apostles, and
which is kept in the Churches by the Successions of Priests; they oppose
themselves against Tradition, saying, that they themselves being wiser not only
than Priests, but also than the Apostles, have found out the sincere truth. And
so it comes to pass, that they assent neither to scripture, nor Tradition.
Which is agreeable to the Title of that Chapter; Quod neque scripturis etc. as
I said above. Whereby it appears, that they rejected Catholic Traditions
derived from the Apostles by succession of Pastors; and therefore when they
appeal to Tradition, it was to certain secret traditions of their own men;
which even yourself (Page 344. N. 28.) affirm out of S. Irenaeus, where you
say, that Catholics alleged Tradition much more credible than that secret
tradition to which those heretics pretended against whom he [S. Irenaeus]
wrote. And (Page 345. N. 29.) You speak most clearly and effectually to your
own confutation. For there, you make a paraphrase of some words of S.
Irenaeus, and make him speak in this manner: You heretics decline a trial of
your doctrine by scripture, as being corrupted and imperfect, and not fit to
determine Controversyes with out recourse to Tradition, and instead thereof,
you fly for refuge to a secret tradition, which you pretend that you received
from your Antecessours. Do not these words declare, both that those heretics
held scripture to be corrupted; and that they relied upon certain hidden and
vain traditions of their own? As contrarily, it is evident out of S.
Irenaeus, that the Fathers were wont to convince heretics by Tradition coming
from the Apostles, and which is conserved in the Churches by succession of
Priests: which demonstrates, that there was no necessity, that all necessary
points should be written; and you wrong S. Irenaeus alleging him to the
contrary, whereas it is most certain, and evident, that this holy Father writes
most effectually in favor of Traditions descending to us by a continued
succession, of Bishops and Pastors, and particularly of the Bishops of Rome,
whose succession and names he sets down to his time, as may be seen (Lib.
3. Chap 3.) and then concludes: by this order and succession that tradition
which is in the Church derived from the Apostles, and preaching of the truth
came to us. And this is a most full demonstration, that it is one and the same
life-giving Faith which from the Apostles to this time has been in the Church
conserved and delivered in truth. I beseech the Reader for the good of his own
soul, to read what this holy Father writes of traditions (Lib. 3. C. 4.25.40.)
and (Lib. 4. C. 43.) where he has these remarkable words; wherefore we ought
to obey those Priests which are in the Church, and have succession from the
Apostles, who with Episcopal succession have receyved the certain gift of
truth, according to the pleasure of the Father. But others who depart from the
principal succession, and have their conventicles in what place soever, we
ought to hold for suspected, either as Heretics, and of ill doctrine, or as
schismatikes, and proud, and pleasing themselves, or else as hypocrites, doing
these things for lucre and vainglory. And yet further (L. 4. C. 45.) he has
these words: Paul teaching us where we may find such, (he means Faithful
persons, whom our Lord has placed over his family, of whom he spoke in the end
of the precedent 44. Chapter) says; he placed in his Church first, Apostles,
secondly, Prophets, thirdly Doctors where therefore the gifts of our Lord are
placed, there we ought to learn the truth, with whom there is a succession of
the Church from the Apostles, and that is constantly kept which is wholesome,
unblemished for conversation, and not spurious but incorruptible in doctrine,
(that is, both for manners, and Faith; affirming, that in neither of those the
Church can err.) For, those men do keep our Faith which is in one God who
made all things, and expound to us the scriptures without danger. And the same
he says (L. 4 C. 63.) yea even whitaker Controu: 1. 9. Q. C. 9. says; We
confess with Irenaeus, the Authority of the Church to be firm, and a
compendious demonstration of Canonical doctrine a posteriori. Where we see
Whitaker speaks of doctrine, and not only of conserving and consigning
scripture to us. And S. Epiphanius is so clear for traditions (Heresi 61.) we
must use traditions, for the scripture has not all things, and therefore the
Apostles delivered certain things by writing, and certain by tradition; (with
whom agrees S. Basile de spiritui sancto, (Cap. 27.) saying some things we
have from scripture, other things from the Apostles tradition etc: both which
have like force unto godliness) that Dr. Reynolds in his conclusions annexed to
his conference (1. conclus: Page 689.) answering to these sayings of S.
Epiphanius, and S. Basil, says; I took not upon me to control them; but let
the Church judge, if they considered with advise enough. etc: And for other
Fathers both Greek and Latin, they are so plain for tradition against the
sufficiency of scripture taken alone, that (as may be seen in Brierley, Tract:
1. sect. 3. subdivis. 12.) whereas S. Chrysostom says (in 2. ad Thessal: Hom:
4.) The Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things
without, and these be as worthy of credit as the other; Whitaker, de Sacra
Scriptura (Page: 678.) in answer thereto says: I answer, This is an
inconsiderate speech and unworthy so great a Father. And whereas (Eusebius Lib:
1. Demonstrat: Evangel: Cap: 8.) is objected to say, That the Apostles
published their, doctrine, partly without writing as it were by a certain
unwritten law; Whitaker, (Page: 668.) says thereto: I answer, that this
testimony is plain enough, but of no force to be receyved, because it is
against the Scripture. And of S. Austine, Cartwright says; (in Mr. Whitgifts
Defense, Page: 103.) If S. Austines judgment be a good judgment, then there be
some things commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures. Yea, not to
insist upon every particular Father, Kemnitius (Exam: Part: 1. Page: 87.89.90.)
reproves for their like testimony of unwritten Traditions, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin. Epiphanius, Hierome, Maximus, Theophilus, Basil,
Damascen: etc: Fulk also confesses as much of Chrysostom, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Austine, Hierome, etc: And Whitaker acknowledges the like of Chrysostom:
Epiphanius, Tertullian, Austine, Innocentius, Leo, Basil, Eusebius, Damascene,
etc. Now sir, are not these Fathers and Ancient Doctors, who teach that the
Apostles have not delivered all things in writing, directly opposite to your
contrary Assertion, so often repeated, but without any proof, which you know
is but to beg the Question? Of people without succession of Pastors, which is
the ground of Tradition, we may truly say as Optatus says of the Donatists
(Lib. 2. cont. Parm.) Sunt sine Patribus filii etc. They are children without
Fathers, disciples without masters, and in a prodigious manner begotten and
borne of themselves.

166. I will make an end of this matter, if first I have noted, that it is a
false gloss of yours, (like to that which I have noted above) and directly
against S. Irenaeus, that when he says; those Heretics taught, that truth
cannot be found by those who know not Tradition, he must mean sufficient
truth, as if those heretics had agreed with Catholics, that all truth is not
sufficiently contained in scripture alone; whereas S. Irenaeus expressly
declares the doctrine of those Heretics to have been, that the scriptures were
not right, and came not from good authority, but were various one from another,
as I have showed, and yourself affirm in those very words which you translate
out of S. Irenaeus: and so not only sufficient truth could not be learned in
the scriptures, but they could not assure us of any truth at all. Whereas you
say; (to have said against those Heretics, that, part of the Gospel which was
preached by Peter, was written by S. Mark, and some necessary parts of it
omitted, had been to speak impertinently* and rather to confirm than confute
their error. I must say, that your consequence is no less impertinent, than
your supposition is false; because no body did ever go about to confute those
Heretics by saying, that part of the Gospel was written, and some part
omitted; but by proving that the scriptures were true, and of infallible
authority, which they denied; and also, that beside scripture, there are true
Catholic Traditions (opposite to the foolish traditions of those Heretics)
from which, truth may be learned: both which Points S. Irenaeus proves, and so
confutes the double error of those heretics, that truth could be found,
neither by the scriptures, nor by the Traditions of Catholics; and thereby
expressly makes good such Traditions, and that both out of scripture and
Tradition we may learn some Points of Christian Faith; which is directly
against that very thing, for which you allege him, and proves my chief intent,
that scripture is not the only Rule of Faith. To which purpose, I beseech you,
hear your own words [Pag: 345. N. 29.] where you bring S. Irenaeus [Lib. 3.
Cap. 2.] speaking thus to those Heretics; Your calumnyes against Scripture are
most unjust, but yet moreover assure yourselves, that if you will be tried by
Tradition, even by that also you will be overthrown. For our Tradition is far
more famous, more constant, and in all respects more credible than that which
you pretend to. It were easy for me, to muster up against you the uninterrupted
Successions of all the Churches founded by the Apostles, all conspiring in
their testimonies against you: But because it were too long to number up the
Successions of all Churches, I will content my self with the Tradition of the
most Ancient, and most glorious Church of Rome, which alone is sufficient for
the confutation and confusion of your doctrine, etc: Thus you: And though you
render very imperfectly both the words and meaning of S. Irenaeus, and in some
words following those which I have set down, falsify his sense: (And therefore
I beseech the Reader to examine the place) yet this is sufficient to show, by
your own confession, what was the judgment of this glorious Saint and Martyr
concerning Traditions, and the no-necessity that all Points of Faith should
have been written, since we may receive them from the Church.

167. By the way: For what mystery do you go about to prove that S. Mark has
written all things necessary, because S. Irenaeus (Lib. 3. Cap. 1.) says; Mark
S. Peter's disciple, delivered to us in writing those things which S. Peter had
preached; and yet do not apply the same proof to S. Luke, of whom S. Irenaeus
in the same place, says: Luke a follower of Paul, wrote down the Gospel
which had been preached by him. (S. Paul.) To what purpose would you go the
further way about, first proving, that S. Mark has all necessary points, and
from the nce inferring, that S. Luke whose Gospel is larger than that of S.
Mark* must needs have written all such things? When as you might have
immediately proved the same thing of S. Luke, of whom S. Irenaeus speaks in the
very same manner, as he speaks of S. Mark.

168. From S. Mark you pass to S. John, whom (Page 211. N. 42.) you would
prove to have written all necessary points, because he says; Many other signs
also did Jesus in the sight of his disciples, which are not written in this
Book: But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the
Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name, (John. 20. V
31.) By (these are written) may be understood, either those things are written,
or these signs are written. Take it which way you will, this conclusion will
certainly follow, That either all that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, or
less then all, and therefore all much more was sufficient to make them believe
that which being believed with lively Faith, would certainly bring them to
eternal life.

169. Answer: Of this Text we have spoken already. Who would ever have dreamed
of this Argument? S. John set down in his Gospel as much of the Miracles
which our B. Savior wrought, as was sufficient to oblige men to believe that
he was the Son of God: Therefore he set down evidently all things necessary to
salvation; as if nothing were necessary, except the belief of that single
Point; or as if none can be damned if he believe that Point, which is to say,
no Christian can be damned. For, he who believes not Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God, and the Messiah, is no Christian. Does the Apostles Creed consist only
of that Point? And yet Potter and you say, it contains only things belonging
to Faith. Do not many Heretics believe that Point? Yea if they did not believe
that Article, they were not Heretics, but Jews, Turks, or infidells, and
Aposttaes from Christian Faith. Suppose S. John had written only some Miracles,
sufficient to prove Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, without mentioning any
other doctrinall point at all, who will say, that he had evidently set down
all things necessary to salvation? And S. John (Epist. 1. C. 2. V. ^.) says:
these things I write to you that you may not sin: as he says in his Gospel;
These things are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is Christ, the son of
God. Therefore as you will not say, that in that Epistle he evidently setts down
all Points of Faith, and other conditions required for keeping the
commandments, and avoiding sin; but only that he wrote it to that end, which
yet was not to be obtained by that Epistle alone; so although S. John says
(Ep. 1. C. 1.4.) These things we write to you, that your joy may be full; yet
the contents of that Epistle alone could not give full joy, which requires the
state of Grace, and observation of all things belonging to Faith and Good life.
Nothing is more ordinary than to attribute an effect to some one cause, because
indeed it is a cause, though it alone be not sufficient to produce such an
effect. He that shall believe, and shall be baptized shall be saved, Mark
(16.16.) and yet Historical Faith alone, even according to Calvinists,
together with baptism, is not sufficient for salvation. Luther (Postilla in
Dominic. 5. post Pasch.) says, Here we see, that to believe in Christ, does
not consist in believing that Christ is one Person which is God and man. For,
this would avail no man. Sadeel (Resp: ad Artic: abjurat: 33. Page 495.) says;
it is not enough to believe that Jesus Christ came into the world; that he
suffered death; that he rose again, and ascended into Heaven: for, this
Historical Faith will not save me. This you did see, and therefore to help the
matter, you closely add, that S. John wrote sufficient to make men believe that
which being believed with lively Faith, would certainly bring them to eternal
life. With lively Faith? Therefore not by believing that Point alone, Jesus is
the Son of God. A lively Faith signifyes the belief of all other Points of
Faith, and all things necessary for keeping all the Commandments; and you
should have proved, that S. John setts down in his Gospel evidently all
Points belonging to Faith and manners. Here I must put you in mind, of your
doctrine, that there cannot be given a Catalogue of necessary or fundamental
Points of Faith; and yet it may be easily and speedily given, (and you actually
give it in this place) if the belief of this Article alone, Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, will certainly bring men to eternal life.

170. But indeed is this Point which you alledg, clear and evident in S. John's
Gospel? You could scarcely have picked out a place, or Point, less for your,
and more for our, purpose. Do not Protestants differ both from Catholics and
amongst themselves about the Consubstantiality, Merit, and Satisfaction of out
B. Savior? And for that which you say was S. John's prime intent in writing his
Gospel, Vt credatis, That you may believe, do not you in this, differ from
other Protestants toto genere, as much as a belief only probable and fallible,
differs from a most certain and infallible assent? And concerning the words,
that you may have life in his name, do not you and your Socinian brethren,
differ from other Protestants, who believe the Value of our Saviors works,
his Merit, Satisfaction for our sins, and Redemption of mankind? And so (in
his name) must be understood, by different Protestants, in a very different
sense, which is the life of scripture. In which maine differences, you in your
Principles will not say, but that many, or diverse, or at least, some,
Protestants, do sincerly seek the true meaning of scripture, and therefore could
not disagree among themselves, and from Catholics, if those words of S. John
were evident, according to your own Rule. That a thing is not evident, when
men so qualifyed, disagree about it. Catholic Bishops did overthrow the
Arians, (who made no end of alleging scripture for their Heresy) by Tradition,
and the word homoousion, which is not found in scriprure. And so you could not
have brought any Text of greater strength to prove the necessity of Tradition,
and of a Living Judge, then this, which you alledg for the evidence and
sufficiency of scripture alone: and if this Text itself be so difficult, how
can you by it prove, that all other necessary Points are evident? especially if
we reflect on your words (Page 93. N. 106.) That the Evangelists wrote not only
for the learned, but for all men. And therefore that they intended to speak
plain, even to the capacity of the simplest. A pretty paradox! that the
simplest are able to learn with certainty, out of the bare words of scripture
alone, the most sublime mysteryes of Christian Religion, which is more than the
learned can do without observing diverse Rules exceeding the capacity of the
unlearned; and yet this absurdity cannot be avoided, if scriprure alone be the
sole Rule of Faith: because God has provided means of salvation both for the
learned and unlearned: and therefore if there be no other means beside
scripture, it must be clear to all sorts of people. What is this but to cast
men into despair?

171. By what has been said, there offers it self an easy answer, to the
Objection which you make (Page 93. N. 105.) Where speaking of the Evangelists,
you say: Can we imagine, that either they ommitted something necessary out of
ignorance, not knowing it to be necessary? Or knowing it to be so, maliciously
concealed it? or out of negligence did the work they had undertaken, by halfes?
If none of these things can without Blasphemy be imputed to them, considering
they were assisted by the Holy Ghost in this work, then certainly it most
evidently follows, that every one of them writ the whole Gospel of Christ; I
mean, all the essential and necessary parts of it. In which words you do
nothing but beg the Question, still supposing that the Evangelists were
obliged to set down in writing all necessary Points of Faith; which though
they knew to be necessary to be believed, yet they neither did, nor could know,
that they were necessary to be written: which two things you ought to
distinguish, though it seems you are resolved never to do so. And here also
you take upon you to limit the Gospel to the essential and necessary parts of
it; of which your voluntary restriction I have already said enough.

172. But Sr. I cannot choose but ask you, upon the occasion which here you
give; how you can say, that ignorance or negligence cannot without blasphemy be
imputed to the Evangelists? seeing (Page 144. N. 31.) you affirm, that the
Apostles even after the sending of the Holy Ghost, were, and through
inadvertence, or prejudice, continued for a time, in an error repugnant to a
revealed truth, and against our Saviors express warrant and injunction: and
(Page 137. N. 2.) you teach, that the Church of the Apostles time, did err
against a revealed truth through prejudice or inadvertence, or some other
cause; which last general reason gives scope to proceed in blasphemy (if once
we say, that the Apostles were not in all things belonging to Faith directed by
the Holy Ghost) and for such as you, to say, that if they could err by
inadvertence, prejudice, or some other causes, it was not impossible, but at
length one of those other causes might grow to be malice. But more of this
herafter. Now I will only touch that which I noted before, how little credit,
or authority your reasons ought to have with any judicious person, since you
acknowledge it to be but probable, that every one of the Evangelsts has written
all things necessary, and yet you would needs have your proofs thereof to be
certain and evident. Thus we have heard you say (Page 211.42.) Take it as you
will, this conclusion will certainly follow, that all that which S. John wrote
in his Gospel was sufficient to make them believe, that which being believed
with lively Faith, would certainly bring them to eternal life. Vrceus institui
coepit, cur Amphora prodit? A probability improved to a certainty, by the only
strength of confidence; And (Page 93. N. 105.) you say; that unless we will
blaspheme and accuse the Evangelists either or ignorance, or malice, or
negligence, certainly it most evidently follows, that every one of them writ
the whole Gospel of Christ; I mean, all the essential and necessary parts of
it.

173. Morover, although you pretend to a certainty, that S. Luke has written
all necessary Points, which you hold only probable for the other three
Evangelists; yet your reason comes to be the same for all, which is, that the
Evangelists were obliged to write all things necessary; or else this (which in
effect is all one with the former) what reaso^n can be imagined, that they
should not write all things necessary, and yet set down many things only
profitable? For, unless you presuppose this reason (which is common to all the
Evangelists) you have no ground to affirm, that the words of S. Luke (all that
Jesus began to do and teach) must signify determinately all necessary things,
as I have often said; and so upon the matter, you have the same reason for all
the four Evangelists, which is no more then the same begging of the Question.

174. But what need we use many reasons? Our eyes can witness, that the
Evangelists have not written all necessary Points of Faith. For, (to omit,
that they have not set down the matter and form of Sacraments, the form of
Government of the Church, the power of inflicting censures, and many such
Points, which cannot be evidently proved out of scripture alone, without the
assistance of tradition) we do not find clearly expressed in S. Matthew the
Eternal generation of the Son of God, wherewith S. John begins his Gospel,
In the beginning was the word etc. S. Mark is silent of the Incarnation of our
Lord in the womb of the B. Virgin by virtue of the Holy Ghost; His Birth, and
all other Mysteryes of his sacred life till his age of thirty years. S Luke,
as also S Mark; omits the giving power to forgive sins. (Joan. 20. V. 22.23.)
and (Matthew. 18. V. 18.) which is a chief Article of our Creed, I believe the
remission of sins. S. John wrote nothing of the Annuntiation, Nativity,
Circumcision, Epiphany, and Ascension of our Savior Christ; and according to
Protestants, he speaks not of the Eucharist. For, they deny that [Cap. 6.] he
speaks of that Sacrament: And consequently, communion under both kinds, which
they hold to be a Divine precept, and therefore necessary to salvation, is
omitted by him; as also our Lords prayer. All of them have omitted in their
Gospells, that which is expressed [Act. 2.] about the sending of the Holy
Ghost; and the Decrees of the Council of the Apostles, (Act. 15.) wherein
amongst other things, they declare, that it was not necessary to observe the
Mosaicall Law, which is a most important and necessary point. I have been
longer in answering this objection, as containing many heads and diverse
Arguments of the same nature, which I thought best not to divide. Let us now
see what more you can object.

175. Object 3. (Page: 93. N. 105.) If men cannot understand by scripture,
enough for their salvation, why then does S. Paul say to Timothy, the
scriptures are able to make him wise unto salvation?

376. Answer: First, It is not said, the scriptures alone are able to make one
wise to salvation: And if you had dealt honestly, and not conceald what went
before and after, it would have been clear, that S. Paul speaks not of
scripture alone; and of what scripture he speaks; and how scripture may
instruct to salvation; which points being well considered, it will appear,
that this Text is so far from proving what you intend, that it makes against
you. S. Paul (V 14. and 15.) says; Tu vero permane, etc. But thou continue in
those things which thou have learned, and are committed to thee knowing of whom
thou have learned; and because from thy infancy thou have known the holy
scriptures, which can instruct thee to salvation, by the Faith that is in
Christ Jesus. In which words S. Paul speaks of things which Timothy had
learned of him (though out of humility and modesty he concealed, his own name
as he does 2. Cor. 12.2. scio hominem etc I know a man in Christ above fourteen
years ago, etc.) beside scriptures, which Timothy had known from his
infancy; therefore he speaks not of scripture taken alone, or without a
Teacher, and so it can only be inferred, that scripture or the word written,
joined with the unwritten word, is sufficient to instruct unto salvation. But
besides this, of what scriptures does S. Paul speak? Of those in which S.
Timothy had been conversant from his infancy, which could be only the
scriptures of the Old Testament, and therefore that which S. Paul delivered by
word of mouth, must contain many more Points concerning Christian Religion,
than Timothy could learn evidently, distinctly, and in particular by the Old
Testament alone. Of that maine Point, which one would think should be most
clear, that Christ our Lord is the true Messiah, the Eunuch said* and how can
I (understand) without an interpreter? Which yet he might have done, if
scripture in that fundamental Point had been evident, according to the Axiom
of the Socinians, he needs no guide who clearly and certainly knows the way.
No doubt but the Old Testament may help to believe in Christ, being rightly
interpreted; but it alone is not so evident as you pretend scripture to be. The
star which appeared to the three Sages, had not been sufficient to call and
direct them to Bethleem, without some other help; as that tradition, Vid: S.
Hieron: Lib: 1. Comment: in Cap: 2. Marth: S. Ambrost Lib: (...) 2.
There shall arise a starr from Jacob (Number. 24.17.) And of Bethleem it self,
that Prophecy (Mich. 5.3. And thou, Bethleem, the Land of Juda art not the
least among the Princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come forth a Captain to
govern my People Israel) had not been clear without the declaration of the
Clergy of that time; which declaration they also received by tradition. Whereby
it appears, that when it is said; The scriptures can instruct thee unto
salvation, this being spoken of the Old Testament only, can signify no more
then that they may help to that effect, but not that they alone are
sufficient, which is the thing you should prove. Which may be confirmed by
considering, that S Paul does as it were prevent an Objection, or Demand which
might be made: why does the Apostle exhort Timothy to be constant in those
things, which he had learned out of the scriptures, of the Old Testament, if
they be not sufficient to make a man perfect? To which, S. Paul answers, that
although those scriptures alone be not sufficient, yet they are profitable. And
this he proves, in the next verse (16.17.) because all scripture being inspired
by God, is profitable to teach etc. And therefore nothing can be gathered from
this place to prove the sufficiency of scripture alone. Which appears also by
those words which the Apostle adds; per Fidem etc. by Faith which is in Christ
Jesus, declaring that the Old Testament may instruct to salvation, not taken
alone, but with the help of a teacher expounding it according to the Analogy
of Christian Religion: and so this Text proves, that besides scripture, a
Living Guide is necessary: which is also proved by those words: (2. Tim. 3.14.)
But thou continue in those things which thou have learned, and are committed to
thee: that is; (says Cornel: a Lapide upon this place) are committed to thee
as a Bishop, to be conserved and promulgated: which interpretation he proves
out of the Greek. And so it still appears more and more, even by this place
of S. Paul, that more is to be believed, than is contained particularly in
scripture; as also we learn out of the same Apostle, (2. Tessalon: 2.15.)
Observe the Traditions which you have received from us, whether by word, or by
Epistle: and (2. Tim. 1.13.14.) Have thou a form of Sound words, which thou
have heard from me in Faith, and in the love of Christ Jesus: (Mark, he says,
which thou have heard from me, and not which have been written by me) keep the
good depositum by the holy Ghost, which dwells in us; and (2. Timoth. 2.2.)
The things which thou have heard of me (mark again, have heard, not have redd
in my words) by many witnesses these commend to faithful men, which shall be fit
to teach others also. He taught, and would have others teach; and this
perpetual course of Teaching, is the Catholic Tradition.

177. Object: 4. [Pag: 179. N. 80.] You ask, Why may not the Apostles writings
be as fit means to conserve us in unity, and keep us from error, as the
Bishops that composed the Decrees of the Counsel of Trent, or the Pope that
confirmed them? Or as the Decrees themselves? Surely their intent was to
conserve unity of Faith, and to keep us from error. Was the Holy Ghost then
unwilling, or unable to direct them so, that their writings should be fit and
sufficient to attain that end they aimed at in writing? For, if he were both
able and willing to do so, then certainly he did so. And then their writings
may be very sufficient means, if we would use them as we should do, to
preserve us in unity in all necessary Points of Faith, and to guard us from all
pernicious Error.

178. Answer: As you are still begging the Question, so I may not fail to be
putting you in mind, that you do so. You should prove, and not take as granted,
that the intent of the Apostles was to conserve unity of Faith, and to keep us
from error by their writings, taken alone, without any unwritten word, or
Tradition. Our Question is, whether all necessary particular Points be
evidently contained in Scripture alone: if they be not so contained; then it
follows, that the scripture alone, can neither conserve us in unity, nor
preserve us from error in those points of which it says nothing, but for such
things, all will proceed, as if there were no scripture, therefore you must
suppose all necessary things to be contained in scripture, before you can
affirm, that the intent of the Apostles was to conserve unity, and to keep us
from error, by their writings alone; that is, you must beg, that which you
know is denied. The Holy Ghost was both able, and willing, so to direct the
Apostles and all Canonical Writers, that their writings should be fit and
sufficient to attain that end they aimed at in writing, and certainly he did
do so. But you have nor proved that they aimed at that end, which not the Holy
Ghost, nor the Apostles moved by his inspiration, aimed at, but which you only
presume to prescribe, for making good your error. You say; the scriptures may
be very sufficient means if we would use them as we should do, to preserve us
in unity, etc. But experience teaching, that by not following a Living Guide,
no unity can be hoped for by scripture alone; to use them as we should do, is
not for every one to follow his own interpretation, but that of Gods Church.
And it is an injury to the insinite wisdom of our B. Savior, to imagine, that
he left that, for a sufficient Means to conserve Unity, which hitherto neither
has had, nor ever will, nor ever can have that effect, without a perpetual,
great, and unusual Miracle, by making men, different in all other things,
agree in the sense of Scripture. You will not deny, but that while the Apostles
and other Canonical writers were alive, the scripture, joined with such
explication as they could give by word of mouth, or by writing new books, was
sitter to conserve unity, then now it is: and, by not making use of such help
of some authentical interpreter, it is said of the Epistles of S. Paul, (2.
Pet. 3 V. 16.) that there were in them some hard things to be understood,
which, unlearned and inconstant persons did deprave to their own perdition, as
they did also other Scriptures. Now the Church supplies that want of the
Apostles personal presence: And so we may say of all Controversyes in Faith,
as S. Austine (de unit: Eccles: C. 22.) writes concerning the Question about
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics: Seeing we find not in
Scripture, that some pass to the Church from heretics, and were receyved, as I
say, or as thou say, I suppose, that if there were any wise man of whom our
Savior had given testimony and that he should be consulted in this question,
we should make no doubt to perform what he should say, least we might feeme to
gainsay, not him so much as Christ, by whose testimony he was recommended. Now
Christ bears witness to his Church. And a little after: Whosoever refuses to
follow the practice of the Church does resist our Savior himself, who by his
testimony recommends the Church.

179. To your demand; Why may not the Apostles writings be as fit means to
conserve us in unity, and keep us from error, as the Decrees of the Church?
The Answer is easy and clear. First, If one Decree be obscure, it may be
declared by another, seeing the church ca^ never perish. 2. If any new
co^troversy in faith arise, the Church, always living and present, ca^
determine it by some new Decree or Declaration. These conditions are wanting in
scripture, which is always the same, and will be no more clear, or of any
larger extent for the contents thereof, to morrow, than it is to day; nor can
'it speak and declare it self by it self, but only can be declared by some
living Judge or Interpreter. And you are in a great error, if you conceive that
we hold any one Writing or Decree, to be sufficient for deciding all
Controversyes; But we say, that the Church upon several exigents can declare
her mind, either by explicating former Decrees, or by promulgating new ones, as
necessity shall require. And for this cause, there are extant so many Decrees
of Counsels, etc: If we did yield to any one writing the sufficiency of ending
all emergent Controversyes, God forbid we should deny it to holy scripture!
Neither do we distinguish Tradition from the written word, because Tradition is
not written by any, or in any book or writing; but because it is not written
in the scripture or Bible. For Tradition has this advantage, that it may be
both written and delivered by word of mouth; and so be certainly conserved. By
these considerations, is answered an Objection which you make against some
words of Cha: Ma: and it shall be.

180. Object: 5. [Pag: 54. N. 5.] You are pleased to speak to your Adversary in
this manner: In the next words (of Cha: Ma: Part: 1. Chap: 2. N. 1.) we have
direct Boyes-play, a thing given with one hand, and taken away with the other;
an acknowledgment made in one line, and retracted in the next. We acknowledge
(say you) Scripture to be a perfect rule, for as much as a writing can be a
Rule: Only we deny that it excludes unwritten Tradition. As if you should have
said, we acknowledge it to be as perfect a Rule, as a writing can be; only we
deny it to be as perfect a rule as a writing may be. Either therefore you must
revoke your acknowledgment, or retract your retraction of it; for both cannot
possibly stand together. For, if you will stand to what you have granted, That
Scripture is as perfect a rule of Faith, as a writing can be: You must then
grant it both so complete, that it needs no addition, and so evident, that it
needs no interpretation. Now that a writing is capable of both these
perfections, (you say N. 7.) is so plain, that I am even ashamed to prove it.
For he that denies it, must say, That something may be spoken which cannot be
written. For if such a complete and evident rule of Faith may be delivered by
word of mouth, as you pretend it may, and is; and whatsoever is delivered by
word of mouth, may also be written, then such a complete and evident rule of
Faith may also be written. Answer me; Whether your Church can set down in
writing all these, which she pretends to be Divine unwritten Traditions and add
them to the verityes already written? And whether she can set us down such
interpretations of all obscurityes in Faith, as shall need no farther
interpretations? If she can; let her do it, and then we shall have a writing,
not only capable of, but actually endowed with both these perfections, of being
both so complete as to need no Addition, and so evident as to need no
Interpretation. Lastly, no man can without Blasphemy deny that Christ Jesus, if
he had pleased, could have writ us a rule of Faith so plain and perfect, as
that it should have wanted neither any part to make up its integrity, nor any
clearness to make it sufficiently intelligible, and then a writing there might
have been endowed with both these propertyes.

181. Answer I have had the patience to set down your words much more at
large, than was needful: the answer having been given already; that no one
writing, can without a great and unusual miracle, be capable of being a
perfect Rule of Faith; and your Arguments prove no such matter, as will appear
anon. But first I must tell you, that you cite Cha: Ma: very
disadvantagiously, or rather falsely, thus: We acknowledge scripture to be a
perfect Rule, for as much as a writing can be a Rule, only we deny that it
excludes unwritten Tradition; and here you stopp; whereas He added; We only
deny, that it excludes either divine Tradition, though it be unwritten, or an
external judge to keep, to propose, to interpret it, in a true, Orthodox, and
Catholic sense. Now, that no writing is able to propose, or prove it self to
be authentiall or true, or to keep and conserve it self, Cha: Ma: proved
ibidem, (N. 3.4.5.6.) and the thing is of it self so true and evident, that
(Page: 61. N. 24.) to the words of Cha: Ma: (The scripture stands in need of
some watchful and unerring eye, to guard it, by means of whose assured
vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it sincere and pure) you answer; Very
true: and (Page: 69. N. 46.) to His saying (That the divinity of a writing
cannot be known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecall authority) you
answer expressly, that he n^ed not prove it, for no wise man denies it. And
(Page: 62. N. 25.) you confess, that we believe not the books of scripture to
be Canonical, because they say so. For (say you) other books that are not
Canonical may say they are, and those that are so, may say nothing of it. All
which acknowledgments of yours, make good what Cha: Ma: said, that no writing
alone can propose itself to be Authentical, and much less infallible, and
divine, or can keep and preserve it self from corruption. Seeing then you grant,
that no writing alone can perform these things, it follows, that scripture
cannot do them. Or if any one writing can do so, I hope, you, and Protestants
who pretend so much to reverence scripture, will not hold it any great crime in
Cha: Ma: to have said, that if any writing alone were capable of these
propertyes, to prove, conserve, and interpret it self, we would acknowledge
scripture to be endued with them.

182. But here (Page: 55. N. 8.) you make an Objection against Cha: Ma: in these
words: You will say, that though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of Faith,
yet it must be beholding to Tradition to give it this testimony that it is a
Rule of Faith, and the word of God. I answer: First, There is no absolute
necessity of this. For, God might give it the attestation of perpetual
miracles. Secondly: That it is one thing to be a perfect Rule of Faith;
another, to be proved so unto us. And thus, though a writing could not be
proved to us to be a perfect rule of Faith, by its own saying so, for nothing
is proved true by being said or written in a book, but only, by Tradition,
which is a thing credible of it self; yet it may be so in it self, and contain
all the material Objects, all the particular Articles of our Faith, without
any dependence upon Tradition; even this also not excepted, that this writing
does contain the Rule of Faith. Now when Protestants affirm against Papists,
that Scripture is a perfect Rule of Faith, their meaning is not, that by
Scripture all things absolutely, may be proved, which are to be believed. For,
it can never be proved by Scripture to a gainsayer, that there is a God, or
that the book called Scripture, is the word of God. For, he that will deny
these Assertion; when they are speken, will believe them never a whitt the more
because you can show them written: But their meaning is, that the Scripture, to
them which presuppose it Divine, and a Rule of Faith, as Papists and
Protestants do, contaynes all the material Objects of Faith; is a complete
and total, and not only an imperfect and partial Rule.

183. I answer to your Objection, and to your Answer, that whereas you say to
Cha: Ma: (you will say, that though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of
Faith, yet it mi^st be beholding to Tradition to give it this testimony, that
it is a Rule of Faith, and the word of God) If you had cited his words aright,
you could not have said (you will say, that although a writing be never so
perfect, etc:) For every one would have seen, that he had said it already: But
you had reason to dissemble those words, which were both evidently true, and
did clearly by way of anticipation confute what you say now, that a writing
alone may have all propertyes necessary to a perfect Rule of Faith, of which
none can be more essentially necessary, then that such a writing be believed to
be infallible, and that it can conserve itself pure and incorrupt; which two
qualityes yourself grant that no writing can have, as has been showed out of
your own words; though now in your First Answer you either contradict them,
and yourself, or else speak wholly impertinently to the purpose, in saying;
there is no absolute necessity that a writing be beholding to Tradition, to
give it this Testimony, that it is a Rule of Faith, and the word of God. For,
God might, if he thought good, give it the attestation of perpetual Miracles.
Good Sr., Reflect that the Question is, whether any writing alone can give to
it self this testimony, that it is a Rule of Faith, and the word of God; and
remember your own words which I cited above out of your (Page: 69. N. 46.) that
we need not prove that the Divinity of a writing cannot be known from it self
alone, but by some extrinsecall authority; For no wise man denies it. You must
therefore, unless you will contradict yourself, grant that no writing alone is
sufficient for such an effect; and if God should do it by Miracles, it were
not done by a writing alone, and so it makes not for our present purpose. But
you will say; in that case it should not be done by Tradition. I reply; that
seeing de facto God uses no such Miracles, as we did suppose as a thing evident
by experience, and which your self do also suppose, and therforteach every
where that we can know by Tradition only, that Scripture is the word of God,
and even here (N. 8.) in this Objection which we answer, you say expressly,
Nothing is proved true by being said or written in a Book, but only by
Tradition, which is a thing credible in it self; Which according to you were
not true if de facto God did give it the attestation of perpetual Miracles; It
follows, that as things stand, though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of
Faith, yet it must be beholding to tradition to give it this Testimony, that it
is the word of God; otherwise why do you teach, that by Tradition alone, we
know Scripture to be the word of God? Besides, if you will fly to Gods
Omnipotent Power in vvorking Miracles, for excluding the necessity of
Tradition and a Living Judge, you may ease men of all dispute about Scripture,
or necessity thereof, seeing God can direct every man without Scripture by
perpetual Miracles, and make all as infallible in their Thoughts, as the
Apostles were in their words and writings, We ought therefore to speak of
things as they are, and according to their natures, and the way which God has
set down; without recourse to a mere possibility of Miracles, against
Experience teaching that He works not such imaginary wonders. Whereby I come
now to prove, that it is not only impossible for any writing alone to propose,
or prove, and conserve it self, but also to interpret its own meaning; because
as Cha: Ma: says, (Part: 1. Chap: 2. N. 3.) It must be, as all writings are,
deaf, dumb, inanimate, and being always the same, cannot declare it self any
one time, or upon any occasion more particularly than upon any other; and let
it be redd over an hundred times, it will be still the same, and no more fit
alone to terminate Controversyes in Faith, than the Law would be to end suites,
if it were given over to the phansy, and gloss of every single man.

184. And this which has been said in general of any one writing, is in a
particular manner to be affirmed of Holy Scripture, or of any writing
containing Divine and sublime Mysteryes, which seem repugnant to natural
Reason. For, the height of such truths moves the will, and persuades the
understanding, to seek out any sense of words, though orherwise seeming clear,
rather then to believe things seeming evidently contrary to Reason. Besides,
seeing (as I alleged out of Doctor Taylour in his. 3. N. 2.) words may be
taken in a litterall or spiritual sense, and both these senses are subdivided;
For the litterall sense is either natural or figurative: And the spiritual is
sometimes allegorical, somtymes anagogicall, nay, somtymes there are diverse
litterall senses in the same sentence, as appears in diverse quotations in the
New Testament, where the Apostles and Divine Writers bring the same Testimony
to diverse purposes; Seeing, I say, this is so; how it is possible, that any one
writing, can be so evident, both for words, and meaning, that all men by only
reading the same words, must be necessitated to take them in the same sense,
literal, spiritual; natural, figurative; allegorical, anagogicall; and that
even of diverse literal senses of the same Text, every person must see all;
which if he do not, he may miss in one, though he chance to hitt right in
another; since there cannor possibly be assigned any infallible Rule, (which
yet is necessary for settling an Act of Faith) to know in particular, when and
where, words capable of so many and so different meanings, are determinately to
be understood in this, or that, sense? If you say, God might put a remedy to
this diversity of meanings, by settling the indetermination or diversity of men's
understandings, with perpetual Miracles, effectually keeping them all to the
same judgment of all the same places, or subtracting his concurse to all
contrary assents: I answer, this would be, a strange kind of proceeding, or
Miracle; neither would it make any thing to your purpose, because, as I said,
we speak of a writing taken alone, without Miracle, or Tradition. And seeing de
facto God works no such Miracle, as we see by Experience in the disagreements
of Christians concerning places of Scripture, which for the words seem very
evident; it follows, that both for the divinity, and Interpretation, or true
meaning of Scripture, we must depend on Tradition, or a Living Judge. And thus
is answered your Argument; that no man can without Blasphemy deny that Christ
Jesus, could have writ us a Rule of Faith so plain and perfect, as that it
should have wanted neither any part to make up its integrity, nor any clearness
to make it sufficiently intelligible. For I grant, that our Savior could by
Miracle have procured, that all men should frame the same Judgment of the same
words; but deny that this could have happened infallibly, by means of any one
writing alone, which is our present Question; and your having recourse to our
Saviors extraordinary Power, proves the very thing to be true which I affirm;
that it cannot be done by any one writing alone. And when Charity Maintained
said we acknowledge Holy scripture to be a most perfect Rule for as much as a
writing can be a Rule, every one sees by the whole drift of his discovrse, and
plain words, that he spoke of a writing alone, and considered according to the
nature thereof, and in that course which God de facto holds, without dreaming of
Metaphysicall suppositions of your imagination; or of flying to such Miracles
as God neither has, nor (for ought we can with any shadow of reason imagine,)
ever will work universally in the understandings of all men, to believe with
certainty the particular dogmaticall sense of words, for the understanding
whereof, they have no certain universal Rule, either evidently seen by
Reason, or certainly believeed by revelation. It is also evident, that when
Cha: Ma: spoke the aforesaid words, of Scripture, He compared it not with all
writings, which successively and without end, may interpret or declare one an
other, but with any one writing taken alone, which, as I have proved, can not
possibly propose, conserve, or interpret itself. For as Scripture, or the
Bible, is one whole work or book, so it ought to be compared only with one
other writing or book; as also He spoke of a writing, as it is
contradistinguished from Tradition, or a perpetual Living Judge. But if you
will be supposing a multiplication, or as it were successiue addition of a
latter writing to extend or declare the former, you are out of our case of a
sole writing, and join a writing with a Living Writer and Judge, and so grant
perforce the very thing which we affirm, and you pretend to deny. If the
Apostles were still Living to declare their former writings by word of mouth,
or new Scriptures, we needed no other Living Judge: but seeing they are deceased,
and no one writing is sufficient to interpret it self, we must have recourse
to some present, always existent, and Living Judge, for determining
Controversyes of Faith, and interpreting Holy Scripture. I believe, the
impartial Reader will Judge, that which you call Boyes-play, to have turned in
good earnest to a greater disadvantage to yourselfe and your cause, than you
imagined: And that your Arguments are of no force to prove, that any one
writing can of it self be a perfect Rule of Faith.

185. We grant, that whatsoever is spoken, may be written, and affirm, that as
no one writing, so no one speech, can be a complete Rule of Faith, but both the
one and the other stand in need of some other speech, or writing to declare
them, as occasion shall require: neither do we pretend that the Church can set
down in any one writing all traditions, and Interpretations, or Declarations
of all things belonging to Faith; but she can, and will, by several writings
declare Doubts, as they shall occur necessary to be determined. You say:
Neither is that an Interpretation, which needs again to be interpreted; as if
a word or writing, or Interpretation, might not be clear for some part, and
yet need a further Declaration in some other respect, or point, or purpose, or
for such as did not fully understand the first Interpretation: And as you say;
it is one thing to be a perfect Rule of Faith, another to be proved so unto us,
so it is one thing to be a true, yea a full Interpretation in it self, another
to appear so without addition of some other declaration; as also the first
interpretation may give some light, yet to be further perfited by some
subsequent exposition. None can deny, that the Canonical Writers of the New
Testament, alleging some passages of the Old (and by alleging them to a
certain purpose, they interpret and declare them to signify that for which
they allege them) are not always so clear in every respect as that they may
not require some Interpretation or Explication, as we see performed by Holy
Fathers, and Interpreters of scripture, who sometime find difficulty, even in
fynding in the Old Testament, what is cited out of it; and we have heard out of
a Protestant Doctor that The Apostles and divine Writers bring the same
Testimony to diverse purposes; which shows, that every interpretation does not
adequate the sense: yea since some Protestants, hold that the same Text of
Scripture cannot admit several true and different senses (as Fulk in his
Confutation of Purgatory, (Page: 151.) and Willet in his Synopsis, (Page: 26.)
they must aknowledg great difficulty in the interpretation of the same places
to ^^vers purposes, as Divine Writers have done, and will be forced to give
some interpretation or declaration of those very different interpretations,
which Canonical Writers gave of those Texts of the Old Testament. Thus your
Arguments being clearly confuted, I must put you in mind of some Points on
which I believe you did not reflect, and which will prove, that it is not Char:
Main: but yourself who give a thing with one hand, and take it away with the
other.

186. In your first Answer to an Objection which you make against yourself
(Page: 55 N. 8.) you say: God might give a writing the attestation of perpetual
Miracles, that it is a Rule of Faith, and the word of God. This you give here;
and yet you take it away in your Answer to your Third Motive to be a Roman
Catholic; where you say; the Bible has been confirmed with those
supernatural and divine Meracies, which were wrought by our Savior Christ,
and his Apostles; and add; It seems to me no strange thing, that God in his
Justice should permit sometrue Miracles to be wrought to delude them, who have
forged so many, as apparently the professors of the Roman Doctrine have, to
abuse the world. The same you expressly deliver (Page 379. N. 69) Now, if even
true Miracles may be wrought, to delude any sort of people, certainly they
might have been wrought to delude the Jews, who despised and impugned the
Miracles of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and denied Christ to be the
true Messiah, and forged false witnesses to put Him to death, and discredit his
Doctrine. Nay, what People, or what single Person can be sure that their sins
have not deserved such a punishment? Every deadly sin unrepented, will
certainly be punished with eternal torments, which is the greatest evil that
can be imagined, or rather so great, that it cannot be imagined by any mortal
man; and therefore much more may every such sin be justly punished by
permitting true Miracles to be wrought, to delude the sinner, if once that be
granted which you affirm. How then could our Savior say, (John 10.38.) If you
will not believe me, believe the works? Or does not this open a way to
affirm, that the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, have been wrought to
delude men? And finally, to come close to our purpose, how could God give any
certain attestation by any Miracle, that Scripture is the word of God, if true
Miracles may be done to delude men? And how do you say in your Answer to your
said Third Motive to be a Roman Catholic; The Bible de facto has been
confirmed with those Supernatural and Divine Miracles which were wrought by
our Savior Christ, and his Apostles? Is not this, with one hand to give
Scripture the prerogative of being the word of God, and with the other to take
it away? In the mean time; I challeng all the enemies of the Roman Church, to
show any one Miracle-forged and approved by Her; and yourself know, that she
censures with excommunication broachers of false Miracles, as Charity
Maintained (Part 1. Chap. 3. N. 9.) shows, and you in your Answer deny it not,
it being notorious to the whole world, that such forgers are most severely
punished in Catholic contryes.

187. In another respect also, you give and take away. Here you tell us, that
God might give scripture the Attestation of perpetual Miracles, that it is the
word of God: and in your Answer to your third Motive as I said even now, you
say, that the scripture has been confirmed with those innumerous,
supernatural, and Divine Miracles, which were wrought by our Savior Christ
and his Apostles. If this be so, we must infer that as the particular contents
of scripture; for example, the Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurtection, and
Ascension of our Savior Christ etc: being confirmed by Miracles, became
material Objects of our Faith; so seeing you confess this Truth (The Bible is
the word of God) to be proved by the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, it
follows evidently, that it is a material Object of Faith, no less then the
particular Truths which it contaynes. Andthis your self affirm in this very
place, in your Second Answer, where you say; by Scriptures not all things
absolutely may be proved which are to be believed: For it can never be proved
by Scripture to a gainsayer, that there is a God, or that the Book called
Scripture, is the word of God. Is not this to say, that one of the things which
cannot be proved by Scripture, and yet are to be believed, is, that Scripture
is the word of God. Therefore, we are to believe, that Scripture is the word of
God: and what is this but to be a material Object of our Faith? This, I say,
you teach here. But in other places, you affirm and take care to prove, that
Scripture is not one of the material Objects of our Faith, as shall appear in
my next Chapter.

188. You do also overthrow what we have heard you say, that Miracles may be
wrought to delude men, by the contrary doctrine delivered (Page: 144. N. 31.) in
these words: It is impossible that God should lie and that the Eternal Truth
should set his hand and seal to the Confirmation of a falsehood, or of such
Doctrine as is partly true and partly false. The Apostles Doctrine was thus
confirmed, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part either false or
uncertain. But how is this true, if the Apostles might have been permitted to
work even true Miracles to delude men; or how is not their Doctrine
uncertain, if you cannot be certain but that their Miracles were wrought to
such an end of deluding men? How many ways are you fallen into that which you
objected to your Adversary as direct Boyes-play? Giving, taking away; saying,
unsaying, and in a word, contradicting yourself; not in any by-point, or
incident speech, (as that was which without reason you taxed in Charity
M^^tayned) but in a matter of greatest moment, as is the certainty and belief
of Holy Scripture, one of the prime Objects of Christian Faith.

189. I know not to what purpose you say in your second Answer, that it is
one thing to be a perfect Ru^e of Faith, an other to be proved so unto us
(seeing your adversary expressly spoke of scripture in order to us, affirming
(Page: 41. N. 6.) that it could not be proved unto us to be the word of God by
its own saying so: which you also grant) unless it were to give a blow to
Protestants, who calumniate us, as if we did subject the word of God, to the
judgment of the Church, whereas we say no more, then here you acknowledge, that
Scripture is in it self true, but not known or proved so to us, otherwise than
only by Tradition, which, say you, is a thing credible of it self; against
other Protestants, who hold the Church to be only the first external Motive,
or inducement, and direction to believe scripture, (as Potter speaks, Page:
193. and 141.) but not that for which we chiefly believe it, which they hold to
be either the private Spirit, or the Majesty, or other signs found in scripture
it self.

190. Object: 6. That all may understand in Scripture enough for their
salvation, you endeavor to prove [Pag: 93. N. 105.] out of S. Austine, whose
words you cite thus: Ea quae manifest posita sunt in Sacris Scripturis, omnta
continent quae pertinent ad Fidem, moresque vivendi. The place you cite not,
which is your ordinary custom. I conceive, you mean de Doctrina Christiana
(Lib: 2. Cap: 9.) Where S. Austine speaking of the Books of Holy Scripture,
says; Illa quae in eis aperte posita sunt, vel praecepta vivendi, vel regulae
credendi, solertius diligentiusque investiganda sunt. Quae tanto quisque plura
invenit, quanto est intelligentia capacior. In iis enim quae aperte in
Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent Fidem, moresque
vivendi, spem scilicet, atque charitatem.

191. Answer. You know very well, that S. Austine, believed, we are obliged to
believe more then can be clearly, and certainly, and particularly proved out of
scripture taken alone, without the authority and Declaration of Gods Church.
Did he not believe, and most zealously defend the validity of Baptism
conferred by Heretics, and taught it as a Point to be believed and practiced
by all? And yet (de unit: Eccles: Cap. 22.) he teaches expressly, that we must
in this Point rely upon the authority of the Church, as we have seen by his
words. This Testimony of S. Austine was alleged by Cha: Ma: (Part: 1. Ch: 2.
N. 27. Page: 74.) and you take notice of it in your Page 118.119. N. 163. and
yet return to alledg against us the words, of the same saint; in iis quae
aperte posita sunt etc: which shows that I was not rash in saying, you could
not but know, that S. Austine held, that more points are to be believed and
practiced, then can be proved out of scripture. Nay, your own Answers to this
authority of S. Austine demonstrate, that you believed what I say about his
judgment. For

192. You answer; First, you say to Catholics, In many things you will not be
tried by S. Austines judgment (this you prove by instances which are answered
by an absolute denial that S. Austine is contrary to us in those points) and
therefore can with no reason or equity require us to do so in this matter. 2. To
S. Austine in heat of disputation against the Donatists, and ransaking all
places for Arguments against them, we oppose S. Austine out of this heat,
delivering the Doctrine of Christianity calmely, and moderately; where he
says, In ijs que aperte posita sunt etc.

193. Answer. It is strange, or rather ridiculous; I will not say, Boyes-play,
(as you thought good to speak) that you should except against our allegation
of S. Austine, because, say you, in many things we will not be tried by him,
and that you in this very place alledg S. Austine against us: you I say, who
together with your fellow Socinians speak more contemptibly of that holy,
learned, glorious Saint, than of any other Father. And no wonder, seeing you
find that zealous Doctor to be most direct, clear, and efficacious for the
Visibility, Splendor, Amplitude, Perpetuity, Succession, and Infallibility of
Gods Church, and unwritten Traditions, which is our present Question. This
spirit you discover (Page: 152. N. 44.) where you speak in this manner: To
deal ingenuously with you and the world, I am not such an idolater of S.
Austine, as to think a thing proved sufficiently, be cause he says it, nor
that all his sentences are oracles; and particularly in this thing, that
whatsoever was practiced or held by the universal Church of his time, must
needs have come from the Apostles. But good Sr. what play is this? To bring for
an Argument and proof against us, a saying of S. Austine, and yet to profess
not to think a thing proved sufficiently, because he says it? And, which is
most strange, to bring for an Argument against us a place of S. Austine, to
prove by his authority, the contrary of that which you acknowledge him to
affirm, namely that (whatsoever was practiced or held by the universal Church
of his time, must needs come from the Apostles) as if with reason and equity,
you may require us to believe S. Austine when you bring him against us, and yet
yourselfe not believe him, when in the very self same matter, for which you
alledg him against us, yourself acknowledge him to stand for us, to wit, that
whatsoever the universal Church holds, must be believed to come from the
Apostles, and consequently to be believed, although it be not expressed in
Scripture, which is directly against that for which you alledg him, even here,
that all necessary Points of Faith are set down in scripture alone. But of
your little respect to B. Saint Austine, more may beseene through your whole
Book particularly (Page 258. N. 16. Page: 259, N. 20.21. Page: 301. N 101. etc:

194. In your second answer, you do not only slight S. Austines judgment, but
wickedly tax his will and piety, as if he had overlashed out of heat or had
been more excessiuely earnest in impugning heresies, than zealous in delivering
the Doctrine of Christianity, as you speak: out of which Book you cite his
words against us; or as if that can be called heat of disputation, which is
delivered in writing, at leisure, upon mature study, and never retracted. But,
as I said, you cannot endure that B. Saint, because he is so great a defender
of Gods Church; and you could not have done a service more acceptable to the
Devil, and pernicious to souls, than to give a ground for every one to
despise S. Austines Writings against the Donatists, as being but exaggerations,
and effects of heat in disputation; whereas of all those holy, learned, and
pious volumes of his, none can be of greater profit to Gods Church, then those
which he wrote against the Donatists, who were Schismatikes from, and impugners
of the same Church. It is well (though this also be wickedly done on your
behalf) you confess that S. Austine did ransack all places for Arguments
against the Donatists; and yet we see he finally rested upon the Churches
authority, and not upon scripture; which directly proves for us, that after all
diligence used, he comes to acknowledge that more is to be believed and
practiced, than is contained in scripture.

195. Your third Answer is delivered in these words: We say, he speaks not of
the Roman, but the Catholic Church of far greater extent, and therefore of
far greater credit and authority than the Roman Church.

196. Answer. This your Answer has but two faults; Falsehood, and Impertinency.
For S. Austine speaks of the visible universal Church; And that there was no
true Church, which did not agree with the Roman, and the Roman with it in S.
Austins time, Protestants themselves do grant, while they commonly give to the
purity of the Roman Church, a larger extent of years than from the Apostles to
S. Austine. And, for consequent ages, till Luthers time, either you must say
Christ had no true universal Church upon earth, or else that it was the Roman,
and such as agreed with her. Your Answer is also no less impertinent, then
untrue. For, our present Question is not; what, or which, is the true Church,
(which is a Point to be disputed a part) but only in general, whether the true
Church ought to be believed in delivering Objects of Faith, not particularly
contained in scripture, and consequently whether all divine Truths be found in
scripture alone.

197. Your fourth Answer is: He speaks of a Point not expressed, but yet not
contradicted by scripture, whereas the errors we charge you with, are
contradicted by scripture.

198. Answer. First: I am very glad to hear you confess again, that S.
Austine speaks of a Point not expressed in scripture: and yet it is a Point
believed, not only by S. Austin, but also by diverse learned Protesra^ts, (as in
particular, by Urban. Regius, Hoffmanus, Sarcerius, Co^fessio Augustrana, and
Bilson, who are exactly cited by Bierly Tr: 3. sect 7. under M. at 13.) that
baptism is necessary for the salvation of Children; and consequently it were a
pernicious error to hold, that baptism conferred by Heretics, is valid, if
indeed that Doctrine be not absolutely certain, since it were to hazard the
salvation of infants and others; besides that S. Austine confesses, that the
baptizing of Children is not grounded upon scripture, and yet he believes it as
a certain and necessary doctrine. Secondly: it is impertinent whether the
errors you charge us with, be contradicted by scripture; seeing our present
question is only whether some truth was believed by S. Austine, (yea and is
also believed by Protestants, who are not wont to rebaptize the children of
Catholics, or of different Sects amongst themselves) which is not expressed
in scripture. It being also very untrue, that any doctrine of ours is
contradicted by scripture, this your Answer comes, as the former, to be adorned
with the two excellent qualityes I mentioned, of falsehood, and Impertinency.

199. Your fifth Answer says: He (S. Austine) says not that Christ has
recommended the Church to us for an infallible definer of all emergent
Controversyes, but for a credible witness of Ancient Tradition. Whosoever
therefore refuses to follow the practice of the Church (understand, of all
places, and ages) though he be thought to resist our Savior, what is that to
us, who cast of no practices of the Church, but such as are evidently post-nate
to the ^yme of the Apostles, and plainly contrary to the practice of former and
purer times.

200. Answer. S. Austine says not only that Ahrist has recommended the Church
as a witness of Tradition, or matter of Fact, but also what de jure ought to be
done, about rebaptizing of such as were baptized by Heretics; and therefore says
expressly: If there were any wise man of whom our Savior had given Testimony,
and that he should be consulted in this Question, we should make no doubt to
perform what he should say, least we might seem to gainsay not so much him,
as Christ, by whose Testimony he was recommended. Now Christ bears witness to
his Church. Behold S. Austine speaks of the Question, or Doctrine it self, and
not only of examples, or what was practiced by the Church, and therefore says,
we should not doubt to perform even for time to come, what a wise man, of whom
our Savior had given Testimony, should advise, and not only to believe him,
that such a thing was, or was not, practiced before. Now S. Austine says that
Christ bears witness to the Church, as upon supposition he had done to some
wise man; therefore we are to believe the Church as we would believe such a man
so recommended, whom certainly we ought to believe both for matter of Fact, and
Faith, or Doctrine. Beside, if S. Austine did alledg the Church only as a
witness of Tradition, his Argument were of no force to establish a Point of
Faith, unless he did suppose the Church could not err in delivering what has
been a perpetual Tradition, and that the Point delivered by such a Tradition,
must be true, and consequently that the Doctrine delivered by the universal
Church cannot be false. It had been a strange Argument to say; it is credible,
but not certain, that the Church has always delivered as a perpetual
practice, or tradition, that persons baptized by Heretics are not to be
rebaptized; But the church may err in that which is certain she does
practice: therefore it is certain that persons baptized by Heretics may not be
rebaptized. And is it not a great injury to impute such an Argument to that
learned and Holy Father? If the Church may practice a thing unlawful what
nearer are we by knowing the practice of the Church for our direction in order
to the embracing, or avoiding such a pactise? And therefore S. Austine proposing
the practice of the Church, as a Rule and direction, what we are to follow,
supposes the Church cannot err in the Doctrine on which such a practice
depends; as all practice depends upon some dictamen of the understanding. The
same is evident by other sayings of S. Austine, as [Epist: 118.] Which of these
things is to be done if the authority of Holy Scripture has prescribed, we
must not doubt but that we ought to do accordingly etc: as likewise if the
Church through the whole world practice any of them. For in that case to
dispute whether such a thing be to be done, is a most insolent madness. How
could the disputing against any practice of the universal Church, be censured
so deeply, if the Church may err in her practices; especially when the
Question is, whether such a thing be to be believed as a Point of Faith, which
must rely upon certainty? And we are to observe, that S. Austine speaks of
what ought to be done, and not only of matter of Fact; which is clear by his
words, Quod horum sit faciendum, Which of those things ought be done; as also
because he speaks upon a supposition if the scripture did prescribe something;
and you will not deny, but in that case we were obliged to believe, not only
that it was, or was not practiced, but also that the thing in it self was
lawful: and then he says, that beside scripture, we ought to embrace, and not
to dispute against the universal practice of the church. The same Holy Father
teaches, that the custom of baptizing children, cannot be proved by scriptute
alone, and yet that it is to be believed, as derived from the Apostles. The
custom of our Mother the Church (says he Lib: 10. de Gen: ad Lit: Cap: 23.)
in baptizing infants is in no wise to be contemned, nor to be accounted
superfluous, nor is it at all to be believed, unless it were an Apostolical
Tradition.

201. Ponder first, how the baptizing of infants is not to be contemned, or
accounted a vain or unprofitable thing, and not only that we are to believe
there is such a practice. 2. That seeing what the Church practices, is to be
believed, and yet that it were not at all to be bebelieved unless it were an
Apostolical tradition; it follows, that what the universal Church practices
is an Apostolical Tradition, and consequently certain and infallible, though
it be not written in scripture. And (Sermon: 14. de Verbis Apostoli. Chap 18.)
speaking of the same Point of baptizing children, he says, This the Authority
of our Mother the Church has; against this strength, against this invincible
wall whosoever rusheth, shall be crushed in pieces. Which place is so clear
for us, that the Protestants in the Conference at Ratisbone could give no
answer, but this: Nos ab Augustine hac in part libere dissentimus. In this we
freely disagree from Augustine. But of this answer you take no notice, though
you redd it in Charity Maintained, and seek to answer this very place of S
Austine alleged by Him. And of the Quesstion of not rebaptizing etc: (Lib. 1.
Cont: Crescon. Cap. 32. and 33.) He says, we follow indeed in this matter,
even the most certain authority of canonical scriptures. But how? Does he
mean, that the Question is in particular evidently delivered in scripture? In
no wise. How then? Hear his words: Although verily there be brought no example
for this Point out of the Canonical scriptures, yet even in this Point, the
truth of the same scripture is held by us, while we do that, which the
authority of scriptures does recommend; that so, because the Holy scripture
cannot deceive us, whosoever is afraid to be deceived by the obscurity of this
Question, must have recourse to the same church concerning it, which without
any ambiguity the holy scripture does demonstrate to us. Consider, that we are
said to follow scripture, while we follow the church, even in a thing not
expressed in scripture; and that he speaks not only of examples not found in
scripture, but of that Question, Doctrine, and truth it self; affirming that
the truth of scripture is held, while we follow the church; and that because
the scripture cannot deceive us, the way not to be deceyved, is to have
recourse to that church which the same scripture recommends: which certainly
were no good advise, or direction, if the church might be deceived: neither
could S. Austine referr us to the church in stead of the scripture, or as if
the Question were defined by the scripture it self, unless the church be
infallible as scripture is. And, (de Baptismo cont. Donat. Lib 5. C. 23.) he
has these remarkable words: The Apostles indeed have prescribed nothing of
this (about not rebaptizing etc:) but this custom ought to be believed to be
originally taken from their Tradition, as are many things which the universal
church observes, which are therefore with good reason believed to have been
commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written. Could any thing have
been spoken more clearly, to show that the universal church is an infallible
Proposer, not only of examples, matters of fact, or practice, but also of
Precepts, Commands and Doctrine. And the same glorious Saint says universally
(Lib. 7. de Baptismo Cap. 53.) It is safe for us to avouch with confident and
secure words, that which in the Government of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
is strengthened by the consent of the universal church.

202. By what we have said in confutation of this your fifth answer, the Reader
will of himself see the weakness of your chief answers (Page 151. N.
42.43.44.) to these and other places alleged out of S. Austine by Charity
Maintained (Part 1. Chap. 3. N. 16.) as also out of S. Chrysostom, who
treating (these words (2 Thessalonians. 2.) Stand and hold the traditions which you
have learned, whether by speech, or by our epistle) says; (Homil. 4.) Hence it
is manifest, that they delivered delivered not all things by letter, but many
things also without writing, and these also are worthy of belief. Let us
therefore account the Tradition of the church worthy of belief. It is a
Tradition, seek no more. Which words are so plain against Protestants, that
Whitaker (de sacra scrip. Page 678.) is as plain with S. Chrysostom, and
says; I Answer, that this is an inconsiderate speech, unworthy so great a
Father: These words of Whitaker were alleged in the same place by Charity
Maintained, but are dissembled by you, who (Page 153. N. 45.46.) give two
slight answers to the said words of S. Chrysostom: the first is like to that
which in the first place you gave to the words of S. Austine; that I was to
prove the Church infallible, not in her Traditions, but in all her decrees and
difinitions of Controversyes: Which answer I have confuted already; and it is
directly contrary to S. Chrysostom, who not only says, that we are to believe
the church affirming such, or such a thing to have been delivered, but also,
that the things so delivered are worthy of belief, as he said of things
delivered by the Apostles without Writing, and to be believed in such manner,
as we are to seek no more. Therefore we are to rely on the churches Tradition, as
upon a sure and certain ground or Rule of Faith. It was not without cause,
that Whitaker a man of so great note in England was so angry with S.
Chrisosstome.

203. Your second Answer is; That the things Which the Apostles delivered
without writing, are worthy of belief, if we know what they were: Which is not
to answer, but to deride S. Chrysostom, as if he spoke of a Chimera, and not
of any thing of use, or existent, and applicable to practice, and in stead of
saying as he does: It is a Tradition, seek no more, it is worthy of belief. He
should have said, There is no such thing as Tradition, seek it not, nor
believe it. Besides, in this very conditional grant, that we were to believe
Tradition of the Church, and the things which she delivers as true, you grant
the Church to be endued with infallibility, as I may say, habitually; otherwise
we could not believe her Traditions, or that the things which she delivers, are
true, though she were supposed to deliver them. Now if once it be granted, that
the Church is infallible, not only as a witness of what has been done, but
also of what ought to be done, that is of Fact and Faith, of Practice and
Speculation; we have as much as we desire, to wit, that the Church cannot err
in her Traditions, or in defining what has been delivered by the Apostles. And
in this, Whitaker by rejecting S. Chrysostom, whom he could not otherwise
answer, shows more sincerity then you do.

204. Lastly: Whereas you say, there are no universal Traditions of the Church
for matters of Doctrine, we have demonstrated above, that there are many; as
for example, those which concern the Governors and Government of the church;
Form and matter of Sacraments, and other Points of which I spoke hertofore,
even out of Dr. Field and other Protestant learned Writers. And indeed seeing S.
Chryfostome says, as we have seen, that the Apostles delivered many things
without writing, who will believe without any convincing reason to the
contrary, that not one of those many should be transmitted to posterity,
considering how many things are not clearly expressed in Scripture, even the
chief heads of Christian Doctrine, as Dr. Field confesses; and I have
demonstrated that the very Articles of our Creed, are not clear without the
Declaration of the church, and it appears in the experience we have before our
eyes in the contentions of Protestants, concerning those principal Articles of
the Creed.

205. But now let us return to answer your assertion out of S. Austine, which
in effect is done to our hands by Dr. Field, who, (Lib: 4. Cap: 20.) summoneth
diverse Traditions not contained in scripture, as the chief heads of Christian
Doctrine, and distinct explication of many things, somewhat obscurly contained
in Scripture. Yea Dr. Potter, though he hold all Fundamental Points of Faith
to be contained in the Creed, yet (Page: 216.) he puts this restriction, that it
must be taken in a Catholic sense, that is, as it was further opened and
explained in some parts (by occasion of emergent Heresies) in the other
Catholic Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius.
Now as Heresies may still arise, so still there will be necessity of a new
opening, or explanation: and what would such explications avail us in order to
an Act of Faith, if the whole church may err? And therefore when S. Austine is
alleged to say, that all necessary Points are manifest in scripture, he cannot
be understood of scripture alone without explication, or declaration of the
church, even for Fundamental Points, (and consequently necessary to salvation)
contained in the Creed. This answer you might have gathered out of S. Austines
words, if you had cited them aright, as I have done above. Illa quae etc: Those
things which are set down plainly in them (Books of Holy Scripture) whether
they be precepts of good life. or Rules of Faith are to be sought out with more
industry and diligence, of which, every one fynds out the more, by how much he
is of a greater understanding. For, in those things which are plainly set
down in scripture, all those things are found which contain Faith and
manners. Do not these words signify, that one must use great diligence to seek
out the meaning of scripture, and that some of greater ability, even in things
belonging to Faith, find out more than others? which argues that every one
fynds not out all points of belief and life; for which therefore an authe^ticall
interpreter, or Tradition is necessary. If it had not been for tradition, how
would so many of our modern sectaries have believed the Mystery of the B.
Trinity, and some other Articles of Faith? But the truth is, we are often
obliged to tradition, when we least think thereof.

206. In the mean time I must not omit to say, that in this First answer,
with falsehood you join impertinency, to divert the Reader from the state of
the Question, in saying; Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church
(understand, of all places and ages) though he be thought to resist our
Savior, what is that to us, who cast of no practices of the Church, but such
as are evidently post-nate to the time of the Apostles, and plainly contrary to
the practice of former and purer times, for our Question is not (for the
present) Whether you deny any universal practice or Doctrine of Gods church,
but in general, whether the traditions of the church be not to be followed and
believed, whether they concern Doctrine or practice, and consequently whether
scripture alone contain all Objects of Faith: and it seems by this your
answer, that you do not deny the certainty of the churches universal
traditions nor that he who refuses to follow them, may be thought to resist
our Savior, which is as much as we desire.

207. Your last answer, That the church once held the necessity of the
Eucharist for infants, and that therefore the church may err; is a mere untruth;
and it is strange that you should so intollerably often alledg this Point, and
yet never so much as once offer to prove it; and to alledg it as the doctrine
of S. Austine, without bringing one single Text out of him to make it good:
whereas you cannot be ignorant, that Catholic divines alledg all that can be
said out of S. Austine concerning this subject, and solidly demonstrate, that
the actual receyving Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, was never held
by that holy Father to be necessary for infants: and you presume too much if
you think us obliged to believe you against greater and better authority than
yours can be, only by your ego dico, I say it.

208. (Page 151. N. 42.) You Object against my Argument out of this place of S.
Austine, (Epist. 118.) If the church through the whole world practice any of
these things; to dispute whether that ought to be so done, is a most insolent
madness: That it is a fallacy A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter,
because S. Austine speaks only of matters of order and decency, and from hence
I infer, if the whole Church practice any thing, to dispute whether that ought
to be done, is insolent madness. As if there were no difference between any
thing, and any of these things?

209. Answer: 1. I cited S. Austine, These things, not any thing: 2. If S.
Austine did not suppose that the Catholic church cannot err, he could not
say, that it were a most insole^t madness to dispute against that which she
practices. For, one might doubt, whether that which she practices, did not
contain some error against Faith, or deviation from manners; or whether that
which you call order and decency, or circumstance, may not contain something
against scripture: For example, whether according to the example of our
Savior, the Eucharist were not to be celebrated after supper, or at the time
when we are wont to supp, as Protestants commonly call it the supper; which
certainly you cannot avoid by scripture alone, but only by authority of the
Church, which practices the contrary. And this is so great a doubt, that
Januarivs consulted S. Austine about it; and S. Austine answers, that we are to
follow the custom of Churches: though yet in the same Epistle, (Cap. 7.) he
says: Nonnullos probabilis quaedam ratio etc. Some were moved with a probable
reason, that upon one particular day in the year, on which our Lord gave the
supper, the Body and Blood of our Lord, might be offered and receyved after
meat as it were for a more remarkable commemoration. The same I say of washing
the feet, and other circumstances, which, abstracting from the practice of the
Church, you can have no certainty, but that we are obliged to follow our
Saviors example in them all: And in particular, for washing of feet, our
Savior (Joan. 13. V. 8.) said to S. Peter, If I wash thee not, thou shall have
no part with me; And (V. 14.) you also ought to wash one another feet. Mark
the word ought, which may seem to sound a command, and was spoken not only to
S. Peter, but to all the rest. Therefore unless we rely on the churches practice,
Declaration, and infallibility, we must say that there is a command to wash
feet, either before we receyve the Eucharist, or else absolutely without
relation to that Sacrament, because our Savior said absolutely, you ought to
wash one an others feet. Morover; How will you assure us, that bread for the
Matter of Consecration, must not of necessity be unleavened; and the wine only
of that kind which our Savior used at that time? Or if you may consecrate in
any kind of wine, why not in any kind of bread? Which are things belonging not
only to decency, or circumstance, but also to the substance of the Sacrament;
and though they belonged only to circumstance, yet if they were forbidden or
commanded in scripture, the doing, or omission of the^ were damnable: therefore
S. Austine must suppose that the universal church cannot err. Neither ca^ he
be thought to say: these things are not unlawful, but indifferent, therefore it
is madness to dispute against them, if they be practiced by the whole church;
but contrarily he must say, the whole church practices them; therefore they are
lawful, and it is madness to dispute against them; which were not so, if the
whole church might err: neither had he said any more of the universal than of
any particular church, which ought not to be disturbed for things indifferent:
as you ibid: (Page 151. N. 42.) deny not but it might be esteeme^d pride and
folly, to contradict and disturb the Church for matter of order, partaining to
the time and place and other circomsta^ces of Gods worship: And yet S. Austine
in that Epistle, (Cap. 2.) having first mentioned things contained in
scripture, adds these words: But those things which we keep not as written, but
by tradition, if they be observed through the whole world, are understood to be
kept as reco^mended and ordained either by the Apostles themselves, or by
general Counsels, whose authority is most wholesome in the Church: and having
given examples of things which are differe^tly observed in different places and
countries, says: this kind of things is freely observed: neither is there any
better order for a grave and prudent Christian, then that he do as he sees
done in that church to which he chances to come: and afterward he disallowes
their proceeding, who are cause of disturbance for things which can be decided
neither by the authority of holy scripture, nor by tradition of the universal
church. Therefore according to S. Austine, if o^ce we have a tradition of the
universal church, we may and ought to defend it without further dispute, and
to impugn and reject whatsoever practice, or doctrine of any particular
church, or country, though it may seem to be occasion of trouble; which we
could not do without pride and folly, unless we were assured that the
universal church cannot approve any unlawful practice, or deliver any thing
against faith: and therefore he says Cap. 4. that he who alleges only the
custom of his particular country, will not speak out of scripture, neither
will he take his proofs from the voice of the universal church dilated
through the world: Where we see S. Austine makes a difference between a
particular and universal church, and constantly ioynes together the Holy
Scripture, and the voice of the universal church, either of which whosoever
can alledg, he may confidently stand for what they deliver. And for this cause
(cap. 5.) he says that Januarius to whom he wrote, was to consider whether
that of which there was Question, be contained in scripture, or be unanimously
practiced by the whole church, or of the third kind which is different in
diverse places and countries; of which third kind he says, let every one do
what he finds in that church where he fynds himself. But of the two first
kinds he speaks, as I noted above, in another manner, that there is no doubt
but that we are to do what the Holy Scripture prescribes, as also whatsoever
the universal church does practice, and that to dispute against any such
thing, is most insolent madness. What could have been spoken more clear? to
show that we are not to follow the universal church, because we judge aforehand
that what she practices, is lawful, but because we learn by her practice,
that it is lawful, and so ought not to doubt quin ita faciendum sit, that is
ought to be so done; and so we must learn of her both the practice, and the
lawfulness thereof: And consequently whatsoever is against scripture, or the
practice of the universal Church, must not be ranked among the third kind of
things, of which he said, none of those things are against Faith or Manners;
and contrarily, whatsoever is of the two first kinds, that is, against
scripture, or the universal Church, must be esteemed to be of a different
nature, and contrary to Faith or Manners; and therefore, says he, velemendari
opportet quod perperam fiebat, vel institui quod non fiebat. Either that must
be mended which was done amiss, or that is to be ordained which was omitted.
And therefore your saying here, that it is not to be accounted pride or folly, to
go about to reform some errors which the Church has suffered to come in,
and to vitiate thereby the substance of Gods Worship; is directly against S
Austine: and you cannot avoid the crime of schism, by parting from the Church
upon such false pretenses; nor of Heresy, even by this most pernicious
Doctrine, that the universal Church may err.

210. From these places of S. Austine, and what we have said in this whole
chapter, it is easy to answer a kind of Objection which you make (Page 134. N.
13.) against those words of Charity Maintained (Part. 1. Chapter 3. N. 19.) I
deliver a catalogue, wherein are comprised all Points y us taught to be
necessary to salvation, in these words: We are obliged under pain of
damnation, to believe whatsoever the Catholic visible church of Christ
proposes as revealed by God. Against this you say, that in reason Charity
Maintained might think it enough for Protestants also to say in general, that
it is sufficient for any man's salvation; to believe, that the scripture is true
and contaynes all things necessary for salvation; and to do his best endeavor
to find and believe the true sense of it, without delivering any particular
catalogue of the fundamentalls of Faith.

211. This Objection, I say is easily answered out of the grounds we have laid
and proved. For, First, we deny that scripture contains all things necessary
for salvation; and so one might believe all the contents thereof, and yet want
the belief of some necessary Points. But whosoever believes scripture, with the
Traditions and Definitions of Gods Church, is sure to believe all; and so has
a sufficient catalogue of all. 2. Whosoever believes the church, has an
evident and certain Means to know the true Meaning of scripture, in all
necessary Points: Not so, they, who believe only scripture which needs an
infallible Interpreter. 3. We are sure, that the church which is assisted by
the holy Ghost, will not fail to propose in all occasions every particular
Object of Faith, as necessity shall require: Which, as I have often said,
scripture cannot do, taken alone. And therefore our chiefest care must be, to
believe the true church, which we know will propose, in due time, all necessary
Points of Faith, whether or no we know what Points in particular are
fundamental: and so this belief of the church, brings with it the explicit
belief of all necessary Objects, as need shall be: But you cannot tell whether
you believe all fundamental Points, unless first you know what Points in
particular be such, and therefore Protestants hitherto have endeavored to
assign a particular Catalogue of them: and after all, you come to tell us,
that it is impossible to make any such Catalogue.

212. But enough of this Objection, and whole Question, wherein much more might
have been said, out of scripture, Fathers, and Reason; which may be seen at
large in Catholic VVriters. My purpose was to answer Mr. Chillingworths
Arguments; and yet some will think I have been to long; to whose judgment I
would subscribe as soon as any other, if I had not found, that perpetually he
gives so many advantages, as I must either have been long, or wholly dissembled
them; and by occasion given by him, some things not unprofitable in themselves,
have been declared.

213. And even now, I must not omit to add a new Argument to all my former:
and it is this; that although it were granted, that scripture alone did
contain evidently and expressly, all particular Truths, that we are bound to
believe, yet this were not enough for Protestants, if they will believe this
man's doctrine, which is such, as overthrowes the authority of scripture it
self; and therefore they must either renounce his Assertions, or else be content
to alter their pretended most common ground, that scripture alone contaynes
evidently, and in particular, all Points of Faith; and so return to believe
the authority, and infallibility of Gods Church.

214. The Reader, I confess, may well expect now, that having proved Christian
Faith to be infallibly true, and that this infallibility cannot be settled upon
scripture alone, I should according to good order, declare what is that, on
which it must be grounded: yet for perfiting this Question about the
sufficiency of scripture alone, I must of necessity show out of this man's
particular Tenets, that if his doctrine were true, scripture cannot be any Rule
at all, and much less a perfect Rule for matters of Faith. This I will
endeavor to peforme in the next Chapter.

CHAP: III. A CONFVTATION OF MR. CHILLINGVVORTHS ERROVRS AGAINST HOLY SCRIPTVRE.
IT is a singular Providence of God, to permit you, who pretend that Scripture
is a total, and not only a partial Rule of Faith, as you speak [Pag 55. N.
8.] to publish so gross errors against the Authority thereof, that if they were
true, it could not be so much as any Rule at all, much less a total and
perfect Rule of Faith.

2. First then, you teach and endeavor to prove, that Scripture is none of the
material Objects of Faith, but only the means of conveying them unto us, as
you expressly say (Page: 65. N. 32.) And yet in this you are still like
yourself, so confused, that you may be alleged for both parts of contradictory
Assertions. For, in the same place, you deliver these words: All the divine
verityes which Christ revealed to his Apostles, and the Apostles taught the
Churches, are contained in Scripture. That is, all the material Objects of our
Faith; whereof the Scripture is none, but only the means of conveying them unto
us: Which we believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter contained
in it. So that if men did believe the doctrine contained in Scripture, it
should no way hinder their salvation, not to know whether there were any
Scripture or no. Those barbarous nations Irenaeus speaks of, were in this
case, and yet no doubt but they might be saved. The end that God aims at, is
the belief of the Gospel, the Covenant between God and man; the Scripture he
has provided as a means for this end, and this also we are to believe, but
not as the last Object of our Faith, but as the instrument of it. When therefore
we subscribe to the 6. Article (of the 39. of the English Protestant Church)
you must understand, that by Articles of Faith, they mean, the final and
vltimate Objects of it, and not the means and isntrumental Objects.

3. what confusion and obscurity is here? First, scripture is none of the
material objects of our Faith, but only the means of the conveying them to
us. Which words put an antithesis between the material objects of our Faith,
and the means of conveying them to us, that is scripture. Then; which
(Scripture) we believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter
contained in it; or as you say afterward; this (Scripture) also we are to
believe, but not as the last object of our Faith, but as the instrument of it.
Which words seem to signify, that we are to believe scripture (though not
finally, and for it self) and consequently that it is a material object of our
Faith. For, what is a material object of Faith, except that which is believed
by Faith? And then how is scripture none of the material objects of Faith, if
it be one that is believed, though not for it self? If a thing cannot be said,
to be a material object of Faith, unless we believe it finally and for itself,
diverse verityes contained in scripture, shall not be material objects of our
Faith; and in particular, all those of which S. John speaks (Cap 20. V.
30.31.) Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his Disciples, which
are not written in this Book; And these are written, that you may believe,
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God: and that believing, you may have life in
his name. Those Miracles then were written not for themselves, but as a means
to attain the knowledge of this Truth; Jesus is Christ, the Son of God: and
even the belief of this Truth, is referred to a further end; that believing,
you may have life in his name. And (1. Pet. 1.9.) we read more universally,
that the end of our Faith, is the salvation of our souls. Besides this, (Page:
217. and 218. N. 49.) you say; Is it not manifest to all the world, that
Christians of all Professions, do agree with one consent, in the belief of all
those Books of scripture, which were not doubted of in the Ancient Church
without danger of damnation? Nay, is it not apparent, that no man at this time.
can without hypocrisy, pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must
do so? Seeing he can have no reason to believe in Christ, but he must have the
same to believe the scripture.

4. Sir: Are you a Christian of any profession? If you be, then it must be
manifest to all the world, that you must agree with others in the belief of
scripture. Therefore scripture, is one part or Object of your belief; and this as
you profess, under pain of damnation, and consequently it is not only an
object, but a necessary object to be believed: and you cannot without hypocrisy
pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity you must do so (that is,
believe scripture) seeing you can have no reason to in Christ, but you must have
the same to believe the Scripture. If then you teach, as you do, that one is
not bound to believe Scripture, but may reject it, you must grant, that by the
same reason he may not believe, yea, may reject Christ himself. And now hear
what you say; (Page: 116. N. 159.) If a man should believe Chistian Religion
wholly and entirely, and live according to it, such a man, though he should not
know or not believe the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, no nor to be the word
of God, my opinyon is, he may be saved; and my reason is, because he performs
the entire condition of the new Covenant, which is, that we believe the matter
of the Gospel, and not that it is contained in these or these Books. So that
the Books of Scripture are not so much the Objects of our Faith, as the
instruments of conveying it to our understanding; and not so much of the being
of the Christian Doctrine, as requisite to the well being of it. Irenaeus tells
us of some barbarous Nations; that believed the Doctrine of Christ, and yet
believed not the Scripture to be the word of God, for they never heard of it,
and Faith comes by hearing: But these barbarous people might be saved: Therefore
men might be saved without believing the Scripture to be the word of God; much
more without believing it to be a Rule, and a perfect Rule of Faith. Neither
doubt I but if the Books of Scripture had been proposed to them by the other
parts of the Church, where they had been before receyved, and had been doubted
of or even rejected by those barbarous Nations, but still by the bare belief
and practice of Christianity, they might be saved: God requiring of us under
pain of damnation, only to believe the verityes therein contained, and not the
Divine Authority of the Books wherein they are contained. In some of these
words, you may perhaps seem to speak ambiguously, That the Scriptures are not
so much the Objects of our Faith, as the instruments of conveying it to our
vndersting. For, (not so much) seems to signify, that they are the objects of
our Faith in some degree: but this very mincing of things, shows the absurdity
of that wherein you are afraid to declare your mind plainly, or if you believe
as your words seem most to signify, we must say, that you hold scripture not
to be a material Object of our Faith which must consist in indivisibili. For,
if this truth (scripture is the word of God) be revealed, it is no less
absolutely and rigorously a material object of Faith, then the verityes
contained in it. If it be not revealed, it is not only not so much, but not at
all an object of Faith. But your other words: (neither doubt I, but if the
Books of Scripture had been proposed to those barbarous people, by the other
parts of the church, where they had been before receyved, and had been doubted
of, or even rejected by them, but still by bet bare belief and practice of
Christanity they might be saved) do either directly signify, that scripture is
absolutely no material Object of our faith, nor a thing revealed by God; or
else co^taine a most wicked doctrine, or rather blasphemy, that a truth revealed
by God, may be rejected, which you co^fess, is to give God the ly. And that
finally this is your opinion (scripture is not a material object of Faith)
appears by your next N. 160 Page 117.) Where you say; This discourse whether
it be rational and concluding or no, I submitt to better judgment* For you
speak of the discourse which I have now set down out of your (N. 159.)
Neither can you avoid this absurdity, by saying; one may reject scripture, if
it be not sufficiently propounded. For, you put the very case, that it should
be proposed by the other parts of the church, where they had been before
receyved: As also you expressly put a difference between the verityes contained
in scripture and scripture which contaynes them, saying; God requires of us
vnderpayne of damnation, only to believe the verityes therein contained, and not
the divine Authority of the books wherein they are contained; and yet it is a
thing granted by all, and evident of it self, that none ca^ be obliged to
believe the verityes contained in scripture, or any other verityes, unless they
be sufficiently proposed: and therefore if you will make good, the difference you
put between scripture and the contents thereof, and not contradict yourself, you
must confess, that one is not obliged to believe scripture or the divine
Authority thereof, but may reject it, although it be sufficiently proposed: yea
it will also follow, that the contents thereof may be rejected, the first, and
last, and total knowledge whereof Protestants pretend to receive only from the
written word. For, they cannot possibly conceive any obligation to believe the
contents of scripture, if first they be persuaded, that they have no obligation
to believe scripture it self, from which alone they can come to know any such
obligation. And so protestant ministers in England, subscribing to the 6, of
their 39 Articles (That scripture contains all things necessary to salvation)
in effect subscribe to nothing, but may reject all those Articles whenever
they please. But of the absurdity of this your doctrine herafter.

5. For the present, I must observe some things delivered by you in the places
which I have cited. First, (Page 66. N. 33.) where you teach, that scripture is
an isntrumental Object of our Faith: which is a strange kind of speech.
Philosophers tell us of a material, and formal Object, of a total, and
Partial, of an Adequate, and Inadequate, and some other Divisions of Objects;
but of an isntrumental Object I never heard. Nothing can be styled an Object
of any act of our understanding, unless it be apprehended by that act; and
nothing consequently can be called the Object of an Act of Faith, unless it be
believed by an act of Faith; and if it be believed by an act of Faith, as a
thing revealed, it is a material Object of Faith, and so your phrase of an
isntrumental Object, serves only to confute your own doctrine, and prove that
scripture is a material Object of Faith. Besides, who ever dreamed, that
either the divine Revelation, which is the formal Object of Faith, or the
things revealed, which are the Material Objects thereof, can be called
according to Philosophy, the Instruments of an act of Faith? Or who ever heard
that an Instrument is divided into a Formal and Material Instrument?

6. 2. You say in the same place All the divine Verityes which Christ revealed
to the Apostles, and the Apostles taught the Churches are contained in
scripture. Against which words I have these just exceptions: That they are
against yourself, who expressly teach that the Apostles declared diverse things
to the Church of their time, which declarations are not extant: as also that
they are against this doctrine of yours, that scripture is not a material
object of Faith. For I ask, whether, or no, the Apostles taught the Churches,
that the Books or Epistles, or Prophecyes, written by Canonical Authors, were
the word of God? If they did; then the divine authority of scripture is a
material object of our Faith, as being a thing taught by the Apostles with
divine infallible assistance: which is the reason why we believe, that other
mysteryes delivered by them, are to be believed by an Act of Faith. If the
Apostles did not teach the Churches this Truth; by what authority do you now
believe it to be the word of God? Yourself, speaking of the Ca^onicalness of
some scriptures, say, (142. N. 28.) If it were not revealed by God to the
Apostles, and by the Apostles to the Church, then can it be no Revelation: as
on the other side, you teach in the same place, that if the Apostles delivered
it, it was to be believed as an article of Faith?

7. 3. In your (Page: 217. and 218. N. 49.) which I cited above, you say, Is it
not manifest to all the world, that Christians of all Professions do agree with
one consent, in the belief of all those Books of scripture, which were not
doubted of in the Ancient Church, without danger of damnation? And how then say
you (Page 116. N. 159.) that men might reject the scripture; God requiring of
us under pain of damnation, only to believe the verityes therein contained, and
not the Divine Authority of the Books wherein they are con^ayned? Will you make
us believe, that not to be damnable, which yourself acknowledge Christians of
all Professions to agree with one consent to have been damnable, namely, not to
believe all those Books which were not doubted of in the ancient Church? Or
how are not those books an Object of our Faith, and belief, in the Belief
whereof, Christians of all professions agree with one consent? Or how can you
say in the same (Page 218. N. 49.) Is it not apparent, that no man at this
time, can without hypocrisy, pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he
must do so? That is he must believe all those Books of Scripture, which were
not doubted of in the Church, seeing he can have no reason to believe in Christ,
but he must have the same to believe the scripture. And Page 116. N. 159.) you
say; It were now very strange and unreasonable, if a man should believe the
matter of the Books, (of Scripture) and not the Authority of the Books: and
therefore if a man should profess the not believing of these, I should hane
reason to fear he did not believe that: How, I say, can you write in this
manner, who teach, that scripture is not a material object of faith, which we
are bound to believe under pain of damnation, and yet that we are bound to
believe the verityes contained therein, of which, Christ is one? Is there the
same reason to believe a thing revealed, and another acknowledged not to be
revealed? I hope your meaning is not that it is reasonable, not to believe the
authority of scripture, and yet that it is reasonable, for the authority thereof
to believe the matter of it: which were not only unreasonable, but impossible
also; as no man can possibly assent to a Conclusion in virtue of Premises which
he believes not to be true.

8. But in this last place (Page: 116. N. 159.) you have a subtilty expressed in
these words: There is not always an equal necessity of the belief of those
things, for the belief whereof there is an equal reason. We have I believe, as
great reason to believe there was such a man as Henry the eigh^ King of
England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate: yet this is
necessary to be believed, and that is not so. So that if any man should doubt
or disbelieue that, it were most unreasonably done of him, yet it were no
mortal sin, nor no s^^ne at all: God having no where commanded men under pain
of damnation to believe all which Reason induces them to believe. Therefore as
an Executor, that should perform the will of the dead, should fully satisfy
the law, though he did not belieuo that parchment to be his Written will, which
indeed is so: so I believe, that he who believes all the particular doctrines
which integrate Christianity, and lives according, to them, should be saved,
though he neither believed, nor knew that the Gospel were written by the
Evangelists, or the Epistles by the Apostles. This is your discourse; which
deserves detestation rather then confutation. Yet I must not omit to make some
reflections on it.

9. First then: whereas you say, There is not always an equal necessity for
the belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is an equal reason: I
answer, that you speak very confusedly, and imperfectly; and either untruly,
if your words be so understood, as they may make any thing to our present
Question: or impertinently, if they belong nothing to it. I say therefore: if the
belief of one thing, be necessary for the belief of another, which I am bound
to believe, the belief of both is necessary: the one, for it self, the other
for that other, which is supposed to be necessary of it self, as you say the
belief of scripture is only for the belief of the contents. Secondly; if the
reason for which I believe a thing, be not only true, but also by the nature
thereof necessarily obliges me to believe that thing which it proves; in that
event, whersoever I find that reason, I shall remain obliged to believe that
Object which it proves. This is our case. For, no Christian, yea no man endued
with reason, can deny, but that if I believe an Object, as testified by God, I
am obliged to believe all other Truths so testified. Now I pray you tell us the
reason for which at this time you hold yourself obliged to believe the contents
of scripture. You must answer: because they are revealed by God testifying the
truth of them by many and great miracles. Then I ask, for what reason do you
believe Scripture to be the word of God? If you answer, because God has
testified it to be such, by those Miracles which the Apostles wrought to prove
their words and writings to be infallible and inspired by the Holy Ghost: then
I infer, that as you are bound to believe the contents of Scripture, so you
are also obliged to believe Scripture it self; seeing you have the same reason
to believe that God has testified both the Scripture, and the contents thereof.
If you believe Scripture to be the word of God, not for the Divine Testimony,
for which you believe the contents, but for some other Reason; then your saying
(There is not always an equal necessity for the belief of those things, for
the belief whereof there is an equal Reason) was impertinent, because for the
belief of Scripture there is not the same reason for which you believe the
verityes therein contained and your other saying (Page 218. N. 49) must be false
(that no man at this time can have reason to believe in Christ, but he must
have the same to believe the Scripture,) if it be true that you believe not
scripture for the same reason for which you believe Christ, and other mysteryes
contained in it. But let us know indeed, for what reason you believe Scripture
to be the word of God. It seems, one may answer for you out of your Answer to
your Third Motive, where you teach, that the Bible has been confirmed with
those supernatural and Divine Miracles, which were wrought by our Savior
Christ, and the Apostles; And (Page 379. N. 69.) you say, following the
Scripture I shall believe that which universal never-failing Tradition assures
me, that it was by the admirable supernatural work of God, confirmed to be
the word of God. If this be true; how are not men obliged to believe that which
has been so confirmed? Or for what other reason do you believe the Truths
contained in Scripture; as our Savior; His Incarnation; Life; Death;
Resurrection, and other Mysteryes of Christian Faith, but because they were
confirmed by the admirable supernatural works of God, whereby you expressly
grant Scripture to have been confirmed to be the word of God? You must therefore
either grant, that there is a necessity to believe Scripture to be the word of
God, or deny that there is a necessity to believe the contents thereof. And then
further, for our present Question; you must either grant, that Scripture is a
material Object of Faith, or deny that the verityes therein contained, are such
an Object; unless you will confess yourself to be a very strange and
unreasonable man, to believe the matter of the books, (of Scripture) and not
the Authority of the books; and therefore since you profess not to be obliged to
believe, these, may not one have reason (to use your own words) to fear, that
you do not think yourself obliged to believe, that? Nay, is it not apparent
(still I use your own words) that you at this time cannot without hypocrisy,
pretend an obligation to believe in Christ, but of necessity you must
acknowledge an obligation to believe the Books of scripture; seeing you can have
no reason to think you are obliged to believe in Christ, but must have the
same to believe the scripture: and if your belief of the contents of scripture,
or of obligation to believe them, be unreasonable, it cannot proceed from the
particular motion of the Holy Ghost, nor be an Act of divine Faith. And I
beseech you reflect, that here there is not only the same reason for the truth
of things in themselves, but also for our obligation to believe them, namely,
the divine Testimony: which Point if you observe, you cannot but see, how
impertinent your example was about believing there was such a man as King
Henry, (which you say, one is not bound to believe) and that Jesus Christ
suffered under Pontius Pilate, which is a Truth set down in a writing
confirmed by Miracles to be the word of God, and consequently to deny the
Mysteryes contained in that book, were to reject a thing confessed to be
witnessed by God. And is not a man obliged to believe whatsoever he knows to
be witnessed by God? I said, your example is impertinent; but I must add, that
it is also false, unchristian, and blasphemous, to say, as you do, We have I
believe as great reason to believe there was such a man as Henry the eight,
King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate. Have you
as great reason to believe the Chronicles of England, and the Testimony of men,
as to believe the word of God?

10. Morover though it import nothing to our present Question, whether or no
you speak true, in saying; there is not always an equal necessity for the
belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is an equal reason; yet
perhaps you will not easily make it good, if there be perfectly and entirely
the same reason, and of the same kind, for both of them. For if I conceive the
same reason for both, if I believe the one I may believe the other; nay, I have
a necessity to believe it, so far, as I cannot believe the contrary; as it is
impossible from the same premises, believed to be the same, to infer contrary
or contradictory conclusions. If perhaps you answer, that when one believes a
thing for a reason, which he sees to be the self same for another, he cannot
dissent from that other, yet he may suspend his understanding, from any
positive assent to it; which he cannot do when there is a command to believe
it: This answer will not serve your turn; but first, it is against your self,
who (Page 195. N. 11.) say to Cha: Ma: your distinction between Points
necessary to be believed, and necessary not to be disbelieved, is a distinction
without a difference, there being no point to any man, at any time, in any
circumstances necessary not to be d^sbelieved but it is to the same man, at the
same time, in the same circumstances, necessary to be belieyed. Out of which
words it follows, that seeing, one can at no time disbelieue, or dissent from
that for which he has the same reason, in virtue whereof he belieues another
thing, he must necessarily believe it, according to your doctrine. Secondly: If
we believe a thing merely for some humane or natural Reason, you will not, I
believe, be able to show that we are obliged to believe any one thing, and are
not obliged to believe another, for which we have the same reason. For, if the
command be only this; that reason obliges us to believe that which in reason
deserves belief the reasons being equal, the necessity of believing must be
equal. But if the command of believing be supernatural, or some Positive
Divine Precept, then this must be notifyed to us by revelation, and so there
will not be the same reason for both, but as different as is between humane
reason and divine revelation; and therefore, Thirdly; If I have the same reason
of divine revelation to believe both, there is always an equal necessity for
the belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is that equal reason
of divine revelation: and so your subtilty, That there is not always an equal
necessity for the belief of those things, for the belief whereof etc: is against
reason, against yourself, and against all divinity.

11. I have no time to loose in examining your saying: If any man should doubt
or disbelieue, that there was such a man as Henry the eight, king of England,
it were most unreasonably done of him, yet it were no mortal sin, nor sin at
all; God having no where commanded men vnderpayne of damnation to believe all
which reason induces them to believe. Yet perhaps some would ask, whether you
suppose, that he who in the example you give, so doubts or disbelieves, does it
vincibly, or invincibly? If invincibly; then in him it is not unreasonable:
because he, in such circumstances could judge no otherwise, and so in him it is
reasonable. For, it falls out often, that a true judgment may be imprudent, and
unreasonable, if it be framed lightly, and for insufficient reasons; and
contrarily, one may judge amiss for the material truth in it self, and yet
judge prudently, if he be moved by probable reasons; and so a true judgment may
be rash, and a false one prudent. But if he who so doubts, be supposed to err
vincibly; you will not easily excuse him from all fault: for example, of
pertinacy, and obstinacy of judgment against all wise men; or precipitation; or
imprudency, or at least from an idle thought in his extravagant, unreasonable,
false, and foolish belief, which surely can be of no solid profit for himself
or others, or for the glory of God: and you know, our B. Savior has revealed,
that every idle word is a sin. But whatsoever be said of your Doctrine taken in
general, that God has no where commanded men to believe all which reason
induces them to believe; yet I leave it to be considered, whethert he
particular example which you give may not seem in it self to imply something of
the dangerous; for if it be no sin at all, to believe that there was never any
such man as Henry the eight, (and I suppose you will say the same of other like
examples, of Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, and Magistrates) some perhaps will
infer, That if your Doctrine were true, it could be no sin at all to believe
that they had no lawful Successors, seeing no body can succeed to a Chimera,
or to a Nobody, or a Nonentity, as you say King Henry may be without sin
believed to have been.

12, But at least your friends will think you have spoken subtly, and to the
purpose in your other reason, or example: That as an Executor that should
perform the whole will of the dead, should fully satisfy the law, though he
did not believe that Parchment to be his written will, which indeed is so: So I
believe, that he who believes all the particular doctrines which integrate
Christianity, and lives according to the^, should be saved, though he neither
believed nor knew that the Gospels were written by the Evangelists, nor the
Epistles by the Apostles, Yet in this also, you either err against truth, or
overthrow your own maine cause. For, if such an Executor did not believe that
Parchment to be the dead man's written will, and had no other sufficient ground
to believe the contents to be his will, he should neither satisfy the law,
(which gives him no power, but in virtue of the dead man's will) nor his own
conscience, but should usurp the office without any Authority, and expose
himself to danger of committing great injustice by disposing the goods of the
dead against his meaning, and depriving of their right those, to whom, for
ought he knows, they were bequeathed by the true will of the party deceased.
Now apply this your case to our present Question, and the result will be; that
seeing according to Protestants, de facto we know the contents of Scripture, and
the Will and Commands of God delivered therein, only by Scripture it self, and
by no other means of Tradition or declaration of the Church; if one be not
obliged to believe the Scripture, he cannot be obliged to believe all, or any
of the particular doctrines which integrate Christianity, nor can judge himself
obliged to live according to them; nor can any man without injury deprive men
of the liberty which they possess, by imposing upon their consciences such an
obligation.

13. And here I must not omit your saying; that a man may be saved, though he
should not know or not bel^^ue the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, no nor to
be the word of God: Where you distinguish between being a Rule of Faith, and
being the word of God, whereas it is clear, that nothing ca^ be a Rule of
Christian Faith, except it be the word of God; because Christian Faith, as I
said, has for its Formal Object, the Divine Revelatio^, or word of God, and
nothing which is not such, ca^ be a Rule of our Faith. D. Potter (Page: 143.)
says; The chief Principle or ground on which faith rests, and for which it
formally assents unto those truths which the Church propounds, is Divine
Revelation made in the Scripture. Nothing less then this; nothing but th^s ca^
erect or qualify an act of supernatural faith, which must be absolutely
undoubted and certain. In which words, although he err against truth, in
saying, that the Divine Revelation on which Faith must rest, must be made in
scripture, (seeing Gods word or Revelation is the same whether it be written, or
unwritten) yet even in that error he shows himself to be against your error,
that one may believe or reject scripture, in which alone divine revelation is
made according to him: and so take away scriptures, or the belief of them, all
Revelations and Faith must be taken away; and he declares that nothing but Gods
word or Revelation can erect or qualify an Act of Faith, and consequently only
Gods infallible Word can be a Rule of Faith.

14. But it is time that we come to the matter it self, and confute this
error, which in effect I have done already, by occasion of examining some
sayings of yours.

15 First then, I oppose yourself to yourself. And beside the places which I
have alleged above out of your Answer to your Third Motive, where you confess
scripture to have been confirmed, with those supernatural and Divine Miracles
which were wrought by our Savior Christ and his Apostles; and out of your
(Page: 55. N. 8.) That, By Scriptures not all things absolutely may be proved
which are to be believed. For it can never be proved by Scripture to
againsayer, that there is a God, or that the Book called Scripture, is the
word of God etc: In which words you rank scriptures among those things which
are to be believed, which is to be a material Object of Faith, as the
existence of God is such an object; besides, I say, the places which I have
produced already, I must not omit what you say (Page: 141. N. 28.) where you
suppose that the Apostles revealed what Books are Canonical, and that what
they delivered in that kind, is an Article of Faith, and if an Article of
Faith, then it is a material object of Faith: and (Page: 142. N. 29.) where you
expressly say of some Books, that if they were appro^ed by the Apostles, this
(...) hope was a sufficient definition: and I hope that the definition of the
Apostles is sufficient to make a thing an Object of Faith, and induce an
obligation for us to believe it. Also (Page: 90. N. 101.) speaking in the person
of an English Protestant, you say, Scripture evidently contains, or rather is
our Religion, and the sole, and adequate object of our Faith. If scripture be
the sole and adequate object of Faith, certainly it is an object of Faith or a
thing believed by Faith. How then do you teach, that it is not an object of
Faith? Besides, into what extremes do you fall, teaching on the one side, that
scripture is not a material object of Faith, and yet affirm that it, and it
only, is the Object of Faith, by being the sole and adequate object thereof? And
thus, as sometime you teach, that not scripture it self, but only the contents
thereof are the object of Faith; so now you must say, that not the contents, but
only scripture it self is the object thereof; because having begun to say, that
scripture contains the objects of Faith; by way of correcting that speech,
you say it is rather the sole and adequate object of it; giving to understand,
that at least rather scripture, then the contents thereof are the object of
Faith, and that you had spoken more truly, or more exactly, if you had said,
scripture is the sole and adequate object of Faith, the^ in saying, it
contains the objects of Faith. To this I add, what you write (Page: 115. N.
156.) Nothing can challeng our belief, but what has descended to us from
Christ by original and universal Tradition: now nothing but Scripture has
thus d^sce^ded to us, therefore nothing but Scripture can challenge our belief.
Does not this clearly declare, that scripture challenges our belief? You say
also (Page: 377. N. 58.) All Christians in the world (those I mean, that in
truth deserve this name) do now, and always have believed the Scripture to be
the word of God. Therefore, say, I the belief of all Christians that in truth
deserve that name, is, that scripture is the word of God, or an object of their
belief; which since you deny, how, will men say, do you deserve the name of
Christian? Also if me^ may be saved by believing the mysteryes of Christian
religion, though they be ignorant of scripture, yea and deny it; how can you
say, they deserve not the name of Christians? Or if they do not deserve that
name, surely they cannot be saved. And, how ca^ you say, all Christians in the
world do now, and a^w^yes have believed Scripture to be the word of God, since
(P. 116. N. 159.) you affirm out of S. Irenaeus, that some barbarous nations
believed the doct^in^ of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture, and you
say expressly these barbarous people might be saved. How the^ is it true, that
all Christians have always believed scripture to be the word of God? Lastly:
you speak home when (P. 337. N. 19.) you say: The Church may yet mo^e truly be
said to perish when she Apostates from Christ absolutely, or rejects even those
Truths out of which her heresies may be reformed; as if she should directly
deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the Scripture to be the word of God. If the
Church must perish by denying Scripture to be the word of God, you must grant
that the contrary Truth, Scripture is the word of God, must be a matter of
Faith, as it is a matter of Faith, that Jesus is the Christ. But because it is
no news for you to cotradict your self, I confute your doctrine by other
arguments.

16. Secondly; it is impossible to believe the matters contained in Scripture
to be revealed by God, upon the Authority of Scripture, unless we believe the
Authority of Scripture it self to be revealed. For how can I believe, a thing,
because such a man affirms it, unless I believe, both that he affirms it, and
that his word deserves credit? But Protestants believe the contents of
scripture for the Authority of scripture, or, as we have heard Potter speaking
(Page 143.) For divine revelation made in scripture: Therefore they must believe
the Authority of scripture: and so scripture it self is no less a material
Object of Faith, than the contents of it which are confessed to be a material
object of Faith, because they are believed,

17. Thirdly. If Trismegistus, Plato, or any other of fallible Authority, had
casvally delivered the same Mysteryes, which Christians believe he who should
have taken them only upon such Authority, could not have believed by a firm,
infallible, Divine Faith; Therefore it is not sufficient to believe the Matters
contained in scripture, unless they be believed for some firm and infallible
Authority: Therefore if we believe the Mysteryes of Christian Faith, for
scripture, we must beliue scripture itself to be of infallible Authority: And
Protestants in particular can have no Faith at all, who pretend to believe all
the Mysteryes of our Faith for the Authority of scripture alone, if scriptur be
not believed to be infallible.

18. Fourtly. I take an Argument from your reason to the contrary. For those
people of whom S. Irenaeus speaks, had not been obliged to believe the
Mysteryes of Christian Faith, unless they had been confirmed and made credible
by Arguments, which proved them to proceed from God: but you grant that the
scripture is proved to proceed from God, by those very Miracles which were
wrought by Christ and his Apostles: therefore if these people were the^ obliged
to believe the co^te^ts of scripture; christians now are for the same reason
obliged to believe scripture it self

19. Fifthly. Not unlike to this Reason is that which I took from your own
words; (Page: 115. N. 156.) where you teach, that nothing can challenge our
belief, but what has descended to us by original and universal Tradition:
and that scripture alone is such: therefore scripture does chaleng our belief,
and is an object of Christian Faith.

20 From these two last Arguments, I deduce, that this Truth, (Sctipture is the
word of God) is an object to be believed by Faith, though we should suppose,
that it were proposed to one, whom God would not oblige to know the particular
Mysteryes contained therein: because independently of any such obligation, it is
sufficiently proposed as a thing revealed by God, and consequently as an
Article of Faith, abstracting from any relation to a further end. Which
consideration overthrowes the ground of your assertion, that the belief of
scripture is referred to the end of believing the contents of it, and therefore
itself is not an object of Faith.

21. Sixthly. If we be not obliged to believe the scripture, Protestants are not
bound to believe the contents thereof, as I have often said upon several
occasions; because they have no notice of the contents, but by scripture it
self. Neither can you answer, that we are obliged to believe scripture as a
means to lead us to the verityes contained in it. For, this answer supposes,
that I have some notice and belief of being obliged to believe the matter of
scripture, before I believe the scripture; whereas Protestants must say the
direct contrary, to wit, that all their belief or any apprehension of the
particular Truth of scripture proceeds, from, and is grounded, in scripture,
which therefore must be believed before, we can be obliged to the belief of those
particular Truths. So that if we have no antecedent obligation to believe
scripture; we cannot possibly, in the grounds of Protestants, be obliged to
believe, the contents thereof. Besides, this Answer overthrowes your own
Assertion, and grants that we are obliged to believe the scripture, at least as
a means de facto necessary to attain the belief of the contents thereof; it
being clear, that if I be obliged to attain an End, I am necessarily obliged
to use the Means which is necessary to attain that End, and consequently this
Answer does not excuse you, but strongly proves that you have a strict
obligation to believe scripture, since you are obliged to compass that End of
the belief of those Divine Truths which it contains. Neither is our Question,
whether scripture be a material Object believed for itself alone, as I said
above, but whether it be an Object, which I am obliged to believe; which this
very Answer is forced to grant. This discourse is clearly confirmed by your
words (Page 86. N. 93.) It was necessary that God by his Providence should
preserve the scripture from any indiscernable corruption in those things which
he would have known; otherwise it is apparent it had not been his will that
these things should be known, the only means of continuing the knowledge of
the^, heing perished. Much more you must say; it is appare^t it had not been
Gods will that the conte^ts of scripture should be known, if we need not
know, yea if we may reject the only means of begetting or continuing the
knowledge of them, which you in this very particular acknowledge to be scripture,
and thence you infer that God could not but preserve it from any indiscernable
corruption.

22. Seventhly. They who believed these Articles of Christian Faith, because
the Apostles and Apostolical men did preach them, believed not only the
Mysteryes or Matters which they preached, but also the Authority of those
Preachers, as of persons worthy of credit, so that it was a material object of
Faith, that the Apostles spoke in the name of God, and inspired by him; yea the
matters proposed were believed for the Authority of the proposers, which
therefore must be believed at least as much as the things believed: yourself
saying (Page: 377. N. 59.) We must be surer of the proof, then of the thing
proved, otherwise it is no proof^. Therefore as their words, so their writings
must be believed as an object of faith, at least as much as the truths which
they spoke or wrote, neither does speaking or writing make any difference at
all in this point. And as you say their writings were referred to the belief of
the things which they wrote, or were taken as Means for that End, so their
speaking, or preaching was ordained to beget a belief of the things which they
spoke; and so there is a most exact parity; neither ca^ you exclude the
authority of scripture from being a material Object of Faith, but you must
likewise say, that me^ were not bound to believe the Authority of the Apostles
when they preached; and consequently that they were not obliged to believe the
Truths which they preached, and which they could believe only in virtue of the
belief of such an authority. And further: although it were supposed, that some
one or more believed the Articles of Christian Faith, by an extraordinary
Motion and light of the Holy Ghost, without the Preaching or writing of the
Apostles, and lived according to their belief and were saved: In that case,
although those men could not be obliged to believe the preaching or writing of
the Apostles precisely as a means for attaining the belief of those Articles,
which they believed already; yet they would remain obliged to believe the
authority of the Apostles, if at any time it came to be sufficiently
propounded, and proved by miracles, or other arguments of credibility, and
could no more reject it, the^ they could disbelieue the articles of Christian
Faith sufficiently proposed: Therefore the authority of the Apostles, and the
infallibility of their preaching and writing, is sufficient to terminate an act
of faith, that is, to be a material object thereof even of it self, or taken
alone, because so taken, it may be proved to be revealed by God, which is the
formal motive for which we believe all the material object of faith. Since
therefore you teach, as I have often put you in mind, that scripture had been
confirmed by Miracles, you cannot deny it to be a material object of Faith.
And this argument is stronger against you, the^ the case I put, does declare;
wherein it was supposed, that the articles of our faith were known by some
other means, then by the preaching or writing of the Apostles; whereas de facto
you profess to know those articles only by scripture; which therefore you are
obliged to believe upon a double title or account, that is, both as it is
credible in itself by divine arguments, abstracting from any further end; and
also as a means to attain the said end of believing the articles therein
contained.

23. Eighthly. You confess, that we are obliged to believe the contents or
verityes contained in scripture: but one of those is, that scripture it self is
the word of God, and inspired by Him; therefore we are obliged to believe
scripture to be the word of God. The minor is proved out of (S. Paul 2. Timoth:
3.16.) All scripture divinely inspired, is profitable to teach, etc. that the
man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work. Which words,
Protestants and yourself in part, alledg to prove, that scripture is a perfect
and total Rule of Faith. And if it be a perfect Rule, certainly it must be a
Rule; therefore that scripture is a Rule of Faith, is a truth contained in
scripture, and consequently a material Object of our Faith. Or if you will
needs say, that we do not believe as an Object of Faith, scripture to be a
total Rule of faith, you overthrow the cause of Protestants, and yourself, by
confessing, it cannot be proved out of scripture, that scripture is such a
total Rule, which is the thing I have mainly urged against you in my last
Chapter; and if this cannot be done, why do you go about to do it, by
alleging texts of scripture for that purpose? Or out of what ground can you
possibly pretend to prove, that scripture alone is the Rule of Faith if you
grant it cannot be proved out of scripture, on which you profess all matters of
Faith to be grounded? Yourself (P. 143. N. 30.) note, it is said in scripture
All scripture is divinely inspired. Show but as much for the Church: show where
it is written, that all the decr^es of the Church are divinely inspired; and
the controversy will b^at an end, that is, you will believe as a matter of
Faith, that the decrees of the Church are infallible; seeing then scripture
says that itself is divinely inspired, you must believe as a matter of faith,
that it is infallible, or the word of God. The like argument I take from the
doctrine of Protestants, and their endeavor to prove out of scripture, that it
is a Rule evident for all necessary Points, for which they are wont to alledg
the words of the (Psalm 18. V. 9.) The precept of our Lord lightsome;
illuminating the eyes, and (Psalm: 118. V. 105.) Thy word is a lamp to my
feet. and (2. Pet: 1. V. 19.) which you do well attending unto, as to a
candel shining in a dark place. Therefore according to them; this Proposition,
scripture is an evident Rule for all necessary Points, is a truth contained in
scripture, and a material Object of Faith; unless they will grant what we urge
against them, that it cannot be proved out of scripture that it is an evident
Rule for such Points. Besides, (Page: 143. N. 30.) you bring the said words of
S. Paul, All scripture is divinely inspired, expressly and immediately to prove,
that the Apostles were infallible in their writings: Therefore it is a truth
contained in scripture, and consequently by your own confession, a material
Object of Faith. Morover, we read (2. Pet. 1.20.21) understanding this first,
that no prophecy of scripture is made by private interpretation. For not by
man's will was prophesy brought at any time: but the Holy men of God spoke,
inspired with the holy Ghost. Therefore we are obliged to believe, as a truth
contained in scripture, that the writers thereof spoke and wrote inspired by
God. And what is oftener repeated in the Prophets, then, the word of our Lord
was made to me, or the like? Therefore one truth contained in scripture is, that
they wrote by divine inspiration. Does not S. John begin his Apocalypse with
these words: The Apocalypse of Jesus Christ, which God gave him, etc: blessed is
he that reads and hears the words of this prophecy? Which words declare
that he wrote a Prophecy, which God gave him, or inspired into his mind: and so
it is contained in scripture, and a material Object of our Faith, and his
Apocalypse is the word of God; Which Truth being declared by S. John, men are
bound to believe it as a matter of Faith, though they were supposed to know all
the contents of the Apocalypse by other means, for example, by immediate
Revelation or Inspiration, as S. John himself came to know them; unless you
will say, that men may reject what an Apostle has set down in writing. Does
not S. Peter also (2. Epist: Cap. 3.15.16.) teach, that S. Paul wrote his
Epistles by wisdom and inspiration from God? Therefore it is a material object
of Faith, that S. Paul's Epistles are the word of God, even although one were
not bound to know the particular contents of them, or had known them by some
other means: Therefore your Doctrine, that it is sufficient for Salvation to
believe the conte^ts of scripture, though we deny scripture itself, is clearly
against scripture, and repugnant to a truth contained therein.

24. Ninthly and lastly; in stead of an argument, I may express a just
admiration, how such a Doctrine as this could appear in a Book printed in
England, and approved as agreeable to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England! Fulke a chief man amongst English Protestants, says plainly (in
his Confutation of Purgatory, Page 214.) Whosoever denies the Authority of the
Holy Scriptures, thereby be wrayeth himself to be an heretic: And hitherto all
English, and other Protestants, have pretended to oppose themselves against the
Swenckfeldians, who rejected all the Scripture, as you say one may do, and yet
be saved. And certainly if men be not obliged to believe Scripture as a matter
of Faith, it imports nothing, whether they accept, or reject it: if also they
do not believe it to be the word of God, what certain credit can they give to
it? and if Christians did not believe it to be such, they would account it very
great foolishness, to believe Mysteryes, which seem repugnant to all
Philosophy and natural Reason, and deprive men of those things, to which
nature is most inclined, upon any Testimony or Authority, less then Divine. And
this your Doctrine is less tolerable, because you are not able to bring in
favor thereof, any one argument deserving answer.

25. You say indeed (Page: 116. N. 159.) that without knowing or believing
scripture, one may perform the entire condition of the new Covenant, which is,
that we believe the matter of the Gospel, and not that it is contained in these
or these Books.

26. But this is a plain begging the Question, to suppose or affirm without
proof, that one condition of the new Covenant is not, to believe scripture to
be the word of God. Yourself (Page: 134. N. 13.) expressly teach, that among the
conditions which Christ requires, one is, that we believe what he has revealed,
when it is sufficiently declared to hane been revealed by him. Now that
scripture has been revealed by God, is proved with the many Miracles which the
Apostles wrought to confirm that they were messengers of God, and Infallible
in all matters, which they delivered by word or writing, and therefore cannot
without damnation be rejected by any to whom it is sufficiently propounded for
such; which sufficiency of proposition, is required in all articles of Faith,
fundamental, or not fundamental, before one can be obliged to believe them.

27, Since then according to your Doctrine, we are not obliged to believe
Scripture to be the word of God, yea and may reject it: It remains true, then,
as I said in the last Chapter, Scripture cannot be a perfect Rule, nor any Rule
at all of Faith, although we should falsely suppose, that it contains evidently
all things necessary to be believed. For, what can it avail me in order to the
exercising an act of Faith, to read any Point in that Book, which I conceive
my self not obliged to believe? Let us now come to another error of yours.

28. Your second error I find (Page 144. N. 31.) where you write thus. If you
be so infallible as the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did; They went
forth (says S. Mark) and preached every where, the lord working with them,
and confirming their words with signs following. It is impossible that God
should lie, and that the eternal Truth should set his hand and seal to the
confirmation of a falsehood, or of such Doctrine as is partly true, and partly
false. The Apostles Doctrine was thus confirmed, therefore it was entirely true
and in no part either false or uncertain. I say, in no part of that which they
d^livered constantly as a certain divine Truth, and which had the Attestation
of Divine Miracles. For, that the Apostles themselves, even after the sending
of the Holy Ghost, were, and through inadvertence or prejudice, continued for a
time in error repugnant to a revealed Truth, it is unanswerably evident from
the story of the Acts of the Apostles. For notwithstanding our Saviors express
warrant and injunction to go and preach to all Nations, yet until S. Peter
was better informed by a vision from Heaven, and by the conversion of
Cornelius, both ho, and the rest of the Church held is unlawful for them to
go or preach the Gospel to any but the Jews. And (Page 145. N. 33.) you say,
the Apostles could not be the Churches Foundations without freedom from error
in all those things which they delivered constantly, as certain revealed
Truths. Do not these words overthrow Christian Religion, and Authority of
Scriptures?

29. These conditions you require that the Doctrine of the Apostles be to us
certain, and receyved as Divine Truth. 1. It must be delivered constantly. 2
It must be delivered as a Divine Truth. 3. It must have the Artestation of
Divine Miracles; and these conditions you require for every part thereof. For
you say, the Doctrine of the Apostles was false or uncertain in no part, and
then you add expressly this limitation, I say, in no part of that which they
delivered constantly, as a certain Divine Truth, and which had the Artestation
of Divine Maracies You cannot deny but that the Apostles, if they conceyved
that the Gospel was not to be preached to the Gentills, did frame that opinyon
out of some apprehended Revelation (for example, In viam gentium ne abieritis
(Matthew: 10.5.) Into the way of the Gentiles go ye not, or (Matthew: 15.24.) I
was not sent but to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel, or some
other) and so delivered a thing conceyved by them to be a Divine Truth, yet
they were deceyved in that Point, because it wanted the other conditions of
constancy, and Attestation of Divine Miracles; and consequently your doctrine
must be, that every Point of Faith must have all the said three conditions, and
that the Apostles after the sending of the Holy Ghost, might fail in some of
them, and might teach an error in delivering matters concerning Faith and
Religion.

30. If this be so; what certainty can we now have, that they on whom
Christians are builded as upon their Foundation (Ephesians. 2.20) have not erred in
writing, as then they erred in speaking? And in particular, whether they did
not err in setting down that very command which (Page: 137. N. 21.) You cite
out of S. Matthew: (29.19.) Go and teach all Nations: And so at this present, we
cannot be certain, whether the Apostles erred in their first thoughts of not
preaching, or in their second, of preaching the Gospel to Gentiles. If they
were universally assisted by the Holy Ghost, they could err in neither;
without it, in both: and if once you deny such an universal assistance, we
cannot possibly know when they are to be trusted; and how can you be certain,
that S. Luke has not erred in declaring this very Story, out of which you
would prove that S. Peter and the other Apostles did err? You grant (Page: 35.
N. 7.) That the means to decide Controversyes in Faith and Religion, must be
endued with an universal infallibility, in whatsoever it propounds for a
Divine Truth. For if it may be false in any one thing of this nature, in any
thing which God requires men to believe, we can yield unto it but a wavering
and fearful Assent in any thing. Seeing therefore you teach, that the Apostles
were deceaved in a thing, which God required them to believe, and commanded
them to practice; according to your own saying, we can yield unto them but a
wavering and fearful assent in any thing. What the Apostles spoke or preached,
they might have written (it is your own saying (Page: 54. N. 7.) Whatsoever is
delivered by word of mouth, may also be written:) neither had it been more or
less true or false, by being committed to writing, than if it had been only
spoken or preached: and so if they could err in speaking, we cannot be sure
but that their writings may contain some error, proceeding from inadvertence
or prejudice, or some other cause, as you speak (Page: 137. N. 21.) This I may
confirm by what you say to Ch: Ma: (Page: 84.86.) D. Fields words, I confess,
are somewhat more pressing, and if he had been infallible, and the words had not
slipped unadvisedly from him, they were the best Argument in your Book. In which
words, I note, that although D. Field had been infallible, yet words might have
slipped from him unadvisedly even in writing (for you speak of what he has
written in his Book) and therefore much more if the Apostles were supposed to
have been fallible, and actually to have erred, (as you say they did) why might
not their error have unadvisedly slipped from them into their writings?

31. If you answer, that it belongs to Gods providence, not to permit an error
to be set down in writing, and conveyed to posterity: I reply; by this very
Reason it is clear, that God could not permit the Apostles to err against
any revealed Truth, and yet oblige us to believe with certainty their writings,
which we can believe only for the Authority and Infallibility of the Writers;
especially, since you pretend, that this error of theirs is also transmitted
to posterity, by being recorded by S. Luke whom you alledg: and so if your
false assertion were true, we are as sure that they held an error, as that
they delivered any truth, because we believe both by the same Authority of
scripture; yea according to your doctrine related above, we are not obliged to
believe, that scripture it self is the word of God, and yet are bound to
believe the truths delivered therein, one of which you affirm to be, that the
Apostles did err, and therefore we must believe that they erred, and yet may
deny the Authority of scripture, which relates that error. God, I say cannot
in his Holy Providence be contrary to himself, and oblige us to believe with
certainty, the writing of those whom we believe to have erred, and yet for
whose Infallibility we believe those very writings to be infallible. For, the
Apostles were not infallible because they wrote Scripture; but we believe
Scripture to be infallible, because it was written by the Apostles, who by
Divine Means (even before they wrote any Scripture) immediate proved
themselves to be infallible and worthy of all credit, and so mediate those same
Means, proved their writings to be Divine and infallible. We could not believe
any Book to be Canonical, if we did think it delivered any one point
contrary to some other Part of the Scripture; and how can we certainly believe
the Apostles in other Matters of Faith, if we once yield them to have erred and
contradicted truth, in any one?

32. The second condition required by you, for assuring us, that the Doctrine
of the Apostles was neither false, nor uncertain, is, that it be delivered by
them as a certain Divine Truth. This also is a source of vncertaintyes. For
Scripture is not wont to declare expressly, or as I may say, in actu signato,
whether the Writers thereof intended to deliver this, or that, as a certain
Divine Truth; and though they had done so, yet if their infallibility be not
Universal, we could not believe them with certainty in that Declaration: And
if their infallibility be Universal, we must believe them, though they use no
such expression, of a certain Divine Truth. Hitherto it has been believed,
that Scripture is the word of God, and that all the Verityes contained in it,
though otherwise they be but natural truths, are revealed or testified by God,
and by that Means grow to be both certain and Divine, as invested with the
supernatural Divine Testimony. Now if some things be delivered in Scripture,
as certain Divine Truths, others not; you make Scripture an Aggregate of
different kinds of Truths, without being able to give any infallible, certain,
general Rule (and not only some probable conjecture of your own) to know
positively, and certainly, when the Scripture speaks of one kind, and when of
another; which yet in your grounds is necessary for giving us assurance,
whether the Doctrine of the Apostles, be entirely true and in no part false or
uncertain. For if that condition of delivering a certain Divine Truth, do not
subsist, we have not a sufficient ground to exercise an act of Divine Faith,
and so we cannot be obliged to believe the contents of Scripture.

33. The third condition which you require for our assurance, that the Doctrine
of the Apostles be entirely true, is, that it have the attestation of Divine
Miracles; which either discredits the writings of the Apostles, and most of the
Uerityes contained in them; or else confutes your onwe. Doctrine that the
Apostles might err in Matters belonging to Religion For if you mean, that
every particular Truth which they preached, must be confirmed by Miracles, you
disoblige men from believing innumerable Points of Scripture, for which we have
no proof, that they were so particularly confirmed; yea we have no proof from
Scripture, that the Apostles did ever directly and immediately confirm by
Miracles, that it is the word of God; and yet upon this ground all the
pretended Religion of Protestants, that is, the whole Bible, and Truths
contained therein, depends. If your meaning be only, that it was sufficient for
the belief of every particular Truth, which the Apostles spoke, or wrote, that
by Miracles, Sanctity of life, and other undoubted arguments, they approoved
themselves as it were in general, that they were worthy of credit in all
Matters belonging to Religion; then you cannot maintain, that S. Peter, who
wrought many Miracles to prove himself a man sent from, and approved, by God,
did err in that particular main article about preaching the Gospel to
Gentiles; or if he could err in that, we cannot believe his words or writing in
many other Points not confirmed in particular by Miracles. The same I say of
the other Apostles, Preachers, and Canonical Writers. Lastly; I confute these
your errors by your own words (Page 290. N. 88.) To speak properly, not any
set known company of men is secured, that, though they neglect the means of
avoiding error, yet certainly they shall not err, which were necessary for the
constitution of an infallible guide of Faith. But you say (Page 114. N. 155.)
The Apostles persons while they were living were the only Judges of
controversies; And (Page 60. N. 17.) That none is fit to be judge but he that
is infallible: Therefore according to you, we must infer, that the Apostles
were secured not to err, though they were supposed to neglect the means of
avoiding error, and consequently they neither did, nor could err by
inadvertence or prejudice, or by any neglect of the means to avoid error.
Beside (Page 146. N. 34.) you say, The Apostles were led into all Truths by the
Spirit, efficaciter: The Church is led also into all truths by the Apostles
writings, sufficienter. How then could the Apostles actually fall into any
error, seeing they were efficaciter led into all truths? And yet again, you
contradict yourself, and say (Page 177. N. 77.) Ye are the salt of the earth,
said our Savior to his Disciples: not that this quality was inseparable from
their Persons, but because it was their office to be so. For if they must have
been so of necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put
them in fear of that which follows, if the salt have lost his Savor, etc. If
this be so, what certainty can we have that de facto the Apostles did not err,
seeing they may err?

34. Your Objection is easily answered. S. Peter himself never doubted whether
the Gospel were to be preached to the Gentiles. Neither can any such thing be
proved out of the (11. and 12.) of the acts as you pretend. (Page 137. N. 21.)
The Vision recorded in those Chapters, as exhibited to S. Peter, was ordained
to the satisfaction, not of all Christians, but of converted Jews, who were
offended with him for conversing with Gentiles, as is evident (Chap. 11. V.
2.3.) They that were of the Circumcision (that is, Jews made Christians)
reasoned against him, saying, why did thou enter into men uncircumcised, and
did eat with them? And accordingly S. Chrysostom (Hom. 24. in Act. Cap.
11.) says; Those who were of the circumcision, not the Apostles, did contend.
They were offended (says the scripture) not a little, and mark upon what
pretense. They said not, why have thou preached? But why have thou eaten?
Neither did they object that, (of preaching) for they knew that it was the gift
of God. According to which saying, even the converted Jews were not offended
with S. Peter for preaching to, but for eating, with, Gentiles. That before the
conversion of Cornelius, other Gentiles were become Christians, Cornel. a Lapide
(in Act. Cap. 10. post versum 48.) affirms and proves by diverse arguments: and
therefore S. Peter was not ignorant, that he and the other Apostles were to
preach to the Gentiles, but he did abstain from preaching publikly, and as it
were solemnly, to avoid the offense of Jews converted to Christ till by this
heavenly vision he might sweetly and effectually persuade them that such was
the will of God. Thus S. John Chrysostom: (Hom: 22. in Act: Cap: 10) says; Because
it was so to fall out, that they would all accuse Peter as a breaker of the
law, which was very common with them, he said necessarily and opportunely, I
have never eaten. Did he himself fear? God forbid. But Gods spirit did so
direct him, that he might have in readynes, a defense against those who would
reprehend him, etc: (Not o Lord, because I have never eaten any common or
unclean thing) And a voice came to him; That which God has purifyed, do not
thou call common. This seemed to be spoken to him, but indeed it was wholly
directed to the Jews; for if the master (S. Peter) be blamed, much more they:
that is the Jews for thinking that it was unlawful to eat with Gentiles. It
appears then, that neither S. Peter nor the other Apostles, did fear to deal
and preach to the Gentiles, but the Holy Ghost spiritus moderabatur, (as S.
Chrysostom speaks,) and ordained all for the satisfaction of others.

35. But for better understanding this whole matter, we are to reflect on three
things. For, we may consider; first, the eating of Jews with Gentiles: 2.
Eating meats forbidden to the Jews. 3. preaching to them. Now, S.
Chrysostom, as we have seen, observes, that the Jews were offended with S.
Peter for eating with Gentiles, and if we consider, as I may say, the letter, or
the most immediate literal sense of the vision made to S. Peter, it had
respect to the Law of the Jews, to whom certain meats were forbidden, and
esteemed unclean, as appears (Chap: 10. V. 12.) Where in were all fourfooted
beasts and that creep on the earth, and fowls of the air; and accordingly S.
Peter said (V. 14.) I have never eaten any common or unclean thing. And there
is not any thing said directly and precisely of preaching to Gentiles, but at
most by consequence, because the Apostles could not commonly and constantly
preach to them, but that they should have occasion to eat with them: or else by
way of signification, or that unclean meats in general, did also signify
Gentiles, whom the Jews esteemed as it were unclean and irreligious persons:
Yet preaching and Eating are of their nature, different: as, we may deal with
an excommunicate person for his conversion, though ordinarily we may not eat
with him. This being so; you cannot affirm, that the Apostles did think it
unlawful to preach to the Gentiles, unless you do also believe that they judged
Christians converted from Judaisme, to be obliged to observe the whole Law of
the Jews, in conformity to the vision presented to S. Peter, of all sorts of
beasts or meats which the Jews could not lawfully eat. Will you grant this?
Will you rank the Apostles with that faction of Pharisees converted to Christ,
which troubled the most primitive Church, by preaching that the Jewish Law was
necessary to salvation, even for converted Gentiles? S. Paul says, If you be
circumfised, Christ shall profit you nothing (Gal: 5. N. 2.) And do you think,
that the Apostles were in an error, which must draw upon them so heavy a
doom? A Council was gathered about this matter, not that the Apostles could
doubt thereof, but for satisfaction and quiet of Christians: and in like manner,
that vision was showed to S. Peter, not for rectifying any error of his own
about preaching to Gentiles, but for pacifying and settling the mynds of Jews
converted to Christianity. Have we not heard you say (Page 101. N. 127.) That
it is clear in Scripture, that the observation of the Mosaicall Law is not
necessary? And therefore it cannot be imagined that the Apostles, for whose
authority we believe the scripture, could doubt thereof. Or if you think the
Apostles might err about the necessity of observing the Mosaicall Law, what
certainty can we have, notwithstanding the Definition of that first Council,
but that still we may think the keeping of Moses his Law to be necessary? you
see how much you did exaggerate in saying; that the Apostles them selves, for a
time continued in an error repugnant to a revealed Truth, is unanswerably
evident from the story of the acts of the Apostles; seeing this Story, as you
will needs understand it, does either prove nothing for your purpose, or more
than you will grant, or is true in itself, and so by proving too much you come
to prove nothing at all: and this only remaynes true; That although scripture
did contain all necessary truths. yet we could not believe them, for such a
scripture as you offer us, which certainly could be no Rule of Faith at all.

36. Your Third error (for I am willing to reduce them to as small a number as
I can, though in those which I have laid together in gross, many particulars,
distinct from one another, are involved, as for example, every one of the
conditions which you require for infallibility of the writings of the Apostles,
be so many several errors) Your third error, I say, is set down in the same
(Page: 144. in the next Number 32.) in these words: For those things which they
profess to deliver as the dictates of humane reason and prudence, and not as
Divine Revelations, why we should take them to be Divine Revelations, I see no
reason; nor how we can do so, and not contradict the Apostles, and God himself.
Therefore when S. Paul says (1. Epist: to the Cor: 7.12.) To the rest speak I,
not the Lord; And again, concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord,
but I deliver my judgment: If we w^ll pretend, that the Lord did certainly
speak, what S. Paul spoke, and that his judgment was Gods commandment, shall
we not plainly contradict S. Paul, and that Spirit by which he wrote? Which
moved him to write, as in other places Divine Revelations, which he certainly
knew to be such, so in this place his own judgment, touching some things which
God had not particularly revealed unto him.

37. This your doctrine I confute as I have done your other errors. For, if
the Apostles sometime deliver things as the dictates of humane Reason and
prudence, we cannot believe with certainty any thing they deliver, unless you
con give us a certain Rule, how to discern when they utter such things, and
when they deliver Divine Revelations. Yea, according to your Principles, who
must prove all by Scripture alone, you must give us such a certain Rule, out
of some evident Text of Scripture. As you teach, that God may permit true
Miracles to be wrought to delude men, much more may you say, that he may permit
the Apostles to write their own dictamen and judgment, without declaring
whether they write only such dictamens, or else deliver divine Revelations.

38. S. Paul in this seventh Chapter which you cite (V. 39 40.) even according
to the Protestant English Translation (Anni. 1622.) says, the wife is bound by
the Law as long as her husband lives; but if her husband be dead she is at
liberty to be married to whom she will, only in the Lord. But she i^ happyer if
she so abide, after my judgment: and I think also that I have the spirit of
God. Now consider, I pray you, that S. Paul in these words advises a thing for
widows, which God has not commanded, and so might have said in this place, I
speak, not our Lord, and then when he adds; I think also, that I have the
spirit of God; I ask whether he speak these words out of humane prudence, or
by divine Revelation and inspiration? If he speak by divine Revelation, you
have no reason to say, that he delivers not a divine Revelation, when 12.) he
says, To the rest speak I, not our Lord. But if S. Paul in these words, I
think also that I have the spirit of God, speak not out of divine inspiration,
but only out of a probable hope or persuasion that he had the spirit of God,
how can we believe by divine infallible Faith that his writings are true in any
Point? Especially if you consider that he teaches, widows would be more
blessed if they remained so, for this very Reason that he advises it, and that
he thinks himself to have the spirit of God: which proof supposes that he was
endued with an universal infallibility, and that therefore his counsel in this
particular matter was best. And this word (I think) might with greater show of
reason, make men believe that S. Paul was not certain, that he had the spirit
of God, then the reason which you alledg that he spoke out of humane prudence.
For, what consequence is this? Our Lord has commanded nothing in this
particular, but I give this advise or Counsel as the best; Therefore S. Paul
speaks not by divine inspiration: Or thus: by inspiration I say God has not
commanded: therefore I speak not by inspiration in that which I Counsel: as if
God could not inspire both parts of this speech, that is, both his saying, that
God did command, and yet, that the thing not commanded was better than the
contrary, seeing both those Propositions are true, and so one excluds not the
other, but both may be inspired by the author of Truth. Nay, if you say he
spoke by inspiration for one part, (that there was no command) it is very
inconsequent to affirm that be spoke not by the like inspiration in the other
(I judge it the better:) and if he spoke by inspiration in both, he spoke only
out of humane prudence, in neither. In those words, I have not a Command of our
Lord for Virgins, but I give Counsel, does S. Paul say any more, than that
virginity is not commanded, or necessary to salvation, [which I hope you will
say is a revealed Truth but only I counsel it? And by what art can you
persuade men that he spoke the first] I have not a command of our Lord by
Revelation, and not the second, considering that S. Paul makes no such
difference in his act of belief, or as I may say, ex part subjecti, but only
in the Object, for not being commanded, but only counseled; both which, as I
said, being true, both might be vtterd by divine inspiration, as indeed they
were. And those other words, speak I, not our Lord, show only, that our B.
Savior left power to the Apostles and their Successors to advise, Counsel,
ordain, or command some things, as several occasions might require which he
himself had not commanded in particular. Which is a most certain Truth and the
ground of Obedience and subordination to Lavvfull Pastors in Gods Church, and
cannot be denied by protestants themselves; and therefore it is not only a
dictate of humane prudence.

39. All this will appear more manifest; if we ponder S. Paul's words as they
lie. He says (V. 5.) Defraud not one another, except perhaps by consent for a
time, that you may give yourselves to prayer: and return again together,
least Satan tempt you for your incontinency. Where we may consider how in the
first part of this Verse, there is a command of God; (defraud not one another)
except perhaps by consent for a time, that you may give yourselves to prayer,
(in the greek, and to fasting) which is not a command, but a counsel: and
thirdly, return again together, which is neither a command nor a counsel,
but a permissio^, or indulge^ce to avoid a^ evil, and not as a thing which he
judged to be best; which he declares in the next (Uerse 6.) But I say this by
indulgence, not by commandment; and then (V. 7.) declaring what he judged to
be the best, he says; For I would all men to be as my self: and (V. 8.) But I
say to the unmarried, and to widows; it is good for them if they so abide,
even as I also. Behold then a Command, a Counsel, a Permission! Now I ask,
whether in all these S. Paul spoke by Revelation, or only out of humane
prudence? Or how can you (without any least reason) imagine, that in some of
them he spoke one way, in others, another? And if you say so, you will only
clearly confirm what I said, that we can have no certainty, when he vtters
things revealed or only his own judgment. For, although in the words
rehearsed, he say not expressly, not I, but, our Lord, nor, not our Lord, but
I; yet he might have said so, seeing he declared both a Commandment of God, and
so might have said, (not I but our Lord) and a Conunsell, and might have said
(not our Lord, but I) And therefore when he says (V. 10. and 11.) But to them
that be joined in matrimony, not I give commandment, but our Lord, that the
wife depart not from her husband: and if she depart, to remain unmarried, or
to be reconciled to her husband. And let not the husband put away his wife; And
(V. 12.) For to the rest, I say, and not our Lord, you cannot infer, that he
speaks by another spirit or motion then in the precedent verses where he might
have used the same words, not our Lord, but I and, not I, but our Lord, and
therefore he must be understood to speak by divine inspiration in all, or none.

40 But I pray you, in any part of this Chapter, or in any part of all S.
Paul's Writings, does he ever say; in this God inspires me to speak, and I
speak not of my self: in this other, God does not inspire me to speak, but I
speak of my self? Is it all one to say; God commands, not I; and to say, God
inspires, and I speak not of my self; Or I command, not God; that is I advise
of my self, not inspired by God? Command or counsel, are words of very
different significations from inspired or not inspired; neither can any man
precisely infer one from another, as you would make us believe, that S. Paul
was inspired, when he said, God commands; and not inspired when he said, I
Counsel. And if you say, S. Paul spoke not by inspiration when he said, I give
Counsel; with what certainty can you say, that even his setting down in
writing the Command of God, and his own counsel, proceeded from inspiration?
And so we can have no certainty of S. Paul's writings, unless we believe that
he spoke by inspiration as well when he gave advise, and Counsel, as when he
declared a Divine Command. And therefore after he had said (V. 40.) of widows;
more blessed shall she be, if she so remain according to my counsel, he adds
presently, and I think that I also have the spirit of God; least any should
think he spoke and advised, only out of humane prudence, and not by Divine
inspiration, as if the Holy Ghost had forseene, that there would not want such
blasphemers, as you are. S. Chrysostom (Hom. 19. in Cap. 7.1. Cor.) speaking
of the words of S. Paul, Ego and non ego, I and not I: says; that they signify
the Precept of God, and the judgment of S. Paul, as I said; and then adds,
Least you should think those things to be humane, therefore he added, and I
think that I have also the spirit of God. And the same Holy Father (apud
Salmeronem Tom. 14. Disp. 12. Page 94.) says; For that cause, he, S. Paul,
said; not our Lord, but I; not meaning to signify thereby, that that was a
humane saying; for how can that be? But that Christ had not delivered that
precept to his Disciples while he was upon earth, but does now deliver it by
him. And afterward: fear not: for I said so, because that I have Christ
speaking in me, neither do thou suspect, that that speech is in any part
humane. And Theodoret. (ap. Salm: ib.) writes upon these words, in this manner;
this I say; which signifyes, I have not found this Law written in the Gospells,
but now I ordain it. And that the Laws of the Apostle are the Laws of God is
manifest to those who are instructed in Divine Matters. For it is his voice:
seek you an experiment of him that speaks in me, Christ? And S. Austine
(Tract. 37. in Joan.) has these words; Sometime men, of those things of which
they are certain, seem by way of reprehension to doubt; that is, they use a
word of doubting, when indeed in their heart they doubt not: as if thou be angry
with thy servant, and say; thou contemnests me, consider, perhaps I am thy
master. Hence it is that the Apostle says to some who did despise him; (just
as you do) and I think that I also have the spirit of God. He that says I
think, seems to doubt: but he did reprehend, and not doubt. And Christ our
Lord reprehending the future infidelity of mankind, says, (Luc: 18. V. 8.) The
son of man coming shall he find think you, Faith in the earth? Thus S.
Austine. If then S Paul did speak with certainty in a thing not commanded by
our Savior, who dare deny but that he did it by inspiration? and it is clear
S. Paul speaks this (And I think, that I also have the spirit of God) not of
any command of God, but of a Counsel, which he gave for widows to abstain
from marriage: in which therefore those his words, not our Lord but I, have
place. And indeed, as S. Paul, if he had spoken only the dictates of humane
reason and been subject to error, when he said (V. 10.11.) To them that be
joined in matrimony, not I give commandment, but our Lord, that the wife depart
not from her husband, and let not the husband put away his wife) had put a
great command upon Christians, for which he had no certainty or warrant; so
also counselling perpetual chastity as the best, if it be not so indeed (as he
might err if he spoke only by humane prudence) he had much diminished the
natural freedom, which people have to marry, or perpetually live chaste. For
though he did not command it, yet to persons of timorous consciences, and
desirous to do what they are taught to be most perfect, such a counsel from
such a person, could not but much move, and as I may say, more than e^cline
them, thereto. For, the Corinthians, in those Questions which they proposed, and
S. Paul answers in this Chapter, had recourse to Him not as to a wise man only,
or as a private person, for dictates of humane reason, but as to an Apostle,
from whom they expected undoubted answers, by Revelation from God, upon which
they might securely build their Christian Faith, in matters of so great moment:
and as they believed him speaking of our Saviors command against divorce, so
they believed him advising chastity, and supposed they might do it as safely
in both, as in one for, Point of S. Paul's being inspired. And this
consideration vrges so much the more, as the Corinthians were like to find
greater difficulty in those Points, for Virgins to remain always such, and
for widows to abstain from a second marriage; in regard they were much given
to sensual delights, as Writers have observed, and appears out of S. Paul in
diverse places; and therefore to exhort them in those beginnings to perpetual
chastity, had been both burden some and dangerous to them, and not safe for S.
Paul himself, if he had done it without certainty, communicated by divine
inspiration.

41. Thus we see, that he having (V. 35.) counseled virginity, presently (V.
36) adds; and this I speak to your profit: not to cast a snare upon you; as
like wise having said (V. 27.) Art thou loose from a wife? Seek not a wife: he
adds, (V. 18.) but if thou take a wife, thou have not sinned: and is it not a
very preposterous conceit, to say, that in the first part, seek not a wife,
which is a counsel, he vtters only a dictate of prudence; and in the second,
if thou take a wife, thou have not sinned which implies a matter of Faith, he
speaks by inspiration? What is this but to bring all the writings of S. Paul
to an uncertainty? And, as I said above by the like occasion, to make holy
scripture a confused aggregatum per accidens, of truths different in nature and
kind; and, as I may say, to incorporate with Gods word Apocryphal Writings,
which are so called, not because they may not be true, but because they are not
Divine, as the dictates of humane prudence are not: and do you not cosen
people, who believe that all is scripture which is contained in S. Paul's
Epistles? You say, the Bible has been confirmed, by Miracles. I ask whether
all truths contained in it have been so confirmed or no: If they have, seeing
you say here, (N. 31.) it is impossible God should set his hand and sea^e to
the confirmation of a falsehood, at least now all the words of S. Paul are
attested by God, and grown to be matters of Faith, though we should falfly
suppose, they were not such, in virtue of his teaching the^, as our Savior
said, If ye will not believe me believe the works (Joa: 10.38.) If you say,
all Truths in scripture were not confirmed by Miracles; it is as good, in order
to us, as if none had been so confirmed; since the Miracles themselves do not
specify, what in particular they confirm, and what not: and so we can only
believe in general, that some Points contained in the Bible, are Truths; but
this is not enough to believe with certainty any one in particular. Besides all
this, S. Paul in counselling virginity, counsels the same which our B. Savior
had done before, as is recorded (Matthew: 12.12.) and therefore he delivers a
Divine Revelation which he knew to be such, and spoke not out of humane
prudence, as you would have him. If it be objected; how then does he say: I
speak not, but our Lord? Ianswer. It cannot be said, I speak not by
inspiration, but our Lord: (for what an incongruous speech were that?) But, I
speak signifyes, I counsel, advise, command, or permit, by antithesis to those
other words (V 10.) Not I give command, but our Lord. You know, Catholics are
wont to alledg this Chapter of S. Paul, to prove as a Point of Faith, the
counsel of perperuall virginity; and yet never any of our Adversaryes, have
excepted against this Argument by saying; S. Paul professes to deliver that
matter, only as a dictate of humane reason, and not as a Divine Revelation;
which had been a clear and unanswerable reply, that we could not prove by that
place perpetual virginity to be more perfect, as a Point of Faith, if they had
been of your mind; and they might easily have told us, that we could not prove
an Article of Faith, by words which the Apostle himself professes to contain
but a humane dictamen. But so it is. They who once forsake Gods Church, learn
only, and practice, and teach others this lesson; Evil men and seduce ^s shall
prosper to the worse; erring and driving into errors. (2, ^^noth: 3. V. 32.)

42. I would gladly make an end of this matter. But first, I must ask, how you
can say, (N. 32.) If we will pretend, that the Lord did certainly speak what S.
Paul speaks, and that his judgment was Gods commandment, shall we not plainly
contradict S. Paul, and that spirit by which he wrote? For, who ever pretended,
that S. Paul's judgment was Gods command? Contrarily, when his judgment is,
that such a thing is no command of God, we do most firmly believe, that it is
no command; because we are sure, that he was no less assisted by Inspiration in
saying, (V. 12.) it was no command, speak I, not our Lord, than when (V. 10.)
he declared a command, not I, but our Lord.

43. Now upon the whole matter; it follows out of this your Error: that
although all things necessary to be believed, were contained in scripture; yet
that were not enough to make it a sufficient Rule, or any Rule at all, for
Christian Faith: seeing we cannot be absolutely certain, when the writers
thereof set down divine Revelations, or only dictates of humane reason: yea and
as you say S. Paul was not inspired by God, when he Counseled virginity, and
consequently might have erred therein; so we cannot be sure, that indeed he gave
any such judgment or counsel, but that as in counselling, so in writing and
setting down that counsel, he was no more assisted by Inspiration, tha^ in
giving it. And I will end with these words of Christanity Maintained (about the
said Texts of S. Paul) (Chap: 4. N. 9. Page: 44.) Certainly if the Apostles did
sometimes write out of their own private judgment or spirit; though it were
granted that themselves could discern the diversity of those motions or
spirits, (which one may easily deny, if their universal infallibility be once
impeached) yet it is clear that others, to whom they spoke or wrote, could not
discern the diversity of those spirits in the Apostles. For which cause,
learned Protestants acknowledge, that although each man's private spirit were
admitted for direction of himself, yet it were not use full for teaching
others. Thus you say (P. ^41. N. 27) A supernatural assurance of the
incorruption of scriptures may be an assurance to ones self, but no argument
to another. And as you affirm (Page 62. N. 25) that Books that are not
Canonical may say they are, and those that are so, may say nothing of it: so
we cannot be assured, that the Apostles deliver Divine Revelations, though they
should say, they do; nor that they deliver not such Revelations though they
say nothing thereof, if once we deny their universal infallibility.

A fourth Error is set down in your (Page: 62. N. 24. and Page: 141. N. 27.)
where you profess to know no other means to be assured of the scriptures
incorruption, then you have that any other Book is incorrupted, and that your
assurance of both, is of the same kind and condition (though this for scripture
be far greater for the degree) both Moral assurances, and neither physical
or Matematicall.

44. If this Doctrine may pass for true, it will necessarily follow, that the
assurance which we have of scripture, must not only be of the same kind, but be
far less for the degree of it; seeing the books of profane Authors, have a
more full testimony and tradition of all sorts of men, Atheists, Pagans, Jews,
Turks, and Christians; whereas the Bible was either unknown, or impugned, or
not much regarded by all, except Christians, and by some also who pretended to
the name of Christian. Times stood so with the Jews, that the Old scripture
was once lost, as some say, or at least lay hid; and Christians had not those
commodityes, to transcribe faithfully Copyes of the new Testament, which pagans
had for publishing their Books: Whence it comes to pass, that we find not so
many diverse readings, in Cicero, Virgill, and other profane books, as we
find in scripture. To which, if we add the many vulgar Translations, and
Editions, to what uncertainty shall we be brought, if we proceed only by humane
moral assurance of scripture, without any living visible Guide (the Church) so
directed by the holy Ghost, as we may be most certainly assured, that she will
either never permit such corruptions to happen, or will never make use of them:
As we were assured, the Apostles could never approve any corruption in
scripture, though in their times it could not be avoided, but that Errors
might be committed, by the diversity of transcribers so many centuryes of
years before Printing was in use. And in vain do you [Pag. 62. N. 24.]
alledg, that Divine providence will never suffer the way to Heaven to be
blocked up, or made invisible; which no man denies; but seeing his holy
Providence cannot be contrary to itself, and disposes of all things sweetly, by
Means proportionable to his Ends, we must even from hence gather, that he has
left Means to beget a true divine supernatural Faith, more firm than we
yield to humane stories: which cannot be done by scripture alone, if we neither
be certain that it is not corrupted, nor have any other infallible Guide to
rely on, besides the bare written word; and so this your Assertion proves that
which you seek most to avoid, that scripture alone, even though it were falsely
supposed to contain all things necessary to be believed, cannot be sufficient
to erect an Act of Faith, for want of strength of an infallible authority,
because still we remain uncertain and unsatisfied, whether perhaps it be not
corrupted in that part upon which we build our assent.

54. Your sift Error, not unlike to this, I touched above out of your (Page
116. N. 159.) where you say; We have, I believe, as great reason to believe
there was such a man as Henry the eight King of England, as that Jesus Christ
suffered Under Pontius Pilate. You should have said; we have far greater
reason to believe that there was such a man, as Henry the eight, or Alexander,
Caesar, Pompey, etc: if your false Assertion were true, that Christian Faith
rihes no higser than humane Tradition, and story can raise it. For we have a
more full and universal Tradition, and Consent of all sorts of Persons, that
there were such men as Caesar, etc: and that they fought such battles,
obtained such victoryes, and the like, than that there was one called Jesus
Christ, that he had Disciples etc: And what Christian can hear this without
detestation? Your saying, that we have as great reason to believe there was
such a man as Henry the eight, as that Jesus Christ suffered etc: seems to
signify, that we have as great reason to believe what is delivered by humane
History or Tradition, as that which is testified or revealed by God, since you
pretend to believe that scripture which gives witness to Christ Jesus, is the
word of God, and yet affirm that we have as great reason to believe, there was
such a man as Henry the eight (which we know only by humane tradition) as that
Jesus Christ suffered Under Pontius Pilate, which we learn from scripture. If
you grant this, as it seems you expressly do; I suppose your ground must be,
that which you express (Page: 36. N. 8.) that the Conclusion always follows
the worser part: as if a message be brought me from a man of absolute credit
with me; but by a messenger that is not so, my considence of the truth of the
relation, cannot but be rebated and lessened by my diffidence in the Relatour:
and therefore because we know only by moral certainty (as you speak in the same
place) that scripture is the word of God, and that the contents thereof were
revealed by God, and confirmed by Miracles, our belief can be proportionable
only to those moral inducements or humane tradition; which being as great that
there was such a man as Henry the eight, as that Jesus Christ suffered etc: we
have as great reason to believe that, as this. If this be your meaning, and
upon this ground; the^ I infer, which hither to I have not so absolutely done,
that Christian Faith, with you, is not only fallible, and not absolutely
certain, but also is no more, yea (as I have proved,) less certain, though it
be testified by God, than if it had been testified, or affirmed to be true by
men only; because all must depend on, and be exactly measured, not by the
difference of Humane and divine testimony, but wholly and only by the means or
probability by which such a Testimony is conveyed to our understanding. And
this must be the cause which moves you to say, that we have as great reason to
believe there was such a man as Henry the eight, as that Jesus Christ suffered
Under Pontius Pilate: because the Motives are a like, though the testimony of
God and of men be different. Or if you say, that when we have the same motives
to believe that God testifyes a thing, and that man does testify it, we have
greater reason to believe what is testified by God, than what is testified by
man; then you contradict what yourself say, that we have as great reason to
believe there was such a man as Henry the eight, as that Jesus Christ suffered
Under Pontius Pilate. Howsoever; I must still conclude, that seeing, according
to your Principles, and express words, we have as great, yea, as I have proved,
greater reason to believe there was a Caesar, Pompey etc: than Jesus Christ,
what will it avail us, in order the exercising to an Act of true Christian
Faith, that all Points necessary to be believed, are contained in Scripture, if
in the mean time we have as great reason to believe what is related in
profane Stories, as what is revealed in scripture?

46. A sixth Error you teach (Page 67. N. 38.) I may beli^ue even those
questioned Books to have been written by the Apostles and to be Canonical;
but I cannot in reason believe this of them so undoubtedly, as ^f those Books
which were never qu^stioned. At least, I have no warrant to damn any man that
shall doubt of them, or deny them now: having the examples of Saints in Heaven,
either to justify, or excise such their doubting or denial. And (Page 69. N.
45.) The Canon of Scripture, as we r^^eyue it, is builded upon Universal
Tradition. For we do not profess ourselves so absolutely and undoubtedly
certain, neither do we urge others to be so, of those Books, which have been
doubted, as of those that never have. But this is not all. For to the words of
Cha. Ma. (Part. 1. Chap. 2. N. 9.) That according to the sixth Article of the
English Protestants, which says; In the name of Holy Scripture, we do
understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
Authority was never any doubt in the Church, the whole Book of Esther must
quit the Canon, and diverse Books of the New Testament must be discanonized, to
wit, all those, of which some Ancients have doubted, and those which diverse
Lutherans have of late denied. You answer (Page 68. N. 43.) When they say, Of
whose Authority there was never any doubt in the Church, they mean not, those
only of whose Authority there was simply no doubt at all, by any man in the
Church; But such as were not at any time doubted of by the whole Church, or by
all Churches, but had attestation, though not vn^versall, yet at least,
sufficient to make considering men receive them for Canonical. In which number
they may well reckon those Epistles which were sometimes doubted of by some,
yet whose number and Authority was not so great, as to prevail against the
contrary suffrages.

47. Nothing could more lively set before our eyes the necessity of believing,
that Gods Church, from which we receive Holy Scripture, is infallibly assisted
by the Holy Ghost, than these your Assertions, and pernicious Errors, which
yet do naturally result from the Opinyons of those Protestants, who deservedly
laughing at the pretended private spirit of rigid Calvinists, and yet denying
the infallibility of the Church, are driven to such Conclusions, as you
publish, and for which, those others had disposed the Premises. For if the
Scripture be received upon the Authority of the Church, considered only as a
company of men subject to error, and not as infallibly directed by the Holy
Ghost, who can blame one for inferring, that if those men once doubted of some
Books of Scripture, such books cannot challenge so firm a belief, as others in
which all have always agreed? Though even these in which all have agreed, can
never arrive to be believed by an infallible assent of Divine Faith, while
these men, though never so many, are believed to be fallible.

48. But to come to your Error: If it be granted, that we believe some books
of Scripture more undoubtedly then other, by reason of a greater or less
consent, and so give way to more or less in the belief of Gods word, we shall
soon come to end in nothing. For why may not those books of which sometime
there was doubt, and were afterward receyved for Canonical, in time loose some
voices or sussrages, and by that means come to be discanonized? You teach that
we have not infallible certainty, but only a probability for any part of
Scripture; how far then shall we be removed from certainty, for those books
which participate of that probability in a less and less degree? The common
Doctrine of Protestants, is, that Scripture became a total Rule of Faith, when
the Canon was perfited, because they cannot determine with certainty, in what
particular books necessary Points are contained. If then some parts of
Canonical Scripture be more undoubted than others; in case some fundamental
points chance to be set down only in these others, it follows, not only that
they cannot be so certain of the Truth of those necessary Points, as of other
truths not fundamental, or of no necessity at all, being considered in
themselves; but also that they cannot be certain at all; since it is supposed
that they do not believe those books with absolute certainty, but with a lower
degree even of a probable assent. Your pretended Bishop of London, D. King, in
the beginning of his first Lecture upon Jonas says: comparisons betwixt
scripture and scripture, are both odious, and dangerous: The Apostles names are
evenly placed in the writings of the holy Fundation. With an impartial respect
have the children of Christ's family from time to time, receyved, reverenced,
and embraced the whole volume of scriptures. Mark that it is both odious and
dangerous to make comparisons betwixt scripture and scripture, and that the
children of Christ's family with an impartial respect receyve the whole Volume
of scriptures. Yourself (Page 68. N. 42.) say, that the controversy about
scripture, is not to be tried by most Voices; and what is the greater number,
of which we have heard you speak in the next (N. 43.) that it was sufficient
to prevail against the contrary suffrages, but only most voices, or consent in
one judgment, seeing you attribute infallibility, or the certain direction of
the Holy Ghost, to no number, great, or small? And as for the greater authority
which in the same (N. 43.) you ascribe to one part more than to another, what
can it be, in your Principles, except greater learning, or some such kind of
Quality, nothing proportionable to that authority, on which Christian Faith
must rely? Take away the special assistance of the Holy Ghost, and few for
number, even one single person, may for weight have as good reason for what he
says, as a great multitude for the contrary. There is scarcely any part of
scripture, which has not been Questioned by so many as would have made men
doubt of the works of Cicero, Livie, etc: as we see men doubt of some works,
which have gone under the name of Old Authors, because, for example, Erasmus,
or others, have called them in Question, upon mere conjecturall reasons, as
seeming difference of Style, or the like. If then men have not presumed to
doubt of scripture, as they would have done of other Writings, it is because
they believe Gods church to be equally infallible in all that she propounds,
though some perhaps doubted before such a Proposition, or Definition. I have
proved, that in your grounds we have greater certainty for what is related in
humane stories, then for the contents of the most undoubted Books of
scripture. What strength then can those Books of scripture have which you
receive with a less degree of belief?

49. You Object (Page: 67. N. 36. and 38.) Some Saints did once doubt of some
parts of scripture; therefore we have no warrant to damn any man that shall
doubt of them, or deny them now, having the example of Saints in Heaven, either
to justify, or excuse their doubting or denial.

50. Answer: This very Objection proves the necessity of an infallible Living
Judge, as will appear after I have first told you, that by this form of
arguing, we may now be saved, though we believe no part of the whole Bible;
because the time was when no part of it was written; We may now adhere to many
old Heresies, condemned by the whole Church, which before such a condemnation
or definition. Saints might have held without damnation, or sin: We may now
reject the Faith of Christ, because many were Saints and saved, in the Law of
Nature, and Moses, without it. Yourself (Page: 280. N. 66.) affirm, That what
may be enough for men in ignorance, may be to knowing men not enough. That the
same error may be not capital to those who want means of finding the truth,
and capital to others who have means, and neglect to use them. Howsoever, we
Catholics are safe by your own words, since we have the example of Saints in
Heaven, and holy Fathers, (as is confessed even by Protestants) for those
Practices, and Doctrines, which you will needs call Errors, beside S. Bernard,
S. Bonaverture, and others, whom Protestants confess to be Saints in Heaven;
and therefore by your own rule you have no warrant to damn us having such
examples either to justify, or excuse us. If then you will stand to your own
doctrine, you cannot deny, but at one time that may consist with salvation,
which at another time is not compatible therewith. The Church of God has
defined what Books be Canonical; and this Definition all are obliged under
pain of damnation to believe, and obey. And even by this, we may learn the
necessity of acknowledging a Living Judge. All Books which are truly Canonical,
were proposed and receyved by Crihstians. After ward the knowledge of some
Books, and some truths, began to be obscured, or doubted of, or denied by
some, and perhaps not by a few, and those of great authority, if we respect
either learning, or other endowments, qualityes, and abilityes, under the
degree of infallibility; as we see there wanted not in the Apostles time some
who were zealous for the observation of the Mosaicall Law: and as these could
not have been confuted, convinced, and quieted, but by the infallibility of the
first Council, held in Jerusalem; so, after some Books of scripture come once
to be Questioned, it is impossible to bring men back to an unanimous, or any
well grounded reception and certainty of them, except by some authority
acknowledged to be infallible; which if we deny, those Books which are receyved
by many or most, may, as I said, be doubted of even by those many, and they
which were receyved by few, may in time gain number and authority: and so all
things concerning scripture, must be still ebbing, and flowing, and sloating in
irremediable and endless uncertainty, of admitting and rejecting the Canonical
Books. And what connection, or tie, or thread, can we have, to find out the
Antiquity and truth of scripture, except by such a Guide?

51. And here I may answer an Objection, which you make against some words of
Cha: Ma: (Part: 1. Chap: 3. N. 12.) which you relate (Page: 141.142. N. 28.29.)
Some Books, which were not always known to be Canonical, have b^ne
afterward receyved for such; but never any one Book or syllable defined for
Canonical, was afterward Questioned or rejected for Apocryphal. A sign that
Gods Church is infallib^y assisted by the Holy Ghost, never to propose as
Divine Truths any thing not revealed by God! These words, that you may with
more ease impugn, you think fit to cite imperfectly. For, where Cha: Ma:
said; never any one Book or syllable desined by the Church, was afterward
Questioned or rejected for Apocryphal, you leave out (by the Church) which
words yield a plain Answer to your Objection, or any that can be made* Thus
then you say: Tone^ing the first s^rt; if they were not commended to the Church
by the Apo^^^es as Canonical, seeing after the Apostles, the Church pretends
to no new Revelation, how can it be ^n Article of Faith to belicue them
Canonical? And how can you pretend that your Church which makes this an
Article of Faith is so assisted as not to propose any thing as a Divine Truth
which is not revealed by God? If they were commended to the Church by the
Apostles as Canonical, low then is the Church an infallible keeper of the
Canon of Scripture, which has suffered some Books of Canonical Scripture to
be lost? And others to loose for a long time their being Canonical, at least,
the necessity of being so esteemed, and afterward as it were by the Law of
Postliminium has restored their Authority and Canonicalbiess unto them? If
this was delivered by the Apostles to the Church, the Point was sufficiently
discussed, and therefore your Churches omission to teach it for some ages as an
Article of Faith, nay degrading it from the Number of Articles of Faith, and
putting it among disputable problems, was surely not very laudable.

52. Answer: All Canonical Books were commended to the Church by the Apostles
for such (though not necessarily to all Churches at the same instant) and we
pretend to no new Revelations. And for your demand, how then is the Church an
infallible keeper of Scripture, if some Books have been lost, and others lost
for a long time their being Canonical, or at least the necessity of being so
esteemed? I answer: Your Argument is of no force against us Catholics, who
believe an always Living Guide, the Church of God, by which we shall
infallibly be directed in all Points belonging to Faith and Religion to the
worlds end, as occasion shall require; yea we bring this for a Demonstration,
that the Church must be infallible, and Judge of Controversyes. There was no
scripture for about two thousand years from Adam to Moses: And again for
about two thousand years more from Moses to Christ our Lord, holy scripture
was only among the people of Israe^l: and yet there were Gentiles in those days
endued with Divine Faith, as appears in Job, and his friends. The Church also
of our Savior Christ, was before the scriptures of the New Testament, which
were not written instantly, nor all at one time, but successively, and upon
several occasions, and some after the decease of most of the Apostles; and
after they were written, they were not presently known to all Churches: and as
men could be saved in those times without scripture, so afterward also, upon
condition, that we have a Living Guide, and be ready to receive scripture, when
it shall be proposed to us by that Guide But your Objection vrges most against
your brethren and yourself, who acknowledge no other Rule of Faith but scripture
alone, and yet teach, that the duty of the Church is to keep scripture, which
being now your only Rule and necessary for Faith and salvation, how does she
discharge her duty, if she has suffered some Books to be lost? And others to
loose for a long time their being Canonical, at least, the necessity of being
so esteemed? Especially seeing you teach against other Protestants, that we
receive scripture from the Authority of the Church alone, and therefore if she
may fail either by proposing false scriptures, or in conserving the true ones,
Protestants want all means of salvation. Neither can you answer, that it
belongs to Gods Providence, not to permit scripture to be wholly lost, since it
is necessary to salvation. For you must remember your own Doctrinem; that God
may permit true Miracles to be wrought, to delude men, in punishment of their
sins; and then why may he not permit, either true scriptures to be lost, or
false ones to be obtruded for true, in punishment of sin, and particularly of
the excessive pride of those, who prefer their judgment before the Decrees of
Gods church, deny her Authority, allow no Rule but scripture, interpreted by
themselves alone; that so their pride against the Church, and the abuse of true
scripture may be justly punished by subtraction of true, or obtrusion of false
Books? Beside, God in his holy Providence works by second causes or Means. If
then he permit some scriptures to be lost, and yet his Will be, that there
remain a way open to Heaven, he will not fail to do it by other Means, which
is, by the Magistery of other men, (Faith comes by hearing) that is, by his
Church, which he has commanded us to hear; unless you will have all men
pretend with Svvinckfeldians to be guided by enthusiasmes, or extraordinary
lights, motions, or rapts. And so this very Providence of God, in permitting
some scripture to be lost, or questioned for a time, proves the necessity of a
Living Guide, and the no-necessity, or no sole-sufficiency of scripture, and
that God has permitted such a loss or doubting, to teach us the necessity and
sufficiency of a visible Living Guide.

53. But then, say you, How is the Church an infallible keeper of s^ripture,
which has suffered some books to be lost? It is easy for us to answer; that
the Church shall always be infallibly directed to perform whatsoever is
necessary for salvation of men; and if any books of scripture have been lost,
we are sure the Church can, and will, supply that defect, by the assistance
which God has promised Her: as your Volkelius (de vera Relig: L. 6. C. 19.)
affirms, and endeavors to prove, that by scripture alone the Church may be
restored, though she were supposed, totally to have failed* which conceit of
his, though it be but a mere chimera, since it appears by experience, that
scripture alone is not sufficient to produce unity in faith, nor can instruct
us in all Points necessary to be believed; yet it demonstrates, that if the
Church be acknowledged to be infallible she may supply all want or loss of
scripture, by the perpetual Direction of the Holy Ghost, as she did for years
and Ages before scripture was written. But this answer cannot serve
Protestants, who on the one side cannot be assured, that in those scriptures
which were lost, there were not contained some fundamental or necessary Points
of Faith; and on the other, are resolved not to make use of the inestimable
benefit, which they might receive by submitting to Gods Church, and commit a
grievous sin by rejecting her Authority: and so God giving most sufficient and
certain means, you remain inexcusable for not making use of them. Thus then
the infallibility of Gods Church in being a keeper of scripture, consists not
in this, that no scripture be lost which God in his holy Providence supplies by
another Means, but that she be so directed, as no scripture, or other Means
be lost, if indeed they be necessary for salvation.

54. What you say of the Churches restoring to some books of scripture their
authority, and Canonicallness, must be answered by Protestants, who receive for
Canonical some books, of which once there was some doubt; neither will they
pretend, to restore to them authority or Canonicallness, which in themselves
they could never loose (for, what is once written by inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, is for ever truly said to have been so written) but only we may come to
know that which we did not know, or to be assured of that whereof some doubted.
Which yet you must not so understand, as if the whole Church did ever doubt of
those books, and much less that she did deny, or ever could make any
Declaration or Definition that they were not Canonical, but only that they
having been once commended to the Church by the Apostles, some particular
persons afterward fell into some doubt concerning the^; as many have questioned
or denied diverse Articles of Faith delivered to Christians by the Apostles; and
the Church, in due time, even by occasion of such doubt or denial, declared,
the Truths contrary to those Heresies, to be arricles of Faith, and those books
of which some doubted, to be Canonical. Thus Potter (Page: 216.) teaches, that
the Ap^^^^es Creed as it was further opened, and explayned in some parts, (by
occasion if emergent Heresies) in the other Catholic Creeds of Nice,
Conseantmople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius, contains all fundamental
Points of Faith. And therefore you are injuriours to Gods Church in saying; her
omission to teach for some ages as an Article of Faith that such books were
Canonical, nay, degrading them from the number of articles of Faith, and
putting the^ among disputable problemes was surely not very laudable For, the
church did not omit to declare in due time, and upon fit or necessary occasion,
that they were Canonical, as the ancient Council of Nice (of whose Creed your
Church of England (Art. 8.) says it ought thoroughly to be received, and
believed) by occasion of the damnable heresy of Arius, with whom you and your
Socinia^s agree, declared that Christ was Consubstantiall to his Father.
Neither did the Church ever degrade from an article of Faith, or put among
disputable problemes, a^y Part of true Canonical scripture, and therefore Cha:
Ma: said truly, that never a^y book or syllable defined by the church for
Canonical, was questio^ed or rejected for apocriphall, either by the church,
or any Catholic to whom such a Definition was sufficiently notifyed; though
Heretics will still be doing what pride and obstinacy may suggest. In the
mean time, you will find, that I have already a^swered what you object P. 142.
N. 29 against the said affirmation of Cha: Ma: that never any book or syllable
once defined etc: and of which you are pleased to say; certainly it is a bold
assertion, but extremely false, and say; He ( Cha: Ma:) were best ru^b his
forhead hard, and say, etc: But our answer is very obvious, that the book of
Ecclesiasticus, and Wisdom, the Epistle of S. James, and to the Heb: (which
you mention) were approved by the Apostles for Canonical: yet that did not
hinder, but afterward some might be ignorant, or doubt of them, as many did of
diverse principal articles delivered by the Apostles, and then the church had
reason and authority to declare the matter. You cite S. Gregory (L 9. Moral:
C. 13.) calling the books of Machabees not Canonical. S. Gregory has no such
thing in the chapter which you cite but (L. 19. C. 17.) which you might have
learned out of Potter, who (P. 259.) cites the same authority as I have set it
down. This I would not have noted, if you had not taxed your adversary for
missing a citation in one place, whereas he cites the same thing right in
another as I note herafter. Potter, I say, makes the same objection out of S.
Gregory, and Cha: Ma: (Part. 2. Chap. 7. N. 18.) answers it at large, and you
cannot be excused in taking no notice thereof, and yet make still the same
Objection which Potter did. These then be the words of Charity Maintained: what
you alledg out of S. Gergory, is easily answered for he does not call the
Machabees, not Canonical, as if he would exclude them from the number of true,
and divine scriptures, but because they were not in the canon of the Jews, or
in that which he had at hand when he wrote his first draught of his
commentaryes upon Job. For he was at that time the Popes Nuncius, or Legate at
Constantinople, and the Greek Rapsody. of African Canons had untruly put out of
the Canon the two Books of the Machabees, though they were receyved in Africa
as Canonical, by the Decree of the African Council. And therefore you were ill
advised, under color of commending Pope Gregory, (but indeed the more to
impugn us by his authority) to write Greg: M: or Magnus, the great, whereas he
was no Pope, but only Deacon, when he first wrote those commentaryes upon Job.
Thus far Cha: Ma:

55. As for your demand: whether before Sixtus Quintus his time our Church had
a defined canon of scripture, or not?

I Answer: We had the same Canon then, which we have now, and which the
sacred council of Trent has set down, (Sess: 4. decreto de Canonicis
scripturis.) The church had alvvayes the same Canon, that is, she never
declared by any decree, any books to be Apocryphal at one time, which she
admitted for Canonical at another. One Council may omit or not mention some
book which another specifyes, but can never declare it to be Apocryphal, or
not canonical; to which contrariety, only private persons are obnoxious. But
yet although our church had not set do wne the cano^ of scripture, it is very
improper for you to object; then was your Church surely a most vigilant keeper
of scripture, that for (1500) years had not defined what was scripture, and
what was not. For, do not Protestants till this day disagree about the canon of
scripture, and so are not able to define what is scripture, and what is not*
yea they positively deny some books to be scripture, which others of them
affirm to be Canonical. It is true, I cannot properly say, that, for (1500)
years they have not defined any canon, because they have no such ancient
being. But I must say; although they should last (1500) millions of years,
they would never be able to set down any certain canon, as not having any
assured ground, for which one part should yield to another. And still I must
be putting you in mind of the difference betvveen Catholics and Protestants,
that we who believe the church to be infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost,
are sure that she cannot deceive us, with false or Apocryphal scriptures, nor
obtrude any false canon; vvheras you, who rely upon scripture alone, and yet
can have no certainty what is the true canon, (as appears both by your
mutual disagreements, and because you have no certain infallible means to
know what is true scripture) can have no security for your faith, in regard
you have no certainty concerning the total rule thereof.

56. Your other Demand, (Whether our Canon of scripture was that which was
set forth by Sixtus, or that set forth by Clement, or a third, different from
both?) If it be well considered, is, to speak truth, exoticall; for to the
demand what books be Canonical, the direct and right Answer is, that such or
such books belong to the Canon of scripture; for example, Genesis, Exodus,
Psalms, four Gospells, etc: which Demand and Answer abstract from that
other question, about different Translations, and Editions. And who will
ask, whether the Septuagint, or Aquila, or Luther, Calvin, Beza, Castalio,
set out a different Canon of scripture, I mean, for those books in which they
agree that they are Canonical, and yet it is notorious that their Translations
of the same canon, or books of scripture, are most different? Or, if you will
have these demands to be all one, seeing both the Hebrew and Greek books are
corrupted, as Calvin confesses, your answer to your own Demand must be, that
no true canon of scripture can be found; and then woe be to Protestants, whose
Faith and salvation depends upon the true canon of scripture. If your Demand be
about the Edition of Sixtus and Clement; I Answer, They set forth no different
canon, but the selfsame; to wit, those books which before their time made up
the canon of scripture. And, as for the edition of Sixtus, it is no good
dealing in you to do in this, as you did concerning the words of S. Gregory,
concealing the large and clear Answer which Cha: Ma: gave to the same
objection (made by Potter) (Part. 2. Chap. 6. N. 3.) where by the Authentical
Testimonies of Persons above all exception he showed that the Decree of Sixtus
about, his edition, was never promulgated; that he himself had declared diverse
things to have crept in, which needed a second review; and that the whole work
should be re-examined, which he could never do, being prevented by death.

57. But good Sr. Reflect I beseech you, that in this, and the like Demands,
you give deadly wounds to Protestants, who profess to rely upon scripture
alone, and yet cannot possibly have any certainty what scripture is true or
corrupted, by the Hebrew or Greek Texts, which they acknowledge to be corrupted,
and much less by Translations of Protestants, who bitterly accuse one another
of most grievous errors in their Translations, as Cha: Ma: has showed (Part.
1. Chap. 2. N. 16.) which I wish the Reader, for the Eternal good of his
soul, to peruse, and reflect, that if scripture be the only Rule of his Faith,
and yet he either is sure that some Texts thereof are corrupted, or at least not
sure but that they are so, he cannot be obliged to believe any one Text, nor
can in Matters of Eternity rely thereon: as in case diverse meats were set
before me, whereof I know some to be poisonous, and I have no means to discern
them from the other, I cannot safely touch any one of them. But the matter
passes in a far different manner with us Catholics, as I have often said, and
must often repeat: We being sure that the church can neither approve any least
corruption, nor ground upon it any Point of Faith: and so a corruption in a
true book of Scripture, can no more hurt us, then false Scriptures or Gospells
which were vented in the primitive church, could prejudice those Christians.
Nevertheless, although, as I said, the church cannot approve any false
translation, yet she is not obliged at all times to declare one for
Authentical, till all circumstances considered, there appear some necessity
thereof; as the sacred Council of Trent did, by occasion of a multitude of
pernicious Translations, published by modern Heretics in favor of their
heresies; and for other just causes. Luther himself Lib: contra Zwing: de verit
Corporis Christi in Euchar:) was at length foroed to confess, that, If the
world last longer, it will be again necessary to receive the Decrees of
Counsels, and to have recourse to them, by reason of diverse interpretations of
scripture which now reign.

58. To that which you say in the same (N. 29.) suppose it had been true, that
never any Book after reteyving had been Questioned, how had this been a sign
that the Church is infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost? In what mood or
figure would this Conclusion follow out of these Premises? Certainly your
flying to such poor signs, as these are, is to me a great sign, that you
labor with penury of better Arguments: and that, thus to catch at shadows
and bulrushes, is a shrewd sign of a sinking cause.

59. Answer What greater sign of particular Assistance, and as it were a
Determination to Truth from some higher cause, than consent and constancy of
many therein, while we see others change, alter, and contradict one another (and
even the same man become contrary to himself) who yet in all other humane
respects have the same occasion, ability, and reason, of such consent and
constancy? Tertullian, (Praescript: Chap: 28.) says truly: Among many events
there is not one issue, the error of the churches must needs have varied. But
that which among many is found to be one, is not mistaken, but delivered. And
the experience we have of the many, great, and endless differences of
Protestants about the canon of scripture, and interpretation thereof, is a very
great argument, that the church, which never alters nor disagrees from herself,
is guided by a superior, infallible, Divine Spirit; as Christians among other
inducements, to believe that scripture is the word of God, alledg the perfect
coherence of one part thereof with another.

60. Before I pass to your next Error; I must ask a Question about what you
deliver (Page: 141. N. 28.) where, speaking of some Books of scripture, you
say; Seeing after the Apostles the Church pretends to no new Revelations, how
can it be an Article of Faith to believe them Canoncall? And (Page: 142. N. 29.)
If they (some certain books of scripture) were approved by the Apostles, this
I hope was a sufficient definition; How, I say, you who hold that, Scripture is
not a Point of Faith, nor revealed by God, can say, that to propose books of
scripture, though they had been proposed before, is to propose new Revelations
or Definitions of the Apostles: But, as I said hertofore, it is no news for
you to utter contradictions.

61. A seventh Error plainly destructive both of scripture, and all
Christianity, is taken out of your Doctrine (of which I have spoken hertofore)
that the Bible was proved to be Divine, by those Miracles which were wrought by
our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and yet that God may permit true Miracles
to be wrought to delude men. Which Assertions put together, may give occasion
to doubt, whether those Miracles, whereby the Scriptute was confirmed, were not
to delude men; and so we can have no certainty that Scripture is the word of
God.

62. To this I will add a Doctrine of yours delivered (Page: 69. N. 47.) which
overthrowes all proof that can be taken from Miracles, for confirmation either
that scripture is the word of God, or that other articles of Christian Faith
are true. Thus you write: For my part I profess, if the Doctrine of the
scripture were not as good, and as sit to come from the fountain of goodness,
as the Miracles by which it was confirmed, were great, I should want one maine
pillar for my Faith, and for want of it, I fear should be much staggered in
it. Does not this assertion declare, that true Miracles are in sufficient of
themselves, to convince that a thing confirmed by them, is true, or good,
unless men do also interpose their own judgment, that the things in themselves
are such? which is not to believe the Miracles, or God speaking and testifying
by them, but to subject the Testimony of God to the judgment of men? whereas,
contrarily, we ought to judge such things to be good, because they are so
testified, and not believe, that Testimony to be true, because in our judgment,
independently of that Testimony, the things are good in themselves; which were
to vary our belief of Gods Testimony, according as we may chance to alter our
judgment at different times, and upon diverse reasons which may present
themselves to our understanding. Do not you in diverse places pretend, that this
reason is above all other? God says so, therefore it is true: and further do you
not say? (Page 144. N. 31.) If you be so infallible, as the Apostles were, show
it as the Apostles did. They went forth (says S. Mark) and preached every
where, the Lord working with them and confirming their words with signs
following. It is impossible, that God should ly: and that the Eternal Truth
should set his hand and seal to the confirmation of a falsehood, or of such
Doctrine, as is partly true and partly false. The Apostles Doctrine was thus
confirmed, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part either false or
uncertain. If the testimony of God be with you above all reason, and that by
signs or Miracles the Eternal Truth sets his hand and seal to the
confirmation of what is so confirmed; how comes it, that your Faith could be
staggered (notwithstanding the working of such Miracles) if in your judgment
the doctrine of the scripture were not as good, as the Miracles by which it was
confirmed, were great? Or what could it avail us to prove our doctrine by
Miracles, as the Apostles did, if the belief of those Points so proved, must
stand to the mercy of your judgment, which as I said, may vary upon diverse
occasions: and yet this diversity of judgment you must, according to this your
doctrine, follow, even against any point, though confirmed by Miracle. It is
therefore clear; That in your Principles, you can have no certainty of the truth
of scripture, nor of the contents threrof, although it were supposed, that it
alone did expressly and inparticular contain all Points necessary to be
believed.

63. Your 8. Error consists in this: that, beside what I have said already in
your second and third Error (that you impeach the certainty of scripture, by
taking away universal infallibility from the Apostles who wrote it, and for
whose Authority we believe it.) I find you do the same in other places. You say
(P. 144. N. 30.) The infallibility of the Church depends upon the infallibility
of the Apostles, and besides, this dependence is voluntary, for it is in the
power of the Church to deviate from this Rule, being nothing else but an
aggregation of men, of which every one has free will, and is subject to
passions and error. Change the terms, and say: The infallibility of the
Apostles depended upon the infallibility of our Savior, and this dependence
was voluntary; for it was in the power of the Apostles to deviate from this
Rule, being nothing but a number of men, of whom every one has freewill, and is
subject to passion and error; and that we way be sure of this last, in the
very next (N. 31.) you teach, That the Apostles themselves, even after the
sending of the Holy Ghost, were, and through inadvertence or prejudice (and P.
137. N. 21.) to tinadvertence or prejudice, you add, or some other cause,
(which gives scope, enough to censure the Apostles) continued for a time in an
error repugnant to a revealed truth notwitstanding our Saviors express
warrant and injunction to go and preach to all Nations. Christ then, according
to you, did not deprive the Apostles of freewill, though he proposed externally
the Object, and gave them sufficient Grace to perform his will. For if he had
moved them to Truth by way of necessity, they could not have erred: If you
grant this, what will follow, but that as the Church, so the Apostles might
deviate from that which God declared and commanded, and consequently either
believe amiss, or not set down faithfully in writing, what they believed?
Which is also confirmed by what you write (P. 86. N. 93.) If it were true that
God had promised to assist you, for the delivering of true Scripture would this
oblige Him, or would it follow from hence that he had obliged himself, to teach
you, not only sufficiently, but effectually, and irresistibly the true sense of
scripture? And a little after; God is not lavish in superfluityes, and therefore
having given us means sufficient for our direction, and power sufficient to
make, use of these means, he will not constrain or necessitate us to make us
of these means. For, that were to cross the end of our Creation, which was to
be glorified by our free Obedience: Whereas necessity and freedom connot stand
together. And afterward: If God should work in us by an absolute irresistible
necessity (the Obedience of Faith etc:) he could no more require it of us, as
our duty, than he can of the sun to shine, of the Sea to ebb and flow, and of
all other creatures to do those things which by mere necessity they must do,
and cannot choose (And Page: 88. N. 96.) you say expressly, That God cannot
necessitate men to believe aright, without taking away their free will in
believing and in professing their belief. It seems by these words, you hold
the Apostles to have had freewill in believing, preaching, and writing, and
that therefore it was in their power to deviate from Gods will and motion: and
then, according to your grounds, as the church, so also the Apostles might
err. Which deduction is also proved by your words (Page: 172. N. 71.) The
spirit of truth may be with a man or Church for ever, and teach him all Truth,
and yet he may fall into some error; even contrary to the truth, which is
taught him only sufficiently, and not irresistibly, so that he may learn it,
if he will, not so that he must and shall, whether he will or no. Now, who can
assertaine me, that the spirits teaching is not of this nature? Or how can you
possibly reconcile it, with your Doctrine of freewill in believing, if it be
not of this nature? Now, if you do not deprive the Apostles of freewill,
because otherwise God could no more require of them as their duty to believe,
preach, and write such truths as were inspired by Him, than he can of the sun
to shine, of the sea to ebb and flow, etc: this discourse of yours takes away
their infallibility, and proves that they might fall into some error even
contrary to the truth which was taught or revealed to them, and the contrary
assertion cannot possibly be reconciled with their freewill. And Page: 87. N.
95. you say; If the Holy Ghosts moving the Church be resistible, then the Holy
Ghost may move, and the Church may not be moved. And why do you not say, if the
Holy Ghosts moving the Apostles to believe, preach, and write Scripture be
resistible, it must in the same manner follow, that the Holy Ghost may move,
and the Apostles may not be moved, and so may believe, preach, and write
errors.

64. But this is not all the bitterness you Vent against the church, in such
manner, as it wounds the Apostles, no less than the church. You say (P. 86. N,
93. and P. 87. N. 94.) If you Church be infallibly directed concerning the true
meaning of Scripture, why do not your Doctors follow her infallible direction?
why does she thus put her cand^e under a bushel, and keep her Talent of
interpreting Scripture infall^bly, thus long wrapped up in napkins? why sets
sheenot forth Infallible Commentaryes or Fxpositions upon all the Bible? Is it
because this would not be profitable for Christians, that Scripture should be
interpreted? It is blasphemous to say so. The scripture itself tells us, all
scripture is profitable. And the scripture is not so much the words as the
sense.

65. In answer to this your weak and irreligious discourse, I return the like
Demands, whether the Apostles were infallibly directed concerning the true
meaning or interpretation of scripture, as they were for writing it? I suppose
you will say, they were so directed. Why then did they put their candle under a
bushel, and keep their Talent of interpreting Scripture infallibly, wrapped up
in napkins? Why did they not set forth infallible commentaryes, or expositions
upon all the bible? Was it because this would not have been profitable for
Christians, that scripture should be interpreted? It is blasphemous to say so.
The Scripture itself tells us, all scripture is profitable. And scripture is
not so much the words, as the sense. And when you have made these Demands
against the Apostles, you may in like manner ascend higher, and ask, why
diverse parts of scripture were so written, as they not only need expositions,
but that no mortal man can understand them? When you have given a satisfactory
answer to these Demands, the same will answer your Questions concerning the
church, which being directed by the Holy Ghost, will not fail to interpret,
declare, and perform all that is necessary in order to the Eternal salvation
of souls, and in particular will supply by Tradition, or other Means, what is
obscure, or is not contained in Scripture. But then you ask again (N. 95.)
Whether this Direction of the Holy Ghost be resistible by the Church, or
irresistible? I still answer by demanding, whether the Motion of the Holy Ghost
was resistible by the Apostles, or irresistible? If irresistible; why may we
not say the same of the church for those particular Actions of Interpreting
Scripture, and Deciding controversyes in Religion? If resistible; then either
we are not sure that the Apostles did not deviate from the Motion of the holy
Ghost, as you infer^ against the infallibility of the church; or else we learn
by this example of the Apostles, that God may move resistibly, and yet
infallibly for attainng that End, which by means of such a Motion he intends.
This if you be resolved to deny, we must conclude, that the Apostles were not
infallible in their writings, and that we can have no certainty, that Scripture
does not contain errors. But whatsoever you think, the truth is, that God
wants not power to move men resistibly, and yet infallibly, by diverse ways
known to his infinite Wisdom. I would gladly know, whether you believe, that
God can possibly be sure to make any one a Saint, or a repentant sinner, or can
promise perseverance to the end. I suppose you will not deny but that he can:
and then seeing one cannot be a Saint, or a converted sinner, or persever to the
end, except by free Actions of the will, proceeding from Grace, you must grant,
that the congruous and efficacious Grace of God, may consist both with freedom
of our will, and infallibility in Gods foresight. I said, that if freewill in
the Church cannot stand with infallibility, neither could it consist with
infallibility in the Apostles. Now I add: your Arguments prove not only against
the fallibility of the Church and Apostles, but also of Christ our Lord, in
your wicked doctrine, that he is not God, nor Consubstantiall to his Father,
but only man; and then your demands enter; whether he were moved by his Father
resistibly, or irresistibly? And the same answer you give for Him, must be
given for his Apostles, and his Church. You say (Page: 86. N. 63.) God gave the
W^semen a starr to lead them to Christ, but he did not necessitate them, to
follow the guidance of this starr: that was left to their liberty. But this
instance makes against your self; for no man dare deny but that God so moved
those Wisemen as he was sure they would follow the starr, and perform that for
which he presented it to their eyes, and gave light to their understandings,
and efficacy to their wills; that so our Savior Christ might be preached to
the Gentiles, by their means, as S. Leo (sermon: 1. de Epiphan.) says; Dedit
aspicientibus intellectum, qui praestitit signum: and quod fecit intelligi,
fecit inquiri. He who gave the sign, gave them also light to understand it,
and what he made to be understood, he made to be sought after: where the word
fecit, signifyes, that God did move them effectually, and yet we have no
necessity, to say that they were necessitated.

66. By what we have said, is answered a wild discourse, which you make (Page
87. N. 95.) about the Popes calling the Council of Trent; which I have showed
might be done both freely, and yet proceed from the infallible fore-knowledg
and Motion of the Holy Ghost. And what you say of the Pope, may be applied
against the Apostles and other Canonical Writters, why they did delay so long
to write Scripture, and whether they were moved to it resistibly, or
irresistibly etc.?

67. I conclude, that together with the Church, you impugn the infallibility
of Christ and the Apostles, and consequently of their Writings, which forces me
to repeat, that, according to your Doctrine scripture cannot be any Rule of
Divine Faith, and much less a sufficient Rule, though it were supposed to
contain all necessary Points of Faith.

68. Your 9. and most capital Error remaynes; whereby you deprive scripture of
certainty and infallibility, and make both it and the contents of it, less
credible, than the Books of profane Authors, and things related in them: I
mean your Assertion, that we know Scripture to be the word of God, not by an
infallible private Spirit, or by undoubted criteria, or signs appearing in
Scripture it self, as some other Protestants teach; nor by the Church as
infallibly assisted by the Direction of the Holy Ghost, according to the
Doctrine of Catholics: but from the Tradition of all Churches, merely as they
are an Aggregation of men subject to Error, and as their consent is derived to
us by History and humane Tradition. The private Spirit (which must be tried by
Scripture, and not Scripture by it) and those pretended manifest signs found
in Scripture it self, are mere fopperyes, confuted, by the experience of so
many learned men, who hertofore have differed, and of Protestants, who at this
day differ about the Canon of Scripture; and this forces you to say to your
Adversary (Page: 69. N. 46.) That the divinity of a writing cannot be known
from it self alone, but by some extrinsecall Authority, you need not pro^e, for
no wise man d^nyes it. And therefore whereas Protestants teach, that the Church is
only an inducement, and not the certain ground, for which we believe
Scripture, you in opposition to them, affirm that those criteria or signs are
only Inducements; but that the ground to receyve Scripture, is the Church, in
the manner I have declared. Out of these considerations, you choose rather to
be sacrilegious, then seem to be simple, or no wise man; and therefore teach
that Christian Faith is not infallibly true, but only probable: Which being a
doctrine detested by other Protestants, and by all, respectiyely, who profess
any Religion, and Worshipp of God, it follows that we must receive Scripture
from the Church of God, acknowledged to be infallible. This being once granted,
we must further say, that Her infallibility is universal in all things
concering matters of Faith and Religion: neither is it possible to bring some
other infallible Authority, to prove the Church infallible in this Point alone.
For, to omit other Reasons, you must prove that Authority, by some other, and
so without end. In the mean time, we have reason to bless our good God, who
has forced Protestants, at length to see the foolery of a private spirit, and
the vanity of manifest signs pretended to be found evidently in scripture; and
so come either to acknowledge the infallibility of Gods church, or with Atheists
and enemies of Christian Religion, to deny the infallibility of Christian
Faith, by settling the truth thereof upon humane fallible tradition, which say
you (Page 72. N. 51.) is a principle not in Christianity but in Reason, nor
proper to Christians, but common to all men. And (Page 53. N. 3.) you teach,
that scripture may be judge of all controversyes, those only excepted, wherein
the Scripture itself is the subject of the Question, which cannot be determined
but by natural Reason, the only Principle beside scripture, which is common to
Christians. Behold the Analysis or Resolution of Christian Faith into humane
fallible, natural Reason! But now let us show the falsehood of this your Error.

69. First, it is an argument of no small weight, that both in this devise
itself you contradict all Catholics and Protestants, and in the consequence
which inavoidably follows it, namely, that the assent of Christian Faith is
fallible; wherein, as I said, you contradict all Christians, and all men who
profess any Religion.

70. 2. Christian Faith is infallible as I have proved; which it could not be,
if the ground on which it relyes were fallible.

71. 3. It has been proved that Christian Faith is the Gift of God, and in all
occasions requires the supernatural influence of the Holy Ghost, which yet
could not be necessary, if Faith were but a fallible conclusion, evidently
deduced from a Principle not in Christianity, but in natural reason, as we
have heard you profess, and upon that ground affirm, that Christian Faith is
only probable, not raising our Understanding above the probability of humane
inducements: wherein it differs from the judicium credibilitatis of which
Catholic Divines speak, and by which practice and effectually we judge the
Articles of Christian Faith, to deserve, and require of us, under pain of
damnation, a most certain infallible belief, beyond all precedent Motives of
credibility, which judgment being the beginning of supernatural Faith, and of
it self an Act of great difficulty to humane Reason, requires a particular
assistance of Divine Grace.

72. 4. If we receive Scripture upon this your fallible Tradition, we shall
have greater certainty of the Books of profane Authors, that they were
written by such men, than that the Books of Scripture, were written by those
whom we believe to have written them; because the Tradition is more full for
those, than for these, as I said above; as also there are many works of those
men, which never any Christian or other called in question, whereas scarcely any
Book of Scripture has not been questioned, even by Christians; as they are
despised and denied by all the enemies of Christian Religion. It will also
follow, for the like reason, that we are more certain that there was such a
man as Henry the eight King of England, Coesar, Pompey etc. Then that there was
such a man as Jesus Christ, as I have showed already: and yet what Christian
can hear such blasphemies, without just indignation, and horror?

73. 5. Protestants are wont to object, that we give greater credit to men,
than to the word of God; because we believe the scripture for the authority of
Gods church. This is of no force against us, who believe the church to be
infallibly assisted, and inspired by the Holy Ghost, and that God speaks by
the church, and consequently that the voice of the church is the voice of God;
and so we believe the word of God, for the authority and Testimony of God; as
all must acknowledge the Primitive of Christians, to have receyved and believed
the Scriptures, upon the authority of the Apostles, who yet were men, but men
inspired and infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost. But the Objection turned
against you, is unanswerable; because you ground the belief of scripture, and
all the contents thereof, upon men, expressly as they are fallible, and subject
to Error, whose words you must believe more than the word of God, according to
your own Rule, (Page 377. N. 59.) we must be surerof the Proof, than of the
thing proved, otherwise it is no Proof.

74. This Argument I confirm by your words (Page 143. N. 30.) There is not the
same reason for the Churches absolute infallibility, as for the Apostles and
Scriptures. For, if the church fall into Error, it may be reformed by
comparing it with the rule of the Apostles Doctrine and scripture. But if the
Apostles have erred in delivering the Doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall
we have recourse, for the discovering and correcting their error? Again,
there is not so much strength required in the Edifice as in the Foundation: and
if but wise men have the ordering of the building, they will make it much a
surer thing, that the Foundation shall not fail the building, then that the
building shall not fall from the Foundation. Now the Apostles and Prophets, and
Canonical writers are the foundation of the Church; therefore their stability in
Reason ought to be greater then the Churches, which is built upon them. Again,
a dependent infallibility cannot be so certain as that on which it depends:
But the infallibility of the Church depends upon the infallibility of the
Apostles, as the streightness of the thing regulated, upon the streigness of
the Rule. Therefore the Churches infallibility is not so certain as that of the
Apostles. This is your discourse, which I pray you apply to our present
purpose, in this manner. There is not the same reason for the Scriptures
infallibility, as for Tradition. For, if some Apocryphal Scripture be obtruded
for Canonical, it may be reformed by comparing it with universal Tradition;
But if universal Tradition has erred in delivering the Canon of Scripture, to
whom or to what, shall we have recourse for the discovering, and correcting
that error of proposing Apocryphal Scripture? Again, if but wise men have
the ordering of a building, they will make it a much surer thing, that the
Foundation shall not fail the building, then that the building shall not fall
from the foundation. Now, universal Tradition of men subject to error, is to
you the Foundation of Scripture; therefore their authority in (your) reason ought
to be greater then the Scripture which is built upon them. Again a dependent
infallibility cannot be so certain, as that on which it depends; But the
infallibility of Scripture, depends upon the infallibility of universal
Tradition of men: Therefore the Scriptures infallibility is not so certain as
that of the Tradition of men; that is, neither the one, nor the other is
certain. What say you to this application, and to your Doctrine which forces
us to make it? But this application rests not here. For, as you have told us,
that the infallibility of the Apostles must be greater then that of the Church;
so for the same reasons, the infallibility of the Church must be, to us,
greater then that of the Apostles, yea of Christ himself, seeing you believe the
Apostles and our Savior Christ to have been infallible, and to have proved
their infallibility with Miracles, only by your universal Tradition of the
Church, which therefore is the foundation on which your belief concerning the
Apostles and our Savior, depends; and consequently their infallibility is not
so certain to you, as the fallible Tradition of men. For, we must examine and
measure our knwledg of the words and works of the Apostles, and our Savior,
by Tradition, and not Tradition by them, because Tradition to you is a
Principle in nature, and precedent to our belief of Christ; the Apostles; and
Scripture, which depend on it as the streightness of the thing regulated, upon
the streightness of the Rule.

75. 6. Before we believe Scripture, in your way, there is no Principle but
Reason, placed between Motives (which you confess make it only probable, that
Scripture is the Word of God) and Arguments, which seem very strong and
convincing, that the Mysteries contained in Scripture, are contrary to the said
only Principle, Reason; besides the difficultyes, which to the same Reason
seem great and insuperable, in answering seeming contradictions of Scripture
to it self; which are so many, and so intricate, as certainly they will appear
to any judicious Man, unanswerable, without submission to some infallible
Authority, as a support for humane Reason against the strength of them; as
appears by the great pains taken by learned men, and the difference of ways
in satisfying such difficultyes; and finally by a true confession, that when
they have done their uttermost, the last and best refuge is to captivate their
understanding to the Obedience of Faith; and one thing is most certain and
evident, that Protestants reject diverse Books of Scripture receyved by
Catholics for Canonical, upon incomparably less seeming difficultyes, or
contradictions, and falsehoods, then are found in those Books of Scripture,
which both Catholics and Protestants admit: Now (say I) in this case, what
shall Reason do, being left to itself, without any Authority beside itself?
The Motives and humane Testimonies of your tradition produced in favor of
Christianity, are only probable, as you affirm; Arguments to the contrary,
seem convincing, and such as have been held for Principles, among the best
Philosophers, as I showed upon another occasion; and therefore Christian Religion
is accounted foolishness to the Gentiles; (and we treat of the time before one
is a Christian) who the^ will oblige such a Man, being in possession of his
Liberty, to accept under pain of damnation, an obligation positively to
believe, and to live according to the Rules of Christian Faith, only upon
fallible inducements, in opposition to so great seeming evidence to the
contrary?

76. Neither can you, in your grounds, say, that Miracles wrought in
confirmation of Christian Religion, ought to be prevalent against all seeming
evidence of reason. For, you teach, that true Miracles may be wrought to delude
men; for avoiding of which delusion, it may seem wisdom, and safest, to
stick close to the Principles of Reason, whereby though he may chance to be
deceyved, yet he cannot be accounted rash, imprudent, or inexcusable. 2. you
must suppose, that Miracles and all other Motives end in probability alone
(for, if they surpass probability, you grant Christian Faith to be infallible)
and then the difficulty still remaynes; how one can be obliged to embrace mere
probabilityes, and such, as you confess are not able to raise our mind to a
higher and more firm assent than they themselves are, against, and as I may
say, in despite of seeming evidence of Reason opposed only by such
probabilityes. 3. This Answer is not pertinent to our present Question, which
is not to treat, how far one may be obliged by Miracles, either evident by
sense, to those who see them wrought, or asserted and delivered, by an
authority, believed to be infallible, as we Catholics believe Gods church to
be: but we speak of Miracles, wrought in great distance of time and place from
us, commended and believed only by your fallible tradition, which therefore
leaves this doubt, whether one can be obliged to prefer fallible humane
tradition, confessedly insufficient to cause a certain assent, before seeming
evidence and certainty of natural Reason. And it seems easy to demonstrate
that Protestants, if they will be constant to their own assertions and
proceedings, must yield to that seeming evidence of Reason. For, it cannot be
denied without great obstinacy and impudency, that in all ages there have been
wrought frequent, great, and evident Miracles, by the professors of the
Catholic Religion; recorded by men, eminent for learning, wisdom, and
Sanctity, who would be credited in whatsoever case or cause of highest
concernment, and testified not by one, or a few, or many single persons, but by
whole Communityes, Cittyes, and Countries: by means of which Miracles,
Infidels have been, and are at this day converted from the worship of Idols,
to know the true God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ: and yet
notwithstanding all these Miracles, which are able to convert Pagans,
Protestants will not conceive themselves obliged to believe, that such Miracles
were wrought, or that those Articles of our Faith, in confirmation whereof they
were wrought, are true. And why? Because they seem contrary to natural
Reason; as the Real Presence, Transubstantiation etc: Seeing the^ they reject
Catholic Doctrines, confirmed by Miracles, in regard of that seeming
contrariety to Reason, how can they pretend Reason, to receive Scripture, and
the contents thereof; for example the Misteryes of the B. Trinity, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, the Creation of all things out of nothing, the
Resurrection of the Dead, and other such Articles which they make show to
believe, and are no less, yea much more seeming contrary to reason then those
doctrines of Catholics which they reject? Wherefore, our final Conclusion must
be, that to deny an infallible Authority both to propose Scripture and deliver
infallible Traditions, is to undermine and overthrow Christian Religion.

77. 7. Since Scripture may be corrupted, (as some have been lost) and in
particular Protestants affirm, even the Vulgate Translation, which anciently
was used in the Church, to be corrupted, as also the Greek and Hebrew, your
Tradition cannot secure us, what in particular is, or is not corruted, because
it delivers only as it were in gross, such or such Books, but cannot with
certainty inform us of all corruptions,, additions, varietyes, and
alterations, as occasion shall require. Thus, some, both Catholics and
Protestanis teach, that Additions have been made even to Pentateuch; others
assirme the same of the Books of Josue, Kings, and Hieremy; and the like
Additions might, and perhaps have been made to other Books, at least we cannot
be sure of the contrary, if we consult only your fallible Tradition; neither
can we know by it, that such Additions proceeded from the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. And as Protestants are wont to say, that a very great number of
Catholic Doctrines (which they untruly call errors) crept in by little and
little (as you also say Page: 91. N. 101.) so what certainty can they have, that
corruptions in Scriptures, yea whole Apocriphall Books, may not in time have
gained the repute of being Canonical? As for corruptions in Scripture, you
speak dangerously in saying (Page: 141. N. 27.) As for the infallibility of the
Church it is so far from being a proof of the Scriptures incorruption, that no
proof can be pretended for it, but incorrupted places of Scripture: which yet
are as subject to corruption as any other, and more likly to have been
corrupted (if it had been possible) then any other, and made to speak as they
do, for the advantage of those me^, whose ambition it has been a long time, to
bring all under their authority. And afterward: I would ask, how shall I be
assured, that the Scriptures are incorrupted in these pla^es (which arealledged
to prove the infallibility of the Church?) seeing it is possible, and not
altogether improbable, that these men, which desire to be thought infallible,
when they had the government of all things in their own hands, may have
altered them for their purpose. Do not these words give scope for the enemies
of Christian Religion, to object that we cannot be certain of any Text of
Scripture, whether or no it be incorrupted? For, as you say, it is not
altogether improbable, that we have altered some places for our purpose, of
proving the infallibility of the Church; so you may say, we have done the same
in other places to prove other Points of our belief: and the like may be said
of all others, who teach different Doctrines; that they will incline to corrupt
Scripture, in favor of their several Sects. Neither can we have any
certainty, whether this which may be done, has not been practiced, and so all
comes to be uncertain, unless we admit some infallible Living guide.

78. But here I must reflect how apt you are in every occasion to write
contradictoryes. You say of the places of Scripture, whereby we prove the in
fallibility of the Church, that they are as subject to corruption as any other,
and more likly to have been corrupted (if it had been possible) then any other,
and made to speak as they do, for the advantage of those men whose ambition it
has been a long time, to bring all under their authority. You say, that those
places are more likly to have been corrupted if it had been possible; which
signifyes, that it was not possible: and yet a few lines after, you affirm
that it is possible, and not altogether improbable, that we have done it. Is
the same thing not possible, and possible, or, not possible and yet not
improbable? Beside, you say, it is more likly those places which we alledg for
the infallibility of the Church, have been corrupted (if it had been possible)
than any other, and made to speak as they do for our advantage: Wherein you
confess that actually some places of Scripture speak for our advantage; and
then who are you, to controwle Gods Word, and speak against those, for whose
advantage it speaks? Morover you say, no proof can be pretended for the
infallibility of the Church, but incorrupted places of Scripture; where you
signify, that nothing can be proved, unless we know certainly what places be
incorrupted. Now I ask: whether it was possible for us to corrupt those places
which we bring to prove the infallibility of the Church, or it was not
possible? If it were not possible; then you wrong us, in saying, that it is
both possible, and not altogether improbable, that we have done it. If it be
possible then as I said, what certainty have you, that we have not done it,
seeing you say, it is both possible, and not improbable that we have done so? Or
what certainty can you have, that others have not done the like in other Texts
for defense of their several Doctrines?

79. Lastly. You still go upon a false ground; that we cannot prove the Church,
otherwise then by Scripture; whereas we must first prove Scripture, by the
Church.

80. 8. How uncertain your kind of Tradition is, appears by your own words,
which are such, as no enemy of Christian Religion could have uttered more to
the prejudice thereof, than you do (Page: 90. N. 101.) Where in the Person of a
member of the Protestant Church of England: you speak to Catholics in this
manner: You have wronged so exceedingly his (Christ's) Miracles and his
Doctrine, by forging so evidently so many false Miracles for the confirmation
of your new Doctrine; which might give us just occasion, had we no other
assurance of them but your Authority, to suspect the true ones. (what Authority
have you but that of the Roman Church and such as agreed with Her?) Who with
forging so many false Stories, and false Authors, have taken a fair way to
make the Faith of all Stories Questionable; if we had no other ground for our
belief of them but your Authority; who have brought in Doctrines plainly and
directly contrary to that which, you confess to be the word of Christ (o
portentuous untruth!) and which, for the most part, make either for the honor
or profit of the Teachers of them: which (if there were no difference between
the Christian and the Roman Church) would be very apt to make suspt^ious men
believe that Christian Religion was a humane invention, taught by some cunning
Impostors, only to make themselves rich and powerful; (I pray you, what good
Christians were there before Luther, except Roman Catholics, and such as
agreed with them? And therefore what difference can you put between good
Christians and Roman Catholics?) Who make a profession of corrupting all sorts
of Authors: a ready course to make it justly questionable whether any remay ne
uncorrupted. For if you take this Authority upon you, upon the six Ages last
past; how shall we know, that the Church of that time, did not usurp the same
Authority upon the Authors of the six last Ages before them; and so upwards
till we come to Chrict himself? Whose questioned Doctrines, none of them came
from the fountain of Apostolic Tradition, but have insinuated themselves into
the streams, by little and little, some in one Age, and some in another, some
more Anciently, some more lately, and some yet are Embryos, yet hatching, and
in the shell. Thus you; and then conclude; Seeing therefore the Roman Church is
so far from being a sufficient Foundation for our belief in Christ, that it is
in sundry regards a dangerous temptation against it; why should I not much
rather conclude, seeing we receive not the knowledge of Christ and Scriptures
from the Church of Rome, neither from her must we take his Doctrine, or the
Interpretation of Scripture.

81. Now let the Reader consider. 1. If the Roman Church, and all those
Churches which agreed with Her before Luther, that is, all true Churches of
Christ, be such a thing as he describes, what can they contribute to make up
any part of his universal Tradition? Yea she must needs make it suspected for
false, fallacious, fraudulent. And then what Tradition will remain creditable,
or even considerable? The Greek Church agreed, and at this day agrees with
Catholics against Protestants, as is manifest and confessed by learned
Protestants, for which cause they did directly refuse to join with Luther and
his Associates. The Muscovites, Armenians, Georgians, Aethiopians, or
Abissines, either hold the Doctrine of Eutyches, which even Protestants detest
as a damnable Heresy, or use Circumcision, or for the rest agree with the Greek
and Roman Church, and they can contribute little to your Tradition. I desire
the Reader to peruse Charity Maintained C 5. from N. 48. to 54. were he will
find clearly demonstrated what I have now said of the Greek, and other
Churches. Since then you blast the credit of the Roman Church, and such as
agreed with Her against Protestants, there will remain no Tradition at all.

82. 2. You say: That we by forging Miracles Might give just occasion, had you
no assurance of them but our Authority, to suspect the true ones, of Christ;
and by forging so many false stories, and false Authors, have taken a fair way
to make the faith of all Stories questionable, if you had no other ground for
your belief of them, but our Authority. This is your Assertion or Major
Proposition: to which if an enemy of Christian Religion will subsume, and add
this Minor which is evidently true: But you can have no assurance of Miracles,
and ground for belief of Stories, but by our Testimony or Tradition, as I have
clearly proved; What will be the Conclusion, but this; That there is just
occasion to suspect true Miracles of Christ, and Question all Stories? Behold
the effect of your Tradition! This I confirm out of what you say in your
Answer to the Direction, where having first set down your nynth Motive to be a
Catholic, in these words: Because the Protestant cause is now, and has been
from the beginning, mayntayned with gross falsifications, and calumnyes:
whereof their prime controversy Writers, are notoriously, and in high degree
guilty: Your answer is this (N. 43.) To the 9. Iliacos intra muros peccatur and
extra. Papists are more guilty of this fault then Protestants. Which though it
be very false, as it touches us, and not so much as offered to be proved by
you, yet it clearly destroys your own kind of Tradition. For if both
Protestants and Catholics be notoriously, and in high degree guilty of gross
falsifications in these times, why may not the same be said to Heretics in
former Ages according to your deduction from the six Ages last past, to the six
last Ages before them, and upward till we come to Christ himself? And so
neither Catholics, nor Protestants need now, corrupt Authors or Historyes, but
will find it done to their hands; unless your meaning be that Protestants
maintain their cause with more gross falsifications and Calumnyes, and are
more notoriously, and in a higher degree guilty thereof than any Heretics before
them. But why do I speak by Inferences, and argue by parity of reason? Since
you also expressly, directly, and immediately assirme what I inferred, while you
say to us: If you take this Authority upon you, upon the six Ages last; how
shall we know, that the Church of that time, did not usurp the same Authority
upon the Authors of the six last Ages before the^; and so upwards till we come
to Christ himself? In which words you say much more then I inferrd, that by
your reason we could not be sure but that as Protestants are, by your own
confession, notoriously guilty of gross falsifications in a high degree, so
former heretics have been. For you speak even of the Church, and ask, how
shall we know, that the Church of that time did not Usurp the same Authority
(of corrupting) upon the Authors of the last six Ages before them, and so
upwards till etc: And this will appear more easy to have been done in the
times nearest our Savior and the Apostles, when fewer Authors did write, in so
much as some Protestants affirm S. Justine to be the first whose Writings are
not spurious, and that helived Ao 140. And if the first writings and stories be
once corrupted, what certainty can we have of the rest? And then, Good Sr. If
we cannot know, but that the Church has done this, what is become of your
tradition, which, for ought you proofess to know, will deliver only fained
Authors, corrupted Stories, forged Miracles, Apocriphall Scriptures? But in
this lies a mystery not known to every one, unless he have some acquaintance
with Socinian Writers, who press Protestants with this Argument: If the Church
might err, and is believed by you to have erred in the Ages next precedent to
Luther, and so upwards from Age to Age, till the first six hundred years after
Christ, (which you say were pure) what certainty or solid Reason can you
alledg, why the Church might not also err in those years, since you do not
hold Her to have been Infallible? An Argument unanswerable by Protestants, who
there for must either admit the Church in all Ages to be infallible, or else can
have no certainty, that she did not err, or corrupt, or permitted the
corruption of Authors and Stories, and Scriptures, and forging of Miracles in
any Age far from, or near to the Apostles.

83. 3. If the motives of Honor and profit which you Object against the Roman
Church, Would be very apt to make suspicious men believe that Christian
Religion was a humane invention, taught by some cunning Impostors to make
themselves rich and powerful, if there were no difference between the
Christian and Roman Church: I beseech you, either inform us, what Christian
Church distinct from the Roman, or such as agreed with Her against Protestants,
was there before Luther, to wipe away this your cause of suspicion? Or else give
us leave to infer, that you grant there was indeed cause of that suspotion.
You say (Page: 14. N. 14.) I know no Protestants that hold it necessary to be
able to prove a perpetual visible Church distinct from yours. If this be not
necessary, it remaynes, either, that it is not necessary to free Christian
Religion, from being esteemed a humane invention taught by some cunning
Impostors, or that you are highly and even ridiculously injurious against the
Roman Church, as if she a one, though not distinct from the Protestant Church,
could give occasion of any such wicked suspicion: and finally that if still you
will say, there is any thing which would be apt to make suspicious men believe
that Christian Religion is a humane inve^tion, it must be the Christian church
herself, which is a blasphemy fit for such as you are, who reduce our belief of
Scripture and the assent of Christian Faith, to Probability, Opinion; and mere
humane Tradition, and such as being (according to your Principles) for ought
you know, corrupted, is no better than a humane invention.

84. 4. What you say of us, (Whose questioned Doctrines, none of them came from
the fountain of Apostolic Tradition, but have insinuated themselselves into
the streams, by little, and little, some in one Age, and some in another, some
more Anciently, and some more lately) makes, as I touched above, a fair way to
say the same of some Books, or parcells, or clauses of Scripture, and of any
Point of Christian Faith; which some insidel, or Heretic, or other enemy of
Christian Religion will say, came not from the fountain of Truth, but have
insinuated themselves, into the streams, by little, and little, etc: which being
once granted, as possible to happen, (and we are not sure but in fact that
happened, if we deny a Living watchful Guide, assisted infallibly by the
Direction of the Holy Ghost) Your Tradition will also loose all credit, as
being subject to the like danger of not coming from the fountain of Apostolic
Tradition, but of being corrupted, forged, and having insinuated itself by
little, and little etc: For if this may happen so easily to Authors, Historyes,
Tradition, and Doctrine, your Tradition being confessedly no other but humane
Historye, is manifestly subject to the same exception, and total uncertainty.

85. 5. You say of us: who make a profession of corrupting all sorts of
Authors: a ready course to make it justly questionable, whether any remain
incorrupted. I beseech you where, or when made we profession of corrupting all
sorts of Authors? Yourself know this to be a vast untruth. But if it were true,
and were a ready course to make it justly questionable whether any remain
incorrupted, it seems (by this your own saying) you cannot have your
Tradition from any sort of Authors, which may not be justly questioned, whether
or no they remain uncorrupted, And is not this a goodly Tradition to be the
ground of our belief of Scripture, and all Christian Religion? May not the
enemies of Christian Religion, triumph, and say we can alledg no Authors which
may not justly be questioned, whether they be not corrupted? Which in effect is
all one for erecting an Act of Faith, as if we were sure, they were corrupted.

86. 6. You say: Seeing the Roman church is so far from being a sufficient
foundation for our belief in Christ, that it is in sundry regards a dangerous
temptation against it; why should I not much rather Conclude: Seeing we receive
not the knowledge of Christ and Scriptures from the church of Rome, neither from
her must we take his Doctrine, or interpretation of Scripture? But still I must
ask, from what true Christian church could England, or any member of any
church in England, receive the Scripture and knowledge of Christ, except from
the Church of Rome, and such as agreed with Her? You confess it is not
necessary to prove any church distinct from ours before Luther, and yet you
will not deny, but it is necessary to receive the Scripture from some church,
seeing you profess to believe the Scripture (which you hold for a sufficient
foundation of your belief in Christ) upon the sole Authority of the church, and
therefore you must take the direct negative of your conclusion, and say: seeing we
receive the knowledge of Christ and Scriptures from the church of Rome, from her
we must take his Doctrine and the interpretation of Scripture. Having thus
pondered your sayings, and proved that they overthrow Christian Religion, we
may now go forward to impugn this your Tradition. And therefore

87. 9. We have showed, how uncertain and dangerous your Tradition must needs
be, by reason of corruption to which all writings have been subject, if your
Assertions were true. But besides this, I will demonstrate how insufficient
your Tradition must be of it self, and much more if you add the said danger of
corruption. (Page: 273. N. 56.) You alledg Charity Maintained saying (Part. 1.
Chap: 5. N. 17.) When Luther appeared, there were not two distinct visible
true Churches, one pure, the other corrupted. For, to feign this diversity of
two Churches, cannot stand with record of Historyes, which are silent of any
such matter; and then you reply, in these words: The ground of this is no way
certain, nor here sufficiently proved. For, whereas you say, Historyes are
silent of any such matter, I answer, there is no necessity, that you or I
should have redd all Historyes that may be extant of this matter, nor that all
should be extant that were written, much less extant uncorrupted: especially
considering your Church, which had lately all power in her hands, has been so
perniciously industrious, in corrupting the monuments of Antiquity that made
against her; nor that all records should remain which were written; nor that
all should be recorded which was done. Nothing could have been spoken more
effectually, to prove the necessity of a Living Judge; who being once upon good
and solid reason most certainly believed to be infallible, (as the Apostles
proved their own infallibility) takes away all doubt, or possibility of fear,
least the want, or corruption, or alteration, or contrariety of any writings,
or records, may weaken our Belief of whatsoever such an Authority proposes.
For, till one be settled in the strength of such an Authority, one may be
doubting of whatsoever fallible Tradition, whether there may not be extant some
Stories, Records, or Tradition, contrary to that which he follows, there being
no necessity that he should have redd all Stories, nor that all Historyes or
Records should be extant that were written; which if they had been extant, and
had come to his knowledge, perhaps might have moved him to relinquish the
Tradition, which now he embraces; nor that all should be recorded which was
done; and therefore he cannot tell whether something may not have been done,
repugnant to that which his Tradition induces him to believe; nor finally,
whether the Tradition on which he relyes, has not been corrupted, and therefore
sit only to lead him into, and keep him, in error. Which yet is further
confirmed by your words (Page: 266. N. 35.) Why may not you mistake in thinking
that in former Ages, in some country or other, there were not always some good
Christians, which did not so much as externally bow their knees to your Baal?
And then Sr: why may not you mistake, in thinking, that in former ages there
were not always some good Christians, who did not agree with those from whom
you take your Universal Tradition, which therefore will indeed cease to be
Universal? Do you not see how strongly you argue against yourself? And yet my
next Reason will affoard more in this kind.

88. 10. I take an Argument from what you deliver (Page: 130. N. 6.) where,
impugning some who as you say, Hold the Acceptance of the decrees of Counsels
by the Universal Church, to be the only way to decide Controversyes; You have
these words: What way of ending controversyes can this be, when either part
may pretend, that they are part of the Church, and they receive not the decree,
therefore the whole Church has not receyved it? I beseech you, apply your own
words thus: what way of ending Controversyes about the Canon of Scripture, can
this be, when either part may pretend, that they are part of the Church, and
they receive it not, therefore the whole Church has not receyved it? By this
doctrine of yours, those Heretics who (as you confess Page: 361. N 40. out of S.
Irenaeus) did accuse the Scriptures, as if they were not right, and came not
from good Authority, might have defended themselves, by saying, the whole
Church had not receyved them, because they themselves were part of the Church,
and did not receive them. According to this account, your universal Tradition
comes to be nothing; because whosoever dissent from the rest, will be ready to
say, that they also are part of the whole, and so no Tradition contrary to
them, can be universal; just as you say, that Luther and his fellows departed
not from the whole Church, because they did not depart from themselves, and
they were part of the Church. Also (Page: 362. N. 41.) You overthrow your own
Tradition, while you write thus: Though the constant and universal delivery of
any doctrine by the Apostolic Churches ever since the Apostles, be a very
great Argument of the truth of it. Yet there is no certainty but that truth,
even Divine truth, may through men's wickedness, be contracted from its
universality, and interrupted in its perpetuity; and so loose this Argument,
and yet not want others to justify and support itself. For it may be one of
those principles which God has written in all men's hearts, or a conclusion
evidently arising from them: It may be either contained in Scripture in express
terms, or deducible from it by appare^t consequence. But good Sr. seeing that
the Cano^ of Scripture, or what Books be Ca^onicall, is not one of those
principles, which God has written in men's hearts, nor a conclusion evidently
arising from them* nor is contained in Scripture in express terms, or
deducible from it by apparent consequence, it being your own Assertion (Page:
69. N. 46.) that it need not to be proved, that the Divinity of a writing
cannot be known from itself alone, but by some extrinsecall Authority; for no
wise man denies it; it follows, that according to your Principles it can be
known only by the constant and Universal delivery of all Churches ever since
the Apostles. Now, as you say, there is no certainty but that a Doctrine or
truth, even a Divine truth, constantly and universally delivered by the
Apostolic Churches, may through men's wickedness be contracted from its
universality and interrupted in its perpetuity; So also may the Canon, or
Books of Scripture (which can have no other argument to justify and support
them beside Tradition) run the some hazard by the wickednenss of me^, and so
come to loose universality and perpetuity, and so cannot justify and support
any Divine truth. And as true Books may come to loose, so false ones may, by
the wickedness of me^, come to gain authority, unless we be assured of the
contrary, by the belief of an infallible Guide, which can never admit of
Apocryphal, of false Scripture.

89. 11. I go forward to impugn your Tradition out of your own words (Page:
14. N. 14.) were you say: Though you say, that Christ has promised there shall
be a perpetual visible Church; Yet you yourselves do not pretend, that he
has promised there shallbe Historyes and Records always extant of the
professors of it in all ages: nor that he has any where enjoined us to read
those Histories that we may be able to show them. Out of these words I argue
thus: It is not sufficient for your universal Tradition of all Ages, that the
whole Church of this age, for example, accept a Book for Canonical, unless it
can be proved to have been receyved by all Churches of all ages, as (Page: 152.
N. 44.) You openly profess to dissent from S. Austine in this: that whatsoever
was practiced or ^eld by the universal Church of his time; must needs have
come from the Apostles; and therefore it is necessary for you to affirm, that
there always must be Historyes and records, which one Age is to receyve from
another, to prove that Scripture was delivered for the word of God by the
Apostles; But You do not pretend that God has promised that there shall be
Historyes or Records always extant; nor that he has any where enjoined us to
read these Historyes that we may be able to show them, and by them know the
true Books of Scripture. Therefore you must grant out of your own assertion,
that you have no sufficient means to know and rely upon your Tradition:
especially if we consider, that unlearned men cannot possibly know, whether
there be such sufficient ground, and Historyes, as are necessary to make it
Universal; and yet all sorts of people, must have necessary and sufficient
means for the knowledge of all things necessary to salvation: which means
Protestants affirm to be the Scripture alone. But with us the case is far
different, who believe a Perpetual Visible Church. For, we believing that
Church to be Infallible in one age, as well as in another, are not obliged to
seek after historyes or Records of times past (as you are for your humane
fallible Tradition,) in regard the Church being always existent and Visible,
is perpetually endued whith such Notes, Prerogatives, and Evident Signs, as
make her manifest in every age, and worthy of credit in matters belonging to
Religion; and among other Points, for this in particular, that herself must
always be Visible, as shall be declared herafter more at large; though it be
also true, that it may be evidently showed, for every age, by all kind of
Witnesses, as well friends as Adversaryes, that our Church has always had a
visible Being, and Prosessours of her Doctrine, with a perpetual Succession of
Pastors; and this so manifestly, that it can no more be denied, than that
there have been Christians ever since the time of the Apostles; yea or that
there have been Emperors, Kings, Writers, Wars, or such public things, as no
man can deny. But you (who ground. your belief of Scripture and all
Chaistianity upon a fallible Tradition, known by Humane Historyes and Records
of all ages) and every one of your sect, must either despair of salvation, or
else procure to be learned, and versed in all Historyes: though yet even this
will not preserve them from cause of despair, considering how insufficient
humane Tradition is of itself, as I have proved out of your own words; and to
the rest, I will add your saying (Page: 361. N. 40.) The Fathers did urge the
joint Trad (...) all the Apostelique Churcher, with one mouth and one voice,
teaching the same Doctrine, not at a demonstration, but only as a very
probable* Argument. If this be so; seeing your universal Tradition can, I hope,
be no better than the joint Tradition of all the Apostolic Churches, surely
you can Urge it only for a very probable, and no demonstratiue Argument:
especially, if we reflect, that you profess the whole universal Church before
Luthers time, to have fallen into many, great, and gross errors, even
concerning the Canon of Scripture, and consequently, that the first universal
Tradition, from the Apostles, came to be altered and corrupted; and that your
foresaid very probable Argument de facto has failed, if your Heresy were true,
that the whole Church has fallen into error.

90. 12. (Page: 149. N. 38.) You say: I must learn of the Church, or of some
part of the Church, or I cannot know any thing Fundamental or not
Fundamental. For how can I come to know, that there was such a Man as Christ,
that he taught such Doctrines, that he and his Apostles did such Miracles in
confirmation of it, that the Scripture is Gods Word, unless I be taught it? So
then the church is, though not a certain foundation and proof of my Faith, yet
a necessary introduction to it. I confess I have studied to find what sense you
can have in these words; and can find nothing but contradictions: and finally,
that your own Tradition cannot be a sufficient ground for our belief of
Scripture. You say, I must learn of the Church, or of some part of the Church,
or I cannot know any thing Fundamental, or not Fundamental: And in
particular, That Scripture is the Word of God. I aske^ what you mean by the
Church, or some part of the Church? Is your meaning, that the Tradition of some
part of the Church is sufficient to believe Scripture to be the Word of God?
Against this you profess every where, that the Scripture is to be receyved only
upon universal Tradition of all Churches, and Times from the Apostles. At
least, will you have it a necessary introduction to Faith? I do not see how you
can say this, seeing you profess to disallow S. Austines saying, as we have
seen a little before: That, Whatsoever was practiced or held by the universal
Church of his time, must needs have come from the Apostles: and how can that be
a necessary introduction to Faith, which either contaynes a falsehood, or is
confessedly subject to error, as de facto you Protestants proclaim, that the
whole Church before Luther was fallen into gross, and as you speak, damnable
errors: and you also say (Page: 148. N. 36.) An Authority subject to error can
be no firm or stable foundation of my belief in any thing: and if it were in
any thing, then this Authority being one and the same in all proposalls, I
should have the same reason to believe all, that I have to believe one, and
therefore must either do unreasonably, in believing any one thing, upon the
sole warrant of this Authority, or unreasonably in not believing all things
equally warranted by it: And therefore you expressly conclude in these words: we
believe Canonical Books not upon the Authority of the present Church, but upon
universal Tradition. But then, how is that true, which we have heard you say:
The Church is, though not a^ certain Foundation and proof of my Faith, yet a
necessary introduction to it? For, seeing Scripture is the certain foundation
and proof of your Faith, and that, you believe the Scripture (not for the
private spirit, or other criteria, as some Protestants do, nor upon the
Authority of the present Church, but) upon universal Tradition, it follows
evidently, that Universal Tradition of the Church is the certain Foundation
and proof of your Faith. And this you cannot deny, if you remember your own
Doctrine: That men may believe, and be saved without Scripture, but not without
the Church, according to your own saying: I must learn of the Church, or of
some part of the Church, or I cannot know any thing Fundamental, or not
Fundamental: and in particular that the Scripture is the Word of God. Therefore,
say I, the Church is a more necessary, not only introduction to Faith, but also
Foundation and proof of it, then Scripture can be: but if you will persist in
this your Assertion, that the Church as you take it for a fallible aggregation
of men, is not the Foundation of Faith, and that Scripture both in truth, and
according to your own Principles, must be receyved from the Church; what
remaynes, but that the Church must be infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost in
all matters belonging to Religion.

91. Lastly: to ptoue how easily men may be deceyved, unless they rely upon
some infallible Authority, may appear by what happened to myself, who some
years ago, falling upon a wicked Book, under a false name of Dominicus Lopez
Societatis Jesu, about the Authority of Scripture, and as printed in a
Catholic city; it came to my mind, that in time the Book might come to be
accepted for such as the title professes. My thoughts proved Prophetical. For
since that time, a Catholic learned Writer cites it for such; though upon
better information, he declares afterward, in the same Work, that the Book was
written by an Heretic, and printed among Heretics.

92. And here I will end this Chapter, having proved diverse ways, that
according to several Doctrines of yours, Scripture cannot be any Rule of
Faith, and much less a perfect one, although we should falsely suppose, that it
did contain evidently, and in particular, all Points necessary to be believed.
Wherefore it remaynes, that, seeing Scripture alone cannot be a sufficient and
total Rule of Faith, we declare, what that Means is: Which we will endeavor
to perform in the next Chapter.

CHAPTER IV. A LIVING INFALLIBLE IVDG IS NECESSARY FOR DECIDING CONTROVERSYES
IN MATTERS OF FAITH.
THE Premises set down in the precedent Chapters, did Virtually and
implicitly contain, and leave it easy for Us to infer explicitly and
expressly, as a conclusion, the Title of this Chapter. For, since Christian
Faith is the Gift of God, and infallible; since Scripture alone does not
evidently contain all necessary Points of Faith: since your particular way of
receiving Scripture as the word of God, cannot be sufficient to erect an Act of
infallible Faith, no nor can be any Rule of Faith, and much less a perfect
Rule; it follows necessarily, that there must always be extant a Living.
Uisible Judge; which can be no other, but the Church of God, against which, our
B. Savior promised, that the gates of Hell should not prevail. This Deduction
is so clear, that you are forced to acknowledge it (Page 326. N. 4.) Where you
affirm, That Catholics would feign have the Doctrine (of the infallibility of
Christian Faith) true, that there might be necessity of our Churches
infallibility. Seeing then, both Catholics and Protestants, and al Christians
firmly believe, Christian Faith to be infallible, and that this cannot be
defended without believing the infallibility of the church, it follows that we
must either acknowledge in Her such an infallibility, or tell Christians, that
for ought they know, all that they believe of God, of Christ, of Scripture, of
the Resurrection, of the Dead, of Heaven, of Hell, of all the Articles of
Christian Religion, may prove no better than a dream, or an imposture, or
fiction. Blessed be the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God, who destroys the
Wisdom of the Wise, and the prudence of the prudent (1. Cor. 1.19.) This Man
was picked out among all the men in England, to impugn the Roman Church: his
Book was approved by three chiefest men of an University, and was excessively
cried up by his friends, neither did any Writer ever show greater malice
against the Roman Church, than he. But with what success? No other but this:
That Protestants must either deny, with this man, all Certainty of Scripture,
and Christianity; or else acknowledge, not the Scripture, but the Church to be
Judge of Controversyes in matters concerning religion: that is, they must either
renounce Christianity, by denying the infallibility of Christian Faith, or
abandon Protestancy, by conde^ning their capital doctrine of the fallibility
of the Church, and sufficiency of Scripture alone; and so must return to
believe, and obey, the Decrees, and Definitions of General Counsels, and with
them condemn the Heresies which now themselves maintain. This then may be my
first Argument to prove the infallibility of Gods Church: and indeed this alone
might suffice with Christians: yet

2. 2. This Truth of the necessity of an infallible Judge appears also, by what
has been said about Translations, Additions, Detractions Corruptions, and loss
of some Scriptures, which would leave us in doubt and perplexity, unless we
believed an infallible Authority, able to supply all such defects, and provide
for all events.

3. 3. Out of Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 64. N. 19.) There must be some
Judge fit for all sorts of Persons, learned and unlearned, which the ignorant
may understand, and to whom the greatest Clerks must submit: Such is the
Church; and the Scripture is not such.

4. 4. To this Argument you answer (Page: 92. N. 104.) saying: The Scripture is
sufficiently perfect, and sufficiently intelligible in things necessary to all
that have understanding, whether they be learned or unlearned. And my reason
hereof is convincing and Demonstratiue, because nothing is necessary to be
believed, but what is plainly revealed.

5. This Answer is nothing to your purpose, unless you add. That nothing is
necessary to be believed, but what is plainly revealed in Scripture: and that
being added, it is a mere begging of the Question, taking that for a Proof,
which is the thing controverted between us so far is your Reason from being
convincing and demonstratiue! You should have used a direct contrary form of
Argument, and said: The Scripture is not clear in points of greatest moment,
even to the learned, (as experience teaches, and I proved hertofore at larg)
Therefore God has not failed to provide us of some Judge and rule intelligible to
all; which is his Visible Church on earth.

6. But say you, (Page 93. N. 106.) The Evangelists did not write only for the
learned, but for all men. And therefore, unless we will imagine the Holy Ghost
and them to have been wilfully wanting to their own desire and purpose, we
must conceive that they intended to speak plain, even to the capacity of the
simplest; at least, touching all things nec^ssary to be published by them, and
believed by us.

7. Answer. 1. In this whole Controversy: whether the Scripture alone be a Rule
of Faith without the Church, you go upon humane and topicall discourses,
whereas if all matters of Faith are to be tried by Scripture alone, your
Arguments should be taken from it alone. For, by humane Reason, we cannot be
assured of Gods voluntary Decree, whether or no he will have us regulated by
Scripture alone. 2. To make your discourses have any show of proof, you must
still beg the Question, and suppose that there is no means left for us to
learn matters of Faith, except the Scripture: and therefore you say, the Holy
Ghost and the Evangelists had been wilfully wanting to their own desire and
purpose, unless they had written to the capacity of the simplest, at least all
things necessary to be published by the^, and believed by us, which supposes
all things necessary must needs be written, and that no such point could be
delivered by the Church, though not expressed in Scripture: which is manifestly
false, seeing the Evangelists wrote, while the Apostles were alive, and could
deliver by word of mouth not only some, but all necessary or profitable
Articles of Faith, as Christians were taught for those years before which no
Scripture of the New Testament was written: and therefore I may turn the
Argument upon yourself, and say; At that time, there was no necessity, that the
Gospells should be written to all, yea or to any: and therefore supposing the
writing of them, you cannot suppose that they were plain, even to the capacity
of the simplest. If writing were so necessary for all, then enters your own
Argument against yourself: How the Holy Ghost, and the Evangelists were not
wanting to their duty, in differring so long to write; in so much as S. John's
Gospel was not written many years after our Saviors Ascension, that is,
about the year 99. which makes it clear, that writing was not so necessary. I
do not deny, but when they wrote, they wrote for all, but not as if all must of
themselves be able to understand them without the help of the Church (and in
this sense we may say, they rather wrote for all, than to all) otherwise all
must be obliged to learn to read, yea and to be learned, and be able to judge
of languages, translations etc. seeing from Scripture alone they must learn all
Points necessary to salvation. Do not you teach, that if one should believe all
the Mysteryes of Christian Religion, though he should not believe, but even
reject Scripture, yet he may be saved? Therefore much more one may be saved,
though he himself understand no Scripture, in case he have some other to
declare it: Yea even the most learned must finally not rely upon their own
abilityes, or evidence of Scripture, but upon the infallible Voice and
Interpretation of the Church, as we have proved. Not only the Gospells, but all
Scripture was written for all, that is, for the good of all, one way or other:
and yet I hope, you will not say it is necessary, that all must by themselves
understand all Scripture. Do you think in good earnest, that none is so
unlearned, as not to understand all the four Gospells? And yet you say, they
did not write only for the learned, but for all men. You will say: at least
they must be plain to all, touching all things necessary to be believed. Yes,
if first you take for true and granted, that which you know we deny: that all
things necessary are contained in Scripture alone, or that we can learn them
by no other means than by Scripture itself. And this your Limitation (at
least) insinuates, that you cannot affirm the Gospells to be clear in all
Points: and yet, as I said, and as you say, the Evangelists did not write only
for the learned, but for all men.

8. You say; This (writing the Gospells) was one especial means of the
preaching of the Gospel, which was commanded to be preached, not only to
learned men, but to all men.

9. Answer: Preaching and writing are different things, and we are not wont to
say, that men preach by writing, or write by preaching; yet if you mean only,
that writing the Scripture is one especial means for divulging or publishing
the Gospel, I grant it, and acknowledge an infinite obligation to God, for
having vouchsafed to inspire men for writing the Holy Scripture; but I deny,
that writing was a necessary means of preaching the Gospel; which the
Apostles themselves declared in fact, who instantly after the receiving of the
Holy Ghost, set themselves to preach, but not to write, and they who wrote,
were but few, and those few performed it, not as a thing necessary, or
enjoined, but only upon incident occasions: Therefore where you make this
Argument; writing was one especial means of the preaching of the Gospel; and
therefore must be plain, even to the capacity of the simplest; you should say
the contrary: Writing was no necessary means of the preaching the Gospel; and
therefore there is no necessity that it be plain to all. Yourself say (Page: 35.
N. 7.) Plain sense will teach every man, that the necessity of the means must
always be measured by, and can never exceed the necessity of the end. As if
eating be necessary, only that I may live, then certainly if I have no
necessity to live, I have no nece^sity to eat. If I have no need to be at
London, I have no need of a horse to carry me thither. If then, we may learn
all things necessary to salvation, without a writing or Scripture (as you grant
we may, and as all Christians must grant, for the time before Scripture was
written) we must say; therefore it is not necessary for that end; and though it
were necessary, yet it is not necessary that it be so plain, as every man may
understand it by himself, seeing that end of understanding, may be compassed by
another means, which is the Declaration of Gods Church. And here I beseech you
reflect on your own words (Page: 79. N. 68.) That it is altogether abhorrent
from the goodness of God, to suffer an ignorant Laymans soul to perish
meercly for being misled by an indiscernable false Translation, which yet was
commended to him by the Church, which (being of necessity to credit some in
this matter) he had Reason to rely upon either above all other, or as much as
any other. Therefore, say I, we are to believe, that the Church, on which we
must rely, ought to be infallible, that so we may trust her without danger.
For if her Authority be fallible, uncertain, and doubtful, (yea if de facto
she erred) she is liable to your censure (Page: 37. N. 20.) A doubtful and
Questionable Guide is for men's direction as good as non^ at all.

10. But here again (Page: 93. and Page: 94. N. 108.) (which is put to two.) You
object, how shall an unlearned man amongst us know which is the true Church;
or, what that Church has decreed; seeing the Church has not been so careful
in keeping of her Decrees, but that many are lost, and many corrupted; and that
even the learned among us are not agreed concerning diverse things, whether
they be de fide or not: Or how shall the unlearned be more capable of
understanding the sense of the Decrees of the Church, than of plain Texts of
Scripture; especially seeing the Decrees of diverse Popes and Counsels are
conceyved so obscurely, that the learned cannot agree about the sense of them,
and are all written in languages which the ignorant understand not; and therefore
must of necessity rely herein upon the uncertain and fallible Authority of
foam particular men, who inform them, that there is such a Decree. And if they
were translated into vulgar languages, why the Translators should not be as
fallible, as you say the Translatours of the Scripture are, who can possibly
imagine? And (N. 109.) you say; How shall an unlearned man, or indeed any man,
be assured of the certainty of any Decree, seeing a Council depends on a true
Pope, which, he cannot be, if he came in by Simony, or were not babtized,
(which depends on the due Intention of the Minister) or were not rightly
ordained Priest, and this again depends upon the Ordainers secret Intention,
and also upon his having the Episcopal Character?

11. This is the sum of what not only you, but other Protestants are wont to
object, and it is the utmost of your endeavors: But will be easily answered,
by laying this ground: That both in this, and other Points, we must
distinguish, between the certainty of a general ground, or foundation, and the
certainty of that particular means, by which we actuate, or apply to
particular occasions that General ground, which, unless it be first believed
with certainty, cannot have strength, to move us to undertake with resolution
and perseverance, mattters of great difficulty. You say (Page: 143. N. 30.)
There is not so much strength required in the Edisice, as in the Foundation:
And if but wise men have the ordering of the building, they will make it much a
sever thing, that the foundition shall not fail the building, then that the
building shall not fall from the Foundation.

12. This Truth will better be understood by Examples. That we may prudently
yield Obedience, Piety, and Observance, (and be obliged to do so) toward
Magistrates, Parents, and Superious, it is sufficient, that we have a moral
and prudent practical judgment, that they are such; because that judgment is
sufficient, to apply the general ground, that Obedience, Piety, etc: are due
to Magistrates, Parents etc: But if that General ground were not certain, as
an evident dictamen of Reason, but only probable, men would not think
themselves obliged to such duties, but rather would stand for their liberty, by
pleading possession, and following that other dictamen of Reason, Equity, and
Justice, Meliorest conditio possidentis. To Hope for the reward promised to the
just after this life it is sufficient, that we have good Reason, though not
certainty, that we are just, or in the state of Grace: But if this general
Principle, The just shall be eternally rewarded, were not certain, few I
fear, would be persuaded to prefer a future uncertainty, before that which
they enjoy certainly, and for the present. You say (Page: 172. N. 71.) The
Spirit of Truth may teach a man Truth, and yet he may fall into some error
even contrary to the truth which is taught him, if it be taught him only
sufficiently and not irresistibly: But if one were not certain of this
general ground, That God of his part, teaches every one sufficiently, men
would not easily think themselves obliged, or would be induced to use their
best endeavors to learn things, which they believe cannot be learned, unless
God alone teach them sufficiently, if they had no certainty, that they can hope
for any such teaching. And to come nearer to our purpose: If one do verily
believe some particular Point to be evidently contained in Scripture: who can
oblige him to believe that Point with absolute certainty, unless he first
believe Scripture itself to be the infallible word of God? Neither is this
enough to make his Assent really infallible (though it were supposed to be
casually true) unless Scripture were not only believed to be the word of God,
but that indeed it be so. For, Infallibility of Assent, signifyes two things:
the one that de facto the thing for the present is true: the other, that it
depends on such constant Causes or Priciples, as cannot in any possible case,
or occasion, consist with falsehood, or uncertainty, which could not be
verifyed, unless Scripture, in truth, and reality, and not only in opinion or
belief, be the word of God. For, though in some one occasion it might chance to
speak truth, yet in some other it might fail, and cause us to fall into some
error. But if we make another kind of supposition, That one is told by his
Pastor, or Prelate (whom he might prudently believe) that some Point is
contained in Scripture which indeed is so contained, and he believe it as
contained in that book which he believes to be the word of God, and in itself
is such, and consequently infallible; in that case, he of whom I spoke, may
exercise an infallible act of faith, though his immediate instructour or
proposer be not Infallible: because he believes upon a ground which both is
believed to be Infallible, and is such indeed; to wit, the word of God; who
therefore will not deny his supernatural concurse necessary to every true act of
Divine Faith: Otherwise, in the ordinary course, there would be left no means
for the Faith, and salvation of unlearned persons; from whom, God exacts no
more, than that they proceed prudently, according to the measure of their
several capacityes, and use such diligence, as men ought to use in a matter of
highest moment. All Christians of the primitive Church were not present when
the Apostles spoke, or wrote, yea it is not certain, that every one of those
thousands whom S. Peter converted, did hear every sentence he spoke, but might
believe some by relation of others who stood near.

13. Three things then, are necessary, and sufficient, for exercising an Act of
Faith: 1. That the ground itself be infallible. 2. That it exist in that case;
for example, that God have indeed revealed such a truth. 3. That he who
believes, proceed prudently. Now, to determine in particular, when one may be
judged to proceed prudently, depends on diverse circumstances, of Persons,
capacity, instruction etc. What I have exemplifyed in Scripture, may be applied
to Divine Revelation in general, which could not be the Formal Object, or
Motive of our Faith, if it colud bear witness to any least untruth; and yet we
may believe by an Act of true Faith, that which we only prudently believe that
God has revealed, if indeed he has revealed it. And so, the first ground
which I laid, is true; that the Foundation upon which we finally rely, must be
absolutely certain, whatsoever the particular means by which such Foundation,
or Principle is applied, may chance to be. This I say is true, speaking of
particular persons, cases, motives, and, as I may say, in actu exercito,
without, touching for the present other Questions.

14. This ground being premised, I demonstrate, That both learned and unlearned
Catholics, have a firm Foundation, upon which they build their Faith: and
that Protestants, whether they be learned or unlearned, have no such ground.

15. First: we have proved that Scripture does not contain all necessary
Points of Faith: and therefore for those necessary Points which are not to be
found in Scripture, they must either be ignorant of them, or err by denying
them, or else believe them upon the Authority of the Church, which they
expressly and obstinately hold to be fallible: and so we may apply against
them, your own words (Page: 148. N. 36.) where you expressly grant, that unless
the Church be Infallible in all things, we cannot rationally believe her for
her own sake, and upon her own word and Authority in any thing. For, an
Authority subject to error, can be no firm or stable Foundation of my belief
in any thing: and if it were in any thing, then this Authority being one and
the same in all proposalls, I should have the same reason to believe all, that
I have to believe one; and therefore must either do unreasonably, in believing
any one thing, upon the sole warrant of this Authority, or unreasonably in not
believing all things equally warranted by it. Out of which words it follows,
that you cannot believe any one Point of Faith for the Authority of the Church,
and that it were unreasonable in you to do so; and an unreasonable and
imprudent Act cannot be supernatural, or be pleasing to God, nor proceed from
the special motion of the Holy Ghost, as every Act of Divine Faith must do.
Therefore, since Protestants rely upon Scripture alone, which contaynes not all
necessary Points of Faith, the best learned amongst them must be destitute of
something necessary to salvation, and then what shall we say of the unlearned,
who depend on their teachers? But it is clear, that Catholics learned and
unlearned, who believe the infallibility of the church, may learn of Her, and
by tradition, or the unwritten word of God, what is not particularly contained
in his written word, or Scripture.

16. But here, as in diverse other occasions, I must unexpectedly, yet
necessarily, make some stay. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 3. N. 15. Page:
94.) has these words: If I doubt of any one parcel of Scripture, receyved for
such, I may doubt of all: and thence by the same parity I infer, That if we
did doubt of the Churches infallibility in some Points, we could not believe
Her in any one, and so not in propounding Canonical Books, or any other
Points Fundamental or not Fundamental. At these words you take exception
(Page: 148. N. 36.) and say; By this Reason your Proselyts knowing you are not
infallible in all things, must not, nor cannot believe you in any thing. Nay
you yourself must not believe yourself in any thing, because you know that you
are not infallible in all things. Indeed if you had said, we could not
rationally believe her for herowne sake, and upon her own word and Authority
in any thing, I should willingly grant the consequence. which you prove in the
next words (alleged by me above) For, an authority subject to error, can be
no firm or stable foundation of my belief in any thing etc:

17. Answer. You have no reason to cavil at the words of Charity Maintained,
which are very clear, and contain no more then what we have heard yourself
expressly teaching, That an Authority subject to error can be no firm
Foundation of my belief in, any thing. And therefore He said expressly, if we did
doubt of the Churches infallibility in some Points, we could not believe her in
any one. Where you see, he speaks of Infallibility, which is destroyed by any
one least error; and consequently cannot possibly be understood otherwise than
of believing the Church for her own infallibility, and Authority; and being so
understood, yourself profess willingly to grant the consequence, which is the
very same which Charity Maintained did infer; and even out of the very same
reason which you did give. Besides, he speaks expressly of Scripture and the
Church, in order to the proposing of Canonical Scripture, or believing other
Points of Faith, Fundamental or not Fundamental, which require a Proposer
universally infallible, as yourself grant. And so (to answer your Objection) no
body can believe me, nor I can believe my self, for my own authority, in
matters which require certainty and Infallibility, (as all Points of Faith do)
unless I were believed to be infallible in all things, for the same reason,
which we have heard yourself give; that an Authority subject ^o error can be
no firm Foundation of my belief in any thing But, you say, there is no
co^seque^ce in this Argument, (which you say is like to mine) the d^vell is not
infallible; therefore if he says, there is one God, I cannot believe him. No
Geometrician is infallible in all things, therefore not in the things which he
demonstrates. N. N. is not infallible in all things, therefore he may not
believe, that he wrote a Book, entitled Charity Maintained.

18. Answer. It is very true, that I cannot believe the Devil, with an
infallible Assent, for his own Authority, in saying, there is one God, unless
I believe him to be infallible. But if he prove what he says, by some evident
demonstration, I do not believe him for his Authority, but I yield Assent to
the demonstration proposed by him, for the evidence and certainty of the thing
itself, proved by such a demonstration; and so always infallibility in our
Assent, requires infallibility in the Ground or Motive thereof: As de facto the
Devil himself knows with an infallible internal Assent, yea, and as I may
say, feels to his cost, that there is a God; but whether you can believe him
with certainty, when exteriourly he vtters that, or any other Point, merely for
his Authority, is nothing to our purpose, though it seems, you can best diue
into his intentions, by what you say in your Answer to your Eight Motive, where
you say; The Devil might persuade Luther from the Mass, hoping by doing so to
keep him constan^ to it; or that others would make his disswasion from it, an
Argument for it, (as we see Papists do, you should add, and as yourself did
before you were a Papist) and be afraid of following Luther, as confessing
himself to have been persuaded by the Devil. This your strange answer to your
own Motive I do not confute in this occasion, it having been done already in a
little Treatise, entitled Heantomachta, or Mr. Chillingworth against himself;
and in an other called, Motives Maintained. Certainly you have not observed
that saying; We must not belly the Devil.

19. The same Answer I give to your example of a Geometritian, whom in those
things which he demonstrates, we do not believe for his Authority, but for
evidence of his demonstration, which is infallible; neither did the Author of
Charity Maintained believe for his own fallible Authority, that he has
written such a Book, but by evidence and infallibility offense. And here, you
should remember your own words, (Page: 325. N. 2.) Faith is not knowledge, no
more then three is four, but eminently contained in it, so that he that
knows, believes, and something more, but he that believes, many times does not
know; nay if he does barely and merely believe, he does never know. Therefore,
according to your own Doctrine, he who assents in virtue of some evident
demonstration, does know, and not believe for the Authority of another. And who
sees not, that if I believe a thing for some other reason, and not for the
Authority of him, who affirms it. I cannot be said to believe it for his
Authority, but I assent to it for that other reason: Yea if we consider the
matter well, when I know one affirms a thing, and yet do not believe it for
his Authority, but for some other Motive or reason, I may be said, of the two,
rather to disbelieue then believe him, at least I do not believe him at all
(for that Point) but either some other Person, or for some other Reason.
Wherefore You do but trifle when (Page: 138. N. 36.) You speak to Charity
Maintained in these words: You say we cannot believe (the Church) in
propounding Canonical Books, (if the Church be not universally infallible) if
you mean still (as you must do, unless you play the Sophister) not upon her
own Authority, I grant it: For we believe Canonical Books not upon the
Authority of the present Church, but upon universal Tradition. If you mean,
not at all, and that with reason, we cannot believe these Bockes to be
Canonical, which the Church proposes, I deny it. In these words, I say, you do
but trifle. For, you know that Charity Maintained did speak of believing the
Church upon her own Authority, which is so true, that you say he must mean so
unless he play the Sophister, and what then shall we think, you play, in
imputing to him such a sense, whereas you deny not, but that his words may be
taken in a good sense, as indeed they could not be taken otherwise. Beside, I
do not at all, believe the Church, when I chance to believe that which she
proposes, if I believe it, for some other reason, and not for her Authority;
and therefore it is a contradiction in you to say, I believe the Church at all,
when I believe for some other reason, as I have declared above. You say (Page:
35. N. 7.) I grant that the means to decide Controversyes in Faith and
Religion, must be endued with an universal infallibility in whatsoever it
propounds for a Divine Truth. For, if it may be false in any one thing of
this nature, in any one thing which God requires men to believe, we can yield
unto it but a wavering and fearful assent. Is not this the very same thing
which Charity Maintain said? If now, one should turn your own words against
yourself, and say; Indeed if you had said, we can yield unto it but a wavering
and fearful Assent in any thing for its own sake, I should willingly grant
your consequence; But if you mean, not at all, I deny it: Would you not say,
that he did* but cavil? Remember then; Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne
seceris. But let us go forward.

20. The second difference between learned and unlearned Catholics, and both
those kinds of Protestants, is this. You say (Page: 87 N. 94.) The Scripture is
not so much the words, as the sense. If therefore Protestants have no certain
Means or Rule to know the true sense of Scripture, to them it cannot be
Scripture, nor the infallible Word of God. But I have proved, that Protestants
have no such certain Means, or Rule: Therefore we must infer, that by
pretending to follow Scripture alone, they do not rely upon any certain
ground, and that Scripture to them cannot be an infallible Rule. And this being
true, even in respect of the learned, the Faith of the unlearned, who depend on
them, cannot possibly be resolved into any infallible ground; whereas the
unlearned amongst Catholics, believing their Pastors, who rely on the Church,
which both is, and is believed to be, infallible, their Faith comes to be
resolved into a ground really infallible. The like Argument may be taken from
Translations, Additions, Detractions, and Corruptions of Scripture, of which,
the learned Protestants can have no certainty, and much less the unlearned; and
so their Faith is not builded upon any stable Foundation, and consequently the
vncertaintyes which we object to you, touch the very general grounds of your
Faith, and not only the particular means by which they are applied to every
one.

21. 3. I appeal to the conscience of every impartial man, desirous to save
his soul, whether in Prudence, one ought not to prefer the Roman Church, and
those who agree with Her, before any company of Sectaryes; who disagreeing
among themselves, cannot all believe aright: and yet none of them is able to
satisfy, why their particular sect should be preferred before others, who
pretend Scripture alone, no less then they. Of which differences the unlearned
amongst them being not able to judge, they cannot prudently join themselves
rather to one than another Sect; as for the same reason they being not learned,
cannot prudently conceive themselves able to convince us out of Scripture, no
more than they can judge, what company of Sectaryes is to be preferred before
all other, seeing the learned Protestants cannot convince one another;
especially if we remember, that they assign for understanding the sense of
Scripture, many Requisites and Rules, which exceed the capacity of the
unlearned, who therefore must resolve either to be of no Religion at all, which
no man endued with the common light of reason, can resolve, or else must judge
that they may safely, and ought constantly to embrace the Catholic Roman
Religion: which if they do, their proceeding being prudent, God will not be
wanting to affoard them his supernatural concurrence for the production of an
Act of Faith, even though we should suppose that the particular immediate
reasons, which induce them to this resolution, be not of themselves certain
and infallible, but yet such as, all circumstances considered, are prudent, and
the best that occur in such an occasion. Beside; No Man of ordinary
discretion, knowledge, and prudence, though otherwise unlearned, can choose but
have heard, that the Roman Religion is very ancient, that diverse learned
Protestants think very well of it, and of those who die in that profession, yea
expressly grant, that diverse whom they believe to be Saints in Heaven, did live
and dye in our Religion: they see evidently, that we agree among ourselves;
that great Miracles have been wrought in our Church, with the happy success of
converting Infidells to Christian Religion: Whereas contrarily, for every one of
the said considerations, it is evident, that Protestants cannot chaleng them;
yea, they profess, that before Luther, the world was in darkness, and that
their reformation began with him; that we hold, no Heretic, whether
Protestant, or other, can be saved without repentance, and yet, as I said, that
the most learned among Protestants grant Us salvation; that they have no peace
among themselves, nor can ever hope for it: that they profess Miracles to have
ceased; that they do not so much as endeavor to convert Nations, and yet every
Christian believes, that Christ commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel to
Nations, for their conversion: these things, I say, and diverse other, are so
manifest, that the unlearned cannot be ignorant of them, and therefore no
Protestant can prudently adhere to any particular Sect.

22. You in particular, who teach, that Christian Faith is but probable, must
profess, that even learned Protestants have no infallible ground for their
Faith. For if they had such a ground, and did certainly know it to be such,
their Faith would be infallible, which you deny. But this head of uncertainty
does nothing at all touch Catholics, learned or unlearned, who unanimously
believe Christian Faith to be absolutely certain and infallible. Out of these
grounds I come now to answer your Objections.

23. You ask, (Page: 93. N. 108.) How shall an unlearned man ignorant of
Scripture, know watch of all the Societyes of Christians is indeed the Church?

24. Answer. This Demand must be answered by yourself, who profess to believe
the Scripture for the Authority of the Church, as for the chief ground of such
your belief: and other Protestants acknowledge the Church to be an inducement to
believe it. How then do you, and they, independently of Scripture, or before
they believe Scripture, know which of all the Societyes of Christians is indeed
the Church? The Church was before Scripture, and might still have continued
without Scripture: in which respect there cannot want evident Notes, to
distinguish between the true and false Church, even for the vn^^arned, if they
will apply themselves to cooperate with the occasions, and Grace which Goind
his Goodness never fails to offer.

25. But then, say you, (ibidem) seeing men may deceive and be deceyved, and
their words are not demonstrations, how shall he be assured that what they say,
is true* Answer, First the Notes and Marks of Gods Church are so patent, that
every one may evidently see them, upon condition that he be not negligent in an
affair of so great moment. 2. I have showed already, that the Means by which,
infallible grounds of Faith are applied to every one, need not be of themselves
infallible; as also I have declared the difference between unlearned Catholics
and Protestants, in this behalf. Now the true Church being once found, your
other Objections are of no force. For, that Church, infallibly directed by the
Holy Ghost, cannot fail to make Decrees, and conserve or renew, and
communicate them to faithful people, as need shall require. A thing not hard
to be done in the Catholic Church, professing obedience to one supreme Head,
the Vicar of Christ, and Successor to S. Peter, who by subordinate Prelates
and Pastors, can easily and effectually convey Decrees, Ordinations, and Laws
to all sorts of Persons.

26. You say (Page: 94. N. 108.) even the learned among us are not agreed
concerning diverse things, whether they be de fide, or not. But this can apport
no prejudice to the unlearned, yea nor to the learned, so that they all stand
prepared and resolved, to believe and obey what the Church shall determine;
which as I have often said, she will be sure to do, when it shall be necessary
for the good of souls; and to do it so as her voice shall be clearly heard,
and understood, by one, or more, decrees, and declarations? Thus we see
General Counsels have declared diverse Points of Faith, after they began to be
controverted by some, and found means to notify them to Catholics of all
sorts. I beseech you, what Christians after the ancient and sacred Council of
Nice, were ignorant that Arius, and is followers, your progenitors, were
condemned for denying our Savior Christ to be the Son of God, true God and
equal to his Father? Or what Catholic in these latter times is ignorant, that
Heretics hold, and have been condemnd for holding diverse Errors, contrary to
the belief and practice of the Catholic Church; as making the sign of the
Cross; The Real presence, and Adoration of our Savior Christ in the B.
Sacrament: the Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers to the Saints in Heaven, and for
the Souls in Purgatory; Worshipping of Images: Seven Sacraments: observing of
set feasts, and fasts: vow of Chastity for Persons in holy Orders, and
Religious men and women, and the like.

27. You urge (Page: 94. N. 108.) How shall an unlearned man be more capable of
understanding the sense of Decrees made by the Church, then of plain Texts of
Scripture? especially seeing the Decrees of diverse Popes and Counsels are
conceyved so obscurely that the learned cannot agree about the sense of them.
And then they are written all in such languages which the ignorant understand
not, and therefore must of necessity rely herin upon the uncertain and fallible
authority of some particular men who inform them that there is such a decree.
And if the decrees were translated into vulgar languages, why the translatours
should not be as fallyble as you say the translatours of scripture are, who can
possibly imagine?

28. Answer. Take away an infallible living Judge, and Tradition of the Church,
you will hardly find any Text of Scripture containing the sublime Mysteries of
Christian Faith, evident, even to the learned among you; as has been proved
hertofore, and appears by the experience of your great and irremediable
disagreements; and is manifest of itself, because you have no certain Rule
when the Scripture is to be taken in a litterall, figurative, moral etc:
sense: which difficulty ceases in the Decrees of the Church: both because it is
known upon what occasion, and against what Enours the Church makes ^her
Decrees (as all know upon what occasion, and against whom, the sacred Council
of Trent was gathered) and thereby it is easy to understand the decrees for the
Negative or affirmative part, at least for the substance, and the things
chiefly intended in them: or if any doubt should remain, the Church can
declare herself; which Scripture can never do. And although the Decrees of
Popes and Counsels, are not conceyved so obscurely as you would make men
falsely believe, yet all obscurity is easily cleared, by some further
declaration. As for languages in which they are written, it is Latin: a
language known not only to the learned but to many also whom we need not
reckon among the learned: and they who understand not Larine, will find so
great uniformity among all those who understand that Language, that they cannot
remain uncertain concerning the meaning of those Decrees, though they be not
translated into vulgar Languages; or if they were so translated either the
translations would be found totally to agree, or else it were easy to be
informed, which of them did mistake, seeing innumerable persons do perfectly
understand Latin: and Besides, as I said, it is evidently known upon what
occasion the Decrees were framed, and what was the scope of them, and what part
they condemned as false, or defined as true. But for Scripture: seeing you have
no certain Rule to know the sense thereof, and Translations of Protestants are
manifestly seen to be contrary one to another, the most learned among you can
have no certainty (yea, I dare say, that greater learning will occasion
greatest multiplicity of doubts and perplexityes, unless there be acknowledged
an infallible Living Judge) and much less can the vnleaned have certainty
sufficient to exercise a true Act of Divine Faith. More of this matter may be
seen in Charity Maintained (Part: 2. Chap: 5. N. 32.) in answer to an Objection
made by Potter, like to this of yours. To your saying: If the Decrees were
translated into vulgar Languages, why the Translators should not be as fallible
as you say the Translators of the Scripture are, who can possibly imagine? I
answer: There is a manifold difference between the Translations of Scripture,
and of the Ecclesiastical Decrees. For, every word of Scripture was inspired
by the Holy Ghost: One Text may have diverse literal senses intended by the
same Holy Spirit: We are ignorant what was the scope of Canonical Writers for
every particular Chapter, or Text: Every Reason given in holy Scripture, is a
matter of Faith: The style and Majesty thereof surpasses humane wit and manner
of writing: All which considerations make the Translations of Scripture, both
more difficult, and more dangerous, then those of Ecclesiastical Definitions
or Decrees, in which the fore said Reasons have not place, as appears by what
I said even now.

29. But you would prove (Page: 94. N. 109.) that no man can be certain of the
Churches Decrees; which must be confirmed by a true Pope. Now the Pope cannot
be true Pope if he came in by simony: Which whether he did or no, who can
answer me? He cannot be true Pope unless he were baptized, and baptized he was
not unless the Minister had due intention: So likewise he cannot be a true
Pope, unless he were rightly ordained Priest; and that again depends upon the
Ordainers secret intention, and also upon his having the Episcopal Character.
All which things, depend upon so many uncertain suppositions, that no humane
judgment can possibly be resolved in them. I conclude therefore, that not the
learned man amongst you all, no not the Pope himself, can according to the
grounds you go upon, have any certainty, that any Decree of any Council is
good and valid, and consequently, not any assurance that it is indeed the
Decree of a Council.

30. Answer: These very Objections Potter made, and are answered by Charity
Maintained; (Part: 2. Chap: 5. N 31.) but you take no notice thereof) That your
suppositions are never to be admitted; but we are sure, that whosoever in a
time free from Schism, is once accepted by the Church for a true Pope, is such
indeed. Yet if you will be making such untrue suppositions, that the Pope did
enter by Simony, or wanted Baptism, or true Ordination, God would never
permit him to define any thing in prejudice of the Church. Neither are the
occasions of Defining matters of Faith always urgent; as we see the Church for
the space of three hundred years after the Apostles, past without any General
Council. Yea if de facto any Pope define some truth to be a matter of Faith,
we are sure even by his doing so, that he is true Pope, it being impossible,
that God should permit his universal Church to be obliged to believe a
falsehood, or an uncertain thing, as all are obliged to believe the Definition
of one who is accepted for true Pope. See more of this, in the said place of
Charity Maintained.

31. But now, Good Sr. I beseech you reflect, that in being so eager against
us, you have degraded (or rather have denied) your Bishops, Priests, and the
whole Pretended mock-Hierarchy of the Protestant Church in England, which
hitherto has been ambitious, to prove the Ordination and Succession of your
Bishops, from the Roman Church, of which nevertheless you say, (Page: 77. N.
67.) He that shall put together, and maturely consider all the possible ways
of lapsing and nullifying a Priesthood in the Church of Rome, I believe will be
very inclinable to think, that it is an hundred to one; that amongst an
hundred seeming Priests, there is not one true one. Nay, that it is not a thing
very improbable, that amongst those many millions, which make up the R^man
Hierarchy, there are not twenty tr^^. If this be so; if the fountain be so
troubled, or rather none at all, what certainty can there be in the stream
which flowed from Rome to England? if of many millyons among us, there are not
twenty true Priests, (if we keep a proportion with England to the whole
world) there must not be among you one true Bishop, or Priest. And was not your
Book fitly approved expressly as conform to the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England? Neither can you answer, that your Arguments proceed only
against the ground we go on, that intention of the Minister is necessary to
the validity of Sacraments. For, if indeed it be not necessary, then you must
grant, that those vncertaintyes which you exaggerate against our Baptism,
Ordination etc: are but imaginary fears; as yourself say (Page: 358.) That some
men's persuasion that there is no such thing, as an indeleble Character, hinders
them not from having it, if there be any such thing, no more than a man's
persuasion that be has not taken Physic, or Poison, will make him not to have
taken it, if he has. (Though, by your leave, this instance of Physic etc: is
not convincing; because they who deny an indeleble Character, may perhaps out
of an obstinate love to their Heresy, and hatred against our Doctrine, resolve
and intend rather not to receive the Sacrament, than to admit any thought that
there is such a thing as a Character, which you call a creature of our own
making, a fancy of our o^ne Imagination, and then really they receive neither
Character, nor Sacrament) and so if intention be not necessary, the want of it,
cannot possibly make any Sacrament invalide. If it be necessary; you have
destroyed your own Hierarchy, while you impugn ours, upon this ground, that
we hold the intention of the Minister to be necessary. Nay, seeing not only all
Catholics, but some learned Protestants also, teach intention to be necessary,
at least, you cannot be sure that it is not so; and then again, you must
either renounce your own Objections, or undermine, and make doubtful your
Hierarchy: Which you must do also in another respect. For, though you take our
Catholic Doctrine about the necessity of intention, as one ground of
uncertainty, for the validity of our Sacraments; yet you mention other Points,
which are common to us and Protestants, as, that determinate Matter and Form
are essential to Sacraments; and your English Church in particular, in the
Administration of Baptism, expressly says: If they which bring the infants to
the Church, do make such uncertain answers to the Priests questions, as that
it cannot appear, that the child was baptized with water, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, (which are essential parts of
Baptism) then let the Priest baptize it in Form above written, concerning
Public Baptism etc: And (Page: 76. N. 64.) You say; To be certain that one is
a Priest, he must know, first, that he was baptized with due Matter; 2. With
the due Form of words (which he cannon know, unless he were both present and
attentive.) And (N. 65.) He must undertake to know, that the Bishop which
ordained him Prtest, ordained him completely with due Matter, and Form. And
(N. 60.) He must undertake to know; that the Bishop which made him Priest, was
a Priest himself. And (N. 67.) He must protend to know the same of him that
made him Priest, even until he comes to the very founta^ne of Priesthoed, For,
take any one in the whole train and Su cession of Ordainers, and supp^se him
by reason of any defect, only a supposed, and not a true Priest, then according
to your Doctrine (and according to the Doctrine of Protestants also, if the
defect fall upon the Matter or Form) he could not give a true, but only a
supposed Priesthood; and they that receyve it of him, and again, they that
derive it from them, can give no better than they receyved; receyving nothing
but a name and shadow, can give nothing but a name and shadow: and so from age
to age, from generation to generation, being equivocall Fathers beget only
equivocall Sons. Thus you. And it is Gods just judgment, that the certainty,
and validity of Protestants Ordinatio^s, and their whole Hierarchy of Bishops
should be made questionable, seeing they could endure the publishing of your
Book wherein the certainty of Christian Faith is denied.

31. But now, to say something by this occasion, concerning the Intention in
administration of Sacraments, whatsoever you are pleased to say, yet in true
judgment, there is less danger of any defect in that behalf, than in any other,
for example, of Matter or Form; which may be vitiated, both by the malice of
the Minister, and also against his will; whereas a due Intention is wholly in
his own power, and will, and, as I may say, costs him nothing; and we suppose
him to be a man, not a Devil, delighting in the damnation of Souls, without
any self interest: or if in your Charity you will suppose him to be so full of
malice, it is easy for him to vitiate the Form. For, seeing the validity of the
Sacrament, does not oblige him to speak with a voice, loud and audible to
others, he may pretend to speak the form secretly, and yet either say nothing
at all, and so omit the Form, or else say something else: or if he pronounce most
of the words audibly, he may with an vnder-voyce interpose some words, which
will destroy the Form, as if, for example, he say openly, I Baptize the, and
secretly put in this word (Not) in the Name of the Father etc: And this he may
be induced to do by your doctrine (that, Intention is not necessary and so,
the want of it will not invalidate the Sacrament) and therfo^ to be sure of
some defect to be committed in that which is essentially necesary even in the
opinion of Protestants, he will procure to corrupt the matter, o^ form, or
both.

32. Besides, as I began to say above, some chief learned Protestants, teach
the necessity of Intention in the Ministers of Sacraments. (Page: 326. N. 3.)
you style Mr. Hooker, a Protestant Divine of great Authority, and no way
singular in his opinions, and yet this very man, who, you say, is not singular
in his Opinions, in his sift Book of Ecclesiastical Policy, (Sect: 58.)
says: That in as much as Sacraments are Actions religious and mystical, which
nature they have not unless they proceed from a serious meaning: and what every
man's private mind is, as we cannot know, so neither are we bound to examine:
therefore always in these cases the known inof the Church generally does
suffice; and where the contrary is not manifest, we may presume that he which
outwardly does the work, has inwardly the purpose of the Church of God.
Consider, how this your Divine of great Authority affirms, that Sacraments
cannot be so much as religious and mystical actions (which are Attributes
essential to Sacraments) unless they proceed from a serious meaning; and that
this meaning has noe difficulty; seeing it suffices that one intend to exercise
that Action as Christians are wont to do; which intention; we may in a manner
say a man cannot choose but have. For, though he were a Pagan, yet if he
intended to do what Christians are wont to do in that particular action, it
were sufficient. Covell also in his defense of Hooker, teachers the same
Doctrine: and neither you, nor any Protestant in the world, can have any
ground, to think that it is possible to convince them of fall shood in this
matter: and therefore this uncertainty, which you impute to us, falls heavy upon
yourself, and other Protestants, if indeed they administer Sacraments without
such an intention as all Catholics and some chief Protestants believe to be
necessary.

33. Now as for the Doctrine itself of Catholics about the necessity of
Intention; it is so reasonable and clear, that it is strange, any can call it
in Question. For, I beseech you, if a madman, or a fool, ar a drunken man, or
an infant, or one in his sleep, should chance to cast water upon one, and
pronounce the Form, should such an one be baptized; or if he were baptized
already, were such an action of such persons, a rebaptizatio^? If one with
purpose, only to learn the manner of baptizing, did practice the pronouncing
the words, and applying the Matter, should that be true Baptism? If one by
chance reading, or disputing, or for some other end, should pronounce the words
of Consecration out of Scripture, and that without his knowledge there should
chance to be bread and wine with in a moral distance, should he consecrate the
Eucharist? Or, are men obliged never to pronounce those words in such occasions
as I specifyed least they consecrate whether they will, or no^ Are not these
foolish absurdityes? If you say (and it is all that can be imagined you can
say) that at least he who pronounces the words, must exercise a deliberate,
humane, moral, free Action, which madmen, infants etc. nor even men in their
wits, cannot exercise, when they are ignorant of the moral presence of the
matter that is to be consecrated: but that it is not necessary, besides the
substance of a moral Action, to intend also to administer a Sacrament: I
answer; first, This answer evacuates the ground of Heretics, who say, That
intention is not necessary, because the words receive force only from the Will
and Institution of God, and therefore must not depend upon the morality of that
Action, which morality depends upon the intention of him that pronounces the
words: to wit that he intend to do it seriously, and not in jest, or by way
only of pronouncing the material words without their signification: and so the
salvation of souls must depend upon a secret intention, of which we cannot be
sure, as men exercise many indeliberate actions without any virtuall or actual
inte^tion. If for the validity of a Sacrament, it be sufficient to exercise a
deliberate action without any further reference or Intention, one could not
without a deadly sin, wash an infant already baptized, and for devotion say, I
wash the in the name of the Father, etc: as me^ are wo^t to say, I do this in
Gods name; because according to this answer, it would be repabtization. 2. I
answer: if one be supposed to intend the performance of the Sacramental action
for the substance, no reason can be imagined, why he should not inte^d to do
as others do in such an action, for example, if the child be brought to be
Christened, and the Minister deliberately apply water, and pronounce the Form,
either can be no cause which can move him at least not to intend that which
there are wont to do in the like case: and to think the contrary may easily or
almost possibly happen, argues only in you an excessive desire to impugn, by
whatsoever arguments, our Catholic Doctrine.

34. And here I must of necessity make a diversion rather than a digression,
and answer some Points, to which you referr yourself in this (Page: 94. N. 109.)
in these words: All which things, as I have formally proved, de^end upon so
many vn^ertaine suppositions, that no human judgment can possibly be resolved
in them. For, although what you pretend to have been formally proved, has been
in effect answered already; yet I thought sit to examine every point in
particular, that so the Foundation of your assertions in this place, being
overthrown, all the superstructions which you and other Protestants are wont
to make, may evidently appear false and ruinous, and so fall to the ground.

35. Cha: Ma: (Part. 1. Chap: 2. N. 16.) having showed out of Brierly, (Tract:
1. Sect: 10. subd: 4.) joined with (Tract. 2. Chap: 2. Sect: 10. Subd: 2.) That
the Translations of Scripture, made by Luther, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, and
the Divines of Basil, Cast^lio, Calvin, Beza, and Geneva Bibles, as also the
English Translation, are mutually condemned by Protestants themselves
(respective) as corrupting the Word of God (and the Authors, as Antichrists and
deceivers) Wicked, and altogether differing from the mind of the Holy Ghost,
sacrilegious, Ethnicall, making the Text of the Gospel to leap up and down,
using violence to the letter of the Gospel, adding to the Text, changing the
Text, deserving either to be purged from those manifold errors which are both
in the Text, and in the margent, or else utterly to be prohibited; in the
Translation of the Psalms, in addition, substraction, and alteration,
differing from the Truth of the Hebrew in two hundred places at the least, and
such, as is doubtful whether a man with a safe conscience may subscribe
thereto, depraving the sense, obscuring the truth, deceiving the ignorant, in
many places detorting the Scripture from the right sense, (and that the
Translators show themselves to love darkness more than light, falsehood more
than truth) taking away from the Text, adding to the Text, to the changing, or
obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost etc. This I say Charity Maintained
having showed, adds these words: Let Protestants consider duly these Points:
Salvation cannot be hoped for without the true Faith: Faith according to them,
relyes upon Scripture alone: Scripture must be delivered to most of them by
Translations: Translations depend on the skill and honesty of men, in whom
nothing is more certain, then a most certain possibility to err, and no
greater evidency of truth, than that it is evident some of the^ embrace
falsehood, by reason of their contrary Translations. What then remains, but
that truth, Faith, Salvation, and all, must in them rely upon a fallible and
uncertain ground? How many poor souls are lamentably seduced, while from
preaching Ministers, they admire a multitude of Texts of Divine Scripture, but
are indeed the false translations, and corruptions of erring men? Let them
therefore, if they will be assured, of true Scriptures, fly to the always
visible Church, against which the gates of Hell can never so far prevail, as
that she shall be permitted to deceive the Christian world with false
Scriptures.

87. Against these words (Page: 76. N. 63.) you speak in this manner: This
Objection, though it may seem to do you great service for the present; yet I
fear, you will repent the time that ever you urged it against us as a fault,
that we make men's salvation depend upon vncertaintyes. For the Objection
returns upon you many ways.

38. Answer. I assure you, Charity Maintained has never felt, nor ever will
feel, any such repentance, as you mention, having never been taught to repent
him self of a good deed, as it seems, you confess, his to have been, while you
say to him: I fear you will repent the time. Do you fear He will repent? the
Object of fear is some apprehended evil; and therefore your fear that He will
repent, must imply that it were ill done of him to repent, and consequently
that he must persist in what he wrote; and so He may well do, for any thing you
bring to the contrary; all your Objections being already answered, by the
Ground which I laid, That more certainty and strength is required in the
general Principles of Faith, than in that particular means, or Act, whereby
such Principles are applied in Practice to the Person of every one; as for
example, we are certain by Revelation certitudine Fidei, that he who persevers
unto the end shall be saved: but that every particular person does perform on
his part, what is requisite to persever, we have no revelation nor absolute
certainty, God having so disposed, that we ought to work our salvation with
fear and trembling. The further reason whereof may be; because if the general
Grounds or Means appointed by God, were in themselves fallible and uncertain:
this want would be ascribed to God himself, as if he had not given us
sufficient Means for our salvation; but for the particular application made by
free Acts of men, or by Means of second causes, all the defect is imputed to
them alone, and in no wise to God, who on his part has provided Means
certain and sufficient, as will appear herafter, by answering all the
particulars which you alledg whereby it will be found, that no uncertainty can
be derived from the general Principles or Grounds of our Faith, (as it must
proceed from the very Grounds of Protestants) but only from the fallibility,
infirmity, or fault of men in particular cases.

39. To this Ground, I add this other brief consideration; That it is one
thing to treat, whether or no, a Sacrament be valid; and an other; whether the
defect of an invalid Sacrament. may be supplied by some other Means: For
example, Intention of the Ministers is universally necessary to the validity of
a Sacrament (in the sense I have declared) but whether, or when, or to whom,
Sacraments be so necessary, that they cannot be supplied by other Means, must
be resolved, by descending to particular cases, as will appear after a while,
and will show the weakness of the Objections which you extend to no fewer
numbers or Sections than the 63.64.65.66.67.68.69.70.72.73.74.) And yet all are
the same which we have touched, and answered already; as that we cannot be sure
that he who absolves the Penitent, or consecrates the Eucharist, is a true
Priest: because we cannot know that he or any other was baptized with due
Matter, Form, and Intention, and for the like reasons, we are not certain,
that the Bishop who ordained him, was a true Bishop. But, as I said, these
vncertaintyes neither are, nor can be, so great as you make them, nor do they
touch the Principles of our Faith, but are as it were matters of Fact, and
concern only the application of those general Grounds to particular
occasions, for which we have no Revelation, or certainty of Faith, which
assures us only, that there shall be always in Gods Church a succession of
Bishopes and Priests; and this is enough to show that your Objections are but
exaggerations, and panick fears, as if of many millions, not twenty should be
true Prists: which in effect is to say, that God has no Providence over his
Church, but leaves all things to chance, or the weakness and possible malice of
men. You teach, that we cannot be certain of the Decrees of Counsels, because
we are not certain that the Pope who must confirm them is true Pope: you
should say the contrary; There have been true general Counsels: Therefore they
who celebrated them were true Bishops, and the Pope who confirmed them was true
Pope. Thus also we are sure true Priests have Power to absolve repentent
sinners, and true Bishops, to or dayne Priests: but not that this or that in
particular is a true Priest or Bishop, or that every particular Penitent has
true sorrow: Otherwise every one must be sure that he is in state of grace, and
salvation, making no distinction between the virtue of Hope and Faith, but must
with absolute certainty believe, and not only hope that his sins are forgiven.
And therefore Charity Maintained did not object against Protestants (who believe
Christian Faith to be absolutely infallible, and with whom He had to do, and
not with such as you are) whatsoever uncertainty, but said expressly, that
their Faith did rely upon an uncertain Ground, and therefore could not be
infallible. And it is strange that you (N. 68.) should speak to us, in this
manner: I hope you will preach no more against others for making men's salvation
depend upon fallible and uncertain Grounds, least by judging others, you make
your selves and your own Church inexcusable, who are strangly guilty of this
fault, above all the men and Churches of the world: I say it is strange this
should be objected by you (that we make men's salvation depend upon uncertain
Grounds) who profess that no Article of Christian Faith is to us certainly
true, and therefore though one were certain, that he did use all means
prescribed by Christian Religion for attaining salvation, yet he might miss
thereof; which is plain blasphemy, putting our want of salvation, not upon any
defect in men, but upon the uncertainty of Christian Religion, and of the
Grounds which Allmighty God has provided for the belief thereof. You say indeed
(N. 70.) that we believe the Church to be infallible, only upon prudentiall
Motives; but this we utterly deny. For we believe this Point for the same
Reason for which we believe other Articles of Christian Faith, which I have
proved, (Chap: 1.) to rely upon most infallible Grounds.

40. In your (N. 71.72.) you object no more than what I have answered more than
once; That, although particular men may be moved to accept Christian belief,
for some immediate reason or Motive not infallible of it self, yet still their
Faith may be resolved into an infallible Ground, which is Divine Revelation
proposed by the Church of God, certainly acknowledged to be infallible, as I
have showed; and that no particular Translations can prejudice us, who submit
to the Church which God will never permit to be deceyved by them.

41. For the vulgate Translation of which you speak (N. 74.75.76.77.78.79.) I
need say for the present only this; That it being approved in the sacred
Council of Trent, we are sure, that it cannot contain any least Point against
Faith or good manners: And if by the fault of the Printers, or by any other
means, any error should chance to creep into it, the Church can never make
use of that error: And therefore, to treat here at large of this particular
Translation. would be a labor both fruitless, and needless, diverse Catholic
Divines having learnedly done it, and every one may go to Bellarmin (de Uerbo
Dei. Lib: 2. Cap: 9.10.11.12.13.14.) where he answers all the Objections of
Heretics.

42. To exaggerate the uncertainty of Baptism, and consequently of Absolution,
(N. 64.) you will needs suppose, that A sew, a More, an Atheist, or an Arian,
or any that believes not the Doctrine of the Trinity, are not capable of having
due intention for administering Baptism; which yet is very untrue. For such men
as these, notwithstanding their particular Errors, may seriously intend to do,
as much as they can, and as Christians are wont to do; in which case, if they
observe the true Matter and Form, their Errors have no influence into their
intention, but are wared and laid aside as if they were not at all. For, in
effect their intention is this: If Christian Religion be true, or if this
Action of Baptizing be of any valve, I for my part intend to make of it the
most and best I can. Now this condition being true, and subsisting, it
follows, that that Action will be a true baptizing. This me thinks you should
not deny, who were known to be an Anti-trinitarian, and Arian; and yet I
conceyve you would be loath that Catholics or Protestants, should believe, that
if you baptized any, the Baptism was invalid, and of necessity to be repeated.
The like I say of Absolution, which may be valid though the Priest be in his
mind an Heretic, upon such conditions, as I expressed concerning the
Administration of Baptism. You say (N. 66.) that our Rule is, Nihil dat quod
non habet: which is true in some cases; but we have no such general Rule. A
Catechume, for example, or any other may validly Baptize, though himself be not
Baptized. And no wonder: seeing the Minister is but the instrument of Allmighty
God; and it is not required that an instrument have in it self, all the
perfections, conditions, or qualityes, which are communicated to the effect,
although in our present case the Minister immediately only applies the Matter
and form, and makes his intention, all which is in his power to do, though
be not Baptized.

43. You say (N. 68.) That according to our Principles, When we have done as
much, as God requires for our salvation, yet can we by no means be secure, but
that we may have the ill luck to be damned; which is to make salvation a matter
of chance, and which a man may fail of, not only by an ill life, but by ill
fortune.

44. This I have answered already; that, to be secure is a happyness of the
next, not of this world, where he who pretends to be secure is in most danger
not to be safe. And besides, I must apply here, what I noted above; That, it is
one thing, whether or no, a Sacrament be valid, and another, whether the defect
of that invalidity may be supplied by some other Means. If the nullity be of a
Sacrament, the effect whereof is not necessary to salvation, it is clear, that
one may be saved though the Sacrament be invalid. The difficulty is in those
Sacraments, which, as Divines speak, are necessary necessitate medij, being
ordained to conferr the first justifying Grace, and forgive deadly sin,
incompatible with Grace. Of this condition are the Sacraments of Penance, and
Baptism.

45. As for the Sacrament of Penance; the Doctrine of Catholics is not
subject to cast men upon perplexityes, as you pretend, nor to make salvation a
matter of chance, which a man may fail of, not only by an ill life, but by ill
fortune. For we teach, that sin alone is the cause of damnation, and neither
ill fortune, nor any thing else. If one in state of deadly sin, were taken out
of this world by a sudden death, or fall out of his wits, so unexpectedly,
that he could not repent, he shall be damned, not for any new sin committed by
omitting to repent, which was not in his power to do in those circumstances;
but for his former sins, committed and never forgiven, because never repented:
as if one having committed a robery, endeavor to fly, but fail of his
purpose, he shall be executed for his robery, not for failing to escape, though
he had not been executed, if he had not been taken in his endeavor to escape.
And therefore you say very untruly, that according to our Principles, when we
have done as much as God requires for our salvation, yet we may have the all
luck to be damned. For according to our Principles and belief, God requires for
our salvation that we do not sin, but that we keep his commandments, which,
by the assistance of his Grace, all may observe; and if we do so, we are very
secure.

46. But you will say, if one have sinned, and afterward do as much as God
requires of him for his salvation, he may have the ill luck to be damned.
Answer. God has provided Means sufficient on his part, and if by accident, or
malice of men, they have not their effect, that defect cannot be imputed to
God, nor shall ever any man be damned except for sin alone. This yourself must
grant. For you believe, or pretend to believe, that there are some Points of
Faith so Fundamental, and indispensably necessary to be believed, that they
are, as you say, minimum vt sic, without which none can hope for salvation.
Suppose then, some Pastor or other, upon whom an unlearned man might prudently
rely, and had no better means to inform himself, should malitiouslly teach
him an error in those Fundamental Articles, or else say they were not
necessary, and that the unlearned person believed his Pastor: I ask, what
would you say in this case? Can this poor man be saved without that Faith
which is indispensably necessary to Salvation? To say, he can, were to speak
plain contradictoryes, that such a Faith were, and were not necessary: if he
be damned, will you infer, that when one has done as much as God requires,
for his salvation, yet he is not secure, but may have the ill luck to be
damned, which, say you, is to make salvation a matter of chance, and which a
man may fail of, not only by an ill life, but by ill fortune. If you answer,
That he is damned, not for ignorance or error caused by the malice of an
other, but for his own sins, and that God had provided means, sufficient in
themselves; you make good what I said, and must Answer your own chief
Objection against us: Or if you answer further; That if he who failed in not
believing all Fundamental Points, had in his former life and Actions
cooperated with Gods Grace, His Divine Goodness would not have fayld, one way,
or other, to give him Direction and light, without permitting him to be
deceyved in a matter necessary to salvation. Facienti quod in se est, Deus non
denegat gratiam. God will not be wanting to second his own Graces, with
perpetual addition of more, and greater, if we be not wanting to them, and our
selves: Which if we be, we cannot be said to have done as much as God requires
of us. Deus non deest in necessarijs; and we speak in a case of necessity. If,
I say, you give this Answer, you answer for us, who can easily transferr the
example from one deceyved by a malicious Pastor or Teacher, to another
defrauded of absolution by a wicked, or a feigned Priest; that if the Penitent
had kept close to Gods Inspirations, he would not have been permitted to fall
upon such a Priest, or else his soul would have been raised to contrition,
whereby all deadly sins are forgiven.

47. This Instance which I have urged out if your own Assertion, that there
are some Points indispensably necessary to salvation, is declared by Potter
(Page: 243.) who speaks thus of Fundamental Points: these are so absolutely
necessary to all Christians, for attayning the end of our Faith, that is, the
salvation of our souls, that a Christian may loose himself, not only by a
positive erring in them, or denying of them; but by a pure ignorance or
nescience, or not knowing of them. And to this purpose among other he cites
Dominic: Bannez (in 2.2. Quest: 2. Art: 8.) saying; Invincible ignorance cannot
here excuse from everlasting death, though we want them without any fault of
ours, or although it were not in our power to attain the knowledge of them:
even as if there were one only remedy whereby a sick man could be recovered from
corporal death: suppose the Patient and the Physician both were ignorant of
it, the man must perish, as well not knowing it, as if being brought unto him,
he had refused it. Which words declare, how one may be damned, by occasion of
inculpable Ignorance, though, not for it, but for his sins committed, and not
pardoned. The like example may be given, of one inculpably ledd into an error
concerning Repentance, which no man denies to be necessary for remission of
deadly sins; as, if he were taught, that no Repentance were necessary; or
that it did require no kind of sorrow, for what is past, but only a purpose to
amend for time to come; or that it were sufficient to conceyve sorrow only for
some humane motive, or some temporal shame, pain, or loss, or the like, which
is but tristitia saeculi, and makes one rather a greater sinner, than a true
Penitent; Or else, That Attrition alone is sufficient without Absolution; (which
is your pernicious error) or, That it is sufficient to have sorrow for one, or
a few deadly sins, though it extend not itself effectually to all: Or, That
Faith alone without precedent Repentance, is sufficient, or the like. For, as
one may be taught an Error in other Points, so also in this of Repentance.
Now, of men in these cases, I make the same Demand which, I made above; whether
they can be saved without sufficient Repentance? And it being clear that they
cannot, and yet are supposed to have been misled without any fault of theirs,
your Objection turns upon yourself; how, when you have done as much as God
requires for your salvation, yet can you by no means be secure, which is to
make salvation a matter of chance. etc: What I have specifyed in the belief of
Fundamental Points, and repentance, may easily be applied to other Points of
practice, necessary for salvation.

48. Besides: Many Divines teach, That Contrition is necessary in Diverse
Occasions, whereby all his sins will be forgiven, whatsoever his Sacramental
Absolution chance to be. Some say, Contrition obliges as often as deadly sins
are presented to our mind vt practice detestanda. Some, that it obliges upon
festival days, because we cannot spend the day in God Allmightyes service,
unless first we be contrite for our sins; Others teach, That it obliges in
occasion of some public necessity, which we have reason to fear is inflicted
for a punishment of our sins. Others; as often as we are to begin some
heroical work, upon which the public weal, or profit of the people depends;
because the forcible and powerful help of God is wont to be denied to
sinners. Others, and those, men of great learning, hold. That at least all are
obliged to Contrition at the true, or believed, hour of death, or in moral
danger of death, (as in war, or a long and dangerous voyage by sea,) because
a moral danger of death is equivalent to the last hour of death and this they
understand even though one confess Sacramentally, and much more if he want a
Confessarius. Besides, all are bound to Contrition, either when they administer
Sacraments, or receive those Sacraments, which are called Sacramenta Vivorum,
if they be guilty of some deadly sin, not confessed. Vide Amicum (To: 8.
Disp: 9. Sec: 3. and 4.) I abstain from examining difference of Opinions. This
is certain, that all Catholics are taught oftentimes to move themselves to
contrition, and all of timorous consciences and good life endeavor to do it;
and every body, at least at the hour of death; at which time Charitas propria,
or Charity toward ones self, for the salvation of his soul, will as it were
naturally, and effectually incline them to it, with the assistance of Gods
Grace, which is never wanting, and so neither the want, nor wickedness of any
Priest can hurt them. Remember what yourself say (Page 277. N. 61.) that
according to Potter, God has promised to the Church an absolute assistance,
for things necessary, and then you add; a farther assistance is conditionally
promised us, even such an assistance as shall lead us, if we be not wanting to
it and our selves, into all, not only necessary, but very profitable truth.
For, Gods assistance is always ready to promote her farther. It is ready, I
say, but on condition the Church does implore it: on condition, that when it is
offered in the Divine directions of Scripture and reason, the Church be not
negligent to follow it. Why do you not apply this to our present Question, and
say; Gods assistance is always ready to promote us farther, (from attrition to
Contrition) upon condition we do implore it and be not wanting to it and our
selves: and that when it is offered in divine directions of Christian Faith
(taeching, that no care, or even solicitude, can be too great in securing the
eternal salvation of our souls) we be not negligent to follow such
directions. Will you say; God is more ready to direct our understanding for the
belief of Points not necessary, but only very profitable, than he is to assist
our will for exercising an Act of contrition, which is always eminently
profitable, and in case of deadly sin, and invalid Absolution, absolutely
necessary? To say nothing, that, as I said, great Divines hold it to be
necessary at the hour of death even though the absolution be valid: At least,
these considerations are more then sufficient to put every dying man (and
indeed every man) in mind to implore the Divine assistance, and to endeavor
the exercising an Act of Contrition. If you be resolved not to approve these
Answers, let us see what better you can give, and how you will apply it to
satisfy the Argument which I have made to show, that the Faith and salvation of
Protestants rely upon uncertain. Grounds.

49. You say (Page: 79. N. 68.) That it is altogether as abhorrent from the
goodness of God, to suffer an ignorant Lay-mans soul to perish, merely for
being misled by an indiscernable false Translation, which was commended by the
Church, which, (being of necessity to credit some in this matter) he had reason
to rely upon either above all other, or as much as any other, as it is to damn
a penitent sinner for a secret defect in that desired Absolution, which his
Ghostly Father perhaps was an Atheist, and could not give him, or was a
villain, and would not.

50. I answer as above: The total and proper cause of damnation of men is
their sin, and not any secret defect, or invalidity in the Absolution; and
therefore in your case, an unlearned man shall not be damned merely for being
missled by an indiscernable false Translation, but for the sins which he has
voluntarily committed; and his damnation can be imputed to himself alone, and
in no sense to any want on Gods behalf, from whose Goodness it is not
abhorrent to suffer a manes soul to perish for his sins; which punishment he
might have permitted and inflicted in the very moment wherein they were
committed: for sin of it self gives most just cause for a man to be instantly
lodged in Hell; as we see ma^y are permitted to die in the Act of some
wickedness, without foresight of that just punishment hanging over their head,
and therefore without possibility to repent upon the motive of being so
forewarned: neither shall they be damned for their vnvoluntary omission of
repentance, in that case, but for the sin itself never forgiven. And this, I
return to say, your self must affirm, as I proved above. For, suppose, by
such a false Translation on were misled into some error destructive, of a
Fundamental point of Faith; such a man cannot be saved, and it would not be
abhorrent from the Goodness of God to damn such a person; not for his error,
which we suppose to be vnvoluntary; but for his sins. God has promised pardon
to repentant sinners, but has no where obliged himself to expect their leisure
for repenting, or to give his efficatious Grace at their pleasure, who
believing man to be what he is, infiinitely inferior to the Divine Majesty,
and infinitely obliged to his Goodness; and God to be what He is, infinite in
all kind of perfections; and sin to be what it is, infinitely ugly, deformed,
and malicious; a sinner, I say, firmly believing all this, and yet differring
his repentance, if it were but for one moment, must blame himself alone, if he
die without true repentance, and so be damned for his sins never repented. If I
were not well acquainted with your custom of contradicting yourself, I should
wonder that you should object to us, as a thing abhorrent from the Goodness of
God, that men should be permitted to be misled by a false Translation, and so
chance to be damned; seeing you teach, that God may in his Justice permit, true
Miracles to be wrought to delude men, in punishment of their sins; and besides
this, seeing you affirm, true Repentance to consist, not only in hearty sorrow,
and firm purpose to amend, but to require, as you say (Page: 392. N. 8.) the
mortification of the Habits of all Vices, and effectual conversion to newness
of Life and Universal Obedience, and withal, that an Act of Attrition, which
we say, with Priestly Absolution is sufficient to salvation, is not
mortification, which being a work of difficulty and time, cannot be performed
in an Instant. It follows clearly out of this Doctrine, that neither
Attrition, nor Contrition, can save a poor soul at the hour of death:
because this your kind of Repentance, being a Work of difficulty and time,
cannot be, performed in an instant; Nor can such a man be saved at that time,
though he do as much as God can require of him for his salvation in those
circumstances. You object against us, as a huge absurdity, that one may be
damned by reason of an invalid Absolution, when as yet it is in the Penitentes
will, assisted with Gods Grace, to exercise an Act of Contrition, whereby he
shall certainly be saved; and yet you are not afraid to tell us, that a sinner,
though he do all that possibly he can, and have that most perfect kind
ofsorrow, which is called Contrition, yet cannot be saved without the
Mortification of the Habits of all vices, and effectual conversion to a
newness of life, and Universal Obedience; Which things cannot be performed in
an instant, but require long time; And then his damnation shall not proceed
from his not doing as much as he is able, in those Circumstances, (for we
suppose him to do all that) nor for any accidental defect in applying such
Means as Almighty God has provided, but because, according to your Doctrine,
God has not provided sufficient Means for the salvation of a Repentant sinner
at the hour of his death: Which to affirm, is no better then blasphemy, and
makes men's salvation depend not only upon vncertaintyes, (as you object to us,)
but also upon impossibilityes: And they shall be damned by reason of the nature
of those very Means, which are appointed by God for forgiveness of their sins
and salvation: that is, by your way of Repentance. The like I may say of your
Doctrine, That, Attrition alone is sufficient for salvation; which being
certainly most false, and if you have any modesty, must be even, in your own
Oppinion, uncertain, as not being the common opinion of Protestants, for ought
I know, you put salvation of souls upon Grounds which are in themselves (and
not only in the application of them) uncertain: And the same I say of your
wicked Doctrine, that Christian Faith is not infallible, which must be a sourse
of all other vncertaintyes.

51. Having thus answered for ourselves, and retorted your Arguments, it will
not be amiss to examine what you undertake to speak for us, (without any
Commission) to a considering man lying on death bed, who feels or fears that
his Repentance is but Atrition only, and not Contrition, and consequently
believes that if he be not really absolved by a true Priest, he cannot possibly
escape damnation. Such a man for his comfort, you tell, first, (you who will
have men's salvation depend upon no vncertaintyes) that though he verily believe
that his sorrow for sins is a true sorrow, and his purpose of amendment a
true purpose; yet he may deceive himself, perhaps it is not, and if it be not,
he must be damned. You tell him secondly, that the party he confesses to, may
be no Priest, by reason of some indiscernable invalidity in his Baptism, or
Ordination; and if he be none, he can do nothing. You tell him thirdly, that
he may be in such a state, that he cannot, or if he can, he will not gi^e the
Sacrament with due Intention: And if he does not, all is in vain.

52. You plead our cause so feebly and falsely, that your best fee will be, to
be silenced. First, I have told you, in what sense we would have men's salvation
depend upon no vncertaintyes. 2. For your case of a man lying upon death bed,
who feels or fears that his repentance is but Attrition only, and not
Contrition; (surely if it be attrition only, it is not Contrition) we tell him,
that Gods grace is never wanting if we do implore it, (which are your own
words cited by me above) and not neglect to cooperate with it: If therefore he do
his endeavor, God will not fail to give him all that shall be necessary for
his salvation, whether it be atrrition with the Sacrament, or Contrition
without it; and so it shall not be in the Parsons power to damn whom he will
in his Parish, as you are pleased to speak; and you speak profanely in
applying to our present purpose, that saying; Spes est rei incertae nomen,
which is to slight all those Texts of Sceipture, which declare that absolute
certainty or security must not be expected in this life, where we must work
our salvation with fear and trembling, so that neither Hope excludes a
wholesome fear, nor fear a comfortable Hope; it being also most true, tha we
are saved by Hope, and, Hope does not confound, which signifyes more then rei
incertae nomen, an empty name only. By this Instruction, the dying man will
clearly see, that neither want of Priesthood in the party he confesses to, nor
want of Intention in a true Priest, nor any other thing, beside his own
freewill neglecting to cooperate with Gods Grace, can damn him. We have heard
your words (Page: 277. N. 61.) That, Gods assistance is always ready on
condition, that when it is offered in the divine directions of Scripture, or
reason, the Church be not negligent to follow it (I cannot stand here to note,
that you seem to place Gods assistance only in the external divine directions
of Scripture or reason, without necessity of any internal Grace, which is
direct Pelagianisme) and you put the case expressly when the Penitent fears
that his Repenta^^^ is attrition only, and consequently, when God has given
him light to see his danger, and the necessity of contrition, and therefore, that
God will not be wanting to affoard his Grace, if he be not negligent to follow
it; and by this truth he may prudently quiet his mind. This seems to be the
Doctrine of S. Thomas (3. Part: Q. 64. a. 8. ad. 2.) granting, that, in persons
endued with the use of reason, Faith and devotion supplies the defect of
intention in the Minister, for justification from sin, but not for making the
Sacrament valid.

53. Let us hear what more you are pleased to answer in our behalf. You say;
Put case a man by these considerations should be cast into some agonyes, (of
your own making and fayning; for we clear him of all) what advise, what
comfort would you give him? Verily I know not what you could say to him, but
this: That, First, for the Qualification required on his part, he might know
that he desired to have true sorrow, and that that is sufficient. But then if
he should ask you, why he might not know his sorrow to be a true sorrow, as
well as his desire to be sorrowful, to be a true desire, I believe you would
be put to silence. Then secondly, to quiet his fears, concerning the Priest
and his intention, you should tell him by my advise, that Gods Goodness (which
will not suffer him to damn men for not doing better than their best) will
supply all such defects as to humane endeavors were unavoidable. And therefore,
though his Priest were indeed no Priest, yet to him he should be as if he were
one: and if he gave Absolution without Intention, yet in doing so, he should
hurt himselself only, and not his Penitent.

54. Answer. First; If you should tell him, that only a desire of true sorrow,
is sufficient for remiffion of deadly sins, either alone, or with Sacramental
Absolution, you should deceive him. For, a desire only, is of a thing which one
is supposed not to have; and therefore he who only desires to have sorrow,
certainly wants it; as he who only desires to find the true Faith and Religion,
cannot be said to have it; though such a desire may move him to seek, and
sind, if he persever in seeking; and in like manner, he who desires true
sorrow, may, to satisfy that good desire, endeavor to pass from a mere
desire to the thing desired, seeing God will not be wanting on his part to
affoard his Grace to perfect that desire; and so persons of timorous or
scrupulous consciences, may conceive they only desire true sorrow, when indeed
they have it.

55. You say: If he should ask you, why he might not know his forrow to be a
true sorrow, as well as his desire to be sorrowful, to be a true desire; I
believe you would be put to silence.

56. Answer: All that you can infer from this your Objection, is, That you
have put yourself to silence For you it was, and not Charity Maintained, who
talked of a desire to be sorrowful, as sufficient, though it were alone.
Nevertheless, if one should ask, whether you are not very sure, that you did
desire to know and embrace the true Faith and way which leads to eternal
happyness, I suppose you would answer, that you were absolutely certain of
such a desire, and yet you cannot in your Grounds, be certain that the Faith
which you embrace, is true: For then you would be certain, that Christian
Faith is true, which you deny; and accordingly (Page: 376. N. 57.) You say only;
This is the Religion which I have chosen, after a long deliberation, and I am
verily persuaded, that I have chosen wisely. And yet certainly you thought
yourself to have been more than verily persuaded of your general desire to
embrace the true Faith. Therefore one may know his desire of Faith to be a true
desire, and not be certain that his Faith is a true Faith; and then, why may
he not be certain that he has a true desire of sorrow, and yet not be certain
that he has true sorrow? But to omit this Instance, the truth is, that you do
not distinguish between an effectual, and ineffectual desire; This may be
without the effect, or the object of it which is the thing desired, but That
cannot be: For when we treat of Actions, which, all things considered, are in
our power to exercise, if one effectually desire them, he will not fail to
have them; For, an effectual desire, will move him to apply all means
necessary, for, and to remove all impediments, against, that end. And from
hence I infer, that every one may obtain true Contrition by the assistance of
Gods Grace, if his endeavors be not wanting: And even these your exaggerations
of the great danger men may incur by want of Intention in the Minister, or
defect in the Matter or Form of Baptism and Penance, may move him to procure
Contrition for making all sure, and so out of your poisonous Doctrine make
wholesome triacle. But you are mistaken, if you conceive the Question to be,
whether or no one may know that he has either a desire of sorrow, or sorrow,
which in general one may as it were feel and know; but whether his desire and
sorrow, be such as they ought to be, supernatural, effectual, universal, and
from what cause they proceed; whether from the Divine, Angelical, humane, or
bad Spirit, who not seldom transfigures himself into an Angel of light.

57. The second advise you would have us give concerning the Priest and his
intention, is, to tell him that Gods Goodness (which will not suffer him to
damn men for not doing better than their best) will supply all such defects as
to humane endeavors were unavoidable. And therefore, though his Priest were
indeed no Priest, yet to him he should be as if he were one: And if he gave
Absolution without Intention, yet in doing so, he should hurt himself only and
not his Penitent.

58. Answer. We have already showed that if one do his best, God will not
fail to supply all defects concerning the Priest, and his Intention, by giving
him Grace to attain contrition; which is a clear and solid way of supplying
the said defects, as that which you propose is not, if your meaning be, that
although the Priest were no Priest, or gave Absolution without Intention, yet
God would either make it a valid Sacrament immediately, as I may say, performing
by himself alone the function of the Priest, or else would give the effect which
the Sacrament would have conferred if it had been valid, without any change in
the Penitent; as if, for example, he had attrition only, his sins should be
forgiven, no less than if he had receyved true Absolution, or had arrived to an
Act of Contrition. Now certainly this your way could not quiet the fears of
any understanding man; unless you could bring some irrefragable Authority, or
convincing reason (which is impossible for you to do.) that God does ever make
valid an Absolution, invalid for want of a true Minister or Intention; or that
a deadly sin may be forgiven by attrition alone. If you suppose, that God does
effectually move him to Contrition, you alter the case and your Opinion, and
contradict your own words; That, though his Priest were indeed no Priest, yet
to him he should be as if he were one. For, if the Penitent have contrition,
that false Priest is not to him as if he were one, but all passes as if he had
never confessed his sins to any such man, only by change of the disposition
in the Penitent himself; which is the same which I have declared; and so upon
the matter, your particular way of quieting such a Penitent, might rather
plunge him into greater fears, and perplexityes.

59. You go forward, and object our making the salvation of infants depend of
Baptism, a casual thing, and in the power of man to conferr, or not conferr:
and our suspending the same on the Baptizers Intention.

60. Answer. This Point concerning Baptism of infants, being especially in
these times, most necessary to be understood, I hope it will not be amiss, to
repeat some things of which I have spoken before. First then, To deny the
necessity of Baptism for infants, was the condemned Heresy of the Pelagians,
as appears out of S. Austine, (Haere: 88. and, Cont: Julian: Pelag: L: 6. C.
7.) which is so certain, that it is confessed by the Centurists, (Centur: 5.
Col: 585.) and by the Protestant Writer, Sarcerius (Loc: Com: 88.) And S.
Epiphan: (Haer: 28.) Condemns Cerinthus for teaching, that a man may be saved
without Baptism. And Whitak: Cont: Duraeum, L. 10 P. 883. says: we believe
and teach, That sins are forgiven, and grace conferred in Baptism, which the
Manichees were accustomed to deny. 2. Learned Protestants confess, that not
only S. Austine taught the necessity of Baptism for the salvation of Children
(for which, Cartwright in Whitg: Def: charge him with absurdity) but also in
General, that the Fathers were of the same mind, in so much as Musculus (in
locis, Tit: de Baptismo) says; The Fathers deayed salvation to the children
who dyed without Baptism, though their parents were faithful. In further
proof whereof, we need no clearer Testimony, than that of Calvin (Instit: Lib:
4. Chap: 1^. N. 20.) saying; It was vsuallmany Ages since, even almost from the
beginning of the Church, that in danger of death, lay people might Baptize, if
the Minister was not present in due time. And Bilson (Confer: at Hampton Court)
affirms; the denying of private Persons. in case of necessity to Baptize, were
to cross all antiquity. Hooker also (fifth Book of Ecclesiastical Policy,
Sect: 62.) says expressly, That the general and full consent of the Godly
learned in all Ages, does make for validity of Baptism, yea albeit administered
in private, and even by women, (and this Doctrine he himself imbraceth and
defends at large,) which confessed sense of Antiquity, declares evidently the
necessity of Baptism. Besides, the same man (fifth Book of Ecclsiast:
Politicy, Sect: 59.) speaking of that Text, (Joan: 3.5.) Unless a man be borne
again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
(By which, Catholics prove the absolute necessity of Baptism) speaks
against Calvinists, thus: To hyde the general consent of Antiquity, agreeing
in the literal interpretation, they cunningly affirm, that certain have
taken those words as meant of material water, when they know that of all the
Ancient, there is not one to be named, that ever did otherwise either expound,
or allege the place, then as implying external Baptism. 3. Not only
Protestants confess, that the Fathers hold Baptism to be necessary for the
salvation of infants, but also diverse of themselves teach the same Doctrine.
Bilson in his true Differen: (Part: 4. Page: 368.) concludes from S. Austine
and the Scriptures, That if children be excluded from Baptism, they be
likewise excluded from the kingdom of God; And, That without Baptism they
cannot be saved, by reason Original sin is not remitted but in Baptism. Dr.
Andrews pretended Bishop of Winchester, and a great Rabbi amongst English
Protestants (in his Answer to the 18. Chapter of Cardinal Perrons Reply N.
18.) expressly teaches, that Baptism is necessary via ordinaria. Kemnitius, one
of the most learned Protestants that ever wrote, teaches and proves out of
scripture, That God does not save us without means, but by the laver of
regeneration. (Tit: 3.) And: Baptism is a mean or instrument by which is made
the communication of Christ's benefits: For by Baptism Christ cleanses and
sanctifyeth. (Ephesians: 5.) Yea he says expressly The testimonies of Scripture
are manifest: which, as they cannot be denied, so they ought not to be shifted
of. (Ephesians. 5.) Clensing her with the laver of water in the Word. (Joan: 3.)
Unless one he borne again of water etc. (Act: 22.) Be Baptized and wash away
thy sins. (1. Pet: 3.) Speaknig of water etc: He says: Baptism being of the
like form (of the Ark of Noah) saves us. And he concludes: These being most
manifest tectimonyes, which expressly ascribe Efficacy to Sacraments, and
declare what that (Efficacy) is, are not to be perverted by tropes from their
simple and native signisication, which the proper signification of the words
gives, and so the ancient (Fathers) have understood these testimonies simply,
as they sound. Behold the Doctrine of a chiefest Protestant proved out of
Scripture, and confessed to be the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers interpreting
Scriptures; so as our Catholic Doctrine comes to be approved by Protestants,
by Scripture, and by the Ancient Fathers, and by Protestants interpreting
Scripture: all which Points are further taught by the Protestant Urbanus
Regius, (In 1. Part: Operum, in Cathechismo minori, Folio 105.) confessing that
the Scripture, and the Authority of the ancient Church, constrain him to
believe, that children dying unbaptized, are damned. The same Doctrine is
delivered by Sarcerius; and by Confess: Augustana: The Protestants of Saxony,
and sundry other Protestant Writers, as may be seen in the Tripl: Cord: (Chap:
20. Sect: 4. Page 456.)

61. Now, we may reflect: First, seeing these Protestants for their Doctrine of
the necessity of Baptism, rely upon Scripture, (as indeed the words of
Scripture are as clear for this Point, as any can be) I would gladly know,
what certain Ground you, or any man can have, that so many learned Protestants
(to say nothing of all Fathers, Antiquity, and modern Catholic Writters) have
erred in this their Interpretation of Scripture? Is it not your own Rule, That
when men truly desirous to know the truth, and of upright meaning (I hope you
believe Protestants to be such, at least, most of them) differ about the sense
of Scripture, it is a sign, that such places are not evident? And seeing, we
now treat of a Point, which at least, is necessary to be known, whether or no
it be necessary (otherwise we cannot be assured that we want nothing necessary
to salvation) it follows, that Scripture is not evident in all things
necessary to be known; and therefore we must have recourse to a Living Judge. 2.
Seeing so many of those whom you call brethren, teach our Catholic Doctrine,
whatsoever you object against us, makes no less against them. 3. Your saying,
That Baptism is a casual thing, and in the power of man to conferr, (though
yet many learned Protestants, hold Baptism to be necessary) is a profane
speech, as if God had not a most particular Providence in disposing all rhings
for the good of his Elect, particularly in things necessary to salvation. Why
do you not likewise object against all Christians, their making the salvation
of every one depend on the preaching of the Gospel (of which our Savior spoke
when he also commanded his Apostles to conferr Baptism (Matthew: 28.19.) which
you may also say, is a casual thing, and in the power of man to do, or omit?
as if God could not be sure how to order infallibly all events or effects,
unless they fall out by necessity. Nay, I say more. Our God is so good, and
desirous that all be saved, that if men did strictly concur and cooperate
with his holy Providence, and Grace, in all occasions, things would so fall
out, as that mediate or immediate, proxime or remote, one way or other, there
would never want sufficient Means for infants to be baptized. So far is this
matter from being a casual thing! And still we must consider, that infants
dying without baptism, are deprived of salvation, not for the fault of those
who omitted to Baptize them, nor properly for want of Baptism itself, but for
Original sin, once contracted and never abolished, by that means and
instrument, which God has appointed for that End and Effect; as he might in
his Justice have left all Mankind in their sins, without providing for them a
Redeemer, according to the proceeding which he held with the apostating
Angels; and therefore this Doctrine, That children dying without Baptism,
cannot be saved, implies no cruelty, absurdity, or strangeness, to those who
believe other Points of Christian Faith: Especially if we consider, that
although they shall not enjoy felicity in Heaven, yet they shall lead their
life with much content, by contemplation, and also by considering, that perhaps
if their Creator had granted them longer life, yea and procured them to be
baptized, they might have dyed in actual deadly sin, and have been damned in
Hell, with Poena Damni, and Sensus, both of being deprived of the beatificall
Vision, and of insufferable torments of sense; and what greater absurdity is
it, that infants should Miss of salvation, for want of intention in the
Minister, then if they had not been in the occasion of not being baptized at
all, by reason of some other impediment? And therefore I see no reason, why we
should for such cases of want of Intention in the Minister (or of due Form or
Matter) have recourse to any extraordinary Means; which should not be
extraordinary, but ordinary, if God did provide it, whenever the infant is
not baptized, upon whatsoever occasion or impediment, and so indeed Baptism
should never be absolutely necessary to salvation. Besides, seeing there can be
no certainty of extraordinary means, the matter will still remain doubtful,
and objections must be answered some other way.

62. But you will object, That at least we differ from Protestants in
suspending the salvation of infants, on the Baptizers Intention.

63. Answer. I have showed, that some learned Protestants of chief note,
require the same intention which we do; and also that every judicious man will
certainly judge, that there is no danger of invalidity in Baptism for want of
intention, but rather in respect of the Matter or Form; and yet not only the
Protestant Church of England teaches, that the Matter and Form are necessary
for Baptism, but also diverse other Protestants deliver the same Doctrine, as
may be seen in The Triple Cord (Page: 457.) and the thing is evident of it self
to every one who understands the terms of Matter and Form. If men may be
damned for their Actual sins, though they be supposed to be invincibly
ignorant of necessary or fundamental points of Faith (as Potter confesses) why
may not infants be deprived of Heaven for original sin, though their want
of Baptism be not immediately voluntary to any?

64. Your last Objection (N. 69.) is against Our making he Real Presence of
Christ in the Eucharist depend upon the casualtyes of the Consecrators true
Priesthood and intention, and yet commanding men to believe it for certain
that he is present, and to adore the Sacrament which according to your
Doctrine, ^^^ought they can possibly know, may be nothing else, but a piece of
bread, so exposing them to the danger of idolatry, and consequently of
damnation.

65. Answer. First: Who will not wonder, you should object to us danger of
idolatry, by reason of some particular case, or application of a general true
Ground (which can be neither Heresy, nor formal idolatry) while Protestants
are exposed to danger of Heresy and idolatry, and consequently of damnation, by
reason of the very general Ground, by which, their Actions should be directed?
Luther and Lutherans believe the Real Presence, and diverse of their chiefest
Writers expressly teach, that Christ is to be adored in the Eucharist. And
Kemnitius proves it by the several sayings of the Saints, Austine, Ambrose,
and Gregory Nazianzen. The Reader may be pleased to see Brierley (Tract: 2.
Cap: 1. Sect: 3.) Seeing then Zwinglians, Calvinists, Socinians, and all they
who deny the Real Presence, hold the opinion of Lutherans to be false, and
that the Eucharist for substance is but a piece of bread; according to your
Objection those Lutherans expose themselves, not only to the danger of
idolatry, and consequently of damnation; but also to certain idolatry, if the
Faith of Sacramentaryes be certainly true, as, themselves hold it to be. On the
contrary side: If Christ be really and substantially present in the Sacrament,
they who deny both his Presence, and Adoration, are Heretics, and expose
themselves to the danger of a sin no less heinous than idolatry. For it is no
less (if not more) injurious to deny that honor to any person which is due to
him, than it is to yield greater respect than is due; rather this latter is
less grievous that that former; because to exibite due honor, is one of those
precepts which Divines call Affirmative, and do not oblige for all times; but
expressly to deny that honor which is due to one, yea and avouch it not to be
due, is ranked in the class of Negative Precepts, which oblige for all places,
times, and other circumstances. Thus we are not obliged to be at all times in
act of adoring God, but we are bound never to deny the supreme honor, which
Divines call Latria, to be due to his Divine Majesty. If therefore Lutherans be
Hererikes and Idolaters, for adoring Christ in the Eucharist, if it be only a
piece of bread; other Protestants shall be Heretics, and as bad, or worse,
than Idolaters, if indeed Christ, true God and man, be really present. The
difference then and doubtfullness among you, concerns Matter of Faith; but
that which you object to us, concerns only matter of Fact. We are most assured
of this general Ground; Christ is re^^^ present in the Consecrated Host; but
it is not an Article of Faith, that this Host in particular is Consecrated,
or, that that which seems to be bread and wine, is indeed such. You say; We
command men to believe for certain, that Christ is present in the Eucharist,
but for certain you speak against your conscience, if you would have the
Reader to believe, that we command men to believe with certainty of Faith, that
Christ is present in this or that particular Host; though, unless we have some
grounded positive reason to the contrary, we ought not positively to doubt;
which would be but an Act of imprudency, or perhaps incharitableness, or
injustice; as it happens in a thousand cases, wherein we have no certainty of
Faith, or Metaphisicall evidence, and yet it would be mere foolishness,
positively and practically to doubt of them: nor could there be in this case
any shadow of danger to committ formal, or culpable Idolatry. Religion is a
moral Virtue, and requires not, for its direction in particular occasions, the
certainty of Faith, but is regulated by the virtue of Prudence, which in our
case does most reasonably judge, that Christ is really present, in that Host,
which we have good reason to judge is Consecrated; and if there be no danger of
formal idolatry, there can be no danger of damnation. But in the mean time,
you should consider, that by your fallible Faith, you can have no certainty,
that Christ either, is, or is not present in the Eucharist, and so you expose
yourself to the danger of a grievous sin, by not believing and adoring Christ,
if really he be present. Besides; seeing you hold, that any error against
Divine Revelation, is damnable in itself, no man must read Scripture, or seek
to find the sense thereof, least he chance to miss of the true meaning, and so
expose himself to danger, of committing a thing damnable in itself. You blame
Charity Maintained because you conceive he would not have us subject to any
uncertainty in matters belonging to salvation; and yet now you object against
all Catholics, that they adore our Savior, when they are not absolutely
certain that he is present; though indeed, if passion did not blind you, you
would condemn Lutherans only, who believe, that bread remaynes, and therefore if
Christ be not really present, as you hold for certain he is not, they adore
that which is nothing else but a piece of bread: whereas we Catholics believing
that bread does not remain, cannot possibly direct our intentions, and
Adoration to bread, but to Christ himself, and so the most that can be imagined
will only be this; that we adore Christ, thinking he is where he is not, our
intention being still carried to him and not to any Creature; which if you will
hold for true idolatry, you must condemn all good Christians of idolatry who
adore God as He is in Heaven, Earth, and every where, though in the opinion of
your fellow Socinians He be really and substantially, only in Heaven. Even Dr.
Tailor in his Liberty of Prophesying (Page: 258. Numb: 16.) speaks home to the
purpose of freeing Catholics from all danger of idolatry, in these words:
idolatry is a forsaking the true God, and in giving the Divine Worship to a
Creature or to an idol, that is, to an imaginary God, who has no foundation
in essence or existence: And is that kind of superstition, which by Divines is
called superstition of an undue object: Now it is evident that the Object of
their Adoration (that which is represented to them in their minds, their
thoughts and purposes, and by which God principally, if not solely takes
estimate of humane actions) in the blessed Sacrament, is the only true and
eternal God, hypostatically joined with his holy humanity which humanity they
believe actually present under the veil of the Sacrame^tall signs: And if
they thought him not bresent, they are so far from worshipping the bread in
this case that themselves profess it to be idolatry to do so, which is a
demonstration that their soul has nothing in it that is idololatricall. If
their confidence and fancyfull opinion has engaged them upon so great mistake
(as without doubt is has) yet the will has nothing in it, but what is a great
enemy to idolatry, Et nihil ardet in inferno nisi propria voluntas.

66. Having thus answered and retorted the Objections wherein you seem to
triumph, it is time to go forward in proving the necessity of a Living
infallible Judge.

67. Fourthly then, I resume the Argument of Charity. Maintained (Part: 1.
Chap: 2. N. 23. Page: 67.) There was no Scripture for about two thousand years
from Adam to Moses: And again for about two thousand years more, from Moses
to Christ our Lord, Holy Scripture was only among the people of Israel; and yet
there were Gentiles endued with divine Faith, as appears in Job and his friends.
Wherefore during so many ages, the Church alone was the instructor of the
faithful, by means of Tradition. The Church also of Christ was before the
Scriptures of the New Testament, which were not written instantly, nor all at
one time, but successively, upon several occasions; and some after the decease
of most of the Apostles: And after they were written, they were not presently
known to all Churches; and afterward some were doubted of, etc:

68. To this Argument (Page: 100. N. 123.) You answer, that it is just as if I
should say, York is not in my way from Oxford to London, therefore Bristell is:
Or a dog is not a horse: Therefore he is a man. As if God had no other ways of
revealing himself to men, but only Scripture, and an infallible Church, whereas
S. Paul tells us, that men may know God by his works, and that they had the
Law written in their hearts. Either of these ways might make some faithful men
without either necessity of Scripture, or Church. To this purpose you cite also
S. Chrysostom, Isid: Pelus: and S. Paul, (Heb: 1.1.)

69. You could not but see the weakness of this your Answer, since you know
that we speak not of extraordinary cases or concurrence, but of the ordinary
Means, which God in his Holy Providence is wont to use, helping one man by the
ministry of another, in governing, teaching, preaching, and the like, and
making good that truth of the Apostle, sides ex auditu. Faith comes by hearing.
Which only way of teaching, and Tradition, could serve to beget Faith for that
time wherein no Scripture, either of the Old, or new Law was written. Will you
take up the Apostle for saying, Fides ex auditu, and tell him, that there be
other Means beside hearing, to beget Faith, as the Law written in men's hearts,
and consideration of Gods creatures? If this be not the state of the Question,
to what purpose do you through your whole Book, seek to establish the
sufficiency of Scripture alone, and to destroy the necessity of the Churches
Declarations, and Traditions? Since, when all is done, you may be told in your
own words, That without necessity of Scripture or Church, there are other
Means to produce Faith, and so all your Arguments will be like this; York is
not in my way etc: A dog is not a horse etc: By this Means, one may with the
Old Heretics Manichees, Valentinians, Cerdonists, Marcionists, and the new
Libertines, reject Scripture, and not be subject to the letter, but that they
ought to follow the Spirit that quickens. As likewise the Swenckfeldians
rejected the wtitten word, as the letter that killed contenting themselves with
internal Spirit; and might with you alledg, that men had the Law written in
their hearts. Yourself say (Page: 15^. N. 38. The Church is, though not a
certain Foundation of proof of my Faith, yet a necessary Introduction to it;
Which you must understand in the Ordinary way. Unless you have a mind to
contradict your self, and say; That absolutely there are no other possible
means to attain Divine Faith, than by the Seripture and the Church, as a
necessary introduction to it. Yourself therefore must answer your own slighting
Instances. For, if in the ordinary course, and as I may say, without a kind of
Miracle, it were true, that the way from Oxford to London were either York, or
Bristoll, or that a dog must be either a horse, or aman; were not these
conseque^ces very Good? But York is not; therefore Bristoll is; But a dog is
not a horse; therefore he is a man? Now, the Ordinary necessary means to produce
Faith, being either Scripture, or the Church; if we subsume; But it is not
Scripture, (which is evident for that time, when there was no Scripture) it
clearly follows; Therefore it is the Church, which I Hope, you will not deny to
have been infallible in the Apostles time, before Scripture was written; and so
your examples prove against none but yourself.

70. We must still remember, that Faith being the Gift of God, we cannot
believe, except in cases wherein God by his Eternal Providence has decreed to
affoard us his particular Grace for that end; which he is not wont to do,
unless the conditions by Him prescribed, be performed. Since therefore the Church
has been appointed, as the ordinary Means to attain Faith, we ought not to
promise ourselves the particular assistance of Grace, necessary for exercising
an Act of true Faith except under condition of hearing and submitting to that
Church, and not by consideration only of Gods creatures, or by the Law written
in our hearts, or by extraordinary enthusiasmes, private spirits, and the like.
If it had been Gods holy pleasure to require of men to believe only that God
is, and that he is a Rewarder of those that seek Him, or some other few
Articles, he would have affoarded his sufficient supernatural Grace to believe
those Points, as also to love Him, repent of our sins, and attain salvation by
believing those Points only (for as much as would belong to Faith:) But de
facto it falls out otherwise, and we are to believe many other Points, as
yourself pretend to teach (Page: 133. N. 13. where you say, That they who should
believe the said Article, That God is and that he is a rewarder of them that
seek him, (Heb: 6.11.) might be rewarded, not with bringing them immediately to
salvation without Christ but with bringing them first to Faith in Christ, and
so to salvation: Which you endeavor to prove by the story of Cornelius (Act:
10.) of whom you say (Page: 134.) If he had refused to bell euein Christ after
the sufficient Revelation of the Gospel to him and Gods will to have him
believe it, he that was accepted before, would not have continued accepted
still, because one of the conditions which Christ requires for remission of
sins, and salvation from him, is, that we believe what he has revealed, when it
is sufficiently declared, to have been revealed by him. This confirms what I
said, that God does not give Grace to Believe, Hope, and Love, except upon
those conditions which he appoints and requires, which now is not only to
believe some one Article, or to attain Faith by the mere consideration of Gods
creatures, or by the Law written in our hearts, or by immediate extraordinary
lights, but by the Ministry of the Church; and therefore (Ephesians: 4.11.12.)
Pastors and Doctors are said to be given to the consummation of the Saints,
unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the Body of Christ.
Which declares, that men cannot be made members of the Body of Christ, but by
the Ministry of Pastors and Doctors: And even those Protestants who rely
upon the private Spirit for knowing true Scripture, will grant, that the Spirit
is not given but when the Churches Ministry precedes as an Introduction, or,
as Potter (Page: 139.) speaks, the present Church works upon all whithin the
Church, to prepare, induce, and persuade the mind as an outward means, to
embrace the Faith, to read and believe the Scriptures.

71. It remaymes then, that not Scripture, but the Church, (which was before
Scripture, and from which we receive it) must be the necessary means, in the
ordinary course which God has appointed to produce Faith, and decide
Controversyes in Religion, and consequently, must be infallible according to
your own Doctrine (Page: 35. N. 7.) that the means to decide Controversyes in
Faith, and Religion, must be endued with an universal infallibility in
whatsoever it propounds for a divine truth. For if it may be false in any one
thing of this nature, in any thing which God requires men to believe, we can
yield unto it but a wavering and fearful assent in any thing.

72. 5. I urge the Argument of Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 2. N. 23.
Page: 69.) If Protestants will have Scripture alone for their Judge or Rule, let
them first produce some Text of Scripture, affirming that by the entering
thereof, infallibility went out of the Church.

73. To this you answer (Page: 104. N. 138.) In these words: As no Scripture
affirms, that by the entering of it, infallibility went out of the Church, so
neither do we, neither have we any need to do so. But we say, that it continued
in the Church even together with the Scriptures, so long as Christ and his
Apostles were living, and then departed: God in his Providence having provided
a plain and infallilde Rule, to supply the defect of Living and infallible
Guides. Gertainly, if your cause were good, so great a wit as yours is, would
devise better Arguments to maintain it. We can show no Scripture afsirming
infallibility to have gone out of the Church; therefore it is infallible. Some
what like to his discourse, that said; it could not be proved out of Scripture,
that the King of Sweden was dead, therefore he is still Living. Me thinks in all
reason, you that chaleng privileges and exemption from the condition of men,
which is to be subject to error; you that by virtue of this privilege usurp
Authority over men's consciences, should produce your Letter-patents from the
King of Heaven, and show some express warrant for this Authority you take upon
you; otherwese you know, the Rule is, vbi contrarium non manifest probatur,
presumitur pro liberate.

74. This Answer is easily confuted. First, I must return it upon yourself,
with thanks for your voluntary express grant, That no Scripture afsirmes, that
by entering of it, infallibility went out of the Church. Remember your own
saying; that there are only two Principles common to Christians; Reason, and
Scripture: Seeing then it is evident, that mere natural Reason cannot
determine any thing in this matter, and that you grant it cannot be proved by
Scripture, that infallibility went out of the Church by the entering of
Scripture, what remains, but that you have no proof at all for it? And, since
that you directly grant, infallibility to have continued for some time in the
Church, even together with the Scriptures, and that neither by reason, nor
Scripture, you can prove that it ever departed from Her; we must of necessity
conclude, that she still enjoyes that privilege, most necessary for deciding
controversyes belonging to infallible Christian faith. You say, God has
provided a plain and infallible Rule, to supply the defect of living and
infallible Guides. But we have proved the contrary, That Scripture is not
plain in all Points belonging to Faith; and though it were so, yet yourself
confess in this place, that infallibility in the Church, may stand with the
sufficiency and plains of Scripture; and therefore you cannot infer; scripture
is sufficient; therefore the Church is not infallible. You teach (Page: 101. N.
126.) That though all the necessary parts of the Gospel be contained in every
one of the four Gospells, yet they which had all the Books of the New
Testament, had nothing superfluous; for it was not superfluous, but profitable,
that the same thing should be said diverse times, and be teslifyed, by diverse
witnesses. Therefore the Testimony of the Church, if she were supposed to be
infallible, might be profitable, although Scripture were clear and sufficient.
Protestants pretend, that we can prove matters belonging to Faith, only by
Scripture: Wherefore you must either prove by some plain Text of Scripture,
that infallibility dyed, as I may say, with the Apostles, or never affirm
herafter any such groundless, voluntary, and pernicious Proposition. From
Scripture we learn, that with out repentance are the gifts of God. (Rom:
11.29) And it is an Axiom of natural Reason, Melior est conditio possidentis.
God once bestowed upon the Church, the gift of infallibility; and therefore
without some evident positive proof, you are not to deprive her of it: And we
are not obliged to produce any other Argument, except to plead Possession,
which you cannot take from us without some evident proof to the contrary; And
you being the Actor, and we the Defendents, not we, but you must prove; and
perform what you exact of us, to show some express warrant etc: though it be
also most true that we have great plenty of convincing proofs for the
infallibility of Gods Church.

75. As for your Instance about the King of Sweden, I believe you will loose
your jest, when I shall have asked whether this were not a good Argument; we
can know by Scripture alone, whether the King of Sweden be alive or dead; but
we know by Scripture, he was once Living, and know not by any Scripture that he
is dead: Therefore, for ought we know, he is alive; and so your example returns
upon yourself; that seeing you know by Scripture infallibility to have been once
in the Church, and that by no Scripture, (which with you must be the only
proof in this case) you know, that it ever departed from Her, you must believe
that still she enjoyes it. As for us, we challeng no Privileges, but such as
were granted by our Savior to his Church, and which we prove by the same
Arguments, whereby the Apostles and their Successors prove their Authority, (as
shall be showed herafter) and the Rule, Ubi contrarium manifest non probatur,
praesumitur pro liberate, is profanely applied to our present case, wherein it
is an unspeakable benefit to have our liberty, not taken away, but moderated,
directed, and elevated to the End of Eternal Happyness. If in any case,
certainly in this, that saying, Licentia omnes sumus deteriores, is most true;
as lamentable experience teaches in so many Heresies, and so implacable
contentions of Heretics among themselves, by reason of the liberty which every
one presumes to take in interpreting Holy Scripture: And for avoiding so great
an inconvenience and mischeife, it is necessary to acknowledge some infallible
Living Judge, and so your Rule for Liberty, being rightly applied, proves
against yourself: And the Church having once confessedly enjoyed infallibility,
I must return against you your own words: Me thinks in all Reason, you that
presume to take away Privileges once granted, by God himself, for the Eternal
Good of souls, should produce some exprress warrant for this bold attempt;
especially it being a Rule, Privilegia sunt amplianda; chiefly, when they
proceed from a Sovereign Power, and are helped by that Dictate of Reason,
Melior est conditio possidentis. And in the mean time, you are he, who break
that Rule, Ubi contrarium non manifest probatur, praesumitur pro liberate, by
pretending, that men are obliged to submit Reason, though seeming never so
certain and evident, to the contents of Scripture, which yet you teach, not to
be manifestly and certainly, but only probably, true: Against which is your
own saying, Praesumitur pro liberate, vbi contrarium non manifest probatur,
as it happens in your fallible and only probable Faith, which cannot be
manifestly proved to be true; for if it could be so proved, Christian Faith
should be absolutely certain, and not only probable: And so, continually you
are framing Arguments in favor of your Adversary.

76. I will not here loose time in examining your saying (Page: 101. N. 126.)
The Books of Scripture, which were receyved by those that receyved fowest, had
as much of the Doctrine of Christianity in them, as they all had which were
receyved by any; all the necessary parts of the Gospel, being contained in
every one of the Gospells. Are not the diverse profitable things which are
contained in some of the Gospells, and omitted in others, part of the Doctrine
of Christianity, taught by the Apostles to Christians? Besides, what can you
understand by these words (Page: 101. N. 125.) For ought appears by your
reasons, the Church never had infallibility? And yet Charity Maintained spoke
of the Church of Christ, as it was before any Scripture of the new Testament
was written; which Church He proved to be infallible, because at that time
there could be no other infallible Rule or Judge, which is a clear and
convincing Reason. And so I hope it appears by his Reasons that the Church
once had infallibility.

77. Sixthly: You have these words (Page: 115. N. 156) Nothing can challeng our
belief, but what has descended to us from Christ by Original and universal
Tradition: Now nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us. Therefore
nothing but Scripture can challeng our belief. Now I say in like manner; it is
neither delivered in Scripture, nor otherwise has descended to us from Christ
by Original and Universal Tradition, that Scripture is not at this time
joined with some infallible Living Judge, as once it was; or that the Church was
ever divested of that Authority, and infallibility, which it had; or that God
had provided a plain and infallible Rule, to supply the defect of a Living and
infallible Guide, (as you say) or that Scripture alone without Tradition, is
the Rule of Faith: Therefore none of these Points can challeng our belief. My
saying has been proved hertofore, and yourself confess, that you do not prove
out of Scripture, that with the entering of it, infallibility went out of the
Church; but contrarily, that they did remain together for a time.

78. Seaventhly: I take an Argument from your own Doctrine, that Scripture is
not a material Object of Faith, or an Article which we believe: To which
Mayor, I subsume thus: But that Means, by assenting to which alone, I believe
all other Points, must itself be assented to, and believed (for how can I
believe any thing for an Authority which I do not believe?) Therefore Scripture
alone cannot be the Means by which I come to believe all other Points. And
seeing no other ordinary Means to produce Faith, can be assigned, besides
Scripture, and the Church, we must infer, that the Church is the ordinary
Means to produce Faith, and decide Controversyes in Religion; and consequently
even according to your own Doctrine, she must be infallible; Otherwise, as you
say of the Means to decide controversyes, (Page: 35. N. 7.) We can yield unto
it, but a wavering and fearful Assent in any thing.

79. Eighthly. You confess, that the Church erring in any Fundamental Point,
ceases to be a Church; and seeing you also profess, that we cannot know what
points in particular be Fundamental, you cannot know whether the Church de
facto has not failed. unless we believe: that she is infallible and cannot
fail. And yet most Protestants gra^^ that the Church cannot fail, our Savior
having promised tha^ (...) gates of Hell shall not prevail against Her: In so
much as Whitaker against Reynolds, in his Answer to the Preface, (Page: ^3.)
says; (...) believe to the comfort of our souls, that Christ's Church ^^th
continued, and never shall fail so long as the world endures. And we account
is a sprophane Heresy to teach otherwise. And Potter avoucheth, that Christ
has promised, the Church shall never fail, as you confess (Page: 277. N. 61.)
That there shall be by divine Providence preserved in the world to the worlds
end, such a company of Christians who hold all things precisely and
indispensably necessary to salvation, and nothing inevitably destructive of it:
This and no more the Doctor affirms, that God has promised absolutely. And
yourself say, (Page: 106 N. 140.) VV^ yield unto you, that there shall be a
Church which never erreth in some Points, because (as we conceive) God has
promised so much. By the way; if according to Whitaker, it be a profane Heresy
to say the Church shall fail; and that according to Potter, God has promised
so much absolutely, yea and that it was a most proper Heresy in the Donatists
against that Article of our Creed, I believe the Catholic Church; and that you
also conceive our Savior Christ has done so, how dare you say (Page: 15. N.
18.) The contrary Doctrine I do at no hand believe to be a damnable Heresy? Is
it not a damnble Heresy to believe that Christ can fail of his promise?
Besides, since these Protestants profess, and you also conceive, that God has
promised the Church shall certainly be assisted, so far as not to err in
Fundamental Points; I ask, whether the Church can resist such an Assistance
or Motion of God, or no? Whatsoever you answer for Protestants, and yourself,
will serve for an Answer to this very Objection of resistibility, or
irresistibility, which you make against us, who defend the infallibility of the
Church, and absolute certain Assistance, that she shall never err in matters
belonging to Faith and Religion. But to return.

80. Seeing the Church cannot perish, she cannot fail in Fundamental Points;
and seeing also you confess, that it is impossible to determine in particular
what Points be Fundamental; (and we see other Protestants could never yet
agree in giving a Catalogue of such Points) we must either believe that she can
fail in no Points at all, or else we cannot be sure, that she fails not in
Fundamental Articles. This granted, I go a step further, and say; that seeing
in the ordinary course of Gods Providence, we are not taught by immediate
Revelations, Enthusiasmes, or the like, but by the Ministry of the Church, it
follows, that God has endued and adorned her with such Prerogatives and
Notes, that all who will cooperate with Gods Grace, may attain the knowledge of
Her, and be able to join themselves to Her Communion, and abandon all other
false Synagogues or Congregations. Otherwise it is all one to make the true
Church invisible, or indiscernable from other Communityes, and to say there is
no true Church at all, in order to any fruit, which faithful people can take
or receive from Her; and infallibility in Fundamental Points, which, even
Protestants grant Her, will serve to no purpose at all. It is your own saying,
(Page: 105. N. 139.) No Church can possibly be fit to be a Gaide, but only a
Church of some certain denomination. And what comfort can it be to our souls
as Whitaker said, That Christ's Church never shall fail, if we cannot know
where that Church is, nor that there be Means and Notes, to show her unto us?
Neither can any be obliged to obey her Commands, follow her Doctrine, hear her
preachers, frequent her Sacraments etc: unless they can be sure to find her.
(Rom: 10. Verse: 14.15.) How shall they believe him whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a Preacher? But how shall they preach unless
they be sent? Behold preaching, in the ordinary course, necessary to Faith, and
lawful Mission necessary to Preaching! All which can belong only to the
visible true Church. For this cause, (Ephesians: 4.) There must be in the Church,
Pastors to govern, and Doctors to teach. And (Esaias: 62.6.) We read; upon thy
walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the day and all the night for
ever they shall not hold their peace. If they hold not their peace, they must
have auditors, who must be known, and these must know where their Preachers
are to be found. Even Calvin (Lib: 4. Inst: Chap: 1. Sect: 4.) Says, that the
knowledge of the visible Church is not only profitable, but necessary for us,
and that we are to be kept under her custody and government all the days of
our life, our weakness requiring that we be her Disciples through the whole
course of our life. And having (Sect 5.) alleged the words (Ephesians: 4.11.) He
adds; We see that God, who could make men perfect in a moment, yet will not do
it but by the education of the Church. God inspires Faith, but by Means of the
Gospel, as Paul tell us (Rom: 10.17.) That Faith comes by hearing. Although
the Power of God be not tied to outward means, yet he has tied us to the
ordinary way of teaching. Whereby we see, that even those who talk so much of
the private Spirit, yet profess that it is not given without the Ministry of
the Church, as I said above. Fulk also ( in his Answer to the counterfaite
Catholic, Page: 100.) says of Preachers: Truth cannot be continued in the
world but by their Ministry. And in Propositions and Principles disputed in
the university of Geneva. (Page: 845.) The Ministry is an esse^tiall mark of
the true Church. Mr. Deering (in his Reading upon the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Chap: 3. Lecture 15.) says; Salvation springs in preaching of the Gospel,
and is shut up again with the ceasing of it. And, (Ibid: Lectur: 16. fine)
Take away preaching, you take away Faith. Cartwright (in his second Reply,
Part: 1. Page: 381. circa medium) maintayneth, that the people perish, where
there be no preachers, although there be Readers. And that by bare reading,
ordinarily there is no salvation, no Faith. Let Protestants mark this. If
Scripture were of itself evident in all Points of Faith, it were sufficient to
read it; and people need not perish for want of preaching, but Faith and
salvation might be had without it, by only reading Scripture.

81. Out of what has been said, these important Corollaryes are manifestly
deduced. First: That the true Church, which all ought to seek, and may find if
they endeavor, and be not wanting to Gods Grace, is a visible Congregation,
which may be distinguished from all other, and so come to be of one
denominatio^. For, it is evide^t, our Savior said not of false pastors and
prelates, he that hears you, hears me Luc: 10.16. nor were false Preachers
sent by him; nor did he appoint Pastors, Doctors etc. to be followed in a
false Church; nor did he appoint watchmen etc. in Babylon, but in Jerusalem:
nor can the sayings of Protes^nts, which I have ^ited above, be understood
either of a false Church, or of a true Church, as it were in general and in
abstracto, without being possible to be known in particular. But they must be
understood, of a true Church; with relation to us, and the salvation of
particular persons, for which end our B Savior did constitute, and does
preserve Her: What else ^^n Calvin's words signify? That it is necessary for us
to know her; That the keeps and defends us; That we must be her Discrples;
That our of her ^osome, no remission of sins can be hoped: That although God
could, yet he will not bring Us to perfection, but by the education of the
Church: That he inspires Faith, by the instrument of the Gospel, and Means of
hearing; and that God has tied us to this ordinary way. And what else can Fulk,
and other Protestants mean. For it were but foolery to say, That an unknown
Ministry is an essential Mark of the true Church? Or that salvation springs
in a preaching not known where to be found, and is shut up with ceasing of it?
Or that truth cannot be continued: in the world without the ministry of
Preachers? Or of any such sayings?

82. Secondly: It follows, that seeing there must always be a known
particular Church which cannot perish, that is in your Principles, cannot err
in Fundamental Points, that known Church must be infallible absolutely in all
Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental. For, if we did conceive she could
err in any one Point of Faith, we could not rely on her Authority in any
other; which you also grant, as we have lately showed; and (Page: 105. N. 139.)
you speak directly to our present purpose in these words: We utterly deny, the
Church to be an Infallible Guide in Fundamentalls; for to say so were to oblige
ouerselves to find some certain society of men, of whom we might be certain,
that they neither do, nor can err in Fundamentalls, nor in declaring what is
Fundament all: And consequently to make any Church an Infallible Guide in
Fundamentalls, would be to make it Infallible in all things which she proposes
and requires to be believed. To which Assertion of yours, I subsume thus: But
there must be always a visible Church discernable from all false
Congregations, which Church cannot err in Fundamental Points of Faith:
Therefore there must always be a discernable Church, Infallible in all things
she proposes, and requires to be believed.

83. Thirdly: It is deduced: That even according to the most rigid Protestants,
God does not ordinarily affoard his Grace for bringing men to Faith by the only
consideration of his Creatures, or by the Law written in our hearts, or by other
secet means, but by teaching, preaching, and the like. By which consideration,
we have not only confuted what you said, (Page: 100. N. 123.) that men might be
made Faithful without either necessity of Scripture; or Church; but that also
is answered, which you Object (Page: 356. N. 38.) where you ask; Why should not
I be made a true and Ortodoxe Christian, by believing all the Doctrine of
Christ, though I cannot derive my descent from a Perpetual Succession that
believed it before me? To which demand, the Answer is very easy, and
convincing, to all such as against the Pelagians, believe true Christian Faith
to be the Gift of God, and producible only by his special Grace and
Inspiration, which he gives only by the means appointed in his Holy
providence, that is, Preaching, Teaching, and Ministry of his visible Church,
as we have heard Calvin saying, God inspires Faith, by Means of the Gospel,
as Paul tells us, that Faith comes by hearing. And if any will take upon them,
to believe by force of natural Reason, or by Revelatio^ in Scripture,
understood by their own wit and interpretation, they shall be sure to be
miserably deceyved, and be far enough from exercising any true Act of Divine
supernatural Faith, necessary to Salvation. Now the Church by Divine
Institution cannot consist without a Succession of Bishops, from the Apostles
to the worlds end, and therefore God gives not his Assistance for the production
of true Faith, except by the Ministry of such a Church, as is governed by
Bishops; though no man denies, but that he might have done otherwise, by
ordaining and ordering another course of his holy Providence; as Protestants
will grant that God might have saved men without Scripture, though in their
opinion de facto he will not do it, but that it, even taken alone, is not only
sufficient, but necessary to salvation.

84. Fourthly I deduce; That, the Premises considered, it may justly appear to
every Christian very strange, that (Page: 150. N. 41.) having cited these words
of Charity Maintained; If the Church be not an Infallible teacher, why are we
commanded to seek, to hear, to obey the Church? You would answer in this
manner: For commands to s^eke the Church, I have not yet met with any, and I
believe, you, if you were to show them, would be yourself to seek. But yet if
you could produce some such, we might seek the Church to many good purposes,
without supposing her a guide Infallible. And then for hearing and obeying the
Church, I would feign know, whether none may be heard and obeyed, but those
that are infallible? Whether particular churches, Governors, Pastors, Parents,
be not to be heard and obeyed? Or whether all these be infallible? I wonder you
will thrust upon us so often these worn out objections, without taking notice
of their Answers. But all this is clearly confuted, by what has been said
already. And 1. What Christian would not wonder, as I said, to hear you
affirm, that you have not met with any commands to seek the Church? If the
Ministry of the Church be the ordinary Means to attain Faith, and, as even
yourself confess, a necessary Introduction to it; if Faith come by hearing; if
in Her only we con expect to find true Pastors and Doctors; if it be
necessary to know her, as Calvin confesses; if Faith, remission of sins, and
salvation cannot be had except by her Means; I beseech you, are not these
sufficient commands to seek Her, or rather may we not call this command of
seeking her, either the command of Commands, or else a command employed in all
the commands, of Believing, Hoping, Loving, Repenting and seeking salvation,
seeing these cannot be had, but by seeking, and finding her, and is it not
evident, that if we be obliged to attain an End, we are bound to seek out the
Means, which are necessary for that End? Nay do you not speak inconsequently
to yourself, while you deny not, but that there is a command to hear and obey
the Church, and yet deny that there is any command to seek her? It seems you
are indeed a child of Adam, who would hide yourself from God, and from those
Superiors whom he has appointed to guide and govern you, in his place. If
one believe that there are some, whom by Gods appointment he is to hear and
obey, in order to Heaven, and Happyness, is it not his part, or has he not a
most strict obligation, to do his best endeavor, to find out such persons, or
such a Congregation? But, say you, we might seek the Church, to many good
purposes, without supposing Her a Guide Infallible. No doubt, but, speaking in
general, we may seek one without supposing him to be a Guide Infallible, as
one may seek some lost sheep, such as you are, to bring them from Heresy to
the Church, and from Socinianisme to true Reason, (Which will not be guided by
itself, but by a Superior Master, appointed by God) without supposing them to
be Infallible Guides. But when we seek a Church, from which alone we con
learn with certainty required to Faith, what Scripture is Canonical and all
Points of Faith necessary to salvation (neither of which we can learn from
Scripture) we must suppose that Church to be Infallible. Thus all they who
believe the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, (whether total, or not)
consequently believe it to be infallible: And (Page: 35. N. 7.) you confess,
that the Means to decide controversyes in Faith and Religion, must be endued
with an Universal Infallibility in whatsoever it propounds for a Divine
Truth. And if the Church were not Infallible, one of those many good purposes
which you fancy to yourself in seeking Her, would be, that we should certainly
expose ourselves to danger, of being perniciously deceived, in matters
concerning Eternal Salvation; seeing, as I said, we have no other certain and
sufficient Means, to believe scripture, and other Articles of Faith. And now,
I beseech you, tell me, whether we hear and obey all particular Churches,
Governors, Pastors, and Parents, as Judges of Controversyes in Faith and
Religion, and the only Means to propose to us all Points necessary to be
believed? Certainly, if we were obliged to hear and obey them in so eminent a
degree, (as we are not) we ought also to believe them to be infallible, even
according to your own Assertion repeated in diverse places of your Book. I
wonder you and other Protestants will be still thrusting upon us this worneout
Objection, without taking notice of the Answer which has been so often given,
and which shows, that your Objection tumes against yourself. And as for our
obligation to seek the Church, none can speak more home, than Dr. Field, one
of the chiefest Protestant Divines of England (in his Treatise of the Church,
in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord Archbishop,) teaching expressly, that
there remains nothing for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out, which among all the societyes in the
world; is that Church of the Living God, which is the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, that so they may embrace her Communion, follow her directions, and rest
in her judgment.

85. Fifthly; I know not whether you speak more untruly, or perniciously, or
(give me leave to speak truth) more ridiculously, when (Page: 105. N. 139.) you
say to Charity Maintained: You must know there is a wide difference between,
being infallible in Fundamentalls, and being an infallible Guide even in
Fundamentalls. Dr. Potter says, That the Church is the former; that is, There
shall be some men in the world, while the world lasts, which err not in
Fundamentals; for otherwise there should be no Church: For to say the Church,
while it is the Church may err in Fundamentalls, implies contradiction, and is
all one as to say, The Church, while it is the Church, may not be the Church.
So that to say, that the Church is infallible in Fundamentalls, signifyes no
more but this, There shall be a Church in the world for ever. Thus you: And
thus the sons of men, and children of darkness, take pleasure to seem witty by
jeasting sacrilegiously in things belonging to God. The Church cannot err in
Fundamental Ponts, because if she err in such Points, she is no more a
Church. Why say you not thus? All men are infallibly true, because if they
err, they cease to be true, in that wherein they err. Mr. Chillingworth is
immortal, and cannot die, because if he die, he is no more Mr. Chillingworth;
and happy had it been for him, and others seduced by his sophistry, si non
fuisset natus homo ille. Thus also you may say: That God, when he threatened and
decreed, that Adam should be mortal, and dye, if he transgressed his command,
at the same time even after his transgression he was immortal and could not
dye, because if he died, he should no more be Adam. To be immortal, in common
sense, signifyes a certainty not to dye, and not ridiculously, that if he die,
he does exist no more; and so not to exist implies the direct contrary of being
immortal, and supposes one to be mortal; and therefore to say, The Church is
infallible, because if she err, she is no more a Church, comes to this, that
she is fallible, which is directly contrary to infallible. For, as we said of
immortality, so in proportion, infallibility must signify an assurance not to
err; and the Church to be infallible in Fundamental Points, must signify,
that she cannot err in them, and so not loose her being by such error, which
is plainly opposite to your saying, that she may err, and thereby cease to be.
You err therefore, in not distinguishing between Actum primum and secundum, or
Potentiam and Actum, as Philosophers speak. To say, a Church is infallible, or
cannot err or be destroyed, signifyes some antecedent, either extrinsecall or
intrinsecall, Principle, or Power, preserving Her in such manner, as that such
a Principle, cannot actually consist with error. And therefore you speak not
like a Philosopher, in saying, The Church is infallible in Fundamentalls, that
is, There shall be some men in the world while the world lasts, which err not
in Fundamentalls, passing ab actuad potentiam, and proving that men are
infallible, because de facto they err not, whereas men may chance not to err,
and yet not be infallible. You have heard Whitaker saying, We believe to the
comfort of our souls, that Christ's Church has continued, and never shall
fail so long as the world indureth, and we account it a profane Heresy to
teach otherwise. What comfort, I pray, can it be to souls, that the Church may
err in Fundamental Points, yet so, as she remaynes no more a Church; which
Whitaker accounts a profane Heresy? Every one conceaves infallibility to be a
favor, and Privilege? You tell us the plain contrary; That infallibility in
the Church, for the most principal and necessary Points of Faith, does not
signify, that she may not err in them, but that if she err, she must
inevitably perish, or dye by such a damnable error, and become as it were the
Devils martyr, by dying for so bad a cause: Which surely is no favor or
Privilege; especially if we call to mind, an other Doctrine of yours, that
Errors not Fundamental are compatible with the Being of a Church, which is a
greater favor than to be destroyed: And therefore how can infallibility in
Fundamental Points, in your way of explication, (that if she err in such
Points she cease to be a Church) be a Privilege or Favor, seeing no body will
say, that fallibility and error in Points not Fundamental, which yet destroy
not the Church, are favors? Other men conceive, that these Propositions are
convertible: Whosoever is infallible, cannot err; and, whosoever cannot err,
is infallible: But you contrary to all other men's Logic, say the Church is
infallible, because she may err damnably and desperately, and thereby loose her
Being.

86. When Protestants teach, That the Church cannot perish, but is infallible
in Fundamental Points, they make a difference between Points Fundamental, and
not Fundamental; and teach, That she may fail and de facto has failed in
these, but cannot fail in those. But you in opposition to all others
maintain, That the Church may err both in Fundamental and not Fundamental
Articles; from whence, every one would infer, that she is absolutely fallible
in both, and infallible in neither; or if infallible in either, in both: And
yet you have found a devise, that though she err in both those kinds of
Articles, she is infallible in one of them only, that is, in Fundamental
Points: And fallible in Points not Fundamental. A rare piece of Philosophy! To
err damnably, and Fundamentally, and yet be infallible! Yea, which is most
admirable, to be infallible, because she erres most deeply, and be fallible
because she erres in matters of lesser moment. Beside, other Protestants put a
difference between the universal Church is infallible and cannot err in
Fundamental Points, but that Particular Churches and Persons may; But in your
doctrine there ca^ be no such distinction. The universal Church, with you, is
infallible, because if she err Fundamentally, she ceases to be a Church, as
also Particular Churches, if they err Fundamentally, cease to be Churches; and
the same I say of particular Persons, and so particular Churches and Persons
shall be no less infallible than the universal Church, which is contrary to
the doctrine of other Protestants, and to your own words also (Page: 106. N.
140.) We yield unto you, that there shall be a Church which never erreth in
some Points, because (as we conceive) God has promised so much. Now you will
not say, that God has promised so much to particular Churches and Persons; and
therefore you must put a difference between the universal, and particular
Churches; which difference cannot stand with this your speculation, that the
Church is only in fallible in some points, because if she err in them, she
ceases to be a Church: which exoticall kind of infallibility agrees to all
particular Churches, and persons.

87. Hence it is, that Protestants ground the Perpetuily of the vniverfall
Church, not upon a probable belief or hope that it shall be so, or upon Her
actual not erring Fundamentally, as you do, but upon some antecedent
Principle, namely, the Promises of our Savior Christ and Assistance of the
Holy Ghost. Dr. Potter in particular, whom you undertook to defend, speaks
very clearly to this purpose (Page: 105.) in these words, The whole Militant
Church, (that is all the members of it) cannot possibly err, either in the
whole Faith, or any necessary Article of it. For, such an error must needs
disvnite all the Members from Christ the Head; and so dissolve the Body, and
leave Him no Church, which is impossible. Mark that he says not as you do;
The Church cannot err in any necessary Article, because thereby she should
cease to be a Church, but contrarily, seeing it is impossible that she can cease
to be a Church, and leave Christ no Church, she cannot possibly err in the
whole Faith, or any necessary Article of it. With what modesty, or conscience
do you alledg here Dr. Potter, as if he did not disagree from you? The contrary
whereof will appear more by his words (Page: 153.154.155.) The Church, says he,
Universal is ever in such manner assisted by the good spirit, that it never
totally fails, or falls of from Christ. For it is so firmly founded on the
Rock: Matthew: 16.18. ( that is on Christ the only Fundation, Cor: 3.11.) that
the gates of Hell) whether by temptation, or persecution) shall not prevail
against it. And that you may see how far he was from dreaming of your
Chimericall infallibility, he cites Bellarmine (de Eccles: Lib: 3. Cap: 13.
saying, That the Church cannot err, is proved out of Scripture, (Matthew: 16.)
upon this rock I will build my Church) and then goes on in these words: The
whole Church cannot so err as to be destroyed. For then our Lords promise here
(Matthew: 16.18.) of Her stable edification, should be of no value. Observe this:
And what he has afterward, in these words: The Church universal has not the
like assurance from Christ, that she shall not err in unnecessary additions,
as she has for her not erring in taking away from the Faith, what is
Fundamental and necessary. It is comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord
in mercy will secure her from all capital dangers, and conserve her on earth
against all enemies: But she may not hope to triumph over all sin and error.
That the Church be never robbed of any truth necessary to the being of the
Church, the promises of Christ assure us. Behold; First; The Church may err in
not Fundamental, but cannot err in Fundamental Ponts, whereas you say she may
err in both. 2. That the reason why she cannot err in Fundamental Points, is,
because she is firmly founded on the rock, and if she did fail, our Lords
promise of her stableedification should be of no value: And therefore the Lord
will even secure her from all capital dangers, and of this, the promises of
Christ assure us. And this, as I said, is the common doctrine of Protestants:
Whereby it appears, that the Church is not said to be infallible in
Fundamental Points, because she should perish by every such Error; but
contrarily, because she is assisted by the Holy Ghost, never to err in such
Points, she shall never be destroyed; in direct opposition to you who say, that
she may err, and by erring be destroyed. What a kind of Syllogism must be
framed out of this your Doctrine, in this manner? The Church is infallible, or
cannot err in Fundamental Points, because if she did so err, she should
cease to be a Church: But she may cease to be a Church: Therefore she is
infallible, and cannot err in Fundamentalls. You should in ferr the direct
contrary: Therefore she may err, and is not infallible. I beseech you, of what
value should our Saviors promises be, according to your doctrine? That the
Church should not err, at least in Fundamental Points of Faith? No. You say
she can err in such Points. In what then? Only in this admirable work, that
if she did err, she should be sure to pay for it, by perishing. For, say you,
To say the Church, while it is the Church, may err in Fundamentalls, implies
contradiction, and is all one as to say, the Church, while it is the Church,
may not be the Church. This then is the effect of Gods Promises, that that
shall be, which implies contradiction to be otherwise; that is, Gods Power and
Promise shall only effect, that two contradictions be not true; as, that if
some Living sensible creature be a beast, he shall not be a man. Is not this to
be sacrilegiously impious against God, and his holy Promises, and Providence?
Is the Church so built upon a Rock, assisted by the Holy Ghost, that the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against Her, only to this effect, that if she err,
she shall perish; that is, the Gates of Hell shall in the most prevalent way
that can be imagined, prevail against her? What foolish impietyes are these?
Let us therefore infer out of these Premises: That there must be always a true
visible Church, known, and discernable from all false ones, and therefore of
one denomination: That even according to Protestants, this true Church must be
infallible in all Fundamental Points: That if she be infallible in
Fundamental Points, we must believe Her to be infallible in all, even
according to your own grant, as I have showed out of your own words: And so
finally we must conclude, that there must be always a visible Church of one
denomination, and infallible in all Points of Faith, as well Fundamental, as
not Fundamental.

88. And by what has been said, I confute and retort your saying, (Page: 150.
N. 39.) A man that were destitute of all means of communicating his thoughts
to others, might yet in himself and to himself be infallible, but he could not
be a Guide to others. A man, or a church that were invisible, so that none
could know how to repair to it for direction, could not be an infallible
Guide, and yet he might be himself infallible. This, I say, is retorted. For
whosoever is infallible in him self, is fit to be an infallible Guide to
others, per se loquendo, and in actu primo, and needs only that accide^tall
impediments be removed, as it happens in our case, the Church being visible,
and spread over the whole world. So that she can be hidden to no body, but is
furnished with all means of communicating her Doctrine to others. Yourself,
and Protestants, grant, that the Church is a necessary introduction to Faith,
which she could not be, if she were invisible, or that none could know how to
repair to her for direction: And then Protestants teaching that she is
infallible in Fundamental points, it follows, that she may be an infallible
Guide in such points, and in all other, according to your own inference. And
so I conclude that your difference of the Churches being infallible, and an
infallible Guide, is vanished into nothing. But enough of this. Let us now
proceed to other Reasons proving the necessity of an infallible Guide.

89. I prove the infallibility of the Church, by confuting a Reason or
similitude much urged by our Adversaryes: That to him who knows the way, a
Guide is not necessary: And therefore the Scripture being a plain Rule for all
necessary Articles of Faith, no living Guide will be necessary.

90. But this Argument is many ways defective. 1. We retort it; Seeing it has
been proved that Scripture alone is not a sufficient Rule, a Living Guide must
be necessary. Certainly if the whole Bible had been put into several men's
hands, without any precedent known Tradition, Declaration, or Ministry of the
Church, it would have fallen out, that in the most important Mysteryes of
Christian Religion, which now all are obliged to believe, for example, The
chiefest Articles of the Creed, Sacraments etc. scarcely any one would have
agreed with another; and much more had it been impossible for them by the sole
evidence of Scripture, to join in the same Idea, or frame of a Church. Suppose
then the Bible had been offered to some Understanding Pagan, wholly ignorant of
Christian Religion and Doctrine, do you think he would have been able to
gather from the bare words of Scripture, the same meaning, or Articles, which
Christians now believe by the help of Tradition, instruction, and preaching? I
say, he would never have fallen upon the same meaning of the words, whether he
did believe them to be true, or no, (as we see Protestants themselves cannot
agree.) Which is a sign, that the words only of Scripture do not evidently
signify those Mysteryes, which Christians believe them to contain: Otherwise
every one who understands the words, would understand the true sense, as
ordinarily we understand the meaning of other writings, wherein we see men do
seldom disagree. And the more we consider the force, use, and necessity of
Tradition, the more we shall be constrained to rank it among those things,
which are better known, by wanting, than we can apprehend by always enjoying
them. If men did do things only by the Book, even in mechanical arts, or
handy-crafts, how different and unlike works would every one take from the
precepts, learned only by reading, and with how much study and difficulty would
that be done, and how different would they be both from one another, and from
those, which artificers do now by custom and tradition work with great ease
and uniformity? I doubt whether you would trust an apothecary taught only by
his book, or pharmacopaeia, without any master at all.

91. Secondly; If one know a way as perfectly as it is capable to be known,
but that indeed it is such, as there cannot possibly be given any Rule or
Direction how to find, or walk in it without danger of error, such a knowledge
of such a way would not be sufficient of itself, but a guide would be necessary
to sind, and walk in it, without danger. Now we have showed, not only that the
Scripture contains not all points necessary to be believed, (for which therefore
we stand in need of a guide) but also that there is no certain infallible
Rule, how to know certainly the meaning of those truths which it contains,
which we proved out of Protestants themselves, and by the many hard and
intricate Rules which they give for that purpose, and by their perpetual and
irreconciliable differences, which could not happen, if they had any such
clear and certain Rules, wherein agreeing, they must needs agree among
themselves. Que sunt eadem vni tertio sunt eadem inter se. Therefore beside
scripture which you compare to a way, there must be a living Judge to guide us
in that way.

92. Thirdly: You teach, That Scripture is a plain way, in this sense, that
although we cannot either by it, or any other Means, know what points in
particulat be Fundamental; yet because all such Truths, and many more, are
evident in Scripture, whosoever knows all that is evident, shall besure to
know all that is necessary or Fundamental. Now this very Doctrine shows, that
Scripture alone cannot be a plain and sufficient way. For, to know precisely
and certainly all evident places of Scripture, is impossible to many, and of
obligation to none, as I declared elsewhere; and therefore the End (which is to
know all necessary points, and can be attained by this Means alone) cannot be
of obligation, which to affirm is absurd; as if one should say, points
necessary to be known, are not necessary to be known. By a Living Guide this
difficulty is avoided, we being sure that the Church will not fail to propose
in due time, all that shall be necessary without imposing on men's Consciences,
heavy, and ungrounded burdens.

93. Fourthly; There is a great and plain disparity between the knowing of a
way by our corporal eyes, and finding out a Truth by our understanding, the
eye of our soul. Our senses are naturally, necessarily, and immoveably
determined to their objects. One who is supposed to know his way perfectly, may
Voluntarily take an other way, but cannot therefore be said to mistake his own.
It passes not so with our understanding, except in some prime principles of
Reason, evident of themselves. In other points, which either are elevated above
the natural forces of humane capacity, or have an appearance of being contrary
to it, or cross our will, or carry with them a repugnance to the natural
dictates and inclinations of flesh and blood, our understanding is apt and
ready to mistake or be misled, as daily experience teaches, and therefore stands
in need of some assisting help and Authority, believed to be infallible, to
strengthen and settle it against all encounters and temptations. It is your
own Assertion (Page: 329. N. 7.) that, the Points which we believe, should not
be so evidently certain, as to necessitate our understanding to an Assent,
that so there might be some Obedience in Faith, which can hardly have place
where there is no possibility of disobedience as there is not, when the
understanding does all, and the will nothing. Now the Religion of protestants,
though it be much more credible than yours, yet is not pretended to have the
absolute evidence of sense or demonstration. Behold a confessed difference,
between one who knows a way by evidence of sense, and an other, who believes a
way or Rule only by Faith. The former needs no command of the will, nor any
guide; but the latter needs a guide, and you confess he needs the command of
the will, which were not needful if the way, which is Holy Scripture, were so
plain as you pretend: and if the understanding must depend on the will for
believing Points which seem evident in Scripture, that there might be some
place for obedience; how shall the weakness and mutability of the will it self
be established, except by some other infallible Living Authority? And therefore
your Argument proves nothing, because it proves too much; that, as one who
knows and sees his way, neeeds no help of his will, or of Guide, or any other
particular assistance; so for attaining the true meaning of Scripture, we need
no interpreter, no diligence, even such as Protestants prescribe, as skill in
languages, conferring of places etc: though (2 Pet: 1.21) it be said; Not by
man's will was prophecy brought at any time: But the holy men of God spoke,
inspired with the Holy Ghost. Which sequeles being very false, you must
acknowledge a great disparity, between the evident knowing of a way, and
understanding Scripture. To which purpose. I may well alledg your own words
(Page: 137. N. 19.) If we consider the strange power that education and
prejudices instilled by it, have over, even excellent understandings, we may
well imagine that many Truths which in themselves are revealed plainly enough,
are yet to such or such a man, prepossest with contrary opinions, not revealed
plainly. I pray you tell us, what education, or prejudices, could hinder a man
from finding that way, which he is supposed perfectly to know, and which it is
not in his power to miss by ignorance, though, as I fayd, he may voluntary go
out of it? You must therefore acknowledge, that your similitude or parity is
nothing but a disparate, and disparity.

94. Fifthly: Let a man be never so perfect in the knowledge of his way, he shall
never come to his journeyes end, if he want strength to walk that way. Now
Faith being the gift of God, and requiring the assistance of Grace, exceeds the
strength of humane wit or will; and this Grace being not given but by the
Ministry of the Church* as I have declared, and as we have heard Calvin saying
God inspires Faith, but by the instrument of the Gospel as Paul teaches, that
Faith comes by hearing: It follows, that none can, in the ordinary course,
receive strength to understand, and know the way, which you say is Scripture,
without the Ministry of the Church, or a Living Guide; and so it appears many
ways, that your Argument, or similitude proves nothing against us, but very
much against yourself.

95. Tenthly, and lastly: I prove the universal infallibility of the Church,
by answering an Argument or removing an impediment, which Potter objects, as if
some Catholic Doctors held not the Church to be universally infallible. This
the Doctor (Page: 149.) pretends to prove out of Dr. Stapleton in particular;
as if he did deny the Church to be infallible in Points not Fundamental; to
which purpose he cites him (Princip: Doctrinal: Lib: 8. Contr: 4. Cap: 15.) But
this is clearly confuted by Charity Maintained (Part: 2. Chap: 5. Page:
127.128.129.130.) showing, that Dr. Stapleton does not oppose Points
Fundamental to other revealed Truths, or Points of Faith not Fundamental, as
if the infallibility of the Church did extend itself only to Fundamental
Articles; but he distinguishes between Points revealed, and belonging to Faith,
and Points not revealed, nor belonging to Faith, but to Philosophy, or curious
disputes, either not called in Question amongst Catholics, as if they were
matters belonging to Religion, or if they chance to be such, yet are not
defined by the Church. For, if once they be controverted, and the Church give
her sentence, he expressly teaches in the same place, that the infallibility of
the Church has place in those Points which are called in Question, or are
publicly practiced by the Church: As also (Rel: Cont: 1. Q. 3. Art: 6.) He
expressly says, that certain Doctrines are either primary Principles of
Faith, or else, though not primary, yet defined by the Church, and so, as if
they were primary. Others are Conclusions deduced from those Principles, but
yet not desined. Of the first kind are the Articles of Faith, and whatsoever is
defined in Councels against Heretics etc: Of the second, are questions, which
either belong to the hidden works of God, or to certain most obscure places
of Scripture, which are beside the Faith, and of which we may be ignorant
without loss of Faith, yet they may be modestly, and fruitfully disputed of.
And afterward he teaches, that whatsoever the Church does universally hold,
either in doctrnie or manners, belongs to the foundation of Faith: And proves
it out of S. Austine, (Sermon: 14. de verb: Domini. Ep: 28.89.96.) who calls the
custom of the Church, Ecclesiae morem fundatissimum, and Fidem fundatissimam,
consuetudinem Ecclesiae fundatissimam, Authoritatem stabilissimam fundatissimae
Ecclesiae: The most grounded practice of the Church, and most grounded Faith,
the most grounded custom of the Church, the most firm Authority of the most
grounded Church. Could any thing be more clear, to show, that according to Dr.
Stapleton, the infallibility of the Church reaches further then to those
Points which you call Fundamental, and that it belongs to the very foundation
of Faith, that we believe whatsoever the Church holds? And that it is not
lawful for any to dispute against such determinations of the Church? Which
does overthrow your distinction of Points Fundmentall and not Fundamental*
though you alledg the Authority of S. Thomas (2.2. Q. 2. Art: 5.) and Stapleton
in favor thereof. For S. Thomas in the very place you cited, after he had said,
that there are some objects of Faith which we are bound explicitly to believe;
adds, that we are bound to believe all other Points, when they are
sufficiently propounded to us, as belonging to Faith. Thus far Charity
Maintayn^d. Whereby it is manifest, that according to Stapleton, the Church
cannot err in defining any point to be revealed, which is not so; or that it
is not revealed, if indeed it be so; and consequently, that she is universally
infallible in all points belonging to Faith, whether they be of them selves
Fundamental, or not Fundamental. I say, of themselves: for in sensu
composito, as I may say, That is, upon supposition that once they be desined,
he expressly declares; as we have seen, that that belongs to the Fundation of
Faith whatsoever the Church universally holds either in Doctrine or worship.
When therefore he says: (Princip: Doctrine: Controv: 4. Lib: 8. Chap: 15.) for
God, as also nature, as he is not wanting in things necessary, so is he not
lavish in superflnityes; He speaks not of points of Faith not Fundamental,
which being once defined, he professes to belong to the Fundation of Faith, but
in the next precedent words he expressly declares, that when he says, the
Church is not infallible, he understands only, that infallibility was not
granted to her Propter aut invtiles curiositates explendas, aut subtilitates
non necessarias investigandas; Either for satisfying idle curiosityes, or
finding out unnecessary subtiltyes; and proves it, because God and nature as
they are not wanting in things necessary, so are they not lavish in
superfluityes. And therefore Potter did wrong the learned Stapleton, alleging
those his words, as if he had ever dreamed, that the Church is not universally
infallible in all Points of Faith, whether the matters, of themselves, be great
or small.

96. And you also wrong Charity Maintained* in saying (Page: 144. N. 32.) That
he wrongs Dr. Potter when (Part: 1. Page: 91.) he writes thus: Dr. Potter (Sect:
5. Page: 150.) speaks very dangerously toward this purpose (of limiting the
infallibility of the Apostles and Scripture to necessary Points only, as he
restraines the Promises made by Christ to his Church) where he endeavors to
prove, that the infallibility of the Church is limited to Points Fundamental,
because as nature, so God is neither defective in necessaryes, nor lavish in
superfluityes. Which Reason does likewise prove, that the infallibility of
Scripture, and of the Apostles must be restrained to points necessary to
salvation, that so God be not accused, as defective in necessaryes, or lavish
in superfluityes. In which words you say; Charity Maintained wrongs Dr. Potter:
Because it is not he, but Dr. Stapleton in him that speaks the words Charity
Maintained cavills at. Answer; If Charity Maintained had absolutely assirmed,
those to be the very words of Dr. Potter, the Doctor might blame himself only;
who having first cited the immediately precedent words of Dr. Stapleton in a
different or cursiue letter, declaring that they were Dr. Stapletons, and not
his own: the words immediately following (for as nature, so God is neither
defective etc.) he sets down in the ordinary letter of his Book both in his
first and second Edition. 2. Seeing Potter accepts, and approves those words, he
must be answerable, for all consequences that are truly deduced from them, as
if they were his own. 3. The truth is Dr. Stapleton brings those words for a
purpose not only different, but contrary to that for which Dr. Potter alleges
them, and therefore not Stapleton, but Potter must be liable to all bad
consequences, which follow out of them. For, Potter would prove out of them,
that infallibility was given to the Church, not for all, but only for
Fundamental points of Faith; which we have seen to be directly contrary to
the Doctrine of Stapleton, who out of the said words proves only, that
infallibility was not granted, for deciding idle curiosityes, or unprofitable
subtiltyes: And therefore, 4. seeing the life and essence of words, is their
signification, this being wholly different in those words, as they are spoken by
Stapleton, and understood, misapplyed, and misalledged by Potter, Charity
Maintained did not wrong him, but he did wrong Dr. Stapleton in applying the
sound, and as I may say, carcass of his words, against the true meaning and
life of them, intended, and fully declared by Stapleton; as you also, do wrong
Stapleton in approving Potters allegation of those words; and Charity
Maintained, as if he had wronged Potter. Who can deny this to be a good
consequence; God is neither defective in necessaryes, nor lavish in
superfluityes; Therefore he has not induced the Church with infallibility for
deciding of unprofitable questions; which is Stapletons Argument? As contrarily
this other is of no force; God is not lavish in superfluityes; Therefore he has
not conferred infallibility upon his Church, for any other Points of Faith, and
revealed Truths, except such as are of themselves necessary to salvation (as if
all points which are not Fundamental were curious or unprofitable matters.)
Which Potter does infer, directly against the consequence which Stapleton
draws from those very same words, affirming, that every thing defined by the
Church, belongs to the Foundation of Faith. Besides, since Potter alleges
those words, to prove that the promises of our Savior made to his Church, must
be restrained to Points Fundamental, least he might seem lavish in
superfluityes; Charity Maintained had reason to infer, that for the same
Reason of not being lavish in superfluityes, the Doctor might limite the
infallibility of the Apostles to necessary and Fundamental Points. Neither is
it sufficient for you to say (Page: 143. N. 30.) that we read in Scripture, All
Scripture is divinely inspired, and therefore All Scripture, whether it deliver
Fundamental, or not Fundamental Points is true. For, Charity Maintained in
this very place and about this very Text of Scripture which you cite out of him
(and endeavor to answer) by way of prevention, had confuted this your
instance, in these words: If it be urged, That All Scripture is divinely
inspired, that it is the word of God etc: Dr. Potter has affoarded you a ready
answer, to say, That Scripture is inspired, etc: Only in those parts or
parcells wherein it delivers Fundamental points: Thus Charity Maintained. But
you thought safest to dissemble, these words. And I pray, if those unlimited
words concerning the Church; that the gates of hell shall not privaile against
her (Matthew: 16.18.) and that the holy Ghost shall lead her into all truth etc:
(which texts are alleged by Potter) must be limited to Fundamental points;
why may not those other words, all scripture is divinely inspired, signify
only, that all scripture is inspired, for what belongs to points fundamental,
or necessary to salvation, as Cha: Ma: does urge in the same place.

97. Now then, upon the whole matter it is manifest; that the learned Dr.
Stapleton, teaches neither more nor less, concerning the Infallibility of the
Church, than all other Catholics do. For, (besides that which we have said
already) Relect: Controv: 4. Quest: 2. He expressly declares, That she is
infallible in the Conclusion or Doctrine and definition, though it be not
necessary, that she be Infallible in the Arguments, or proofs, or manner of
teaching. Est, says he, in ipsa Doctrina infalliblis, etsi in forma and
ratione docendi, non ita: and therefore he puts no difference, between the
certainty of her Definitions, though the Reasons or proofs which she use,
chance to have, of themselves, more or less certainty, whether they be taken
from Scripture, or Tradition, or otherwise; in regard that these may chance not
to be so clear, as of themselves alone to convince. 2. He teaches, That the
objects of Her certainty are not Questions unnecessary, but such as belong to
the substance of Faith, public Doctrine, and things necessary to salvation:
and we have heard him say, ad fundamentum Fidei pertinere quidquid Ecclesia
tenet, sive in Doctrina, sive in cultu: That whatsoever the Church holds,
either in Doctrine, or in worship, belongs to the fundation of Faith, and that
all things defined by the Church, are as if they were primary principles of
Faith, and so according to him, all things defined by the Church, belong to the
substance of Faith, and are necessary to salvation.

98. But here is not an end of Potters taxing Dr. Stapleton without ground, and
against truth. For (Page: 161.) he says; Stapleton has a new pretty devise,
that the Church, though she be fallible and discursiue in the Means, is yet
Prophetical, and depends upon immediate Revelation (and so infallible) in
delivering the Conclusion. And (Page: 169.) he says: Bellarmin leaves his
companion Stapleton to walk alone in this dangerous path and avoweh to the
contrary (De Council: Lib: 1 Chap: Dicuntur igitur.) that Counsels neither
have, nor write immediate Revelations: But Mr. Doctor, to speak truth,
Bellarmin leaves Stapleton, just as you leave your art of citing Authors
against their meaning. Bellarmin teaches, That Counsels neither have, nor
write immediate Revelations. And does not Stapleton purposely teach, and
carefully prove the same? And does he not do it, even in the first and Third
Notabili, which immediately precede that fourth Notabile, out of which you
pretend to draw that, which you call a new pretty devise? How then can you say,
that Stapleton teaches, that the Church is Prophetical, and depends upon
immediate Revelation in delivering the Conclusion; seeing he teaches expressly
the contrary? Nay, does he not in that very fourth Notabili which you cite,
expressly say; Ecclesiae Doctrina non est simpliciter Prophetica, aut ex
Revelationibus immediatis dependens. The doctrine of the Church, is not simply
Prophetical, or depending upon immediate Revelations. Who would have believed,
that in matters of so great consequence, you could use so little sincerity? Dr.
Stapleton teaches the same, and proves very learnedly (Princip: Doctrine: Contr:
4. Lib: 8. C. 15.) Which very Chapter you also cite, and yet make no conscience
to tell us, that Bellarmin in this leaves Stapleton. But how then does
Stapleton say, the Doctrine of the Church is discursiue in the Means, but is
Prophetical and divine in the Conclusion? Answer. We have showed, that
Stapleton says expressly in the same place, That the Doctrine of the Church is
not Prophetical: And besides, he explicates the word Prophetica by the word
Divina, which you leave out, and says it is divina propter ea quae in tertio
and quarto Argumentis produximus: for the causes which we alleged in the Third
and Fourth Arguments: In which Arguments he proved, that the Church is
infallible, and cannot err, because she is guided and taught by an infallible
master the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets were, (and in this agrees with
Prophets) though as I said out of Stapletons express words, with this
difference, that the Prophets had immediate Revelations, which the Church
pretends not to have, but is infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost, to embrace
and declare former revelations, made to the Apostles; upon which assistance
the certainty and infallibility of her definitions rely, and not upon
discourses or inducements.

99. Potters falsification will appear more by these words of Stapleton The
Doctrine of the Church is discursiue in the means, but is prophetical and
Divine in the Conclusion: which Potter cites thus the the Church though she be
fallible and discursiue in the Means, is yet Prophetical, and depends upon
immediate Revelation, (and so infallible) in delivering the conclusion. What a
mixture is here of Potters words with the words of Stapleton? Which say not
that the Church, depends upon immediate Revelation, but the direct contrary as
we have said, and his Parenthesis, (and so infallible) is also a falsificarion,
as if Stapleton had grounded the infallibility of the conclusion upon immediate
revelation, whereas he grounds it upon an other principle, as we have seen.
This being supposed, that Stapleton teaches, the Church to have no immediate
Revelations, and the certainty of her Definitions to depend on the assistance
of the Holy Ghost, not upon humane disce^^se, and inducements, or Premises, the
Doctor had no Reason to say that Stapletons doctrine is a fancy repugnant to
Reason and to itself. He Objects (page: 168.) A conclusion follows the
disposition of the Means, and results from them. But this is not to the
purpose; seeing the Definitions of the Church are called by Stapleton,
Conclusions, only because they are that which the Church determines and
concludes, not because they are formal Conclusions, essentially, as such,
depending on Premises. Neither does it follow, that there can be no use of
diligence and discourse, if the Church be infallible, in the sense I have
declared. Thus the Apostles in their Council (Act. 15.) did use diligence,
and, as the Scripture says, there was made a great disputation, and they
alleged the working of Miracles and other Arguments of Credibility, and yet no
Christian will deny, but that the Apostles were infallible: So the Church must
on her behalf use diligence, and discourse, that all things on her part, may
be done more sweetly, in order to the persuading of others; but the absolute
certainty of her definitions and conclusions, must rely upon those words which
the Apostles used, Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis: It has seemed good to
the holy Ghost, and us. Neither likewise does it follow, that the Canons of
Counsels are of equal authority with holy. Scriptures, in which every reason,
discourse, Text, and word, are infallible; which we need not say of Counsels,
though they be certain and infallible for the substance of their definition;
Whereof more may be seen in Catholic Writers, and particularly in Bellarmine
whom even Potter does cite, (de Concill: Lib: 2. Chap: 12.) and yet, as if he
had seen no such matter in Bellarmine, inferrs against Stapleton (who fully
agrees with Bellarmine) that if the canons of Counsels be divinely inspired,
they must be of equal Authority with the Holy Scriptures

100. Many other Arguments might be brought, to prove the necessity of an
infallible Living Guide, and Ecclesiastical Traditions; from Scriptures,
Fathers, Theological Reasons, which I omit, referring the Reader to Charity
Maintained (Part. 1. Chap: 2. and 3.) and in this whole Work, I have upon many
occasions proved the same. For, this point is so transc^^dent, and necessary,
that we must meet with it, almost in all Controversyes concerning Faith and
Religion. This I must not omit, that I having answered, and confuted, all the
Objections which you could make against the Arguments and Reasons alleged by
Charity Maintained, it follows, that they remain still in force, and prove
this most necessary Truth: Scripture alone is not a sufficient Rule of Faith,
but Tradition, and a living Judge are necessary to determine Matters belonging
to Faith and Religion: And whosoever will take an other way, will have reason
(and God grant it prove not too late, to tremble at those words of Uincent:
Lirinens: (contra Here Is: Cap: 23.) concerning Origin: Dum parvi pendit antiquam
Christianae Religionis simplicitatem; dum Ecclesiasticas Traditiones, and
Veterum magisteria contemnens, quaedam Scripturarum capitula novo more
interpretatur; meruit vt de se quoque Ecclesiae Dei diceretur: Si surrexerit in
medio tui Propheta. Et paulo post: Non audies, inquit, verba Prophetae illius.
While he despises the ancient simplicity of Christian Religion; while
contemning Ecclesiastical Traditions, and magistery of the Ancient, he
interprets some places of Scripture in a new manner, he deserved that it should
be also said to the Church of him: If there shall rise in mids of thee a
Prophet. And a little after thou shall not hear the words of that Prophet. God
grant, that every one hear this wholesome advise: The neglect thereof alone,
has been cause of Schisms and heresies in ancient Times, and never more than
in these lamentable days of ours.

101. But because you do without end object, that we cannot prove the
infallibility of the Church without running round in a Circle, proving the
Church by Scripture, and Scripture by the Church, which is in effect, to prove,
the Church by the Church, and the Scripture by Scripture; I will in the next
Chapter endeavor to confute, and show the vanity of this so often repeated
Objection.

CHAP: V. IN WHAT MANNER AND ORDER WE PROVE THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHVRCH
1. I Say, in what manner and order. For we having already proved the
Infallibility of the Church; inremaines only now to declare, how we can do it
without falling, into a Circle, proving the Scripture, by the Church, and the
Church by the Scripture, which you object without end; though, if you be a man
of any solid learning, it is impossible you could be ignorant of the Answer,
which Catholic Writers give to this common objectio^. We grant that with
different sorts of persons, we must proceed in a different way. If one believe
not the Church, or Notes, proprietyes, and prerogatives belonging to Her, and
yet believe Scripture to be the Word of God; to such a man the Church may be
proved by Scripture; as contrarily, to him who believes the Infallibility of
the Church, it may be demonstrated in virtue of Her Authority, what Scripture
is Canonical, and what is the true sense thereof, by informing him what Canon
the Church receyves, and what Interpretation she gives. Thus, in regard
Protestants deny the Infallibility of the Church, but pretend to believe
Scripture to be the Word of God, to them we prove by Scripture the perpetual
Existence, Unity, Authority, Sanctity, Propagation, efficacy, Infallibility,
and other Propertyes of the Church. But speaking per se, and ex natura rei, the
Church is proved independently of Scripture, which we receive from the Church,
as you grant, which was in Being before the Scripture, as all must yield; and
yet at that time there wanted not means to find the Church. For, none could
have believed the Scripture to be Infallible, unless first they believed the
Writers to be infallible; and many were converted to the true Church, before
they could believe the Scripture, as not extant at that time. So that all must
grant, that there be Means, and Arguments, whereby some men may gain such
credit, as others may, and ought under pain of damnation, to believe, that
they are Persons to be accepted as Messengers of God, and Teachers of Divine
Doctrine.

2. Thus Moses, the Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, all
Apostolical men by whom God has converted Nations to the true Faith and
knowledge of Him, did prove themselves true Preachers, by many effectual, and
most certain inducements, independently of the Old, or New Testament; yea S.
Irenaeus relates, as you expressly grant, that some Nations were made
Christians without any knowledge of the Scripture. As therefore our Lord and
Savior Christ, his Aposties, and all they who afterward converted the world to
Christian Religion, proved themselves to be sent by God; (being verifyed of
them, He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you, despises me,
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.) by Miracles, Sanctity of
life, Efficacy of Doctrine, admirable repentance of sinners, Chang of manners,
Conversion of all sorts of Persons, of all Countries, through the whole world;
and this to a Faith, Profession, and Religion, that proposes many Points, as
necessary to be believed, above, and seemingly contrary, to humane Reason, and
against men's natural inclinations; together with the consideration of the
constancy of Martyrs, Abnegation of Confessors, Purity of Uirgins, Fortitude
even of the youngest Age, and weaker sex, and other admirable conspicuous
Notes, and strong inforcements, to gain an absolute and undoubted assent to
whatsoever they should propose in Matters concerning Faith and Religion: So the
Church of God by the like still continued Arguments and Notes, of many great
and manifest Miracles; Sanctity; Sufferings: Uictory over all sorts of enemies,
Conversion of Infidels, all which Notes are daily more and more conspicuous and
convincing, and shall be increasing the longer the world shall last; and it
seems, God in his wisdom and Goodness has blessed us very particularly since
the appearing of Luther, and other modern Heretics, for the greater confusion
of them, and glory of his Church; and the same I say of the name Catholic,
which is continually more verifyed by accession of new Countries; as also that
of succession of Bishops from the Apostles, particularly in the Sea of Rome;
Unity, Stability, Perpetuity: The Church, I say, by these and the like evident
Arguments, proves that she deserves credit, as the first Doctors and Preachers
did; and consequently that her Doctrine, and Definitions, in Matters concerning
Faith, are certainly true. And we may with all truth avouch, that whosoever
either denies these Notes of Miracles, and the rest to be found in the
Catholic Roman Church, or despises them as insufficient, opens an inevitable
way for Jews, Turks, Gentiles, and all enemies of Christian Religion, to deny
the truth thereof; which to them must be proved by such Arguments as are
evidently found in the Roman Church, and in no other Congregation. Moreover as
the Apostles, and Apostolical men, were not believed to be Infallible, because
they wrote Scripture but contrarily, their Writings or Scriptures are believed
to be infallibly true, because the Writers were preendued with Infallibility,
which Infallibility was proved by Miracles and other Arguments: so the Church
is believed infallible in force of the same Arguments, abstracting from any
proof drawn from Scripture; whereby we are uery sure not to run in a Circle,
into which we are not entered, while first we believe the Church for such
Arguments as I have spoken of, and afterward embrace Scripture for the Churches
Authority; and if we be forced to prove the Church by Scripture; it is propter
incredulitatem vestram, for your incredulity, and not because indeed it is
needful of itself. Whatsoever you object against us in this way, will be
found, upon examination, to impugn the infallibility of the Apostles, and
Primitive Church, and to prove that Insidels converted to Christianity in
virtue of such Arguments, as I have touched, were rather deluded, than
converted.

3. If any object, that although, what we have said, be true of the true
Church, yet it remains to be proved that the Roman Church is the true Church.

4. I answer; For our present purpose, it suffices that the true Church be
proved to be infallible, without descending to other particular disputes in
this place: (Though something I have touched already.) This is clear: That
neither Protestants, nor any of our new Sectaryes, can so much as pretend to
the true Church, if they grant her to be infallible, since they believe their
own Church to be fallible. The same I might say of the Gift of working
Miracles; of which our Savior says. (Marc: vlt: Verse: 17.) Them that believe,
these signs shall follow: They shall cast out Devils. etc: On which place
Calvin (in Harmonia) confesses that the grace of Miracles is promised, not to
every one, but to the whole body of the Church. And in the marginall notes of
the English Bible printed An: 1576. upon (Joan: 14. Verse: 12.) He that believes
in me, the works that I do, he shall do, and greater; our adversaryes confess
and say, that this is referred to the whole body of the Church in whom this
virtue does shine for ever, Luther also (To: 7. Lib: de Judaeis etc:) urges
against the Jews the daily confirmation of our Christian Faith by Miracles in
all Ages since Christ, saying; From God we have learned and received, as an
everlasting word and verity of God, for these thousand five hundred years
confessed and confirmed by Miracles and signs. How then can it be said, that
Miracles have ceased ever since the Apostles time? Now it is evident, that this
Gift is lasting in our Church, and in our Church only. The same appears in the
Motive of Succession of Bishops; Antiquity; Unity; perpetual Existence;
Conversion of Nations; which Propertyes we manifestly prove to be wanting in
all Sects. In England Protestants did once pretend a Succession of Bishops;
whose institution they pretended to hold as Divine: But this pretense is to
little purpose for them. For; 1. It was no universal consent, but opposed by
many, even in England; by Scotland, France, Holland, Germany, and other
Protestant Congregations. 2. They wanted both true Ordination, and Succession,
and so could not be true Bishops. 3. They held it not necessary; but that they
who reject them, may be saved; and it is strange, that a Church rejecting and
impugning a Divine Institution, can hope for salvation; yea even by this they
either acknowledge themselves to have had no absolute certainty, that Episcopacy
is de Jure Divino; orels they speak very inconsequently, and unchristianly,
that without them, there may be true Churches, and salvation. Who would not
wonder to read in Dr. Andrews the pretended Bishop of Winchester, and a prime
man among Protestants in England, these words, directed to the French Hugonot
Molin (Respons: ad Epist: 2. Petri Molinaei?) Quia hic idem nobiseum etc: I
make no doubt but you are of the same opinion with us in this matter. If
without offense you can profess so much, you shall do a thing very gratfull to
us; if you cannot, you shall perform a thing not ungrateful, if for time to
come you meddle not with our affairs. For, in the condition in which you are,
it will be hard both to please your own, and not displease ours: Neither does
it follow, if ours be divini juris, of divine right, that either silvation
cannot be had, or the Church cannot stand without it. A strange Divinity, and
fortitude, and zeal in a Bishop; not to dislike dissembling, in a thing
believed to be Juris Divini, least one offend his parishioners; or that it is
not damnable to impugn a thing which is Juris Divini! But what does Molin
answer to this Divinity? Hear him. (Epist: 3.) Non potui dicere etc: I could
not say, that the primacy of Bishops is Iuris Divini, of divine right, but that
I should have accused of Heresy our Church, which has shed so much blood for
Christ: For, to be obstinate against those things which are of divine right,
and to oppose the Command of God, is plainly Heresy; whether it be in a thing
concerning either Faith or discipline. And besides, I must have overthrown
that Principle, by which our Religion does chiefly defend itself against
Papistery: That all things which are Iuris Divint of Divine Law are contained
sufficiently and evidently in Holy Scripture. I beseech the Reader to observe
two maine Points: 1. That it is an Heresy to deny any thing which is Juris
Divini, of Divine right, though it belong only to the discipline of the Church;
which is very true; because whatsoever is against any thing revealed in
Scripture, is against Faith, and damnable to be defended, whether it concern
speculation, or practice; and to hold that it is not damnable, to deny a thing
sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, is plain insidelity. 2. That to say,
Episcopacy is Juris Divini, is to grant that not all things which are Juris
Divini, are sufficiently and evidently contained in Scripture alone, which is
the: thing I affirmed in the beginning of my second Chapter: And so English
Protestants, who teach, Episcopacy to be Juris Divini, must either say, that
some Point^^ ^ealed by God, is not evident in Scripture; or else renounce their
plea for Episcopacy, that it is Juris Divini. And indeed, as long as they hold
it not as a Point of Faith, and consequently not necessary to be believed, it
is all one, as if they did not hold it to be Juris Divini, because in this
case, nothing, is as good, as no certainty. For, it is certain, and a matter
of Faith, that the true Church must have Bishops, and to deny it, is an Heresy
in a matter of greatest moment, and which strikes at the very root of
Religion; neither can any true Church communicate, or dissemble or conniue,
with those Congregations who deny this truth, as our English Protestants do
connive and communicate with them, and Dr. Andrews expressly says may be done;
yea or with those, who hold it to be only probable and the better doctrine,
though not certain, nor the contrary to be Heresy; whereas to affirm that any
Article of Faith is only probable, is plain Heresy. And in this Point the
Divinity of the French Hugonot Molin is better than that of the English
pretended Bishop; I mean for the consequence which he makes, that if
Episcopacie be Juris Divini it is damnable to impugn it; and with Molin agrees
Dr. Tailor; of Episcopacy, teaching. 46. That to separate from the Bishop,
makes a man at least a Schismatike, and. 47. That it is also Heresy. And in his
Liberty of Prophesying, (Epist: Dedic: Page: 32.33.) having said, that the
Lutheran Churches, the Zuinglians, and the Calvinists reject Episcopacy, he
adds; which the Primitive Church would have made no doubt to have called
Heresy. More of this, and of the Notes of the Church, may be seen in Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 9.) this not being a place to treat at large of
these matters. It is sufficient for our present purpose, to demonstrate, that
we are no way guilty of walking in a Circle. Only it will be necessary to note
here two Points,

5. First: That the Arguments of credibility fall primarily upon the Church,
not upon Scripture: (which confirms what I said, that the Apostles were not
Infallible because they wrote, but their writings deserve credit, because the
writers were Infallible.) Thus in the Old Law. Moses gained authority by
working Miracles, and by other Arguments of credibility, whereby the people
accepted him as a Man sent by God, to declare his word and will, and in such
manner as they were sure to believe God by giving credit to Moses. They
believed our Lord, and Moses his servant (Exodus: 14.31. and 19.9:) and there
upon they belie^ed the Scripture which he wrote, and proposed as the Infallible
word of God, and by it other particulars, even concerning Moses himself. In
the New Law; the Apostles proved and settled the Authority of their Persons,
before their writings could be prudently received as Divine, or the Word of
God. The Reason thereof is, because the Motives or Arguments of credibility,
immediately make that credible of which they are effects, which immediately
manifest their cause. Now the Motives to embrace Religion agree immediately to
the Church or Persons, and not to writings, and so Marc: Vlt: it is said; These
signs shall follow those who believe. And therefore, though there were no
Scriptures, if the Church did still remain, these motives would also remain;
for example, Sanctity of life; Miracles; conversion of Nations; Martirdomes;
Victory over all enemies; the name Catholic etc: Which could not agree to
Scripture, though we did falsely suppose, that it did remain, and the Church
perish. For, no Writing is capable of Sanctity of life, Succession of Bishops
etc: yea, the Scripture can have no efficacy, unless it be first believed to be
the word of God, and it must be beholding to the Church for such a Testimony;
and therefore whatsoever perfections or attributes may seem to belong immediately
to the Scripture, must depend on the Church, as the Scripture itself does, in
order to our believing it to be the word of God; But contrarily, the
Perfections or privileges of the Church, are independent of Scripture, as the
Church itself is, which was before Scripture. And here it is also to be
considered, that we have no absolute certainty, that the Apostles ever wrought
any particular Miracle, to prove immediately that Scripture is the word of God;
but we are sure, they did it mediate, by gaining Authority to their Persons,
and then to their writings. And thus you say (in your Answer to the Direction
N. 43.) That the Bible has been confirmed with those Miracles, which were
wrought by our Savior and the Apostles. But now, if we be obliged to believe
the Scripture in all things, by reason of Arguments which bind us to believe it
to be the word of God, we must also be obliged to believe the Church, in
whatsoever she proposes as Divine Verityes, since the Arguments and Reasons of
credibility do more immediately prove the true Church than they prove Scripture.

6. The second thing to be observed, is, That when we are obliged to receave
some Persons as messengers of God, appointed and assisted by him to deliver
Divine Truths, as the Apostles were; we are bound to believe them in all things
which they propound for such Truths. For, as I have often said, if they might
err in some things of this nature, we could not believe the^ in any other
thing for their sole Authority; as all co^fess of Scripture, that being once
delivered by me^ of the foresaid Authority as the word of God, it must be
receyved as universally true, in all and every least passage, though the
Apostles did not confirm by seve rall Miracles the matter of every particular
Text (and yet every one is an object of Faith) nor of every particular Truth
which they spoke; but it was sufficient that people did, and were obliged to
receive them, as men who by commission from God, taught the true way to
eternal Happynes, and therefore were to be credited in all particulars which
they did propose.

7. Out of this true Ground, I infer; That it cannot be said without injury
to Gods Church, to the Apostles, and God himself, that, when men of our Church
work Miracles, and produce other Reasons, to prove that they preach the true
Faith and Religion to gentiles, Jews, Turks, or Heritikes, those Miracles are
not sufficient Proofs of all that which our Church propounds as Divine Truth,
but of some particular Points; for example, not of Purgatory, Prayer to Saints,
Real Presence etc. but of such Christian verityes, as Protestants believe with
us. This cannot be said. For, it is evident, that the same might have been
objected against the Apostles, to wit, that God intended to prove by their
Miracles, only some verityes believed by Jews, or Heretics, and not every one
of the particular Mysteryes of Christian Religion. Neither can it be said, that
the Preachers of our Catholic Church, when they convert Nations, do work
Miracles to bring them to I know not what Faith in general, or in abstracto,
or an Idea Platonica, but to the Catholic Roman Religion, which if it were
false, God in his Goodness could never permit, so many and great Miracles to
be wrought, and other so evident Arguments of credibility to be produced, that
people must be obliged to receive such Preachers, as Teachers of the true way
to Heaven; as he could not permit the Apostles to work Miracles, intending
that they should be trusted in some, not in all Points. For, this general
Reason taken from Gods Goodness and providence, is the same in all who bring
the like Arguments of Credibility, as our Church never wants Arguments like to
those, whereby the Apostles made good their Authority. Besides, if the said
Objection were of force, men de facto can have no certainty, that Scripture is
the word of God for all Points contained therein; because it will be said, that
although Miracles were wrought to prove that the Bible is the word of God, they
might be understood, not to confirm every passage or Text, but only some
Truths contained therein. And likewise according to this Objection or invention,
no certainty can be had what the Apostles or other Preachers teach, or teach
not, with infallibility: Nor will there remain any means to convert men to
Christianity. For, every one may say, that, not the Point which he apprehends
to be false, was confirmed by Miracles, but those other Articles, which he
conceaves to be true: And so no Heretic can be convinced by Scripture, which,
he will say is not the word of God, except for his opinions; and so nothing
will be proved out of Scripture, even for those things which are contained in
it. Neither will any thing remain certain, except a general, unprofitable,
impracticable Notion, that the Apostles taught, and the Scripture contaynes
some things revealed by God, without knowing what they are in particular; which
would be nothing to the purpose, and therefore as good as nothing.

8. But yet, dato, non concesso, That the Apostles and the Church are to be
believed only in such particular Points, as are proved by Miracles etc: we say,
that innumerable Miracles have been wrought, in consirmation of those
particular Points wherein we disagree from Protestants, as may be seen in
Brierly (Tract: 2. Chap: 3 Sect: 7. subdiv: 1.) For example, of Prayer to
Saints (out of S. Austine Civit: L. 22. C. 8.) Worship of Relics (out of S.
Gregory Nazian: S. Austine, S. Hierom: S. Basil: Greg: Turonen: Theodoret:) the
Image of Christ: Real presence, Sacrifice of Christ's Body; Purgatory, Prayer
for the Dead; The great virtue of the sign of the Cross; Holy water; Lights
in the Church; Reservation of the Sacrament; Holy Chrisme; Adoration of the
cross; Confession of sins to a Priest, and extreme Unction; which miracles
Brierly proves by irrefragable Testimonies, of most creditable Authors, and
Holy Fathers; whereof, if any Protestant doubt, he can do no less for the
salvation of his soul, than examine the matter, either by the (...) of this
Author, or of other Catholic Writers, and not only by (...) clamours and
calumnyes of Protestant Preachers, in their Ser(...) Writers, in their Books:
And let him take with him for his (...) thief considerations. 1. That these
Miracles were wrought and testified, before any Protestant appeared in the
world: And therefore could not be feigned, or recorded upon any particular
design against them, and their Heresies. 2. That even Protestants acknowledge
the Truths of such Miracles. Whitaker. (cont: Duraeum, Lib: 10.) says; I do
not think those Miracles vain which are reported to have been done at the
monuments of Saints: as also Fox and Godwin acknowledge Miracles wrought by S.
Austine (the Monk sent by S. Gregory Pope, to convert England) through Gods
hand, as may be seen in Brierly (Tract: 1. Sect: 5.) and yet it is confessed
by Protestants, and is evident of itself, that he converted us to the Roman
Faith. But, not to be long, I referr the Reader to Brierly, in the Index of
whose Book, in the word (Miracles) he will find full satisfaction, if he
examine his allegations, that in every Age since our Savior Christ, there have
been wrought many ad great Miracles, both by the Professors of the Roman Faith,
and expressly in confirmation of it. This I say, and avouch for a certain
truth; that whatsoever Heretics can object against Miracles wrought by
Professors of our Religion, and in proof if it, may be in the same manner
objected against the Miracles of our B. Savior, and his Apostles; and that
they cannot impugn us, but jointly they must undermine all Christianity.

9. To these two considerations, let this Third be added; that it is evidently
delivered in Scripture, Miracles to be certain Proofs of the true Faith and
Religion, as being appointed by God for that end. (Exodus: 4.1.) when Moses
said, They will not believe me, nor hear my voice, God gave him the Gift of
Miracles, that they might believe God had spoken to him. (3. Reg: 17. Verse:
24.) That woman, whose son Elias had raised to life, said; Now, in this I
have known that thou art a man of God, and the word of our Lord, in thy mouth,
is true. Christ (Matt: 11. V. 3.4.5.) being asked whether he was the Messiah,
proved himself to be such by the Miracle; which he wrought The blind see, the
lame walk; the lepers are made clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise again.
Which words signify, that Miracles are not only effectual, but necessary to
prove the truth of a Doctrine, contrary to what was receyved before. Yea (Joan:
5.36.) Miracles are called, a greater testimony the^ John. (Marc: vlt:) they
preached every where, our Lord working withal, and consirming the Word with
signs that followed. (2. Cor: 12. V. 12.) The signs of my Apostleship have
been done upon you in all patience, and wonders and mighty deeds. (Hebr. 2.4.)
God withal testifying by signs and wonders, and diverse Miracles. But why do I
urge this Point? You clearly confess it (Page: 144. N. 31.) in these words; If
you be so infallible, as the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did. They
went forth (says S. Mark) and preached every where the Lord working with
them, and confirming their words with signs following. It is impossible, that
God should lie, and that the Eternal Truth should set his hand and seal to
the confirmation of a falsehood, or of such doctrine as is partly true, and
partly false. The Aposiles doctrine was thus confirmed, therefore it was
entirely true, and in no part either false or uncertain.

10. Now, put these Truths together: Many and great Miracles have been wrought
by professors of the Roman Religion, and particularly in confirmation of it;
Miracles are undoubted Proofs of the true Church, Faith, and Religion: What
will follow, but that the Roman Faith and Religion is entirely true, and in no
part either false or uncertain? Wherefore men desirous of their Eternal
salvation, may say confidently with B. S. Austine (Lib: de Vtilit: credendi,
Cap: 17.) Dubitabimus nos ejus Ecclesiae etc. Shall we doubt to rest in the
bosom of that Church, which with the acknowledgment of mankind, has obtained
the height of Authority from the Apostolic Sea by Succession of Bishops,
Heretics in vain barking about her, and being condemned, partly by the
judgment of the people, partly by the gravity of Counsels, partly by the
Majesty of Miracles? To which not to give the first place, is indeed either
most great impiety, or precipitous arrogancy.

11. Behold the Notes of the true Church, Miracles, Succession of Bishops!
Which perpetual Succession of Bishops, is the Ground and Foundation of the
Amplitude, Propagation, Splendour, and Glory of the Church, promised by God, and
foretold by the Prophets, as may be seen Isaiae (Chap: 60. Verse: 22. Chap: 2.
Verse: 2. Chap: 49. Verse: 23. Chap. 54. Verse: 2.3. Psalm: 2.8. Dan: 2.44.) Which
Promises some learned Protestants finding evidently, not to be fulfilled in the
Protestant Church, which before Luther was none, and being resolved, not to
embrace the Catholic Church, wherein alone those Promises are clearly
fulfilled, fell either to be perplexed and doubtful of Christian Religion, or
utterly to forsake it, and become Jews, or Turks. Such were Castalio, David
Georg, Ochinus, Neuserus, Alemannus, and others, as may be seen exactly set
down in Brierly, (Tract: 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 5.)

12. These things considered, we must say, that if it be once believed against
wicked Atheists, that there is a God; that he has Providence over his
creatures, and is to be worshipped in some Religion; it is impossible, that he
can bestow so great Prerogatives upon the Roman Church, and affoard so many,
forcible, and evident Reasons convincing Her to be the true Church, and yet
that she should not be so indeed. For, such an error could not be ascribed to
man, following the best guidance of evident Reason, but to God alone; which
cannot be affirmed without blasphemy. And how is it possible, that Gods will
should be, that we embrace his true Worship, and Religion, and yet affoard to
the contrary error, so great strength of Reason, that in all prudence and
reason, men should embrace, not the true, but the false Faith and Religion?

13. And this may suffice for the present to demonstrate, that we are free
enough from walking in a circle; and that you speak very untruly, when you say
(Page: 377. N. 59.) and in your Answer to the Direction (N. 8. and 14.) that we
can pretend no proof for the Church, but some Texts; wherein you contradict
even yourself, who (Page: 66. N. 35.) say that our Faith, even of the Fundation
of all our Faith, our Churches Authority, is built lastly and wholly upon
prudentiall Motives? If wholly upon prudentiall Motives, how do you so often
tell us, that we build it only upon Scripture. And that by so doing, we run
round in a Circle, proving Scripture by the Church, and the Church by Scripture?

14. But now, let us consider a little, whether your pretended Brethren the
Protestants, can themselves avoid that, which you and they do so vehemently
object to us. First then; They who profess to know the private spirit, cannot
avoid a Circle, while they prove Scripture by that spirit, and that spirit by
Scripture, by which alone, according to their Principles, they can try whether,
or no it proceed from God. Whereof Ihaue spoken heretofore.

15. Secondly; they who pretend to know the Scripture by certain internal
criteria, or signs found in Scripture itself, as light, majesty, efficacy, or,
as Potter speaks (Page: 141.) a glorious beam of divine light which shines in
Scripture, must fall into the same Circle with those men of the private spirit.
For, seeing those criteria, which they fancy to themselves, are nor evident
either to sense, or natural reason, they must be known by some other means,
which can be none except some internal private spirit, or Grace within, as
Potter expressly speaks (Page: (141.) and (Page: 142.) says, There is in the
Scripture it self, light sufficient, which the eye of Reason cleared by Grace,
may discover to be Divine, descended from the Father and fountain of light. If
then we ask these men, why they believe Scripture to be endued with such
light, majesty, etc. seeing these things appear not evidently to any of our
senses, nor to our understanding, as prima principia of natural Reason which
are manifest of themselves; their Answer must be, that internal Grace^ assures
us thereof, and so this Grace is necessary, not only ex part subjecti or
potentiae, to assist our soul above our natural forces, in order to
supernatural Objects; but it is the reason, motive, and medium ex part
objecti, for which we believe; for, other reason these men can give none; and
then enters the Argument which I made even now. How can they know that this
light, or spirit is infused by God, (and proceeds not from some bad spirit)
except by Scripture, and consequently by first knowing Scripture, whereby that
light must be examined? and yet they cannot know scripture, except they be
first inspired with this light, and know it to be a true light and not an
illusion; which is a manifest Circle, placing this light before Scripture, and
Scripture before this light; and finally, they are in effect, cast upon the
private spirit. Catholics, I grant, believe that the particular assistance of
the Holy Ghost is necessary for exercising an Act of Faith, but they require
it only ex part potentiae, to enable our understanding to assent to an object,
represented and proposed by Motives sufficient to oblige us to an infallible
Act, having for its principal and formal Object, the Divine Revelation, which
Revelation and Motives, are adequately and perfectly distinguished from the
said Assistance; as in proportion we believe by the virtue and strength of the
Habit of Faith ex part potentiae, but we do not believe for it, neither is it
apprehended, or considered, or represented to our understanding, when we
believe; but that which we apprehend, moves the Act of our understanding, is
the reason and motive for which we believe; as also the faculty of our
understanding is necessary for us to believe, and yet we do not believe for,
but by it: And therefore Protestants avoid a Circle, as we evidently do.

16. Thirdly. As for you who profess to believe the Scripture for the Church,
if you be free from an unprofitable Circle, we also, who receive and believe
the Scripture for the Authority of the Church, are secured from it for the same
reason; and therefore you must either acquit us, or condemn yourself; though
you will never be able to be proved not guilty of untruth and injustice, in
objecting to us alone, that very thing of which yourself are guilty.

17. But now, because in this Controversy about the Church, Protestants seek
to make great use of a distinction between Fundamental, and not Fundamental
Points, I must in the next Chapter say something thereof; that is, whereas Charity
Maintained has showed against Dr. Potter, the falsehood and impertinency of
that distinction, as it is applied by Protestants; yea and that they contradict
themselves therein; I will now endeavor to prove that notwithstanding all that
you have written in defense of the Doctor, the Arguments of Charity Maintained
remain in force, as also that you, in this matter contradict both Protestants,
and yourself.



CHAP. VI. ABOUT FVNDAMENTALL AND NOT FVNDAMENTALL POINTS OF FAITH.
1. THis Question concerning Fundamental and not Fundamental Points of Faith,
is stated at large by Charity Maintained (Chap: 3. N. 2.) The sum is. Some
Points are called Fundamental or necessary, because every one is obliged to
know and believe them expressly, and explicitly; and Potter (Page: 243.)
speaking of some Points of Faith, says; These are so absolutely necessary to
all Christians, for attaining the End of our Faith, that is, the salvation of
our souls; that a Christian may loose himself; not only by a positive erring
in them, or denying of them; but by a pure ignorance, or nescience, or not
knowing of them. Other Points are called not Fundamental, for the contrary
reason, that men may be ignorant of them, or not believe them explicitly,
without sin and damnation; yet so, as they cannot, without a grievous sin, be
rejected or denied, whenever they are sufficiently represented to our
understanding, as Thruths revealed by God. For, in that case they grow to be
Fundamental, so far, as they cannot be denied without damnation. And in this
sense, there is no distinction between Fundamental and not Fundamental
Objects of Faith. Which is so evident, that Potter (Page: 240.) says; It is
Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he
believe all revealed truths of God, whereof he may be convinced, that they are
from God. And (Page: 212.) he teaches, that such Points may not be denied or
contradicted without Infidelity. This he says, and this every one must say who
understands the terms. For, to reject what one believes to be testified by
God, is to think that he either deceives, or may be deceived,

2. But then, How comes it to pass, that when we object to Protestants, that
all of them cannot be of the same Church and Faith, and consequently cannot all
hope to be saved, seeing it is evident they contradict one another in many
Points of Faith, wherein one side must deny a revealed Truth, which they confess
to be damnable; how (I say,) come they to answer, not that those Points wherein
they differ, are not sufficiently proposed to all of them as revealed by God,
and so all of the^ may be excused by ignorance (which were a poor, and
uncertain, and as it were a casual Answer, depending on particular
circumstances of persons, capacityes etc: for which no general Rule can be
given, and they themselves often pretend some of them to err against
Scripture, when it is no less evident in some not Fundamental, than it is in
some Fundamental Points, and so ignorance cannot excuse them) but they are
wont only to answer, that they agree in all Fundamental Points, though they
differ in Points not Fundamental; placing the difference not in the different
proposition of the Object, but in the nature, or weight of the Objects, or
Articles themselves. For, if they speak of the proposal alone, they can put
no difference betwixt not Fundamental and Fundamental Points; seeing no man
can believe either kind of those Points, till they be sufficiently proposed, as
Potter (Page: 246. expressly says: Sufficient proposition of revealed Truths is
required, before a man can be convinced. For, if they be not propounded to me,
in respect of me it is all one as if they were not revealed. And for want of
this, he excuses the Apostles who believed not the Resurrection, which is a
Fundamental Point of Faith, and therefore sufficient proposal is necessary in
Fundamental Articles. What then will Protestants finally answer? If they
disagree in Fundamental Points, they differ in the substance of Faith, and in
things necessary to salvation. If they differ in Points not Fundamental, yet
sufficiently proposed, they differ also in things which Potter affirms to be
Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for salvation. What then
remaynes, but that they cannot be of the same substance of Faith, howsoever
they answer?

3. We see then, how vain, false, disadvantagious and contradictory to
Protestants themselves, this distinction is, as they apply it; seeing they must
say, as we have proved, that error in Points not Fundamental is against the
substance of Faith, and destructive of salvation, and yet that it is not such,
in regard they affirm, that all of them may be saved, notwithstanding their
errors in Points not Fundamental; which they cannot imagine to be possible,
if an error in such Points be damnable, as we have heard Potter confess it to
be, and you also acknowledge the same in a hundred places of your Book.

4. Yet for the present, let us have the patience to hear them say, that they
agree in Fundamental Points, and therefore in the substance of Faith. But then
every one who desires satisfaction in this matter, and has no mind to be fed
or rather fooled, with an empty sound of words in the air, cannot choose, but
instantly demand, what those Fundamental Points are in particular?

5. For, it cannot be discerned whether all Protestants, or a few, or any,
agree with others, or the same man at different times with himself in
Fundamental Points, unless it be known, what those Points be. What would it
avail a sick person, to tell him, that there are some infallible remedies for
his disease, if you cannot tell him what they are? Catholics have often, and
earnestly, upon most just and necessary causes, urged Protestants to exhibit a
Catalogue of Fundamental Points; and learned Protestants have endeavored to
give it; but with so great disagreement among themselves, and ill success for
their purpose; that their pains proved advantageous to us Catholics alone,
and showed that no such thing could be done; as appears by their disagreeing
Catalogues, set down at large, and in particular by Cha: Ma: (Part: ^. Chap:
3. N. 19.) yourself (Page: 408. N. 35) say: Protestants do not agree touching
what Points are Fundamental.

6. But in the mean time, what is your opinion? Or how do you defend
Protestants, and yourself? In a very strange manner: Either by contradicting
them, and plainly confessing, that no such Catalogue can possibly be given; or
else by contradicting yourself, sometime saying, that one can be given, sometimes
that it cannot. Sure I am, you give us none, though certainly it is a thing
very necessary to be done in the way of Protestants. (Page: 201. N. 19.) you
teach that to give a Catalogue of Fundamentalls (because to some more is
Fundamental, to others less, to others nothing at all) is impossible. And
Page: 166. N. 59. We know not precisely just how much is Fundamental. (And Page:
134. N. 13.) that may be Fundamental and necessary to one, which to another is
not so. Which variety of circumstances, makes it impossible to set down an
exact Catalogue of Fundamentalls, and proves your request as reasonable, as if
you should desire us to make a coat for the moon in all her changes. And
(Page: 23. N. 27.) He that will go about to distinguish, what was written,
because it was profitable, from what was written because necessary, shall find
an intricate piece of business of it, and almost impossible, that he should be
certain he has done it, when he has done it. And then it is apparently
unnecessary to go about it. Are you not an excellent Advocate for the
Protastants cause? Whose both sayings, and doings, or endeavors, to set down
a Catalogue of Fundamental Points you contradict; and make good in fact,
(while you give us no such Catalogue,) and affirm in express words, that it is
not possible for them to do it. They, endeavored and could not: You, both by
reason, and experience of their fruitless pains, will not seem to endeavor
it. Their endeavors showed their judgment, of the great importance, and real
necessity thereof. You perceaving the impossibility, are necessitated to say, it
is not of importance, but needless. They in actu exercito; you in actu signato,
show it impossible to be done. You, I say, teach it to be needless, because you
find it to be impossible, as Protestants would make the world believe, that
Miracles are ceased, because they can work none: which if they had hope to do,
they would soon chang their Doctrine, as you and they would quickly teach a
Catalogue to be profitable, and necessary, if you could make one. The truth is;
such a Catalogue is necessary in the principles of Protestants who deny the
Authority of the Church, and yet being indeed impossible to them (as we see by
experience in their differences, and your express confession) it shows in what
desperate case they, and you are. But here I must by the way note a
contradictio^ of yours. We have heard you say (Page: 134. N. 13.) that may be
Fundamental and necessary to one, which to an other is not so. Which is
repugnant to what you say (Page: 13^. N. 20.) Points Fundamental be those only
which are revealed by God, and commanded to be preached to all, and believed by
all. For if Fundamental Points be such only, as must be believed by all, it is
clear, that they which are necessary to be believed not by all, but by some
only, cannot be Fundametall. You also contradict Potter, who (Page: 21^.)
teaches that by Fundamental Doctrines we mean such Catholic verities as are
necessary to be distinctly believed by every (mark, every) Christian that will
be saved.

7 Now, That such a Catalogue is needless, you would show, as I said, because
whosoever believes the Scripture, which is evident in all necessary Points,
and in many which are not necessary, shall be sure to believe, all that is
necessary, and more.

8. This evasion I have confuted already; yet in this particular fit occasion,
I must not omit to say something.

9. First then in saying a Catalogue is needless, you contradict other
Protestants, to whom I suppose you will deferr so much, as to think their
opinion not void of all probability, and consequently your own not to be
certain, which were only to any purpose. For, if the contrary chance to be
true, and a Catalogue be really necessary, your Doctrine denying, both that it
is necessary, or that it can be given, must be very pernicious to souls,
deceaving them with an opinion, that that is neither necessary, nor possible,
which yet is absolutely necessary for their salvation. In the very sentence or
Motto before your Book, you alledg Casaubon saying, Existimat ejus Majestas
etc. His Majesty judges, that the number of things absolutely necessary to
salvation is not great, and therefore that there is not any more compendious way
to make an agreement, than carefully to distinguish between necessary and
unnecessary things, and that all endeavor be used to procure an agreement in
things necessary. Do not these words signify, both a possibility and necessity
of distinguishing between necessary and unnecessary Points? And yet we have
heard you say, that it is both impossible, and unnecessary; in direct
opposition to your Motto. And you say in your Epistle Dedicatory to the King,
that your Book is in a manner nothing else but a superstruction upon that
blessed Doctrine where with you have adorned and armed the frontispice of your
Book, and which was recommended by King James, as the only hopeful means, of
healing the breaches of Christendom. A strange cure, by that means only, which
you hold to be unnecessary, and impossible! And here, by occasion of mentioning
Casaubon, I cannot omit to declare (for a warning to others) that I have it
under the hand of a person of great quality, and integrity, that that unhappy
man, finding himself in danger of death, dealt with the said worthy person, to
procure the presence and help of a Catholic Priest: but his intention being
discovered, or suspected, he was so besieged by his wife, and a Protestant
English Minister, that it was not possible to be effected. A fearful example
for all such as check, or choke the Inspirations of the holy Ghost, and
procrastinate their conversion, till they find that common, but terrible,
saying, when it concerns Eternity, to be true: He who will not when he may,
shall not when he will.

10. (...), by this reason of yours, there is no necessity of giv(...) even a
Definition or Description of Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental; or of
even mentioning such a distinction; seeing in practice you cannot by any such
description or distinction, know when they offer themselves in particular, and
you are sure not to miss of them, by believing all that is clear in
Scripture: Especially if we add your words (Page: 23. N. 27.) That Protestants
give you not a Catalogue of Fundamentalls, it is not from Tergiversation, but
from Wisdom and Necessity. And when they had done it, it had been to no
purpose; There being, as Matters now stand, as great necessity, of believing
those Truths of Scripture, which are not Fundamental as those that are. And
yet all learned Protestants harp upon nothing more, than upon this distinction
of Points Fundamental, and upon the definitions, or descriptions of them, as
particularly, may be seen in your client Potter (Page: 211.213.214.215.) which
is a needless pains, if this your evasion be good, and solid.

11. Thirdly. Though one be obliged not to disbelieue any Truth revealed in
Scripture, when it is known to be such, yet he is not bound to believe
explicitly all such Truths. For, by this Fundamental and not fundamental
points are distinguished, as Potter (P: 213.) says: Fundamental properly is,
that which Christians are obliged to believe by an express and actual Faith.
In other Points that Faith, which the Card: Perron (Replique Liur: 1. Chap 10.
calls the Faith of adherence, or non-repugnance, may suffice, to wit, an humble
preparation of mind to believe all, or any thing revealed in Scripture, when it
is sufficiently cleared. Now if I cannot sever or distinguish these two kinds
of Points, I shall either be obliged to know absolutely all, and every Truth,
contained in Scripture (which is a voluntary, and intolerable obligation) or
none, (seeing I cannot tell in particular what they be which I am obliged to
know) and so be in danger to be ignorant of fundamental Articles, without the
actual and express knowledge whereof, I cannot be saved. And this difficulty is
increased by the doctrine which you deliver (Page: 195. N. 11.) That there is no
Point to any man, at any time, in any circumstances necessary not to be
disbelieved, but it is to the same man, at the same time, in the same
circumstances, necessary to be believed. Seeing then no point of Scripture, can
at any time, in any circumstances, be disbelieved, it is necessary at all
times, in all circumstances, to be believed: And much more this must follow, if
we cannot know what points be Fundamental, except by knowing every plain Text
of Scripture: which, as I said, is an intolerable burden.

12. Fourthly; It imports very much to know summarily, and certainly, what
points men are obliged to believe explicitly, that they may with more facility,
application, and perfection, learn them, and not be diverted by things not
necessary, with prejudice to the knowledge of Articles Fundamental, or
necessary, by obliging every one to know every Text of Scripture. Neither can
you answer; that this is done already in the Creed of the Apostles. For, we
have that form of Creed, by Tradition only, and according to your principles,
we cannot believe any thing contained in the Creed, except we first know it to
be contained in Scripture, from which if we cannot learn, what is
Fundamental, and what is not, we cannot be certain that the particular points
contained in the Creed. are Fundamental; nor can you learn out of any text of
Scripture that the Creed contains all Fundamental points: to say nothing,
that the Creed, without the Church and Tradition, is not sufficient to declare
the meaning of itself; and so we see, Protestants cannot agree in the sense of
any one Article thereof, as I showed hertofore. Besides, if the Creed contain
all Fundamental Points, why do you deny that it is possible to give such a
Catalogue? Or if you say, that even in the Creed, it is impossible to determine
precisely, what Points are Fundamental; my former Argument retains its force,
that by this means, one cannot tell what he is chiefly to study and learn,
nor what he is bound explicitly to believe in the Creed itself. Nay, since you
can alledg no precept out of Scripture, that all men are obliged to know and
believe the Creed, the Creed of itself can be to you no rule at all, either for
Fundamental; or not Fundamental Points, but still you are devolved to find in
the whole Bible Fundamental Articles of Faith, mixed with Points not
Fundamental; and so it availes Protestants nothing, to alledg the Creed as a
summary of all Fundamental Points. Lastly Potter (Page: 241.) holds it only for
very probable, that the Creed contains all necessary Points, and yourself
(Page: 194. N. 4.) say of Potter: he affirmed it not as absolutely certain, but
very probable; as also the Doctor pretends only, that all Articles of pure
Faith, but not of practice are, contained in the Creed, and yet no man can be
saved without believing all Fundamental points, whether they be pure credenda,
or belong to practice; and therefore we must conclude, that to alledg the Creed
for solving this my Argument, can in no wise satisfy.

13. Fifthly; According to Protestants, we cannot be obliged to believe
explicitly any Object, unless we find such an obligation evidently set down
in Scripture: And if such an obligation be evidently expressed in Scripture, it
follows, that you may give us a Catalogue of such Points: If not; you cannot
burden men's consciences with such an obligation not expressed in Scripture.

14. Sixthly; I oppose yourself to yourself. (Page: 149. N. 37.) You speak of
Protestants in this manner: Seeing they ground their belief, that such and such
things only are Fundamentalls, only upon Scripture, and go about to prove their
Assertion true, only by Scripture, then must they suppose the Scripture true
absolutely and in all things, or else the Scripture could not be a sufficient
warrant to them to believe this thing, that these only Points are Fundamental.
Which words seem to signify, that Protestants can prove out of Scripture, that
such and such things only are Fundamentalls; and what is this, but to give a
Catalogue, so exact, that they may not only say; these Points are Fundamental,
but also that these only are such; that is, these, and neither more, nor fewer
than these are Fundamental Articles? And (Page: 150. N. 40.) You say: They
(Protestants) may learn of the Church, that the Scripture is the word of God,
and from the Scripture that such Points are Fundamental, others are not so.
And (Page: 408. N. 35.) You tell Charity Maintained that he overreaches in
saying that Protestants cannot agree what Points are Fundamental, and yet you
grant in the same place, that they do not agree; and what reason can be given
of this their so constant and long continued disagreement, except because they
have no assured means, and rule how to do it? Also (Page: 160. N. 53.) To these
words of Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 3. N. 19.) Scripture does deliver
divine Truths, but seldom qualifyes them, or declares whether they be or be
not absolutely necessary to salvation) You answer: Yet not so seldom, but that
out of it I could give you an abstract of the essential parts of Christianity
if it were necessary. What difference put you between an abstract of the
Essential parts of Christianity, and a Catalogue of Fundamental Points? And
how agrees this, with what we have heard you say (Page: 166. N. 59.) We know not
precisely just how much is Fundamental. And (Page: 23. N. 27.) You say; He that
will go about to distinguish, what was written because it was profitable, from
what was written because necessary, shall find an intricate piece of business
of it, and almost impossible that he should be certain he has done it, when
he has done it. And (Page: 22. N. 27.) A little before the words I cited last,
treating whether it be possible and necessary to give a Catalogue of
Fundamentalls, you say; For my part, I have great reason to suspect it is
neither the one nor the other. What a confusion is here? First: It is possible,
it is not possible to give a Catalogue of Fundamentalls. 2. It is possible to
give an abstract of the Essential parts of Christianity. 3. (Page: 135. N. 14.)
Perhaps we cannot exactly destinguish in the Scripture what is revealed because
it is necessary, from what is necessary consequently and accidentally, merely
because it is revealed. 4. I suspect that it is neither necessary, nor
profitable to give a Catalogue of Fundamental Points. 5. It is a business of
extreme difficulty. 6. it is an intricate piece of business, and almost
impossible that one should be certain he has done it, when he has done it.
By all which you can gather nothing but contradictions and ambiguityes, an
Affirmation, a Negation, a Perhaps, a Suspicion, an extreme Difficulty, an
intricate piece of business, a Possibility, an impossibility, an almost
Impossibility, and finally, nothing certain but this, that in this most
important matter of Fundamental Points, Protestants neither have, nor can have
any certainty, but that it may be so, and so, it may be neither so, nor so; as
we see by experience, that they do not only disagree in assigning what Points
are Fundamental, but some affirm certain Points to be Fundame^tall Truths,
which others believe to be Fundamental errors. But now in an other respect
also, I oppose yourself to yourself.

15. Seaventhly; For I must upon occasion still put you in mind, of your
doctrine, that it is not a material object of our Faith, to believe that
Scripture is the word of God, and that men are not obliged to receive it for
such, yea and that they may reject it. This supposed; it follows, that I am
not obliged, yea that I cannot believe the contents of Scripture as divine
Truths, whether they be Fundamental, or not Fundamental: And therefore by
believing all that is evident in Scripture, I can in no wise be assured, to
believe all Fundamental Truths. Besides, according to Protestants, men can
know by Scripture only, that there are any such things as Fundamental Points
of Faith, as yourself teach (Page: 149. N. 37.) In these words; Protestants
ground their belief, that such and such things only are Fundamentalls, only
upon Scripture, and go about to prove their Assertion true, only by Scripture.
Seeing therefore you hold, that men are not obliged to believe Scripture, it
follows, that you are not obliged to embrace that means by which alone you
can attain the knowledge of Points either Fundamental or not Fundamental, and
consequently de facto the means to know all Fundamental Points cannot be, to
know and believe all that is evidently contained in Scripture.

16. Eighthly; and chiefly; I have proved that all Points necessary to be
believed, are not evidently contained in Scripture; and therefore by only
believing all that is evident in Scripture, a man is not sure to attain, yea
he is sure not to attain, the knowledge and belief of all necessary Points. But
let us now see what you can object against us.

17. Object: 1. You say (Page: 134. N. 13.) That, As, Charity Maintained (Chap:
3. N. 19.) Being engaged to give a Catologue of Fundamentalls, instead thereof
tells v^ only in general, that all is Fundamental, and not to be disbelieved
under pain of damnation, which the Church has defined, without setting down
a complete Catalogue of all things which in any. Age the Church has defined; so
in reason we might think it enough for Protestants to say in general, that it
is sufficient, for any man's salvation, to believe that the Scripture is true,
and contains all things necessary for salv^tion; and to do his best endeavor
to find and believe the true sense of it, without delivering any particular
Catalogue of the Fundamentalls of Faith.

18. Answer; 1. Charity Maintained was not any way engaged to give a particular
Catalogue of Fundamental Points, as Protestants are, for the reasons which I
have given; because without it, they cannot possibly know whether themselves,
or their Brethren, or any Church at all believe all Articles necessary to
salvation: Yet voluntarily Charity Maintained gave such a general Catalogue,
as could not fail in bringing us to the knowledge of all particulars, in all
occasions. For this cause he said; do here deliver a Catalogue, wherein are
comprised all P^n^s by us taught to be necessary to salvation; etc: Which is
most true, and puts a manifest difference between you and us, concerning the
necessity of every man's being able to give a distinct Catalogue ofne^essary
Points. For, seeing we believe an infallible Living Judge, who can, and
infallibly will, propose divine Truths, and declare himself in all occasions
for what is necessary; we are assured, that we shall in due time be informed of
all that is necessary, and much more, if we be so happy as to submitt to such
Information and Instruction. If I had one always at hand, who would and could
(yea^ could not but) certainly instruct me, what I were to believe, or say, or
do, were not all these actions in my power, no less than if I did not depend
upon any such prompter? Charity Maintained had then reason to say, that in the
Catalogue which he gave, all necessary Points were comprised, and this in a way
no less easy, intelligible, and certain, then if we had before our eyes a
Catalogue of all particular Points. For, our soul being disposed by this
submission, and the Object proposed by such a Guide, we shall always find a
Catalogue made to our hands, by the Goodness of God, and Ministry of the
Church. For the contrary reason of not submitting to any Living Judge of
Controversyes, Protestants cannot possibly be assured, whether, or no they
believe all Fundamental Points; which, yourself confess, cannot be done except
by knowing all evident Texts of Scripture, to which task no man can be
obliged: To say nothing, that Scripture contains not all necessary Points, nor
is sufficient to declare itself: Of which considerations I have spoken
hertofore. And by this is answered, what you object (Page: 160 and Page: 161. N.
53.) Where you pretend to assign some general Catalogues, but such, as by
means of them it is impossible to know particulars, as we may by that general
one which Charity Maintained gave. Thus also is answered the Objection which
you make (Page: 158. N. 51. and Page: 22. N. 27.) Where you demand of us a
Catalogue of all the Definitions of the Church. For, we have told you, that it
is sufficient for us, to be most certain, that the Church will not fail to
instruct us of all her Definitions, Decrees, and whatsoever else is necessary,
as occasion shall require, according to the several degrees of Articles more
or less necessary, in different Circumstances; which Scripture alone cannot
do, as has been demonstrated.

19. Object: 2. (Page: 159. N. 52.) You say touching the necessity of Repentance
from dead works, and Faith in Christ Jesus, the Son of God, and Savior of the
World, all Protestants agree: And therefore we cannot deny, but that they agree
about all that is simply necessary.

20. Answer. What? Have we now a Catalogue of All that is simply necessary, and
yet a Catalogue of necessary or Fundamental points cannot be given? 2. If
these be All the Points which are simply necessary; why do you so often
exclaim against Charity Maintained, for saying, that confessedly the Church of
Rome believes all that is simply necessary? For, you grant (Page: 34. N. 5.) and
else where, that we believe those Points.

21. 3. I desire you to consider, that Fundamental Points are those, which we
are bound to believe actually and expressly, and as Potter says (Page: 243.)
are so absolutely necessary to all Christians, for attaining the End of our
Faith, that is, the salvation of our souls; that a Christian may loose himself
not only by a positive erring in them: but by a pure ignorance, or nescience,
or not knowing of them. Now if one cannot be saved, without explicit and
actual knowledge of these Points, he cannot have true Repentance without
actual dereliction of the contrary errors, and express belief of such Points,
in which. Ignorance cannot excuse; and you say (Page: 15. N. 29.) Error against
a Truth, must needs presuppose a nescience of it; And that Error and ^gnorance
must be inseparable. Therefore whosoever erres in such Points, looses himself
by such an Error, seeing even a pure ignorance cannot excuse him, and
consequently he cannot be saved without actually relinquishing such an Error,
and embracing the contrary Fundamental Truth, and so cannot be sure, that he
has true Repentance, unless he know in particular what Truths and Errors are
Fundamental. And you deliver a very pernicious Error, in saying; (Page: 159,
N. 52.) whosoever dies with Faith in Christ, and contrition for all sins
known and unknown (in which heap, all his si full Errors must be comprised)
can no more be hurt by any the most ma^ignant and pestilent Error, then S.
Paul by the Viper which he shook of into the fire. For, if he remain in his
Error about Fundamental Points, he wants the contrary actual explicit
belief of them, which is supposed to be absolutely necessary to Salvation; and
so he will not cast that viper, but it will cast him, into the fire. His Error
then, which is supposed to be Fundamental, must be known to him (and being
known to be an Error, eo ipso, it is rejected, since our understanding cannot
assent to a known falsehood) and therefore cannot be comprised in the heap of
sinful Errors known and unknown, but must be distinctly known, and
forsaken.

22. How can you say, that all Protestants agree touching the necessity of
Repentance from dead works, and Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God, and
Savio^r of the world? They may agree in the words or Grammatical signification
of them, as any boy, Turk, Jew, or Infidel, could not but do, if they
understood the tongue, wherein those words were set down. But for the sense, you
could scarcely have picked out Articles of greater moment, and withal less
agreed on among Protestants; since every word discovers their irreconciliable
differences concerning them: and yet (which is well to be observed) they
concern points of practice, and things absolutely necessary to salvation, as
we have heard you confess, and therefore an error in them, is damnable without
all remedy.

23. Let us cast an eye upon every word. Repentance. Protestants are not agreed
wherein true Repentance consists, as may be seen in Bellarmine (de Poenit: Lib:
1. Chap: 7. and Lib. 2 Chap: 4.) and you in particular hold a Doctrine
different from the rest, That Attrition alone is sufficient, and that, whether
it be Attrition, or Contrition, it requires the extirpation of all vicious
habits, which you say is a thing of difficulty and time, and cannot be
performed in an instant; and what sinner, though repenting himself never so
heartily at the hour of his death, can be saved with this your kind of
Repentance, which at that hour is an impossible thing? From dead works. What
will you understand by dead works? You know, many chief Protestants hold, all
our best works to be of themselves not only dead, but deadly sins; and so
Repentance of dead works must signify, Repentance that ever we have done any
good, that we have believed, hoped, and loved God and our neighbor, obeyed our
Parents, kept any of the Commandments etc: And if you consider the person from
whom they proceed; in case he be predestined, no sin can hurt him whatsoever
he do: To the former, Repentance is needless; to the latter, fruitless. How
then do Protestants agree in the necessity of Repentance from dead works, or
in Repentance itself? For the second Point (Faith in Christ Jesus, the Son of
God and Savior of the world) there is not one word wherein Protestants agree,
for the sense. Faith. You say; A probable Faith is sufficient: all others deny
it, professiing, that Christian Faith necessary to salvation, must be
infalible; and therfory you cannot be saved by your kind of Faith, even by the
doom of Protestants; and in that respect, all men who have care of their
souls, ought to detest your Doctrine and Book. But do those other Protestants
agree among themselves, what Faith is necessary, and sufficient, for salvation?
They do not. Some hold, that, Faith necessary and sufficient for Justification,
is that whereby one believes certainly, that his sins are forgiven, and that
they are forgiven even by believing so; according to which Doctrine, what
necessity can there be of Repentance? Seeing men are justified precisely by such
a Faith: and how then did you tell us, that Protestants agree in the necessity
of Repentance from dead works? Of which strange kind of Faith, He whom you call
the learned Grotius in his Discussio Riveriani Apologetici etc: (Page: 2^0.)
says very truly: Evangelij vox haec est: Resipiscite: Facite fructus dignos
Poenetentiae: adhortamini vosmetipsos per singulos dies, donec hodie nominetur,
vt non obduretur quis ex vobis fallacia peccati: Terra proferens spinas and
tribulos, proxima est maledictioni, cujus consummatioin combustionem. At Riveti
eique similium, long alia agendiratio: remissa tibi sunt peccata. Vnde id
sciam? Debes id credere. At quo Argumento, cum non remitantur omnibus? Remissa
sunt credentibus. Et quid credentibus? Remissa sibi esse peccata. Mirus vero
circulus. Ita, si istos sequimur, and remissio est causa credendi; nihil enim
credi debet factum esse nisi quod factum est; and contra, credere, causa
remissionis, quia conditio est requisita ad remissionem. Haec vere sunt
inextricabilia. (Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God and Savior of the
world.) Who is ignorant, how deeply Protestants disagree in these points? You
Socinians absolutely deny Christ Jesus to be the Son of God and Consubstantiall
to his Father, and Potter (Page: 113.114.) cites the doctrine of some whom he
terms men of great learning and judgment, that all who profess to love, and
honor Jesus Christ, are in the Visible Christian Church, and by Catholics to
be reputed Brethren. One of these men of great learning and judgment cited by
Potter is Thomas Morton, who (in his Treatise of the Kingdom of Israel)
teaches, that the Churches of Arians (who denied our Savior Christ to be God)
are to be accounted the Church of God, because they hold the Foundation of the
Gospel, which is Faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God and savior of the
world. Which are your very words: Wherein appears your hypocrisy, in calling.
Christ the Son of God, which men will conceive you understand as all good
Christians do (that he is consubstantiall to his Father) whereas you mean only,
as the Arians did, that he was the Son of God, by conjunction of will, or some
such accidental way; and so Protestants do not, agree in a point: simply
necessary (Savior of the world*) For, Socinia^s deny Christ to have satisfied
for the sins of the world, as may be seen in Volkelius, (Lib: 4. Cap: 2. and
Cap: 22.) against other Protastants, who in an other extreme hold, that he
alone satisfied so, as no satisfaction is required at our hands; though we
tell them, that such our satisfaction depends on, and taks all its valve from
his. You are an excellent advocate for Potter seeing you differ from him in this
Point, which (Page: 242.) he calls that most, important and most Fundamental of
all Articles in the Church that Jesus Christ the Son of God, and the Son of
Mary, is the only Savior of the world. Surely, one of you must be in such a
most important and most Fundamental error, that you cannot both be saved,
though you were inculpably ignorant of it, as we have seen out of Potter,
(Page: 243.) even concerning this particular Article. And now I pray you
consider this agreement of Protestants in the foresaid Articles of Repentance,
and Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God and Savior of the world; which yet
you confess to be simply necessary.

24. Object: 3. In the same (Page: 159. N. 52.) You say; Suppose a man in some
disease were prescribed a medicine consisting of twenty ingredients, and he
advising with Physicians should find them differing in opinion about it, some
of them telling hem, that all the ingredients were absolutely necessary; some,
that only some of them were necessary, the rest only profitable, and requisite
ad melius esse, lastly some, that some only were necessary, some profitable,
and the rest superfluous, yet not hurtful; yet all with one accord agreeing in
this, that the whole receypt hid in it all things necessary for the recovery of
his health and that if he made use of it, he should infallibly find it
successful; what wise man would not think they agreed sufficiently for his
direction to the recovery of his health? I ust so, these Protestant Doctors
with whose discords you make such Tragedyes, agreeing in These thus far, that
the Scripture evidently contains all things necessary to salvation, and that
whosoever believes it, and endeavors to find the true sense of it, and to
conform his life unto it, shall certainly perform all things necessary to
salvation, and undoubtedly be saved; what matters it for the divection of men
to salvation, though they differ in opinion touching what Points are absolutely
necessary, and what not?

25. Answer. You Socinians, who adore natural reason, and take pleasure in
being esteemed considering men, are much delighted in proposing similitudes,
which make a fair show, and may seduce the ignorant; but being examined, prove
nothing against any, except yoursel ves. First; This similitude can prove
nothing, unless you beg the Question, and suppose one receypt to have in it
all things necessary for the recovery of the diseased man's health; that is,
Scripture to contain all Points necessary to salvation, which you know we
deny, and say you err in Thesi. If with Scripture, you would join the
Tradition, and Definitions of the Church, your suppositions were true, and your
parity good; Otherwise your receypt cannot have all necessary ingredients.

26. Secondly: Suppose the sick man had great reason to believe, that the
ground upon which the Physicians build their opinion and agreement, were not
good, nor such as he had any obligation at all to credit, what sick man, if he
were also wise, could judge their agreement to be sufficient, for an undoubted
direction to the recovery of his health? Here then, (as in other several
occasions) I must put you in mind of your doctrine, that we are not bound to
believe, as an Object of our Faith, Scripture to be the word of God, but that
we may reject it. What then availes it me, toward the belief of such or such
Points, that they are evident in Scripture, if I do not believe Scripture
itself?

27. Thirdly: Suppose the ingredients were very sovereign and sufficient in
themselves, but that it were not in the sick man's power to procure them, were
the speculatiue agreement of the Physicians sufficient for his recovery? So
here. It is impossible for most men to know all evide^t texts of scripture,
which yet, according to your grounds, must make up that number of Truths,
wherein one shall be sure to find all Fundamental Points; and so the agreement
of Protestants, that all necessary Truths are evidently contained in Scripture,
is to little purpose, since they cannot distinguish them from Points not
necessary; and for all men to know all Points evident in Scripture, but not
necessary, is impossible; and though it were possible, yet being not of
obligation for any man, even though he be learned, to know all such Texts,
defacto he might without sin be ignorant of necessary Points, which he can be
certain to know, only by knowing absolutely all clear places of Scripture, and
so be damned for want of believing some Point absolutely necessary necessitate
medij; which is a plain contradiction, that some Points should be necessary to
salvation, and yet that we are not bound to attain the knowledge of them; or
that the End, which is the knowledge of such Points, should be necessary, and
the only means to attain it, be either impossible, or at least not of
obligation to any, as certainly no man is obliged to know precisely all and
every particular evident Text of Scripture, which ^et, in your way, is the only
means to know all Fundamental Points; as in your example, if a sick man were
obliged to procure the recovery of his health, he must be obliged to make use
of that receypt which alone could be effectual in order to that end.

28. Fourthly: Suppose I could not take such a receypt, without danger of
drinking poison, together with the wholesome ingredients, your similitude which
goes upon the contrary supposition, does clearly prove nothing. Thus it passes
in our case. Men left to themselves, without the Direction and Traditions of
the Church (yea with direct opposition to her Definitions and Authority) cannot
choose, but by occasion of reading Scripture alone, fall into many errors
against some Divine Revelation, delivered either in Scripture, or by Tradition;
that is, in the written or unwritten word of God; as we see by experience of
old and new Heretics, and particularly by the dissensions of Protestants,
whereof some must needs contradict some Truth delivered in Gods Word, either by
detracting, from, or by adding, to the true sense thereof. Now in divets places
you affirm, that every error contrary to any revealed Truth, is in its own
nature damnable without Repentance; and you add (Page: 158. N. 52.) that for the
most, part, men are betrayed into errors, or k^^t in them by their fault, or
vice, or passion: And therefore the true Conclusion will be, that men presuming
to read and interpret Scripture by their own wit, without dependence on the
Church, ought to conceive, that they expose themselves to certain danger, of
erring against some Divine Truth or Revelation; that is, to a thing in itself
damnable: Neither can they hope for any help from Sectaryes, whom they see
infinitely divided among themselves: And if they take such men for their
Physicians, some of them will affirm some ingredients to be necessary or
profitable, which others will swear to be rank poison; and so every
Protestant is left to himself, and a particular Catalogne of Fundamentalls is
necessary for every one. All which is strongly confirmed, by calling to mind,
that even the most learned Protestants, have no certain Rule for interpreting
Scripture. Your supposition therefore in the consult of Physicians, that in the
receypt, of which they spoke, though perhaps there might be some ingredients
superfluoous, yet not hurtful, cannot be applied against us, but retorted upon
yourselfe; that as in case the whole receypt did contain some things hurtful,
no man could in conscience take it; so (...) being in danger of falling into
damnable errors, by occasion of interpreting Scripture, without dependence or
relation to an infallible Guide, cannot without manifest danger of their souls
hope to find all necessary Points of Faith in Scripture alone, and therefore
must resolve to seek a Living Guide, the true Church of God; which they shall
be sure to find, if they seek, with great instance, constancy, and humility.

59. Out of what has been said in this Chapter, these Corollaryes, are
evidently doduced: That, there are certain Fundamental Articles of Faith,
which unless a man believe actually and explicitly, he cannot have the
substance of Faith, nor can any Congregation be a true Church, nor can there be
any hope of salvation; as all, both Catholics and Protestants, affirm; That
unless there be some Means to be assured, what those Fundamental Articles
are, none can be certain, that they have the substance of Faith, or be members
of the true Church, or oan^^pect salvation; That hitherto Protestants,
notwithstanding their ^^most endeavor could never declare, what those Points
are; That the means which Mr. Chillingworth has invented for being sure not
to miss of them, is neither sufficient, nor possible; That indeed it is not
possible for Protestants to assign any such Catalogue; That Catholics (...) a
most certain, and infallible way, to know such Points, and all other Truths,
as occasion shall require, by submitting to a Living Judge of Controversyes: And
therefore, That none can be sure, that he has true Faith, is a member of the
true Church, or is in possibility to be saved, unless he believe, profess, and
obey such an Infallible Judge, the One, always existent, Visible Church of God.
From which Truth, this other evidently follows; That whosoever devide
themselves from the Communion of that true Church, are guilty of the grievous
sin of Schism. And that Protestants have done so, shall be demonstrated in
the next Chapter.

CHAP: VII. PROTESTANTS ARE GVILTY OF THE SIN OF SCHISM.
1. THE Title of this Chapter having been made good at large by Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 5.) against all that Dr. Potter could invent, in
Defense of Protestants: If now I can confute whatsoever you alledg in Defense
of the Doctor; the Arguments and Reasons of Charity Maintained must in all
right be adjudged to keep their first possession, and this Truth remain
constant; That Protestants, and all others who separate themselves from the
Roman Church, must needs be found guilty of the grievous sin of formal Schism.

2. In the beginning Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chapt: 5. N. 4.) lays this
ground; That the Catholic Church signifyes One Congregation of Faithful
people, and therefore implies not only Faith to make them Faithful Believers,
but also Communion, or common union, to make them One in Charity, which
excludes Separation and Division, or Schism. This is a very evident and
certain Truth; and therefore Tertulian (de Praescrip: Cap. 41.) observes it as
a property of heretics, that they communicate with all. Pacem quoque passim cum
omnibus miscent. Nihil enim interest illis, licet diversa tractantibus, dum ad
vnius veritatis expugnationem conspirent. Thus we see Protestants, will needs
call all Brethren, who are not Papists. Yea many will not have Papists make a
Church distinct from them. S. Austine was of an other mind from Protestants;
who (de Uera Relig: Cap: 5.) condemns Philosophers, because teaching different
things of God, yet they frequented the same sacrifices; and adds; So it is
believed and taught, that it is the principal point of man's salvation, that
there is not an other Philosophy, that is, study of wisdom, and an other
Religion, when they, whose Doctrine we approve not, communicate not in
Sacraments with us. Which Truth S. Austine judges to be of so great valve, and
necessity, and the contrary so pernicious, as he avoucheth. Si hoc vnum tantum
vitium Christiana disciplina sanatum videremus ineffabili laud praedicandam
esse neminem negare oporteret. And (Lib: 19. cont. Faust: Cap: 11,) he says:
Men cannot be joined into any name of Religion, true or false, unless they be
linked with some sign or fellowship of visible Sacraments; Therefore Communion
in Sacraments, is essentially necessary to unite the members of One Church, and
distinguish it from all other. In this manner, (Act: 2. 42. it is said of those
first Christians: They were presevering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
Communication of breaking bread, and prayer. Behold a Communication, not only
in Faith, or Doctrine; but also in Sacraments and Prayers. Neither do
Protestants deny this Truth. Molins (Lib: 1. cont: Perron: Cap: 2.) says: The
ancient Doctors are wont to understand by the Church, (which oftentimes they
call Catholic) the whole Society of Christian Churches, Orthodox, and sound in
Faith, united together in Communion: and they oppose this Church to the
Societyes of Schismatikes, and Heretics, which we will not reject. By which
words it appears; That the Holy Fathers, and even Protestants, make unity in
Communion, against Schism, no less essential to the Church, then in Faith,
against Heresy. Field, (Lib: 1. Cap: 15.) The Communion of the Church
consists in Prayers and dispensation of Sacraments. And (Lib: 2. Cap: 2.)
Communion in Sacraments is essential to the Church.

3. The reason of this Truth is very clear. For, without Communion in
Sacraments, Liturgy, and public worship of God, the true Church cannot be
distinguished essentially from any Schismatic congregation: Because seeing
Schismatiks, as they are distinguished from Heretics, cannot be distinguished
by a different Faith, wherein they are supposed to agree with Catholics, they
can be distinguished, only by external Communion; which therefore must be
essential to the Church, as being the thing which alone formally and
essentially excludes Schism S. Austine speaks excellently to this purpose
(Epist: 48.) You are with us in Baptism, in the Creed, in the rest of Gods
Sacraments: in the spirit of unity, in bond of peace, finally in the very
Catholic Church you are not with us. Which words declare, that the spirit of
unity, and bond of peace, are necessary and essential to constitute men
members of One Church. All agree, that to be one Church, there must be unity in
Faith; and seeing Faith is ordaynd to the salvation of souls, (1. Pet: 1.9.) by
the true worship of God; unity in this worship is no less necessary, than unity
in Faith. The Militant true Church of Christ is a visible congregation; and
therefore does essentially require visible signs to distinguish it from all
other companyes, by Sacraments, external worship of God, and a public
Liturgy: which if you take away, you destroy the unity of the Church. For, a
Division of that which is essential, is a plain destruction. Protestants
teach, the true preaching of the word, and due administration of Sacraments to
be so essential to the Church, that without them a Church ceases to be a
Church: therefore if there be not agreement or Communion in them, they cannot be
essentially one Church, but essentially different and divided one from another.
This true Principle being settled;

4. The first reason which Charity Maintained (Chap: 5. Part: 1. N. 12.)
alleges to prove his Assertion, is this; Seeing Schism consists essentially in
leaving the external Communion of the Visible Church of Christ, and that
Luther and his Associars did so (as he proves by evidence of fact, and by the
confessions of Protestants, Luther saying (in Praefat: Oper: suorum) in the
beginning I was alone. And Calvin: (Ep: 141.) We were forced to make a
separation from the whole world; besides the sayings of other Protestants: it
follows that they cannot be excused from Schism.

5. The Answer which may be gathered out of Dr. Potter to this Reason, is; That
they left not the Church, but her Corruptions. Which evasion, Charity
Maintained confutes, by willing him to consider, that for the present we speak
not of Heresy, or departing from the Church, but of Schism, of leaving her
external Communion; which manifestly they did, by separating from all
Churches, and consequently from the Universal Church, which is the most
formal sin of Schism. And indeed they ought to infer, that the Universal
Church is not subject to any error in Doctrine, and not tell the world, that
they forsook her Communion for her Errors; seeing her Communion is never to be
forsaken; and therefore it is not possible, that she can give any cause of such
a separation by falling into error. This we learn of S. Austine (Cont: Parm:
Lib: 2. Chap 11.) There is no just necessity to divide Unity. And (Ep: 48.) It
is not possible that any may have just cause, to separate their Communion, from
the Communion of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as
if they had separated themselves from the Communion of all Nations upon just
cause. And S. Irenaeus (Cont: Here Is: Lib: 4. C 62.) They can not make any so
important reformation, as the evil of the Schism is pernicious

6. Secondly: Charity Maintained proves them to be Schismatikes, by this
Argument. Potter teaches, that the Catholic Church, cannot err in points of
Faith, Necessary to salvation; and therefore it cannot be damnable to remain in
her Communion, although she were falsely supposed to teach some Errors, seeing
they cannot be damnable, and consequently cannot yield any necessary cause to
leave her Communion; but it is clear, that Luther, and the rest, left the
whole universal Church, which was extant before them, under pretense of
Errors, which cannot be Fundamental; Therefore it is clear, they left Her
without any necessary cause. Which I confirm by your own words, (Page: 220. N.
52.) where you say; May it please you now at last to take notice, that by
Fundamental, we mean all, and only that which is necessary; and then I hope
you will grant, that we may safely expect salvation in a Church which has all
things Fundamental to salvation; unless you will say, that more is necessary,
than that which is necessary. And (Page: 376 N. 57.) he that believes all
necessary Truth, if his life he answerable to his Faith, how is it possible he
should fail of salvation? Therefore, say I, seeing the Church universal cannot
err in necessary Points, whosoever embraces her Faith, for as much as belongs
to Faith, cannot fail of salvation, unless you will say, that more is
necessary, then that which is necessary, which are your own words: You say
also (Page: 33. N. 4.) If a particular man or Church may hold some particular
Errors, and yet be a member of the Church universal; why may not the Church
hold some universal Error, and yet be shell the Church? This parity is none
at all: yet seeing you must make it good, I may say much more with all truth,
and without any dependence upon your false parity; if the Church universal may
hold some universal Error, (as you confess she may, which yet indeed is
impossible) and be still the Church, why may not a particular man, or Church,
hold some particular errors, and yet be a member of the Church universal; and
consequently capable of salvation for as much as concerns his Faith? And
therefore none can forsake the Church by leaving her Communion, and making
himself no member of Her, for any such errors as are not opposite to a
necessary Truth, into which kind of errors, it is confessed the Church cannot
fall. To which I may add what yousay (Page: 35. N. 7.) if some Controversyes may
for many Ages he undetermined, and yet in the mean while men be saved, why
should, or how can the Churches being furnished with effectual means to
determine all Controversyes in Religion, be necessary to salvation, the end
itself, to which these means are ordained, being as experience shows, not
necessary? O, how truly may we say; (and happy had your progenitors been, if
they had done so) If for so many; Ages before Luthers pretended Reformation,
but true Schism, men wrought Miracles, converted Nations, were eminent for
Sanctity, attained salvation, and are esteemed Saints in Heaven by our
Adversaryes; and this in the belief and profession of those Points, which
Catholics now profess, how could any Reformation, or separation, be
necessary, since the end itself of salvation, to which all means are ordained,
was not necessary, but was attained without any such Reformation or separation?

7. Like to this Argument of Charity Maintained is another which (N. 22.) he
took from these words of Potter, (Page: 155.) It is comfort enough for the
Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all capital dangers, and
conserve her on earth against all enemies; but she may not hope to triumph over
all sin and error, tell she be in Heaven. If it be comfort enough to be secured
from all capital dangers, why were not the first pretended reformers content
with enough, but rent the Church, out of a pernicious greedyness of more then
enough, or a pretended desire to free men from all error, which cannot be
hoped for out of Heaven? If even the universal Church may not hope to triumph
over all Error, till she be in Heaven, much less can particular Churches, and
men, conceive any such hope, and so you must either grant, that Errors not
Fundamental, cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Churches Communion,
or you must affirm, that all Churches may and ought to be forsaken, and that a
man cannot lawfully be of any Church, yea and that every one is obliged to
forsake himself, if it were possible, for avoiding errors not Fundamental.
Besides, as it is not lawful to leave the Communion of the Church for abuses
in life and manners, because we cannot in this life hope to triumph over all
sin, as Potter speaks; so neither can her Communion be forsaken, for Errors
not Fundamental, seeing the Doctor says also, that the Church may not hope to
triumph over all Errors.

8. Another Argument Charity Maintained (N. 25.) took from these words of
Potter (Page: 75.) There neither was, nor can be, any just cause to depart from
the Church of Christ; no more than from Christ himself. But to depart from a
particular Church, and namely from the Church of Rome, in some Doctrines and
Practices, there might be just and necessary cause, though the Church of Rome
wanted nothing necessary to salvation. Mark what he says. There can be no
cause to depart from the Church of Christ, and yet he teaches, that the Church
of Christ, the universal Church, may err in Points not Fundamental; therefore
errors in Points not Fundamental, cannot be judged a sufficient and just
cause to depart from the universal Church; and for the same reason, if the
errors of the Roman Church be supposed to be not Fundamental, there can be no
just cause to depart from Her: But here he expressly speaks upon supposition
that the Roman Church wanted nothing necessary to salvation, and consequently,
that she did not err in Fundamental Points; therefore there could be no cause
to forsake Her. And that Potter affirms absolutely in other passages of his
Book, that the Roman Church does not err in Fundamental Articles, shall be
demonstrated herafter; and consequently, that he contradicts himself, in
saying, the universal Church cannot be forsaken, and yet that there might be
just and necessary cause to forsake the Church of Rome, which erres only in
Points not Fundamental, as he holds the universal Church may err: to say
nothing for the present, That Luther did forsake all Churches, which is to
forsake the universal Church; as also that indeed all Ortodox Churches agreed
with the Roman, and so to forsake her, was to forsake all Churches, for which
there can be no just cause.

9. Another evasion Potter (Page: 76.) bring to avoid the just imputation of
Schism: and it is, because they acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a member
of the Body of Christ, and not cut off from the hope of salvation. And this,
says he, cleares us from the imputation of Schism, whose property it is, to
cut of from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from
which it separates.

10. This shift is confuted at large by Charity Maintained, as a strange
Doctrine, that men should be Schismatiks in for saking a Church, which they
judge to want something that is necessary to salvation; and that they should be
excused from Schism, who forsake her, and yet profess that she has all things
necessary to salvation; as if a man should think it a sufficient excuse for
his rebellion, to alledg, that he held the Person against whom he rebelled, to
be his Lawful Sovereign: And Dr. Potter thinks himself free from Schism,
because he forsook the Church of Rome, but yet so, as that still he held her
to be a true Church, and to have all necessary means to salvation. But I will
no further urge this most solemn foppery, and do much more willingly put all
Catholics in mind, what an unspeakable comfort it is, that our Adversaryes
are forced to confess, that they cannot clear themselves from Schism,
otherwise tha^ by acknowledging that they do not, nor cannot cut off from the
hope of salvation our Church. Which is as much as if they should in plain
terms say: They must be damned, unless we may be saved. Moreover this evasion,
does indeed condemn your Zealous Brethren of Heresy, for denying the Churches
perpetuity, but does not clear yourself from Schism, which consists in being
divided from that true Church, with which a man agrees in all Points of Faith,
as you must profess yourself to agree with the Church of Rome in all
Fundamental Articles. For otherwise you should cut her off from the hope of
salvation, and so condemn yourselfe of Schism. And lastly, even according to
this your own definition of Schism, you cannot clear yourselfe from that
crime, unless you be content to acknowledge a manifest contradiction in your
own Assertions. For, if you do not cut us off from the Body of Christ, and the
Hope of salvation; how come you to say (Page 20.) that you Judge a reconcilation
with us to be damnable? And (Page: 75.) that to depart from the Church of Rome,
there might be just and necessary cause, And (Page: 79.) That they that have the
understanding and means to discover their error, and neglect to use them, we
dare not flatter them with so easy a censure of hope of salvation. If then it
be (as you say) a property of Schism, to cut off from the Hope of salvation
the Church from which it separates, how will you clear yourself from Schism,
who dare not flatter us with so easy a censure? And who affirm, that a
reconciliation with us is damnable? But the truth is, there is no constancy in
your Assertions, by reason of difficultyes which press you on all sides, For,
you are loath to affirm clearly, that we may be saved, least such a grant
might be occasion (as in all reason it ought to be) of the conversion of
Protestants to the Roman Church: And on the other side, if you affirm that our
Church erred in points Fundamental, or necessary to salvation, you know not
how, nor where, nor among what Company of men, to find a perpetual Visible
Church of Christ before Luther. And therefore your best shift is, to say, and
unsay, as your occasions command. I do not examine the Doctors Assertion, that
it is the property of Schism to cut of from the Body of Christ, the Church
from which it separates; wherein he is mistaken, as appears by his own example
of the Donatists, who were formal and proper Heretics (as he affirms, because
they denied the perpetuity of Gods Church, which he says, is in its nature a
formal Heresy, against the Article of our Creed, I believe the Catholic
Church) and not Schismatiks, as Schism is a vice distinct from Heresy.
Besides, although the Donatists and Luciferians (whom he also al^edges) had
been mere Schismatiks; yet it were against all good Logic, from a particular
to infer a general Rule, to determine what is the property of Schism. Thus
far Charity Maintained. And indeed this might seem a good Argument; The
Church of Rome wants something necessary to salvation, Therefore it is lawful
and necessary to forsake Her; but not this. We have forsaken the Church of
Rome, but yet so, as we believe she wants nothing necessary to salvation;
Therefore we are not Schismatiques.

11. A third devise Potter has to clear Protestants from Schism, saying;
(Page: 75.) There is a great difference between a Schism from them, and a
Reformation of ourselves. But this (says Charity Maintained N. 29.) is a
subtility, by which all Schism and sin may be excused. For, no body can intend
evil, but for some motive of Virtue profit, or pleasure. And since their
pretended reformation did consist, as they gave out, in forsaking the
corruptions of the Roman Church, the Reformation of themselves, and their
Division from us, fall out to be one and the self same thing: and so if it was
not lawful to forsake us, it was not lawful to reform themselves by
forsaking us. Besides, we see, the they disagree infinitely in the particulars
of their pretended Reformation, and therefore the thing upon which their first
thoughts did pitch, was not any particular Model, or Idea of Religion, but a
conceit, that their most necessary, and, as I may say, immediate Reformation,
did consist in forsaking the Roman Church.

12. An other argument ( Charity Maintained, N. 35.) sets down in these words:
It is evident that there was a division between Luther and that Church which
was visible when he arose; but that Church cannot be said to have divided
herself from him, before whose time (...) was, and in comparison of whom she
was a whole, and he but a Part: therefore we must say, that he divided himself,
and went out of her; which is to be a Schismatique, or Heretic, or both. By
this Argument, Optatus Milevitanus proves, that not Caecilianus, but
Parmenianus was a Schismatique, saying, (Lib: 1. cont: Parmen:) For,
Caecilianus went not out of Majorinus they Grandfather, but Majorinus from
Caecilianus: neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or
Cyprian, but Majorinus, in whose Chair thou sit, which had no beginning
before Majorinus. Since it manyfestly appears that these things were acted in
this manner, it is clear that you are heirs both of the deliverers up (of the
Holy Bible to be burned) and also of Schismatiks. The whole Argument of this
Holy Father makes directly both against Luther, and all those who continue the
division which he began; and proves: That, going out, convinces those who go
out to be Schismatiks; but not those from whom they depart: That to forsake the
Chair of Peter is Schism; yea, that it is Schism to erect a Chair which had
no origin, or as it were predecessor, before it self: That to continue in a
division begun by others, is to be heirs of Schismatiks; and lastly; that to
depart from the Communion of a particular Church (as that of S. Cyprian was) is
sufficient to make a man incur the guilt of Schism, and consequently, that
although the Protestants, who deny the Pope to be supreme Head of the Church,
do think by that Heresy to clear Luther from Schism, in disobeying the Pope:
Yet that will not serve to free him from Schism, as it imports a division
from the obedience, or Communion of the particular Bishop, Diocese, Church,
and Country, where he lived. Thus Charity Maintained. And to this purpose,
Optatus says excellently, (Lib: 1.) The business in hand is concerning
separation: In Asrica as in all other Provinces likewise, there was but one
Church before it was divided by those who ordained Majorinus in the Chair upon
which by succession thou art set. The matter therefore to be r, consider (...),
which of the two parties has remained in the root with the ^^^le world? Which
of them went out? Which of them is set upon a new Chair which hertofore was
not in being? Which of them has raised an Altar against an Altar? Which of them
made an Ordination during the life time of him who was before ordained? Lastly
which of them is obnoxious to the sentence of S. John the Ap^^^e, who fortold
that many Antichrists would go out of the Church?

13. In confirmation of this Argument, we may allege Dr. Andrews (Respons: ad
Epist: 1. Molinaei Page: 171.) commending Molinaeus in condemning Aerius for
opposing the consent of the universal Church. The words of Molinaeus were,
quod in re pridem and vbique recepta, ausus sit opponere se consensui
Vniversalis Ecclesiae. Which the first Protestants did by opposing themselves,
to the whole Church extant before them, and consequently to the consent of the
Church universal. In like manner we have heard Dr. Tailor (Page 327.) saying,
That to separate from the Bishops makes a man at least a S^hismatick. And (Page:
329.) that it is also Heresy. Now who does not see, that the first Protestants
did separate themselves from all Bishops, and therefore must be both
Schismatiks, and Heretics? Let men therefore pretend as much as they please, to
shed tears, and be ready even to shedd their blood for procuring unity amongst
Christians; their thoughts, and endeavors will be in vain, unless they
resolve to return to that Body from which they separated themselves, and being
but parts, made a Division from the Whole. A truth so clear; that even the
wisest of our adversaryes acknowledge it; and in particular, one of the most
erudite, eloquent, experienced, and learned Protestants, Hugo Grotius,
confesses that Union cannot be hoped for in the Church, except by being
conjoined with those who are United with the Sea of Rome. His words are these,
(Rivetiani Apologetici Discuss: Page: 255.) Restitutionem Christianorum in vnum
idemque corpus, semper optatam a Grotio, sciunt qui eum norunt. Existimavit
autem aliquando incipi posse a Protestantium inter se conjunctione. Postea
vidit, id plane fieri nequire; quia, praeterquam quod Calvinistarum ingenia,
ferme omnium, ab omni pace sunt alienissima, Protestants nullo inter se
communi Ecclesiastico regimine sociantur: quae causae sunt, cur factae parts
in vnum Protestantium corpus colligi nequeant, imo and cur parts aliae atque
aliae sint exsurrect urae. Quare nunc plane ita sentit Grotius, and multi cum
ipso, non posse Protestants interse jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum ijs, qui
Sedi Romanae cohaerent; sine qua nullum sperari potest in Ecclesia commune
regimen. Ideo optat, vt ea divulsio, quae even it, and causae divulsionis
tollantur. Inter eas causas non est Primatus Episcopi Romani secundum canonas,
fatente Melanctone; qui eum Primatum, etiam necessarium putat ad retinendam
vnitatem. Neque enim hoc est Ecclesiam subijcere Pontificis libidine, sed
reponere ordinem, sapienter institutum.

14. And this Argument drawn from the grievous sin and deformity of a Part
in forsaking the whole, was of force to move that bold and obdurate heart of
Luther in the midst of his full cups, and sensual pleasures; and I beseech
all Protestants for the love they bear to that sacred ransom of their souls,
the Blood of our Blessed Savior, attentively to ponder, and impartially to
apply to their own conscience, what this man spoke concerning the feelings and
remorse of his. How often says he (Tom: 2. Germ: Jen: Fol: 9. and Tom: 2.
Wit: of Anno 1562. de abrog: Miss: private: Fol: 244.) did my trembling heart
beat within me, and reprehending me object against me that most strong
argument? Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err? Were so many ages
ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so many into hell to be damned
eternally with thee? And (Tom: 5. Annot: breviss:) he says: Do thou who art
but One, and of no account, take upon thee so great matters? What, if thou,
being but one, offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all (Mark all) to
err, why may he not permit thee to err? To this belong those Arguments, the
Church, the Church, the Fathers, the Fathers, the Counsels, the Customs, the
multitudes and greatness of wise men: Whom do not these Mountains of Arguments,
these clouds, yea these seas of examples overthrow? And these thoughts wrought
so deep in his soul, that he often wished and desired that he had (Colloq:
mensall: Fol: 158.) never begun this business: wishing yet further, that his
Writings were burned, and buried (Praefat: in Tom: German: Jen:) in eternal
oblivion.

15. Another Argument to prove that Protestants are Schismatiks, at least for
dividing themselves from one another, is delivered by Charity Mamtayned (Part
1. N. 38. Page: 203.). For if Luther were in the right, those other Protestants
who invented Doctrines far different from his, and divided themselves from
him, must be reputed Schismatiks: and, the like Argument may proportionably be
applied to their further divisions, and subdivisions. Which reason is confirmed
out of Dr. Potter, (Page: 20.) affirming, that to him and to such as are
convicted in conscience, of the errors of the Roman Church, a reconciliation
is impossible and damnable. And yet he teaches, as I show elswere, that their
difference from the Roman Church, is not in Fundamental points: and therefore
seeing Protestants differ in Points, at least not Fundamental, a reconciliation
between them must be impossible and damnable. Which yet may be further proved
out of Potter, who (Page: 69.) confesses, that even among Protestants, the
weeds, thistles, tares, and cockle, are not perfectly taken away, nor every
where alike. Now I ask, whether by reason of these weeds, Ptotestants must
separate from one another, or no? If they must, there will be no end of
Schisms, and Divisions; and what a Church, or Churches, are those from which,
one is obliged to divide himself? If they must not separate from one another by
reason of errors or weeds, it was not lawful for them to divide themselves
from us; unless they will return to say, that Protestants are obliged to
separate both from Catholics, and from one another; making e^dless Schisms
and Divisions, not only lawful, but necessary. For which Chilling worth opens
a fair way, (Page: 292. N. 91.) in these words: If the Church were obnaxious to
corruption (as we, Protestants pretend it was) who can possibly warrant us that
part of this corruption might not get in, and prevail in the (...) or 4. or 3.
or 2. age? What is this but to say, that in those primitive ages, for ought we
know, men were obliged to forsake the Communion of the universal visible
Church?

16. To these reasons we may yet add what Potter says: (Page: 131 and 132.):
That the Donatists and Novatians were just branded for Schismatiks, for
opposing the Church, and that it will never be proved, that Protestants oppose
any Declaration of the Catholic Church, and therefore are unjustly charged
either with schism or Heresy. But M. Doctor, I beseech you inform us, whether
Luther and his followers, did not oppose the doctrines and declarations of all
Churches extant before them: and consequently of the universal Church? And
therefore you are justly charged both with Schism and Heresy according to your
own ground.

17. Other Arguments Charity Maintained alleges, of which we shall have
occasion to treat herafter. Particularly that is to be observed which (N. 47,
Page: 221.) et seqq. he proves, to wit, that Luther, and the rest departed from
the Roman Church, and were. Schismatiks for such their division from her
Communion. And because some Protestants are wont to produce certain persons,
as members of their Church; harity Maintained demonstrates, that the Grecians,
Waldenses, Wickless, Huss, Muscovites Armenians, Georgians, cannot be of the
same Church with Protestants: and therefore that Luther and his followers
opposed the doctrine, and separated themselves from the Communion of all
Christian Churches, which cannot be done without Schism and Heresy, unless men
have a mind to deny that there are any such sins as Schism, and Heresy. And
here I must not omit, that Chillingworth thought it not wisdom to answer the
discourse of Charity Maintained proving that the aforesaid people, Waldenses,
Wickleff etc: were Protestants, but dissembles that matter. A sign, that he
judged those vulgar allegations of Protestants to be wholly false, and
impertinent!

18. Now then, we having proved, that Potters evasions cannot clear
Protestants from Schism, we must examine what you can say; whose answers being
confuted, this truth will remain firm: Protestants are guilty of the sin of
Schism.

19. Your main and capital answer consists in three propositions, set down
(Page: 264. And 265. N. 30.3^.32.) That not every separation, but only a
causeless separation from the external communion of any Church, is the sin of
Schism. That imposing upon men under pain of excommunication a necessity of
professing known errors, and pract^sing known corruptions, is a sufficient and
necessary cause of separation: And that this is the cause which Protestants
allege to justify their separation from the Church of Rome. That to leave the
Church, and to leave the external communion of a Church, at least as Dr.
Potter understands the words, is not the same thing: That being done by ceasing
to be a member of it, by ceasing to have those requisites which constitute a
man a member of it, as faith, and obedience. This by refusing to communicate
with any Church in her liturgies and public worship of God.

20. These be his remembrances and memorandums, as he calls them, but indeed
are conceypts borrowed out of a letter of Mr. John Hales of Eaton, written to a
private friend of his, as I am most credibly informed, by a Person well known,
to them both, at that time, and who saw the letter itself: And further
affirms of his own certain knowledge, that Mr. Hales was of a very inconstant
judgment, one year, for example, doubting of, or denying, the Blessed Trinity,
the next year, professing, and adoring the same. The substance of all consists
in the first; That only a causeless separation from the external communion of
any church, is the sin of Schism. For if you ask the cause excusing from
Schism their separation from us, he will answer: The Church was corrupted, and
it is not lawful to communicate with any Church in her corruptions. This, I
say, is his main ground, with which his other Momorandums must stand, or fall.
For if either the Church cannot err, or else her errors and corruptions be not
such, as can yield just cause to leave her external communion, the Prelates of
Gods Church, may impose upon man, under pain of excommuniation, a necessity to
remain in her communion, and by Ecclesiastical censures, oblige them to do
that, which otherwise they are by divine Law most strictly obliged to perform:
And further, if the separation be causeless, the separatists from the external
communion of the Church do jointly leave the Church, either by professing a
different Faith, or denying obedience, both to the Church, and to God, who
commands us not to forsake the communion of the Church, faith and obedience
being those requisites which, say you, constitute a man a member of a Church:
And so all is reduced to your Memorandum: a causeless separation from the
external communion of any Church, is the sin of Schism. Yourselfe say
expressly (Page: 267. N. 38.) The cause in this matter of separation, is all in
all: And why then would you entangle men with I know not what other
unnecessary, and untrue remembrances? But necessity has no Law. You cannot
give any reason why you leave us, and yet why Protestants must not leave one
another (since it is clear that they in disagree Points at least not
fundame^tall) and therefore you fly to other chifts besides the cause; which yet
you say is all in all though (Page: 267. N. 40.) you expressly say, that the
cause or the corruption of our Church is not the only or principal reason of
your not communicating with us. A pretty congruity! the cause is all in all,
and yet is not the principal reason etc;

21. Now, to that pretended maine ground of yours; It is not lawful to
profess known errors, or practice known corruptions; I say, That either we
may consider what is true in it self, or what in good consequence follows
from the principles of Protestants, and in particular of Potter and
Chillingworth, or, as the Logicians speak, ad hominem, which are two very
differenr considerations; and yet by the assistance of Gods holy grace, I will
show, that according to both of them Protestants are guilty of the sin of
Schism.

22. For the first; It is most true in itself, that in no case it can ever be
lawful to dissemble, Equivocate, or Ly, in matters of Faith, and he shall be
denied in Heaven, who in that manner denies God on earth. But, as I began to
say above, from this very ground we prove, that the Church cannot err in such
matters. For, seeing all Fathers, Antiquity, and Divines, have hitherto
proclaimed with a most unanimous consent, that to forsake the external
communion of Gods Visible Church, is the sin of Schism; it follows, that
there can be no cause sufficient for such a division, and consequently, that
she cannot fall into such errors or corruptions, as may force any to leave her
Communion. And therefore as we prove a priori, that the Church cannot fall into
error, because she is infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost: So as it were a
posteriori, or ab absurdo, we must infer, that she is infallible, and not
subject to error, because otherwise we might forsake her Communion, and men
could have no certainty who be Heretics or Schismatikes: but all would be
obliged to leave all Churches, seeing none are free from error, and so,
remaining members of no Church on earth, could hope for no salvation in Heaven.

23. For this cause, in the definition of Schism, our Forfathers never put
your limiting particle (causless) well knowing, and taking it as a principle in
Christianity, that there could be no cause to forsake the Communion of Gods
Church; as, in proportion, if one should say, it is not lawful to divide ones
self from Christ without cause, he should insinuate, that there might be some
cause in some case to do so: and yet Potter (Page: 75.) affirms, That there
neither was, nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ; no
more than from Christ himself. Durum telum necessitas. It could not be denied
that Luther departed from all Churches, and so there was no possible way to
avoyde the note of open Schism, but by inventing a new definition of that
crime, and supposing the possibility of a thing impossible, that there may be
just cause of separating from the Communion of the Church. But while they
labor to avoid Schism, they broach a most pernicious Heresy, that indeed
there may be any such just cause; verifying what S. Hierome says upon those
words of the Apostle, which (a good conscience) some casting off, have suffered
shipwreck: Though schism in the beginning may in some sort be understood
different from Heresy; yet there is no Schism, which does not feign some
Heresy to itself, that so it may seem to have departed from the Church upon
good reason: That is, that their divsion may not seem to be a causless
separation, as you speak in your new definition. But I pray you hear S.
Austine (Lib: 2. Cont: Petil: Chap 16.) saying; I object to thee the sin of
Schism, which thou will deny, but I will straight prove. For thou do not
communicate, with all Nations. To which if you add what he has (Epist: 48.) It
is not possible that any may have just cause to separate their communion from
the communion of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as
if they had separated themselves from the communion of all Nations upon just
cause: and (Lib: 2. Cont: Parm: Cap: 11.) There is no just necessity to divide
unity. And (Lib: 3. Cap: 4.) The world does securely judge, that they are not
good, who separate themselves from the world, in what part of land soever. If,
I say you consider these sayings of S, Austine, the conclusion must be, that
Luther who divided himself from the communion of the whole world, and all
Nations, was a Schismatike, seeing it is not possible that any may have just
cause to do so, as S. Austine affirms. Observe also what this same glorious
Doctor says (Lib de Unit: Eccl: Cap: 4.) Whosoever believe that Jesus Christ
came in flesh, in which he suffered, was borne, etc: yet so differ from his
Body, which is the Church, as their communion is not with the whole, whersoever
it is spread, but is found separate in some part, it is manifest that they are
not in the Catholic Church. Was Luthers communion with the whole, which was
not with any one place, or person? Dr. Lawd (Page: 139.) says plainly: The
whole Church cannot vn^versally err in absolute Fundamental Doctrines. And
therefore it is true that there can be no just cause to make a Schism from the
whole Church. Which must be understood, that absolutely there can be no cause
at all. For it were ridiculous to say; There can be no just cause to make a
causeless Schism or division, seeing if there be cause, it is not causeless.
And it is to be observed, that the Reason he gives why there can be no just
cause to make a Schism from the whole Church, is, because she cannot err in
absolute Fundamental doctrines, which supposes both that she may err in
Points not Fundamental, and; that errors in such points cannot yield
sufficient cause to forsake her communion; which is directly against all those
who teach that the Roman Church does not err Fundamentally, and yet that they
had cause to forsake her communion, by reason of her errors. We must therefore
conclude, that seeing there can be no just cause to depart from the communion of
the Church, and yet that there might be just cause to do so, if she were
subject to corruption or error, we must absolutely believe her to be
infallible, and that they who teach the contrary, and upon that pretense
forsake her communion, are guilty of Schism, and heresy.

24. And this is a fit place to put you in mind of your doctrine, that the
Apostles, after the receaving of the holy Ghost, and the whole Church, with
them, erred in a point clearly revealed, and commanded by our Savior Christ,
about preaching the Gospells to gentiles. For, this false doctrine supposed; I
ask whether or no, it had been necessary, or lawful to leave the communion of
that most primitive Church. If it were not lawful; then errors even in Faith,
affoard not a just cause to forsake a Church. If you say it was lawful to
forsake the Apostles, and the whole Church of their time, you blaspheme: And
yet if the Apostles, and the whole primitive Church did err, they, that is all
Christians, might and ought to have been forsaken; and therefore if it were but
to avoid this gross absurdity, we must say, that neither the Church of that,
nor of consequent ages, could err.

25. Thus much be said in the first way: That, considering things as they are
in themselves, the Church might be forsaken, if she could err, and therefore
because it is most certain that she can never be forsaken, we must firmly
believe that she cannot err; though indeed I must add, that if she could err,
she might, and might not be forsaken; it being no strange thing, that upon a
false supposition, contradictoryes may follow: whereof more herafter.

25. Now let us see, what may be said in the second way, or consideration, that
is, in order to Protestants, and their grounds, or ad hominem: though I must
confess, this to be a nice and difficult undertaking, by reason of their
inconstancy, saying, and unsaying as they are forced by different, or contrary
occasions, which make them do as they can, not what they should, and never
hold constantly what they ought.

27. First then, we suppose, that the Church out of which Luther departed, was
a true Church for substance (whether it were the Roman, or any other Church:)
Otherwise we must say, that Christ had no true Church on earth: which you;
Potter; and all chiefest Protestants, deny, and expressly teach, that always
there has been, is, and ever shall be such a Church, as we have seen above. In
so much as D. Lawd (Page: 141.) says: All Divines Ancient, and Modern,
Romanists, and Reformers agree in this, That the whole Militant Church of
Christ cannot fall away into general Apostasy. And (Page: 142.) he says: that
otherwise falsehood in the very Article (of the Creed, that the Church is Holy)
may be the subject of the Catholic Faith, which were no less then Blasphemy
to affirm.

28. Secondly; Hence it follows, that she did not err in any Fundamental
Point, every one whereof, utterly destroys the Church, but that her (falsely)
supposed errors were only in Points not Fundamental, or not absolutely
necessary to salvation.

29. Thirdly; That if such errors in Points not Fundamental do not exclude
salvation, men may be saved without profession of the contrary truths, it being
impossible that one believe an error, and also the truth contrary to that
error: and therefore, if the error be not destructive of salvation, it is
impossible that the contrary truth be necessary thereto.

30. Fourthly; If therefore we can show that according to Protestants, errors
in Points not Fundamental, destroy not salvation, it will follow of it self,
that, in their grounds, they might, and ought to have remained in the external
communion of the visible Church, notwithstanding such errors; since by so
doing, they had wanted nothing necessary to salvation; nor done any thing
incompatible therewith. For which, we take your own words (Page: 272. N. 53.) It
concerns every man who separates from any Churches communion, even as much as
his salvation is worth, to look most carefully to it, that the cause of his
separation be just and necessary: For, unless it be necessary, it can very
hardly be sufficient. And, say I, how can it be necessary, if one may be saved
without it? Let us now see what Protestants hold in this matter.

31. I grant, that sometime in words they will seem to teach, that it is
necessary to believe, whatsoever is revealed by God, if it be sufficiently
proposed. But if we respect their deeds, and consider other grounds of their
Doctrine, it will appear, that they must hold the contrary; and that in
express words they sometime actually declare so much. Neither ought this to
seem any strange thing: since Heretics must say and unsay, to help a bad
cause, as well as their wits will serve them. In which respect, I could never
much approve the great pains which some Catholic Divines employ, to prove
that Heretics hold this, or that, because sometime they deliver expressions
contrary to that of which it is disputed, whether or no it was their Opinion.
For, all that can be inferred from such their different sayings, is (not that
they held determinately this, and not that, but only) that indeed they
contradicted, and by Gods just judgment destroyed themselves

32. Well then, that it is necessary to believe whatsoever is revealed by God,
and sufficiently propounded, Potter (Page: 245. affirms in these words: It
seems Fundamental to the Faith, and for the salvation of every member of the
Church, that he acknowledge and believe all such Points of Faith, as whereof he
may be sufficiently convinced that they belong to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.
For he that being sufficiently convinced, does oppose, is obstinate, an
Heretic, and finally such a one as excludes himself out of Heaven, wherinto
no wilful sinner can enter. And (Page: 250.) It is Fundamental to a
Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all revealed
truths of God, whereof he may be convinced, that they are from God. And herupon
Chillingworth (Page: 11.) speaks to Charity Maintained in this manner: It amazed
me to hear you say, that he (Dr. Potter) declines this question, and never
tells you whether or no there be any other Points of Faith, which being
sufficiently propounded as divine Revelations may be denied and disbelieved. He
tells you plainly there are none such. Again it is almost as strange to me,
why you should say, this was the only thing in question, whether a man may deny
or disbelieue any Point of Faith, sufficiently presented to his understanding
as a truth revealed by God. Produce any one Protestant that ever did so, and I
will give you leave to say, it is the only thing in question. Thus he.

33. To which I answer: That the state of the Question being, whether both
Catholics and Protestants be capable of salvation, in their several Faiths and
Religions (and the same reason is of all who differ in any matters of Faith,
though of themselves they be not Fundamental) and Protestants judging us to be
very uncharitable in saying they cannot be saved, seeing they hold the Creed,
and all Fundamental Points (as they conceive) and therefore if they be in
error, it is only in Points not Fundamental; Charity Maintained said, that
Potter never answered to this Point clearly, directly, and constantly, as he
ought to have done; that is, he never declared, whether different belief in
Points not Fundamental, does so destroy the unity of Faith in persons so
disagreeing, as that they cannot be said to be of one Faith for the substance,
or of one Church and Religion, in such manner as one might absolutely say,
Catholics and Protestants are of one Faith and Church, and capable of salvation
in their several beliefs and professions of Faith. This, Potter never did, nor
in policy durst do, because says Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 3.) He was
loath to affirm plainly, that generally both Catholics and Protestants may be
saved: And yet seeing it to be most evident that Protestants cannot pretend to
have any true Church before Luther, except the Roman, and such as agreed with
her, and consequently that they cannot hope for salvation, if they deny it to
us, he thought best to avoid this difficulty by confusion of Language, and to
fill up his Book with Points which make nothing to the purpose. Besides, if
once he grant, that difference of belief, though it be only in Points not
Fundamental, destroy the true Faith, Church, and Religion, he could not
pretend, that Protestants disagreeing among themselves, could be all of one
Church, or substance of Faith, and Religion, and capable of salvation. What
remedy then, but that he must contradict himself, accordingly as he might be
pressed by diversity, or contrariety, of difficultyes; and so by uttering
contradictions, say Nothing at all to the maine question; (or else speak equally
in favor of both Contradictories.) For, what implies contradiction, implies
only nothing. But let us go forward, and add to what we have already cited out
of Chillingworth, his other words (Page: 21.) If any Protestant or Papist be
betrayed into, or kept in any error, by any sin of his will, (as it is to be
feared many millions are) such error is, as the cause of it, sinful and
damnable. The same doctrine he pretends to deliver through his whole Book;
whereby it seems that both he and Potter hold (in words) that to believe any
error against Divine Revelation sufficiently propounded, is sinful and
damnable, and destroys the fundation of Faith, being as Chilling: says (P.
11.) no less, than to give God the ly.

34. Nevertheless it is evident that in reality and deeds, yea and in express
profession, they and other Protestants, do, and must, maintain the contrary,
unless they have a mind to contradict themselves, in Points of heigh
concernment for their cause. This I prove by these considerations.

35. First: The World knows, that nothing is more frequent in the mouth of
Protestants, than that they all hold the same substance of Faith, and retain
the essence of a true Church, because they agree in Fundamental Points, which
they are wont to prove, because they believe the Apostles Creed, and the four
first General Counsels; and Potter in particular (Page: 216.) teaches, that
the Creed of the Apostles, as it was further opened and explained in some parts
(by occasion of emerfent Heresies) in the other Catholic Creeds of Nice
Constantinople, Ephepsus, Chacedon, and Aranesius contains all fundamental
truths; and from thence inferrs (Page: 232. that Protestants agree in
fundamentalls: and (Page: 241.) he says, the Creed is the perfect Summary of
those fundamental truths, wherein consists the unity of Faith, and of the
Catholic Church. But these assertions were very false, and impertinent, if it
be damnable, and even Fundamental against Faith, to believe any error
repugnant to. Divine Revelation, though in a Point not Fundamental of itself.
For, what imports it, to believe all the Articles of the Creed, if in the mean
time, they deny some other truths revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed
for such; for example, innumerable Texts of Scripture containing no matters,
Fundamental of themselves? As certainly some Protestants must do, seeing two
contradictoryes cannot be true. Or why do they deceive men, in telling them,
that by believing the Creed, they cannot err Fundamentally; seeing they hold
that there are millions of truths which to deny were a damnable and
Fundamental error? If therefore they will keep this ground, that they have
the same substance of Faith and hope of salvation, because they agree in
Fundamental Points, they must affirm, that disagreement, or error in a Point
not Fundamental, does not destroy the substance of Faith, or deprive men of
hope to be saved, nor is a Fundamental error, as Potter and Chilling: sometime
say it is, as we have seen; and Chilling: says in particular, (Page: 131. N.
9.) If Protestants differ in Points Fundamental, then they are not members of
the same Church one with another, no more than with you (he means, us
Catholics.) Wherefore upon the matter, if to deny Points of themselves not
Fundamental sufficiently propounded, be a Fundamental error, de facto
Protestants are not members of the same Church one with another, according to
Chillingworths own words. If it be not a Fundamental error, the contrary
Truth is not necessary; and so one may be saved, though he deny some revealed
Truth sufficiently propounded; which is the thing I intended to prove.

36. Secondly. Learned Protestants are very desirous, and even ambitious, that
the world should believe them to be of the same Church with the Roman; and this
merely upon necessity, and for their own sake; least otherwise they should be
necessitated to affirm, that before Luther there was no true Church upon
earth, but that he and his followers created a new Church out of nothing; from
which, Potter utterly disclaimes (Page: 59.) saying; Protestants never intended
to erect a new Church, but to purge the old; the Reformation did not change the
substance of Religion. And (Page: 63.) The most necessary and Fundamental
truths, which constitute a Church, are on both sides unquestioned: And for that
reason, learned Protestants yield them the name and substance of a Christian
Church, though extremely defiled with horrible errorurs and corruptions: And
adds, that, The very Anabaptists grant it. But how can they be of the same
Church for substance with us, who, they say, are defided with horrible errors
and corruptions, if every error in any Point of Faith, though not
Fundamental, destroys the substance o Faith and Church, and possibility of
salvation? If then they will speak with consequence to themselves, they must
affirm, that, errors in Points not Fundamental, do not exclude salvation.

37. Thirdly: Protestants teach, that the Church may err in Points not
Fundamental, and yet remain a Church, but cannot err in Fundamentalls
without destruction of herself. Now, if sinful errors in Points not
Fundamental, be damnable, Fundamental, and destructive of salvation, they
also destroy the essence of the Church; and therefore Protestants must either
say, that the Church cannot err in any Point though not Fundamental, as she
cannot err in Fundamentalls; or else must affirm, that sinful errors not
Fundamental, are not damnable, or Fundamental, or destructive of salvation,
according to their grounds.

38. Fourthly; Protestants are wont to say (and by this, seek to excuse their
Schism) that they left not the Church of Rome, but her corruptions; and that
they departed no farther from her, than she departed from herself: But if
every error against a Divine Truth sufficiently proposed, be destructive of
the substance of Faith, and hope of salvation, the Roman Church (which you
suppose to be guilty of such errors) has ceased to be a Church, and is no
corrupted Church, but no Church at all, nor does exist with corruptions, but by
such corruptions has ceased to exist; and so you departed not only from her
corruptions, but from herself, or rather she ceasing to have any being, your
not communicating with her, was total, and not only in part, or in her
corruptions: and if you departed from her, as far as she departed from
herself, seeing she departed totally from herself, you also must be said to
have departed totally from her, which yet you deny; and therefore must affirm,
that sinful errors not Fundamental, destroy not the Church, nor exclude hope
of salvation. If therefore Protestants will not destroy their own assertions,
v.g. That they left not the Church, but her corruptions; that they departed no
farther from her, than she departed from herself; that they left not the
Church, but her external Communion; that Protestants agree in substance of
Faith, because they agree in Fundamental Points; that their Church is the same
with the Roman; that the Church may err in Points not Fundamental, but not in
Fundamentalls; if, I say, Protestants will overthrow these, and other like
assertions, they must grant, that sinful errors in Points not Fundamental,
destroy not the substance of Faith, nor exclude salvation, and consequently
that they left the Church for Points not necessary; and so are guilty of
Schism, which you grant to happen of when the cause of separation is not
necessary, as we have seen out your own words, (Page: 272. N. 53.)

39. But yet let us see, whether Protestants do not confess, that sinful
errors not fundamental are compatible with salvation, as we have proved it to
follow out of their deeds and principles. You say (Page 307. N. 106.) That it is
lawful to separate from any Churches communion, for errors not appertaining
to the substance of Faith, is not universally true, but with this exception,
unless that Church require the belief and profession of them. And (Page: 281.
N. 67.) We say not, that the communion of any Church is to be forsaken for
errors vnfundamentall, unless it exact withal either a dissimulatiom of them
being noxious; or a profession of them against the dictate of conscience, if
they be mere errors. And (N. 68.) Neither for sin, nor errors, ought a
Church to be forsaken if she does not impose and enjoyne them. Therefore, say I,
we must immedintly infer, that errors not Fundamental, do not destroy Faith,
Church, salvation. For if they did, ipso facto the Church which holds them,
should cease to be a Church, and so she must necessarily leave all Churches,
and all Churches must leave her, she loosing her own being, as a dead man
leaves all, and is left by all. And here let me put you in mind, that while
(Page: 307. N. 106.) above cited, you seem to disclose some great secret or
subtilty, in saying, that it is not lawful to separate from any Churches
communion for errors not appertaining to the substance of Faith, is not
universally true, but with this exception, unless that Church requires the
belief and profession of them; you do but, contradict yourselfe. For if the
Church err in the substance of Faith, or but does not impose the belief of
them, why are you (in your grounds) more obliged to forsake her, than a Church
that, erres in not Fundamentalls, and does not impose the belief of them?
Especially if we call to mind your doctrine, that one may err sinfully against
some Article of Faith, and yet retain true belief in order to other Points in
which why may you not communicate with such a Church (Also Page: 209. N. 38.)
you say: You must give me leave to esteem it a high degree of presumption, to
enjoin men to believe, that there are, or can be any other Fundamental
Articles of the Gospel of Christ, than what himself commanded his Apostles to
teach all men; or any damnable Heresies, but such as are plainly repugnant to
these prime Verityes. Therefore we must infer, that seeing errors in Points not
Fundamental, are not repugnant to those prime verityes, they cannot, in your
way, be esteemed damnable Heresies; and if not damnable Heresies, they cannot
be damnable at all; since we suppose their malice to consist only in opposition
to Divine Revelation; which is a damnable sin of Heresy. Potter (Page 39.)
says, Among wise men each discord in Religion dissolves not the unity of
Faith. And (P. 40.) Unity in these matters (Secondary Points of Religion) is
very contingent and variable in the Church, now greater, now lesser, never
absolute in all particles of truth. From whence we must infer, that errors
not Fundamental exclude not salvation, nor can yield sufficient cause to
forsake a Church, or else that men must still be forsaking all Churches, because
there is never absolute unity in all particles of truth. Whitaker also
(Controver: 2. Quest: 5. Cap. 18.) says; If an Heretic must be excluded from
salvation, that is, because he overthrows some foundation. For unless he
shake or overthrow some foundation, he may be saved. According to which
Doctrine, the greatest part of Scripture may be denied. But for my purpose, it
is sufficient to observe, that so learned a Protestant teaches, that errors in
Points not Fundamental, exclude not from salvation. Morton in his imposture
(Cap: 15.) says: Neither do Protestants yield more safty to any of the Members
of the Church of Rome in such a case, then they do to whatsoever Heretics,
whose belief does not undermine the fundamental Doctrine of Faith. Therefore
he grants some safety even to Heretics, if they oppose not Fundamental
Articles; and yet they must be supposed to be in sinful error against some
revealed truth; otherwise they could not be Heretics. Dr. Lawd (Page: 355.)
teaches, That to err in things not absolutely necessary to salvation, is no
breach upon the one saving Faith which is necessary. And (Page: 360.) in things
not necessary, (though they be Divine Truths also) men may differ, and yet
preserve the one necessary Faith. And (Page: 299.) he says; I do indeed for my
part acknowledge a possibility of salvation in the Roman Church; but so, as
that which I grant to Romanists, is, not as they are Romanists, but as they are
Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed, and hold the foundation, Christ
himself, not as they associate themselves wittingly and knowingly to the
gross superstitions of the Roman Church? Behold a clear confession, that the
pretended errors of the Roman Church do not exclude salvation, and yet they
are supposed to be against some revealed Truths! Therefore errors in Points not
Fundamental, are not repugnant to salvation.

40. But what conclusion can we deduce from these Premises, that errors in
Points not necessary or Fundamental, are not damnable, but that one may be
saved in them. Dr. Lawd has done it for us (Page: 133.) in these words: The
whole Church cannot universally err in absoute Fundamental Doctrines, and
therefore there can be no just cause to make a Schism from the whole Church.
And (Page: 196.) he teaches, that by the manifest places in Scripture there may
be settled Unity and Certainty of Belief in Necessaryes to Salvation; and in
Non necessarijs, in and about things not necessary there ought not to be a
Contention to a Separation. And (Page: 129.) That the whole Church cannot
universally err in the Doctrine of Faith, is most true, (so you will but
understand its not erring, in Absolute. Fundamental Doctrines.) And therefore
it is true also, that there can be no just Cause to make a Schism from the whole
Church. Certainly Luther did not follow this advise, who began, and maintained,
a Contention to Separation from the whole World, from which, Dr. Lawd expressly
says there can be no just Cause to make a Schism. But this is not all. For,
(Page: 226.) he says: Suppose a General Council actually Erring in some Point
of Divine truth, I hope it will not follow that this Error must be so gross,
as that forthwith it must needs be known to private men. And doubtless till
they know it, Obedience must be yielded: Nay when they know it, (if the Error
be not manifestly against Fundamental Verity in which case a General Council
cannot easily err) I would have all wise men consider, whether external
Obedience be not even then to be yielded. For if Controversyes arise in the
Church, some end they must have, or theyil tear all in sunder. And I am sure
no wisdom can think that fit. Why then, say a General Council Err, and a
Erring Decree be ipso jure, by the very Law itself invalid, I would have it
wisely considered again, whether it be not fit to allow a General Council
that Honor and Privilege, which all other Great Courts have. Namely, that
there be a Declaration of the invalidity of its Decrees, as well as of the
Laws of other Courts, before private men take Liberty to refuse Obedience. For
till such a Declaration, if the Council stand not in force. A. C. Sets up
private Spirits to control General Counsels; which is the thing he so much
cries out against in the Protestants. Therefore it may seem very fit and
necessary for the Peace of Christendom, that a General Council thus erring,
should stand in force, till Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration make the
Error to appear, as that another Council of equal Authority, reverse it.
For, as for Moral Certainty, that's not strong enough in Points of Faith. How
many Points do these words contain in favor of Catholics, against
Protestants?

41. 1. That known Errors in Points not Fundamental, are not only to be
tolerated, but that Obedience is to be yielded to the Church, or Council, even
concerning such Points and Errors. How then can Luther be excused from
Schism, who was so far from yielding Obedience to the Church, that he opposed
himself to, and made a public Separation from all Churches? And how can
Protestants be now excused from Schism, who follow his example, defend his
doctrine, and persist in the Separation, and breach which he made?

42. Secondly: That to profess externally errors in Points not Fundamental,
excludes not salvation. For, to do any thing repugnant to salvation, I am sure
no wisdom can think fit, to use his own Words: And then it cannot be
necessary to forsake the Church, for avoiding the profession of Errors not
Fundamental; and yet this is the reason for which Protestants pretend to be
excused from Schism.

43. Thirdly; He does not only affirm, but endeavors to prove, that external
Obedience must be yielded to the Decrees of Counsels, because if Controversyes
arise in the Church, some end they must have, or theyil tear all in sunder:
Which he says no wisdom can think fit. Which proves very well, that some
Living Judge of Controversyes is necessary; and is directly opposite to
Chillingworth, who affirms, that there is no necessity of such a Judge, because
it is not necessary that all Controversyes be ended. But then,

44. Fourthly: It follows evidently, in true Divinity; that, if such a Judge
be necessary, He must be infallible in all things belonging to Faith and
Religion. For, seeing to dissemble in matters of Faith, or profess one thing,
and believe the contrary, is a grievous sin, and a most pernicious ly; no man
can yield external Obedience against the judgment and dictamen of his
Conscience; and yet it being also true, that we are obliged to obey the Decrees
of General Counsels, we must of necessity affirm, that they are infallible,
and cannot Decree any Error in Faith: Otherwise, I must either disobey, or
speak against my Conscience in matters of Faith, which is intrinsece malum,
and can never be excused from a damnable sin. To these straights Protestants
are brought, by denying the infallibility of Gods Church. May Counsels be
disobeyed? Then there will be no means to end Controversyes, and theyil tear
all in sunder? Must they be obeyed? Then in case they decree an Error against
Faith, as they may do if they be fallible, men must proceed against their
Conscience. What then remaynes, but to believe that they are infallible? and so
we securely may, and necessarily must, obey their Decrees, because I am sure
that they have both infallibility not to err, and Authority to command. Thus
our belief and proceeding is clear, smooth, and most consequent; whereas our
Adversaryes denying the said infallibility, are forced to great impietyes
against God, and manifest contradictions with themselves. Besides seeing he
confesses, that Moral Certainty is not strong enough in Points of Faith, the
Judge of Controversyes in such Points, must be absolutely infallible; otherwise
we cannot receive from him Certaintyes strong enough for Points of Faith. And
if Controversyes must be ended by General Counsels, as he affirms, their
Decrees must be of more than Moral Certainty.

45. Fifthly; Whereas he says, that Obedience is not to be yielded if the Error
be manifestly against Fundamental Verity, he ought to consider, that the
chiefest malice in Heresy, consists not in being against such or such a
material Object, or Truth; great; or little; Fundamental, or not
Fundamental; but in the opposition it carries with the Divine testimony,
which we suppose to be equally represented in both kinds of Points,
Fundamental, and not Fundamental: And therefore he must either say, that
Obedience is to be yielded in both, (which were most absurd) or in neither:
And, that it may be securely yielded in both, we must acknowledge a Judge endued
with infallibility. Neither does A. C. Set up private Spirits to control
General Counsels, which Catholics believe to be infallible; but that
absurdity flows out of the doctrine of Protestants, affirming them to be
fallible, even in Fundamental Points, and consequently private men are neither
obliged, nor can rely on their Authority in matters of Faith, for which, Moral
Certainty is not strongh enough, but may Judge as they find cause out of
Scripture, or reason, and may oppose their Decrees, nor can ever obey them
against their Conscience. And if all Counsels be fallible, what greater
certainty can I receive from the second, than from the first, if we merely
respect their Authority. For, if I be moved with some new reason or
Demonstration, I am not moved for the Authority of the Council, but for that
Reason which seems good to me. And is not this to set up private men and
Spirits to control General Counsels?

46. Sixthly: He says, A General Council cannot easily err manifestly
against Fundamental Verity: From whence I infer, that seeing Luther opposed
the whole Church, and so many General Counsels, held before his time; he is
to be presumed, to have opposed them, not for any manifest Fundamental, but at
most for Errors not Fundamental; (to speak as Protestants do: For indeed
Counsels cannot err in either kind) in which Points not Fundamental, he
says men are to yield Obedience, and therefore He, and all those who formerly
did, and now do, follow his example, are to be judged guilty of Schism.

47. Seaventhly; He says, It may seem very fit and necessary for the Peace of
Christendom, that a General Council thus erring, should stand in force till
evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration make the Error to appear, as that
another Council of equal Authority reverse it. In these words he gives us
Catholics no small advantage against the Capital principle of Protestants;
that, Scripture alone contains evidently all necessary Points. For if evidence
of Scripture, or a Demonstration may be so inevident, or obscure to a whole
lawful General Council, that it may fall into Fundamental Errors, which,
in the grounds of Protestants, are opposite only to some Truth evidently
contained in Scripture, it is evident that he and other Protestants say
nothing, when they talk of evidence of Scripture, but that indeed every one
makes and calls that evident, which he desires should be so: And how is it
possible that a true General Council should be so blind, as not to see that
which is evident? And this indeed is to set up private Spirits to control
General Counsels. I will not urge, what he means by a Demonstration, when he
distinguishes it from Evidence of Scripture. A Demonstration implies an
undeniable, and as I may say, an Evident Evidence; and if it be an Evidence
distinct from the Evidence of Scripture, which according to Protestants
contains evidently all necessary Points of Faith, it must be evidence of
natural Reason, which is common to all men: And how can a General Council
err against such a kind of Evide^ce? But as I said, Evide^ce with Protestants
is a voluntary word, which they make use of to their purpose. Besides,
Scripture is no less evide^t in innumerable points not fundame^tall, than it
is in some which are Fundamental: and therefore, all who believe Scripture, are
obliged to believe those no less than these, unless men will say that it is not
damnable, to believe, and profess something evidently known to be against
Scripture; and therefore in this, there can be no distinction between
Fundame^tall and not fundame^tall Points; and so a General Council may as
easily err against Fundamental Articles, as against Points not Fundamental
clearly delivered in Scripture; in which case, it is destructive of salvation
to err against either of those kinds. I have been somewhat long in pondering
his words, because I understand the book is esteemed by some; and I hope it
appears, by what I have now said out of it; that we may be saved; that a
Living judge of controversyes is necessary; that, Luther, and all Protestants
are guilty of the sin of Schism. Three as main and capital Points in favor
of us, against Protestants, as we can desire, and they fear!

48. Herafter we will ponder Mr. Chillingworths words for our present purpose;
who speaking of General Counsels, says (Page: 200. N. 18.) I willingly
confess, the judgment of a Council, though not infallible, is yet so far
directive, and obliging, that without apparent reason to the contrary, it may
be sin to reject it, at least, not to affoard it an outward submission for
public peace-sake. As also we will consider Potters words: (Page: 165.)
speaking thus: We say, that such General Counsels as are lawfully called, and
proceed orderly are great and awful representations of the Church Catholic;
that they are the highest external Tribunal which the Church has on Earth;
that their Authority is immediately derived and delegated from Christ; that no
Christian is exempted from their censures and jurisdiction; that their decrees
bind all persons to external obedience, and may not be questioned but upon
evident reason, nor reversed but by an equal authority: that if they be
careful and diligent in the use of all good Means for finding out the truth,
it is very probable that the good spirit will so direct them, that they shall
not err, at least, not Fundamentally

49. But let us proceed in proving, that Protestants hold Points not
Fundamental, not to be of any great moment, and much less to be destructive of
salvation. It is clear, that Protestants differ among them selves in many
Points, which they pretend to be only not Fundame^tall, and say they do not
destroy the ubsta^ce of Faith, nor hinder the^ from being Brethren, and of the
same Church. And why? because such Points are small matter, as Whitaker speaks
(Cont: ^. Quest: 4. Cap: 3.) Things in different and tittles, as King James
says in his Monitory Epistle: Matters of no great moment, as Andrews
(Respons: ad Apolog: Bellarmin: Cap: 14.) No great matters, Apology of the
Church of England. Matters of nothing, as Calvin calls them Admonit: Vlt: (Page:
132.) Matters not to be much respected if you believe Martyr (in locis, Class
4. C. 10.. 65.) Forms and phrases of speech, as Potter speaks, (Page: 90.) a
curious nicity (Page: 91.)

50. Out of all which, we must conclude both out of the words, deeds, and
principles of Protestants: First that errors against Points not Fundamental
are not destructive of salvation, being but matters of small consideration in
their account. Secondly; That they can not be excused from Schism, who
forsook all Churches for Points not Fundamental, and of so small moment, in
which they disagree amongst themselves, and in diverse of which, many of them
agree with us, against their pretended Brethren; which is to be well observed.
Thirdly, that, Chillingw^ had no reason (Page: 11) to say to Charity Maintained;
produce any one Protestant that ever did so (that is, affirm that every error
not Fundamental is not destructive of salvation) and I will give you leave to
say, It is the only thing in Question; seeing I have proved out of many chief
Protestants, that, for which he says no one can be produced; yea and I can yet
produce a full confession of Mr. Chillingworth himself, that, Errors in not
Fundamentalls, are not destructive of salvation, nor such as may necessitate or
warrant any man to disturb the peace, or renounce the Communion of a Church.
Thus he speaks in his Answer to the Direction, (N. 39.) Though I hold not the
Doctrine of all Protestants absolutely true, (which with reason cannot be
required of me, while they hold contradictions) yet I hold it free from all
impiety, and from all Error destructive of salvation, or in itself damnable.
For the Church of England, I am persuaded, that the constant Doctrine of it is
so pure and Orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and lives according to it,
undoubtedly he shall be saved, and that there is no error in it, which may
necessitate or warrant any man to disturb the peace, or renounce the communion
of it. Here I observe; first; If the doctrine of Protestanss (whom he expressly
confesses to hold contradictions, and consequently some of them to hold errors
at least in Points not Fundamental) be free from all error destructue of
salvation, or in itself damnable; it follows, that errors against Points not
Fundamental, are not destructive of salvation, nor in themselves damnable,
which is the thing I intended to prove. 2. What he says of the Errors among
Protestants, that they are not destructive of salvation, he must also say of
our pretended errors: both because commonly, of disagreeing Protestants one
part agrees with us, as also because, as I said, diverse of them stand directly
with us, against the common course of the rest; and finally, because the reason
of being, or not being damnable, is common to all Points not Fundamental,
which are supposed to contradict some divine revelation sufficiently
propounded; which to do, if it be destructive of salvation, must be so for all
such Points; if not; in none at all. 3. If the constant doctrine of the Church
of England be so pure, that whosoever believes it and lives according to it,
undoubtedly he shall be saved; and that there is no error in it, which may
necessitate or warrant any man to disturb the peace, or renounce the communion
of it, you must say; seeing Luther and his followers did, and do, disturb the
peace, and renounce, the communion of the whole Church of God before his time,
which must be supposed to have erred only in Points not Fundamental,
(otherwise it had been no Church) they did, and do, that, for which there was
no necessity, and for which they had no warrant, and therefore cannot avoid the
just imputation of Schism. For the same reason also (that the Church erred
only in points not Fundamental) you must grant, that whosoever believes as the
Church did, and lives accordingly, undoubtedly shall be saved. For I am sure
you believe the Church of England to have erred in diverse Points, and in
particular in her 39. Articles, which was her constant doctrine, if she had any
constant at all. In particular, your conscience tells you, that you believe not
the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, and much less, that our Savior Christ was
true God, and consubstantiall with his Father: to say nothing of other Points,
of those 39. articles. And is it not ridiculous, to hear you talk of purity
of doctrine of the Church of England, which you believe to be stained with such
Errors? But you wrote for Ends! If then salvation may be so assured in the
Church of England, you must grant the same of that Church which Luther and his
associates forsook, and that therefore they certainly exclude themselves from
salvation by forsaking the communion of them, amongst whom salvation was so
certain: and remember your words (Page: 272. N. 53.) it concerns every man who
separates from any Churches communion even as much as his salvation is worth,
to look most carefully to it, that the cause of his separation be just and
necessary. For unless it be necessary it can very hardly be sufficient. To
which proposition, if we subsume; but it cannot be necessary to separate, for
avoiding that error, or attaining that Truth, which to avoyde, or attain, is
not necessary to salvation; therefore Luther who separated from the Church for
Points not necessary, cannot pretend any necessary or sufficient cause for such
his separation, and consequently was guilty of the sin of Schism. 4. But yet
you will still be making good, that in these matters, Protestants, and yourself
in particular, have no constancy, but say and unsay, as may best serve their
turn. You tell us; the doctrine of all Protestants is free from all Error in
it self damnable; which agrees not with what you say of Protestants (Page: 19.)
If we fail in using such a measure of industry in finding truth as humane
prudence, and ordinary discretion shall advise, in a matter of such
consequence, our Errors begin to be malignant, and justly imputable, as
offenses against God, and that love of his truth which he requires in vt. And
(Page: 306. N. 106.) For our continuing in the Communion (of Protestants)
notwithstanding their Errors, the justification hereof, is not so much, that
their Errors are not damnable, as that they require not the belief and
profession of these Errors among the conditions of their Communion. And (Page:
279. N. 64.) The visible Church is free indeed from all Errors absolutely
destructive, and unpardonable, but not from all error which in itself is
damnable; not from all which will actually bring damnation upon them that keep
themselves in them, by their own voluntary and avoidable fault. If the visible
Church be not free from error which in itself is damnable, how could you say
that the Protestant Church of England is free from all error damnable in
itself? But why do I cite particular passages? You give a general Rule
concerning all Errors, (Page: 158. N. 52.) in these words: If the cause of it
(an error) be some voluntary and avoidable fault the Error is it self
sinful, and consequently in its own nature damnable; as if by negligence in
seeking the Truth, by unwillingness to find it, by pride, by obstinacy, by
desiring that Religion shoudl be true which suits best with my ends, by fear
of men's ^ll opinion, or any other worldly fear, or any other worldly hope, I
betray my self to any error contrary to any Divine revealed truth, that
error may be justly styled a sin, and consequently of it self to such a one
damnable. And if he die without Contrition, this error in it self damnable,
will be likewise so unto him. I have set down your words at large, that
Protestants may learn by them, how to examine their conscience, about what
care they use, to find the true Church and Religion, which imports them no
less, then the eternal salvation, or Damnation of their souls: And that every
one may clearly see, that you do not only grant more than once, the errors of
Protestants to be in themselves damnable, but also a reason for it; namely,
because all errors in Faith are contrary to some Divine Revelation; which
reason is common to Protestants, to the Church of England, and to all who err
in matters of Faith. And then with what sincerity could you affirm, that
whosoever holds the doctrine of the Church of England, and lives according to
it, undoubtedly he shall be saved? Can one who is in an error damnable of
itself, be undoubtedly saved, without repentance? Have we not heard you say;
To him who dyed without contrition, the error in itself damnable, will be
likewise so unto him? Do you not say (Page: 138. N. 23.) For ought I know, all
Protestants, and all that have sense, must grant that all errors are alike
damnable, if the manner of propounding the contrary Truths be not different?
Therefore you must grant, that as errors against Fundamental Truths
sufficiently propounded, are damnable; so also errors against not Fundamental
Truths, are damnable, if both be equally proposed. How then are the Errors of
all Protestants, and of the Church of England in particular, not damnable?

51. Thus we have sufficiently confuted your first Memorandum; and showed, that
the separation of Protestants was causeless, both in reality, and ad hominem,
or according to the principles, and professions of Protestants themselves. In
reality; because there can never be just reason to separate from the Church of
God (which therefore must be infallible, and free from all corruptions and
errors.) Ad hominem; because according to the principles of Protestants,
errors not Fundamental, being not destructive of salvation, cannot yield
sufficient cause of separation, nor free any from yielding obedience, even in
the supposed vnfundamentall errors, as they confess ours to be; and if sometime
Protestants say the contrary, at other times they contradict themselves; which
serves only for their greater condemnation, in leaving the communion of all
Christian Churches, upon vncertaintyes in which themselves do waver, sometime
affirming, sometime denying. And upon this very ground of uncertainty, I go
forward to prove more, and more, that their separation was causlesse.

52. For, (Page: 308. N. 108.) you do not disallow the saying of Cha: Ma: (Part:
1. Page: 207.) In cases of uncertainty, we are not to leave our Superior, nor
cast of his obedience, nor publikly oppose his decrees. And Hooker cited by you
in your (Page: 310. 311. N. 110.) teaches two things to our present purpose. The
one: That an Argument necessary and demonstratiue is such, as being proposed to
any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent. The other;
that in case of probability only, or uncertainty, Laws established, are to be
obeyed, and men are bound (not to observe those Laws which they are persuaded
to be against the law of God, but) for the time to suspend their persuasions to
the contrary, and that in otherwise doing, they offend against God by troubling
the Church. This ground being laid, I subsume; (besides what has now been said
of the variousness and uncertainty of Protestants about Points not
Fundamental) Protestants cannot possibly have evidence or certainty against
Catholics, therefore they offended against God by dividing theselves from us,
and troubling the peace of all Churches. The subsumption, or Minor I prove
diverse ways (abstaining from examination of particular Controversyes) and:

53. First in this manner; An Argument necessary and Demonstratiue is such, as
being proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly
assent, says Hooker. If therefore the arguments of Protestants against us were
necessary and demonstratiue, learned Catholics could not choose but inwardly
assent; and unless they were extreme wicked dissemblers against their
conscience, would also publikly profess. And yet we see, that all Catholics,
in all Ages, and places, learned, holy, wise, and such as God used for
instruments, in working many great and evident Miracles, and in converting
nations to the Faith of Christ, all these, I say, did, and do, and ever will,
dissent from the Arguments and conclusions of Protestants: therefore it is
clear, that their reasons against us, are not necessary nor demonstratiue, and
so according to Hooker, the Laws established were to be obeyed and Protestants
were bound to suspend their persuasions to the contrary. Truly, this is an
Argument which must convince any man, of a mind not perverse, and resolved to
persever in his error.

54. Secondly I prove that they cannot produce against us any necessary or
demonstratiue Argument; in regard of the Antiquity of our doctrine confessed
even by our Adversaryes, as may be seen in Brierley (P. 129. and seqq.
Edition: Ann. 1608.) now how could these doctrines have passed the search and
examine of so many learned men, and watchful Prelates, for the space of so many
ages, if any necessary or demonstratiue argument, to which men cannot but
assent, could have been produced against them?

55. Thirdly; Learned Protestants confess, that the Fathers hold with us,
against them, in many and chiefest Points of Doctrine controverted in these
days, as we have seen hertofore: which could not happen, if the Arguments of
Protestants against the Fathers and us, were necessary and demonstratiue.

56. Fourthly; In all our chiefest differences, diverse most learned
Protestants, agree with us, against their pretended Brethren, as we have also
demonstrated hertofore. Now these men, being learned could not but see and
assent to necessary and demonstratiue Arguments; if any could have been
alleged against us; and being Adversaryes, would not have fayld to make use of
them; nor would they have ever left their Brethren, and joined with us, if
evidence of truth, and reason had not forced them thereto; or if they could have
espied any even probability, in the grounds and Doctrines of their Brethren:
whereby it appears, that the tenets of Protestants are so far from being
evident or their Arguments necessary and demonstrative, that they are not so
much as probable. Who, I pray, will believe, that you could have any necessary
demonstratiue Arguments for your so many changes of Religion, and for your
ending in Socinianisme, which you never durst openly profess, and yet men are
not wont to be ashamed of truths, proved by necessary, and demonstratiue
Reasons? One demonstration or evidence cannot be contrary to another, and yet
no doubt but you pretended evidence for all your alterations to contrary
opinions; which still makes it more and more evident, that with Sectaryes,
evidence affects rather their will, or fancy, than their understanding. And
here you ought in all reason to apply to the Ancient Fathers, and learned
Protestants agreeing with us, against their Brethren, what you say, (Page: 40.
and 41. N. 13.) in favor of Protestants in general to prove, that there is no
necessity of damning all those that are of contrary belief; in these words;
The contrary belief may be about the sense of some place of Scripture which is
ambiguous, and with probability capable of diverse senses: and in such cases it
is no mervaile, and sure no sin, if several men go several ways. Also, the
contrary belief may be concerning Points wherein Scripture may with so great
probability be alleged on both sides, (which is a sure note of a Point not
necessary) that men of honest and upright hearts, true lovers of God and of
truth, such as desire above all things, to know Gods will and to do it, may
without any fault at all, some go one way, and some another, and some (and
those as good men as either of the former) suspend their judgments. Now
whatsoever you judge of us, yet I hope you will not deny, the Ancient Fathers,
and your own Protestant Brethren, to be so qualifyed as you describe, men of
honest and upright hearts, true lovers of God and the truth etc: And therefore
seeing they understood the word of God as we do, you ought to absolve them, yea
and us, and conceive that Luther had no necessary cause to forsake the whole
Church, for Points maintained by men of so great quality in all kinds, whose
authority you cannot deny to be sufficient for making a doctrine probable, and
for devesting the contrary of certainty: and therefore according to Hookers
rule, they ought to have suspended their persuasion, and they offended against
God by troubling the whole Church.

57. Neither can you object against the Fathers what you say against us (Page:
280. N. 66.) that, what may be enough for men in ignorance may be to knowing
men not enough etc: For, besides that it, is I know not whether more ridiculous
or impious, to say the Fathers were men in ignorance, and the whole Church in
error; at least you will not deny, but those Protestants who agree with us are
knowing men, and have all the means of knowing the truth, which other
Protestants have, and they being supposed (by you I hope) to be men of honest
and upright hearts, may without any fault at all dissent from their Brethren,
according to your own rule. And since you must excuse them, it were manifest
injustice to condemn us, who defend the same doctrine with them.

58. Fifthly; It is a principle of nature that no private person, much less a
Community, and least of all the whole Christian world, should be deprived of
that good name, of which they were once in peaoeable and certain possession,
without very clear, and convincing evidence. Seeing then, even Protestants
grant, that for diverse Ages, the Church, and the Roman Church in particular,
enjoyed the good Name, and Thing, of being Orthodox, and Pure, she cannot be
deprived of them without evidence; neither can probability or uncertainty, be
sufficient to forsake her Communion, as noxious. O of how different a mind are
our Novelists, from the Ancient Doctors of Gods Church, who against all
Heretics opposed the Tradition and Succession of the Bishops of Rome! as
Tertuilian, the SS. Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Optatus and Austine, as Calvin
confesses (L. 4. Instit. C. 3.) and thinks to save himself, with this Answer,
(Sect. 3.) Cum exrra contoversiam esset etc. Seeing it was undoubtedly true,
that nothing was altered in doctrine from the beginning till that Age, they did
alledg that which was sufficient to overthrow all new errors, namely, that
they were repugnant to the Doctrine which by unanimous consent was constantly
kept from the very time of the Apostles themselves. But this Answer, can serve,
only to show that the Argument of the Fathers against Heretics, was plainly of
no force at all. For, if the Tradition and succession of Bishops in the Church
of Rome, were not assured of the particular assistance of the holy Ghost, no
argument could be taken to prove any doctrine true because it had been taught
in that Sea, in regard that without such assistance, Error might have crept
in, and tradition might have delivered a falsehood. Therefore the Fathers
alleging the Doctrine of the Roman Church, for a Rule to all other, must
suppose such an assistance, without which their adversaryes might have rejected
the Tradition of that Sea, with as much facility, as the Tradition, and
Authority, of any other. And to say, the Fathers grounded their Argument merely
upon matter of fact (that de facto the Church of Rome had delivered otherwise,
than those Heretics held) and thence had inferred the falsehood of their
Heresies, would have been directly petitio principij, as if they had said; The
Church of Rome de facto (without any certain assistance of the Holy Ghost)
holds the contrary of that which you Heretics teach, but that which she holds,
is true; therefore your Doctrine is false. For, this Minor (that which she
holds, is true) had been a mere begging of the Question, without any proof at
all, and had been no more in effect, then if the Fathers had said; The Doctrine
of the Roman Church, and our Doctrine which is the same with Hers, is true,
because we suppose it to be true, and therefore yours is false. Wherefore we must
give glory to God, and acknowledge that the Fathers believed that the Roman
Church was assisted by the Holy Ghost above other Churches, not to fall into
error in matters of Faith and Religion. Howsoever, let us take what Calvin
grants, that at least the Church of Rome conserved the Truth and purity of
Faith till the time of S. Austine, that is, between the fourth and fifth Age
after our Savior Christ; and Heretics commonly grant, that the Church of Rome
was pure for the first five hundred years. Now let any man of judgment
consider, whether it was probable, or possible, that immediately after so great
purity, and Sanctity, so huge a deluge of superstitions, Idolatryes, Heresies,
and corruptions, could have flowed into the Church of Rome, within the space of
one hundred years, that is, till the time of S. Gregory the Great, without
being noted or spoken of, or contradicted by any one: Especially if we
consider, that other doctrines, which both Protestants and Catholics profess to
be Heresies, were instantly observed, impugned, and condemned: and to say, that
those only of which they hold us guilty, did pass without observation of any,
can be judged no better than a voluntary, affected, foolish fancy. I beseech
the Protestant Reader, for the Eternal good of his own soul, to pause here a
little, and well ponder this Point. Besides, S. Gregory himself, was a most
holy, learned, and Zealous Pastor; in so much that in those respects, his
Feast is solemnly kept in the Grecian Church, and all the Orthodox Bishops of
the whole World, never ceased to hold their Communion with Him; his
Predecessors; and Successors; which they neither would, nor could have done,
if they had discovered any one, and much more, if so many, and so enormious
Errors, and corruptions, had appeared in that Sea, which was not any private,
obscure, and, as it were, invisible Church, but was ever visible, and
conspicuous, and like a beacon to all Nations: And therefore what she taught and
professed, could not be hidden under a bushel, but being placed upon a
candlestick, did so shine to all, that all must needs see it, and either
contradict, which none did, or approve it, as they did. And here we may alledg
the saying of King James ad Peron: (Page: 388.) Durst one but lightly corrupt
the Faith approovea through the World? It was easy for a child to discover the
new Master by his Novelty. And the belief of truth being found, all the
Pastors of the whole World, if need were, were moved, and being moved did not
rest, till they had removed the ill, and provided for the security of the
sheep of Christ. How then is it possible, that, this heap of pretended
Errors, in the Roman Church, could appear without being discovered, till
Luther, an Apostata from his Faith, and Religious Order, did sacrilegiously
marry a vowed Nun, and in the midst of his shameful carnal pleasures,
receive revelations from the Devil, as himself does openly confess? Wherefore
we must conclude, that these Points which Protestants would needs miscall
Errors, were indeed the Orthodox Doctrines of the Ancient Fathers, and whole
Church of all precedent Ages: of the Possession of which Truths, and good Name,
we ought not to be deprived, without most certain evidence, which is
impossible for any Heretic so much as pretend to do with any modesty or show
of truth, as I have proved, and will say more hereafter.

59. Sixthly; Protestants can prove nothing against us, with evidence, but by
Scripture alone; which is impossible for them to do, as I have showed at large
(Chap 2.) For, seeing words are capable of diverse senses, it is impossible, by
the words al^^e, to convince that they are understood in such or such a
particular, determinate sense, and not in some other, of which they are
capable; and what is possible, for ought we know, does actually happen; and
Gods free Decrees in this matter of using words in some set meaning, are not
evident, either in themselves, or are notifyed to us by any certain Rule: and
therefore Protestants cannot with any evidence, prove out of Scripture, that our
doctrine contains any Error Fundamental, or not Fundamental. And it is well
to be considered, that the same Arguments, which Protestants object against us
now, were observed and answered by Catholic Divines, before Protestants
appeared to the world, as they answered objections made against Christian
Religion, or Catholic Verityes, by Pagans, Turks, Jews and such Heretics, as
Protestants detest; and it is thereby apparent, that they did not dissemble
difficultyes but did propose them with no less candor and sincerity, than they
answered them with truth, learning, and solidity. They alone were the men, who
opposed themselves murum pro Domo Dei, against all the enemies of Christianity,
and the world believed, that they gave at that time as true solutions of those
very objections of old Heretics, which now happen to be made by Protestants,
as they did to those difficultyes, which were urged against Christian Religion,
or against Catholic Verityes, by old Heretics, whom even Protestants
condemn, Wherefore, to come now, and tell the world, that the Answers of those
Catholic Doctors, against some few Points, were not solid, must needs breed a
huge scandal, against Christian Religion, and Orthodox doctrine impugned by
Pagans, Jews, Turks, and old condemned Heretics. Certain it is, that the
enemies of Christian Religion, may object greater difficultyes against
Christianity, than any Heretic can invent against us. It is therefore clear,
that Protestants can have no necessary or demonstratiue Argument, to prove that
the Church has degenerated into any least falsehood, in matters concerning
Faith; and so we must conclude with these words of Hooker (cited by Chilling:
Page: 311.) As for the orders established, since equity and reason favor that
which is in being, till orderly judgment of decision be given against it, it is
but justice to exact of you, and perverseness in you it should be to deny
thereunto your willing Obedience. Does not every word of Hooker condemn Luther
and his followers: Since equity and reason favor that which is in being, and no
orderly judgment of decision had been given against the orders which they found
established in all Churches; it was but justice to exact of them, and worse
then perverseness in them to deny thereunto willing obedience, and a formal sin
of Schism, by such disobedience to forsake the Communion of the whole Church.

60. Seventhly; As the Roman Church, and all Churches of Her Communion could
not be despoyled of the Possession they held of being accounted true and pure
Churches; so also the Pope, Bishops, and other Prelates, and Pastors under Him,
could not without Sacrilege, and injustice be disobeyed and deprived of the
Right, which they did peaceably possess, when Luther first appeared. And for
the Popes Primacy in particular, it is acknowledged by Protestants to have
been ancient, and taught by Holy Fathers, even with in the compass of years
which Protestants admit for Orthodox; and by some chief Protestants is held as
a thing indifferent, yea and profitable. And I desire the Reader for his
satisfaction in this behalf, to see Brierlyes Index Verbo Peter's Primacy, and
Popes Primacy, and turn to the places which there he shall find cited See also
Charity Maintained (Page: 1. Cap: 3. N. 19.) of this matter. If then this Point
be maintained by Ancient Fathers; if believed and practiced in those incorrupt
Ages; if acknowledged by Protestants for a thing profitable; who will so much
as pretend any evidence of Scripture, or necessary demonstratiue reason against
it? And consequently who will not infer, that the separation of Protestants
from the whole Church was causeless, and so according to your own Memorandum,
sinful, and Schismatic?

61. Let us now come to examine your second evasion (Page: 265. N. 31.) The
imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication a necessity of professing
known Errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient and
necessary cause of separation: And that this is the cause which Protestants
alledg to justify their separation from the Church of Rome. But,

62. First; It is manifest that Protestants departed from the Roman Church
voluntarily, before they were forced by Excommunication, or by any other
means. For, they voluntarily professed a Faith contrary to that of the whole
Church, which most carefully and even sollicitously endeavored by all means
possible to reclaim them, as appears in the life of Luther; Cardinal Caietan
being sent to Germany for that very purpose, a safe conduct being assured to
them. And for Communion in Sacraments, Liturgy, and Obedience to Prelates; they
did separate from them, as well as from profession of the same Faith; one of
their Errors being, that our worship of God being corrupted, they could not
communicate with us in Liturgy, public prayers etc. Therefore they first did
separate themselves: Fugitivi, non fugati, the contrary whereof they are wont to
affirm. And not only they ceased to communicate with us, nor were content to
hold their peace, bearing with patience the corruptions of the times (as they
falsely styled them) but also drew men to conventicles of their own, pretended
to erect new Churches, and set up altar against altar, and the like; and this
against the commands of Bishops and Princes, both Ecclesiastical, and
Temporal. You profess hightly to esteem Hugo Grotius. If in this you believe
not me, believe him (in voto pro pace Ecclesiastica, Pa: 5.) Intelligebam,
says he, ex seniorum relatu, and ex perscriptis Historiis, extitisse postea
homines, qui illa^, in qua majores nostri fuerant Ecclesiam deserenda^ omnino
dicerent: neque tantum ipsi desererent, nonnulli etiam priusquam excommunicati
essent, sed and novos caetus facerent, quos vocabant and ipsi Ecclesias, nova
ibi facerent presbyteria, docerent, Sacramenta administrarent, idque multis in
locis, contra edicta and Regum, and Episcoporum, dicerentque, vt haec
defenderent, plane quasi de caelo mandatum haberent quale Apostoli habuerant,
obediendum Deo magis esse quam hominibus. Which refractary proceeding, how much
he disliked, is declared by him (Page: 31.) Novum caetum, and vt nunc loqui mos
est, Ecclefiam colligere mihi, etiamsi liceret, non liberet, video quam male id
aliis cesserit: Multiplicarunt numerum, and non laetitiam. If you ponder the
words of Grotius, you cannot choose but see, how perfectly they agree to Luther
and his followers, and clearly confute this your Memorandum. And indeed,
whosoever considers this Point, will find it to be no better then nonsense, and
a contradiction, to alledg this cause for justifying your separation; since
before any Excommunication, men leave the Church by professing a contrary
Faith, and in virtue of that new Faith forsake Her Communion, and yet say, that
they leave it, because we require, as a condition of our Communion, that they
leave not that which necessarily, and as I may say, essentially, and
antecedently, they of themselves do leave, whether we require it or no; and
therefore our requiring it, cannot be the cause of that Effect, which is
preexistent before that, which you say is the cause thereof, and would be the
same, whether we required it or no; and we may say, that Heretics are the
first, as it were to excommunicate, and divide themselves, before the Church
can excommunicate them: Therefore this allegation of imposing under pain of
Excommunication a necessity etc: is plainly impertinent; and all must be
reduced to the cause it self; whether our doctrines be sufficiently and
clearly convinced to be Errors; and then, whether such Errors being not
Fundamental, can be sufficient to cause a separation. And so I retort this
ground and say, that since you confess our Errors alone not to be a sufficient
cause, to excuse your separation from us, (and for this reason you say
Protestants are not obliged to separate themselves from one another) you must
also acknowledge, that indeed they had no sufficient cause to divide themselves
from all Churches.

63. Secondly; Yourselfe contradict this Memorandum. For, (Page: 276. N. 59.)
You say: Though your corruptions in doctrine, in themselves (which yet is
false) did not, yet your obliging us, to profess your doctrine uncorrupted
against knowledge and Conscience, may induce an obligation to depart from your
Communion. Now if our corruptions in themselves, induce an obligation to depart
from our Communion, this obligation is induced before the imposing upon men
under pain of Excommunication a necessity of professing known Errors; and
why then do you say, that imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication a
necessity of professing known Errors, is the cause which Protestants alledg
to justify their separation? Since there is another cause precedent to that,
and such a cause, as without it, this other of imposing upon men etc: cannot
subsist. For, if our Errors, in themselves, do not impose upon you an
obligation to forsake us, it is a sign, that they are not damnable in
themselves, nor necessarily to be avoided; and consequently, you may, and
ought, to remain with us, notwithstanding such Errors; and if you ought to do
so, the Church may justly command it under pain of Excommunication, as a
punishment of precedent obstinacy, and a medicine to prevent it for time to
come; and so yourselfe overthrow this memorandum, whereby you would excuse your
division from the Church. Yet on the other side, if our pretended errors do in
themselves induce an obligation to forsake our Church, different Sects of
Protestants must, for the same reason, forsake one another, because you deny
not their Errors to be in themselves damnable, and therefore you put a
difference between them and us, only because they exact not of others a
profession of their errors, and we do; and so you reduce all, to this
exacting, or not exacting, a profession of known errors; and not to the
errors in themselves, and yet we have heard you say, that our Errors, (in
diverse of which, chief learned Protestants agree with us against their
Brethren) in themselves induce an obligation upon you to forsake us. What is
here but contradicting, saying, and unsaying, the same thing? Which shows,
that with you nothing is certain, except that you are certain of nothing; And
consequently could have no necessary and certain reason, to forsake all
Churches.

64. Thirdly; To bring you out of the clouds, and to understand things as they
are: The separation we mean (when there is speech of division by Schism and
Heresy) is not that separation which is caused by the Ecclesiastical censure
of Excommunication, which deprives men of the public suffrages of Gods Church,
of use of Sacraments, and conversation with faithful people, and may consist
with the Grace of God and Charity, not only when it is unjust, but also when
the party censured, repents himself by perfect contrition of the sin for which
the Censure was imposed, though he be not actually absolved from it, in regard
of some cause or invincible impediment, which is not in his power to alter or
remove, but heartily desires to be absolved, and so is united to the Church in
voto. And this Censure of Excommunication, is wont to be inflicted, not only
for Schism, or Heresy, but for other offenses also, against God or our
neighbor. But Luther and his fellows, voluntarily put themselves upon another
kind of separation, to wit, from the profession of the same Faith, and
external communion in Sacraments, Liturgy etc. upon pretense of Errors in the
Faith, and corruptions in the discipline of the Church; and were so far from
repenting themselves of such their proceedings, or admitting any votum or
desire, to be united with the Church, that they held all such repentance to be
a sin; whereby they certainly exclude themselves from Gods Grace, and Charity:
and so it appears, that by mere Excommunication, one is not separated from
the Church as a Schismatike is; nor is a Schismatike first separated because he
is excomunicated, but is excommunicated, because he is a Schismatike, and had
been divided from the Church, though he had never been excommunicated, or
though the excommunication were taken away. Besides as I touched already, it is
ridiculous to say, that the Church requires as a condition of her Communion,
the profession of her errors in Faith, and external Communion in Sacraments,
Liturgy, and other public worship of God. For profession of the same Faith,
and communion in Sacraments etc. is the very thing, wherein Communion consists,
or rather is the Communion itself, and therefore is not an extrinsecall or
accidental condition, voluntarily required by the Church, or to be conceived
as a thing separable from her communion; and so you speak, as if one should
say, Profession of the same Faith is a condition required for Communion in
profession of the same Faith. It was therefore no condition required by us, that
made Protestants leave our Communion; but they first left our Communion by
their Voluntary proper Act of leaving us, which essentially is incompatible
with our Communion. This whole matter will appear more clearly by the next
Reason.

95. Fourthly; Either there was just cause for your separation from the
Communion of the Church, or there was not. If not; then by your own confession
you are Schismatiks, seeing you define Schism to be a causeless separation: in
which case, the Church may justly impose under pain of Excommunication a
necessity of your return, and then your Memorandum cannot have place, nor can
excuse you from Schism, since such an imposing a necessity, would, upon that
supposition, be both lawful, and necessary. If there were just cause for your
separation; then you had been excused from Schism, though the Church had never
imposed, under pain of Excommunication, a necessity of professing known
errors; because you, say, Schism is a Causless separation; and surely that
separation is not causeless, for which there is just cause. Wherefore your
Memorandum about imposing upon men a necessity etc: is both impertinent, and
incoherent with your first Memordium; That not every separation, but a
causeless separation is the sin of Schism. And yet (P. 282. N. 71.) you say
expressly: It is to be observed, that the chief part of our defense, that you
deny your Communion to all that deny or doubt of any part of your doctrine,
cannot with any color be employed against Protestants: who grant their
communion to all who hold with them not all things, but things necessary, that
is, such as are in Scripture plainly delivered: So still you utter
contradictions. Wherefore the confessed chife part of your defense, being
confuted, both by evident reason, and out of your own sayings, it remains
that you will never be able to acquit yourselfe of Schism.

66. Fifthly; How can you maintain this your Memorandum, and not give full
scope, to all other Protestants, who believe not all the 39. Articles of the
Church of England to be true (of whom I am sure you are one,) to forsake her
communion, seeing she excommunicates all whosoever shall affirm, that the 39
Articles are in any part superstitious or erroneous. Is not this the very
thing, which you say is the cheef part of your defense for your separation from
us? O Approbators! Is it conform to the doctrine, and discipline of the Church
of England, to say, Her communion may, and must, be forsaken? And with what
conscience could you Mr. Chillingworth, communicate with English, and other
Protestants in their public service, corrupted with errors about the Trinity,
the Creed of S. Atha^ etc: as you believe it is. Or why could you not
communicate with us? Or how will you excuse Luther who left us?

67. Yet I must not here omit to observe some Points: First; what a thing your
Religion is, which can so well agree, and hold communion with innumerable
Sects, infinitely differing one from another? and yet you conceive yourselfe to
be obliged, to part from us Catholics. But so it is. The false Gods of the
Heathens, and their Idolaters, could handsomely agree amongst themselves, but in
no wise with the true God, and his true worshippers! An evident sign, that the
Catholic Roman Religion is only true, and teaches the right worship of God,
and way to salvation. Falsehoods may stand together, but cannot consist with
truth.

68. Secondly: If, as you tell us, things necessary be such as are in Scripture
plainly delivered, points not Fundamental of themselves, become Fundamental,
because they are revealed in Scripture, and it is Fundamental to the Faith of
a Christian to believe all Truths sufficiently proposed, as revealed by God, as
Potter expressly grants. Seeing then, Protestants differ in points, which one
part verily believes, to be plainly delivered in Scripture, and consequently in
things necessary, according to your assertion; they cannot grant their
communion to those, who hold not with them in such necessary points, that is in
effect, in all things wherein they disagree. For, every one judges his opinions
to be plainly delivered in Scripture. How then can they be excused from
Schism, in their separation from us, while they hold Communion with other
Protestants, and think they may, and ought to do so, and that in doing
otherwise they should be Schismatiks? Which Argument still presses them more
forcibly, if we reflect that many of the most learned Protestants, in diverse
chief Articles of Faith, stand with us Catholics, against their pretended
Brethren; and therefore they must either part from them, or not part from us,

69. Thirdly; it appears by your express words that they who differ in Points
necessary, must divide from one another, though neither part impose upon the
other a necessity of professing known Errors: and since every one thinks his
Doctrine to be necessary, that is, plainly dedelivered in Scripture, he cannot
communicate with any of a contrary Faith, though they do not pretend to impose
a necessity etc: And so your memorandum about imposing a necessity etc: Which,
you say is the chief part of your defense, comes to nothing, even by your own
grounds: and therefore you have indeed no defense at all, to free yourselves
from Schism.

70. Fourthly; When we speak of Points of Faith not Fundamental, it is
always understood, that they be sufficiently proposed, and therefore are
always Fundamental per accidens, and the contrary Errors certainly damnable,
and consequently a necessary cause of separation, no less then Errors against
Points Fundamental of themselves: and seeing according to Protestants, there
can be no damnable Error against Faith, unless either it be, or be esteemed,
repugnant to some Truth plainly delivered in Scripture, which you say is a
necessary point, the conclusion must be, that, Protestants differ in necessary
Points, and therefore according to your own assertion, are obliged to forsake
one another, without expecting any Imposing a necessity of professing known
Errors; and that this your Memorandum or condition is both impertinent and
false: or if, as I said, they are not obliged to part one from another, they
could not without Schism depart from us.

71. Fifthly; to come to the Point, and strike at the root. Tell me, whether
you may be seriously present, as members of one community and, as I may say,
parts in the Quire, with any sort of people, in their Liturgy, and public
service, or worship of God, as long as they do not expressly demand of you, a
profession of those particular Points, wherein you disagree? If you may; then
you may join yourselfe with Turks, Jews, or even Pagans, if they exact not of
you such a profession; which to any Christian must needs appear most absurd
and impious. If you cannot communicate with those of a belief different from
yours, though they do not exact a profession of their Faith, against your own
belief and conscience; it still follows clearly, that your Memorandum of
imposing a necessity of professing known Errors, is impertinent; seeing you
cannot communicate with those of a different Faith, though they impose it not
upon you; and also that either Protestants cannot communicate one with another,
since they differ in Faith, or else that they could not forsake us upon
pretense, that we impose upon you a necessity of professing known Errors;
Seeing that Condition of imposing etc: is impertinent. Into how many
difficultyes and contradictions do you cast yourself by impugning the Truth?
But enough of this Memorandum, or condition.

72. Your last Memorandum was: That, to leave the Church and to leave the
external Communion of a Church, is not the same thing: That being done by
ceasing to be a member of it, by ceasing to have those requisites which
constitute a man a member of it, as Faith and obedience: this by refusing to
communicate with any Church in her Liturgyes, and public worship of God.

73. Answer, I wish you had declared yourself better. First: (Page: 271. N. 51.)
you say: We are not to learn the difference between Schism and Heresy. For,
Heresy we conceive an obstinate defense of any Error, against any necessary
Article of the Christian Faith: And Schism a causeless separation of one part
of the Church from another. I have not time to examine what you mean by a
necessary Article of the Christian Faith. Is not every Article of Christian
Faith necessary to be believed, under pain of damnation, if it be sufficiently
proposed, as revealed by God? And is it not Heresy to deny any such Article? If
it be so, then your necessary Article of the Christian Faith implies no such
Mystery, as one would have expected in those so limited words: and besides, if
it be Heresy to deny any Point, though in itself never so small; of
Protestants differing in any Point of Faith, some must be Heretics, and in
state of damnation, and they must be obliged to separate from one another as
from formal Heretics. If it be not an Heresy, nor damnable, to deny any Truth
sufficiently propounded as revealed by God, Errors in Points not Fundamental
are not damnable: Neither could you, for such Errors, divide yourselves from
the Communion of all Visible Churches. If you will needs say, that no Error is
Heresy, unless it contradict some Article of itself Fundamental: What in
particular is Heresy, or who is an Heretik you cannot know, seeing you profess
that it cannot be determined in particular, what Points be Fundamental; and
therefore you must retract your former words; we are not to learn the
difference between Schism and Heresy. For, if you cannot possibly tell what
Heresy is, you will for ever be to learn the difference between Schism and
Heresy; to say nothing for the present that Potter (Page: 212.) acknowledges,
that whatsoever is revealed in Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of
Scripture, is in some sense Fundamental, that is, such as may not be denied,
or contradicted without Infidelity: therefore it is Heresy at least, to deny
Points sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, though they be not
Fundamental in themselves. And (Page: 250.) he declares expressly every Error
against any Point revealed, to be Heresy; in these words: Where the revealed
will or word of God is sufficiently propounded; there he that opposes is an
Heretic, and heresy is a work of the flesh, which excludes from Heaven:
(Gal: 5: 20.21.) therefore if you will not contradict Potter, and yourself, in
several places, you must confess, that Heresy may be committed, by Error not
Fundamental in itself. But to our purpose, you say, Schism is a causeless
separation of one part of the Church from an other: and (Page: 264. N. 30.) you
teach that a causeless separation from the external Communion of any Church,
is the sin of Schism. Put these together: Schism is a separation of one part
of the Church from an other: And Schism: is a separation from the external
communion of any Church, the Consequence will be this: A separation from the
external communion of any part of the Church, is a separation from the part
itself, and then, proportionally, a separation from external communion of the
whole Church, or of all Churches, must be a separation from the whole Church it
self, or from all Churches; and so your distinction, that to leave the Church
and to leave the external communion of a Church, is not the same thing, is
confuted by your own doctrine* And though it make little to our present
purpose, whether Schism be defined, A separation of one part of the Church
from an other, as you speak (for, as I said, if a separation from the
External Communion of one part be a separation from the part it self, a
separation from the external communion of the whole church, must be a
separation from the whole Church itself, which is the thing I intended to
prove against your Memorandum) yet you must give me leave to say, that your
definition overthrowes itself. For, the Nature and Essence of Schism, being
to separate one from the Church, necessarily it is cause that the party so
divided, is no more a member or part of that Church, nor a part of any Church;
and so Schism is not a separation of one part from another, but the Church
which remaynes after such a sparation made in external Communion, is one whole
Church and Totum est cujus nihil est extra, and so he who is cut off from the
Church, as Schismatiks are, is no part of it but a non ens, or nothing, for as
much as belongs to the Denomination, of being a part of the Church; in which
respect, your definition, as I said, destroys itself, as if one could be cut
off from the Church by Schism, and yet remain a part thereof. A man divided
from the Church, remaynes a man, and is part of the Community or number of men,
but is not a part or member of the Church; as you will not deny, but that if,
for example, one should forsake all Christianity, yea and fall into Judaisme,
Turcisme, or Paganism, he should still be a part of the number of men, but not
a member, or part, of any Christian Church: And it is ridiculous to say, that
Luther and his associats, did not separate from themselves; seeing by their very
separation, they ceased to be any part of the Church, and the Church remained
one whole, and so by their not separation from themselves as men, you cannot
infer that they did not separate from all Churches, and from all true members,
and parts, of all true Churches. Yea, if they be considered as members of the
Church, they did in some sort separate even from themselves, by ceasing to be
now, what once they were, that is, true members of the Church. But we shall say
more of this herafter. Only I observe now, if (as you say Page: 264. N. 30.) the
sin of Schism be a causeless separation from the external communion of any
Church, much more grievous must that sin be, in him, who separates from the
whole Church, or from all Churches, as Luther professed to do.

74. Secondly; When you say, The requisites which constitute a man a member of
the Church, are Faith, and Obedience. What Faith, or what Obedience mean you?
That Faith whereby one believes, and that Obedience, whereby one obeyes all the
Definitions, and Decrees of the Church? If so; then you suppose him to be
united with the Church, not only in Faith, but also in external Communion;
because nothing is more strictly commanded, than such an union and Communion;
but then, you are out of our case, of being separated from the Church. If you
mean, Faith and Obedience to God; it is impossible, even by your own
confession, that one should obey God, and divide himself from the external
Communion of all Churches without cause, and therefore he cannot by any such
imaginary Obedience be a member of the Church. You say (Page: 272. N. 53.) It
concerns every man who separates from any Churches Communion, even as much as
his salvation is worth, to look most carefully to it that the cause of his
separation be just and necessary: For, unless it be necessary it can hardly be
sufficient: Therefore you suppose, there is a strict command not to separate
from any Churches Communion, without necessary cause. And then, as for Faith,
you say (Page: 134. N. 13.) Among the conditions which Christ requires for
salvation, one is, that we believe what he has revealed, when it is
sufficiently declared to have been revealed by him: Therefore, say I, whosoever
opposes a Point, though not Fundamental in it self, yet sufficiently
propounded as revealed by God, fails in the condition of Obedience required
for salvation, and so wants one of the requisites, which constitute a man a
member of the Church; therefore he leaves the Church, and Protestants erring in
such Points, divide themselves from the Church; and certain it is, that some
of them must err in Points at least not Fundamental.

75. Thirdly; The Church essentially implies not only Faith, but also external
Communion in Sacraments, Liturgy, and public worship of God; therefore
whosoever leaves the external Communion of a Church, he cannot but leave the
Church, as being divided from it, in a thing essential to the Church, and
consequently without which one cannot be a member thereof (Moulin Lib: 1. cont:
Peron: Cap: 26.) says plainly; That is the true Church, which is united
together in profession of true Faith, and Communion of Sa^rament^. And Calvin
(Lib: 4. Institut: Cap:. 4.) says; We cannot have two or three Churches, but
Christ must be divided. Whereby it appears, that men cannot be of one Church,
unless they be united in one common mystical Body; for example, John has a
head, a hand, etc: and so has Thomas; but they are not said to communicate in
one head, or hand, because the parts of their Body are not united in one common
link, or whole Body. Different Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, may chance to
have the same Laws, Customs, Statutes, yea and the same form of Government;
yet that is not enough, to denominate them one Kingdom, or Common wealth;
because they have not any such union, or Communion, as may make them one
mystical Body. Dr. Lawd, (Page: 300.) Affirms, that the Donatists agreed in
Faith with the Catholic Church, and yet grants that they were Schismatiks, and
divided from the Church; which Division being supposed, they could not be
properly said to communicate with Her even in Faith, because similitude alone
without a common union in some Whole, cannot make one a member or part of one
Church. But what need I prove, a thing evident in it self? The very Definition
of Schism, taken properly, as it is distinct from Heresy, implies an agreement
in Faith, and that supposed, it is a separation in external Communion only;
therefore similitude in Faith, is not sufficient to make that one be not truly
said to forsake the Church. Jews and Turks believe one God, and so do
Christians, and yet they cannot be said to be in Communion with Christians,
even in that Point which all of them believe; in regard they make not on
mystical Body. I may eat the same meat, which an excommunicate person eats,
but I may not eat with him, not he with me: So Jews and Turks believe some
Truth which we believe, yet properly speaking, they believe not with us,
because they themselves are divided from us. One thing therefore it is, to
believe the same Point, and another to be united in the belief thereof. Neither
is there in this particular, any difference between Fundamental, and not
Fundamental Points. For, though one believe all the same Fundamental Points,
which another believes, yet he believes them not with him, because, as I said,
the believers themselves, are divided in Communion, one from another.
Otherwise, if you will needs have all those to be of one Church, who believe
all Fundamental Points; it will follow, that there is no Schism at all, as it
is distinguished from Heresy. For, that doctrine being supposed, if one believe
all Fundamental Points, he is no Schismatike. If he err in any Fundamental,
or Necessary Point, he is an Heretic: Therefore Schism, in this way, shall
never be distinguished from Heresy, which yet is contrary to your own
doctrine; which we cited above out of your (Page: 271. N. 51.) Where you say; We
are not to learn the difference between Schism and Herely. For, Heresy we
conceive, an obstan^te defense of any error against, any necessary Article of
the Christian Faith: And Schism a causless separation of one part of the
Church from another. You do, not declare, wherein this separation of one part of
the Church from another, consists. But seeing you distinguish Schism from
Heresy, and affirm, that separation by Heresy, consists in Errors against any
necessary Article of Faith, Schism must consist in a separation from the
external Communion of that Church, with which one agrees in all necessary
Articles of the Christian Faith, and consequently, agreement in Fundamental
Articles, is not sufficient to constitute men members of one Church, seeing it
may stand with Schism, taken in the most proper sense, which you say separates
one part of the Church from another: And therefore whosoever divides himself
from the external Communion of the Church, is divided from the Church it
self; and so your Memorandum that to leave the Church, and to leave the
external Communion of a Church, is not the same thing, is a mere ungrounded
speculation. Here also that which I have often told you, offers it self to be
insinuated; that Errors in Points not Fundamental, sufficiently propounded as
testified by God, become Fundamental, that is, damnable, and are true
Heresies, as Potter grants; and, as I showed out of your own words, they who
are guilty of such Errors, observe not that Obedience, which is required as a
Condition for remission of sins, and salvation; and yet you require Obedience
as one of those requisites which constitute a man, a member of the Church, and
therefore a separation by Errors in Points not Fundamental, is not pure
Schism, but more; it is Heresy; and separates a man from the Church, though he
believe all Points which are Fundamental of themselves; so that, as I said,
agreement in such Points which are Fundamental of themselves, is in no wise
sufficient, to make one a member of the Church; yea and beside agreement in
belief, both of Fundamental, and not Fundamental Points, it is essentially
required, that he be not divided from her external Communion; and yourselfe
say (Page: 264. N. 30.) A causlesse separation from the external Communion of
any Church is the sin of Schism; which were not true, if the same belief of
all Fundamentalls (yea and vnfundamentalls also) were of it self, sufficient
to denominate, and conserve one a member of the Church. For, then he should
remain such a member by that belief alone, though he did causelessly divide
himself from the external Communion of the Church. And therefore we must
conclude out of your own grounds against your last Memorandum, that to leave
the Church, and to leave the external Communion of a Church, is the same
thing. And thus, having confuted your Remembrances, whereby you pretended to
excuse yourselfe from Schism, let us now see what you can object against us.

76. Object: 1. You say (Page: 132. N. 11.) If you would at this time propose a
form of Liturgy, which both side should lawful, and then they would not join
with you in this liturgy, you might have some color then to say, they renounce
your Communion absolutely.

77. Answer. What a Chimera do you fancy to yourselfe, and propose to us?
First: you must suppose, that the Roman Church holds all essential, and
Fundamental Points of Faith: otherwise, she should cease to be a Church, and
so you could not communicate with Her, as with a Church, neither could there be
any Liturgy common to her and Protestants; and then, why do you so often blame
Charity Maintained for affirming, that Potter acknowledged us, to hold all
substantial and Fundamental Points of Faith, which now yourself must suppose:
and also (Page: 269. N. 45.) you say: That men of different opinion, may be
menbers of the same Church: Provided, that what they forsake, be not one of
those things wherein the essence of the Church consists. And therefore no form
of Liturgy, can be sufficient to warrant your joining with us, if we err in
Points Fundamental of themselves.

78. Secondly; Seeing no Form of Liturgy could be lawful, in case it did
contain any Fuudamentall Error, and that you confess it impossible, to know,
what Points in particular be Fundamental, it follows, that you cannot know
what form of Liturgy is lawful, and so in practice, you cannot communicate
with one another, nor with us, nor with any Church, at all, as not knowing,
whether in their Liturgy there be not contained some Fundamental Errors; yea
no man can frame any set Form to himself, but may fear least it contain
some such Error. Neither can you avoid this difficulty, by saying, as you are
wont to do, that whosoever believes all that is evident in Scripture, is sure
to believe all Fundamental Points. For, we speak not now in general, of what
every one believes for himself, but in practice, of a particular Form of
Liturgy, wherein he communicates with others, which cannot be lawful, if it
contain any Fundamental Error, as well it may, for ought you can know, who
profess not to know, what errors be Fundamental; unless for a short Form of
Liturgy, you will propose the whole Bible, which in your grounds is the only
way to know all Fundamental Points.

79. Thirdly; Some Points may be necessary for the constitution of a Church,
which are not necessary for every private person, as for example, to know who
are lawful Governous of, and Ministers in the Church, and consequently, by
whom the public Liturgy, is to be lawfully read to the people. For, seeing we
believe your pretended Bishops in England, to be no more then mere Lay men (as
those Protestants who stand for Episcopacy, must hold the same of Ministers not
ordained by Bishops) what Liturgy, can be found common to Catholics, and
Protestants, or to Protestants, among themselves, seeing there can be no
agreement, who be Lawful Ministers, for celebrating the Liturgy, officiating,
reading public Service, and preaching to the people?

80. Fourthly; I must put you in mind, that you and Potter affirm (and the
thing in it self is very certain, and clear) that it is Fundamental to a
Christians Faith, not to deny any Truth sufficiently propounded as revealed by
God, though in it self not Fundamental; and therefore there can be no
Communion, with any Church, which denies any such Point, because she ceases to
be a Church. Seeing then, you say we err in such Points, and diverse learned
Protestants hold with us, against their pretended Brethren, and Protestants
say, that different Sects among themselves, disagree in such Points; all these
must hold, that all the rest disagreeing from them, are no Church, and
consequently not capable of their Communion. How then shall all such no
churches, agree in one Form of Liturgy, common to all Churches? Since they
differ in the very essence, and being of a Church, which is prerequired to all
Communion of Churches, in any lawful Form of Liturgy. They may be a company
of men, but not one community, Communion, or Church of faithful Believers.

11. Fifthly; You teach, that, minimum vt sic, is to believe, That God is, and
is a rewarde^. Would you have a Liturgy so short as to contain only this
point, for fear of Error, if it should contain more? And yet even in this
one point, there could be agreement only in words among Protestants themselves,
or with us. For, in the sense, I have showed elswere, that Protestants disagree
about Faith, or what to believe signifies; and about the Attributes, and
perfections of the Deity; and his Title of a Rewarder; and about our Savior
Christ, whether he be true God? Whether he be to be adored? Whether to be
invoked (Vid: Volkel: Lib: 4. Cap: 11.) Whether reverence to be done to his
sacred name, Jesus? And many other such points. And then I pray, what Communion
could there be in a worship of God, consisting only in words or in prating like
parrots, with infinite difference in the meaning of them; and such a
difference, as one part holds the contrary to believe damnable errors, even in
that one Point in which they must be supposed to agree, as in a Form common to
all; in Errors, I say, damnable, as being repugnant to the Testimony of that
God, whom they pretend to worship? Jews and Turks, believe that God is, and
that he is a rewarder, and Philosophers believed that there is a God, and some
of them, in general, that he is a rewarder. What a sight would it be, to
behold all these in one Church, or Quire of Christians, as agreeing in this
general Liturgy? Of which, Jews, Turks, and Philosophers might say in your
own words; Behold we propose a Form of Liturgy which all sides hold to be
lawful: Why then do you not join with us? If you answer them, because they
err in other points; they might reply, what is that to the purpose, as long as
a necessity of professing those Errors, is not imposed upon you? Or if it be
not lawful, to communicate with men of different Faith and Religion, though
they do as it were abstract from that in which they differ, how can Catholics
communicate with you, or Protestants with one another? or how can you say (If
you would propose a Form of Liturgy which both sides hold lawful, and then
they would not join with you in this Liturgy, you might have some color then
to say, they renounce your Communion absolutely) seeing men of different faith
cannot communicate together, even in a Form of Liturgy which both sides hold
lawful? Or if they may; you cannot refuse your Communion to Jews and Turks,
in such a common Form of Liturgy. I therefore conclude, that either you may
communicate with Jews, Turks etc. or else you must confess, that men of
different faith cannot communicate in one Liturgy, and public worship of God,
whatsoever imaginary Form be proposed, and that you renounce our Communion
absolutely; which you deny against all Truth, and your own grounds, and the
common grounds of Christianity, (unless you will make up one Church of Jews,
Turks, Philosophers, condemned Heretics, and whatsoever different Sects) and
therefore you cannot avoid the just imputation of Schism.

82. Morover, we know, you disliked diverse Points, in the public Service of
the Protestants Church of England, as the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, the
Creed of S. Athanasius, etc: Now I ask, whether you could with a good
conscience be present at the English Service, or no? If you say, you could,
because your intention was carried only to that which was good and true, and
not to those particulars, which you did believe to be false, and errors; why
may not Protestants, on their part, be present at Mass, and our public
worship of God? And why do they alledg, as a cause of their forsaking our
external communion in Liturgy, the corruptions thereof? Or why do you require,
a Form of Liturgy, which all sides hold lawful, if one may be present, at
some corrupt worship of God, so that he intend to participate, and communicate,
only in what is good? And you cannot deny, but that in our Liturgy, there are
many good, and holy things out of which, the Protestant church of England
transcribed diverse things, into their book of common prayer whereby they prove
themselves true Heretics, or chusers, accepting or rejecting what they please;
and deceyving simple people, as if there were small difference betwixt English
Protestants and Catholics. Or how could you wickedly persuade Catholics, to go
to Protestant Service, which you know we believe to contain Errors against
our Faith and Religion, and yet pretend that Protestants were obliged to
forsake our Communion in Liturgy etc. Or if they were not obliged to forsake
us, how can they be excused from Schism in doing so? If you could not be
present at the English Service, (which was the other part of my demand) the
reason must be, because men of different Faith, cannot communicate in one
public worship of God, or Liturgy: And the further reason of this, because
such a communicating, or Communion, were indeed a real, and practical
approbation of such a Communion, and of such a Church, stained with Errors,
and consequently, how can one Protestant communicate with an other whom they
believe to err in points of Faith, and yet think they are obliged not to
communicate with us? Truly they cannot possibly give any reason for this their
proceeding, and, as I may say, acception of persons, the merit or demerite of
the cause being the same. For, this Rule (it is not lawful for men of
different Faith to communicate in Liturgy, and public worship of God) is
universally true, and the contrary is only a ready way to breed confusion,
stisle all zeal, overthrow Religion, and is of its own nature, intrinsece
malum, though there were no scandal, danger of being perverted, and the like,
as really always there are. Certainly, if in any case a Catholic can be said
to approve, and participate with Heretics, as such, it is by communion in the
same Liturgy, and divine offices; and never more, than when it happens to be
with such Heretics, as did purposely reject the Liturgy of Catholics, as
superstitions, and corrupted, and framed an other, as proper to themselves,
which happened in England in direct opposition to our Liturgy; to which
proceeding of theirs he in fact consents, and gives approbation, who refuses
not, to be present at their Service so opposite ^o our Liturgy. Whosoever
considers the zeal of all Antiquity, in abhorring the least shadow of
communion with Heretics, will have just cause to lament the coldness of them,
who seek by distinctions, and speculations, to induce a pernicious
participation of justice with Iniquity, a society between light and darkness,
an agreement with christ and Belial, a participation of the faithful with the
infidel, as we have heard our adversaryes confess, every Error against a
Divine Truth sufficiently propounded, to be Infidelity. Holy Scripture (Number:
16.26.) speaking of Core, Dathan, and Abiron, says, Depart from the
tabernacles of the impious men, and touch you not those things which pertain
to them, least you be enwrapped in their sin. What then shall we say of those,
who will not depart, I say not, from the tabernacles, but even from the public
Service of Heretics, and will touch, and be of the same communion with them? If
the Apostle said to Titus, who was a Bishop, and in no danger of being
perverted, avoid an heretical man; could he have said, Fly the man, but not
communion with him? If in any case, certainly in this, we must call to mind our
Blessed Saviors saying, He that denies me, I will deny him. And, what does it
avail a man to gain the whole world if he loose his own soul? To which
purpose, Tertullian says (de Coron: Mil: Cap 11.) Non admittit status Fidei
allegationem necessitatis. Nulla est necessitas delinquendi quibus vna est
necessitas non delinquendi. The condition of Christian Faith cannot admit for
excuse of a thing not lawful, to say, they were necessitated thereto. There can
be no necessity of sinning, for them, who acknowledge one only thing to be
necessary, namely, not to sin. What is that one thing, which our savior says
is necessary, except, not to sin? Come loss of goods, liberty, and life: let us
remember; It is not necessary, that we be rich, or at liberty, or enjoy a long,
and prosperous life, but, One thing is absolutely necessary; that we do not
offend our God. If in a moral affair, we would guide souls by metaphysicke,
the next step will be, to take the Zuinglian supper, not, forsooth, as it is
received by them, in nature of a Sacrament, but intending only to eat it, as
it is no more than bread, and wine; or as Christians may wear the apparel
which Infidels use according to the civil custom of their country. But in
matters of this nature, middle ways are most dangerous, and next to
precipices; and you must remember those words, (3. Reg: 18. V. 22.) If our Lord
be God, follow him; but if Baal, follow him. Upon which place the Doway
Testament, makes this profitable Annotation; Such zealous expostulation is
necessary to all Neutralls in Religion, who are neither hot nor cold, but
lukewarm: such as Angels detest. (Apoc: 3.) Less harm it is (if we respect
the mischief which may accrue to others) for a man to profess Heresy, than
professing himself a Catholic, to be cause, that others follow his Doctrine,
and example, in communicating with Heretics, in that which they are wont to
call, Divine Service. What a monster may it justly seem for Catholics; at
home, abroad, in their pulpits, and all other occasions, to impugn and speak
against Heresies, and the next day to be seen in the same Church, at the same
public service, with Heretics? This Doctrine of the unlawfulness for
Catholics to be present at the service, or sermons, of Heretics, is taught
by those incomparable, holy, zealous, and learned Authors of the Annotations
upon the Rhemes Testament; Cardinal Alane; Richard Bristo; Willyam Raynolds;
Gregory Martin; in Matthew: 10. N. 32. Marc: 3. N. 13. 2. Cor: 6. N. 14. Ad Tit:
3. N. 10. Joan: 2. N. 10. And who will not prefer the Authority of these men,
who opposed themselves against the Heresy, Policy, and Cruelty of those times,
before any who now should presume to teach the contrary? Upon the whole matter
therefore, I conclude, that it is impossible to propound any Form of Liturgy,
in which both sides can hold it lawful to communicate. And, therefore Luther
and his fellows did absolutely renounce the Communion of all Churches, by
professing a contrary Faith, and ceasing to communicate with them in Liturgy,
and public worship of God; which is the thing you denied in your Objection.

83. Object: 2. (Page: 263. N. 26.) You say to your Adversary; That although it
were granted Schism, to leave the external Communion of the visible Church,
in what state or case soever it be, and that Luther and his followers were
Schismatiks, for leaving the external Communion of all visible Churches: Yet
you fail exceedingly of clearing the other necessary Point undertaken by you,
that the Roman Church was then the visible Church. For, neither do Protestants
(as you mistake) make the true preaching of the word, and due administration of
the Sacraments, the notes of the visible Church, but only of a visible Church:
Now these, you know, are very different things, the former signifying the
Church Catholic, or the whole Church: The latter, a particular Church, or a
part of the Ca^holique. And therefore suppose we should grant what by Argument
you can never evince, that your Church had these notes, yet would it by no
means follow, that your Church were the visible Church, but only a visible
Church: Not the whole Catholic Church, but only a part of it. But then
besides, where does Dr. P^tter acknowledge any such matter as you pretend? Where
does he say that you had for the substance the true preaching of the word or
due administration of the Sacraments? Or where does he say, that (from which
you collect this) you wanted nothing Fundamental, necessary to salvation?

84. Answer. Your conscience could not but tell you, that Charity Maintained
had evidently cleared this Point, and answered your Objections (Part: 1. N. 47.
Page: 221.) in these words: that the Roman Church (I speak not for the present,
of the particular Diocese of Rome, but of all Visible Churches dispersed
through the whole world, agreeing in Faith with the Chair of Peter, whether
that Sea were supposed to be in the City of Rome, or in any other place:) That,
(I say) The Church of Rome, in this sense, was the visible Catholic Church,
out of which Luther departed, is proved by your own confession, who assign
for Notes of the Church, the true Preaching of Gods word, and true
administration of Sacraments, both which for the substance you cannot deny to
the Roman Church, since you confess, that she wanted nothing Fundamental, or
necessary to salvation; and for that very cause, you think to clear yourselfe
from Schism, whose property, as Potter says (Page: 76.) is to cut off from
the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it
separates. Now, that Luther and his fellows were borne and baptized in the
Roman Church, and that she was the Church, out of which they departed, is
notoriously known: And therefore you cannot cut her off from the Body of
Christ, and hope of salvation, unless you will acknowledge your self to deserve
the just imputation of Schism. Neither can you deny her to be truly Catholic
by reason of (pretended) corruptions, not Fundamental. For, your self avouch,
and endeavor to prove, that the true Catholic Church may err in such
Points. Morover, I hope you will not so much as go about to prove, that when
Luther rose, there was any other true Visible Church, disagreeing from the
Roman, and agreeing with Protestants in their particular doctrines: And you
cannot deny, but that England in those days agreed with Rome, and other
nations with England: and therefore either Christ had no Visible Church upon
Earth, or else you must grant, that it was the Church of Rome. A truth so
manifest, that those Protestants who affirm the Roman Church to have lost the
Nature and Being of a true Church, do by inevitable consequence grant, that for
diverse Ages Christ had no Visible Church an earth: From which Error, because
Dr. Potter disclaimeth, he must of necessity maintain, that the Roman Church
is free from Fundame^tall, and damnable Errors, and that she is not cut off
from the Body of Christ, and Hope of salvation. And if, (says he ibidem) any
Zealops amongst us have proceeded to heavyer Censures their zeal may be
excused, but their Charity and wisdom cannot be justified. Thus Charity
Maintained in that place; and then immediately proves clearly; that the
Grecians, Waldenses, Wicklef, Huss, Muscovites, Armenians, Georgians,
Aethiopians, or Abissines, either held damnable Heresies, confessed to be such
both by Catholics, and Protestants, or else that they agree with us Catholics,
in the particular doctrines, wherein Protestants have for saken us. This being
so; who can deny, but that if Luther and his followers were Schismatiks for
leaving the external communion of all visible Churches (which for the present
you are content to suppose) the Roman Church taken in this sense, which you
have heard Charity Maintained declare, was that visible Church; seeing there was
no true Church of Christ, but the Roman in that sense, in which she is not a
particular, but the universal Church, including all true Churches. And yet by
way of supererogation Charity Maintained said (N. 55. Page: 229.) that Luther
and his followers had been Schismatiks, though the Roman were but a particular
Church; because Potter (Page: 76.) says, Whosoever professes himself to
forsake the communion of any one member of the Body of Christ, must confess
himself consequently to forsake the whole. Since therefore in the same place he
expressly acknowledges, the Church of Rome to be a member of the Body of
Christ, and that it is clear they forsook Her, and profess to have done so;
it follows evidently, that they forsook the whole, and therefore are most
properly Schismatiks, for leaving the Roman Church, whether you take it for a
particular, or for the universal, Church; that is, for all Churches which
agreed with Her: and so your instance (P. 263. N. 27.) that the foot might say
to the head, I acknowledge there is a Body: and yet that no member besides you,
is this Body: nor yet that you are it, but only a part of it) has indeed
neither head nor foot: Because when we say, the Roman Church is the universal
Church, we speak not of Her as a particular Church, or part of the whole, but
taken with all other Churches, and consequently as a Whole; and then you are
not to ask, whether the foot be the whole Body, but whether head, foot, and
all other parts taken together, be not the whole Body: which if you cannot
deny, you must confess that your own instance is against yourself, and for us.

85. By this also is answered, what you say; that, Protestants make not the
true preaching of the word, and due adminstration of the Sacraments, the Notes
of the visible Church, but only of a visibble Church* Not of the Church
Catholic, or the whole Church; but of a particular Church, or a part of the
Catholic. But out of what we have said, this appears to be a plain
contradiction. For if they be Notes of every particular Church, or of every
part of the whole, they must also be Notes of the whole, which is nothing but
every part as joined with all the rest, or the parts taken collectiue, that is,
the whole number of parts, which is nothing but the whole Body consisting of
such parts: As if vital actions, be a Note or sign of the presence of our
soul, or life, in every part of our Body, it must also be a sign of life in
the whole Body, consisting of all its parts. Will you have the whole, an Idaea
Platonica, separate from all parts? how then can the true preaching of the word
be a sign of every part of the Church, and not of the whole? Or will you have
the whole or universal Church want an essential note of a true Church? But as
every where, so here you take more upon you in behalf of Protestants, than you
have commission from them to do. The English Protestant Church (Artic: 19.)
says; The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered.
Where you see, the visible Church is called a congregation; and therefore no
such necessary difference passes between the Church, and a Congregation or
Church, as you confidently affirm. Will you say, that the Church which you
will have to signify the universal or whole Church, is a congregation, that
is, a particular Church? And yet the said (19. Article) says, The Church of
Christ is a congregation that is, according to your Divinity, a particular
Church? Or by what Logic can you say, that the Subjectum in a proposition can
be of a larger extent than the Praedicatum, and the universal Church affirmed
to be a particular Church? Also, if preaching of the word be not a Note of the
visible Church, how comes it to be put in the very definition of it? Willet in
his Synopsis (Page: 71.) says, These marks eannor be absent from the Church,
it is no longer A true Church, than it has these marks. And (Page: 69.) The
only absence of them does make a nullity of the Church. Behold, Preaching of
the word etc: Marks both of the and a Church; And these marks are said to be
essential to both; yea both the and a, are applied to the same Church: And, as
I said, it is strange in you, to imagine that what is essential to every part,
must not necessarily be essential to the whole; or, that the whole must
participate of the parts, and not of that which is essential to them: or, that
the parts by being united to compound one whole, must loose that which was
essential to them before such an union or composition, that is, that they must
loose themselves, by loosing that which was essential to them. But if these
clear reasons will not serve, at least be content to be convinced by your own
words (Page: 294. N. 93.) Where you must suppose, that, it is a good Argument to
make an inference from every one of the parts to the whole: What is, say you,
this Catholic Church, but the society of men, whereof every particular, and by
consequence, the whole company is, or may be guilty of many sins daily
committed against knowledge and conscience? Now, I would fame understand, why
one Error in Faith, especially if not Fundamental, should not consist with
the holiness of the Church, as well as many and great sins committed against
knowledge and conscience? And why then do you not make the like consequence, and
say; the visible Church is but a society of men consisting of diverse Churches
whereof every particular, and by consequence, the whole company has for
essential Notes, the true preaching of Gods Word, and due administration of
Sacraments? This instance convinces ad hominem, and upon supposition, that you
will make good your own inference, which indeed is in it self of no force, in
regard, that to sin or err, is not assentiall to every part of the Church, as
preaching of the word is essential to every particular, and consequently to
the whole Church; and therefore God may give his assistance, to keep men from
sin and error, as he shall be pleased; and having promised, that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against the whole Church, and not having made any such
general promise to private persons, which neither are, nor do represent the
whole Church, you cannot infer, that the whole Church, or a General Council,
may fall into Error, because every particular private person, taken apart, may
be deceived. Your parity also between sin and error, is unworthy of a Divine.
Faith externally professed, or the exterior profession of Faith, is necessary
to constitute one a member of the Church; but justifying grace, or sanctity, or
Charity is not. Yourselfe grant, that Error in Fundamental Points, destroys
a Church, and that every particular person ceases to be a member of the Church,
by every such error. I hope you will not say the same of every, or any
grievous sin. You grant (Page: 274. N. 57.) that corruptions in manners, yield
no just cause to forsake a Church, and yet you excuse your leaving the
Communion of our Church, upon pretense of corruptions in Her doctrine, even in
Points not Fundamental of themselves. It appears then, that errors in Faith,
though not Fundamental, preponderate any, or all, most grievous corruptions in
manners, in order to the maintayning or breaking the Communion of the Church.
Do you not expressly say (Page: 255. N. 6.) Many members of the Visible Church
have no Charity? Which could not happen, if Charity were as necessary as Faith,
to constitute one a member of the Church. This is also the Doctrine of other
Protestants. Field (Of the Church, Lib: 2. Cap: 2.) says: Entire profession of
those supernatural verityes which God has revealed in Christ, is essential
to the Church. Fulke (Joan: 14. Not: 5.) The true Church of Christ can never
fall into Heresy. It is an impudent slander to say, we say so. Whitaker;
Contron: 2. Quest: 5. Cap: 17.) The Church cannot hold any heretical doctrine,
and yet be a Church; mark here also, that the, and a are applied to the same
Church. Dr. Lawd (Sect: 10. Page: 36.) Whatsoever is Fundamental to Faith, is
Fundamental to the Church, which is one by unity of Faith. It is then
apparent, that there is great difference, between Faith, and charity, for as
much as concerns the constituting one a member of the Church, and the contrary
is of dangerous consequence, as if by deadly sin, every Bishop, Prelate,
Pastor, Priest, Prince etc. must necessarily cease to be members of Christ's
Church.

86. But here I must observe two things. First; If entire profession of those
supernatural verityes, which God has revealed in Christ, be essential to the
Church: If the true Church cannot fall into Heresy, and that it is an impudent
slander to affirm that Protestants say so; if the Church cannot hold any
Heretical Doctrine, and yet be a Church, as we have heard out of Dr. Lawd,
Whitaker, Fulke, and Field, respective, it follows, that the Church cannot
fall into error against any Truth, sufficiently propounded as revealed by God,
whether it be of itself Fundame^tall or not; because every such error is
Heresy, as contrarily we exercise a true Act of Faith, by believing a Truth,
because it is testified by God, though the thing, of itself, might seem never
so small. And (Page: 101. N. 127.) you speak to this very purpose, saying,
Heresy is nothing but a manifest deviation from, and an oppo^sition to the
Faith. And Potter (Page: 97.) says; The Catholic Church is careful to ground
all her declarations in matters of Faith upon the Divine Authority of Gods
written Word. And therefore whosoever wilfully opposes a judgment so well
grounded, is justly esteemed an Heretik^, not properly, because he disobeyes
the Church, but because he yields not to Scripture sufficiently propounded, or
cleared unto him. And (Page: 250.) Where the revealed will or word of God is
sufficiently propounded; there he that opposes, is convinced of error, and he
who is thus convinced, is an Heretic. And (Page: 247.) If a man by reading the
Scriptures, or hearing them read, be convinced of the truth of any such
Conclusion: This is a sufficient proposition, to prove him that gain-saieth any
such truth, to be an Heretic, and obstinate opposer of the Faith. Field (Lib:
2. of the Church, Cap: 3.) says; freedom from Fundament all error, may be
found among Heretics. From whence it follows, that error against any Point of
Faith, though not Fundamental, is Heresy; and yourselfe (Page: 23. N. 27.) say;
There is, as matters now stand, as great necessity of believing those Truths of
Scripture, which are not Fundamental, as those that are. If then every error,
against any Truth sufficiently propounded, as revealed by God, be Heresy, and
that, according to Fulke, the true Church of Christ can never fall into Heresy,
and that, as Whitaker says, the Church cannot hold any Heretical doctrine,
and yet be a Church, it follows, that either the Church cannot fall into any
error, even not Fundamental, and so Protestants are Schismatiks, for leaving
Her upon pretense of errors; or that, it is no impudent slander to say, that
Protestants say, the Church may fall into Heresy, as Fulke affirms it to be,
seeing she may fall into errors against Faith, and all such errors are
Heresies. Besides, seeing we have heard Potter confess (Page: 97.) that the
Catholic Church is careful to ground all Her declarations in matters of
Faith upon the Divine Authority of Gods written word; how can they avoid the
Note of Heresy, by opposing Her Declarations; or of Schism by leaving Her
Communion? By all which it is manifest, that Heretics have no constancy in
their doctrine, but are forced to affirm and deny, and by perpetual
contradictions overthrow their own grounds, and Assertions. Howsoever, for our
present purpose, we have proved, even out of Protestants themselves, that your
parity between errors against Faith, and sins against Charity, is repugnant to
all Divinity, seeing external profession of Faith, is necessary to constitute
one a member of the Church, but Charity is not; and chiefly I infer that the
Catholic Church is not subject to any error, though not Fundamental, since
it is confessed that she cannot fall into Heresy, and every error against any
revealed Truth, is Heresy.

87. The second thing I was to observe briefly is this. Charity Maintained
speaking expressly of errors in Faith, which are incompatible with the being
of a true Church; you to disguise the matter, ask why error may not consist
with the holiness of this Church as well as many and great sins. Whereas Charity
Maintained did not speak of holiness, but of true Faith, which is essential
to the Church, and every member thereof, as justifying Grace, and Charity, and
Holiness (in this sense) are not; since many grievous sinners are true members
of the Church. We profess, I grant, in the Creed, The Holy Catholic Church,
yet not so as every member of it must needs be holy by justifying Grace, but
for many other important reasons; which are excellently declared in the Roman
Cathecisme ad Parochos, upon that Article of the Creed.

88. You ask: Where does Dr. Potter acknowledge any such matter as you pretend?
Where does he say, that you had for the substance the true preaching of the
word, or due administration of the Sacraments? Or where does he say, that (from
which you collect this) you wanted nothing Fundamental or necessary to
salvation?

89. Answer: It shall be proved herafter, to your small credit, that yourselfe,
Potter, and other Protestants, acknowledge the Roman Church to be a true Church,
and not to err in any Fundamental, and Essential Point; and it is clear,
that she could not be a true Church, unless she had for the substance the true
preaching of the word, and due administration of the Sacraments, which to be
essential Notes of the Church, and without which, the Church ceases to be a
Church, we have proved out of Protestants; and then, how can the Roman Church
conserve the Essence of a Church, if it want what is essential to a Church?
Indeed you are inexcusable, to ask in this place this Question, seeing in that
very place which you cite, Charity Maintained expressly alleges Potter seeking
to free himself and other Protestants from Schism, because they do not cut
off from the Body of Christ, and hope of Salvation, our Church; which certainly
they must do, unless they believe that she wanted nothing Fundamental or
necessary to Salvation.

90. In your next Page (264. N. 27.) you speak thus to your Adversary: In
vain have you troubled your self in proving, that we cannot pretend, that
either the Greeks, Waldenses, Wickleffists, Hussites, Muscovites, Armenians,
Georgians, Abyssines were then the visible Church. For all this discourse
proceeds from a false and vain supposition, and beggs another Point in
Question between us, which is, that some Church of one denomination, and one
Communion (as the Roman, the Greek etc:) must be always, exclusively to all
other Communions, the whole visible Church.

91. Answer. Charity Maintained being to prove, that the Church of Rome, that
is, all Visible Churches, dispersed throughout the whole world agreeing in
Faith with the Chair of Peter, (as he expressly declares himself) was that
visible Catholic Church out of which Luther departed; beside other reasons,
proves it by a sensible Argument, ab enumeratione partium, that there was no
true Christian Church or Churches, before Luther, except either those which
agreed with the Roman, or which held wicked errors, condemned by Protestants
themselves, which therefore they must deny to have been members of their Church:
and therefore we must either say, that Christ had no true Church on earth, or
else that it was the Roman, and such as agreed with Her, and consequently, that
Luther departed out of the Roman Church, taken in that sense, that is, out of
the Catholic Church, there being then no other true Church. Now what think
you, was this labor in vain? Certainly it was not; whether we consider the
end which I have declared, or another of no small moment, connected with this;
which is, as I touched above; That whereas Protestants were wont to make
ignorant persons believe, that before Luther they had some visible Protestant
Church, and to that end would be naming, the Waldenses, Wicklefists, Hussits,
and such others, Charity Maintained demonstrated, that those men held damnable
Errors, against both Catholics and Protestants, and in many Points agreed
with us against Protestants, and therefore could not be Protestants, though they
casually agreed with them in some Points. In the mean time, Protestants have
no reason to give you thanks, for leaving them, and in fact acknowledging, that
Charity Maintained had evident reason for what he said, and that the old plea
of Protestants, had no ground of truth.

92. You say, Charity Maintained begs a Point in Question between us, which is
that some Church of one denomination must be always, exclusively to all other
Communions, the whole visible Church. But with what modesty can you say this?
Seeing Charity Maintained was so far from supposing or affirming some
particular Church of one denomination to be always, exclusively to all other,
the whole visible Church, that as you have heard, he expressly, and purposely,
declared himself to speak of all true Visible Churches, and not of the Roman
Church, as it is taken for the particular Diocese of Rome, and therefore that
not any particular Church, but all true Churches, are the whole Visible Church.

93. Object 3. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 151. N. 2.) says: Because
Schism will be found to be a division from the Church, which could not happen,
unless there were always a visible Church, we will prove, that in all Ages
there has been such a visible congregation of faithful people. Against this,
you object (Page: 254. N. 2.) That, although there never had been any Church
visible or invisible before this Age, nor should be ever after, yet this could
not hinder, but that a Schism might now be, and be a division from the present
visible Church.

94. Answer. Charity Maintained said truly, That seeing Schism is a division
from the Church, it cannot happen (for that is his express word) but when there
is a Church: not always, unless there be always, a Church; never, if never
there were a Church. If then for many Ages there was no Church, there could not
happen a Schism in all those Ages. The Fathers, Doctors, and Divines of all
Ages, speak and treat of Schism, as of a subject and sin, which morally and
ordinarily, and always might happen, (and which de facto did happen too often,
as Heresies did, and were inpugned by the writers of every Age) which they
could not have done, if they had not supposed the Existence of a Church,
through all Ages and Times: And much less would they have done so, if they had
ever imagined, that of sixteen hundred years and more, there was to be no
true Church for the space of a thousand, within the compass of which time, many
of those Divines did live, and never dreamed that in Defining, and frequent
treating of Schism, they spoke of a thing only possible, and not incident to
their present occasions, and so they had not in winter defined a rose, (which
is your example (Page: 260. N. 22.) to prove that a thing may be defined, though
it be not existent) which they were sure to see the next ensuing summer, but
rather a conceit little better than a Chimaera, or a non ens, which had once
existed, though they could not tell how short a time, and then disappeared as
if it had never been. And by this is answered, what you object in the said Page
260. against the saying of Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 165. N. 11.) That,
all Devines by defining Schism to be a division from the Church, suppose, that
there must be a known Church from which it is possible for men to depart.

95. Object 4. (Page: 254. N. 4.) you cite Charity Maintained as saying thus:
That, supposing Luther and they which did first separate from the Roman Church,
were guilty of Schism, it is certainly consequent, that all who persist in the
division must be so likewise; which, say you is not so certain as you pretend.
But the word certainly which you set down as the word of Charity maintained,
and upon which you ground your Objection, is not to be found in his words (Page:
151.) which you pretend to allege. Yet because the thing in it self is
certainly true, let us hear what you can object to the contrary. You say, they
which alter without necessary cause the present government of any state Civil
or Ecclesiastical, do committ a great fault; whereof notwithstanding they may
be innocent who continue this alteration, and no the utmost of their power
oppose a chang, though to the former state, when continuance of time has once
settled the present.

96. Answer. It is no less then great profaneness in you, to make a parity
between a Schism from Gods Church, which is intrinsece, and essentially
unlawful, and alterations in a Civil or Ecclesiastical state, for things
accidental, and of their nature indifferent. For, if you suppose those
alterations to be of their own nature unlawful, and sinful, they can never
be innocent, who continue them, nor can any continuance of time establish them.
Luther and his followers, separated themselves from the Church, by sinful
profession of Faith, contrary in many Points to the belief of all Churches
(for you suppose, for the present, that their separation was causeless and
sinful, which is to be noted) and will you say, it is lawful to continue in a
false profession of Faith, against ones conscience, because others have begun
it? How often do you profess, that it is always damnable to dissemble, or
speak against ones conscience in matters of Faith? Well then, if (upon
supposition) he be obliged to profess the whole Catholic Faith, he must among
other Points believe, that it is absolutely unlawful to communicate with
Heretics in their Sacraments, and that there can be no just cause, to live out
of the Communion of the Church, and that it is unlawful, either to begin or
continue a division from Her, and that they are obliged to return to Her
Communion. And this I prove out of your own words (Page: 312. N. 112.) (it
should be 113.) where you speak to Charity Maintained in this manner: You
spend a great deal of reading and wit, and reason against some men, who
pretending to honor and believe the Doctrine and Practice of the visible
Church (you mean your own) and condemning their forefathers who forsook her,
say they would not have done so, yet remain divided from Her Communion. Which
men, in my judgment, cannot be defended. For, if they believe the doctrine of
your Church, then must they believe this doctrine, that they are to return to
your Communion. And therefore if they do not so, it cannot be avoided but that
they must be a'vtocatacritoi. Behold, whosoever believes as we do, must also
believe, that they cannot continue this Schism begun by others. I wish all
would reflect upon this grant, which evidence of truth has drawn from you,
though it has cost you a contradiction against your saying, that a Schism
with us might be begun with sin, and yet they be innocent who continue it. Your
captious Words, that, Charity Maintained should not have written against these
kind of men, in a work which he professes to have written merely against
Protestants, shall be answered in their proper place.

97. Object 5. Charity Maintained (Part 1. Page: 152. N. 3.) said Charity
unites all the members of the Church in one Mystical Body, Which you say,
(Page: 255. N. 6.) is manifestly untrue; for many of them have no Charity.

98. Answer. Some would say, that it is hard to determine whether this
objection has more of the insolent, or proud, or malicious: But I abstain
from censures. What Charity Maintained said, was not his alone, but the
Doctrine of all Divines, and in particular of the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas,
whose express words he cited, wherein (2.2. Quest: 39. Art 1. in Corp:) he
defines Schism; A voluntary separation from the unity of that Charity, whereby
all the members of the Church are united. Peccatum, says he, Schismatis
proprie, est speciale peccatum ex eo quod intenditse ab vnitate separare, quam
Charitas facit. In which words of this holy Doctor, you have both the
affirmation of Charity Maintained and the reason thereof; That as Heresy is
opposite to Faith, so Schism to Charity: and for that cause, Heresy and
Schism are two distinct vices. Otherwise, how will you distinguish them? In
the same place, as also (N. 7.) Charity Maintained alleges S. Austine, (Lib.
1. de Fid: ad Simp: Cap 10.) saying, Heretics corrupt the Faith by believing of
God false things: but Schismatiks by wicked divisions break from fraternall
Charity, although they believe what we believe. And (Lib: 1. de Sermon: Dom: in
Mon: Cap. 5.) Many Heretics, under the name of Christians deceaving men's
souls, do suffer many such things: but where there is not sound Faith, there
cannot be justice. Neither can Schismatiks promise to themselves any part of
this reward (Blessed are they who suffer persecution for justice) because
likewise where there is no Charity, there cannot be justice. The love of our
neighbor does not work evil: which if they had, they would not tear in
pieces the Body of Christ, which is the Church. Do you not see that this Saint
still opposes Heresy to Faith, and Schism to that Charity, which unites the
members of Gods Church, in one mystical Body which Schism divides? Also the
same Saint says (Ep: 204.) Being out of the Church, and divided from the heap
of unity, and the bond of Charity, thou should be punished with eternal
death, though thou should be burned alive for the name of Christ. Now if
many of the members of the Church have no Charity, as you say, they must be
Schismatiks; or if they be not, they have that Charity which Schismatiks want,
and consequently it is untrue, that they have no Charity. Will you have them be
members of the Church, because they are not divided from her by Schism, and
yet not be members of the Church in regard they have no Charity? Potter (Page:
42.) says; Though faith be kept entire, yet if Charity be wanting, the unity
of the Church is disturbed, her vnton dissolved. Schism is no less damnable
than Heresy. Why do you not object against your client, That, many members of
the Church have no Charity, and therefore that it is manifestly untrue, that if
Charity be wanting, the unity of the Church is disturbed, her union dissolved,
seeing, men may be members of the Church, though they want all Charity, and
consequently, if Charity be wanting, it is not necessary that the union of the
Church must be dissolved? Or if you grant to Potter, that Charity is the cause
that the unity of the Church is not disturbed, and Her union not dissolved,
what is this but to say with Charity Maintained; That, All the members of the
visible Church are by Charity united in one mystical Body? Why is Her union
dissolved, if Charity be wanting, but because by Charity it is conserved? You
say (Page: 273. N. 56.) That if we suppose a visible Church extant before, and
when Luther arose conformable to him in all Points of Doctrine, necessary and
profitable, then Luther separated not from this Church, but adjoined himself
to it: Not indeed in place, which was not necessary, not in external
Communion, which was impossible, but by the union of Faith and Charity. If one
should ask; how do you know that Luther had Charity; or whether he might not
have been a member of that imagined Church, though he had been in deadly sin?
what would you answer? sure I am, whatsoever you answer for Potter, and
yourselfe, will confute your objection against Charity Maintained, and show how
familiar Contradictions are with you; as in our present case you must either
grant that Luther, if he chanced to be in deadly sin, could not unite himself
to that imaginary Church, or else that Charity is not necessary to constitute
one a member of a Church; and consequently, that one may be a member of the
Church, and free from the sin of Schism, though he want that Charity, which is
incompatible with deadly sin, and inseparable from justifying Grace, upon
condition, that he be innocent of that vice against Charity, which we call
Schism, and puts a man so far out of Charity with the Church, or with his
neighbor, as a member of the Church, as not to communicate with him in
Sacraments, Liturgy, and public Worship of God. Neither is there any
necessity, that whosoever offends against a virtue, for example, Charity, must
offend in all Excesses or Defects, or other offenses, that may be committed
against it. To be a good Man, a good Citizen, a good Magistrate, are
considerations very different, and separable one from another: And therefore
Charity Maintained (Chap: 5. N. 3.) told you, that our neighbor may be
considered, either as one private person has a single relation to an other, or
as all concur to make one company or congregation, which we call the Church:
And who sees not, that a man who is in state of deadly sin, and therefore loves
not God above all things, may love his neighbor in such a degree, as not to
wish or procure his death; as also one may want Charity to an other, as a
private person, without separating from him as a member of one Church, in which
they agree and communicate.

99. Object: 6. (Page: 255. N. 5.) You cite the words of Charity Maintained as
if he said: All those which a Christian ought to esteem neighbors, do
coucurre to make one company, which is the Church. And then you add these
words: Which is false: For, a Christian is to esteem those his neighbors, who
are not members of the true Church.

100. Answer. It were strange, if you did not know, that in this particular, we
have no common or universal Tenet; neither can there be any difficulty in the
thing it self, but the Question must have much, only de nomine; and Bellarm:
teaches, Faith to be necessary that one may be said to be united by internal
union to the Body of Christ, which is the Church: And though he holds that
secret infidells belong to the Church, yet he expressly declates, that some
other Catholic Writers are of a contrary opinion; and (Lib: 3. de Eccles:
Cap: 10.) He says; We follow the manner of speaking of the greater number,
declaring thereby, this Question to be only de modo loquendi, of the manner of
speaking. So far is he from judging, the contrary to be repugnant to our
grounds, as you intolerably overlash! But suppose it were, as you say: Where, I
pray you, does Charity Maintained say, that the Catholic Church signifyes one
company of Faithful people; faithful, I say, by internal Faith, and not only
by the external profession of it? He says no such thing, as appears by his
words cited in the beginning of your Objection. And therefore, seeing he does not
express, whether they must be faithful by true internal Faith, or only by
external profession of the true Faith, but his words being general, they are
certainly true in all opinions; to wit, that Faith is required to make one a
member of the Church, not determining, whether that Faith must be internal, or
whether an outward profession be sufficient to that effect. Sure I am this is
no faithful dealing in you.

101. Object: 7. In this same (Page: 255. N. 5.) You allege Charity Maintained
as if he said: All those which a Christian ought to esteem neighbors, do
concur to make one company, which is the Church: And then you add these
words: which is false: For a Christian is to esteem those his neighbors, who
are not members of the true Church.

102. Answer. Charity Maintained never said, that all those which a Christian
is to esteem neighbors, do make one company which is the Church. But these be
his words (Part: 1. Page: 152. N. 3.) Our neighbor may be considered either as
one private person has a single relation to another, or as all concur to
make one company or congregation, which we call the Church. Is not all this
evidently true? May not our neighbor be considered, either as he is a private
person, or as a member of the Church, concurring with other members to make one
congregation? De facto diverse persons concur to make one Church, and
therefore they may be so considered. But where does Charity Maintained say, all
those which a Christian is to esteem his neighbors, do concur to make one
Church? This particle (all) and the words (is to esteem) are your
falsifications not the words of Charity Maintained, who spoke of Heresy, and
Schism, which can happen only amongst Christians: And therefore allthough even
Pagans and infidells ought to be esteemed our neighbors, yet they cannot
concur to make one congregation which we call the Church, which were the
words of Charity Maintained. And so they could not enter into this
consideration, but we may say in this case, what is it to me to judge of them
that are without, (. 1. Cor: 5.12.?

103. Object: 8. Charity Maintained (Part: 1 Page: 154 N. 4.) says: The
Catholic Church signifyes one Congregation, or Community of faithful people,
and therefore implies not only Faith, to make them faithful believers, but also
Communion, or common union, to make them one in Charity, which excludes
separation and Division. Which words signify, that all the members of the
Catholic Church must be united in such manner, as that they be not
voluntarily divided one from another in Communion, against Charity, as we have
declared both out of Catholic, and Protestant Divines. You, (Page: 255. N. 9.)
cite him thus: All the members of the Catholic Church must of necessity be
united in external Communion: Which, say you, certainly cannot be perpetually
true. For, a man unjustly excommunicated, is not in the Churches Communion, yet
he is still a member of the Church: And diverse times it has happened, that
particular men, and particular Churches, have upon an overvavalued difference;
either renounced Communion multually, or one of them separated from the other,
and yet both have continued members of the Catholic Church.

104. Answer. I have declared above, the difference between separation from the
Church by excommunication, even when it is valid, and just, and Division from
it by Schism. But if the Excommunication be unjust and invalide, the party
censured remaynes still a member of the Church, and partakes of all common
suffrages, being really in her Communion, though he may be obliged to abstain
from some actions in foro externo and to be have himself, as if he were truly
excommunicated. But Schism is a voluntary disobedience and separation from the
Communion of the Church against Charity. Separation by excommunication is
voluntary only in causa, in the sin for which it is imposed: Division by
Schism is voluntary in itself, as being the very Division itself from the
external Communion of the Church. You speak very confusedly in saying, That,
particular men, and particular Churches either renounced Communion mutually, or
one of them separated from the other, and yet both of the^ continued members of
the Catholic Church. If you mean only a verbal separation, as I may term
it, whereby one says, or threatens, that he will have nothing to do with the
other, you do but trifle, if afterward no effect follow upon such threats, or
words. For in that case we may say Protestatio contra facta nihil valet. But if
really one part separate from the other in Sacraments, Liturgy, public prayers
and worship of God; then, for preventing further inconvenience, or a Schism
among faithful people, the supreme Pastor vicar of Christ, and Successor to
S. Peter, must interpose his Authority, give Sentence, and command the erring
party to submit; which if he refuse to do, he will grow to be divided not only
from the particular Church which he opposed, but from the universal Church,
whose Pastor he stubbornly disobeyes, and so becomes a formal Schismatike.
For which cause Charity Maintained (N. 5.) said; The guilt of Schism may be
contracted not only by division from the universal Church, but also by a
separation from a particular Church, or Diocese, which agrees with the
universal. Put case twoe particular diocesses or Churches refuse to
communicate one with an other, when occasion offers it self, those twoe are
neither members one of another, nor agree in external Communion; yet they may
agree with the Universal Church, and so agreeing in a third, come to be
united amongst themselves. One part of a community is not a member of another
part, but of the whole Body, with which it is supposed to communicate, and so
you will find, that to be a member of a Community, and to participate in
external Lommunion of the same, do go pari passu; and that therefore your
Objection had no force, except to prove, as indeed it does, the necessity of a
living Judge in Gods Church to prevent Schisms, and command Union, and to give
us a Rule to judge, what true Schism is, and when it happens: For which cause
S. Hierom (Lib: 1. contra Jovin:) affirms that S. Peter was chosen to be Head
of the Church, to take away occasion of Schism, Inter duodecim (says he) vnus
eligitur, vt capite constituto Schismatis tolleretur occasio.

105. Object 9. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Cap: 5. N. 3.) says; Every
heretic is a Schismatike: which you say (N. 8.) he must acknowledge false in
those, who, though they deny, or doubt of some Point professed by your Church
and so are heretics; you continue still in the Communion of the Church.

106. Answer. It is a shrewd sign, you want better matter, who object such
triffles. First; though we should suppose Charity Maintained to have said,
every Heretic is a Schismatike; and that Mr. Chillingworth says the same, as
indeed he does (Page: 339. N. 20.) in these words; Heretics, I confess do
always separate from the Visible Church; Either you must absolve Charity
Maintained from your own accusation, or else condemn yourselfe, and answer
your own Argument. For, if every Heretic do always separate from the Visible
Church, every Heretic must be a Schismatike. But yet, Secondly; Charity
Maintained in the place you cite, affirms nothing of his own, but only
alleges S. Thomas (22. Quest 39. Ar. 1 ad 3.) And therefore you cannot blame
him if he cite that Saint aright, as I am certain he does; for I have the
Book under my eyes at this present, and find the citation to be very
punctual. Neither is your objection of any force against S. Thomas. For,
whosoever denies or doubts of any Point defined by the Church (as you will say
the same of any Point evidently contained in Scripture) and professes
exteriourly such his error, ceases to be a member of the Visible Church, and
of our Communion, not only in Faith, but also in Sacraments, and Liturgy, from
which he is excluded, by such a profession, as I proved above, that persons of
different Faith cannot communicate in the public worship of God. Besides,
Excommunication inflicted upon every Heretic, divides him from the Church, by
a particular new title. If you suppose his Heresy to be merely internal; as it
is incompletly Heresy, in order to a Visible Church, of which we speak; so
also inchoatiue, it excludes him from external Communion, that is, it deprives
him in the sight of God, of merit to communicate in Sacraments, and if he
approach to them, it is to his own damnation; and if the Church could judge de
occultis, he might be expelled from the^: In the mean time he does as a
thief, making use of stolen goods; and so still there runs such a proportion
between Heresy and Schism, as that every heretic is a Schismatike,
completely, or incompletely, perfectly, or inchoatiue, according to the degree
of his being an Heretic.

107. Object: 10. (Page: 274. N. 56.) you say: Though the whole Church were
corrupted, yet properly speaking, it is not true, that Luther and his followers
forsook the whole corrupted Church, or the external Communion of it: but only
that he forsook that part of it which was corrupted, and still would be so,
and forsook not, but only reformed another Part, which Part they themselves
were, and I suppose you will not go about to persuade us, that they foorsooke
themselves or their own Communion. And if you urge, that they themselves
joined to no other Part, therefore they separated from the whole: I say it
follows not, in as much as themselves were a part of it, and still continued
so: and therefore could no more separate from the whole, than from themselves.
Thus, though there were no part of the people of Rome to whom the plebeians
joined themselves, when they made their secession into the Auentine Hill, yet
they divided themselves from the Patritians only, and not from the whole
people, because themselves were a part of this people, and they divided not
from themselves. The like evasion you have (Page: 295. N. 94.)

108. Answer. How many shifts to decline a true confession? First, Protestants
had cause to separate. 2. they are not excused by reason of the cause, or
corruptions. For then, different Sects of Protestants must separate from one
another, no less than from us, which sequel you deny. 3. They did not separate
from the Church, though they did separate from the external Communion of all
Churches. 4. They separated not from the whole Church, because they separated
not from themselves. Of the former evasions we have spoken already. This last
is not hard to be confuted.

109. First, it contradicts yourselfe. For (Page: 273. N. 55.) you say As for
the external Communion of the visible Church, we have without scruple formerly
granted, that, Protestants did forsake it, that is, renounce the practice of
some observances, in which the whole visible Church before them did
communicate. Now, if the whole visible Church did communicate in corruptions,
or was corrupted; by leaving those who were corrupted, they left all, or the
whole Church, for those corruptions, which according to Protestants, happening
de facto to be in the Liturgy, public worship of God, use of Sacraments, and
the like, in which external communion co^sists they left the external
communion of the visible Church, as we have heard you grant in your own words
now cited.

110. Secondly: This evasion is but a begging of the Question, while you
suppose, they who divided themselves from the rest, continued a Part of the
Church, to the union and Communion whereof, external Communion is essential,
and therefore that being altered, it is impossible, that it remaynes the same
Church, in order to all Parts, or that the dividers continue to be a Part of
that former Church, but they become a whole Schismatic conventicle, of their
own. Your error proceeds, from not distinguishing between being a man, and
being a member of the Church, as I declared hertofore. Suppose Luther and his
followers, had denied some Fundamental Point of Faith, they had, even in your
opinion, ceased to be a Part of the Church, but not of the Community of men,
who before their separation, were also members of the Church; as Pagans,
Turks, Jews etc: may be Parts of one Commonwealth, but not of one Church:
Therefore it is one thing to remain a Part of a Community of men, and another
to be still a Part of Gods Church, whatsoever that Church be supposed to be,
whether Roman, or any other. For, this principle, That agreement in external
Communion is necessary to make men members of the same Church, is universally
true. Whereby is confuted your example of the Roman Plebeians: who, if they did
separate from the rest, not only materially, in place, or the like, but also
formally, in the Laws, customs, and Government, they remained not Parts of
the former Commonwealth, for as much as belonged to them; seeing they wholly
divided themselves, erecting a new Community, or Commonwealth, of their own;
though still they be Parts of the whole member of men, consisting of
Patritians, and Plebeians, as you call them, which is the thing affirmed by us;
namely, that Luther and his fellows ceased to be a Part of the former Church,
and erected a new whole Community of their own; and so your Argument comes to
be retorted against yourselfe.

111. Thirdly. Whereas you suppose, that we will not go about to persuade you,
that Luther and his followers forsook themselves, or their own Communion: I
answer; I have small hope to persuade you any truth, that may seem to favor
us Catholics; And, for others, I need not persuade them, to believe that, which
is evident of itself; namely that you will needs remain in a perpetual
equivocation, not distinguishing, between being a man, and being a member of
the Church, or between substance and accidents, or between the same man,
considered phisically, and morally: Which even in your Principles, is clear in
one, who falls into any error repugnant to some Fundamental Article, and so
instantly ceases to be a member of the Church, as he was before, and in that
respect, is morally divided from himself, as much as, est, and non est, are
opposite. If of the same real common subject not destroyed, for example, of
Socrates, we could say, existit and non existit, though for different times, we
might truly say, that he were physically and really divided from himself: Now,
the same subject is really capable of being and not being a member of the
Church successively: Therefore we may say, he is divided from himself, and from
his own Communion. For, as S. Ambrose says most elegantly (Lib: 7. in Cap:
15. Lucae,) of the prodigal Child: Peregre profectus est in regionem
longinquam. Quid long inquius est, quam a se recedere; nec regionibus sed
moribus separari; (not only in place, but in relation to a different and
contrary mystical Body, Community or Church) studiis discretum esse, non
terris; and quasi interfuso luxuriae saecularis aestu (we may say in our case,
charitatis defectu, and proximorum odio) divortia habere Sanctorum? (to be
divided from the Church, the only seat of Saints on earth.) Etenim qui se a
Christo separant (and Potter confesses, that whosoever separates himself from
the Church, is divided from Christ) exul est patriae, civis est mundi. He is
separated from the Church, and becomes a member only of the world, both as the
world is taken for wicked men, divided from Christ, or as it signifyes the
number of all men, as men; of which a Schismatike remains a part, though not a
part of the Church, as has been said.

112. Besides: in the Opinion of those Calvinists who teach that the whole
Church could, and did perish (which is a damnable heresy, yet for explicating
the nature of things, we may for the present suppose it, ad hominem) they who
first separated themselves from the primitive pure Church, and brought in
corruptions in Faith, Practice, Liturgy, and use of Sacraments, may truly be
said to have been Heretics, by departing from the pure Faith; and Schismatiks,
by dividing themselves from the external Communion, of the true uncorrupted
Church, though it be supposed to be destroyed: therefore one may depart from his
own Faith, and remain no more a part of that Body of which he was once a
member, whether we suppose, that former Mystical Body to be still existent, or
to have perished: which consideration of existing, or not existing of the
Community from which one departs, is only material, and accidental to Schism
consisting formally in division from the Communion of the Church, whether only
preexistent, or existent also for the present. If it be said (Genes: 1. V. 5.)
Divisit Lucem a tenebris, he divided the light from the darkness, by taking
away, phisically or, as I may say, destroying one of the extremes (seeing light,
and darkness cannot stand together) much more may we say, that morally one may
be divided from a Church, and from himself, though that Church cease to be, or
still remain; and he shall cease to be a member of it, even by that Division,
though he cease nor to exist, or be a man, or himself.

113. And now appears, that, what Charity Maintained (Part 1. P: 204. N. 39.)
said (That a Protestant may be a Schismatike from himself, because the
selfsame Protestant to day is convicted in Conscience, that his yesterdays
opinion was an error, with who^ therefore a reconciliatio^ according to Dr.
Potters Ground (Page: 20.) is both impossible and damnable; is no stra^g saying
in itself, though yet, to make it appear so, you (Page: 303. N. 103.) do
egregiously falsify his words, which are: From a man's self etc. (as much as is
possible) which words (as much as is possible) you leave out. And by the way, I
wonder with what conscience you can pretend to infer out of the words of Cha:
Ma: That, they that hold errors, must hold them fast, and take special care
of being convicted in conscience, that they are in error, for fear of being
Schismatiks. For, Ch: Ma: said only; with whom therefore a reconciliation
according to Potters grounds is impossible and damnable: which is a clear
inference out of Potter, to show, that a man may be irreconciliable with
himself, and divided from himself, in regard of his own repugnant opinions,
and consequently a Schismatike from himself, if other conditions of Schism do
concur, as for Example, that he leave a revealed Doctrine by falling into
Heresy, or forsake the Communion of that true Church, of which he was once a
member, and so morally divide himself from himself.

114. Fourthly; Your speculation is directly against the holy Fathers. Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 153. N. 3.) cites S. Hierome upon these words (ad
Titum 3. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition,
avoyde) saying; Schism does separate from the Church, which you must say is
not true, because they who separate are Part of the Church, and they separate
not from themselves. And (N. 7.) the alleges S. Austine de gest: cum Emerit:
saying; Out of the Catholic Church one may have Faith, orders, and in sum,
all things except salvation. This you will control, and tell S. Austine, that
none can be out of the Catholic Church, because they themselves are Part of
that Church, and they cannot be divided from themselves. And N. 11. the same
Saint is alleged, saying (in Psalm: 30. Conc: 2.) The Prophets spoke more
obscurely of Christ, than of the Church: because as I think, they did for see
in spirit, that men were to make parties against the Church, and that they were
not to have so great strife concerning Christ: Therefore that was more plainly
fortold, and more openly prophesied, about which greater contentions were to
rise, that it might turn to the condemnation of them, who have seen it, and
yet gone forth. If your Doctrine were true, none can go forth of the Church,
because they cannot go from themselves. S. Fulgentius, cited N. 7. says (de
Fid: ad Pet:) Believe this steadfastly without doubting, that every Heretic or
Schismatike, baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
if before the end of his life, he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church,
what alms soever he give, yea, though he should shed his blood for the Name of
Christ, he cannot obtain salvation. But how can any be reconciled to the
Catholic Church, if he cannot be divided from her, Because he neither was,
nor could be divided from himself? And that you may be convinced by all kind
of witnesses, how could Calvin say, (Epist: 141.) we were forced to make a
separation from the whole world; since he could not separate from himself? We
must therefore say, that, whosoever divides himself from the Church by Schism,
separates from the whole Church, because by that separation, he cease to be a
member of the Church, and so the Church, which before was a Whole, of which he
then was a Part, remains in Herself, a Whole, but he no Part, by reason of
his voluntary Division from Her; which, for the effect of his being, or not
being, denominated a Part of the Church, is all one with corporal death:
unless you will covertly have men believe; that there can be no such
imaginable thing, as Schism from the whole, or universal Church, because the
party separating himself from the Church, is still a Part of Her, in regard he
is not divided from himself. And no wonder, if you make small account of
Schism, or Division from the Church, who think, and speak, so contemptibly of
the Church, as we have heard you (Page: 294. N. 93.) speak even of the
Catholic Church, in these words: What is it but a society, of men, whereof
every particular, and by consequence, the whole company is, or may be, guilty
of many sins daily committed against knowledge and conscience? Now I would
feign understand, why one error in faith, especially if not Fundamental,
should not consist with the holiness of this Church, as well as many and great
sins committed against knowledge and conscience? Which saying of yours has been
confuted above.

115. Object 11. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 196. N. 31.) says Luther
being but only one, opposed himself to All, as well subjects as superiors.
Against this, (Page: 291. N. 89.) you object, How can we say properly and
without straining, that he opposed himself to All, unless we could say also,
that All opposed themselves to him? And how can we say so, seeing the world can
witness, that so many thousands, nay millions, followed his standard as soon
as it was advanced?

116. Answer. This is no good dealing to impugn Charity Maintained, for that
very thing concerning Luther, for which, (Part. 1. Page 161 N. 9.) he cited
Luther himself, expressly saying (in Praefat: Operum suorum;) Primo solus eram
At the first, I was alone. Now will you say to your Patriark; Alone? And yet so
many thousands, nay millions, followed you. But surely, if so many millions
followed him, so very early, they made much more have, than they could make
good speed; in a matter, so uncouth, strange incredible, of so high concerment,
and so visibly repugnant to the doctrine, and practice of the whole universal
Church of God; and therefore they must needs be liable to that just censure of
Holy Scripture; He who soon believes, is light of heart; that is, they could
have no Act of Divine supernatural faith, which requires the particular
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and this cannot be given to produce, or foster,
such fooleryes, or imprudences. In the same manner, you take no notice of that
which Cha: Ma: in the same Section cites out of Calvin (Ep. 141.) we have been
forced to make a separation from the whole world; nor ask him how he could say
so without strayning; and how they made a separation from the whole world; nor
how they could say so, seeing so many millions followed them. But I beseech you
consider, that even Luther himself for his own opinions, and apostasy,
proceeded by degrees, so far, as that he pretended to submitt himself to the
Pope. And then, how could so many follow him, at the first instant, when
himself knew not what to follow? And at that time was he not alone; neither
Catholic; nor settled in any other doctrine? And seeing in those doubts, and
doctrines, some time must pass, before he himself was settled, or could
instill them to others, it is manifest, that he opposed himself to All
Churches then extant, and then we must by your own Rule say, that All opposed
themselves to him, that is, they believed at that time those Articles, and
embraced those rites, Liturgy, and public manner of worshipping God, which he
condemned: which is true, even of those who afterward were seduced by him; and
so it is most true, that in the beginning he opposed himself to All, and All
opposed themselves to him, as appears by that which he further says (Ep: ad
Argentinenses Anno 1525.) Christum a nobis primo promulgatum audemus gloriari.
We dare glory, that Christ was first diuulged by us. (Mark primo first) and
Conrad: Schlusselburg, in Theolog: Calvinist: L. 2. says; It is impudency to
say, that many learned men in Germany before Luther, did hold the doctrine of
the Gospel. The like sayings of others concerning Luther, may be seen in Ch:
Ma: (P. 1. P. 267.) It is therefore true, that he opposed himself to All, and
All to him.

117. Object 12. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. P. 202. N. 57.) to prove it
universally true, that there can be no just cause to forsake the Communion of
the visible Church of Christ, alleges S. Austine, saying (Ep: 48.) It is not
possible that any may have just cause to separate their Communion, from the
communion of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as if
they had separated themselves from the Communion of all Nations upon just
cause. Against this Argument, you object thus, (Page: 302. N. 101.) It is one
thing to separate from the Communion of the whole world, another to separate
from all the Communions in the world: One thing to divide from them who are
united among themselves. Another to divide from them, who are divided among
themselves, Now the Donatists separatet from the whole world of Christians,
united in one Communion, professing the same Faith, serving God after the same
manner, which was a very great Argument, that they could not have just cause to
leave them: according to that of Tertullian, Variasse debuerat error
Ecclesiarum, quod autem apud multos vnum est, non est erratum, sed traditum.
But Luther and his followers did not so. The world, I mean of Christians and
Catholics, was divided and subdivided long before he divided from it; and by
their divisions had much weakened their own Authority, and taken away from you
this plea of S. Austine, which stands upon no other foundation, but the unity
of the whole worlds Communion.

118. Answer. Ex ore tuo te judico. Your own Answer overthrowes your own
doctrine. Whosoever separates from the Communion of the whole world, in that
wherein the whole world agrees, separates from the Communion of the world,
because, to use your own words, this is to divide from them, who are united
among themselves, and is not; to divide from them who are divided among
themselves: But Luther divided himself from the whole world, in points, wherein
the whole world was united; therefore he divided himself from the Communion of
the whole world,. The Minor; that Luther divided himself from the whole world,
in Points wherein the whole world was united, that is (as Protestants falsely
affirm) in errors and corruptions, common to the whole then visible Church,
Charity Maintained (Page:.P. 61. N. 9. and P. 167. N. 12.) has proved out of
learned Protestants, as also we have seen even now by the confession of
Luther, Calvin, and Schlusselb: and the thing is clear of itself, and even
bragged of by Luther and his followers. Neither is there any speech more common
among Protestants, then that the whole visible Church was corrupted; and this
is the reason which you, and other Protestants yield in excuse of your leaving
the Communion of all Churches: otherwise there could have been no pretense of
a reformation. If, says the Protestant, Gregorius Milius in Argumenta
Confessione (Art: 7. de Ec:) There had been right believers which went before
Luther in his office, there had then been no need of a Lutheran Reformation.
Therefore the argument of ha: Ma, taken out of S. Austine, holds good and
strong, no less against Luther, who separated from all Churches in Points
wherein they were not divided, but united, than it was of force against the
Donatists. Yea further, it proves, that those supposed errors, which Luther
pretend to reform, were indeed Orthodox truths, even by the Rule which you
alledg out of Tertullian; variasse debuit error Ecclesiarum quod autem apud
multos vnum est, non est erratum, sed traditum. Seeing then, All Churches before
Luther agreed in those doctrines, which he undertook to reform, they cannot
be errors, being the same, not only, apud multos, among many, as Tertullian
speaks, but, apud omnes, among all Christian Churches in the world. And this
reason taken out of Tertullian, grows stronger in our case, even by your
saying, that, The world of Christians, and Catholics was divided and subdivided
long before Luther divided from it; because when so many, yea and all who
otherwise are divided and subdivided, yet agree unanimously in some Points,
that very consent, amongst men, of so very different dispositions, affections,
and opinions, is more then a very great Argument that Luther, and his
followers, could not have just cause to leave them, as you argue against the
Donatists. From whence it also follows, that you are in an error of
pernicious consequence, while you say (that Christians and Catholics by then
Divisions had much weakened their own authority, and taken away from us
Catholics this plea of S. Austine, which stands upon no other foundation, but
the unity of the whole worlds Communion) seeing this unity yieldes a stronger
argument in our present case, by the Divisions, and subdivisions, of which you
talk, and therefore does not takeaway, but strengthen our plea out of S.
Austine. How familiar is it with you to overthrow yourselfe, and plead for your
Adversary?

119. But this is not all. For, when S. Austine affirms against the Donatists;
It is not possible, that any man may have just cause to separate their
Communion, from the Communion of the whole world; he could not ground his
Asseveration, upon any accidental unity in Communion, which might be altered,
and which you say de facto is taken away, by Divisions, and subdivisions; but
upon a higher, and more universal, and stable Ground, that God has obliged
himself, never to permit, the Gates of Hell to privaile against his Church,
in such manner, as men not only might, but also should be obliged, to forsake
her Communion: Otherwise S. Austines Argument had been of no force, and only a
Petitio principii, as being grounded upon a Point, which was the thing in
Controversy, between Catholics, and Donatists, that is, (whether the Church at
that time was corrupted) and therefore S. Austine, and other Fathers, did rely
upon an universal, and constant ground, as I also observed, when I spoke of
succession of Bishops. And the words of S. Austine can signify no less. For, he
says not, There is not any just cause, to separate from the Communion of the
whole world, as if he spoke only of some present state and condition, or some
accidental, and changeable thing, but he says absolutely: It is not possible
that any may have just cause to separate their Communion from the Communion of
the whole world; whereas according to your gloss, it is not only possible, but
you say that de facto there was just and necessary cause, to separate from the
Communion of the whole world. This being so; I now infer demonstratively, that
seeing it is not possible, that any may have just cause, to separate from the
Communion of the whole world, It is not possible, that the Church of the whole
world, could fall into any error, or corruption; and that Luther was a
Schismatike, for leaving Her Communion, upon a pretense, so false, and
injurious, to God and his Church. Morover, this your answer does undoubtedly
cross your own conscience. For you do not only believe, that there were many
errors in the Church of S. Austires time, as the belief of the B. Trinity,
the Consubstantiality of the Son with his Father etc: but you also affirm
again and again, that S. Austine himself, and the whole Church with him,
held a great error, about the necessity of the Eucharist for children, wherein
though you do perniciously err, and wrong that Holy Father; yet in your
judgment, the Donatists could not be truly convinced of Schism, for leaving
that Church, which you hold, to have been in an error against Faith, in a
Point of very great moment: Or if the Donatists could not separate from the
Church of that time, though corrupted, what excuse could Luther have, for his
Division, from all Churches, of the whole world, upon pretense of errors?

120. And here, that the world may see with what spirit you began to swell, in
leaving the Catholic Church, I cannot omit to reflect, how irreligously in
this Page, and Section, you are bold with that great Doctor of Gods Church,
that Conqueror of Heretics, that Champion for Gods Grace, that Cherubin for
knowledge, and that Seraphin for most ardent love of God, glorious S. Austine.

121. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Cap: 5.) having cited the foresaid saying of
S. Austine, (Ep: 48.) It is not possible, that any may have just cause to
separate their Communion, from the Communion of the whole world; adds this
other sentence of the same Blessed Saint (de Bapt: Lib: 5. Cap: 1.) the most
manifest sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there was no cause of
separation. To which sayings of S. Austine you give this answer (Page: 301. N.
101.) The second of these sentences seems to me, to imply the contradiction of
the first. For, to say, that the sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there
is no cause of separation, implies to my understanding, that there may be a
cause of separation. Now in the first, he says plainly, that this is
impossible. But by your leave, there is no such thing employed in the words of
S. Austine, as your understanding, and will depraved, by pride, and Heresy,
move you to apprehend: And to facilitate your apprehension, it made for your
purpose to abbreviate, or rather falsify S. Austines words, which are these,
and are so cited by Charity Maintained, whom you had read: The most manifest
sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there was no cause of separation: As if
he had said, in direct contrariety to your understanding, and false gloss; it
is always true, that Schism is agrievous sin, but is most Manifest and
Eminent, when there could not be pretended any true, or probable, cause of
separation. I say, any true, or probable cause. For, you do not defend, but
betray the cause of S. Austine, and of the Catholics of his time, by saying,
the Donatists did not deny, but that the public service of God (...) at that
time unpolluted; whereas it is notorious, that they professed the whole Church,
beside their particular congregation in Afrike, to have perished, by reason
that Catholics did communicate with some men, who, as they falsely said, were
guilty of great crimes: and if they held the Church to have perished, how can
you say, that they pretended no cause for their separation? Nay, how could they
choose but allege for their excuse, a most convincing and necessary cause (if
it had been true) the total ruin, and destruction, of the Church; with which
therefore it was wholly impossible, for them to communicate? Neither can it be
denied, but that they calumniated Catholics, for communicating with
Caecilianus, whom they falsely accused of partaking with them, who were called
Traditors of the holy Bible to be burnt, though indeed not Caecilianus, but
they themselves, were guilty of that crime. And beside this cause (which you do
not deny) they objected to Catholics, that they erred, in believing that
Baptism might be co^ferred by Heretics, and that they received, without
competent penance, those who in time of persecution, had denied Christ, and,
says Potter (Page: 125.) out of S. Austine (Epist: 167.) That the efficacy of
Sacraments depends on the dignity of the Minister, that being no true Baptism,
which is not given by a just man.

122. As for that which you say the Donatists objected against Catholics, that
they set pictures upon their Altars (and you speak of the same matter P. 334.
N. 16.) you cannot but in your conscience know, that they meant such, as were
to be worshipped with idolatry, which was a huge falsehood and calumny, and
therefore S. Austine, (Epist: 48.) says, To how many did the reports of ill
tongues shut up the way to enter, (into the Catholic Church) who said, that we
put, I know not what, upon the Altar? And in this. I say again, you cannot but
speak against your own conscience, seeing you cite Optatus to prove your
assertion, and yet he (L. 3.) expressly speaks of a falls report, venturos esse
Paulum and Machariu^ (two Ambassadors sent into Africa by the pious Catholic
Emperor Constans) qui interessent Sacrificio, vt cum Altaria solemniter
aptarentur, proferreat ill^ Imaginem: (of the Emperor) quam primo in altari
ponerent* sic Sacrificium offerretur. Do you not know the Doctrine of all
Catholics, that Sacrisice is due only to God? I beseech the Reader to read
Baronius (Ann. 348. N. 33.34.) I wonder how you durst, at that time, when you
wrote, and published your Book, write, that setting pictures in Churches, and
upon Altars, may yield just cause, to separate from a Church: at that time, I
say, when pictures began to appear in English Protestant Churches, even in the
vniversityes: and still I have fresh occasions of wondering that ever your
Book could be approved. Do not Lutherans to this day, set up Images in their
Churches? The wickleffists, and Hussites, and diverse learned Protestants allow
of Images; yea and some defend even the worshipping of them, as may be seen in
the Triple Cord, (Chapt: 17. Sect: 4.) as also, learned Protestants confess,
that diverse Fathers defended the use and worship of Images; and that Xenaias
was condemned, for being the first, that stirred up war against Images, which
is witnessed by the Protestant Writer Functius. And Nicephorus (Hist: Eccles:
Lib: 16. Cap: 27.) says, Xenaias iste primus (o audacem animam, and os
impudens!) vocem illam evomuit; Christi, and eorum qui illi placuere, imagines
venerandas non esse. See of this whole matter Brierley (Tract: 1. Sect: 3.
Subdivis: 12. Page: 124.) And (Tract: 1. Sect: 8. Subdivis: 2. Page: 214.) And
Bellar: (Tom: 2. de Reliq: Sanct: Lib: 2. Cap: 6.) says, That, Xenaias was a
Persian, and a barbarous fellow, yea and a fugitive (...): and though he was
not baptized, yet faining himself a Christian, he crept into a Bishoppricke;
And de notis Eccles: (Lib: 4. Cap: 9.) demonstrates out of S. Epiphanius,
Lactantius, S. Basil. S. Greg: Nyssen: S. Paulinus, S. Athanas: and others,
That pictures were wont to be placed in Churches. And S. Austine himself (Lib:
1. de consensu Evangelistar: Cap: 10.) witnesses, that in his time, in many
places, Christ was to be seen painted between the Apostles S. Peter, and S.
Paul: And (Lib: 22. cont: Faust: Cap: 73.) he says the same of the History of
Abraham going about to sacrifice his Son. Now I beseech you tell me, whether
use of Images in Churches, be a sufficient cause of a Division from the Church,
or no? If it be, then the Donatists might have reason to depart from the
Church, seeing pictures were set up both in, and before S. Austines time, and
while (to use your own words) the whole world of Christians was united in one
Communion, professing the same Faith, serving God after the same manner. If it
were not; why do you in this place object to us, the use of Pictures, and say,
that S. Austine to avoid the objection of the Donatists (that Catholics set
Pictures upon the Altar) answered only, by denying that to be true which they
objected, as if they might have been excused from Schism, if indeed Pictures
had been set upon the Altar? And must Protestants, depart from the Communion,
of all those their Brethren, who at this day defend the lawfullness, and
practice the setting up of Images in Churches? In the mean time, they who
impugn the use and worsh ip of Images, may consider in Xenaias, what
Progenitors they have. And here to show, how even by the light of natural
reason, the respect, or irreverence which is done to the Image, redounds to
the Prototypon, I cannot omit to set down the words of Nazarius (in panegir:
Constantini) in detestation of the fact of Maxentius, in defacing and throwing
down the Images of Constantine: Ecce enim (proh dolor! verba vix suppetunt)
venerandarum Imaginum acerba dejectio, and divini vultus litura deformis. O
manus impiae! o truces oculi! ita non calligastis? In quo lumen mundi
obsucrabatis, meritas ipsi poenas non imbibistis? Nihil profecto gravius, nihil
miserius Roma doluisti. What then shall we say, of Iconoclasts, or
Image-breakers, or Image-despisers, not of mortal men, as Constantine was
then, but of the Savior of the world; his Blessed Mother; and Saints, now
glorious in Heaven? O England, reflect, and repent!

123. But not in this place only, you are impudently bold with glorious S.
Austine. For, (Page: 259. N. 20.) you say; All that S. Austine says is not
true. And: I believe heat of disputation against the Donatists, and a desire to
^^er-confute them, transported him so far, is to urge against them more than
was necessary, and perhaps more than was true. But it is no wonder, if
notorious Schismatiks, as you are willingly take occasion, to defend such
famous Schismatikes, as the Donatists were, and to do it covertly and ex
obliquo, when you are ashamed to unmask yourselfe, and proclaim it directly
and openly. And this your desperate evasion declares sufficiently, that S.
Austine was clearly with us, in that place which Charity Maintained (Part: 1.
Page: 164.) cited out of him: as also in that other place, which he cited (Page:
165.) whereof you say in your same (Page: 259. N. 20.) I cannot but wonder very
much why he (S. Austine) should think it absurd for any man to say, There are
sheep which he knows not, but God knows, and no less at you for obtruding
this sentence upon us, as pertinent proof of the Churches Visibility. And
(Page: 119. N. 163.) you say; To S. Austine in heat of disputation against the
Donatists, and ransacking all places for Arguments against them, we oppose S.
Austine out of this heat, delivering the Doctrine of Christianity calmely and
moderatly: And (Page: 168. N. 64.) S. Austine when he was out of the heat of
disputation, confesses etc. If any ask, why Socinians are so averse from S.
Austine; I answer; because in his works, he does so often, so zealously, and
so learnedly, defend the Uisibility, Perpetuity, Amplitude, Infallibility, and
Authority of Gods Church, and with Arguments, so direct against all our modern
Heretics, and Socinians in particular, as it is impossible, one can be a
friend to that holy Doctor of Gods Church, and an enemy to the Church of Rome.
A consideration of great comfort, that we defend the same cause, and suffer
with a Person, so holy and learned, as Protestants, when their own cause is
not touched, are wont to prefer him before all other Ancient Fathers.

124. Object: 13. Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap 3. N. 20. Page: 107.)
proves, That, seeing Protestants grant, that the Church cannot err in Points
necessary to salvation, any wise man will infer, that it behooves all, who
have care of their souls, not to forsake her in any one Point. First because
though she were supposed to err, yet the error could not be Fundamental, nor
destructive of Faith, and salvation. Neither can they be accused of any least
imprudence in erring (if it were possible) with the universal Church. 2. Since
she is, under pain of eternal damnation, to be believed in some things,
wherein consessedly she is endued with infallibility; I cannot in wisdom
suspect her credit in matters of less moment. 3. Since we are obliged, not to
forsake the Church in Fundamental Points, and that there is no Rule to know
precisely, what, and how many those Fundamental Points be, I cannot without
hazard of my soul, leave her in any one Point; least perhaps that Prove to be
Fundamental, and necessary to salvation. 4. That Visible Church, even that
Church, which confessedly cannot err in Points Fundamental, does without
distinction, propound all her desinitions concerning matters of Faith, to be
believed under Anathemas, or Curses, holding it as a Point necessary to
salvation, that we believe she cannot err: wherein if she speak true, then to
deny any one Point in particular, which she defines, or to affirm in
general, that she may err, puts a man in state of damnation: whereas to
believe her in sch Points as are not necessary to salvation, cannot endanger
our salvation; as likewise to remain in her communion, can bring no great
harm, because she cannot maintain any damnable error, or practice; but to be
divided from her (she being Christ's Catholic Church) is most certainly
damnable. 5. The true Church, being in lawful, and certain possession of
Superiority, and Power to command, and require obedience, from all Christians
in some things; I cannot without grievous sin, withdraw my obedience in any
one, unless I know evidently, that the thing commanded, comes not within the
compass of those things, to which her Power extends. And who can better
inform me, how far Gods Church can proceed, then Gods Church herself? Or to
what Doctor can the children, and Scholars with greater reason, and security,
fly for direction, than to the Mother and appointed Teacher of all Christians?
In following her, I shall sooner be excused, than in cleaving to any particular
Sect, or Person, or applying Scriptures, against Her Doctrine, or
interpretation. 6. The fearful examples of innumerable Persons, who forsaking
the Church upon pretense of her errors, have failed, even in Fundamental
Points, and suffered shipwreck of their salvation, ought to deterr all
Christians from opposing her in any Doctrine, or practice: As (to omit other
both ancient and modern heresies) we see, that diverse chief Protestants,
pretending to reform the corruptions of the Church, are come to affirm, that
for many Ages, she erred to death, and wholly perished; which Dr. Potter cannot
deny to be a Fundamental error, against that Article of our Creed, I believe
the Catholic Church, as he affirms it of the Donatists, because they
confined the universal Church, within Africa, or some other small tract of
soil; Least therefore I may fall into some Fundamental error, it is most safe
for me, to believe all the decrees of the Church, which cannot err
Fundamentally; especially if we add; that, according to the Doctrine of
Catholic Divines, One error in Faith, whether it be for the matter itself,
great, or small, destroys Faith; and consequently to accuse the Church of any
one error, is to affirm, that she lost all Faith; and erred damnably: which
very saying is damnable, because it leaves Christ no Visible Church on earth.

125. These are the reasons of Charity Maintained in the said (N. 20.) which I
wish you had set down, as you found them; that the Reader might have judged,
how much they ought to weigh, with every one, who has a serious care to save
his soul. Sure I am, they are grown stronger, by your Objections, as will
appear to any indifferent Reader.

126. Your chiefest, and, as I may call it, Fundamental Answer; is, That I
beg the Question, in supposing that any Church of one denomination is
infallible in Fundamental Points, and that Protestants, when they say the
Church is infallible in fundamental Points, understand only, That there shall
be always a Church, to the very being whereof it is repugnant that it should
err in Fundamentalls. But I have showed hertofore, that you wrong even your
pretended Brethren the Protestants, in fastening on them, so ridiculous an
interpretation of the Churches infallibility in Fundamental Points; and
therefore I must still insist upon that ground, in the sense which Protestants
grant, and which I have proved to be true. Which truth being supposed,
yourselfe are forced to favor us, so far, as to say (Page: 163. N. 55.) We
never annexed this Privilege (of not erring in Fundamentalls) to any one
Church of any one Denomination, as the Greek or the Roman Church: which if we
had done, and set up some settled, certain Society of Christians,
distinguishable from all others by adhering to such a Bishop for our guide in
Fundamentalls, then indeed, and then only, might you with some color, though
with no certainty have concluded, that we could not in wisdom, forsake this
Church in any Point, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary Point. And in the
next (N. 56.) you say; First we confess no such thing, thas the Church of Rome
was then this Church, (unerring in Fundamentalls when Luther arose) but only a
Part of it. Secondly, that if by adhering to the Church, we could have been
thus far secured, this argument had some show of Reason. And (P: 150. N. 39.)
If the Church were an infallible director in Fundamental: the^ must we not
only learn Fundame^talls of her, but also learn of her, what is Fundamental,
and take all for Fundamental, which she delivers to be such. In the
performance whereof, if I knew any one Church to he Infallible, I would quickly
be of that Church. Eternally be Gods Infinite Goodness blessed, who has made
us Catholics members of that infallible Church! But in the mean time, you
grant as much, as will serve, to overthrow all your own Arguments, in granting
that if the Church be infallible in Fundamental Points, we have all reason not
to forsake Her: And you give that very Reason which is alleged by Charity
Maintained to wit, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary point; so that you
make good both his Assertion, and reason thereof; and further you are ready to
seal your Doctrine with your practice, by being quickly of that Church. Here
I beseech you remember your own words (Page: 280. N. 95.) May not a man of
judgment continue in the Communion of a Church confessedly corrupted, as well
as in a Church supposed to be corrupted? And then; suppose such a Church should
err in Points not Fundamental, what would you do? The same reason (of not
erring in Fundamentalls) for which you would quickly join yourselfe to her,
would also oblige you nor to forsake her; and then you must find some Answer to
all those Objections, which you make against the Reasons of Charity Maintained,
alleged by him to prove, that if once I believe the Church to be infallible in
Fundamentalls, I cannot in wisdom forsake her in any Point, or part from her
Communion. If you think it impossible, not to sorsake her Communion, in case
she fall into Errors not fundamental, and yet believe that you must not
forsake her, (which is a plain Contradiction) there remains only this true,
and solid remedy, against such an inextricable perplexity; that you believe her
to be infallible in all Points, be they Fundamental, or not Fundame^tall;
which is a certain Truth, and follows from the very Principles of
Protestants, (that the Church cannot err in Fundamentalls) if they understand
themselves, though you be loath to grant this so necessary a Truth. Yea my
inference (that you must believe the Church to be infallible in all Points,
even not Fundamental, if you believe her to be infallible in Fundamentalls,)
is your own Assertion (P. 148. N. 36.) Where you expressly grant, that, unless
the Church were infallible in all things, we could not rationally believe her
for her own sake, and upon her own word and Authority in any thing. For, an
Authority subject to error, can be no firm or stable foundation of my belief
in any thing: And if it were in any thing, then this Authority being one and
the same in all proposalls, I should have the same reason to believe all, that
I have to believe one; and therefore must either do unreasonably, in believing
any one thing upon the sole warrant of this Authority, or unreasonably, in not
believing all things equally warranted.

127. You say, the Church of Rome was only a Part of the Church unerring in
Fundamentalls before Luther arose. But I would know, what other Church, could
be such an unerring Church, except the Roman, and such as agreed with her
against the Noveltyes which Luther began to preach. Certainly there was none
such; and therefore since Protestants profess, that the universal Church is
infallible, we must say, it was the Roman, together with such as were united
in her Communion. This Ground being laid, and your maine Objection being
retorted against your self, let us now examine in particular your other
Objections.

128. You ask (Page: 164. N. 56.) Had it not been a damnable sin, to ^rofess
errors, though the errors in themselves were not d^mnable? Then, (N. 57.) You
go about to prove, that it is impossible to adhere to the Roman Church in all
things, ha^^ng no other ground for it, but because she is infallible in some
things, that is, in Fundamentalls, because, in reason, no Conclusion can be
larger than the Principles on which it is be founded. And therefore if I
consider what I do, and be persuaded, that your infallibility, is but limited,
and particular, and partial, my adherence upon this ground, cannot possibly be
Absolute and universal, and total. This you confirm with a Dialogue, which
adds nothing to the reason, which now I have cited in your own words, save
only, that it proves at large, that which we chiefly desired to be granted:
That, if the Church be believed to be infallible in Fundamental Articles, as
Protestants say she is, we must believe her to be infallible in all Points. In
the end of this Dialogue you say, It may be very great imprudence, to err with
the Church, if the Question be, whether we should err with the present Church,
or hold true with God Almighty.

128. In the (N. 60.) You say; Particular Counsels have been liberal of their
Anathemas, which yet were never conceaved infallible. And (N. 61.) For, the
visible Churches holding it a Point necessary to salvation, that we believe she
cannot err, you know no such tenet, And (N. 62.) God (in Scripture) can better
inform us, what are the Limits of the Churches Power, then the Church
herself. And (N. 63.) That some forsaking the Church of Rome, have forsake
Fundamental Truths, was not because they forsook the Church of Rome; for else
all that have forsaken that Church, should have done so; which we (Protestants)
say they have not; but because they went too far from her. It is true, (say you
in the name of Protestants) if we said, there were no danger, in being of the
Roman Church, and there were danger in leaving it, it were madness to leave it.
But we protest, and proclaim the contrary. And (N. 64.) You say; It was no
error in the Donatists, that they held it possible, that the Church from a
larger extent might be contracted to a lesser; nor that they held it possible
to be reduced to Africa. But their error was, that they held de fact^, this
was done when they had no just ground or reason to do so, and so upon a vain
pretense, separated themselves from the Communion of all other parts of the
Church: And that they required it as a necessary condition to make a man a
member of the Church, that he should be of their Communion, and divide himself
from all other Communions from which they were divided: Which was a condition
both unnecessary and unlawful to be required, and directly opposite to the
Churche^ Catholicisme. You add morover, that, Charity Maintained neither had
named those Protestants who held the Church to have perished for many Ages;
neither has proved, but only affirmed it to be a Fundamental error, to hold,
that the Church militant may possibly be driven out of the world, and abolished
for a time from the face of the earth. And (N. 65.) You say; To accuse the
Church of some error in Faith, is not to say she lost all Faith: but he which
is an Heretic, in one Article, may have true Faith of other Articles. These be
your objections, which being diverse, and of different natures, the Reader may
not wonder, if I be somewhat long in answering them. Therefore, I

129. Answer: In this Question; (whether it be not wisdom, and necessary not
to forsake the Church in any one Point, if she be supposed infallible in
Fundamental Points;) we may either speak, First; of things as they are in
themselves; or, secondly; according to the grounds of Protestants, or ad
hominem; or thirdly; what we may, or ought to infer upon some false, and
impossible supposition (as this is, that the Church may err in Points not
fundamental,) differently, from an inference, proceeding from a suppofition of
a truth: or fourthly; what may or ought to be chosen, at least as minus malum,
when there intervenes a joint, and inevitable, pressure of two, or more evils.
This Advertisment premised.

130. I answer to your demand (whether it had not been a damnable sin to
profess errors, though in themselves not damnable?) that a part rei, and per
se loquendo, it is damnable to profess any least known error against Faith:
and for that very cause, it is impossible the Church should fall into any
error at all: But that I have proved already, that according to the Grounds
and words of Protestants, it is not damnable to do so, if the error be nor
opposite to some Fundamental Truth; and consequently, that they ought in all
Reason, to adhere to the Church, acknowledged to be Infallible in Fundamental
Points, rather than forsake her communion, for Points not necessary to
salvation; especially with danger of forsaking her in some necessary Point. Or
if you say; It is Fundamental to the Faith of a Christian to believe
whatsoever is sufficiently propounded, as revealed by God, as Dr. Potter
grants, and the thingh it self is evidently true; then you must either
affirm, that the Church did not err in any Point of Faith, or else that she
erred Fundamentally, and ceased to be a Church, which is against your present
supposition, and against Potter, who (P. 126.) teaches that to say the church
remained only in the part of Donatus, was an error in the matter and nature of
it properly heretical. And much worse must it be, to say, she remained no
where; and so while you pretend to fly the fained errors of the Church, you
fall into a formal and proper heresy.

131. If we consider what may be inferred, not absolutely, but upon some
impossible supposition; That the Church erres in Points of Faith not
Fundamental; we must infer, that she may be forsaken, because she erres in
matters of Faith; and yet may not be forsaken, because as we have seen out of
the Holy Fathers, it is never lawful to forsake the Church. What then is to be
concluded, but that (as I have said hertofore) she cannot err, and therefore
cannot be forsaken upon any terms? Divines teach, that at least per se
loquendo, non potest dari perplexitas, that is, there cannot happen a case
wherein a man, whatsoever he does, is sure to commit some sinful thing,
(because it is a first principle in nature, that nothing is is more in our
freedom, than to sin, or not to sin.) And yet this cause of perplexity must
perpetually happen; if the Church could err, that is, one must judge that she
were to be forsaken, and not to be forsaken, and so remain miserably
perplexed. We must therefore, for avoiding this absurdity, conclude, that the
Church cannot err in any matter of Faith.

132. But yet (to come to the last part of my Advertisement) If we persist in
the supposition; That one is persuaded, the Church does err, must he therefore
forsake her communion, as Luther and his fellows did? In no case. For then we
must call to mind, the Doctrine of Divines, in case of perplexity: that if one
be in a vincible, or culpable error, for one of the contradictory parts, it is
in his power, and he is obliged, to depose that error; which if he do not, he
shall not be excused from sin, notwithstanding his perplexity, and seeming
excuse of a necessity to sin whatsoever he does. If we suppose his error to be
invincible; for example, he believes the Church may not in any case be
forsaken, and yet that she erres, and that he should sin, in pro-, fessing
those supposed errors; this supposition, I say, being once made (I dispute not
whether such a perplexity be possible in this particular matter, or no) then
enters the Doctrine of all Divines, that he is obliged to embrace the lesser
evil, and to follow the general Axiom, exduobus malis, minus est eligendum:
as we see, nature exposes the arm to defend the head: And in dubijs pars
tutior est eligenda. And therefore your saying (Page: 283. N. 72.) We must not do
evil to avoid evil, taken universally, and in all cases, is manifestly
false, against the light of Reason; and your allegation of Scripture (Page: 168.
N. 63.) you must not do evil that good may come thereon, is not to the purpose.
For, we speak not of attaining, a voluntary greater good, but of avoiding a
greater evil, necessary to be committed, unless a lesser evil be embraced.
This then being certain, that in case of perplexity, one is obliged to embrace
the lesser evil, the Question may remain, whether by doing so, he is excused
from all fault, or only from being guilty of that greater sin, which he
avoides, by choosing the lesser. Certain it is, that he committs not so
grievous a sin, as if he had betaken himself to the other part. But diverse
great Divines, (as Amicus: Tom: 3. D. 15. Sect: 3. N. 43. Tho: Sanch: Tom: 1.
in Decalog: Cap: 11. N. 14. and alij,) are of opinion, that he commits no sin
at all; because in that case of invincible Perplexity, it is not in his power
to avoid that which otherwise were a sin, and can be none in him, because
every sin essentially requires freedom of will. He harh, say they, freedom
to choose either of those two parts, taken as it were materially, or considered
per modum naturae, but not formally, and morally, so to choose them, as to
avoid sin absolutely, seeing he must of necessity choose one side; and therefore
by embracing the lesser evil, he does as much, as lies in his power to do for
avoiding sin, and consequently, is not culpable, or blameworthy. Now according
to these Doctrines; whosoever leaves the Church upon pretense of errors not
Fundamental, cannot be excused from Schism, because to profess such errors,
had been either a less sin, than to leave the Church, and so, in the opinion
of all Divines, he was obliged to embrace that less evil, and not leave the
Church; or it had been no sin at all, in the opinion of diverse good Divines,
and then much less can he be excused for leaving the Church, without any
necessity at all. Yea, seeing this last opinion is probable, he might prudently
conform his conscience to it, and by that means free himself, from, not only
sin, but also from danger thereof, by following a probable, and prudent
dictamen, that to profess errors not Fundamental, were no sin at all, in that
case, and upon that supposition, of insuperable perplexity. Nay, I say more,
that if this latter opinion of Divines be true, a man shall not sin, though he
be of a contrary mind, and think in his conscience, that he sins by choosing
the lesser evil, though not so grievously, as he had done by adhering to the
other part. My reason is; because this latter opinion, is grounded upon the
impossibility, which the perplexed person has to avoid sin, and one cannot
sin, in doing that, which he cannot avoid, though by an erroneous conscience
he judge that he sins; as if one cannot hear Mass upon a holy day; or kills a
man, with a weapon violently put into his hand, and with his hand by like
violence carried to that fact: in those, or the like cases, no sin is
committed, though the parties should think they sin; And this is true, though
that part, or less ill which is embraced, be intrinsece malum, evil of it
self, or of its nature, (which is well to be observed, for our case, of
professing known errors, which of it self is evil) because no sin, of any
kind, can be committed, when it is impossible to avoid it. According to which
considerations, to elect the profession of errors, rather then the desertion
of the Church, is not only secure, but certain, and easy, and therefore
necessary. Thus your main Objection is turned against your self. And then it
is further inferred; that if it either be no sin, or at least a less offense,
to profess errors, than to forsake the Church; she may justly exact, and
injoyne under Censures, that, to which every one is obliged by the Law of God,
notwithstanding any pretense or supposition of errors. For, when the Holy
Fathers, unanimously agree, that it is not possible, there can be any just
cause to forsake the Church, they must suppose, that either she cannot fall
into any error, which is most true, (and indeed they suppose it; otherwise
there could be no difference between the universal, and a particular Church,
which may fall into error, and so be forsaken) or else you must grant, that
they did not conceive any eriours could excuse the leaving her Communion. And
this vnanin^ous consent alone were sufficient for Christians to believe, that
the profession of errors cannot be so great an evil, as separation from the
Church, is. Nevertheless, reason it self, grounded in principles of Faith,
convinces the same. For, in true Divinity, it is Fundamental to the Faith of
a Christian, not to disbelieue any one point, sufficiently proposed as revealed
by God, as Potter expressly grants; and you say further, that it is to give God
the ly: and therefore to profess, as a point of Faith, any thing contrary to the
belief of the Church, is to say she erred fundamentally, and fell into
infidelity, as Potter says, every one does who denies a Divine Truth
sufficiently proposed, and consequently to profess, that the Church erred, is
to say, that she perished, which Potter says, is, in the matter and nature of
it, properly heretical; and so, Whosoever says the Church erred, he himself,
by that very saying, professes indeed a damnable heresy, which is worse, than
to profess an error contrary only to a Truth supposed to be not Fundamental,
nor necessary: and so by your own confessions (though I grant your confessions
contradict yourself) we prove our intent.

123. Besides, it is no less evident, that it is essentially and Fundamentally
evil, to disbelieue a truth known to be witnessed by God, than to profess
externally some point, which one believes not to be true: yea that first, must
be the ground, for which you say, it is damnable, to profess against ones
conscience, an error repugnant to Divine Revelation. For, if it be not
damnable to deny interiourly such a truth, much less can it be damnable to
profess exteriourly only, a denial of that which one believes to be revealed
by God. For, it is to be considered, that we speak not of any internal
error, but only of the external profession of an error, not Fundamental,
which alone is not so great a sin, as internal Heresy, nor so vast a
Mischief, as the inconvenience of Schism is, which is destructive of the
whole Church, essentially including communion in profession of one Faith,
Liturgy etc. and necessarily brings with it a deluge of scandal,
irreligiosity, contempt, disobedience, and in one word, vniversitatem malorum,
and therefore S. Thomas teaches (2.2. Quest: 29. Art: 2. ad 3.) that amongst
sins against our neighbor, Schism is the most grievous: because it is against
the spiritual good of the multitude or community: and as Cha: Ma: says (Part:
1. Page: 156. N. 6.) As there is as great difference between the crime of
rebellion, or sedition, and debates among private men, as there is inequality
betwixt one man, and a whole kingdom, or Common wealth; so in the Church,
Schism is as much more grievous than sedition in a Kingdom or Common wealth,
as the spiritual good of souls surpasses the Civil and political weal. See
here the sayings of the Holy Fathers in Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 157.
N. 70.) of the grievousness of Schism. All which is confirmed by what we said
even now, that the profession of an error, in our case, cannot so much as hurt
a private person, who constituted in an invincible perplexity, does not sin by
embracing the less evil, in the opinion of great Divines, with whose Doctrine
whosoever conformes his Conscience, is certain not to sin, whatsoever the
thing be in it self.

134. Morover, it is evident both in reason, and by experience, that Schism
always brings with it, that very thing which you pretend to be so very
inconvenient, and damnable, that is, a profession of errors, at least not
Fundamental, by multiplying diversity of Sects, and opinions, as we see it
happens among Protestants, some of who^ must be in an error. And S. Hierome
says truly upon those words of the Apostle (which some casting of, have
suffered ship wrack in their Faith) though Schism in the beginning may in some
sort be understood different from heresy, yet there is no Schism which does
not feign some Heresy to it self, that so it may seem to have departed from
the Church upon good reason. And is it not worse, both to believe and profess
culpable errors, than to believe aright, and fail only in the outward
profession of that belief? The former makes one a formal complete Heretic,
both in conscience, and judgment of the Church: the latter is indeed no
Heretic, but only appears so to be, neither is he subject to the punishment
of Heretics. The former offends in two respects; in the belief of an error,
and profession of it. The latter, only in profession, which alone, as I said,
cannot be so sinful as the error of Heresy it self; both because the
profession is sinful, only by reason of the error professed; as also, because
by heresy one doubts, or denies some truth revealed by God, which is immediately
against Gods supreme Uerity and veracity, and so is against an Object of a
Theological Virtue; as S. Thomas says (2.2 Quest: 39. A: ^. c.) Infidelitas
est peccatum contra ipsum Deum, secundum quod in se est veritas prima, cui
fides innititur: But to profess a known error, is only against the precept of
professing ones Faith, which are distinct things; and therefore, as I said, a
culpable error is worse, than the only profession of an error. If you think,
that such an external profession, is worse than an internal error, because
that is against ones conscience; you are much mistaken; it being certain, that
not every sin of dissimulation, against ones conscience, is greater than any
other sin; as is clear of it self, to every Divine, or Philosopher: yea the
external sinful profession of an error, flows from the Heresy itself, which
ordinarily is a worse root, than humane fear, hope, or the like, from which
an external false profession, or dissimulation, is wont to proceed, and
therefore this is less damnable, than that, even though it were a finne, and
were not excused by the supposed invincible perplexity, as we have Showed it
may be. S. Thomas (2.2. Quest: 39. Art: 2. in corpore) teaches, that Infidelity
ex suo genere is a greater sin than Schism, yet adds this exception, It may
happen that some Schismatike may commit a greater sin, than some infidel:
either by reason of greater contempt, or the greater danger which he brings, or
for some like thing. If this Angelical Doctor S. Thomas say this, comparing
Schism with true infidelity, much more may we affirm it, if we consider true
Schism on the one side, and on the other, only a false appearance, or mere
external profession of error, or heresy. As for those limitations of S.
Thomas, they may seem to be prophecyes, if we apply them to Luther and his
fellows, in regard of the contempt, which they showed of all Prelates, and the
whole Church; of the, not only danger, but real, and unspeakable mischiefs,
which their Schism did bring; and of moreand greater inconveniences, than
could have been believed or imagined, if the world did not see, and lament
them. So as we may well speak to them in the words of Ch: Ma (P. 1. P. 187. N.
23.) What excuse can you feign to yourselves, who for Points not necessary to
salvation, have been occasions, causes, and authors of so many mischiefs, as
could not but vnavoidably accompany so huge a breach, in Kingdoms, in
Commonwealths, in private persons, in public Magistrates, in Body, in soul,
in goods, in life, in Church, in the state, by Schisms, by war, by famine, by
plague, by blood shedd, by all sorts of imaginable calamityes upon the whole
face of the Earth, wherein, as in a mapp of Desolation, the heaviness of your
crime appears, under which the world does pant?

135. Some learned Divines speaking of invincible Perplexity, give this
Doctrine; that, if I must either committ a venial sin (in a matter which of it
self, and per se loquendo, is only venial, for example, an officiously) or
expose my self to danger of a mortal sin, I am obliged to choose the lesser
evil (which in opinion of great Divines, were in that case no sin at all)
rather than put my self in danger of the greater evil, a deadly sin. O into
how certain danger, does a Schismaticke precipitate himself, (beside the sin
of Schism) of committing innumerable deadly sins, and of being cause, that
innumerable other persons fall into the like offenses, against God, and his
neighbor! And therefore men are obliged, rather to undergo a less evil, than
to make themselves, obnoxious, to infinitely greater mischiefs, and rather to
profess exteriourly an error, not distructiue of salvation, than to forsake
the Communion of Gods Church, within which, God has confined Remission of
sins, and Salvation. Consider what we have cited out of your own words (Page:
163. N. 56.) If by adhering to the Church, we could have been thus far secured,
(not to err in Fundamentalls) this Argument (that in wisdom we must forsake
the Church in nothing, least we should forsake her in some thing necessary) had
some show of reason; and what you say (N. 55.) We never annexed this Privilege
(of not erring in Fundamentalls) to any one Church of any one denomination:
Which if we had done, and set up some settled certain society of Christians for
our Guide in Fundamentalls, then indeed, and then only, might you with some
color, though with no certainty, have concluded, that we could not in wisdom,
forsake this Church in any Point, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary
Point. In these words you grant, that if any Church of one denomination, were
known to be infallible in all Fundamental Points, we might conclude, though
not certainly, yet probably, that you could not in wisdom forsake her in any
Point, for fear of forsaking her in a necessary Point. If the inference of
Charity Maintained be probable by your confession (upon that supposition of
infallibility in some determinate Church, for Fundamental Points) then you
must grant, that all objections to the contrary may be answered, which I pray
you do; and tell us whether in that case it should be damnable to profess any
known error? If it be damnable; then you must forsake the Church in such
Points; which yet you say, in wisdom one could not do: If it should not be
damnable; you must show how it was not so: and whatsoever you allege for the
defense of professing known errors, and adhering to the Church, even in that
case, will serve for defense of us, and a confutation of your own objections
against us. Besides you say, Charity Maintained might have some color and
reason in the case proposed (of some determinate Churches infallibility in
Fundamentalls) to conclude, that we could not in wisdom forsake such a Church
in any Point, for, fear of forsaking her in a necessary Point. From which
confession I infer; first that if in wisdom one ought not forsake in any
Point a Church infallible in fundamentalls, for fear of forsaking her in a
necessary Point, much more they ought to conform themselves to her in
external profesion; and consequently, that it is a greater evil to forsake
her communion, than to profess externally some vnfundamentall error; and,
Secondly that for fear of incurring a greater evil, that is (in our case) a
Fundamental error, one may and ought to choose the less; which is the thing I
have endeavored to prove, and which utterly evacuates the ground for which you
pretend to excuse Luther, and his followets. Morover; If you mean, that one is
not to profess any error against his Conscience, but that also he ought his
submitt to judgment in all Points to a Church lieved to be infallible in
Fundamentalls, then you overthrow your own ground and words (N. 57.) that it
is impossible to adhere to the Roman Church in all things having no other
ground for it, but because she is infallible in some things, that is, in
Fundamentalls; because in reason, no Conclusion can be larger than the
Principles on which it is founded. And therefore if I consider what I do, and
be persuaded, that your Infallibility is but limited, and particular, and
partial, my adherence upon this ground, cannot possible be Absolute, and
universal, and Total. Thirdly; upon this your own grant, it follows
clearly, that Luther could not in wisdom forsake all Churches, because
Protestants grant that all Churches, or the whole Church, cannot err in
Fundamental Points, and therefore in wisdom could not be forsaken in any thing
at all; not that your first Protestants can be excused from Schism in doing
so. But again, if they were obliged to submitt their judgment to the Church,
and had done so (as indeed they ought to have done) their professing a Faith
contrary to that of the Church, as Luther did had been also to profess an
error contrary to their own conscience: and so whatsoever you say, you are
confuted by your own grounds which appears more by these your express words
(Page: 280. N. 95.) What man of judgment will think it any disparagement to his
judgment to prefer a field not perfectly weeded before a field that is quite
over-runne with weeds and thorns? And therefore though Protestants have some
Errors, yet seeing they are not so great as yours; he that concei^es it any
disparagement to his judgment to change your Communion for theirs, though
confessed to have some corruptions, it may well be presumed that he has but
little judgment. Do not these words declare your opinion, that in case of
perplexity, when of two Evils one must be chosen, it is judgment, and
consequently no sin, to make choice of the less? This is the very thing which
I have alleged out of Divines, and which obliges you to answer your own
argument against Charity maintained. This your chiefest objection being
answered, confuted, and retorted, let us examine the rest.

136. You say (Page: 164. N. 57.) It is impossible to adhere to the Roman Church
m^ll things, having no other ground for it: but because she is infallible in
some things, that is, in Fondamentalls.

137. Answer. Although indeed, if once we suppose that we cannot know what
Points are Fundamental, it be an evident consequence, that we can never
believe the Church in some things, unless, we believe her in all, and so your
objection is of no force; yet Charity Maintained never said, that one may
adhere to the Church in all things, precisely and formally, because she is
infallible in some things; which in speculation and good Logic, had been like
to this Argument: Man's understanding is infallible in some things, for example,
in the most universal known principles, as, that two contradictoryes cannot
be true: or that every whole is greater than a part thereof, and the like:
Therefore I am to believe, man's understanding to be infallible in all things.
But he spoke morally, and pro subjecta materia, and therefore said expressly;
seeing Protestants grant the Church to be infallible in Points necessary to
salvation, any wise man will infer, that it behooves all, who have care of
their souls, not to forsake her. Where you see; he speaks of what were to be
done in wisedowne, and for the safety of ones soul, and considers tkings (as
in this subject they ought to be considered) in a moral, not in a Logical; or
Metaphisicall way, That the Church being confessedly infallible, in all
necessary Points, men must consider well, how they leave her in any point,
least perhaps, either that point wherein they forsake her, be a Fundamental
point, or else least they may fall into some Fundamental error, after they
have left her; as also, that seeing they rely on her Authority in Fundamental
Articles, it is no wisdom to suspect her credit in matters of less moment;
especially considering the many examples of those, who de facto forsaking the
Church, have fallen into damnable, and Fundamental Heresies: and in a word;
seeing there may be great danger in leaving the Church, and damnation cannot be
feared by adhering to her, which I am sure neither does, nor can err in Points
necessary to salvation, there may be great harm in leaving, but no hurt in
fellowing Her, in all that she proposes, as matter of Faith: which is your own
grant, as we have seen above, in these words (Page: 168. N. 63.) It is true if
we said, there were no danger in being of the Roman Church, and there were
danger in leaving it, it were madness to persuade any man to leave it. Now that
the Roman Church does not err in Fundamental or necessary Points, I will
prove herafter out of your own words, out of Potter, and other Protestants;
and therefore it was madness to persuade men to leave Her.

138. These, and the like moral, and prudentiall Arguments, Charity Maintained
urged: which truly in a matter concerning Eternity, ought to move every one;
and more, than mere Metaphysicall speculations. And that this discourse of
Charity Maintained was very reasonable, yourselfe make good in your words which
I have cited, that if there were set up some settled society of Christians, for
our guide in Fundamentalls, then, Charity Maintained might with some color,
and show of reason, have concluded, that we could not in wisdom forsake this
Church in any Point for fear of forsaking Her in a necessary Point. What Mr.
Chillingworth? For fear of forsaking Her in a necessary Point? What color of
reason can there be in this your fear? Seeing we have heard you tell us (P.
164. N. 57.) It is impossible to adhere to the Roman Church in all things,
having no other ground for it, but because she is infallible in some things.
And what will become of your vain Dialogue in this same section, whereby with
great pomp of words, you endeavor to prove, that it is impossible to adhere
to the Roman Church in all thingr, having no other ground etc? Is it not
clear, that you contradict yourselfe, and are engaged to answer all the
Arguments, which you object against Charity Maintained for saying, that if the
Church be infallible in Fundamentalls, it is no wisdom to leave her in any
Point? Can one judge, that there is reason for that which the same man is
confident (which is your own word Page: 165. N. 57.) may be demonstrated to be
false? And by this appears, that your whole discourse (N. 63.) is against this
your own grant. Neither do we say, that universally, one must stick to one
side, for fear of going too far toward the other; but that, when there is no
harm, in embracing one part, and evident danger in forsaking it, in such a
case, we cannot forsake one part, and go to the other; that is we cannot
forsake the Church in Points, not necessary for salvation: because we may
chance to leave her in some Fundamental Point; which even yourselfe grant to
be a rational deduction, if once it be supposed, that any particular Church is
infallible in Fundamental Points, as Protestants commonly grant, the
universal Church to be infallible in such Articles: and therefore, as I said
above, Luther and his fellows could not in wisdom forsake the universal
Church in any one Point. Morover remember what you write (Page: 277. N. 61.) in
these words: Neither is there any reason, why a Church should please herself
too much, for retaining fundamental truths, while she remains regardless of
others. For, who is there that can put her in sufficient caution, that these
errors about profitable matters, may not according to the usual fecundity of
error, bring forth others of a higher quality such as are pernicious and
pestilent, and undermine by secret consequences, the very foundations of
Religion and Piety? If this be true of the universal Church, which is
infallible for Fundamentalls: much more may we say of any private person (who
has no such privilege of infallibility) forsaking the Church in some Point of
Faith; Who is there can put him in sufficient caution, that these Errors about
profitable matters, may not according to the usual fecundity of Error, bring
forth others of a higher quality such as are pernicious and pestilent, and
undermine by secret consequences, the very fundations of Religion and Piety?
And therefore Charity Maintained had reason to say, that the Church ought not to
be forsaken in any least Point, least perhaps that prove to be Fundamental.
Neither can you say, that Protestants were certain, that the Points wherein
they left the Church, were errors. For, to omit the reasons which I have
already given here, I must put you in mind, that diverse learned chief
Protestants agree with us in very many, yea, I may say, in all the maine
differences, betwixt Protestants and us: And therefore your preence of so great
evidence, and certainty against the Doctrine of the Roman Church, is merely
voluntary and verbal. And besides, I would know, how the Church can be
supposed to be infallible in fundamental Points, and yet may be in danger to
fall into such errors as are pernicious and pestilent, and undermine the very
Fundations of Religion and Piety?

139. These maine dissicultyes being taken away, your other Objections, cited
above, are answered, by only mentioning them. The Question is not, whether we
should err with the present Church, or hold true with God Almighty, as you
vainly speak; but whether the word, and will of God Almighty, be better
understood, and declared to us by Gods universal true Church, or by any
private person or particulat Sect.

140. If particular Churches have been liberal of their Anathemas, which yet
were never conceaved infallible: What is that to the Anathemas, of the
universal Church granted to be infallible in fundame^tall points, in which
whosoever disobeyes her, puts himself in state of damnation. And seeing you
confess, that men cannot know what points be fundamental, it follows, that we
cannot with safety disobey her in any one point, for fear of leaving her in
some fundamental Article.

141. That the visible Church of Christ holds itself to be infallible, cannot
be doubted; seeing even her enemies believe she cannot err in fund mental
Points, and she proposes all her definitions of faith to be believed, without
distinguishing between Points fundamental, and not Fundamental: which she
could not do without great temerity, and injury to Faithful people, if she
did not hold herself to be universally infallible. Of which point Ch: Ma (P.
2. Ch: 5. N. 20. P. 132.) spekes at large, in answer to a demand or objection
of Potter: and in vain you say; God (in Scripture) can better inform us what
are the limits of the Churches Power than the Church herself. For, the
Question is only whether God will have his meaning in Scripture, declared by
the Church, or by every man's private spirit, wit, or fancy. Besides, God
declares his sacred pleasure, not only by the written, but also by the
unwritten word.

142. That there is no danger in being of the Roman Church, Protestants must
affirm, who hold, that she had all things necessary to salvation, as shall
appear herafter: and whosoever denies it, must grant that Christ had no Church
upon Earth, when Luther appeared: and that there is danger to leave her,
experience makes manifest, by the infinite multitude of different Sects, and
opinions, whereof all cannot be true and so must be esteemed a deluge of
Heresies.

143. The Heresy of the Donatists, did consist formally, in this; that the
Church might err or be polluted, and by that Means give just cause to forsake
her communion. For, if without any such error in their understanding, they did
only de facto separate by the obstancy of their will, they were indeed
Schismatikes, but not Heretics, as not dividing themselves from the Church in
Matter of Faith: And yet Potter says they were properly Heretics. Yea if it
be not an Heresy to say in general, that the Church may err, and be corrupted
or polluted; to say, that in such a particular case she is corrupted, comes to
be only a matter of History, or fact whether she has done so, or no; but it is
not a point of Faith, and so is not of a nature sufficient to constiute an
Heresy; supposing, as I said, it be once granted, that she may err: For
example; the Donatists gave out, that the Catholic Church was defild, by
communicating with those who were called traditors: The Heresy consists
precisely in this Point; That the whole Church may be corrupted, and so give
just cause to be forfaken; not in that other Point, whether, or no (the
possibility of the thing being supposed) de facto Catholics did communicate
with those traditours. Since therefore it is supposed by you, and affirmed by
Potter, that the Donatists were heretics, their heresy must consist in this;
that the Catholic Church spredd over the whole world, might err, and be
polluted. And is not this the very heresy of Protestants?) And do they not
pretend, to leave the Church, upon this same ground, that she erred? And this
particularly is evident, in those Protestants, who say, the whole visible
Church before Luther, perished; The names of which Protestants may be seen in
Charity Maintained (Part: 1. N. 9. Page: 161.) and more may be read in Brierley
(Tract: 2. Ca: 3. Sect: 2.) And therefore I wonder, you would say, that Charity
Maintained had not named those Protestants who hold the Church to have perished
for many Ages. That it is a fundamental error, of its own nature properly
heretical to say, The Church Militant may possibly be driven out of the world,
is the Doctrine of Potter, as we have seen; as also, that Whitaker calls it a
profane heresy; and more Protestants may be seen to that purpose in that
place where we cited Whitaker: And Dr. Lawd holds it to be against the Article
of our Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church; and that to say, that
Article is not true, is blasphemy.

144. That he which is an Hererike in one Article, may have true Faith in other
Articles, is against the true and common Doctrine of all Catolique Divines, and
universally against all Catholics, to say, That such a Faith can be sufficient
to salvation; because his very heresy is a deadly sin; And therefore to say, the
Church can err, in any one point of Faith, is to say, the whole Church may be
in state of damnation for faith; which is an intolerable injury to God, and
his spouse the Church. For, if she may be in state of damnation, by any
culpable error, she must be supposed to want some thing necessary to
salvation; namely, the belief of that truth which such culpable error denies.
But more of this herafter.

145. By the way. How can you say (N. 56.) to Charity Maintained; That, when it
was for his purpose to have it so, the greatness or smallness of the matter was
not considerable, the Evidence of the Revelation was all in all. For, where
does Charity Maintained say, That evidence of the Revelation is all in all?
Yea, does he not expressly teach Part: 1. Chap. 6. N. 2.) that evidence is not
compatible with an ordinary Act of Faith, and thereby proves (N. 30.) that
Protestants want true Faith?

146. Object 14. Charity Ma^ntayned in diverse occasions, affirms, or supposes
that Dr. Potter, and other Protestants teach, that the Roman Church does not
err in any Point Fundamental, or necessary to salvation: and this you say
diverse times, is not true.

147. Answer. I will not say, as you (Page 76. N. 63.) speak to Charity
Maintained: I fear you will repent the time, that ever you urged this Point
against Charity Maintained; but contrarily, I hope, that the Reader, if he be
not a Protestant, will find just occasion to praise God that the Answer to this
your Objection, will demonstrate to him in how safe a way we Catholics are,
even by the confession of our Adversaryes; and how much it imports him, to
place his soul in the like safety.

148. I have already, upon several occasions, mentioned some passages, wherein
you and Dr. Potter confess that the Roman Church, wants nothing necessary to
salvation. Now I will do it more at large. Potter (Page: 63.) says; The most
necessary and fundamental Truths, which constitute a Church are on both sides
unquestioned: And for that reason, learned Protestants yield them (Romanisis,
as he calls us) the name and substance of a Christian Church. Where we see,
that he says in general learued Protestants yield them etc. In proof whereof,
he cites in his margent, Junius, D. Reinolds, and says, See the juagment of
many other writers, in the Advertisement annexed to the Old Religion, by the
Reverend Bishop of Exeter; and adds; The very Anabaotists grant it. Fr. Ichnson
in his Christian plea, (Pa: 123.) So that with this one Testimony of Potter, we
have many other, even of our greatest Adversaryes. And I desire the reader to
observe well, that here (P:62) he says; To those twelve Articles which the
Apostles in their Creed, este^med a sufficient Summary of wholesome Doctrine,
they (Catholics) have added many more. Such are, for instance, their
Apocryphal Scriptures, and vnwr^ten dogmaticall Traditions, their
Transsubstantiation, and dry Communion, their Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
Worship of Images, Latin service, traffic of Indulgences; and shortly, the
other new Doctrines and Decrees canonized in their late Synod of Trent. Upon
these and the like new Articles, is all the contestation between the Romanists
and Protestants. And then he adds the words which we have cited; The most
necessary and Fundamental truths which constatute a Church, are on both sides
unquestioned; and for that etc. Where we see he grants, we believe the twelve
Articles of the Apostles Creed, which he teaches at large, to contain all
Fundamental Points of Faith; and that we hold all the most necessary and
Fundamental truths which constitute a Church. Therefore, those Points of our
Doctrine which he gives for instance, are no Fundementall errors, nor the
contrary Articles, necessary and Fundamental truths: and yet he names all the
Chiefest Points controverted between us: and Protestants; even
transubstantiation, Communion in one kind, and Latin Service, which are the
things they are wont most to oppose; yea he comprises all the Doctrines and
Decrees of the Council of Trent. Therefore we are free from fundamental
errors, by the confession of our Adversaryes. (Page: 59.) The Protestants never
intended to erect a new Church, but to purge the Old. The Reformation did not
change the substance of Religion, but only cleansed it from corrupt, and impure
qualityes. If the Protestants erected not a new Church, then ours is still the
Old Church; and if it were only cleansed from corrupt qualityes, without change
of the substance, the substance must be still the same that it was, and that
which was, must be the same with that which is. (Page: 61.) The things which the
Protestants believe on their part, and wherein they judge the life and substance
of Religion to be comprised, are most, if not all of them, so evidently and
indisputably true, that their Adversaryes themselves do avow and receive them
as well as they. Therefore we Catolikes have the life and substance of Religion.
(Page: 60.) In the prime grounds of Principles or Christian Religion we have
not forsaken the Church of Rome. Therefore you grant that we have the prime
grounds, or Fundamental Articles of Religion. (Page: 11.) For those Catholic
Verityes which she (the Roman Church) retains, we yield her a member of the
Catholic, though one of the most unsound and corrupt members. In this sense,
the Romanists may be called Catholics. Behold, we are members of the Catholic
Church, which could not be, if we erred in any one fundamental Point. By the
way: If the Romanists may be called Catholics, why may not the Roman Church be
termed Catholic? And yet this is that Argument, which Protestants are wont to
urge against us; and Potter in particular, in this very place, not considering
that he impugnes himself, while he speaks against us, nor distinguishing
between universal, as Logicians speak of it, (which signifyes, one common
thing, abstracting, or abstracted, from all particulars) and Catholic, as it
is taken in true Divinity, for the Church spread over the whole world, that is,
all Churches which agree with the Roman, and upon that vain conceit, telling
his unlearned Reader, that universal and particular, are terms repugnant, and
consequently one cannot be affirmed of the other; that is, say I; Catholic
cannot be affirmed of Dr. Potter, nor Dr. Potter said to be a Catholic,
because a particular cannot be said to be universal, or an universal. (Page:
75.) To depart from the Church of Rome^, in some doctrines and practices, there
might be just and necessary cause, though the Church of Rome wanted nothing
necessary to salvation. (P: 70.) They (the Roman Doctors) confess that setting
aside all matters controverted, the maine positive truths wherein all agree, are
abundantly sufficient to every good Christian, both for his knowledge, and for
his practice, teaching him what to believe, and how to live, so as he may be
saved. His saying, that the Roman Doctors confess, that setting a side all
matters controverted etc. is very untrue: it being manifest, that Catholics
believe, Protestants to err damnably, both in matters of Faith, and practice;
yet his words convince ad hominem, that we have all that is necessary, yea and
abundantly sufficient, both for knowledge, and practice for us to be saved. And
then he discoursing of the Doctrines wherein we differ from Protestants, says
(Page: 74.) If the mistaker will suppose his Roman Church and Religion purged
from these and the like confessed excesses and noveltyes, he shall find in that
which remains, little difference of importance between us. Therefore de facto
we believe all things of importance which Protestants believe. After these
words, without any interruption he goes forward, and says (Page: 75.) But by
this discourse, the Mistaker happily may believe his cause to be advantaged,
and may reply. If Rome want nothing essential to Religion, or to a Church, how
then can the Reformers justify their separation from that Church, or free
themselves from damnable Schism? Does not this discourse prove, and the
Objection, which he rayses from it, suppose, that we want nothing essential to
Religion? Otherwise, this Objection which he makes to himself, were clearly
impertinent, and foolish, if he could have dispatched all, by saying, we err
in essential points, which had been an evident, and more than a just cause, to
justify their separation: which yet appears further by his Answer to the said
Objection; That to depart from a particular Church, and namely from the Church
of Rome, in some Doctrines and practices, there might be just and necessary
cause, though the Church of Rome wanted nothing ne^essary to salvation. And
afterward in the next (P. 76.) speaking of the Church of Rome; he says
expressly: Her Communion we forsake not, no more than the Body of Christ,
whereof we acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a member, though corrupted. And
this cleares us from the imputation of Schism, whose property it is to cut of
from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it
separates. But if she did err in any one Fundamental point, by that very
error she would cease to be a member of the Body of Christ, and should be cut
of from the hope of salvation; therefore she does not err in any Fundamental
Point (P. 83.) we were never disioyned from her (the Church of Rome) in those
maine essential truths, which give her the name and essence of a Church. You
must then say, that she erres not in any Fundamental Point. For, the essence
of a Church, cannot consist with any such error. And that it may appear, how
desirous he is that it should be believed, Catholics and Protestants not to
differ in the essence of Religion, he adds these words immediately after those
which we have last cited: whereof if the Mistaker doubt, he may be better
informed by some late Roman Catholic Writers. One of France, who has
purposely in a large Treatise proved (as be believes) the Hugonots and
Catholics of that Kingdom to be all of the same Church, and Religion, because
of the truths agreed upon by both: And another of our Country (as it is said)
who has lately published a large Catalogue of learned Authors, both Papists
and Protestants, who are all of the same mind. Thus you see, he ransacks all
kind of proofs, to show that Catholics and Protestants differ not in the
substance, and essence of Faith, and to that end cites for Catholic Writers,
those two who can be no Catholics, as Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 3.
Page: 104.) shows the former in particular to be a plain Heretic, or rather
Atheist, Lucian-like, jeasting at all Religion. (Page: 78.) he says; we hope
and think very well of all those Holy and devout souls, which in former Ages
lived and dyed in the Church of Rome. Nay, our Charity reaches further to all
those at this day, who in simplicity of heart believe the Roman Religion and
profess it. To these words of the Doctor, if we subsume; But it were
impossble, that any can be saved, even by Ignorance, or any simplicity of
heart, if he err in a Fundamental point (because as by every such error, a
Church ceases to be a Church, so every particular person ceases to be a member
of the true Churchs) the Conclusion will be, that we do not err in any
Fundamental point. Nay (Page: 79.) he says further, we believe it (the Roman
Religion) safe, that is, by Gods great Mercy, not damnable to some, such as
believe what they profess: But we believe it not safe, but very dangerous, if
not certainly damnable to such as profess it when they believe (or if their
hearts were upright, and not perversely obstinate, might believe) the contrary.
Behold we are not only in a possibility to be saved; we are even safe, upon
condition, we believe that Faith to be true which we profess, and for which we
have suffered so long, so great, and so many losses, in all kinds; which if we
did undergo, for extetnall profession of that Faith, which we do not inwardly
believe to betrue, we should deserve rather to be begged for fools, than
persecuted for our Religion. In the mean time, every Catholic has this
comfort, that he is safe, (even by the confession of an Adversary) if he be not
a foolish dissembler, which would be cause of damnation in a Protestant, or any
other. Even the profession of a truth, believed to be false, is a sin. But I
return to say; it were impossible for any Roman Catholic to be safe, upon
what condition soever, if we err in any one Fundamental Article of Faith.
Here I must briefly note, that whereas Dr. Potter in the words now alleged,
says; It is not damnable to some, and then to declare who those some are,
adds, such as believe what they profess; Chillingworth (Page: 404. N. 29.)
leaves out the distinction, or comma, placed between some and such, and puts
it after damnable. Thus: Not damnable, to some such as believe what they
profess; which words may signify, that it is not safe to all such as believe
what they profess, which may much alter the sense of Potters words, as the
Reader will perceive by comparing them.

149. Now Sir, who will not wonder, at your so often declaiming against Charity
Maintained, for saying; Dr: Potter taught, that the Roman Church does not err
in Fundamental Points? But what if your self say the same? It is clear you
do so. For, whereas Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 15. N. 13.) says: Since
Dr. Potter will be forced to grant that there can be assigned no visible true
Church of Christ, distinct from the Church of Rome, and such Churches as greed
with her, when Luther first appeared, I desire him to declare, whether it do
not follow, that she has not erred Fundamentally; because every such error
destroys the nature and being of a Church, and so our Savior Christ should
have had no visible Church on Earth: To these words (which you thought fit to
set down very imperfectly) you answer (Page: 16 N. 20.) In this manner: I say,
in our sense of the word Fundamental, it does follow. For, if it be true, that
there was then no Church distinct from the Roman, then it must be, either
because there was no Church at all, which we deny; or because the Roman Church
was the whole Church, which we also deny: Or because she was a part of the
whole, which we grant. And if she were a true Part of the Church, then she
retained those truths which were simply necessary to salvation, and held no
errors which were inevitably and vnpardonably destructive of it. For, this is
precisely necessary to constitute any man or any Church a member of the Church
Catholic. In our sense therefore of the word Fuudamentall, I hope she erred
not Fundamentally: But in your sense of the word, I fear she did. That is, she
held some thing to be Divine Revelation, which was not; some thing not to be,
which was. You have spoken so clearly and fully in favor of the Roman Church,
and not only affirmed, but proved that she did not err in any Fundamental
Point, that I need not say one word to ponder your words, or declare the force
of them. (Page: 7. N. 3.) You expressly approve the saying of Dr. Potter, That
both sides by the confession of both sides, agree in more Points then are
simply and indispensably necessary to salvation, and differ only in such as are
not precisely necessary. Therefore, do we infer, Catholics believe all that is
necessary to salvation, and more. But we can never yield so much to you. (Page
85. N. 89.) You confess the Roman Church to be a Part of the Catholic
Church; And we have heard you say (Page: 16. N. 20.) If she were a true Part of
the Church, then she retained those truths which were simply necessary to
salvation, and beld no errors which were inevitably and vnpardonably
destructive of it. For, this is precisely necessary to constitute any man or
any Church, a member of the Church Catholic. This you say, and make good the
like inference, which I made by occasion of Dr. Potters words, that the Roman
Church is a member of the Catholic; and other like Assertions of his. (Page:
163. N. 56.) You say: From Scripture we collect our hope, that the Truths she
(the Roman Church) retains, and the practice of them, may prove an Antiaote to
her against the errors which she maintains in such persons as in simplicity
of heart follow this Absalon. These Points of Christianity, which have in them
the nature of Antidots against the poison of all sins and errors, the Church of
Rome, though otherwise much corrupted, still retains; therefore we hope she
erreh not Fundamentally, but still remains a Part of the Church. But this can
be no warrant to us to think with her in all things: Seeing the very same
Scripture which puts us in hope she errs not Fundamentally, (mark how you
profess to learn, even out of Scripture, that we err not Fundamentally)
assures us, that in many things, and those of great moment, she errs very
grievously. And these errors though to them that believe them, we hope they
will not be pernicious, yet the professing of them against conscience, could
not but bring to us certain damnation. Therefore, the Points in which we
differ from Protestants, being acknowledged not to be Fundamental, and in
other Points professing nothing against our conscience, we are safe by your
own Confession. If we did not believe as we profess, we were no Roman
Catholics. In the same place you say expressly, De facto we hope the Roman
Church does not err in Fundamentalls; yea you say, (Lin: 33.) Perhaps she does
not err damnably, the contrary whereof you affirm so often. You example of
Absalon, was very ill applied to the Roman Church, which did not rebel from
you, but you against the whole Church (the Mother of all Christians) more
sacrilegiously, than Absalon behaved himself wickedly to wards his father.
(Page: 404. N. 29.) you approve Dr. Potters saying (Page: 79.) which I cited
above that the Roman Religion is safe, that is, not damnable to some, such as
believe what they profess. And in the same place you say we may hope that she
retains those Truths which are simply, absolutely and indispensably necessary
to salvation. (Page: 401. N. 27) We approve those Fundamental and simply
necessary Truths which you retain, by which, some good souls among you may be
saved, but abhor your many superstitions and heresies. The Truths you
retain, are good, and, as we hope, sufficient to bring good ignorant souls
among you, to salvation, yet are not to be sought for in the conventi le of
Papists. If any soul may be saved in our Religion; it is clear that we hold
not any Fundamental error, with which no soul can be saved. (Page: 277. N.
61.) you say: The simple defect of some Truths prositable only, and not simply
necessary, may consist with salvation. Seeing therefore you have so often
confessed, that we err not in Fundamental Points, our errors in some Truths
profitable only, and not fundamental, may consist with salvation. How then do
you say to Catholics, (Page: 401. N. 27.) As for our freeing you from damnable
Herely, and yielding you salvation, neither He, (Dr. Potter) nor any other
Protestant is guilty of it? (Page: 219. N. 50.) speaking of Protestants, you
say; They do not disser at all ^n Matters of Faith, if you take the word in
the highest sense, and m^ane by Matters of Faith, such Doctrines as are
adsolutely necessary to salvation, to be believed, or not to be d^^believed.
Now you know well, that in Points of greatest moment, which Catholics believe
against some Protestants, other Protestants stand for us, against their
pretended Brethren: and therefore you must either say that we believe all such
Doctrines as are absolutely necessary to salvation, or that many learned
Protestants do not believe all such Doctrines, and consequently are not capable
of Salvation. (Page: (Page: 269. N. 45.) A man may possibly leave some opinion or
practice of a Church formerly common to himself and others, and continue still
a member of that Church: Provided that what he forsakes, be not one af those
things wherein the essence of the Church consists. For this cause you say, that
although Protestants left the external Communion of the Church, yet they left
not the Church, because they left her not in any thing essential to a Church,
as Fundamental Points are: Therefore you suppose, the Church before Luther, did
not err in any Fundamental Article: Otherwise you had left her, that is, you
had disagreed from her in a Fundamental Point. (Page: 272. N. 52. and Page: 283.
N. 73.) You deny that Protestants divided themselves from the Church,
absolutely and simply in all things, that is, ceased to be a member of it;
which still supposes, that the Church before Luther, believed all essential,
and Fundamental Points, which Protestants also pretend to hold, and for that
cause, say they left not the Church. (Page: 272. N. 52.) You say) In the reason
of our separation from the external Communion of your Church you are mistaken:
For, it was not so much because she, your Church, as because your Churches
external Communion was corrupted, and needed Reformation. But if we erred in
Fundamental Points, Protestants must have forsaken us chiefly for that reason,
that our Church was corrupted with Fundamental errors of Faith. Therefore you
grant, that we erred not in any such necessary Points. (Page: 401. N. 26.) You
confess, that Dr: Potter says indeed, that our not cutting of your Church from
the Body of Christ, and hope of salvation frees us from the imputation of
Schism. (Page: 133. N. 12.) You say expressly: By Confession of both sides we
agree in much more than is simply and indispensably necessary to salvation. It
is well you make so open a Confession, that we believe much more, than is
simply necessary to salvation. But, as I said above, we will not, because we
cannot, yield so much to you. And here I must ask again; How you could say,
(Page: 401. N. 27.) As for our freeing you from damnable Heresy, and yielding
you salvation, neither Dr. Potter, nor any other Protestant is guilty of it?
Seeing you say, that By the confession of both sides we agree in much more than
is simply and indispensably necessary to salvation. If we believe much more
then is necessary to salvation, by what Logic will you deduce, that we
believe not as much as is necessary?

150. These so many and so clear words of Dr. Potter, and yourselfe; may
justly make any man wonder, with what pretense of truth, or modesty, you could
say (Page: 280. N. 95.) As for your pretense that your errors are confessed not
to be Fundamental, it is an affected mistake as I have often told you. And
(Page: 308. 108.) As for your obtruding upon us, that we believe the Points of
difference not Fundamental or necessary, you have been often told it is a
calumny. The oftener the worse, it being a saying void of all truth, and a
shameful calumny in you.

151. To these testimonies of Potter and Chillingworth, many other might be
allelged, out of other Protestants, as we have seen diverse other alleged by
Potter. Dr. Lawd (Page: 299) says: I do aknowledge a Possibility of salvation
in the Roman Church. But so, as that which I grant to Romanists, is not as they
are Romanists, but as they are Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed,
and hold the foundation Christ himself. Behold, not only a possibility of
salvation, but also the reason thereof, because we believe the Creed etc: which
is the very reason for which Protestants hold, that they themselves may be
saved, though they differ in many Points from one another. This I say, is the
reason of Dr. Lawd, which other Protestants must approve, though in true
Divinity it be of no force at all; for, though one believe the Creed, and hold
the foundation Christ himself, that is, that he is God, and Savior of the
world, yet if he deny, any point evidently delivered in Scripture, or otherwise
sufficiently propounded, as revealed by God, he cannot be saved, even according
to Protestants, who therefore do in this, as in many other things, speak
inconsequently, and contradict themselves. (Page: 376.) he says: The Religion
of the Protestants, and the Romanists Religion, is the same: nor do the Church
of Rome and the Protestants, set up a different Religion (for the Christian
Religion is the same to both) but they differ in the same Religion. Therefore,
say I we hold no Fundamental errors, wherein whosoever differ, cannot be of
the same, but must be of a different Religion. And (Page 129.) The Protestants
have not left the Church of Rome in her Essence, not in the things which
constitute a Church. And (P: 282.) he says The possibility of salvation in the
Roman Church, I think cannot be denied; and in proof hereof, (P: 281.) he
alleges Luther. Field. Jos: Hall, Geo: Abbot, Hooker, Mornaeus, Prideaux,
Calvin. And Dr. Jer: Tailor in his Liberty of Prophesying (Page: 251. Sect: ^0.)
teaches, that we keep the foundation, and believe many more truths, than can
be proved to be of simple and original necessity to Salvation. And therefore
all the wisest Personages of the adverse party, allowed to them possibility of
Salvation, whilst their errors are not faults of their will, but weaknesses
and deceptions of the understanding, (which, as I said, may easily be believed
of us Catholics, who suffer so much for our Religion,) so that there is
nothing in the foundation of Faith that can reasonably hinder them to be
permitted: The foundation of Faith stands secure enough for all their vain and
unhandsome superstructures. And in particular he shows that Prayer for the
dead, and the Doctrine of transubstantiation, are not Fundamental errors; and
also says: these two be in stead of the rest. Yea he affirms (Page: 258.)
that there is implied as great difficulty in the Mystery of the B. Trinity, as
in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and shows that we are not in any danger
of sinning by idolatry, in adoring the Sacrament. For further satisfaction in
this matter, the Reader will find the words of learned Protestants in Brierley,
(Tract: 2. Sect: 14.) As; That we are of the Church: That we are of the family
of Jesus Christ, a part of the house of God; That it was evil done of them who
first urged a separation: That we are the Church of God; That, the Catholic
and Reformed make not two, but one same Religion, agreeing in all principal
points of Religion necessary for Salvation; That Catholics and Hugonots are of
one Faith and Religion; That they are Domestik^ of Faith, and branches of the
same vi^e. And, (Tract: 1. Sect: 6. Subdiv; 1.). That Those who live, and die in
the Church of Rome, may notwithstanding be saved: and they are charged, by very
learned Protestants, of ignorance and absurdity, who are of the contrary
opinion.

132. I hope now it appears, that even in the judgment of learned Protestants,
Catholics do not err in points Fundamental, or necessary to salvation: and
therefore, that Luther could not be excused from Schism, in dividing himself
from all Churches, for matters which do not exclude us from eternal
happiness; especially, seeing they who forsook us, maintain errors at least
not Fundamental, as Potter (Page: 67.) plainly confesses, and appears
manifestly, by the disagreement of Protestants amongst themselves, and the
agreement of diverse of them with us, even in diverse of those points in which
Luther pretended the Church to be corrupted, as appears by what we have
demonstrated heretofore. Yet to leave nothing untouched, I will go forward,
not so much because indeed there remains any Objection of moment against us,
as to take away all pretense of cavills; as also, to take occasion of
delivering some Considerations, of importance against our Adversaryes.

153. Object: 15. Although the errors of the Roman Church be not fundamental
in themselves, yet they are against Gods Revelation, and Command, not to deny
any least truth testified by that supreme Uerity, and consequently such errors
are damnable, and for which, the Roman Church might be forsaken.

154. Answer. First: This Objection is not only against the whole Church of
Christ, which you pretend to have been corrupted with such errors, but also
against the Reformers thereof; seeing of Protestants holding contradictoryes,
some de facto must be in error; whereof Grotius; Rivetiani Apologetici Discu:
P: 15. says; Protestantium Confessiones in multis rebus ita dissident, vt
conciliari nullo modo possint. Uidentur autem Genevenses cum Harmoniam
Confessionum edidere, ita credidisse, Harmoniam esse dissidentes Confessiones
in vnum Uolumen compingere. The Confessions of Faith of Protestants do so
disagree, that it is impossible they can be reconciled. It seems that they of
Geneua when they set forth the Harmony of Confessions, were of opinion, that
the Harmony or agreement of Confessions, did consist only in bindeing up in
one Uolume disagreeing Confessions. Nay, Protestants do further teach, that it
cannot be otherwise; that is; that it is impossible, that they can agree in all
points. Calvin (Instit: Lib: 4. Cap: 1. N. 12.) speaks plainly: Quoniam nemo
est qui non etc. Because none is free from some cloua of ignorance, we must
either leave no Church at all or we must Pardon errors in those things, of
which men may be ignorant, without breach both of the sum or substance of
Religion, and loss of salvation. Mark how this Patriark of Protestants,
acknowledges, that noe Church can be free from errors, not Fundamental. Dr.
Lawed (Sect 38. Page: 360.) In things not necessary (though they be Divine
truths also) I confess it were heartily to be wished that men might be all of
one mind, and one judgment. But this can not be hoped for, till the Church be
Triumphant over all humane frailtyes, which here hang think and closes about
her. Whitaker (Cont: 2. Q. 5. C. 8.) It is not needful that all should think
the same: if such vanity be required, there would be noe Church at all. (Potter
Page: 39.) It is a great unity to hope or expect, that all learned men, in this
life, should absolutely consent in all the preces and particles of Divine
Truth. And) Page: 69.) He expressly confesses that all the weeds are not
perfectly taken away in the reformed Church Chilling: (P. 279. N. 64.) the
visible Church is free indeed from all errors absolutely destructive and
unpardonable, but not from all error which in it self is damnable. Morton
(Appologie (Lib: 1.58) only Papists challenge privilege of not erring. And
blessed be God, who has placed us in a Church which upon evident and
necessary, Reason, challenges that privilege, without which there can be not
infallibility in Christian Faith, noe unity in the Church: of which therefore
we have just cause to say with S. Austine Ep 48. (wherewith Charity Maintained
ends the second part of his book,) Others (of the Donatists) say: we did
indeed believe, that it imported nothing, in what company we did hold the Faith
of Christ. But thanks be to our Lord who has gathered us from division, and
has showed to us, that it agrees to one God, that he be worshipped in unity.
For what a Church is that, which is divided even in points of Divine Faith? If
such errors be sufficient to divide from a Church (as Protestants pretend to
have parted from us upon that ground, and without which they must confess
themselves to be Schismatikes) and that noe Church is free from such errors;
what follows, but that all Churches, and all men must be divided from one
another, and noe one Church be left in the whole world? And how can they be
excused from Schism, in leaving all Churches, for errors which no Church can
avoid? And who would be a Protestant, seeing themselves confess, that they
neither are, nor can, be free from damnable errors, that is, errors against
Divine Revelation, which will actually bring damnation upon them, that keep
themselves in them, by their own voluntary and avoidable fault, as you say
(Page: 279. 64.) So as for the General effect of damnation, they differ not
from fundamental errors, which also are pardonable by repentance.) Beside,
(Page: 220. N. 52.) you say: by fundamental, we mean all, and only that which
is necessary; and then I hope you will grant that we may safely expect
salvation in a Church which has all things Fundamental to salvation. By which
words you must understand all truths necessary, because they are revealed by
God and commanded, and not only things indispensably necessary of themselves;
because you say, one may safely expect salvation, if he believe all things
Fundamental, which safety he cannot expect who erres in points revealed
(though not Fundamental of themselves) seeing you teach that all such errors
are damnable: and in plain terms (Page 133. N. 12.) you say; their state is
dangerous, which can not stand with safety; therefore by Fundamental points
with the belief of which, one may safely expect salvation; you must understand
all points not only Fundamental of themselves, but such also as are necessary,
only, because revealed. And (Page: 290. N. 88.) you expressly give those errors
of which we speak, the name of fundamental, (even as one membrum dividens of
Fundamental as the Divisum) in these words: Fundamental errors may signify,
either such as are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their own nature
damnable, though to those, which out of invincible ignorance practice them, not
unpardonable: Or such as are not only meritoriously but remedilessely
pernicious and desiructiue of salvation. Well now these errors which you
acknowledge in the Protestant Church being against Gods Revelation and command,
must be in their own nature damnable, as you do not deny but they are so;
and therefore we say, that Luther and his fellows, could no more forsake the
Roman Church for such errors, than they must forsake one an other, till they
leave no Church at all, and all come to be Independents, both in respect of
others, and even of a mansselfe, who must still be forsaking his own errors
against Faith, as being damnable in themselves. I need not here repeat what I
have of necessity often mentioned; That scarcely we hold any Article against
some Protestants, in which we have not other learned Protestants, on our side,
against their fellows, and I hope, you will not say, that the self same
errors, are even in their own nature damnable in us, and not in Protestants;
which were a pretty nonsense, and an unjust partiality: therefore, I conclude
that this Objection is no less against Protestants, then us: yea it is
vnansweareable by Protestants, who confess, that really their Church is subject
to, and actually, is stained with such errors, which we absolutely deny in
respect of the Roman Church, and such as agree with her.

155. And here you must ponder your words (Page: 280. N. 95.) For, Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 184.) having alleged Potters words (Page: 69.) that
the weeds are not perfectly taken away among Protestants, says: What man of
judgment will be a Protestant, since that Church is confessedly a corrupted
one? To this you reply: And yet you yourselfe make large discourses, in this
very Chapter to persuade Protestants to continue in the Church of Rome, though
supposed to have some corruptions. And why, I pray, may not a man of judgment
continue in the Communion of a Church confessedly corrupted, as well as in a
Church supposed to be corrupted?

156. To this your reply: I may answer out of what I said above. How I pray, is
it all one to make a Supposition, acknowledged by him who makes it, to be a
thing both untrue, and impossible, and to speak of a thing, so certainly and
immoveably true, that the contrary is impossible? The former case treates of a
voluntary supposition (which the supposer knows he may recall, or reverse, at
his pleasure, and bring things to the true state in which they really exist;
and so, as I may say, all will be mended, though he set himself to sleep, and
leave things to their own nature) to show the precise essence of things, and
what will follow in good consequence, upon such an hypothesis of an impossible
thing: as in our present case, if the true Church were supposed to err, in
points not Fundamental (still retaining infallibility in all fundamentalls) it
follows, that it were more safe and less evil, and therefore necessary (upon
supposition of two unavoidable evils) to remain in the Church, rather than so
forsake her, for the reasons alleged hertofore; whereas that supposition (That
the Church erres) being taken away (as indeed de facto it is always taken
away, that is, it is always false, and impossible) the clear consequence is,
that it is not only less evil, but absolutely good, and absolutely necessary,
to remain in her Communion; as by reason of the contrary (not voluntary and
speculatiue, but practical and real, and necessary) supposition of errors
acknowledged defacto in the Protestants Church, without any pretense that she
is in fallible in Fundamentalls (as the universal Church is confessed to be
even by our Adversaryes, and in real truth is infallible in all points; both
Fundamental and not Fundamental) the Question cannot remain, whether it be
less evil to remain, in the Communion of the Protestant Church; but it must
be believed, as a thing certainly true, that it is absolutely evil, and the
greatest evil: seeing that by aduering to the Catholic Church, I am secure
from all errors, and by aduering to the Protestants, I am sure to communicate
with a Church stained with errors by their own Confession.

157. Secondly. I take an answer, from what you said above (Page 290. N. 88.)
That, errors not Fundamental are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their
own nature damnable, though to those which out of invincible ignorance
practice them, not unpardonable. From these words, I say, I will take an
answer, if first I have told you; you should have said, they are no sins, and
being no sins, you should not have said, they are not unpardonable, but the
contradictory, they are unpardonable, that is, they cannot be pardoned, or are
not capable of pardon; because God cannot be said to pardon that, with which he
was never offended, and pardon supposes an offense. This very thing, is taught
by yourselfe (Page: 19.) where speaking of men who, do their best endeavors to
know Gods will and do it, and to free themselves from all errors, you say, So
well I am persuaded of the goodness of God, that if in me alone, should meet a
confluence of all such errors of all the Protestants in the world, that were
thus qualifyed, I should not be so much afraid of them all, as I should be to
ask pardon for them: For to ask pardon of simple and purely involuntary
errors is tacitly to imply that God is angry with us for them, and that were
to impute to him the strange tyranny of requiring brick when he gives no
straw; of expecting to gather where he strewed not; to reap where he sowed
not: Of being offended with us for not doing what he knows we cannot do.
Therefore, say I, and you must infer the same, such errors are not capable of
being pardoned; yea you account it a kind of sacrilege, to ask pardon for
them. But yet to show, how you are possessed with a perpetual spirit
vertiginis, and contradiction to yourselfe, I offer to your consideration, what
(Page: 308. N. 108.) you say of our pretended errors: We hold your errors as
damnable in themselves as you do ours, only by accident through invincible
ignorance we hope they are not unpardonable. And (Page: 290. N. 86.) Having
spoken of the erring of the Roman Church, you add; Which though we hope it was
pardonable in them who had not means to know their error, yet of its own
nature, and to them who did or might have known their errors, was certainly
damnable. (Page: 263. N. 26) You cite and approve the saying of Dr. Potter; that
though our errrours were in themselves damnable, and full of great impiety, yet
he hopes, that those amongst you, who were invincibly ignorant of the truth,
might by Gods great mercy, have their errors pardoned, and their souls saved.
What Mr. Dr., and Mr. Chillingworth? Is it great mercy in God to pardon that
which cannot possibly be any sin? Is not this (to use your own words) Tacitly
to imply that he is angry with us for them, and to impute to him the strange
tyranny of requiring brick when he gives no straw etc: of being offended with
us, for not doing, what he knows we cannot do. A great mercy not to do that,
which were tyranny to do; to forgive that which is no offense! But, as I am
forced often to say, it is no news, in you, to contradict yourselfe.

158. Now I will perform what I promised; and show, that seeing invincible
ignorance, in the opinion of all Philosophers, and Divines excuses from sin; if
we can prove, that every judicious man, having used all diligence^, will find,
that whosoever joining himself with our Church, shall be sure, either not to
err, or at least, not vincibly, or culpably; the consequence will be clear,
that such errors will not be damnable to any such man, but that he will be
assured of salvation, for as much as belongs to matter of Faith: from whence it
will also follow, that none can separate themselves from the Church, without
damnation.

19. First then, I observe; That seeing the Church, (according to Protestants)
cannot err in Fundamental Articles; for other points not Fundamental,
whosoever remain in her communion, are not obliged under pain of damnation,
to choose the more secure part, as they are bound to do, in matters absolutely
necessary to salvation, necessitate medij, as Ch: Ma: proves (Part: 1. Chap: 7.
N. 3.) but it is sufficient for them, ad vitandum peccatum, for avoiding sin,
if they follow a judgment, truly probable, and prudent, in embracing all the
particular objects, which the Church proposes to be believed: Because they are
sure by this means, not to err in points absolutely necessary to salvation,
(in which, the Church which they follow, cannot err) nor to sin, in believing
all other points, which she propoundes, supposing they proceed prudently;
especially, considering, as I said, that in not believing Her in all, they run
hazard to disbelieue her in some Fundamental and necessary Article: which
sequel we have showed, even in your own opinion, to be rational.

160. This being observed; I now prove, that whosoever embraces what the
Church proposes, and particularly for points controverted in these times,
proceeds very prudently, and safely. For, the objects of Faith, surpassing the
reach of humane reason, and for that cause, being apprehended obscurely by our
understanding, do not bring with them evide^ce of demonstration (to which we
have heard Hooker saying. The mind cannot choose but inwardly assent) but yet
the understanding may be forcibly drawn by the will, to embrace rather one
part, than another, upon prudent reasons, and extrinsecall considerations,
which, not to be wanting in our case, appears by reflecting; That for the
points controverted, we have the judgment, and Authority, of the Churches
existent when Luther appeared, that is, of the universal Catholic Church, if
God had any Church on Earth, as you grant he always had: And even yourselfe
speaking of Counsels, say (Page: 200. N. 18.) I willingly confess, the judgment
of a Council, though not infallible, is yet so far directive, and obliging,
that without apparent reason to the contrary, it may be sin to reject it, at
least, not to affoard it an outward submission for public peace-sake. Potter
also, (Page: 165.) Speaks fully, in these words: We say, that such General
Counsels as are lawfully called, and proceed orderly, are great and awful
representations of the Church Catholic; that they are the highest external
Tribunal which the Church has on earth; that their Authority is immediately
derived and delegated from Christ; that no Christian is exempted from their
censures and jurisdiction; that their decrees bind all persons to external
Obedience, and may not be questioned but upon evident reason, nor reversed but
by an equal Authority, that if they be careful and diligent in the use of all
good means, for finding out the truth, it is very probable the good Spirit
will so direct them, that they shall not err, at least not Fundamentally.
Behold, Counsels are not only directive, but obliging; they cannot be
rejected; Their Decrees bind to external Obedience, and may not (so much as)
be questioned but upon apparent and evident reason; nor reversed but by an
equal Authority; if they be careful and deligent in the use of all good
means, for finding the truth, it is very probable, the good Spirit will so
direct them, that they shall not err, at least Fundamentally; that their
Authority is immediately derived and delegated from Christ.

161. Here it is reason I make a pause, and observe some points out of our very
Adversaryes. First, The universal Church, according to Potter and other chief
Protestants, is infallible in fundamental points, and even according to
^hillingworth, is infallible as long as she exists; which he says, has been
from the beginning, and shall last to the worlds end: and so de facto she is
infallible, that is, he is as sure that she shall not err in any fundamental
point, as he is sure, that Christ shall always have a Church on earth; which
ought to be a great inducement not to reject her Authority, without evident
reason. Yea seeing he holds Counsels to be fallible in fundamental points, and
yet that they oblige men to an outward submission, much more he should say so
of the Church, which is confessed to be infallible in all Fundamentalls.

162. Secondly: seeing Potter, Chilling: and Dr. Lawd (whom I cited above)
teach, that we are bound under sin, to affoard outward obedience to General
Counsels, and that we cannot do this in matters of Faith, unless we believe as
we profess, we must believe them to be infallible in all things; least either
we sin against Obedience due to them, or, against our Conscience, profess,
what we do not believe.

163. Thirdly: seeing their Authority is immediately derived and delegated from
Christ, their right to be obeyed, is de jure Divino, of which they were in
possession when Luther arose, and therefore it is a grievous sin, not to obey
them, unless it can be demonstrated with evidence, that they teach or command
something clearly repugnant to the law, or word of Christ.

164. Fourthly: seeing their Decrees cannot be questioned, but upon evident
reason, it follows, that the reasons are not first purposely to be sought, and
then found, because people prepossessed by passion, have a mind to break with
the Church, as it happens in all Schismatiks, and Heretics; but their
Arguments must be so pressing, and irresistible, by ceason of their evidence,
that the understanding cannot, by any means, of contrary reason, or command of
the will, forbear to assent; which to any judicious man, must needs appear to
be a strange, and no better than an imaginaty kind of evidence, and indeed
impossible, in objects of Faith, which are obscure, and exceed the natural
light, of all humane reason.

165. Fifthly. Since they cannot be reversed, but by an equal Authority (and
Dr. Lawd delivers the same Doctrine, as we have seen above) we are assured,
that the Decrees of Counsels before Luther, could not be reversed by Luther,
or any other private person, nor by all Protestants; Who never could pretend to
have a General Council, and in those Colloquiums, or Conferences, or
particular Synods, which they held, could never establish, any universal Union
among themselves, but only declared to the world, that they had no possible
means of Union, and Concord. And indeed, who should call such a General
Council? Or who should preside therein? Or if they would have recourse to
secular Princes, it would make little to their purpose; seeing absolute Princes,
are no more subject one to another, than different Sects of Protestants, will
confess any mutual subordination.

166. Sixthly. Seeing if they be careful in the use of all good means for
finding the Truth, it is very probable the good spirit will direct them, that
they shall not err, at least fundamentally, they could not be opposed, except
by reason more than probable, but men were to presume that they did not err.
Neither should you say; if they be careful etc. it is very probable the good
spirit will direct them, that they shall not err (which may be said of any two
or three, gathered together in Christ's name, if they be careful in the use of
all good means for finding the truth; yea the same may be said, of every
particular person;) but contrarily, seeing you confess them to be derived from
Christ, and that they are the highest external Tribunal, which the Church
has on Earth: and that all are obliged to obey them (which none could be, in
errors against Faith) you should say; because they cannot err, God will not
fail to affoard his effectual Grace, that they be careful in the use of all
good means for finding the truth. For accordingly as God has decreed to bring
us to an End, He will not fail to move us effectually to apply all those
Means which on our behalf are necessary for such an End. And it were but a
most rash, uncharitable, foolish, and false imagination, to think that
General Counsels before Luther, replenished with men of learning, sanctity,
and zeal of the Truth, were not careful in the v^^ of all good means for
finding the Truth: and therefore they could not but be assisted by God to find
it, nor Luther excused from Schism, and Heresy, by opposing them, and it.

167. These things considered, it cannot but appear to any judicious
impartial man, how impossible it is, that any such evidence should offer
itself, against the Faith, and decrees of the Church, or General Counsels*
as can force the understanding to an assent in despite of any pious affection
of the will, and reverence due to Gods Church, and Counsels, and the many and
great reasons which make for Her: which is unanswerably confirmed, by
considering, that Protestants disagree amongst themselves, and many of them in
many things agree with us (which I must often repeat) which could not happen,
if the reasons against us, were demonstratiue, or evident: and in this occasion
your Rule, that the property of Charity is to judge the best, will have place,
at least for as much as concerns those your own Brethren, who agree with us:
As also your other saying (Page: 41. N. 13.) That men honest and upright hearts,
true lovers of God and truth, may without any fault at all some go one way;
some another; which shows, that there can be no evidence, against the Doctrine
of the Church, with which even so many Protestants agree, but that Catholics
have at least very probable, and prudent reasons, not to depart from the Church
in any one point; and that, although we should falsely suppose Her to err in
points not fundamental, the error could not be culpable, nor sinful, but
most prudent, and laudable. And in this, our condition is far different, and
manifestly better, than that of Protestants, who disagreeing not only both from
the Church, but amongst themselves also, must be certain that they are in
error, which for ought they know, may be fundamental, seeing they cannot tell
what Points in particular are fundamental: whereas we adhering to the Church,
are sure not to err against any necessary or fundamental truth. And yourselfe
say (Page: 376. N. 57.) He that believes all necessary Truth, if his life be
answerable to his Faith, how is it possible he should fail of salvation?

168. And then further upon this same ground, is deduced another great
difference, with great advantage on our side; that Protestants are obliged
under pain of damnation, to make choice of the more certain, and secure part,
and must not be content, with a mere probability, if they can by any industry,
care, study, prayer, fasting, almsdeeds, or any other means, attain to a
greater degree of certainty. For, if indeed they err in any one Article of
Faith, necessary necessitate medij, they cannot be saved, even though their
error were supposed to be invincible, as hertofore we have showed out of
Protestants: Whereas we being assured, that, adhering to the Church, we cannot
err in any point, of it self necessary to salvation, for the rest, we are
sure to be saved, if we proceed, prudently and probably, because the truth
contrary to our supposed errors, cannot be necessary necessitate medij, as not
being fundamental: Yea, since indeed Protestants can have no other true and
solid means, of assurance, that they err not Fundamentally, except the same
which we embrace, of believing the Church in all her definitions, they are
obliged under deadly sin, to believe all that she proposes, for fear of erring
in some Fundamental Article. What I have said, that we proceed prudently,
though our Doctrines were supposed to be errors, may be confirmed by an
Adversary, Dr. Jer: Tailor; who (in his Liberty of prophesying (. 20. N. 2.)
says; that our grounds, (that truth is more ancient then falsehood, that God
would not for so many Ages forsake his Church, and leave her in error; that
whatsoever is new, is not only suspicions, but false) are suppositions, pious
and plausible enough. And then having reckoned many advantages of our Church,
he concludes; These things and diverse others may very easily persuade persons
of much reason and more piety, to retain that which they know to have been the
Religion of their Forefathers, which had actual possession and seizure of
men's understandings before the opposite professions had a name, (before Luther
appeared.) And in express terms he confesses, that these things, are
instruments of our excuse, by making our errors to be invinc1ible; which is
the thing I would prove. But here I must declare, that, when I say; It is
sufficient for us to proceed probably, and prudently; It is still upon a false
supposition, that the Church may err in some Point not Fundamental; though in
real truth there be no such distinction. For, we are obliged under pain of
damnation, to believe the Church equally in all points, and use all, not only
probable, but possible means, to find the true Church, and believe her, with
absolute certainty, in all matters belonging to Faith; and in particular, That
she cannot err in any point Fundamental, or not Fundamental; without the
belief of which truth, Christian Faith cannot be certain and infallible, as
has been showed at large.

169. Thirdly. I answer to your Objection, That we absolutely deny, the
Catholic Church to be subject to error, either in Fundamental, or not
Fundamental Points; or that she can err, either Fundamentally, or damnably,
in what sense soever. And therefore, whereas you say (Page: 280. N. 95.) The
errors of Protestants are not so great as ours, we utterly deny, that our
Church can believe, or propose any error at all. And though those Catholic
Verityes, which we believe, were errors, yet they could not be greater, than
those of Protestants, speaking in general; seeing in all the chiefest
controverted points, we have diverse chief learned men on our side, who think
themselves as good Protestants, as those other from whom they disagree.
Besides, in our Question, respect must be had to the kind, and not to the
degree of errors, that is, nor whether the points be Fundame^tall or not
Fundame^tall, nor whether they which be Fundamental, be greater or less in
their own nature; nor whether one not Fundamental, be worse than another not
Fundamental; because if one error not Fundamental yield not sufficient cause
to forsake the Communion of the Church, another cannot: otherwise, you will not
be able to assign any Rule, when the Church may be forsaken, and when she
cannor; and it is damnable to profess, against ones conscience, any error in
Faith, be it never so small: which is the ground, for which you say, the
Communion of the Church, may be forsaken. And lastly, it is more wisdom, to
hold a greater vnfundamentall error with the Church, which I know by the
confession of our Adversaryes, cannot err fundamentally, than by holding a
less vnfundamentall error, expose my self to danger of falling into
fundamental errors, as I proved hertofore: As it is less evil to commit a
venial sin, that is, (which abstracting from the case of perplexity) would
be certainly a venial sin, than to expose ones self to true danger, of
falling into a mortal offense of God.

170. Fourthly; I answer, that as I have often noted, according to you and Dr.
Potter, it is Fundamental to the Faith of a Christian, not to deny any point,
though otherwise of its nature not Fundamental, being proposed, and believed
to be revealed by God; and so your distinction between Fundamental, and
damnable Points, as if the e^^ours of Catholics and Protestants were damnable,
but not Fundamental, is but a contradiction to your own doctrine; Seeing
whatsoever error is damnable, is also Fundamental; and whatsoever is
Fundamental, is damnable, if we respect the negative precept of Faith,
obliging universally, all persons, in respect of all objects, at all times,
semper and pro semper, as divines speak, not to deny any Point, sufficiently
proposed, as revealed by God; as Charity Ma^n^ayned declares at large (Part: 1.
Page: 79.) And the same is taught by your self (Page: 194. N. 4.) In these
words: To make any Points necessary to be believe^, it is requisite, that
either we actually know them to be Divine Revelations; and these, though they
he not Articles of Faith, nor necessary to be bel^e^ed, in and for themselves,
yet indirectly, and by accident, and by consequence they are so: The necessity
of believing them, being enforce, upon us, by a necessity of believing this
essential and Fundamental ^^rt^cle of Faith, that, all Divine Revelations are
true, which to d^ believe, or not to bel^^ue, is for any Christian not only in
pious, but impossible. Or else it is requisite, that they be, first actually
revealed by God; secondly, ^omma^ded under ^^ine of ^amnation, to be
particularly known, and distinctly to be believed. From these words of yours,
it clearly follows, that culpably to deny any point, sufficiently proposed, as
revealed by God, implies a contrariety with this essential and Fundamental
Article of Faith, that all Divine revelations are true; which certainly is a
Fundamental Truth; and therefore all errors, that are culpable, and damnable,
are in this sense, opposite to a Truth, which indirectly, and by accident, and
by consequence, as you speak, becomes Fundamental. The same you deliver (Pa:
197. N. 14.) where you say to Charity Maintained: I deny flatly as a^thing
destructive of it self, that any error can be damnable, unless it be
repugnant immediately or mediatly, directly or indirectly, of it self, or by
accident, to some truth, for the matter of it, Fundamental. Why then do you
distinguish between damnable, and Fundamental errors? Morover, if every
damnable error (as you confess every error to be, which disbelieves any,
sufficiently proposed, Divine Truth) be Fundamental, every damnable error
destroys the Essence, of a Church, which you confess, cannot exist together
with a Fundamental error, and consequently, the Church, cannot err culpably,
even in points not fundamental of themselves, and remain a Church: which is
the thing we teach, and you through your whole Book deny, and are forced to
do so, in regard you hold that Christ has always had a Church on Earth, and
yet must pretend, that she has erred, to save yourselves from the imputation
of Schism and Heresy. The truth is: every sinful error against Faith, in a
point of itself never so small, is damnable, and destroys Faith, Church, and
salvation; neither is there any difference, for the general effect of
damnation, between errors in Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental; and
therefore it is impossible the true Church can err, in either kind of such
points: because it is impossible, that she can want any thing necessary to
salvation, or be obnoxious to any thing destructive thereof, and so, as I said,
for the Negative precept of not disbelieving any thing, sufficiently proposed
to be revealed by God, there is no difference, between those two sorts of
Articles: and the reason is, because the Formal object, or Motive of our
belief, is the same in them both, namely, the Divine Revelation. But for the
affirmative precept, of being obliged to believe explicitly some prime
Material Objects of Faith, there is difference, in regard that as such Truths
are Fundamental, and necessary to be actually believed, so errors contrary to
them, are most properly Fundamental errors, or errors, directly, and
immediately opposite to some Material Object of Faith, Fundamental of itself,
which every body sees does not happen in all errors. Otherwise, how do you;
Potter and other Protestants distinguish between errors in Points
Fundamental, and not Fundamental, if all errors be Fundamental, or against
a Fundamental truth? But you err, by not distinguishing, or not rightly
applying, the distinction between the Affirmative; and Negative Precept of
Faith; nor between the Formal and Material Object thereof. The Negative
Precept arises, from the Formal Object, it being universally, and intrinsece
unlawful, to disbelieve any thing, invested with the Divine Testimony; whereas
the affirmative Precept, is taken from the Material Object of Faith; in regard
that God has commanded, some Truths to be expressly known, and believed, as
absolutely necessary to salvation. Upon this erroneous mistake, youvnadvisedly
find fault with Charity Maintained in your (Page: 197. N. 14.) for saying (Part:
1. Chap. 3 N. 2.) That, errors may be damnable though they be against some
Points, for their matter and nature in themselves not fundamental, (which are
the precise words of Ch: Ma.) Where you see, he speaks of the Matter, or
Material Object, and not of the Formal, of Faith which is Divine Revelation;
and so this Doctrine of his, is evidently true. For, ^s all Truths of Faith,
are not of their own nature, fundamental Truths, so neither can all errors
be fundamental Errors. But, say you, the deny all of any revealed Truth, for
example, of that of Pontius Pilates being judge of Christ, is destructive of
this Fundamental Truth, that, All Divine Revelations are true. I answer, as
above that you err by not distinguishing between the Material and Formal
Object of Faith, and not considering, that fundamental, or not fundamental
Truths, are not to be distinguished in order to the formal object of Divine
Revelation (which being the same in all Truths all should be fundamental, or
all should not be Fundamental.) But as, I said, that distinction is to be
taken, from the Material objects, accordingly as some are more important, and
more necessary to be actually believed, than other. If any object; that this
truth, All Divine Revelations are to be believed, is a thing which we believe
as a Fundamental Truth; and therefore every error against it, must be
Fundamental; To this I answer, as above, that those errors are Fundamental,
which are directly, and immediately opposed to Fundamental Truths; not those,
which only mediatly, and by consequence, are such. Now, the error directly
opposite to this truth; All Divine Revelations are true is this; All Divine
Revelations are not true; which certainly is a Fundamental error, as
contrarily, errors opposed immediately, and directly, to Points not
Fundamental of themselves, are not Fundamental errors, in the common sense
of that distinction: which were no distinction at all, if every error were
equally opposite to a point, Fundamental in itself.

171. You desire Charity Maintained to reconcile his doctrine, that errors may
be damnable, though they be repugnant to some point, for its matter and nature,
not Fundamental, with his other saying (Part: 1. Chap: 4. N. 15.) Every
Fundamental error must have a contrary Fundamental Truth; because, of two
contradictory propositions, in the same degree the one is false, the other must
be true. Indeed Sir, I know nor how to reconcile, those two sayings of Charity
Maintained; because I cannot see, how possibly they could ever fall out or be
at variance. For, what disagreement can be imagined in these Propositions? Some
errors are not Fundamental, as not being repugnant to Fundamental truths,
and every Fundamental errors must have a contrary Fundamental truth; or
rather, have they not a most clear connection, and parity, that, as an error,
not Fundamental, is opposite only to a truht not fundamental; so a
fundamental error is opposite to a fundamental Truth? And the reason of
this, is given by Ch: Ma: in that very place, which you cited; because,
according to Philosophy, the privation is measured by the form, to which it is
repugnant.

172. Thus upon the whole matter it appears; That your affirming our (falsely
supposed) errors to be damnable, and so to yield sufficient cause, of
deserting our Church, is turned against all Protestants, who confessedly, de
facto maintain damnable errors; That although our errors were never so
damnable in themselves, yet they could not be so to us, who are excused by
invincible ignorance; That Potter, and you contradict yourselves, in talking of
pardon, for that which is no sin: and, That you overthrow your distinction of
errors, which you say, are damnable, but not Fundamental, while in the mean
time, you make all damnable errors, to be fundamental, and which for that
cause (if you will speak with consequence) must destroy the unity of Faith,
and Church, and hope of salvation: And therefore seeing you grant that there was
a Church when Luther arose, it follows, that indeed she was not guilty of any
error, even not Fundamental; and that Luther and his followers, were formal
Schismatiks, in leaving her communion, upon a false, and impossible
supposition, or pretense, of errors.

173. Object 16. (Page: 260. N. 22.) you speak thus to Charity Maintained:
whereas you say, That all Divines define Schism a Division from the true
Church, and from thence collect, that there must be a known Church from which
it is po^sible for men to depar^; I might very justly question your Antecedent,
and d^s^^e you to consider, whether Schism be not rather, or at least, be not
as well, and vision of the Church, as from it? A separation not of a Part from
the W^ole, but of some Parts from the other. And if you liked not this
Definition, I might desire you to inform me in those many Schisms, which have
happened in the Church of Rome, which of the Parts was the Church, and which
was divided from it. And (Page: 271. N. 51.) You define Schism; A causeless
separation of one Part of the Church from another.

174. Answer. I have already said enough, against this Definition of yours: yet
because you add an Objection about Schisms in the Church of Rome; and because
I shall have also occasion to add something to what I said above, I think best
to answer this Objection here also; though by the same occasion it will cost me
the labor, of repeating some of those things, which I have already delivered.
If then,

175. You have no certainty in favor of your new Definition, but only say; why
not rather, or at least as well etc: why are you not content with the old one?
And then why do you object, that which your self must answer for the old one?
But there lies a snake under this smooth grass, and covertly you reach poison,
under color of milk. Socinians make small account of the Church, and Her
Authority, and would have such an equality, as might give freedom for every
one to follow his one fancy and begin a new Church, and when all is done, to
say; They divided not from the Church, but one part from another, and they
themselves being one Part, may as well as the other, be called the Church, and
the other be as truly said to be divided from them, as they from the Church;
and in a word, all must come to be Substantives, and independents, in matters
of Faith, and Religion. Thus your definition, comes to be well connected, with
your saying, That Luther, and his fellows, departed not from the Church,
because still they remained a part of it, and they departed not from
themselves. Thus also you would avoid, that unanswerable Argument of Charity
Maint: (Part 1. Chap: 5. N. 35.) That seeing there was a Division between Luther
and that Church which was visible when he arose; and that, that Church cannot
be said to have divided herself from him, before whose time she was, and in
comparison of whom, she was a Whole, and he but a part, we must say, that he
divided himself, and went out of Her: Which is to be a Schismatike, or
Heretic, or both. Thus you may tax S. John (2. Jo: 19.) saying; they went
out from us, and ask why rather from us, that is, from the Church, than that
they made a Division of the Church, dividing one part from another? But indeed
your gloss cannot agree to S. John's text. For, these words, They went out of
us, do not only signify, that there was a Division, but that one part went out
of a whole, and not the contrary. And the same Objection you may make against
the Text (Act: 45.24.) Some went out from us. And (Act: 20.30.) Out of you
shall arise men speaking perverse things. But, as I said, you may easily be
confuted, by the same reflection, which I made upon S. John's words. These Texts
are urged by Cha^ity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 251.) to prove, that, separation
from the universal Church, is a mark of Heresy: which he also proves out of
Vincentius saying. (Lib: Adversus Haer: Cap: 34.) Who ever began Heresies, who
did not first separate himself from the universality, antiquity, and consent
of the Catholic Church. Observe that he says, from the universality of the
Church, and not a separation or Division of one part of the Church, from
another. The same he proves out of S. Prosper, (Dimid: temp: Cap. 5.) a
Christian communicating with the universal Church, is a Catholic, and he who
is divided from Her, is an Heretic and Antichrist. Behold still a separation
from the Church and not a Division of one part of the Church from another. And
S, Ciprian says (Lib: de V^^t: Eccles:) Not we departed from them, but they
from us, and since Heresies, and Schisms are bredd afterward, while they make
to themselves diverse conventicles, they have forsaken the head and origin of
truth. Does not this Saint, clearly declare, that Heretics, and Schismatiks,
depart from the Church and gives the reason, because they have their beginning
after the Church, and so the Church, departs not from them, but they from the
Church; which is the Argument even now cited out of Charity Maintained (Chap.
5. N. 35.) S. Thomas (22. Quest. ^9. Ar..Corp:) defines Schismatiks to be those
who willingly and wittingly divide themselves ab vnitate Ecclesiae, from the
unity of the Church. S Hierome upon those words (Tit: ^.) A man that is an
Heretic. etc: says Schism does separate men from the Church. S. Austine (Ep:
48.) we are certain, that none can justly separate himself from the communion
of all Nations. And co^t. Parme^ (Lib. ^. Cap. 5.) Let us hold it firm and
sure, that no good men can divide themselves from the Church. And Ep. 152.
Whosoever is separated from this Catholic Church, albeit he think, he lives
laudably, by this only wickedness that he is separated from the unity of Christ,
he has not life, but the wrath of God remains upon him. And that no kind of
witnesses be wanting against you to prove that Schism and Heresy signify a
departing from the Church; Fulke says (in his Retentiue etc. (Page 85.) The
Popish Church is but an Heretical Assembly, departed from the universal
Church long since Augustines departure out of this life. You may remember what
I cited out of Calvin (Ep: 141.) That they were forced to make a separation
from the whole world. Where I beseech you mark those words, from, the Whole;
which signify that they were a Part, and the universal Church, a Whole. Field
(of the Church, Lib. 1. Cap. 13. and 14.) makes it particular unto
Schismatikes and Heretics, to depart and go out from the Church of God. Dr.
Lawd (Page: 139.) There can be no just cause to make a Schism from the whole
Church. Why do you not tell him, that he speaks strangly in saying; There can
be no just cause to make a Schism from the whole Church: And that he should
have said; It is absolutely impossible to make a Schism from the whole Church:
because the part, which so divides it self, does still remain one part of
the Whole, and so the Division is only of some part from another. Potter (Page:
75.) There neither was, nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of
Christ; no more than from Christ himself. Will you here, put, of, in place of,
From; and then say, To depart of Christ himself, and so make your Doctor
speak nonsense? Yourselfe (Page: 170. N. 66. and Page: 272. N. 54.) approve the
aforesaid saying of Potter: who also (Page 57.) says; whosoever perversely
divides himself from the Catholic Communton, as do Schismatiks, his
condition is damnable. But above all, what will you say to your own words
(Page: 339. N. 20.) That, Heretics always separate from the visible Church? Why
s^y you nor? Heretics separate of the Church (which would be ridiculous) and
not from her, as you say, seeing Heresy always involues Schism; and if
Hetetiks always separate from the Church, Heresy, (which is the formal cause
whereby they separate) must be a separation from the Church.

176. Now why do you not correct Scripture, Fathers, Catholic Divines, learned
Protestants, your client Potter, and yourselfe; as you take upon you to
control Charity Maintained? But either you do not understand what Schism
means, or else you would be very willing, the world should conceive, there is
no such thing as Schism. For, if you did consider, that part which separates
from the Church, to be no Part. or member thereof, it were easy to see, that
Schism may be defined a separation from the Church, but not a separation of
one part, from another; seeing that by Schism, those men, who once were a part
of the Whole, and com-parts with all the true members of the Whole, by Schism
cease to be a part: As on the other side, Schism is a departing from the true
Church, but not a dividing of the Church. And the reason is, because the Church
is still one in herself, and so Schism is always a Division from the Church
taken formally as a true Church, but never a division of her, seeing she still
remains One true Church, and consequently divided in herself. Besides, when
diverse Parts constitute, or compound one Whole, the Parts cannot be divided
one from another, unless they be conceived to be divided from the Whole, in
order to which, they have the denomination of Parts. For, as long as they
remain with one Whole, they remain united with one another, as Parts; and as
it is said, Quae sunt eadem vni tertio, snnt eadem interse; so in proportion,
quae sunt vnita in vno tertio, sunt vnita interse. Therefore the union with, and
separation from the Whole, is the measure of the union, or separation of the
Parts from one another. Thus S. Thomas in the place alleged (2.2. Quest: 39.
Ar: 1. cor.) says; Proprie Schismatici dicuntur, qui se ab vnitate Ecclesiae
separant, quae est vnitas principalis. Nam vnitas particularis aliquorum ad
invicem, ordinatur ad vnitatem Ecclesiae: sicut compositio singulorum membrorum
in corpore naturali ordinatur ad totius corporis vnitatem. And unless you take
separation of parts in order to the Whole, you destroy all separation, or
division. For, while the parts are in the Whole, they are not divided, but
united; And when they are divided from the Whole, they are no more parts, in
order to those parts which remain in the Whole, of which they ceased, by the
division, to be com-parts, but become Wholes, and can have the denomination of
parts, only by Relation to the Whole, of which they were parts, before the
division was made; so as still union with, or division of parts which remain
in the Whole, must be taken, as I may say, originally from the Whole: and it is
impossible, that two which have been parts of one Whole, can be absolutely
separated from one another, and not from the Whole, with which if they remain
united, they must also be united with one another, in illo tertio, in that
Whole, as I said; And therefore division of parts from one another, must
primarily suppose a division from the Whole, and your singular, Of, must de
content to come after the common from, of all Divines. All separation, properly
taken, must suppose union; and parts, as parts, must relate to some Whole. What
I said, is proved by your own definition, that, Schism is a division of the
Church, which must imply that the Church is divided; after which Division, I
hope you will not say, that both the nocent and innocent, the guilty and not
guilty parts cease to be a Church, but that they only who without cause do
separate, are cut of from the Church, and remain no more a part of it.
Therefore their Schism is a Divison from the Church, and not a Division of the
true Church, which still remains One true Church: as if a corrupt part be cut
of from the Body, the Body still remains one Whole, nor can such a section, or
cutting of, be rightly said to be a Division of the Body (which still retains
its VVholeness, as I may say, and denomination of a Body) but of one part from
the whole Body, and from the incorrupted Parts which remain conjoined in it;
yea the part cut of, and dead, ceases to be so much as a part of that Body from
which it is divided: and, therefore, properly, there is no division of one part
from another, seeing that which is cut of, ceases to be a part, except perhaps
aequivoce. You discourse as of you spoke of a Division of Genus into species,
or of quantity into parts, or in general, of Divisum, into membra dividentia,
where all species participate of Genus, every part of quantity, retains the
same nature which it had before the division; and in general the Divisum is
involued in every member of the Dividents; and so you imagine, that
Schismatikes divided from the Church, remain a part of the Church, as if the
Church were a Divisu^ divided into Obedient Persons, and Schismatikes, as into
membra dividentia, whereas contrarily, the Division we speak of, is not into,
but from, that is, we speak of a Division from the Church, which alters the
formality and condition of the person who is divided, causing him to be no
member of the Church, who formerly was such.

177. But I suppose, that you, who will be broaching a new Divinity, cannot
fail to have found out some new Reason, for your Assertion: as indeed I find
your reason to be, and such a one as is not taught in any Logike, while you
argue thus; I might desire you to consider, whether Schism be not rather, or
at least, be not as well, a Division of the Church, as from it. What I have
found by considering your proposition, my discourse both in this place, and
hertofore, will inform you. But then, you come with another desire: If you
liked not this Definition, I might desire you to inform me in those many
Schisms, which have happened in the Church of Rome, which of the Parts was the
Church, and which was divided from it. This is all your Argument, which I might
answer (as you confute the common Definition of Divines) by a counter-desire of
mine, and say; I might desire you to apply your own Objection to your own
Definition, and inform me; in those Schisms which you mention in the Church
of Rome, or any other Schism, (for, your Objection is common to all) which you
say is a Division of some parts, from the other, which of the parts is
Schismatic, and which not; and consequently, which is the true Church, and
which the Schismatic part. For I hope you will not say, That in every
Schism, the true Church looses her Being of one Church, as the Schismatic
part ceases to be a member thereof: which Being if the Church retain, you must
assign which is the Church, and which is not the true Church, but a
Schismatic member divided from Her; so that, your Argument must be answered
by yourselfe: yea it will be harder for you to answer, than for us. For, of two
disagreeing parts, every one, as I said before, will think his right as good
as that of the other, and it will not be easy to determine, which of them
should yield. But according to our Definition, when we compare a part with the
whole, it is easy to judge, whether a part must yield to the whole, or the
whole to a part: and for that cause, we find no difficulty at all in answering
your Demand, or Objection, (In those Schisms which have happened in the Church
of Rome, which of the Parts was the Church, and which was divided from it) by
saying; That part was, and remained the Church, which was united to the true
universal Church, and lawful Head, thereof, which could be but one. Or, if
you will imagine, that for a time, it is not known, who is the true Head, and
the disagreeing parties proceed bona fide, and cum moderamine inculpatae
tutelae, prudently, and charitably; in that case there is no formal Schism,
but both parts remain members of the universal Church, and really united to
him, who is the true Head: Yea they remain united among themselves mediate, in
as much as they are united, in vno tertio, that is, to the true universal
Church, and the true Head thereof. And even this proves, that, Schism is not
formally a Division of parts, but from the whole; because two parts disagreeing
among themselves, and so divided (if they be considered as compared immediatily
one with another) may be no Schismatikes, if they be united in vno tertio, the
Church, and Head of the Church. Two parts may be separated from the whole, and
not be separated one from another, as the hand and arm cut of from the Body;
but it is impossible, that they can be wholly separated from one another, if
both of them remain Parts of One whole, in which therefore they must needs be
united. Thus, he who inculpably errs actually, against Divine Revelation, is
really united to it by preparation of mind; and an implicit belief of all
things, which are sufficiently proposed to be revealed by God. Contrarily, it
is impossible that one can divide himself from the true Head, or from the
whole, but that tacit he must divide himself from the members, or Parts,
which remain united with the Head, and with the whole; as it is impossible,
that the hand can be divided from the Body, and yet remain united with the
arm, if the arm still remain united with the Body.

177. But you, whose principles give full scope to separations and divisions,
love not to hear of one Head, or one Church, or succession of Bishops, or
Obedience, and subordination, but of parts, and parity amongst all and eve^by
this definition you give us an unanswerable Reason, to prove the necessity of
an infallible living Guide from whom whosoever disagrees in Faith, must be an
Heretic, and of one Head, and Apostolical Sea and Church, from which
whosoever departs, may be known to be a Schismatike. Otherwise there will be
no certain Rule Measure, or ground, to discover Heresies, or judge who be
Schismatiks, but-every part will look upon another, not as a Head, or Whole,
or superior, but as a part and an Equal, which would be an endless sourse of
perpetual Schisms, without any certain means to convince either part. To
which purpose, Baronius (Anno Christi 31. N. 51.) recounts a memorable story
out of Josephus Judaeus, (Antiq. Lib. 12. C. 6.) how Ptolomaeus Philometor gave
sentence in favor of the Jews, and their Temple, and condemned the
Samaritans, as Schismatiks, or Novellists, because the Jews could show a
continued Succession of Bishops from the beginning, till their time. And who
sees not, that for the same reason, Luther and his follows must be condemned
of Schism? whereof see more in Baronius (ibid: N. 52.)

178 And now to end this Chapter; in conformity to what was proposed in the
beginning thereof, I say; that seeing Charity Maintain confuted all the evasions
which Dr. Potter could invent to excuse Protestants from the sin of Schism,
and that I have answered all that Mr. Chillingworth has alleged against the
Arguments of Charity Maintained in defense of the Doctor, the conclusion must
be, that Protestants are guilty of the most grievous sins of Schism and
Heresy, by forsaking the Faith, and communion of the universal Church, or of
all Churches extant when Luther appeared, and therefore, that Protestancy
unrepented destroys salvation.

169. Having then proved, that Christian Faith is absolutely Infallible; that
therefore some Infallible judge or Rule of Faith is necessary; that, this cannot
be Scripture alone; that, all though Scripture did contain all points of Faith
necessary to salvation, yet it could neither be a sufficient Rule, nor any Rule
at all of Faith, if the errors which Mr. Chilling worth holds concerning it,
were true; that the Infallible Judge of controversyes in Faith, must be the
always visible Church of God; that to oppose her doctrine, and forsake Her
communion is Heresy, and Schism; that Protestants cannot be saved without
Repentance: These things, I say, being proved, and every one of them having
such connection, that from the first to the laast one is deduced from another by
evident consequences: We must now see, whether Mr. Chilling worth though he
has not been able to defend Protestants from the sins of schism, and Heresy;
at least, that he has taught the^ some remedy, to obtain pardon for those,
and all other deadly sins, by proposing some true way to Repentance: and our
next Chapter shall show, that the Repentance which he would teach them, is
neither sufficient, nor possible, but plainly destructive of itself. A hard
condition of Protestants, to be forced for their defense to choose an Advocate,
who neither can excuse them from sin, nor prescribes any possible means for
pardon thereof!

CHAP: VIII. Mr. CHILLINGVV ORTHS ERROVRS CONCERNING REPENTANCE, ARE EXAMINED,
AND CONFVTED.
1. NO benefit is wont to be more welcome, than that which we receive from an
enemy, against his will; in regard we enjoy the favor, and yet are absolved
from all obligation of rendering thanks, or even acknowledging it. You are
forced to confess (Page: 34. N. 5.) That, the Doctrine and practice too, of
Repentance, is yet remaining in our Church; and by that confession you grant
that safety to us, which we cannot yield to Protestants, since without true
Faith, Repentance will prove but a mere illusion. And in this, Protestants are
greatly obliged to our sincere declaration, of so necessary a Truth, that being
in due time clearly warned of the danger, they may seek to put their souls in
safety, by embracing that Religion, wherein both we, and our Adversaryes, grant
a possibility of Salvation. But now, as I said hertofore, that although it were
granted, that true Scripture alone is a perfect and total Rule of Faith (as we
have proved it not to be) yet it could not be so much as any Rule at all, if
your pernicious errors, concerning it, were true: so here I will prove; That
although the Doctrine, and practice of Repentance were supposed to remain
amongst Protestants (which we can never grant) yet that Repentance, which you
hold sufficient, and necessary, is such as either in the way of Defect, or too
little, or of Excess and too much, no man can hope for Salvation, by means
thereof. This we will prove by a particular examination of your several
errors: of which, the

2. First, is delivered by you (Page: 32. N. 4.) in these words: God has no
where declared himself, but that whersoever he will accept of that Repentance,
which you are pleased to call contrition, he will accept of that which you call
Attrition; For though he like best the bright flaming holocaust of Love, yet he
rejects not, he quenches not, the smoking flax of that repentance (if it be
true and effectual) which proceeds from hope and fear. In confutation of
which pernicious error, I need not spend pains, or time; since it seems
proper to yourselfe, or perhaps some Associats of yours. But what can be hoped
from those, who have forsaken the direction of Gods Church, but that they
should cross one another in their ways, and end in Extremes, as I have
observed, in several occasions, and appears in this particular matter of
which we treat? Luther, as may be seen in Bellarmin (de Poenit: Lib. 1. Cap.
6.) taught that Attrition makes a man an hypocrite, and a greater sinner. So
far was he, from dreaming that it alone is a sufficient disposition to obtain
remission of sins! Others, in a contrary extreme, hold, that, perfect sorrow or
Contrition is not sufficient without Absolution, as Kemnitius affirms (2.
part: Exam: p. 960.) and even your opinion is, That, perfect Contrition will
not serve, without extirpation of all vicious habits, which you say, being a
work of difficulty, requires time; and so you are singular in a matter upon
which eternal salvation depends, agreeing neither with Catholics (who teach
that Attrition is not sufficient without Absolution, and that, Contrition alone
in all times and moments is enough) nor that contrition is sufficient without
absolution, as Kemnitius holds, but you teach that no Repentance is sufficient,
without the extirpation of all vicious habits, as we shall see herafter.

3. For the thing itself; I wonder what could bring you to such a Doctrine, as
this: That an Act, which you confess (Page 32. N. 4.) proceeds from Hope and
Fear, could alone be a sufficient disposition, for justifying Grace, and the
Theological virtue of Charity, and Love of God. As well might you say, That an
Act of Historical Faith, is a sufficient disposition for the virtue of Hope,
and Hope for Charity, and so Faith would come to justify: I say, an Historical
Faith, which no Protestant holds can justify. But this is the work of our
common enemy, to suggest Doctrines, which can produce no other effect, except
damnation of souls. For, to what other purpose can this your invention serve?
God is always ready, to give sufficient Grace, for an Act of Contrition, when
it is necessary (as always it is necessary for the Remission of deadly sins,
when Sacerdotall Absolution cannot be had) and yet this your Doctrine, if once
it be accepted for true, can have no better effect, than to make men rely upon
it, and not apply themselves to an Act of contrition, whereby they might be
secure; whereas if your Doctrine be false (as most certainly it is) whosoever
contents himself with Attrition, for remission of any deadly sin, shall
infallibly be damned, even though we should suppose, that the belief of this
error were inculpable; because true Repentance is absolutely necessary to
salvation, necessitate medij: wherein invincible ignorance does not excuse; in
which case, every one is obliged, to embrace, not only a probable, but the most
safe, and secure part. And therefore this your error, being against both
Catholics, and Protestants, every one is bound, by the most strict obligation
Charitatis propriae (which obliges us to take the safest means, for the
salvation of our own souls, in things absolutely necessary) not to rely on
your conceypt, but to procure that which is safe, either contrition, or
Attrition with Absolution; and so your Doctrine, can never be practiced without
a deadly sin, though it were supposed to be probably true, as it is certainly
most false. In so much, as D. Jeremy Tailor, (In his Liberty of Prophesying,
Page 252.) speaking of some Doctrines of us Catholics, which he says, lead to
ill life, he specifyes this, that, Attrition (which is a low and imperfect
degree of sorrow for sin, or as others say, a sorrow for sin commenced upon any
reason of temporal Hope, or fear, or desire, or any thing else) is a
sufficient disposition for a man in the Sacrament of Penance, to receive
absolution, and be justified before God, by taking away the guilt of all his
sins, and the obligation to eternal pains. So that already the fear of Hell
is quite removed upon conditions so easy, that many men take more pains to get
a groat, than by this Doctrine we are obliged to, for the curing and acquitting
all the greatest sins of a whole life, of the most victous persons in the
world. How contrary, in another extreme, is this Doctor, to the chosen
champion of English Protestants, Mr. Chillingworth! But as for our Doctrine
concerning Attrition, the Doctor is extremely mistaken, (to say no worse) as
will appear to any, that reads the sacred Council of Trent, declaring what
sorrow is required to obtain pardon of our sins, or Catholic Divines writing
on this subject. For, if the sorrow be conceyved upon any Reason merely of
temporal Hope, or fear, as the Doctor speaks; we teach that it is in no
wise sufficient to make me^ capable of Absolution, or forgiveness of sins; but
it must proceed, from some motive, known by supernatural Faith; for example,
the Fear of Hell, or desire of heaven. Secondly; it cannot be produced by the
natural forces of men or Angels, as being the Gift of God, and requiring the
special moon, inspiration, and grace, of the Holy Ghost: And therefore his
examp, of gaining a groat, is so far from being to he purpose, or true, that
^ontrarily, all the wit, pains, and industry of all men, that have be, are,
or shall be, yea or are possible to be created, cannot arrive to it, by all the
natural forces of them all, though they were assisted with the he^^ of all
Angels, created, or creable, or of all other natural Creatures contained in
the Omnipotency of Almighty God. Thirdly: such sorrow must extend itself to
all deadly sins, in order to which it is to be so effectual, that it must
exclude all affection to them, and the Penitent m^st be resolved, rather to
undergo a thousand deaths, than once consern^ to the least mortal sin. And
therefore, Fourthly; he must resolve to abide, for time to come, all proximas
occasiones, or imminent danger ^f falling into any one mortal sin: As also, if
he have injured any man, by ^aking away his good name, or goods, or limme, or
life, he must effect^ally, and speedily, procure to give satisfaction, or make
restitution, according as the case shall require: yea and sometime, if it be
justly fear^d, that delay will cause a failing in his purpose, Absolution may
prud^ntly, or must, be differred, till he have actually satisfied all
obligation, the neglect whereof would prove to be a deadly sin. And in a word,
that sorrow which we call Attrition, differs from Contrition, in the Motiu^
only; because contrition is conceived for sin, as it is against the infinite
Goodness of God; Attritition, as it is repugnant to our eternal Salvation and
therefore contrition is an Act of the Theological Virtue of Charity Attrition
of the Theological Virtue of Hope, which as it moves us to desire, and hope
everlasting happyness, so it incites us, to fear the loss thereof, and out of
that holy fear, not to fear, any other temporal loss, with the prejudice of
our souls; according to those words of our Blessed Savior, do you not fear
those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul, but rather fear him, who
can punish with Hell f^re, both the body and soul. Which words declare, that,
as I said, a natural fear, merely of temporal loss, though it be even of our
life, i^ not a sufficient disposition for pardon of sins, as is signified by
(Do you not fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul;) but it
must be conceyved, for some loss known by supernatural Faith, as for the
loss of heaven, or pains of Hell; as is signified by the second part of our
Saviors speech, and the adversatiue particle, sed; but fear hin who can etc.
This mistake of the Doctor being cleared, I shall not n^d, nor is it for my
present purpose, to confute his other following wor^ full of mistakes: about
Purgatory, Indulgences etc: especially hav^^g spoken of the like subject, in
Answer to Mr. Chilling: Objection about Indulgences etc: But it is here
sufficient for me to conclude, t^^t seeing there is no certainty among
Protestants, what contrition is ecessary for salvation, as we have seen by the
disagreeing doctrine of this Doctor, Chillingworth, Kemnitius, Luther, etc: it
follows t^^t they cannot be sure, but that they err in a point necessary to
sa^ation, and that this your error is very pernicious and prejudicious t^oules.

4. Your second Error is set done (Page: 391. N. 8.) Fine: Where you say, that
although we pretent to be rigid defenders, and stout champions for the
necessity of good wores, yet indeed we do it, to make our own functions
necessary, but O^dience to God, unnecessary; which will appear, to any man who
conside what strict necessity the Scripture imposes upon all men of essectuall
mortisation of the Habits of all Vices, and effectual conversion to newnes of
^e, and universal Obedience; and withal remembers that an Act of At^tion,
which you say with Priestly Absolution is sufficient to salvation, is not
mortification, which being a work of difficulty and time, canno be performed
in an instant. Which reason proves, that perfect Con^ition, which is an Act
produced in an instant, is not sufficient foremission of sins. Also (Page: 292.
N. 91.) You call it a doct i^e of Licetiousness, that though a man live and die
without the practice of Christian virtues, and with the Habits of many damnable
sins vnmortifyed, yet if ^e in the last moment of his life, have any sorrow for
his sin (this, any, is bu^n untruth of yours, as appears by what I said even
now against Dr. ^aylor) and join confession with it, certainly he shall be
saved. And (Pg: 379. N. 70.) You speak to Catholics in this manner: If I
follow te Scripture, I must not promise my self salvation without effectual
derelicton and mortification of all vices, and the effectual practice of all
Christian virtues: But your Church opens an easyer and a broader way to Heaven,
and though I continue all my life long in a course of sin, and without the
^ractise of any virtue, yet gives me assurance that I may be let into Heave: at
a poslerne gate, even by any Act of Attrition at the hour of death, if it be
joined with Confession, or by an Act of Contrition without Confesion. Here you
declare, that perfect sorrow, or Contrition, is not a sufficient disposition
for remission of sins, even at the hour of death. A doctrine fit only to make
poor sinners despaite! Against this Hypocryticall, and desperate, doctrine of
yours, I bring these reasons.

5. First: Whereas you require for remission of sins, not only Sorrow and
Detestation of offenses past, with a firm Purpose of amendment for time to
come, but also the Object of such an Act or Purpose, that is, Actual
amendment, which you say, being a work of difficulty and time, cannot be
performed in an instant, this Doctrine seems to be contradicted by your self
(Page: 133. N. 12.) In these words: For those that have means to find the
truth, and will not use them, they (Protestants) conceave, though their case be
dangerous, yet if they die with a general Repentance for all their sins, known
and unknown, their salvation is not desperate. You seem either to speak of
men brought to the hour of death (or at least you do not exclude such a case)
and of men in state of sin, proceeding from negligence to find the truth, which
negligence must be caused by some deadly sinful Fear, Hope, or some other
vicious humane respect; and consequently, must have produced some vicious
Habits, and yet you seem to say, such men may be saved by a general
Repentance, which being only general, cannot descend to all particulars, as
the mortification of all particular ill Habits must do; yea you suppose, that
the particular sinful errors, are not known to them; and much less, can those
vicious Habits, from which they proceed, be mortifyed; which cannot be done at
that exigent of imminent death: And therefore, either the doctrine, which you
seem to teach, that it is possible for such men to be saved at the hour of
their death, is false, or else you must grant, that Repentance requires not the
mortification of all vicious Habits.

6. Secondly: As I said, of your Doctrine concerning the fallibility of
Christian Faith, and of your Doctrine of Attrition, that they could serve only
to bring men to damnation; so I say of this your Assertion; that no sinner who
understands, and believes, it to be true, can avoid desperation, at the hour
of death, when he sees, that the extirpation of all vicious Habits, is
impossible, and yet Necessary to true Repentance and salvation of his soul.
Protestants are wont to receive the Communion at the hour of their death,
which, I suppose, you will say, ought not to be done, without true Repentance
of their sins (unless you will suppose all Protestants, at the hour of their
death, to be free from sin, which is against that, which Protestants themselves
suppose, as shall instantly appear) and yet it is impossible for them, at that
time, to attain your Repentance, by extirpation of all vicious Habits. In your
Book of Common Prayer, in the Order of visiting the sick, it is said; Here
shall the sick person make a special confession, if he feel his conscience
troubled with any ^eighty matter. Therefore, as I said, Protestants may have
some weighty matter at the hour of their death. And then is set down the
form of Absolution, which the Ptiest or Minister is to give. But how can he
who feels his Conscience troubled with any weighty matter, truly repent at
that last hour, by your kind of Repentance, which you say is a work of
difficulty and time? Or how can he be absolved without true Repentance?

7. Thirdly. This Assertion, is contrary to two doctrines, very common, and as
I may say, capital amongst Protestants, that Faith only justifyes; and that it
is impossible to keep the commandments. For, that Act of Faith, which they
call justifying, and remissiue of sin, is exercised in an instant, and would
save a man, though he should die, before it were in his power, to extirpate all
vicious Habits. And if it be impossible to keep all the commandments, it is
impossible not to committ some sinful Acts, whereby they are broken, and which
must necessarily leave after them, some vicious Habits, and so instead of
extirpating all vicious Habits, men must still be producing new ones. How then
can you say (Page: 40^. N. 31. Repentance is an essectuall conversion from all
sin to all holiness? Is not the breaking of Gods commandments a sin? Or can he
be converted from all sin, to all holiness, and to universal Obedience, as you
speak, who cannot avoid sin, but must still be disobeying?

8. Fourthly. In your doctrine, what shall become of such, as being newly
converted to the Faith of Christ, from Paganism, Judaisme, or Turcisme, are
baptized at the hour of death, and yet were full of vicious Habits, which they
have no time to Mortify or root out? Or will you deny true Repentance, and
Remission of sin, to those who after a life ledd in many grievous sins, and
after the Production of many ill Habits, being suddenly converted to Christian
Faith, were baptized in their blood, before they could destroy so many vicious
Habits?

9. Fifthly. If you duly consider what you say, you will find your manner of
Repentance, to be impossible, not only in the cases which I have mentioned, but
to those also, who live a considerable time, after forrow for their sins) be
it Attrition, or Contrition.) For the Habits of vice as they were produced by
frequency of acts, so are they not taken away, but by multiplication of
contrary acts. Neither do they consist in indivisibli, so as if one degree be
destroyed, there may not remain diverse others, which must be rooted out, by
little, and little: and yet, while one habit is diminished, or destroyed,
another may remain entire, and even be increased: for example, while the habit
of injustice is destroyed, or diminished, the habit of intemperance, or
impatience, or timidity, may remain, as they were, untouched, or else grow to
be more intense, by acts of those vices. Nay, who does so perfectly, and
totally, upon the very first onset, relinquish any one vice, that he is not,
morally speaking, subject to be committing some one act, or other, of that
former vice, whereby the Habit will return to receive some increase? And then
how large a space of time, may chance to slip away before the Habit of one,
(and much more of all vices) be perfectly rooted out? Especially if it be
deeply radicated, and seconded, and abbetted, or rather prevented, by some
inclination, arising from complexion, temptation of the devil, bad examples,
false principles of the world, and other such causes, which make the committing
of sin obvious, and easy; whereas the contrary acts of virtue not only find
great resistance, for the reasons now mentioned, but also because they are of
themselves of a sublime nature, and require great purity of intention, without
mixture of profit, or pleasure, or tincture of selfeloue; which universal
conjuncture, and perfect harmony, of all good circumstances, is so necessary,
that the want of any one, be it never so small, depraves the whole Action, and
deprives it of the nature, and denomination of being virtuous. All which
declares, how hard it is, to exercise a true Act of virtue, and easy to commit
sin, whereby some vicious Habit will be produced or increased, eve^ while we are
addressing overselves toward an act, and productio^ of an Habit of virtue;
according to the axiom of Philosophers and Divines, bonu^ ex integra causa,
malum ex quocunque defectu. To all which, if we add that which I declared in
the Introduction. That, one whose sins are not forgiven, and consequently is
not in state of Grace, cannot hope to avoid deadly sin, for any long time (and
so will be acquiring, or increasing vicious Habits) it will appear too
clearly, how hard it is, and how much time, industry, constancy, and
application, and above all, particylar Grace of God is necessary to extirpate
all the Habits of all vices; and that sinners though never so full of hearty
sorrow for their sins, must remain in a perplexed, afflicted, and desperate
condition, for fear of dying, before they have arrived to your new kind of
Repentance, oftentimes impossible, and always uncertain; as will more appear
by what I say

10. Sixthly: I would demand, what Rule you, or any man, can possibly give, to
discern, and prudently judge, when a sinner has arrived to that degree of
extirpating all vicious, and acquiring al virtuous Habits, which is sufficient
and necessary for true Repentance, since in Philosophy, natural contrary
Habits, may remain together, in some Degree; and much more if they be not
contrary, but only different or disparati, they cannot destroy one another; and
it is impossible to know, what Degrees they hold, or which, or how little, or
how much, or how many of them are destroyed: especially if we reflect, that
they may remain in their nature, and being, and yet not discover themselves,
or appear sensibly, and experimentally, for want of occasion; or by reason of
attention to other objects; or disposition of body, as sickness etc: or
affections of the mind, by Fear, Hope Joy, Sorrow, and the like; and even one
vice, may be occasion, that another appears not, or if one of them destroy
another, as prodigality, avarice, it is by producing, or increasing, a contrary
vicious Habit, whereby the party may seem to move, and yet not go forward;
change, but not to the better, and perhaps to the worse: and so your Repentance
must be composed, of vncertaintyes, and like that of Judas, more fit to bring
miserable, perplexed sinners to the halter, than to Heaven. You object, and
even vpbraide to Catholics, their making men uncertain of Salvation, by
requiring intention in the minister of Sacraments; which I have showed, to be
an irrational, uncharitable, and a mere panick fear. But indeed this
Doctrine of yours, which requires for true Repentance, conditions oftentimes
impossible, and always indiscernable, whether they be performed, or no, does
really put men, upon true and grounded, fear, and perplexityes, and occasion
of desperation. It is true, the best Divines teach, that a sinner is not bound
to repent himself instantly of his sin; so as he commits not a new sin, if he
do it not; because we sind no positive law of God, imposing any such
obligation; and he is assured by Scripture, that God will not deny pardon, at
whatsoever time, or instant, he is cordially sorrowful for his sins, with an
effectual purpose of amendment. But if he did forsee, that unless he repented
presently, it would grow impossible for him ever to repent, for example by
reason of death, or madness: in that case he were obliged to repent instantly,
both by obligation of the precept of Repentance, which, if ever, obliges in
that case; as also by the precept charitatis propriae, of charity as it
respects a man's self, which binds him to provide for the Salvation of his own
soul. Now seeing whosoever commits a deadly sin, does by that Act, vnavoidably
produce some degree, of a vicious Habit, which may consist with one, yea with
many degrees, of the contrary natural Habit of virtue, and morally speaking,
will still be receiving increase or addition, by many new Acts, which a sinner,
divested of justifying grace, as I said, is prone to committ; it follows, that
no man can possibly have any rational, and solid way to judge (but must
remain practice uncertain) whether he shall sooner, come to an end of
Repentance, or of his life, in your way. And therefore, not to put his soul
into so great uncertainty, and hazard, what would remain, but that he be
obliged to repent, as soon as the sin is committed: though even this he can
hardly do, according to your Doctrine, because he may exercise an Act contrary
to that particular sin, and yet some degree of the Habit thereof remain, unless
he exercise so intense an Act of virtue, that it produce an Habit so intense,
as no degree of the contrary vicious Habit can stand with it; which is both a
very rare thing, and when it happens, it still leaves you uncertain, whether
it has happened, or no: and therefore the more your Doctrine is discussed, and
examined, the more dangerous, pernicious, and absurd, it appears to be, in
many respects.

11. Seavently. In this Question, three sorts of Habits, or, as it were Habits,
are carefully to be distinguished: Which, while you confound, you do but
deceive the Reader. First: After the actual committing of any deadly sin,
there remains in the soul, habitual sin, whereby one is said to be a sinner,
to remain in sin, to be in state of sin, deprived of justifying Grace, an
enemy to God, and deserving eternal damnation* This Habitual sin, is not any
permanent, real, physical, positive Habit, or Quality, but a kind of moral
denomination, or ground thereof, which remains, after the Act of sin is
committed, till it be retracted, and reversed, by true Repentance, that is, by
hearty sorrow for sins past, with a firm purpose, never to offend God mortally
for time to come. Thus even amongst men, when one has offended another, by
some injurious Act, there remains in the deliquent, a moral denomination of a
person injurious, and an obligation of satisfaction, for obtaining pardon from
the person wrongfully offended: Which permanent moral denomination, cannot
formally consist, in any real or physical habit, or Quality, seeing it is
clear, that the pardoning such an offense, does neither produce, nor destroy
any real Quality, or entity, in the offender, who may be pardoned in absence,
and so receave no new, nor loose any former, real entity. If the former
injurious action, produced any vicious Habit, yet the remaining or not
remaining, of such a Quality, or Habit, is wholly impertinent, to the
forgiveness, or pardon granted by the wronged party, who forgives the injury,
without knowing, or caring, whether any natural physical Quality, do, or may
remain (which is the work of Philosophers to discuss) his motive to pardon,
being the moral retractation of the injurious action by a contrary demeanor,
submission, satisfaction, and sorrow; which being once duly perfomed, and
accepted, if any real entity, or habit chance to remain, it is divested of
all formal relation to any Act, as it was injurious, and offensive; seeing that
Act is retracted, and revoked, and therefore remains no more voluntary in the
offending person: as if we suppose one to have shot an arrow, or cast a dart,
with purpose to kill another, and to be instantly by particular motion of the
Holy Ghost strooken with effectual sorrow, and Repentance, before the shaft
arrive to the party against which it was levelled, the wounding or killing, in
that case, will indeed be said, to proceed from the hand, which discharged the
dart, in nature of a real natural effect, but not in the nature of a
voluntary, moral sinful action; since all that which was voluntary and
sinful, is supposed to have been retracted by true repentance, before the
effect was produced. This which we have declared, by the example of one man,
compared to another (that the Habitual offense, or injury, consists not in any
real Habit, or Quality, but in a moral consideration) holds much more, if we
transferr it, to the Habitual offense, of man, against God, who though de
facto he be pleased to forgive sin, upon our Repentance, yet, considering the
thing in itself, he could not be obliged, to forgive our sin, though our
sorrow were never so perfect, and though we were assisted to extirpate all
vicious Habits, by the contrary natural Habits of virtue, but besides all
this, and all that can be imagined to be done by us, there is required a
merciful, and free condonation from his infinite Goodness (whether by infusing
Grace, or otherwise, I do not dispute for the present) without which our sins
are not forgiven: whereby it clearly appears, that the denomination of being an
Habitual sinner, or to be in state of sin, consists not in any real Quality,
or Habit, since these may be destroyed, and yet habitual sin remain, and
these may remain, though habitual sin be taken away; as likewise if we
suppose, Almighty God to hinder miraculously, the production of any real
habits, or Qualityes by not affoardingh his universal free concurrence or
cooparation, without which no second cause can produce any action, or real
habits; yet whosoever commits a sinful action vnavoidably, is, and is
denominated, a sinner, till he repent. Therefore it is manifest, that habitual
sin, or sin remaining Habitually, consists not in any real physical habit, or
quality, and consequently, habitual sin, may remain, though the vicious
habit, either be destroyed, or never exist. Which shows; that your Repentance,
by rooting out all vicious habits is impertinent to true Repentance, and
forgiveness of sins.

12. The second kind of habits, which belong to our present purpose, are real,
physical, and natural Qualityes, or habits of virtue, orvice produced by
virtuous or vicious Acts, which acts being immediately voluntary, and produced
by our free will, are in themselves good or bad; vicious or virtuous; deserving
praise or disprayse; reward or punishment. But good, or bad, habits, are not
voluntary in themselves, but only in their causes; for as much, as they were
produced, by voluntary free Acts, which produce habits, no less necessarily,
than fire produces heat, in a matter capable, and approximated; nor is it in
the power of man, to exercise Acts, good, or bad, and forbid, or hinder them,
from producing virtuous, or vicious habits. When therefore a sinful Act, is
once effectually retracted, by true Repentance, the habit which proceeded from
it, and was voluntary, only in its cause, or sinful Action, remains now no
more voluntary, to that repentant sinner, but retains merely its, as I may
say, innocent, real nature, and entity, being in itself a dead Quality, and
no more a sin to such a one, than sickness, or death, was to Adam, after his
fall and repentance, that is, effects of sin, not sin. They may perhaps
facilitate, and incline to Acts, which may prove sinful, yet that
facilitation, and provocation, being not voluntary, but purely natural, is of
itself no sin at all: As the natural inclination which men have to certain
Objects, may be occasion of sinful Acts (if the will give free consent) yet is
not of itself any sin, nor voluntary unto us, but natural, and may be
occasion of great merit, if bad motions proceeding from it, be resisted by our
will assisted by Gods Grace. And you might as well say, that Repentance
requires the destruction of our nature (I mean, that natural inclination,
which Divines call Fomes Peccati, from which, sinful Acts may proceed, and
which in Adam proceeded from his actual sin, which deprived him of Original
Justice) as you require the abolition of all Habits, inclining to sin, and
produced by sinful Acts, which being retracted by Repentance, the Habits, or
effects of them, can retain no relish or relation to them as they were
voluntary, free, and sinful: For which cause, such Habits, have now nothing to
do, with any sin, either actual, or habitual; and therefore it is impossible,
that they can have any least repugnance, with justifying grace, Sanctity,
Charity, and Love of God, and consequently, true Repentance cannot require
their destruction, seeing their existence is compatible, with grace, and
Sanctity. Besides, if the Acts by which one vicious Habit is destroyed do not
of themselves destroy any degree, of some other vicious Habits, with which,
those Acts have no connection; much less, can justifying grace be incompatible,
with any natural acquired Habits of vice, these being of an inferior nature,
and order to that; and therefore habitual sin, with which grace and Sanctity
cannot stand, consists not in such natural acquired ill habits; neither can
the extirpation of them, be necessary to true Repentance, which may take away
the sin, though those habits remain. Morover the acts whereby some vicious
habit is acquired, may destroy some contrary vicious habit; as for example,
Acts of Prodigality, tend to the destruction of the habit of Avarice (and the
same may be said of all other vices, which are Extremes in order to the mean
of virtue:) But it is absurd, and impious to say, or imagine, that habitual
sin can be forgiven by any sinful Act, since no habitual sin, can be taken
away without Repentance, which being a special supernatural Gift of God,
cannot be a sin: Therefore we must affirm, that, real Qualityes, which we call
habits, are not habitual sin; otherwise sin might be pardoned by sin. Which is
further confirmed, by considering, that vicious habits, may be expelled
immediately and formally by natural habits, and mediate by Acts, whereby the
habits of such virtues are produced: For example, The habit of Injustice by the
Contrary habit of Justice, and so other vices by their contrary virtues,
habits, and Acts. And therefore, if habitual sin consist in real Qualityes, or
habits of vice, sin shall be forgiven formally by a form, or Quality, or habit
acquired by Acts produced by force of nature, which (being but natural) yet
shall be vltima dispositio to supernatural infused justifying Grace; which is
both absurd, and the wicked heresy of Pelagius. Lastly It is a certain truth,
that whosoever departs this life, in any one deadly sin, unrepented, cannot be
saved. And it is also true, that some habitual sin, may consist with some
natural precedent habits of virtue, which are not expelled by every deadly
sin, seeing such a deadly sin may be committed in some matter, which has no
connection at all with the objects of those natural habits of virtue, and
therefore such a sin shall not expel such habits of moral virtues, as de facto
it does not expel, even the supernatural habits of the Theological virtues,
Faith, and hope. And if habitual sin may stand with natural, yea and with
some supernatural Virtues, what reason can be imagined, but that habitual
grace, and Sanctity, may consist with the simple entity or nature of vicious
habits, being cleared, by Repentance, from all former relation of being effects
of sinful Acts, by which they were produced? And consequently; true Repentance
which is a disposition to the infusion of grace, may consist without the
extirpation of the habits, seeing grace itself may stand with them.

13. The third kind of Habits, I call, infused Habits, of the three
Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which have for their immediate
object, God himself, who is our last End; and infused Habits of moral
virtues, which respect or have for their Objects, the Means, which bring us to
that End. Now, for the production, or in fusion of supernatural Habits, we may
dispose ourselves, by voluntary supernatural Acts, produced by the particular
Assistance, of the Holy Ghost; but the Habits themselves, are produced and
infused into our souls, immediately and only by God, and not Physically, and
really produced, by any even supernatural Acts of ours, as natural Habits are
acquired and produced by our natural Acts. And as our soul, which is a
spirit, and the life of our body, is created by God alone, so no wonder if
justifying Grace which is the spiritual life and soul of our soul, be
infused by God, not produced by us. This difference arises, from the diversity
of nature, between natural, and supernatural, or Infused Habits. Natural
Habits do presuppose, a Power, or Ability to produce certain Acts, and Habits
are superadjoyned to the same Power, for producing those Acts, with greater
promptitude, and facility. But supernatural Habits, not finding in our soul,
a power to produce, of it self, supernatural Acts (for how could they be
supernatural, if they could be produced by natural forces?) give us such
power and Ability; and therefore in rigor of speech, should rather be called
Potentiae, than Habitus, Powers, than Habits. For which cause I said, Three
sorts of Habits, or as it were Habits, ought to be distinguished in this
Question. For. Habitual sin is, as I may say, less than an habit, being no
real, or Physical Quality; the infufed habits, are more than mere habits;
they are Powers, as I have declared. Natural, or acquired habits, being real
Qualityes on the one side, and on the other, presupposing in us, a Power to
work without them, are really, properly, and purely habits. It is therefore,
easy to understand the reason, why our Acts cannot produce supernatural
habits, which give us Power to produce such Acts, it being a clear case, that
no effect can produce that, which of its nature is the very Power to produce,
or the Efficient Cause, in respect of such Effects, which Cause must be
presupposed existent, and in being, before it can produce such an Effect.
Otherwise, there would be a mutual causality, and dependence, between the
first production of the Cause Efficient, and the effect thereof; the Cause would
be the effect of its own effect, and the Effect would be the cause of its
Cause; as if the Father should be son to his son, and the son father, to his
own Father.

14. From this Ground: That supernatural habits are Powers, without which, our
soul is not only weak, or infirm, but absolutely unable, to produce any
supernatural Act, and therefore cannot be acquired or produced by any Acts of
ours; there follows another difference; That, natural acquired Habits, yield
as it were a sensible facility, demonstration, experience, and feeling of
themselves, by remooving impediments, disposing the Organs of our Body, and
other such ways. But those other Habits, giving us the first Ability, and
Power, and being in their nature essentially supernatural, are not discernable
by sensible experience, but may well consist with vicious Habits, and with the
facility, or inclination which they affoard toward their several Objects; as
it happens not seldom, that a man, who in the sight of God, is more holy by
supernatural Grace, is carried with a more vehement inclination, or impulsion
to sinful Objects, either by his natural complexion, or vicious Habits,
acquired before his conversion, than another, made of a different constitution
of body, or clogged with fewer vicious Habits: which greater propension to sin,
is so far from being any sin of itself, that it gives continual matter, of
greater merit, by frequent combats, and victoryes.

15. And here I would ask, whether, if you hold the habits of vice to be
habitual sins, even after an Act of Contrition, or Sorrow with a firm purpose
to amend, you must not likewise believe, natural acquired Habits of virtues,
to be justice, and Sanctity, in the sight of God? And yet this were direct
Pelagianisme, evacuating the fruit of our Saviors Satisfaction, and merit;
and is in itself manifestly untrue. For the End to which God has elevated, and
ordained Man, being supernatural (the Beatificall Uision, or enjoying God in
his Glory) the Means, which bring us to that End, must also be supernatural,
and not to be compassed by our natural forces; and therefore natural Habits of
virtue, acquired by our own Acts, cannot be true Sanctity, and Justice, which
make us capable of the Beatificall Uision, nor can that Repentance, which
disposes us for Heaven, consist in the extirpation of vicious Habits, in which
Habitual sin does not consist, as Sanctity does not consist, in natural
Habits of virtue. Neither may it seem strange, that you should believe Sanctity
to consist in the acquired habits of Virtue; who hold Christian Faith, to be no
more than a probable Assent; or Conclusion, deduced by natural reason, from
Premises evidently apt to infer such a Conclusion; As also, who speaking of
Charity, say (Page: 368. N. 49.) It is against reason and experience, that by
the commission of any deadly sin, the Habit of Charity is quite extirpated. By
which you give to understand, that you believe the habit of Charity, to be
produced by our Acts, and to be destroyed by little and little, (as it
happens in natural acquired habits) and that the presence of it, may be
discovered by experience, which agrees only to natural habits, working in us
by a kind of experimental way: Whereas, if you did believe, the habit of
Charity, to be supernatural in essence, not producible by our Acts, but
infused by God, for enabling us, to love his Divine Majesty above all things,
you would easily see, that it could not be destroyed by parts, but all
together, and that only in case of committing a deadly sin, whereby the sinner,
in fact voluntarily prefers some creature before God, his Creator, and thereby
cease to love him above all things, which yet is essential to Charity, and
without which it cannot exist in any least degree. Holy Scripture tells us, he
that loves not, remains in death; which declares, that Charity is the life of
the soul; and de dly sin being the death thereof, if Charity may stand with
deadly sin, the life and death of the soul, should abide together. But, as I
said, it appears by this, that you discourse of the Theological vertrue of
Charity, as of natural acquired habits, produced by our Acts, may be
increased, diminished, produced, and destroyed without any like alteration in
the habits of the infused virtues, which are of a different nature, and higher
kind. And by this appears how necessary it was, to premise the Introduction,
concerning the infused habits, and necessity of Grace.

16. In the mean time, every one may see, that either you make small account
of Scripture, which yet you pretend to be a total Rule of Faith, or else, that
it is not clear, even when it seems to speak most clear. For, what
principle is more received in Christianity, or more evidently set down in
Scripture, than that by true, and hearty Contrition, a sinner does instantly
obtain pardon of his sins? And yet you deny this first principle, and as it
seems, can see no such evidence in Scripture concerning it. The Protestant
Church of England once so termed) at the beginning of their morning Prayer,
has this sentence, (out of the Psalm 51. according to their account) a
sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to God; and that out of S. Luke (15.18.19.) of
the Prodigal child: I will go to my father, and say to him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and against thee: I am no more worthy to be called thy
son; who upon such Repentance was instantly received into favor, as S. Basil
(Homil: de penit) says of him: Caeperat dicere, and mox illum Pater
complectitur. He had searce begun to ask pardon, when it was granted him. And
S. Chrysostom: (priore epist: ad Theodor: laps:) In eo momento totius vitae
peccata abstergit: In that very instant the sins of his whole life were wiped
away. Thus we read (Ezech: 33.12.) The justice of the just shall not deliver
him, in what day soever he shall sin: and the imprety of the impious shall
not hurt him, in what day soever he shall convert from his impiety. Therefore,
as a just man does instantly loosegrace, by his sin, so a sinner repe^ting,
does presentlyobtaine pardon of his sin, and lives by justifying grace, God
being more ready to pardon, than punish. And no wonder; seeing a sinner
performs all that is in his power, for that instant: And god requires of us,
no more than is in our power, nor can he seriously command impossible things
(as you expressly confess (Page: 390. N. 7.) in these words: The Rule of the
Law is also the dictate of common reason and equity, that no man can be obliged
to what is impossible. We can be obleged to nothing but by virtue of some
command: Now it is impossible that God should command in carnest any thing
which he knows to be impossible. For to command in earnest is to command with
an intent to be obliged which is not possible he should do, when he knows,
the thing commanded to be impossible. These I say, be your words, and they are
very true, but directly against the common doctrine of Protestants, that it is
impossible to keep the commandments of God (who surely commanded them in
Scripture in good earnest, and not in jest,) neither is there any moment
wherein a man endued with the use of Reason, may not avoid eternal damnation,
if he cooperate with Gods grace, which is never wanting; nor can there be any
moment, wherein a man may not hope to be saved. It is a true Axiom of Divines,
facienti quod in se est, etc: God does not deny his Grace to him, who does all
that lies in his power, assisted by grace. I said, A sinner does all that lies
in his power at that instant. For, if he surviue, he is obliged to keep all
the Commandments, which oblige under mortal sin: but this observance, is not
a part of Contrition or Repentance, but only the Object thereof, for as much, as
Contrition implies an effectual purpose, of keeping the Commandments: And for
that cause the same Prophet (Uers: 14.15.16.) says; If I shall say to the
impious: Dying thou shallt dye; and he do penance from his sin, and do
judgment and justice, and the same impious restore pledge, and render robbery,
walk in the Commandments of life, and do not any unjust thing: living he
shall live and shall notdy. All his sins, which he has sinned, shall not be
imputed to him: he has done judgment and justice, living he shall live. This
appears in the conversion and justification of David (2. Reg: 12.) who
repenting, had scarce uttered two words, I have sinned to our Lord, when he
heard of the Prophet: Our Lord also has taken away thy sin. Where some
observe, that the Prophet said not, our Lord will take away thy sin, de futuro,
but, has taken away thy sin, de praeterito: to signify, that, Contrition and
remission of his sins, met in the same instant. Which David himself
witnesses, (Psalm: 31. V. 5.) I said: I will confess against me my injustice
to our Lord: and thou have forgiven me the impiety of my sin. Upon which place
S. Austine speaking in person of David, says: my confession had not come so
far as to my mouth, and God heard the voice of my heart. My voice was not yet in
my mouth, and the ear of God was already in my heart. (Actor 2.38.) Peter said
to them, do penance and be every one of you baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ: And (Uers: 42.) They therefore that received his word, were baptized.
But it is clear, that these men, could not have time, to root out all vicious
habits: therefore that cannot be required to true Repentance. Prove: 8. I love
those who love me. But how ca^ God be said to love those, who love him, if he
forgiues not the sin, but remains offended, and an enemy, to one who loves him
by true Contrition, which implies the love of his divine Majesty, above all
things? S. Austine in Enchirid: (C. 65.) says: Not so much the measure, or
quality of time, as of sorrow, is to be considered: For, God does not despise a
contrite and humbled heart. Which last words taken out of the 40. Psalm: do of
themselves prove our Assertion. So that, Scripture, Fathers, and Theological
reasons, do all concur in this, that effectual sorrow for sins past, with a
firm Resolution to amend for time to come, is a sufficient disposition for
remission of sins, whether it be perfect Contrition, without Sacramental
absolution, or attrition with it; though it be also true, that perfect
Contrition must involue, a purpose to receive absolution, in due time.

17. Your third Error is delivered in many places of your Book, and consists
in this: That, one who lives in a sinful error against faith, may be saved,
by a general Repentance of all his sins known, and unknown, though he do not
forsake that culpable error, but live and die in it. In your Answer to the
preface of Charity Maintained (Page: 7. N. 3. you approve the saying of Potter,
that both sides, by the confession of both sides, agree in more Points than are
simply and indispensably necessary to salvation, and differ only in such as are
not precisely necessary: That it is very possible a man may die in error and
yet die with repentance, as for all his sins of Ignorance, so in that number,
for the errors in which he dies: with a repentance, though not explicit and
particular: which is not simply required, yet implicit and general, which is
sufficient: So that, he cannot but hope, considering the Goodness of God, that
the Truths retained on both sides, especially those of the necessity of
Repentance from dead works and Faith in Jesus Christ, if they be put in
practice, may be an andidote against the errors held on either side: to such
he means, and says, as being diligent in seeking Truth, and desirous to find
it, yet miss of it through humane frailty, and die in error.

18. About which words, it is to be observed: First, that as I noted above, you
and Potter confess, that Catholics hold more Points of Faith than are necessary
to salvation; so that the Points in which we differ from Protestants, which you
call errors, are not necessary; and accordingly you teach (Page: 9. N. 7.)
that, men may be saved though they hold the doctrines of Indulge^ces,
Purgatory, and the use of Latin Service. And therefore I may turn against you,
your own words (Page: 220. N. 52.) May it please you therefore, now at last to
take notice, that by Fundamental, we mean all, and only that which is
necessary: and then I hope you will grant, that we may safely expect salvation
in a Church which has all things Fundamental to salvation; Unless you will
say, that more is necessary, than that which is necessary. These words I say,
prove that we may even safely (for that is your word) expect salvation in a
Church, which by confession of all sides, believes more Points than are
necessary, unless you will say, that more is necessary, than that which is
necessary; or, that we believe not as many Points as are necessary, though we
believe more than are necessary. Secondly: That, as I noted before, you
contradict yourselves in saying, That by the goodness of God, the Truths
retained on both sides, may be an antidote against the errors of such as being
diligent in seeking Truth, and desirous to find it, yet miss of it by humane
frailty, and die in error. For, the errors of men, so qualifyed as you
describe them, must needs be invincible; if invincible, no sins) if no sins,
how can any truth be an antidote against them? Or how can; the doctrine of
necessity of Repentance from dead works, concern works, which are not dead,
that is, no sins, nor can be the Object of Repentance, or capable of pardon?
I beseech you remember your own express words (Page: 16. N. 21.) The very
saying they were pardonable, implies they needed pardon, and therefore in
themselves were damnable. How then do you say, that inculpable errors, may be
pardoned by a general Repentance? Or how do you in particular, agree either
with Catholics, or Protestants, about the necessity of Repentance of dead
works, seeing you disagree from both of them, in declaring what Repentance is
necessary? Thirdly: (Page: 8. N. 3.) you say the Doctor gives them only hope of
pardon of errors, who are desirous, and according to the proportion of their
opportunityes and abilityes, industrious to find the Truth, or at least truly
repentant, that they have not been so. In which words you distinguish those,
who are desirous and industrious to find the truth from those, who are
repentant that they have not been so: The former sort of which men, are not
capable of Repentance, because they committed no sin. And if the second be
truly repentant, (as you suppose they are) that they have not been desirous and
industrious to find the Truth, you suppose they know that they have not been
so. To whom then shall belong that Repentance, which you call general and
implicit of all errors, known and unknown? Fourthly; Howsoever you
endeavor to answer these contradictions, it seems you are constant, that a
sinful error may be pardoned, though one live and die in it: And then, Fifthly,
The difficulty, which I spoke of above, comes to urge you: How such a man can
attain your kind of Repentance, at the hour of his death, when it is
impossible. But let us go forward.

19. (Page: 21.) you say; If any Protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept
in any error, by any sin of his will (as it is to be feared many millious are)
such Error is, as the cause of it, sinful and damnable: yet not exclusive of
all hope of salvation, but pardonable if discovered, upon a particular
explicit Repentance, if not discovered, upon a general and implicit
Repentance for all sins known and unknown: in which number, all sinful
Errors must of necessity be contained, (Page: 168. N. 52.) speaking of error
proceeding from some Voluntary and avoidable fault, and in its own nature
damnable, You say: If the party so erring, die with Contrition for all his sins
known and unknown (as his Error can be no impediment but he may) his Error
though in itself damnable, to him, according to your Doctrine (Charity
Maintained disclaimes from any such false, and implicatory Doctrine, as this
it) will not prove so: As the most malignant poison, will not poison him that
receives with it a more powerful Antidote. In these and other passages of your
Book, you teach, that a sinful, and damnable Error (for of such we must
speak, when we speak of Repentance, to object whereof his sin) may be
forgiven, while one remains in such an Error, or without relinquishing it;
which is a most pernicious error, and destructive of itself. For, if his
error be sinful; it is not, because he sees it to be an error, and yet
persists in it; which is impossible, seeing that to judge a particular error to
be an error, is to forsake it and embrace the contrary truth, because an
error discovered, is destroyed; neither is it an error, but a true judgment,
to judge that an Error is an Error, according to the saying of S. Austine
(Lib. 15. de Trinit: Cap: 10.) Nemo falsa novit, nisi cum falsa esse novit.
Uerum est enim, quod illa falsa sint. No man can be said to know false things,
except by knowing they are false: etc: But an error is sinful. because he
gives a culpable cause thereof, either by not vising diligence to find the
truth, in a matter of highest moment, which is that vnum necessarium, that one
necessary Thing, of which our savior spoke, and to which, all other things are
to be referred, and therefore requires our chiefest, and utmost endeavor, and
all that may any way put it in hazard, ought instantly to strike us with a most
deep fright, and move us to fly from it, tanquam a facie colubri, as from the
face of a serpent, o^ by reason of pride, confidence in his own wit or
judgment, or the like sinful cause, which must be known and voluntary, in
order to such an error, and ignorance; otherwise they could not be sinful, as
we have seen out of your own words, that we cannot be obliged to that which
is not in our power. Now, if the cause of such error be sinful, and
voluntary, to say, one may be pardoned of that sin, without actually forsaking
it, is to say: A sin may be repented, and forgiven, while one is actually
persisting in the committing of it, and seeing to pardon a sin, is to destroy
it, and to be committing it, is to conserve it in being, sin should be
destroyed, and conserved; be and not be, at the same time; which is a manifest
contradiction.

20. But you say, The sinner may have Repentance of all sins known, and
unknown. I answer: You are in a great error, or inconsideration, both
concerning the nature of sin, and of Repentance; in supposing that either can
sin be committed without all knowledge, or that true Repentance can extend it
self to a sin, of which one is in Act of voluntary committing it. For, how does
he effactually detest, and with his whole heart repent himself of it, if he be
yet voluntarily committing it? And as for the other part: All sin is voluntary,
and necessarily presupposes, some kind of knowledge thereof to proceed in the
understanding, without which, it were not voluntary, nor vincible, nor
culpable, but necessary, and invincible, or no sin at all. Which being true in
all sin, much more must it be so in deadly, and damnable sins, (as you affirm
errors against Faith to be) which require full knowledge, and deliberation
when they are first committed. And this is particularly true in the subject of
which we speak; in regard, that our good God (whose will is that all should be
saved, and come to the knowledge of Truth) never fails to be frequently
preventing, illuminating, moving, and strongly inciting the souls of men to
embrace the true Faith, Religion and church, within which he has confined
salvation, and is continually speaking so loud as he may be clearly heard, and
so strongly, as every one must confess himself guilty, if he do not obey, and
hearke^ to a voice so sweet forcible, and Divine. And therefore your Contrition
of all sins known and unknown, comes to be a mere sixion, or illusion; your
Repentance of sins which one is actually committing, to be a plain
contradiction; and both of them, to contain a most pernicious Doctrine. To
comprise all this matter in few words: When you speak of sins not known: if
the ignorance be invincible, it is no sin: if vincible, and culpable, it does
not excuse from sin the Error which proceeds from it; and therefore cannot be
forgiven, as long as one is committing it, no more than other sins against Gods
Commandments, for example, hatred, desire of revenge etc. And how can want of
knowledge, excuse one, who either sins by that very want of knowledge, or that
want of knowledge, is the effect of his sin, that is, of culpable neglect to
learn; as a the want is not excused from the rot, by ignorance, proceeding
from his voluntary neglect to study.

21. Perhaps some may say; I have proved sufficiently, that no Protestant, or
other Sectary, can have true Contrition of sins, wholly unknown, or when it is
committing them, or while he has time to amend them, neglects to do it. But
the difficulty may seem to remain, what is to be said of a Protestant, at the
point of death, if he come to be particularly contrite, of his former culpable
negligence, to seek the true Religion (but now has no time to discuss
particular Controversyes) with a firm resolution, to embrace that Faith which,
if God spare him life, he shall, by his Divine Assistance, find to be true. To
this doubt, I

22. Answer, First, That such a one cannot, according to your Doctrine, hope
for Salvation, which is never granted, without true Repentance, and this cannot
be had; at that moment of death. when there is no time to root out all vicious
Habits, which cannot be supposed to be few, in persons, who for worldly
respects* have not cared to seek out the true Religion, on which, every
Christian believes, the salvation of his soul to depend. Secondly: This case
or supposition yields as much as Charity Maintained intended to prove, That, a
formal Protestant cannot be saved, if he persist in Protestantisme. For, he
who is heartily sorry that he has neglected to seek the true Faith, Religion,
and Church, and conceives an obligation to have used more diligence therein:
does clearly doubt, whether the Protestant Religion be true, and the^by is no
more a Protestant, than he can be a Christian, who doubts, whether Christian
Religion be true, it being a true Axiom in Divinity; dubious in side est
infidelis, He who doubts of his Faith, is an infidel. The reason is; because
Christian Divine Faith is infallible, and certainly true, and consequently,
cannot consist with any deliberate, or voluntary doubt; neither does Christian
Faith, believe any Article of Faith with greater certainty, than that itself
is certain. Whosoever therefore doubts, whether Protestants Faith, and
Religion, be true, ceases to be a Protestant, or to believe Protestant Religion
to be true, with that firmnes of Faith, which is required for Salvation. And
although such a pertinent sinner, be not a Catholic, by the actual belief of
those Points, conceruing which he has no time to be particularly instructed,
yet he is really and actually a Catholic by believing in voto or desire,
whatsoever the Church teaches, and those errors of his, which before were
culpable, only by reason of some culpable cause, or neglect to seek the truth,
while he had time to do it, after true, and effectual Contrition of such a
sinful cause remain errors materially only, and no sins, till it be in his
power to examine and reverse them; just as virtuous persons, in the true
Church, may by invincible ignorance hold some error against Faith, till they
be better instructed. And so the final Conclusion will be, that he who
effectually repents his sin, committed in omitting culpably to seek the true
Church, and has no possible means to examine matters, may be saved, not by a
general but by a particular contrition; not of sins unknown, but known: not
remaining a formal Protestant, but being a real Catholic, having retracted
the former malice of his sin, and believing in desire, all that the Catholic
Church believes, and so he is a Protestant neither in act, seeing he doubts of
the Protestant Religion, nor in voto or desire; which is to be a professed
member of the true Church, and to embrace the truth, and forsake all Error, as
in this present Question, we expressly speak of the errors of Protestants,
and enquire whether they can be saved with such errors, as likewise our
supposition, for the present is, that the Roman is the true Church, and so the
Uotum or desire, of such a penitent, is to forsake the Doctrine of Protestants,
and to embrace the Religion of the Roman Church. But then, if such a one
survine, and come to have time sufficient for seeking, and finding out the
truth, and neglect to do it, he waxes recidivous and falls into a new sin,
and his e^^ours grow again to be sinful by reason of their new sinful cause.

23. Your example, that poison will not poison him that receives with it a more
powerful Antidote, is either de subjecto non supponente, as if the poison of
sin could stand with the Antidote of Contrition; or implies a manifest
falsehood, and contradiction, if you suppose, that contrition, can destroy that
sin, which one is committing. Natural or corporal poison, may stand with an
Antidote, but sin, the poison of the soul, cannot stand with Contrition and so
ca^ help no more, tha^ an Antidote not receyved, can hinder the, operation of
poison and contrition, cannot be receyved, in his soul, who continues the act,
or affection to a deadly sin. And so your example turns against yourself; and
this Answer proves to be a more powerful Antidote, than the poison of your
objection, which therefore I hope will not poison any, that receives with it the
Antidote.

23. Thirdly, I answer, by denying absolutely the case which was proposed; that
he who has sinful errors, at the hour of his death, can have true
Contrition; without actual direliction of them. My reason is; because
Contrition, being a most singular Gift of the Holy Ghost, as I proved in the
Introduction, and including the perfect love of God, is an infallible
Disposition to Justifying Grace; as therefore, God in his holy Providence, has
decreed, that after baptism, in the ordinary course, or de lege ordinaria,
none shall be saved, out of his Uisible Church, so he gives not his effectual
Grace to exercise an Act of Contrition in the Will, before he endue him with
true Faith in the understanding, that as his errors were repugnant to Faith,
so his Repentance, and retractation, may rectify them, by the contrary Truths
of Faith. For this cause, the Apostle, after he had said, God will have all men
saved, which words signify the End, adds, and to come to the knowledge of
truth, as the Means, to such an End. And this being the ordinary course; in
vain is it, to dispute what God may do de potentia absoluta, by his absolute
Omnipotency, or whether there be any physical, or Metaphysicall repugnance,
between Contrition, and Errors per se loquendo damnable; since those matters
wholly depend on Gods free will, and holy pleasure, which we cannot know, by
Logical, humane demonstrations, but only by Revelation, whereby God has
declared in general, that for Christians, there is no salvation, without
professing the Faith of his Uisible Church: and for us to put exceptions, to
that general Rule, can have no other effect, than to make men negligent in
seeking the Truth, in time, upon hope, that they may be saved with Errors
against Faith, at the hour of their death, when indeed it will prove too late.
Neither can it be objected, that at the hour of death, it is not possible to
examine particular Controversyes, and none can be obliged to an impossible
thing. For, the answer is easily given, out of what we have already said.
First, that this ought not so seem strange to you, whose kind of Repentance is
impossible, at that hour of death, as I have often said; and so we may apply
against you, your own words (Page: 390. N. 7.) They that confess their sins and
forsake them, shall find mercy, though they confess them to God only, and not
to men. They that confess them both to God and men, if they do not effectually
and in time forsake them, shall not find mercy. Now by your doctrine men cannot
forsake their sins in time, who have not time for rooting out all vicious
habits, and therefore shall not find mercy. But by the way; what evidenct
Scripture have you, that they shall find it who confess their sins only to God,
seeing, some Lutherans, and other Protestants hold, and other confess that it
was the Doctrine of ancient holy Fathers, that, private confession of sins, is
commanded by God? and we have heard Kemnitius teaching, that even Contrition,
without absolution, is not sufficient for pardon of sins, either in act, or in
desire; and your resolute speech to the contrary, is an affirmation, without
any proof. Neither can Contrition be sufficient, unless it imply a firm
purpose to perform all that God has commanded, whereof Confession of deadly
sins is one. Secondly I answer, that, as God is supposed at that time to infuse
perfect contrition, and change the will, so also you should suppose that he
rectifyes the understanding, and the same means which he uses for the one, he
may use for the other, whether he do it immediately by himself, or by the
ministry and help of some second cause, as a catechist, or instructour, or
good books to stir up the species, and then God may give his grace to
believe; and it would be incomparably more strange, that God should give
Repentance, to Christians remaining out of his Visible Church for matter of
Faith, than to clear their Errors, supposing he will give them Repentance,
though indeed in our case, there can be no true Repentance, unless all sinful
errors be rectifyed,

24. That which you allege out of the Prophet David, aboccultis meis munda me,
cannot signify, that sin can be committed without some knowledge, as even
Socinians confess, but only that sins committed by culpable ignorance, are not
wont to move us so much to detestation and sorrow, as those which are committed
with full knowledge; and therefore those hidden sins require a more particular
light, and Grace of God, to present them to our souls so clearly and
effectually, as we may be perfectly sorrowful for them in particular, and not
be deceyved with such a general, ineffectuall, sorrow, as you obtrude, without
dereliction of the sins, of which men, pretend to repent.

25. And now, I hope it appears, upon examination of your particular errors,
concerning Repentance; that you make it either insufficient, by your pretended
necessity of extirpating all vicious habits; or contradictory and destructive
of itself, by holding a Repentance, joined with the actual committing that
sin, for which one repents: And therefore, that Protestants cannot hope to be
saved, though they should die with your Repentance: and consequently that not
only Protestancy unrepented, but even repented, in your manner, is destructive
of salvation; which is more than hitherto has been said, and shows what a
choice champion you are for Protestants, and how unadvised, or partial they
are, who so excessively cry up your Book.

CHAP: IX. THE ANSWER TO THE PREFACE OF CHARITY MAINTAINED IS EXAMINED.
1. HAving in the precedent Chapters, endeavored to draw into Heads, the most
universal and substantial Points, handled in Mr. Chilling worths Book,
either particular to him, or common to Protestants; it remaynes only, that
according to the method held by Charity Maintained, in his Answer to Dr.
Potter, we touch some particulars, which perhaps did not necessarily, or
naturally, offer themselves, in those general Heads, and yet must not be
omitted by me, if it were but for taking away all suspicion, or aspersion, that
any thing has been purposely dissembled, as impossible to be answered; though
it be very true, that all difficultyes of moment, have been considered, and
examined in the former Chapters. And therefore it ought not to be expected, and
much less exacted, that I spend much time, in this particular Survey of every
parcel of His Book, being sufficient, that the Reader be referred, to those
several places, wherein his Sophismes are discovered, his reasons confuted,
Objections answered, forque^t contradictions laid open. I will answer his
Chapter in order, as they lie, having first begun with his answer to the
Preface of C: M. And so now I begin to address my speech to him.

2. In your (Page: 6. N. 2.) you accuse Charity Maintained as perverting the
state of the Question, which, say you, was not whether Papists and Protestants
can be saved in their several professions, but whether we may without
incharitableness, affirm, that Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation. But
this is a difference, without any real disparity. For, Charity Mistaken, and
Catholics, believing in their conscience that the Religion which they profess,
is true, and the contrary false, Dr. Potter must not take it ill, af Catholics
believe they may be saved in that Religion for which they suffer; as Charity
Maintained says: (Part. 1. Page: 27. N. 1. and Part. 1. Page 36. N. 17.) this,
I say being supposed, it follows, that, we must either believe Protestancy
unrepented to destroy salvation; or else, that both Catholics, and Protestants
may be saved in their several professions. For if this last were once granted,
then Protestants might be saved, though it were proved, that our Religion were
true. And therefore all the proofs of Charity Mistaken must be resolved into
this Question; whether both Catholics, and Protestants can be saved. Which
answer is of it self so obvious, that yourselfe did perceive it; and therefore
you say to Charity Maintained. Neither may it be said that your Question here
and mine, are in effect the same, seeing it may be true that you and we cannot
both be saved: And yet as true, That, without incharitableness you cannot
pronounce us damned. As, though Jews and Christians cannot both be saved, yet
a Jew cannot justly, and therefore not charitably, pronounce a Christian damned.
Which is a very strange speech, as if you would have Catholics not believe
Catholic Religion to be true; which if they believe, it follows that
Protestants cannot be saved, unless both Catholics and Protestants may be
saved, and therefore you had no reason to say, that the Question was not,
Whether, both Catholics and Protestants may be saved. For this cause Charity
Mistaken gives this very title to his sixth Chapter: That, both Catholics and
Protestants cannot possibly be accounted of one and the same Religion, Faith,
and Church. And the Title of his tenth, and last Chapter: is: A recapitulation
of the whole discourse (mark, of the whole discourse) wherein it follows upon
the confession of both partyas, that the Catholics and the Protestants, are
not both of them saveable in their sever all Religions. Thus (to turn your
own example directly against you) supposing Jews and Christians cannot both
be saved, a Christian who believes Christian Religion to be true, may justly,
and charitably pronounce a Jew damned. In like manner, Charity Mistaken (Chap:
2. Page: 15.) says expressly, That, as Catholics so long as they believe their
Religion to be true, must believe Protestancy unrepented to destroy salvation
so (says he) the same must they also believe of us, if indeed they believe
their own Religion to be true Christian Religion, of which, Christ himself
pronounced, Qui non crediderit, condemnabitur. And why must Protestants say of
us, as we say of them, but because (as I alleged out of the Title of his last
Chapter) Catholics and Protestants are not both of them saveable in their
several Religions? And therefore the whole discourse of Charity Mistaken was
not so much to prove in particular, the truth of Catholic Religion, and
falsehood of Protestantisme, as that, (supposing Catholic Religion be true) it
is no incharitableness, to believe, and profess, that, Protestants cannot be
saved, without Repentance, and that, Protestants must say the same of us, if
their Religion were true; and so all the Question is resolved, finally, and
formally, into this, Whether both Catholics and Protestants can be saved in
their several Professions, as Charity Maintained affirmed it to be.

3. After this; (N. 3.) you endeavor to prove out of Dr. Potter, that he
answered directly to that Question which Charity Maintained proposed; because
the Doctor teaches, that men of different Religions may be saved by repentance
of all their sins of ignorance. But by your leave, the Question is; whether men
of different Religions, can be saved, if they live, and dye, in that
difference, without repentance. For he who repents his error, or the culpable
cause thereof, ceases to be formally of that Religion, of which he was, before
such his repentance; in regard that he who doubts in his Faith, is an infidel,
in respect of that Faith, as I declared above; and even yourselfe say (Page: 25.
N. 29.) He that would Question whether knowing a thing and doubting of it, may
stand together, deserves without Question, no other Answer, but laughter. Your
numbers (5.6.7.) contain nothing not answered already.

4. In answer to your (N. 8.) I say, as hertofore, that Potter somtymes seems
to affirm, that it is damnable to disbelieue any Point, sufficiently proposed,
as revealed by God: But yet, that both he, and other Protestants do, and must,
contradict that their affirmation, in diverse respects, as I proved above at
large, and therefore whatsoever he seems to say in one place, being
contradicted by himself in another, is to be reputed as never said, in order
to any other effect, except this only, that no regard is to be had, what he
says, either in the one, or the other, of those places: And therefore Charity
Maintained had reason to say, that in this particular he never touched the
Point really, seeing he himself destroys, what himself might seem once to
have builded.

5. All that you have (N. 10.) is answered, by saying, that it is damnable, not
to believe, any least Point, which the Church proposes to be a Divine trurh,
that is, as revealed by God; till which time, one may err, without Heresy.
Now, to determine what Points in particular be so proposed, were to run overall
particular Articles of Faith: Yet to your instances, I answer briefly: The
Quarta decimani, who held, that Easter was to be kept according to the Rite of
the Jews, were justly condemned of Heresy, not precisely for the Circumstance
of Time, but for the ground of that Assertion, that it was necessary to do so;
which would have brought with it, a necessity of keeping all the Rites of the
Jews. And therefore you say untruly, that, God had not then declared himself
about Easter. But the keeping of Chrismass day, ten days, sooner, or later,
goes upon no such ground. For, I never heard, that the Jews kept our Saviors
Nativity, either according to the new, or old Calendar. As for believing that
there are Antipodes; if you can produce any Text of Scripture, or definition of
Gods Church, I will hold it a matter of Faith. Sure I am, it is a matter of
reason, not to produce such impertinent examples as you do. The same I say of
Predetermination; that what the Church shall determine, will become a matter of
Faith. The example of Millenaryes, and necessity of Eucharist for Infants
(which last you untruly Father upon S. Augustine) you are still obtruding upon
us, without proving what you say: as also that S. Austine did not hold it as a
matter of Faith, that the Bishops of Rome had Right and Power, to judge of all
appeals, from all parts of the world; and it is manifestly false, that the
Church ever determined, the Doctrine of the Millenaryes; or that S. Austine did
deny the Pope had Right to judge of all appeals: though for the Practice
thereof, there might be just cause, not to use it promiscuously, in all
occasions. You say, Justine Martyr denies that some good Christians held the
contrary to the Millenaryes: But, even learned Protestants, and more skillfull
in the Greek tongue than you are, interpret S. Justine Martyr in a direct
contrary sense, as I show hereafter. And in fine, our Question is only
concerning matters defined by the Church, and not what any particular Doctor
might hold. It seems you hold it not to be a matter of Faith, that Heretics
may give true Baptism: but S. Austine held, and Gods Church believes it, to be
such; and by this example we prove, that some Points are matter of Faith, which
are not evidently contained in Scripture.

6. To your (N. 13.) I answer: Charity Maintained (N. 6.) said not, that a
persuasion that men of different Religions may be saved, is Atheism, but a
ground of Atheism: yea, he said not this absolutely, but thus: there is not a
more pernicious Heresy, or rather (mark this modification) a ground of
Atheism, than a persuasion that men of different Religions may be saved. Where
you see, such a Doctrine is not absolutely called Atheism, but only that it
may be rather called a ground of Atheism, than a pure, or ordinary, kind of
Heresy. And I pray, is not a persuasion, that men of different Religions may be
saved without repentance, a ground and disposition, either to deny the Deity,
which is to be worshipped only by a true Religion, or not to care much for God,
or Religion? And who would dislike this saying of Charity Maintained,
pronounced in general, except a Socinian, or some such creature? Yourselfe say
(N. 8.) That, to deny a thing sufficiently proposed, to be revealed by God, is
to give God the lie: and to say, that men may be saved, who give God the lie,
is it not a ground, and disposition to end in Atheism? Potter says (Page:
212.) Whatsoever is revealed in Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of
Scripture, is in some sense fundamental, in regard of the Divine Authority of
God, and his word, by which it is recommended: that as, such is may not be
denied, or contradicted without infidelity. Why do you not question the Doctor,
and ask, how he can be an infidel, who believes the true God? Remember your
own saying, that the natural fecundity of error is to beget Error. And so
what will follow of freedom, and indifferency for all beliefes (of which one
only can be true) but a flitting from one Error to another, till they hold no
Religion at all? But the truth is, you could not impugn Charity Maintained,
but by changing, or rather falsifying the Question, which was, whether men of
different Religions, may be saved without repentance, and you say, they may be
saved, by repentance; whereby it may seem, you do not deny, but it were a
ground of Atheism, to assirme, that men of different Religions, may be saved
without any repentance, though they live, and die in their error.

7. The rest of your Answer, being only an Answer, to such Demands, as Charity
Maintained proposed, which have been handled at large in other places, I will
only briefly note, First; what you say. (Page: 18. N. 26.) in these words ( why
an implicit Faith in Christ and his word, should not suffice as well as an
implicit Faith in your Church, I have desired to be resolved by many of your
side, but never could) has been expressly answered (Chap: 2.) where I have
showed, that Scripture alone neither extensiue contains all necessary Points
of Faith, nor as I may say, intensiue, seeing even those Articles which it
contains, for the true and certain understanding of them, require the
authority of the church; to say nothing, that we cannot have an implicit Faith
in the Scripture, unless it be resolved into our belief of the Church, for
whose authority we receive Scripture it self. Secondly; That, (N. 19.) you
answer not directly to the Question of Charity Maintained (Part: 1. P. 15. N.
12.) (What visible Church was there before Luther, disagreeing with the
pretended Church of Protestants:) But transferr it, from a Church, to
particular men, as if it were necessary, for us to show, that every man agreed
with the Roman Church, seeing we know, many particular men, have fallen into
errors; but we affirm that before Luther, there was no visible true,
Orthodox, Church, which disagreed from the Roman, and particularly in those
Points, wherein Protestants disagree from us. Thirdly, that (Page: 23. N, 27. as
it should be) you accuse us of want of Charity, even while you are in the act
of giving the same ill measure to us, saying, that for want of Charity to
Protesiants, we always suspect the worst of them: and what greater want of
Charity can there be in you, than not only to suspect, but to pronounce and
proclaim in print, that we want Charity, which is the heaviest imputation that
can be imagined. For, seeing Charity is major horum, greater than Faith, or
Hope, in saying we want Charity, you say we offend against a virtue, of greater
perfection, than any other, either Theological or Moral. And so, Protestants
in general, are more uncharitable, against Catholics, by accusing them of
want of Charity, than Catholics can be against them, who we say, cannot be
saved, without Repentance, for want of true Faith. And it is well to be
observed, that Protestants do not accuse us, of incharitableness, in saying,
they want true Faith (seeing they profess to believe that we also err in
Faith,) but because we say, they cannot be saved, supposing they want the true
Faith; as we also ought to believe of ourselves, unless we were most infallibly
certain of the truth of our Faith, as we are. Fourthly. You show little skill
in Divinity, while you make no difference betwixt an erroneous Conscience, and
error, whereas Conscience (which is always considered in order to practice) may
be practice true and right, and yet rely upon some invincible speculatiue
error: Fifthly. In vain you labor to prove, that ignorance is not accidental
to error; seeing you know very well, that Charity Maintained spoke not of
ignorance and error, as if they were accidental to themselves, or all
ignorance accidental to error, but that, to be inexcusable or not excusable;
vincible or invincible; culpable or not culpable; voluntary or not voluntary;
are accidental, both to ignorance, and error, which you will not deny, seeing
they are separable, and some error may be vincible, and some other invincible
etc. Wherein if you impugn him, you confute yourselfe, who (Page: 25.) say, that
he who erres, though not conceaveable without ignorance simply, may be very
well considered either as with, or without voluntary and sinful ignorance.
This occurres concerning your answer to the Preface. Now I come to answer your
Chapters, as they lie in order.

CHAP: X. The Answer to his FIRST CHAPTER, ABOUT THE STATE OF THE QVESTION:
And Whether amongst men of DIFFERENT RELIGIONS one side only can be saved.
1. I Omit to take notice, that, whereas Charity Maintained in the Title of his
First Chapter, speaks expressly of men of different Religions, you turn
Religions into Opinions, saying, There is no reason, why among men of different
Opinions, one side only can be saved: As if there were no difference between
difference in Faith and Religion, and in Opinion. Which shows, that no man
could do you injury, in saying, that your kind of Christian Faith was but
Opinion, whereof you complain (Page: 35. N. 7.) But this I omit here, and come
to tell you, that in vain you take great pains, to pervert notoriously the
meaning of Charity Maintained against his words, and intention, about the
possibility of the saveablenesse of Protestants; Whereas He, and Charity
Mistaken, and all Catholics, believe, and profess the same thing; That, a
Protestant, or any other Sectary, if his error be sinful, cannot be saved,
wihout repentance of those errors, it being impossible, that the sin should be
forgiven; while one remains in it. And therefore Charity Maintained
distinguishing between the sinful errors in the understanding of a
Protestant, and other sins, which he might have committed, has these express
words: we have no revelation, what light might have cleared his errors, or
Contrition retracted his sins, in the last moment before his death. The reason
why besides the relinquishing of his errors, Charity Maintained expressly
required retractation of all other deadly sins, was, least any should think,
that for the salvation of Protestants, or any other Sectaryes, it were
sufficient, that they were cleared from their Heresies, and united to the
Church by Faith; whereas indeed, after that is done, there remains a chief
business, which is, to conceive effectual sorrow, for all other deadly sins.
For which cause, when we understand, that a Catholic who has true Faith, dies
suddenly, or without Sacramental absolution, we are moved with just fear, and
grief. So that, Charity Maintained expressly requires two things: A
renounciation of errors, and contrition, both for those sinful errors, and
all other sins. And therefore you had no reason at all to say (Pa. 31. N. 3. I
wish you had expressed yourselfe in this matter more fully and plainly) he
having declared himself very clearly.

2. But you are not only unreasonable, but unjust also, when you take for
plain, that which even yourselfe in this very place say was not plain: And
what you say, is only insinuated (that though no light did clear the errors
of a dying Protestant, yet Contrition might retract his sins) you take for a
plain affirmation, or concession, and continue to do so, and build upon it,
through your whole Book, declaring thereby, that you do proficere in pejus,
even against your own sayings, passing from an insinuating, to a certainty;
for which cause, the Author of that pithy, and learned treatise, called the
total sum, (Page: 39.) calls your proceeding in this particular, an impudent
slandering of Charity Maintained: And that, what you cannot obtain by truth
and fair dealing, you seek to get by falsehood, fraud, and forgery. And (Page:
40.) that without shame you falsify the Tenet of your Adversary, and the
Doctrine of our Church. And (Page: 42.) That the saying which (Page: 31. N. 4.)
you set down. in a distinct character as the verbal and formal Assertion of
Charity Maintained is forged and feigned by yourselfe from the first, to the
last syllable thereof, not only against his meaning in that place, but also the
whole drift of his Treatise: and, that in this, you show the Adamantinall
hardness of your Socinian forhead, and Samosatenian conscience. And (Page: 43.)
That it is an impudent untruth; and that your collection of it out of Charity
Maintained is a fond and voluntary inference; as most certainly it is. For,
neither Charity Maintained himself, nor any other who read his Book, did ever
intertaine any least imagination, of such a meaning. Insomuch, that a
Protestant Writer Francis Cheynell has these words; Men are damned, says he
(Mr. Chillingworth I who die in wilful errors without repentance, but what if
they die in their errors with repentance? Answer in the preface, (Page: 20.)
That is a contradiction, says the Jesuit, and he says true: which shows the
Doctrine of Charity Maintained to be, that sinful errors cannot remain with
repentance, but must be relinquished. Lastly, to make this your calumny
inexcusable, Charity Maintained (N. 5.) has these very words: But yet least
any man should flatter himself, with our charitable mitigations, and therefore
wax carelessin search of the true Church, we desire him to read the Conclusion
of the second Part, where this matter is more explayned. Now, in that
Conclusion he teaches that our greatest care must be, to find out that one
saving Truth, which can be found only in the true visible Catholic Church of
Christ, which we shall be sure not to miss, if our endeavor be not wanting to
his grace, who desires that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of truth. Where you see, Ch: Ma: says, it is in our power with Gods grace, to
find that saving Truth which is but one, and is to be found only in the true
visible Church of Christ: and so it must (...) our fault, if we miss thereof,
and consequently, that our errors will be sinful, and that we cannot
effectually repent of them, without passing to the Truth, that is, without
destroying those culpable sinful errors, which, by Gods grace, is in our
power to destroy, by embracing the contrary truths. And afterward, Ch: Ma:
says, that the search of this truth, will not prove so hard and intricate, as
men imagine, because God has endued his visible Church, with so conspicuous
marks of unity and agreement in Doctrine; Universality for time, and place; a
never interrupted Succession of Pastors; a perpetual visibility from the
Apostles to us etc. far beyond any probable pretense, that can be made by any
other congregations; that whosoever does seriously and impartially weigh these
notes, may easily discern to what Church they belong. Thus Ch: Ma: to show how
culpable, and inexcusable they are, who do not actually embrace Catholic
Religion, and forsake all other Congregations, and errors. And yet, to take
away all possibility, for you to deceive the world, with this unjust calumny,
Ch: Ma: has these very words: Let not men flatter and deceive themselves, that
ignorance will excuse them. For there are so many, and so easy, and yet withal
so powerful means, to find the true Church, that it is a most dangerous and
pernicious error, to rely upon the excuse of invincible ignorance. What could
he have said more, than to style the Hope of Salvation by means of ignorance,
a pernicious error? Yet more and more to confute your calumny, and declare
his own sense, he adds: I wish them to consider, that he can least hope for
relief by ignorance, who once confides therein: because his very alleging of
ignorance, shows, that, God has put some thoughts into his mind of seeking
the safest way, which if he, relying on Gods Grace, do carefully and constantly
endeavor to examine, discuss, and perfitt, he shall not fail to find what he
seeks, and to obtain what he asks. Now if Ch: Ma: teach so effectually, that
none must hope to be saved by ignorance, with what truth, or justice, can you
say, that in his opinion, Protestants may be saved, without actually retracting
their sinful errors? Nay, I am sure, Ch: Ma: believes that if God will in his
Goodness bring a man to Salvation, he will be sure, by his Wisdom to apply
those Means, which in the ordinary course of his holy providence, he has
appointed for that end, which is, to embrace the true Faith, and to be a true
member of the true visible Church.

3. You pretend to believe, that de facto God will bring none to heaven,
without Faith in Christ, and belief of Christian Religion. If then one should
ask, whether a Pagan, or Jew, or Turk could be saved with an universal
sorrow, for all his errors and sins known, and unknown, what would you,
answer? If you say they might be saved, you contradict yourselfe and grant that
Salvation may be had without faith in Christ. If you say, they could not be
saved, because God de facto has appointed Faith in Christ, as a necessary
condition, or means for Salvation: The same I answer in our case, that God
has decreed to save none without true Faith, which is only in the true Uisible
Church; yea, to be a true Christian, and to be a Catholic, is all one, there
being not any other true Christian Faith, than that which is taught by the
Catholic Church, nor is there any true Church of Christ, but One: and
therefore, as you pretend to hold, Christian Faith to be necessary for
Salvation, you should also hold the same of the Catholic Faith, and
consequently, that none can be saved with any sinful error, contrary to that
Faith, nor that it can be true Repentance, which does not exclude any such
error. And, all that you can Object against this truth, may be objected in
behalf of Jews, or Turks, against your pretended belief, that Faith in
Christ is necessary to Salvation: They might, I say, demand of you why they may
not have true Contrition, and pardon of their sins, by a general repentance of
all their offenses, known and unknown, and among the rest, of their errors
against, or ignorance of Christian Religion? and what you answer to them, will
serve for a confutation of your Arguments against us. For this cause, Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 28, N. 3.) says, that we hope, and pray for, the
conversion of Protestants: and surely, our meaning is not, that they be
converted to us, by remaining in their former belief, contrary to us. But Ch:
M. need not wonder, that you falsify him, seeing you are not ashamed to say
(Page: 34. N. 6.) that according to the grounds of our (Catholic) Religion,
Protestants may die in their supposed errors, either with excusable ignorance,
or with contrition, and if they do so, may be saved. But I beseech you, out of
what Ground, or Principle, of Catholic Religion, can you dream to collect,
that Protestants can be saved by ignorance, or with Contrition, remaining
formal Protestants? And it is a comfort for Ch: Ma: to be calumniated by you,
in that very thing, wherein you calumniate the whole Church of God. In the mean
time, by what I have said, innumerable places (I may say the chiefest part) of
your Book, are answered, which go upon this false ground, that men may be
saved, without relinquishing their sinful and damnable errors, which you
perpetually affirm, without any proof. And what reason can be given, why a
man cannot be saved, without relinquishing other deadly sins, for example,
Hatred, Perjury, Theft etc. and yet that it is not necessary, to forsake
errors, confessed to be sinful, and damnable? But it is no wonder, that
Heretics are willing to sooth their Heresies with false privileges, denied to
all other deadly sins.

4. To your numbers 1.2.3.4.5.6. I have answered already. You say (Page: 33. N.
4.) ( the truth is, the corruption of the Church, and the destruction of it, is
not all one? For if a particular man, or Church, may (as you confess they may)
hold some particular errors, and yet be a member of the Church universal: why
may not the Church hold some universal error and yet be still the Church?
Especially seeing you say, it is nothing but opposing the Doctrine of the
Church, that makes an error damnable, and it is impossible that the Church
should oppose the Church, I mean that the present Church should oppose
itself. Why do you stopp here, and not go forward to declare, what lies
involued in your discourse, thus: In the time of the Apostles, if a particular
man, or Church might have held some error, and yet remained a member of the
Church universal: Why might not the Church of that time have held some
universal error, and yet have been still the Church? You must answer your
own Argument; which is easy for us Catholics to do, by saying:

5. First. No particular man, or Church, may hold any sinful, and damnable
error, and yet be a member of the Church universal. Which is a truth to be
believed by all Protestants, if they understand themselves: and, as I have
often said, Potter confesses that it is, Fundamental to the Faith of a
Christian, not to disbelieue any point, sufficiently known to be revealed by
God, and that he who does so, is an heretic, and that heresy being a work of
the flesh, excludes from the kingdom of Heaven. And what a Church would you
have that to be, which consists of Heretics?

6. Secondly: To put a parity between particular men or Churches, and the
Church universal, may very well beseem some Socinian, who makes small esteem
of the Authority of the Church, but resolves faith into every man's private
judgment and reason; and therefore no wonder, if such a Church be subject to
corruptions, no less than private men, whose natural wits, and reason must
integrate, as I may say, the whole Authority, of, and certainty, in such a
Church, and therefore if particular persons may fall into errors, the Church
cannot be free from them: yea she must contain in her bosom, or rather
bowels, such corruptions and errors, and so many poisons, contradictory one
to another, and yet not break. A noble latitude of heart, and a vast kind of
hellishlike Charity! But for us, your Argument has no force at all. For, we
believe the Church, to be the Means, whereby Divine Revelations are conveyed to
our understanding, and to be the Judge of Controversyes, as has been proved
hertofore at large; and this being supposed, we must make use of your own
words (Page: 35. N. 7.) That the means to decide Controversyes in faith and
Religion, must be endued with an universal Infallibility in whatsoever it
propounds for a Divine Truth. From whence it follows, that every error in
Faith is destructive of that infallibility, which is required in the means to
decide Controversyes in Faith and Religion. Which is further confirmed by those
words of yours (Page: 9. N. 6.) No consequence can be more palpable then this;
The Church of Rome does err in this or that, therefore it is not infallible.
Therefore, say I, to affirm that the Church can err, is to say; she is not
infallible, nor can be judge of Controversyes, nor the means to convey Divine
Revelations to our understanding; nor could she be a Guide, even in matters
Fundamental, as we have proved else where, and yourselfe grant this last
sequel to be good. And in a word, she would cease to be that Church, which we
are sure she is.

7. Thus you say, that Scripture, which alone you hold to be the Rule of Faith,
and decider of Controversyes, must be universally infallible, and that any the
least error, were enough to blast the whole Authority thereof: As also, if the
Apostles, who were appointed to teach Divine Truths, could by word or writting
have taught any falsehood, we could not have relied on their Authority, in any
point of faith, great, or little.

8. You say (Page: 143. N. 30.) There is not the same reason for the Churches
absolute infalliblity, as for the Apostles and Scriptures. For, if the Church
fall into error, it may be reformed by comparing it with the Rule of the
Apostles Doctrine and Scripture. But if the Apostles have erred in delivering
the Doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall we have recourse for the
discovering and correcting their error? These your words, prompt us a ready
Answer, and disparity, between the Church, and private persons: who, if they
fall into error, the error may be reformed by comparing it with the Decrees,
Traditions, and Definitions of Gods Church. But if the Church err, to whom
shall we have recourse, for the discovering and correcting her error? Nay, I
do take a forcible Argument, by inverting, and retorting, your own words. For,
supposing your Doctrine, that we believe Scripture to be true, and the word of
God, for the Authority of the Church; and another saying of yours, that a
proof must be more known to us, than the thing proved, otherwise, say you, it
is no proof; I argue thus: There is not the same reason for our belief of the
absolute infallibility of the Apostles and Scripture, as for the Church. For,
if false Scripture be obtruded, it may be discovered, by comparing it with the
Tradition, and consent of the Church, from which we receive the Scripture, as
the word of God, and consequently, all the certainty we have of the contents
thereof. But if the Church may err, to whom shall we have recourse, for
discovering and correcting her errors seeing, as I said, to compare it with the
Rule of the Apostles doctrine, will be to no purpose, because that very Rule,
ca^ be of no force with us, but for the Authority of the Church, which therefore
must be as great, or greater with us, then Scripture it self, according to
your own saying, The proof must be more known, than the thing proved Our B.
Savior said (Matt: 5.) Uos est is sal terrae: you are the salt of the earth:
But if the salt leese his virtue, wherewith shall it be salted? Upon which
words, S. Austine (L. 1. de sermon: Domini in monte C. 6.) says Si vos etc. If
you by whom others are to be as it were seasoned, forfeite the kingdom of
heaven, upon fear of temporal persecution, what other persons shall be found,
to free you from error, seeing God has chosen you to take away errors from
others? So we may say: If the Church, which God has appointed to teach others,
and deliver them the Scripture, should err, who could be found, to discover,
and correct that error? Your Argument is no better than this: If a man may be
a man, though he be deprived of some unnecessary part of his Body, as fingers,
feet etc. why may he not remain a man, though he want some parts absolutely
necessary, for the conservation of him in Being, as heart, head, brain etc.?
For, infallibility in the Church, is a privilege, necessary, and, as I may
say, essential to her, as she is the judge of Controversyes in Faith, which
office belonging to no private persons, infallibility is not necessary for them.

9. To your vain subtility, That we say, It is nothing but opposing the
Doctrine of the Church, that makes an error damnable, and it is impossible
that the Church should oppose the Church, I mean, that the present Church
should oppose it self; From whence you would collect; that if the Church
should err, yet her error being not damnable, (as not opposite to the Church
herself) she might still remain a Church; I answer; By the same reason, you
may say the Apostles might err, and yet remain of the Church, and their
error not be damnable (yea even though it were damnable and fundamental,
which is to be noted:) because, It is nothing but opposing the Doctrine of the
Apostles, that makes an error damnable, and it is impossible the Apostles
should oppose the Apostles. The like you may say of Scripture it self, that it
might err, and yet that it could not contain any damnable error, because
according to Protestants, It is nothing but opposing the Scripture, that makes
an error damnable, and it is impossible that the Scripture should oppose the
Scripture: which consequences are absurd, and therefore, as you would answer, by
denying the supposition, that the Apostles, can teach, or Scripture can
contain any error, so you know, we absolutely deny your supposition, that the
Church can err in matters of Faith; which if we did grant, we would not be so
foolish, as to belief, that, Nothing but opposing the Doctrine of the Church,
makes an error damnable; but contrarily, we would affirm, that, precisily to
oppose the Churches Doctrine, (that supposition being once made) could never be
Heresy, or a damnable error. And therefore we speak very consequently, in,
First, believing, that the Church cannot err; and, then, in avouching, that
every error repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church, is heresy. The Motto in
the frontispice of your Book, taken out of Jsaac: Casaubon: (in Epist: ad
Card: Perron Regis Jacobi nomine scripta,) says; Simpliciter necessaria Rex
appellat, quae vel express Uerbum Dei praecipit credenda faciendaue, vel ex
Uerbo Dei necessaria consequentia Uetus Ecclesia elicuit. Observe, that he
speaks of things absolutely necessary to salvation, and then I say, if the
Church be subject to error, how can we be sure, that Her Deductions from
Scripture, are necessary, or only probable; true, or false; though to her they
may seem, true, and necessary? You say, it is impossible that the present
Church should oppose itself, and do not reflect, by this vety saying,
yourselfe must suppose that the Church can teach nothing but truth. For, if she
may err in some Points, and believe aright in others, those errors may be
opposite to some truth which she believes, though she do not mark that
opposition. You say (Page: 215. N. 46.) no man's errors can be confuted who
together with his error does not believe (...) grant some true Principle that
contradicts his error. If then the Churches errors may be confuted, as you
will suppose they may, she must believe some truth that contradicts her error;
and therefore if it be impossible, that the Church can be opposite to herself
(as you say it is impossible) you must grant, that she cannot believe or teach
any error; and then indeed it will be impossible for her to oppose herself,
because truth cannot possibly be opposite to truth.

10. In the same (N. 4.) I must touch in a word; that you falsify the words of
Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 19.) some may for a time have invincible
Ignorance, even of some Fundamental Article of Faith, through want of
capacity, instruction or the like, and so not offend, either in such Ignorance,
or error. But you cite them thus: Ignorance may excuse errors, even in
Fundamental Articles of Faith; omitting that necessary limitation, for a time,
without which restriction the words sound, as if absolvtely a man may live, and
die with invincible ignorance of Fundamental Articles, or of Points absolutely
necessary to salvation, and so want means sufficient to besaved, without any
fault of his; which is not true. For, if he cooperate with Gods holy Grace,
they shall be degrees advance to the belief of all necessary Points, though
for a time they were ignorant of them. And here I reflect, that, if a
Protestant err, in, or be invincibly ignorant for a time, fo some fundamental
Point, sufficiently proposed, and believed by other Protestants, they differ in
the belief of fundamental Points, and the ignorant party sins not damnably;
and yet they sin damnably, who disbelieue any Point sufficiently known to be
revealed by God, though otherwise it be not fundamental of it self: and
therefore it is clear, that in matters of Divine Faith, consideration is
chiefly to be had of the formal, and not of the material object.

11. In your (N. 7.) you say: God has left means sufficient to determine, not
all Controversyes, but all necessary to be determined. Which concession is as
much as we desire. For, no man dare say, that God has given any means, only
for superfluous uses, or occasions: and therefore seeing he has left means for
deciding all Controversyes, necessary to be determined, we cannot without
injury to his infinite wisdom, imagine that there will never be necessity of
determining any. Since then, as I said, God has given Authority to his visible
Church for determining such Controversyes, he will not fail to replenish her
with Wisdom to discern, what be the occasions, wherein they ought to be
determined, according to the exigence of particular circumstances. Thus the
Apostles called a Council, upon occasion of difference amongst Christians
about the Law of Moses, and the first four General Counsels, which commonly
Protestants pretend to receive, were gathered upon several occasions, of
emergent Heresies. The Scripture it self was not written all at once, but as
occasion did require: and the same Holy Spirit, which assisted Canonical
Writers in writing, did appoint to them the times, and occasions, for which
their writings would be most seasonable; yet after they were once written, it
was necessary to believe them, as also the Decree of the Apostles in their
Council registered (Act: 15.) and other General Counsels, and commands of the
Church. If Controversyes rise to such a height, that there is periculum in
mora, danger in delaying to determine them, either for avoiding insufferable
breach of Charity, and Schism, or corruptions in manners, or invalidity of
Sacraments, which cannot be otherwise prevented; If silence may be interpreted
to imply a consent; If error be like to prevail, unless it be condemned; if
new Heresies be in danger to take root, if they be not crushed with speed; if
these, or any other causes require the Decision of Controversyes, the Holy
Ghost will effectually inspire, and direct his Church, to apply a convenient
remedy, according to the Condition of the matter. Neither ought it to seem
strange, that something may grow to be necessary, one time, which was not
necessary at another; and in the mean time men may be saved, by an humble
preparation of mind to believe, and obey, whatsoever the Church shall, in good
time, determine, or command. And by the way, out of this discourse, we may
infer, that, Scripture alone cannot be a Rule to decide all Controversyes; in
regard that such a Rule, or judge must serve for all emergent occasions, and
Scripture being always the same, cannot be applied sutably to all new different
circumstances, as I have often said.

12. You say; If some Controversyes may for many Ages be undetermined, and yet
in the mean time men may be saved, why should, or how can, the Churches being
furnished with effectual means to determine all Controversyes in Religion be
necessary to salvation, the end itself to which these means are ordained,
being as experience shows, not necessary? But, the Answer to this objection,
has been given already. For, some thing may be necessary for some persons, at
some time, in some Circumstances, which are not necessary universally for all
Persons, Times, and Circumstances; as I specifyed in the Council of the
Apostles; in Canonical writings (which written upon some particular occasion,
yet require an universal belief) and in general Counsels, which you and
Potter affirm to oblige, as we have seen above. Indeed your peremtory wild
demand (Why should, or how can the Churches being furnished with effectual
Means to determine all Controversyes, be necessary etc:) might well, by your
leave, beseem some Jew, asking; why should, or how can Christian Religion be
necessary to salvation, if for many Ages it was not in Being, and yet in the
mean time, men were saved? Or, why should, or how can the believing and
obeying the Definition of the Apostles in their Council, or the belief of the
Gospells, and other Canonical writings, be necessary to salvation, if for many
ages such belief was not required, and in the mean time men were saved? Or,
why should, or how can infallibility be necessary to write the Scripture, if
the writing of Scripture was not necessary, but that men were said without it?
You say in the same (N. 7.) I grant, that the means to decide Controversyes of
Faith and Religion, must be endued with an universal infallibility in
whatsoever it propounds for a Divine Truth. For, if it may be false in any
one thing of this nature, we can yield unto it but a wavering and fearful
assent in any thing. Which words seem not to agree with what you add against
Charity Maintained in his (N. 7. and 8.) (that an universal infallibility must
be granted to that means, whereby controversyes in Faith are to be determined,
unless men have a mind to reduce Faith to opinion) of which words you say, you
do not perceive, how from the denial of any of the grounds which Charity
Maintained laid, it would follow, that Faith is Opinion: or from the granting
them, that it is not so. For my part, I do not perceive, how it was possible
for you not to perceive it; since you confess, that without an universal
infallibility, we could yield unto such a means, but; wavering and fearful
assent a and what is this but opinion, or a mere humane Faith? As contrarily
if the Means, or Motive, for which I assent be infallible, and I believe it to
be so, and assent with an act proportionable to that motive, my assent must
needs be certain, and infallible, and not a wavering, and fearful assent. If
this be not so, why do you require infallibility in the said means? Certainly,
infallibility is not necessary, to beget, a wavering and fearful assent.

13. You would gladly free yourselfe of that just imputation, that you confound
Divine Faith with opinion. But your tergiversation argues you guilty. You bring
I know not what parityes, between Faith and Opinion, but decline the maine
difference, That Divine Faith, is absolutely certain and infallible; Opinion
not. You being conscious of your Antichristian Doctrine, That Christian Faith
exceeds not probability, dissemble the chief difference, which I have
declared; and you will never be able to acquit yourselfe of that grie^vous, but
just accusation, that you change Divine Faith into opinion. Whereas you say,
that, as opinion, so Faith, admitts degrees; and, that as there maybe a strong
and weak opinion so there may be a strong and weak Faith, and add, that Ch:
Ma: if he be in his right mind, will not deny it. I answer that still you
stick to your false ground, that Christian Faith is not infallible. Otherwise
you would not make this comparison, between the weakness, and strength, of
Opinion, and Faith, which, in its essence excludes all falsehood; As contrarily,
Opinion is not free from all fear least it be false.

14. The confutation of your (N. 8.) about the infallibility of Christian
Faith, is the subject of my first Chapter, and therefore I need say no more
here, except only to ask, what you can understand by these words of yours? But
though the essence of Faith exclude not all weakness and imperfection, yet may
it be enquired, whether any certainty of Faith, under the highest degree, may
be sufficient to please God and attain salvation. Can the very essence of
Faith be weak and imperfect, and yet the degrees thereof, be certain in the
highest degree, and exclude that weakness, and imperfection, which the essence
does not exclude? is not the whole essence of Faith, in every degree, or
graduall perfection thereof? But, as I said, (directly contrary to that which
your words seem to sound) the very essence of Faith, excludes all weakness,
that is, all falsehood, and doubtfulnesse, and every graduall entity thereof
includes such a certainty, though one man's Faith, within the compass of the
same essence, may exceed the Faith of another, in graduall perfections, as
contrarily, though Opinion may have many graduall entityes, yet none of them
can exclude formidinem oppositi, a fear that the contrary may prove true,
which if any particular degree of intension did exclude, it were not Opinion,
but a certain knowledge, and so could not be a degree of intension, under the
species, or essence, of Opinion, but an assent, essentially distinct from all
Opinion.

15. In your (N. 9.) I observe that you do not only grant the possibility of a
certainty of adherence in the will, beyond the certainty of evidence in the
understanding, but also a certainty of knowledge in the understanding, above
the strength of probable Motives, or Arguments of Credibility. For, you say,
they know (mark this word know) what they did but believe; and are as fully
and resolutely assured of the Gospel of Christ, as those which heard it from
Christ himself with their ears, which saw it with their eyes, which looked
upon it, and whose hands handled the word of life. If God can do this with his
Grace; seeing Christian Faith requires the Grace of God; why do you deny, that
by it we are no less assured, that the Objects of Faith are true, than if we
had seen them with our eyes etc:? The rest of this number is answered Chap: 1.

16. You are pleased N. 10. to delight yourselfe, and deceive others, with a
wild collection, as you style it, fathered on Ch: Ma: being only a brood of
your own brain. The case stands thus. Ch: Ma: (N. 8.) has these words: Out
of the Principles which I have laid (That there must be in Gods Church, some
means for deciding Controversyes in Faith, and that it must be endued with an
universal infallibility, in whatsoever it propounds, as spoken by God) it
undeniably follows, that of two men dissenting in matters of Faith, the one
cannot be saved without Repentance, unless ignorance accidentally may in some
particular person plead excuse. For, in that case of contrary belief, one must
of necessity be held to oppose Gods Word or revelation, sufficiently
represented to his understanding, by an infallible Propounder; which opposition
to the Testimony of God, is undoubtedly a damnable sin, whether otherwise the
thing so testified, be, in it self, great, or small. Now what can be more
evident than this consequence, and conclusion? And yet you say, The conclusion
is true, though the consequence of it from the former Premises, either is none
at all, or so obscure, that I can hardly discern it: and then you add: the
difference may be concerning a thing which being indeed no matter of Faith, is
yet overvalued by the Parties at variance, and esteemed to be so: And lastly
you set down the wild collection I spoke of, and deliver it in these words:
God has provided means sufficient to decide all controversyes in Religion,
necessary to be decided; this means is universally infallible; Therefore of
two, that differ in any thing which they esteem a matter of Faith, one cannot
be saved. He that can find any connection between these Propositions, I believe
will be able to find good coherence between the deaf plaintiffes accusation,
in the Greek Epigramme, and the deaf Defendants Answer, and the deaf judges
sentence: and to contriue them all into a formal categoricall sylogisme. Thus
you. But Charity Maintained never pretended to make a syllogism, and his
words, which I have even now alleged, clear him from your vain imputation,
and fond collection. He said expressly, (unless ignorance plead excuse) which
makes the errors against Divine Revelation, to be sinful and damnable; seeing
he speaks of persons, not excused by ignorance. Neither has he those words
which you add (necessary to be decided) nor those other (which they esteem a
matter of Faith) yea he spoke formally and expressly, of two men dissenting in
matters of Faith, and not in Points, which they only esteemed to be matters of
Faith. And because you think it impossible, to contriue his discourse into a
formal categoricall syllogism (which indeed would be impossible to do with
your Additions;) let us suppose, some Truth to be revealed by God, and
sufficiently propounded to the understandings of two, by a Propounder
infallible in himself, and by them certainly believed to be such (which is the
direct supposition of Charity Maintained) and that one of them contradicts the
other, and consequently by so doing, opposes a Truth testified by God, and
sufficiently propounded as such: And then what say you to this syllogism?
Whosoever opposes a Truth, witnessed by God, and for such sufficiently
represented to his understanding, by a propounder, believed by the party
himself to be infallible, committs a grievous sin (and so cannot be saved
without repentance) but in the case proposed, one of the two contradicting
parties, opposes a Truth, revealed by God, and sufficiently propounded to his
understanding, by such an infallible propounder: Therefore he committs a
grievous sin. Yourselfe here (N. 13.) grant, that they cannot be saved who
oppose any least part of Scripture, If they oppose it after sufficient
declaration, so that either they know it to be contained in Scripture, or have
no just probable Reason, and which may move an honest man to doubt, whether or
no it be there contained; as it happens in our case, wherein we suppose, that
the erring party is in sinful error, by reason of opposing, an infallible
Propounder, of Divine Truths, whosoever that Propounder be. This very thing you
grant also in the (N. 11.) where you say: Indeed if the matter in agitatio^
were plainly decided by this infallible means of deciding Controversyes, and
the parties in variance knew it to be so, and yet would stand out in their
dissension; this were in one of them, direct oposition to the testimony of God,
and undoubtedly a damnable sin. Which is the very thing that Ch: Ma: clearly
affirmed. And now, you have lost your jest, out of the Greek Epigramme,
turned by you into a Satyr. Thrice happy had it been for you, to have been
deaf, dumb, and blind, rather than to have ever heard, or spoken any thing,
or that others should have seen those vast absurdityes, and wicked Heresies of
yours, which openly destroy Christian Religion! But there is a just judge, who
is neither deaf, nor dumb, nor blind, but hears, and sees, and punishes all
pride, contempt, and Heresy, and the Approbators of them, if they do not
repent, and in time declare to the world such their Repentance.

17. You speak (N. 11.) to Ch: Ma: in this manner: You may hope that the
erring Part, by reason of some veil before his eyes, some excusable ignorance,
or unavoidable prejudice, does not see the Question to be decided against him,
and so opposes only what you know to be the word of God, and he might know,
were he void of prejudice. Which is a fault, I confess, but a fault which is
incident even to good and honest men very often. Concerning which words I ask;
how can that be a sin, which proceeds from some excusable Ignorance, or
unavoidable prejudice? For, if the cause of the error be unavoidable, and
consequently invincible, and, as you expressly say, excusable, how can the
error itself be sinful? Or, if it be a fault, as you say it is, how is it
not a grievous fault, consisting in a culpable opposition against Divine
Revelation, which you perpetually profess to be damnable? Or, how can a
grievous and damnable fault be incident to good and honest men?

18 To your saying (N. 12.) That it is against Charity to affirm, that me^ are
justly chargeable with all the consequences of their opinions; I answer, as
yourselfe, and every one must answer to the like objection in a hundred other
occasions; that men are justly chargeable with all the consequences of their
opinions; if their not seeing those consequences, proceed from some voluntary,
vincible, root, as ignorance and errors against divine Faith are sinful, and
damnable, when they are Effects of sinful causes.

19. In the (N. 13.) I will only touch in a word, that in saying (S. Cyprian
and Stephen might both be saved, because their contrary belief was not
touching any point contained in Scripture.) You either grant, that it is not a
Point of Faith, That, Baptism conferred by Heretics is valid, (Wherein, for
ought I know, you contradict the chiefest number of Protestants, and in
particular your English Church) or else that something may be a Point of Faith,
which is not contained in Scripture.

20. In your (N. 14.15.16.17.) there is no difficulty. Only it is clear that
you voluntarily alter the state of the Question, wherein Ch: Ma: always
supposed, that speech was of Points, contained in Scripture, and that a man
opposed the Scripture, culpably: For which cause, (N. 17.) he said: According
to Protestants, Oppose not scripture, there is no error against Faith. Oppose
it in any least Point, the error (if Scripture be sufficiently proposed, which
proposition is also required, before a man can be obliged to believe even
Fundamental points) must be damnable: Which words you shamefully conceal, out
of guiltyness, that they prevented all your Answers (about Ignorance, or such
accidental and variable circumstances, to which you sly) before you gave them:
Seeing it appears that Charity Maintained spoke expressly of Scripture
sufficiently proposed; and (N. 15.) you say, That such Points are fundamental.
Our B. Savior says (S. Mark 16.16.) he that does not believe shall be
damned. And S. Paul, (Gal: 5.20.21.) having reckoned some vices, and among the
rest, Sects, concludes; They who do these things, shall not obtain the
kingdom of Heaven. Will you now stand up, and blaspheme, and say, that our
Savior and S. Paul should not have pronounced damnation, against disbelievers,
Sects, and Heretykes, without adding your limitations; to wit unless ignorance
excuse, or a general Repentance obtain pardon?

21. In your (N. 15.) you give a new explication of Points Fundamental, and
not Fundamental, That these Points either in themselves or by accident, are
Fundamental, which are evidently contained in Scripture, to him that knows
them to be so. Those not Fundamental, which are there-hence deducible, but
probably only not evidently. How many things may be observed in these words:
First, it answers not plainly to the Question of Ch: Ma: which was; whether is
there in such denial (of a Point contained in Scripture, and sufficiently
proposed, as Chapter M. expressly speaks) any distinction betwixt Points
Fundamental and not Fundamental, sufficient to excuse from Heresy? As
certainly there is not. Secondly, by this distinction of yours, all that is
sufficiently proposed to be contained in Scripture, is a Fundamental Point,
and every error in such Points must be a Fundamental error, and destroy
Faith, Church, and salvation: and so you grant, what Chapter Ma. desired in his
Question, though you thought not fit to Answer it clearly and in direct
terms, but to involue things, by talking of matters nothing to the purpose;
and therefore I say, Thirdly; Points deducible from Scripture but probably only,
are not Points of Faith, which requires certitude, but may be denied without
sin, if one have probable reason, for his denial, as yourselfe confess (N.
14.) that it is a grievous sin to deny any one Truth contained in Scripture, if
he who denies it, knew it to be so, or have no probable reason to doubt of it:
Otherwise not. Ch: Ma: as I said, spoke expressly, of Points sufficiently
known to be contained in Scripture, that is, of matters of Faith; and by what
logic can you distinguish Points of Faith, into Points which are of Faith,
and points which are not of Faith, as things which are deduced from Scripture
probably only, are not matters of Faith; as we have seen out of your own
words. Does not Logic teach, that the Diuisum, must be affirmed of every one
membrorum dividentium, and will you affirm faith of that which is not Faith?

23. In your (N. 16.) To the Question of Ch: Ma; whether it be not impertinent
to allege the Creed, as containing all Fundamental Points of Faith, as if
believing it alone, we were at liberty to deny all other Points of Scripture;
you answer, It was never alleged to any such purpose. But, as in other Points,
so in this, you speak for Protestants, without any commission, or warrant from
them. For, who knows not, that nothing is more common with them, than to say,
that Protestants may be saved, and are brethren, as agreeing in the substance
of Faith, because all of them believe the Creed; which reason were plain
nonsense if they may believe the Creed, and yet not be of one Faith, nor hope
of Salvation, by reason of their disagreement in other Points? Or what availes
it them, to agree in necessario credendis, all which you say the Creed
contains, (which yet is very false) if they differ in agendis, in Articles of
Faith, by which they are directed for Christian Practice; Seeing Protestants
differ not only in credendis, but in agendis? Howsoever, I take what you give,
that the Creed cannot be pertinently alleged, as if believing it alone,
Protestants may disagree in other Points, and yet remain Brethren; and so by
this very answer, you grant, what Charity Maintained intended to prove, that
disagreement in any one Point of Faith, be it great, or little, cannot stand
with Salvation, on his side, whose error is culpable: As wholosome meat,
taken alone, may nourish, but if the same man receive poison, he shall not
escape death, in virtue of that meat, which otherwise might have conserved him
in life, and health. Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocunque defectu. One
damnable error, is enough to work perdition, though a man believe all Truths,
except that which is contrary to such an error.

22. I have no more to say about this first Chapter, except only that you might
have comprised, the substance thereof, in few lines, or words, if you had not
perverted the state of the Question, by flying to accidental, and changeable
circumstances, and using needless, and endless repetitions of such variable
circumstances.

CHAP: XI. The Answer to his second Chapter CONCERNING THE MEANS WHEREBY THE
REVEALED TRVTHS OF GOD ARE CONVEYED TO OUR UNDERSTANDING, And which must
determine Controversyes in Faith and Religion.
1. I Find by experience, That the reducing of your dispersed, and often
repeated discourses, to some heads, frees me of much unnecessary labor which
otherwise must have been spent, in speaking to every particular Section of
yours. For, in this Chapter, I find little, but either passion, or calumny, or
begging of the Question, or what is answered already, till I come to your (N.
30.) which also contains nothing but a matter of fact, whether Brierly, and
Chapter Ma:, and other Catholic Writers, have abused Hooker in saying, that he
teaches, that Scripture cannot be proved to be the word of God, by the
testimony of scripture itself, but by some other means, namely the Church.
For my part, I have read, and considered the place, cited by Ch: Ma: out of
Hooker (Lib: 3. Sect: 8.) and find, that you are like those charitable people,
who are content to want one eye, upon condition, that their adversary be
deprived of both. You are willing, that Hooker contradict Himself; yourselfe;
and evident reason itself, rather than he should seem to favor us. I say, he
must contradict reason, which can never prove, that Scripture is written by
Divine inspiration, as I know you will not deny, seeing all the contents of
Scripture, might have been set down in writing, without the infallible
direction of the Holy Ghost. You say (Page: 114. N. 156.) If there were any that
believed Christian Religion, and yet believed not the Bible to be the word of
God, though they believed the matter of it to be true (which is no impossible
supposition, for I may believe a Book of S. Austines, to contain nothing but
the truth of God, and yet not to have been inspired by God himself) against
such men there were no disputing out of the Bible. In which words you confess,
that one cannot gather that a writing is inspired by God, even though he did
believe, that the contents thereof were all true. You make him also contradict
yourselfe, who resolve the belief of Scripture into the tradition of all
Churches: and C: Ma: specifies not the present Church, but says only, that
Hooker acknowledged that we believe Scripture for the Authority of the Church.
He must also contradict himself, who I suppose liking not the Puritans private
spirit, and proving that it is not the word of God which does, or possibly can
assure us, (as may be seen in Charity Maintained (Page: 42. N. 7.) citing the
place of Hooker, leaves nothing for our motive to believe it, except the
Church. Yet no man denies, but what we first believe for the Authority of the
Church, may afterward be illustrated and confirmed by Reason: as Hooker says,
The former inducement (the Authority of Gods Church) prevailing somewhat with us
before, does now much more prevail, when the very thing has ministered farther
reason. And yourselfe in this Chapter, (N. 47.) explicate some words of Potter
in this very sense which now I have declared: And therefore consider, whether
you do well in relating Mookers words, to leave out these words (which are
immediately joined to those which you cite) If I believe the Gospel, yet is
reason of singular use, for that it confirms me in this my belief the more.
Is this to say, that natural reason (as it is distinguished from tradition or
Authority of the Church, in which sense we now speak of it) is the last thing
into which our belief of Scripture is resolved, seeing such a confirmation by
Reason, comes after we have believed? You say, that when Hooker says, When we
know the whole Church of God has that o^inion of the Scripture etc: the Church
he speaks of, seenes to be that particular Church wherein a man is bredd: where
I put you in mind, of what you said in another place, that, A, Church signifyes
a particular Church, and, The, Church, (as Hooker speaks) signifyes the
universal. How then do you say, That by, The, Church he signifies a particular
Church? Or how is the Distinction of, A, and, The, Church such as you would
have men believe. But this I let pass, and ask you, what finally you will
have Hookers opinion to be concerning the means for which we believe with
certainty Scripture to be the word of God? The private Spirit? You know he was
an Anti-Calvinist, and the private spirit could not suit with his genius.
Natural Reason? That is evidently against reason, as we have showed, and you
grant* And when he speaks most of reason, he speaks of infidells, or
Atheists, calling in question the authority of Scripture, who may be persuaded
by Sanctity of Christian doctrine etc: So there remains only the Authority of
the Church, if you will have him to say anything. Dr: Covell in his defense of
Hookers Books (Art: 4. Page: 31.) says clearly: Doubtless it is a tolerable
Ovinion in the Church of Rome, if they go no further, as some of them do not
(he should have said, as none of them do) to affirm, that the scriptures are
holy and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us, for the Authority of the
Church. These words of Covell were cited by Cha: Ma: (N. 26.) but it seems you
would take no notice of them, and who could better understand Hookers mind,
than this his Defendant? By the way, we may observe, how hard it is to agree
about the sense of holy Scripture, which is more sublime than humane Writings,
if we cannot agree about the meaning of men.

2. And by this occasion, I must turn back to your (N. 11.) where you quarrel
at some words of Charity Maintained, and give them a meaning clearly contrary
to his sense, and words. You speak thus: You in saying here, that, scripture
alone cannot be Judge, imply that it may bo called in some sense a Judge,
though not abone; yet to speak prop^^ly (as men should speak when they write
of Controversyes in Religion) the scripture is not a Judge of Co^troversyes,
but a rule only, and the only rule for Christians to judge the^ by But in this
imputation, you have no reason at all, to interpret Charity Maintained, as you
do. For, He, in saying Scripture alone cannot be judge in Controversyes, took
only the contradictory of that, which, even in this place, you affirm
Protestants to believe: Scripture alone is the judge of Controversyes, and
therefore it was necessary, for Him to declare his mind, by the contradictory
proposition, that, Scripture alone is not the judge of Controversyes, which is
very true, though i^ be not a judge of Controversyes, either by itself alone,
or in any other sense; and you know, he does expressly, and purposely, and
largely, prove, that it is against the nature of any Writing whatsoever, to be
a Judge; and therefore when you say, men should speak properly, when they write
of Controversyes in Religion, and yet confess that Protestants have called
Scripture the. Judge of Controversyes, and that to speak properly the
Scripture is not a Judge of Controversyes, you tax Protestants only, and
cannot so much as touch Charity Maintayn^

3. Here also I may speak a word to your (N. 15.) as belonging to
interpretation. You say; To execute the letter of the Law, according to rigor,
would be many times unjust, and therefore there is need of a Judge to moderate
it, whereof in Religion there is no use at all. I pray you, would it not be many
times unjust, to execute the letter of the Scripture, taken without a true and
moderate interpretation? And for this very ca^use, there is great use of a
Judge, and Authentical interpreter; otherwise some miscreant might murder his
mother and brother, upon some mistaken Text of Scripture, that idolaters were
to be taken out of the world; subjects might rebel; no war would be judged
lawful, no oaths to be taken in any case etc: And here, I willingly take what
you (N. 17.) give me, that, in Civil Controversyes, every honest understanding
man is sit to be a Judge; but in Religion none but he that is infallible. This
I take, and infer, that you wholly enervate the vulgar Argument of Protestants
(that Judges are to be obeyed though they be not infallible, and therefore that
we cannot infer the Church to be infallible, because we are commanded to hear
Her) not considering this difference, which here your self give, between a
Judge in Civil Controversyes, and a Judge in Religion, wherein such a Judge is
required whom we should be obliged to bel^^ue to have judged right. Which are
your own words; whereas in Civil matters we are bound to obey the sentence of
the Judge, or not to resist it, but not always to believe it ^ust, which are
also your words.

4. Neither will I omit here your saying (N. 27.) When Scripture is affirmed
to be the Rule by which, all Controversyes of Religion are to be decided, those
are to be excepted out of this generality which are concerning the Scripture it
self. ^or, as that general saying of Scripture, He has put all things under
his fee^e, is m^st true, though yet S. Paul tells us, that when it is said, he
has put all things under him, it is manifest, he is excepted who did put all
things under him: So when we say, that all Controversyes of Religion are
decidable by the Scripture, it is manifest to all, but cavillers, that we do
and must except from this generality, those which are touching the scripture it
self. Just as a Merchant showing a ship of his own, may say, all my substance
is in this shipp; and yet never intend to deny that his shipp is part of his
substance, nor yes to say, that his ship is in it self. Or as a man may say,
that a whole house is sipport^d by the foundation, and yet never mean to
exclude the foundation from being a part of the house, or to say, that it is
supported by it self. Or as you yourselves use to say, that the Bishopp of
Rome is head of the whole Church, and yet would think us but captious
Sophisters, should we infer from hence that either you made him no part of the
whole, or else made him head of himself.

5. Answer. Are all those Protestants Cavillers, who teach, that we may know by
Scripture it self, that it is the word of God, and consequently, that it may
decide this Controversy concerning it self? Does not Potter (Page: 141.) say;
That Scripture is of Divine Authority, the believer sees by that glorious beam
of Divine light which shines in Scripture; and by many internal Arguments
found in the letter it self? And does not the Scottish Minister Baron, after
he had confuted the opinions of others, about the private spirit, and the
Doctrine of Catholics, concerning the Church, finally resolve, that Scripture
is known to be the Word of God, by certain criteria, or marks, found in the
Scripture it self? And therefore it cannot be denied, but that when Protestants
teach, that all Points of Faith may be learned by Scripture, they must either
say, that this Point of Faith, (Scripture is the word of God) may be learned by
Scripture, or else contradict themselves, as indeed they must, and for that
cause, ought to grant, that besides Scripture, there is some other Means, to
propose Divine Revelations, and Scripture it self, with the true
interpretation thereof. Your examples, may be turned against you, by those your
Brethren, who deny both the private spirit, and the Authority of the Church,
for assuring us with certainty, that Scripture is the Word of God; and they
will tell you, that if a ship must either be within itself, or no where, a
merchant, showing a ship of his own, and saying, all my substance is in this
ship, must either grant that the ship is in itself, or else that he spoke
untruly in saying all my substance is in this ship; and the like they would say
of a foundation, that if it support the whole house, and cannot be supported by
any thing but by itself, it must support it self; and then they would inform
you, that seeing not only the contents of Scripture, but also Scripture itself,
are objects revealed by God, which revelation can neither be known by a
private spirit, which you and they hold to be a foolery, nor an infallible
Church, which all of you hold to be Papistry, it follows, that. Scripture must
be believed for itself, or else not be believed at all. And the same we may
answer, ad hominem, that if the Pope could not be head of the whole Church, but
he must be head of himself, it could not be said, that he is head of the
whole, unless it be also granted, that he is head of himself, but we deny that
fond supposition, that he cannot be head of the Church, unless he be head of
himself; as contrarily Protestants teach; that the Scripture cannot be known
by an infallible Church, nor, by the private spirit, and therefore it must be
known by itself. The same they would answer to those words, he has put all
things under his feet, that he could not be excepted who did put all things
under him, if indeed those first words, he has put all things under his feet,
could not be verifyed, unless he who put all things under his feet, were put
under him. Neither can you avoid this retortion of your brethren, except by
saying, that we do not infallibly believe Scripture to be the word of God; and
therefore there is required no infallibility in ^he Church, from which you say
we receive Scripture, or else, that Scripture is not a material object, which
we believe; or both; as indeed you affirm, both that Faith is not infallible,
and that, Scripture is not a material object of our Faith. And finally, every
one who has care of his soul, must out of these inextricable labyrinths of
Protestants, conclude with Catholics, that for believing with certainty, that
Scripture is the word of God, we must rely on the Church, with this condition
also, that she be believed to be infallible, which infallibility is absolutely
necessary, if once, with all Christians, we believe Christian Faith to be
infallibly true.

6. To your (N. 34.) I answer: That all those Books of Scripture, are to be
acknowledged for Canonical which the Church receives for such: Before which
declaration, of the Church, all they were very secure, who differed about some
Books, because they always believed the Authority of Gods Church, which could
not fail to propose in due time all things necessary for salvation. But for
the contrary reason, Protestants relying upon the sole written word, cannot be
safe; in regard that they, not knowing, what Points in particular be necessary
to salvation, to make all sure, must be obliged to know in particular all that
is contained in all the Books, which diverse learned men, even of their own
Sect, acknowledge to be Canonical, least otherwise, they may chance to remain
in ignorance, or error, of some matter necessary to salvation.

7. The same Answer serves for your (N. 36.) For, it is a Lutheran and
Luciferian blasphemy to speak of Esther, and diverse other Books of
Scripture, as Luther speaks of them, after the Definition of Gods Church to
the contrary. Whereof see Charity Ma. (N. 9. Page: 45.)

8. Your other Sections, or numbers, till the 48. concerning the sayings of
Luther (whom I know you defend against your Conscience) and the Canon of the
English Protestant Church, (which now has no existence, and her 39. Articles
being, or having been, under Censure, may perhaps be altered) I let pass, not
to loose time. Only I cannot omit your words (N. 47.) directed to Charity
Maintained: You might have met with an Answerer that would not have suffered
you to have said so much Truth together; but to me it is sufficient; that it
is nothing to the purpose. Belike, if it had been to the purpose, that is,
against you, you would not have let me say even so much Truth together.

9. In your (N. 48.) you speak to Charity Maintained in these words: Out of
liberality you will suppose, that Scripture, like to a corporal light, is by
it self alone able to determine and move our understanding to assent: Yet not
withstanding this supposall, Faith still (you say) must go before Scripture,
because as the light is visible only to those that have eyes: So the Scripture
only to those that have the eye of Faith. Thus you. But it is reason that the
words of Charity Maintained should be set down as they are, and not lamely and
imperfectly, as you give them. These are his words, (Part: 1. Chap: 1. N. 12.
Page: 52.) Let us suppose, (not grant) that Scripture is like to corporal
light, by it self alone able to determine, and move our under standing to
assent; yet the similitude proves against themselves (Protestants) for light is
not visible, except to such as have eyes, which are not made by the light, but
must be presupposed as produced by some other cause. And therefore to hold the
similitude, Scripture can be clear only to those who are endued with the eye
of Faith, or, as Potter says (Page: 141.) To all that have eyes to discern the
shinning beams thereof that is, To the believer, as immediately after he
speaks. Faith then must not originally proceed from Scripture, but is to be
presupposed, before we can see the light thereof; and consequently, there must
be some other-meanes precedent to Scripture, to beget faith, which can be no
other than the Church.

10 This is the discourse of Charity Maintained, and you must not contradict
it, unless you will proclaim your self a Pelagian, that we are able by our
natural forces, or understanding, to believe as we ought, in order to Eternal
Happiness, as the Eye of our Body can by the natural ability thereof see
colors. For, as I showed in the Introduction, we being not able of our selves,
to produce any one Act of supernatural Divine Faith, need the Assistance of
the infused Habit, of Faith, which is a Theological Virtue, or something
equivalent to it, to enable our understanding, for the exercise of every such
Act; and therefore the aggregatum of our understanding, and that Help, is for
the believing of Scripture, as our corporal eye is for seeing of light, or
colors. And then, Scripture will correspond to light; our understanding with
that supernatural Help, to our eye; and the Act, of believing to the Act of
Seeing. This being premised, it will be found, that either your Objections
vanish into nothing, or that you must be guilty of Pelagianisme, as
Christianity Maintained said (Page: 70.) You say: If Scripture do move and
determine our understanding to assent, then the Scripture and its moving must
be before this assent, as the cause must be before its own effect, now this
very assent is nothing else but Faith, and Faith nothing else than the
understandings assent. And therefore upon this supposall, Faith does and must
originally proceed from Scripture, as the effect from its proper cause: and the
influence and efficacy of Scripture is to be presupposed before the assent of
Faith, unto which it moves and determines, and consequently if this supposition
of yours were true, there should need no other means precedent to Scripture to
beget Faith, Scripture itself being able as here you suppose to determine and
move the understanding to assent, that is, to believe them, and the verityes
contained in them.

11. This is your Objection, which goes upon a false ground, and does not
distinguish, between the Act, and Habit of Faith, or something eqvivalent to it
in actu primo, enabling our understanding, to exercise supernatural Acts of
believing. For, Scripture does move and determine our understanding only to the
Actus secundus, or an Act of Faith, but not to the Habit of Faith, or somewhat
equivalent to it (which must answer to our corporal eye) which cannot be
produced by Scripture. If you had considered this Truth, you would not have
gone forward, and said; neither is this to say, that the Eyes with which we
see, are made by the light by which we see. For, you are mistaken much, if you
conceive that in this comparison, faith Answers to the Eye. But if you will not
pervert it, the Analogy must stand thus; Scripture must Answer to light; The
eye of the soul, that is, the understanding, or the faculty of assenting, to
the bodily eye, and lastly, assenting, or believing, to the Act of seeing. For,
I have told you, that our understanding in order to Acts of Faith, alone,
cannot be compared to our corporal eye, which by its own natural force can
see a proportionate object, and so your whole Analogy is made void, and all
that you ground upon it. Thus we have heard even Potter saying, That Scripture
is of Divine Authority, the Believer sees by that glorious beam of light that
shines in Scripture. I would know, of what Belief the Doctor speaks? Of
Faith in Act, or in Habit? If of belief in Habit, then they are Believers,
before they see that glorious beam of light which shines in Scripture. If he
mean, the Act of Faith, then by that Act, he sees that glorious beam, which
Act must therefore be the Eye, whereby he says the Believer is said to see. And
he speaks yet more clearly, in these words following; The Church is the
watchman, that holds out the light in open View, and presents the shining
beams thereof to all that have eyes to discern it. Therefore he supposes eyes,
to which the Scripture is represented: which eyes being not only the natural
Power of our understanding, must be something else* And the Protestant Amesius
(de Circulo) after he had spoken much of the light of Scripture, comes to say;
Tantum fide vt oculo opus esse statuimus, quae in spiritum resolvitur tanquam
in causam. Where you see, he compares Faith to an Eye, and we may ask him,
whether he mean of habitual, or Actual Faith, and apply to his Answer
(whatsoever it be) the same reflection, which I made even now concerning
Potters words. The like difficulty, and Argument may be made against the
private spirit; which if it be a particular Revelation (that Scripture is the
word of God) distinct from the Revelations contained in Scripture, it follows,
that Scripture does not contain all Divine Revelations; and that our
understanding, with that Revelation, must be the eye, whereby Scripture is
seen, and not be produced by Scripture. If it be not a Divine Revelation, it
must be tried by the Belief of Scripture, and so that Belief must be an eye
precedent to the private spirit, and consequently be an eye to itself, and
both come before, and follow itself: yea, whatsoever that spirit be, certain,
or uncertain, a Revelation, or not a Revelation, yet it must serve for an Eye
together with the understanding, to see the Scripture. Whereby it still
appears, that not our understanding alone, but it with some other Help (not
produced by the Scripture) must be compared to our corporal Eye. The same may
be said of Barons Criteria, which cannot be seen without some particular light
of the Holy Ghost, and therefore our understanding with that light, is the Eye,
not produced by the Scripture, but presupposed to the belief of Scripture; And
lastly, you who teach, that we believe for the Authority of the Church, must
say, that the eye whereby we see Scripture, is our understanding together with
the Tradition of the Church: Which Tradition therefore must be known, and
believed before we believe Scripture, and not be produced by Scripture.

12. Whereas you say, Transsubstantiation is fruitful of such monsters
(contradictions) but they that have not sworn themselves to the defense of
error will easily perceive, that jam factum facere, and factum infectum
facere, are equally impossible: you speak wickedly, and ignorantly. We have
heard Dr. Tailor (in his Liberty etc:. 10. N. 16.) confessing, that Christians
believe the Mystery of the Trinity with as much violence to the Principles of
natural and supernatur all Philosophy, as can be imagined to be in the Point
of Transubstantiation. And it is certain, that this sacred Mystery of the
Trinity, to any learned Philosopher, containess far greater dissiculty, than
any that can be objected, against Transubstantiation. And yourselfe, upon a
certain occasion, could say to some Protestants, Either deny the Trinity, or
admit Transubstantiation; and it was answered, we will rather admit this,
than deny that. And with good reason. For, if we respect humane discourse,
there are, as I said, more difficult objections, against that Mystery, than
against this. And if we regard Revelation, Scripture is more clear for the
real Presence, and Transubstantiation, than for the Mystery of the B. Trinity.
And if regard were to be had of Heretics, more have hertofore impugned the
Doctrine of the Trinity, than of the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation.
But no wonder, if they who reduce all certainty of Christian Faith, to the
weight of natural Reason, taking hold of the present time, are glad under the
name of Transubstantiation, to undermine the Doctrine of the B. Trinity, and
all the prime verityes proper to Christian Faith. The other part of your
Affirmation; That, jam factum facere, and factum infectum facere, are equally
impossible, is extreme bold; seeing so many great learned men hold the first,
and no man the latter, being between them as great difference, as between,
Est, Est; and, Fuit, non fuit. But I fear, you do not understand, what learned
men mean by a Reproduction of the same existent thing, or jam factum facere,
which signifyes only that the same thing is, and is; whereas every body knows,
that factum infectum facere is to say, That which was, was not; A manifest
Contradiction. Yet withal I must add, that no Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, does necessarily depend on that Question, Whether it be impossible, jam
factum facere. But enough of this, least others have occasion to say of me, as
you say truly of yourselfe, in the close of this (N. 48.) I digress.

13. I know not well what to make of your long, and distracted discourse (N.
49.) we do not deny, but that Protestants, and other Heretics, may assent to
some Mystery of Faith, by a humane opinion, and persuasion: but that assent of
theirs, is not true Divine supernatural Faith; God not giving his particular
Grace, for believing one Article of Faith, to him, who denies another, equally
proposed, as revealed by God, whereby even the infused Habit of Faith is
destroyed. Unlearned Catholics, may exercise a true Act of Faith; because
indeed their assent, comes to rely upon a firm ground, that is, Divine
Revelation, propounded by an infallible means, Gods Church; whereas Heretics,
have no such ground for the resolution of their Faith, as has been showed, in
several occasions.

14. For gaining time, and saving unnecessary pains, I had omitted to take
notice of your (N. 51.52.) unless your proceeding had forced me to say at least
thus much: that whosoever will read, and compare the words of Ch: Ma. with
your Answer, shall find, that he speaks clearly, and that you do so involue,
and obscure, and alter, what he spoke plainly, that I know not what to make of
your words. He tells you, that the Scripture is not such a first principle in
Christianity, that it may not be proved by another belonging to Christians,
namely by the Authority of the Uisible Church of Christ, as yourself grant; and
to say, as you do, that the Church, or Tradition of the Church, is a Principle
not in Christianity, but in Reason, nor proper to Christians, but common to all
men, for ought I can judge, is repugnant to Reason and Christianity. For, what
has natural Reason alone to do with the Church of Christ, which cannot be
known, except by some supernatural Arguments, as Miracles, Sanctity,
Scripture, Revelation etc.

15. I do not understand these your words (N. 52.) addressed to C. M^. That one
part of Scripture may prove another part Canen^all, and need no proof of its
own being so, you have produced diverse Protestants that deny it, but who they
are that affirm it, nondum constat. I pray you, where did Ch: Ma: say, that
there is any part of Scripture, which needs no proof of its being Canonical?
Does he not prove the necessity of a Living guide, even by this Argument, that
otherwise we cannot be assured, what Book, and parts of Scripture, are
Canonical? And for discerning what Books be Canonical or suppositious, are
not Protestants wont to prove, that such or such a Book which they are pleased
to style Apocryphal, is not conform to other parts of Scripture, and therefore
cannot be Canonical? Do not yourselfe say (N. 27.) The Question whether such
or such a Book be Canonical Scripture, may be decided negatively out of
Scripture, by she wing apparent and irreconciliable contradictions between it
and some other Book confessedly Canonical? And may we not prove
affirmatively, for example, that those Texts of the old Testament, which are
cited in the New, are Canonical, because they are cited for such, in Books
which we believe to be Canonical? I beseech you to what purpose, or upon what
occasion given, do you (N. 51.) utter these words; As if the Scripture might
not be the first, and most known Principle in Christianity, and yet not the
most known in all sciences. Or as if to be a first Principle in Christanity
and in all sciences. Were all one. Charity Maintained said, if Potter mean
that Scripture is one of those Principles which being the first, and most know
ne in all sciences, cannot be demonstrated by other Principles; he supposes
that which is in Question, whether there be not some Principle, for example,
the Church, whereby we may come to the knowledge of Scripture. Do not these
words speak of the first Principle, among Christians, who alone receive
Scripture, and not of Principles in Metaphysicke, Mathematicke, etc: which were
nothing to the purpose? Or who ever dreamed, that Scripture could be the most
known in all sciences, seeing it is not known by any natural science, but
depends on Divine Revelation? Yea, does not Ch: Ma: expressly say? (That if
Potter mean, Scripture to be one of those Principles which being the first and
most known in all sciences; cannot be Demonstrated by other Principles, He
supposes that which is in question.) Which words declare, That Scripture is
none of those Principles which are most known either in all natural sciences,
or in Christianity.

16. Out of what has been said very often, it is easy to answer, and retort
all that you have in all your sections till the (N. 62.) For, to us who
believe, the Church of God to be infallible, diversity of Tranlations, or
corruptions, can bring no harm; seeing we are sure, that the Church can
neverapproue any false Translation, or corruption, nor ground upon them any
Point of Faith. But for you, who deny the infallibility of the Church, and rely
upon Scripture alone, false Translations or corruptions, may import no less,
than the loss of your souls, by being led into some damnable error, or left
in ignorance of some Point necessary to salvation. For, to rely upon Scripture
alone, and yet not to know with certainty, what Scripture in particular is
Canonical, and incorrupted, is to take away all certainty from it, and from
the Faith of Protestants, grounded on it alone. The Church did exist before any
Scripture was written, and must last, although we should imagine that all
Scripture were lost, as some say it happened to the Old Testament; at least it
lay hid. Only I must note for answer to your (N. 58. and 59.) that, Catholics
object to Protestants not only difference of Translations, of which you speak
(N. 59.) but that one of them most deeply condemns the Translation of the
other, as Ch: Ma: (Page: 52. N. 16.) sets down at large. As for the vulgate
Translation, approved by the sacred Council of Trent, we are sure, that it can
contain no error against Faith; and for diverse Readings; we are certain,
that the Church can never approve any one that is false, or settle any doctrine
upon it, as I said even now. But to treat at large of this Translation, would
require a Uolume, and is not for this time for my, (or even your) purpose. In
your (N. 61,) you pretend to make good, or excuse Luther, who in the Text where
it is said (Rom: 3.28.) We account a man to be justified by Faith, translates
(justified by Faith Alone:) and in stead of proving, you only ask; What such
great difference is there between Faith without the works of the Law, and Faith
alone without the works of the Law? Or why does not, without, Alone, signify
all one with. Alone, Without? Answer: there is as great difference between
those two Propositions, as between Truth, and Falsehood. That a man is justified
by Faith without the works of the Law, is a truth believed both by Catholics
and Protestants: for both of us believe, that Faith concurres to justification.
But that other Proposition: A man is justified by Faith alone without the works
of the Law, signifyes that we are not justified by the works of the Law, but by
Faith alone, that is by nothing but by Faith, which is false, and excludes
justification by Hope, Charity, and works of Christian piety: and accordingly
Luther being admonished of this shameful falsification, answered, poenitet me
quod non addiderim and illas duas voces, omnibus and omnium (vz.) sine omnibus
operibus omnium legum. Besides; it is strange, you will defend this
falsification, of (Alone) seeing (Page: 406. N. 32.) you wish, that those
Chapters of S. Paul which entreat of justification by Faith, without the works
of the Law, were never read in the Church, but when the 13. Chap: of the 1.
Epist: to the Corinth. Concerning the absolute necessity of Charity should be,
to prevent misprision, read together with the^. But then good Sr. what danger
of misprision must it needs be, when people shall think S. Paul spoke of Faith
Alone as Luther makes him speak? To this may be added what you have (Page: 218.
N. 49.) of the danger of justification by Faith alone. Neither I, nor others
with whom I have confered can make any sense of your other works, Or why does
not, Without etc. The translation of Zuinglius, This signifyes my Body, in
stead of, This is my Body, is rejected by Protestants themselves: where of see
Brereley (Tract: 2. Cap: 3. Sect. 9. Subd. 3.)

17. In your (N, 62.) till the 80, inclusiue, you vainly triumph, as if you did
invincibly prove, that according to our Grounds, men's salvation depends upon
vncertaintyes: All which I have answered at large, hertofore.

18. Concerning your (N. 83,) I desire the Reader to consider what Charity
Maintained; recites out of Dr: Couell about our vulgate Tanslation of
Scripture, and he will find, that your Answer to that particular, is but a
vain speculation, and that he supposes the Translation, which is called the
Bishops Bible (and is approved in England) to be the best, as coming nearest to
the vulgate; which had been no proof at all, unless he had also supposed the
Vulgate to be the best, all things considered, and so made it a Rule to Judge
of the goodness, and quality, of that English Translation.

19. To your (N. 86.) I answer, that if Dr: Field, when he says (in his
Treatise of the Church, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the L. Archbishop) Seeing
the Controversyes of Religion in our times are grown in number so many, and in
nature so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them, what remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the
societyes in the world, is that blessed Company of holy Ones, that how should
of Faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is. the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, that so they may imbra^e her Communion, follow her
directions, and rest in her judgment. If; I say, Dr. Field did not think of
any company of Christians invested with such Authority from God, that all men
were bound to receive their decrees (as you say he did not) I can only say,
that when he spoke of searching out that Blessed Company of holy Ones etc: he
spoke of a Chimera, or of a thing impossible, and yet he says, that there
remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, only
this, that they search out which among all the societyes in the world, is that
Blessed Company of holy Ones etc: (which had been nothing else, but to bring men
to desperation, by prescribing one only means, for salvation, and that an
impossible one:) And that he, and other Protestants do but cousin the world, and
speak contradictions, or nonsense, when they talk of a perpetual visible
Church, which cannot err in Fundamental Points, and whose Communion we are to
embrace; and yet tell us, that such a visible Church, cannot be designed in
particular, where, and which, she is. For, this is all one as to make her
invisible, and vncognoscible, and of no use at all; and therefore they being
forced by manifest Scripture, to assert, and believe, a perpetual visible
Church, we must, without asking them leave, necessarily infer, that this
Church, by their own necessary confession, must be designable, and
cognoscible, in particular. You say; By all societyes of the world, it is not
impossible, nor very improbable, he might mean all that are, or have been in
the world, and so include even the Primitive Church. But this is no better then
ridiculous. For, he says; What remains but diligently to search out which
among all societyes in the world, is that Church of the living God, which is
the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that so they may embrace her Communion etc: You
see he speaks of that society of men, which is the Church, and which is the
Pillar of Truth, and would have men search it out, whereas the Primitive Church,
neither is, but has been; nor was it for, but directly against, the Doctors
purpose, to advise men, to search out the Primitive Church, and her Doctrine,
which had required time and leisure, and strength of understanding, which, he
says, few men have, and therefore he must understand, a Church to be found in
these times, whose Directions they should follow, and rest in her judgment. To
say as you do, that we embrace her Communion, if we believe the Scripture,
endeavor to find the true sense of it, and live according to it, is very fond;
as if the Doctor spoke of Scripture, when he named the Church; and in saying,
we are to embrace the Communion of the Church, he meant we should embrace the
Communion of Scripture (which had been a strange kind of phrase) and in
advising us to seek out that society of men, and that Company of Holy Ones, he
understood, not men, but the writings of men. Do not your self say, that the
subject he wrote of was the Church, and that if he strayned too high in
commendation of it, what is that to us? Therefore it is clear he spoke not of
the Scripture, in commendation whereof you will not say he strayned too high,
but of the Church, and of the Church of our times, and so says; the
Controversyes of Religion in our times are grown etc: But why do I loose time,
in confuting such toys, as these? It being sufficient to say in a word, that
Protestants in this capital Article, of the invisibility, and infallibility of
the Church, are forced to utter some main Truths, in favor of Catholics,
though with contradiction to themselves.

20. In your (N. 87.) You do but trifle. Charity Maintained (N. 18.) said, That
the true interpretation of Scripture ought to be rece^ved from the Church, is
proved etc: To this you answer: That the true interpretation of the Scripture
ought to be reveaved from the Church, you need not prove, for it is very easily
granted by them, who profess themselves ready to receive all Truths, much
more the true sense of Scripture, not only from the Church, but any society of
men, nay from any man whatsoever. But who sees not, that this is but a cavil,
and that Charity Maintained, to the Question which was in hand (from whence the
interpretation of Scripture was to be received?) answered, it is to be received
from the Church. And I pray, if one should say, the knowledge, or truth of
Philosophy is to be received from Philosophers, would you say, this need not be
proved, nor even affirmed, to them who profess themselves ready to receive all
Truths, not only from Philosophers, but from any man whatsoever?

21. You labor (N. 90.91.92.) to prove* that Protestants receive not the
Scripture upon the Authority of our Church; but in vain. For what true Church
of Christ was there, when Luther appeared, except the Roman, and such as agreed
with her, even in those Points, wherein Protestants disagree from us, and for
which they pretend to have forsaken our Communion? Does not Luther (in his
Book against Anabaptists) confess, that you have the Scripture from us? And
Dove, in his persw sion to English Recusants etc: (Page: 13.) says: We hold
the Creed of the Apostles, of Athanasius, of Nyce, of Ephesus, of
Constantinople, and the same Bible which we receyved from them. And Whitaker
(Lib: de Eccles: etc: Page: 369.) confesses, that Papists have Scripture, and
Baptism etc: and that they came from them to Protestants. That you receive
some Books, and reject others which the universal Church before Luther
received, argues only, that you are formal Heretics, that is, voluntary
choosers, and that, not believing the infallibility of the Church, you have no
certainty of any Book, or parcel, or period of Scripture. And whereas you say
(N. 90.) that we hold now those Books to be Canonical, which formerly we
rejected from the Canon, and instance in the Book of Machabees, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and add, that the first of these we held not to be
Canonical in S. Gregoryes time, or else he was no member of our Church, for it
is apparent He held otherwise, and that the second we rejected from the Canon
in S. Hieromes time, as it is ev^dent out of many places in his works. I
answer, that it is impossible the Church should now hold those Books to be
Canonical, which formerly she rejected from the Canon: and if there were any
doubt concerning these Books of Scripture, they were not doubted of by any
Definition of the Church, but by some particular persons: which doubt the
Church, did clear in due time, as I have declared heretofore, and answered
your Objection out of S. Gregory about the Machabees, as also Charity
Maintained (Part: 2. Page: 195. which you ought not to have dissembled) did
answer the same Objection made by Potter. Concerning the Epistle to the
Hebrews, I beseech the Reader to see what Baronius anno Christi 60. (N. 42.
and seqq.) writes excellently of this matter, and demonstrates that the Latin
Church never rejected that Epistle, as he proves out of Authors, who wrote both
before, and after S. Hierome, and that S. Hierome relied upon Eusebius, and
therefore your absolute Assertion, that this Epistle was rejected in time of S.
Hierome, is no less untrue, than bold. Neither ought you to have concealed the
answer of Char: Maintayn: (Part: 2. Chap: 7. Page: 197.) where he says thus:
Wonder not if S. Hierome speak not always in the same manner of the Canon of
the Old Testament, since upon experience, examination, and knowledge of the
sense of the Church, he might alter his opinion; as once he said (ad Paulinum
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that it was put out of the number by the
greatest part of men; and yet elswere he receives it as the Epistle of S. Paul.
And if you will have a general explication of S. Herome, concerning his
rejecting of Books, not admitted by the Hebrews, hear it in his own words
(advers: Ruff: Apolog: 2.) whereas I have reported what the Hebrews used to
object against the History of Susanna, and the Hymn of the Three Children, and
the Story of the Dragon Bell, which are not in the Hebrew: I have not declared,
what I thought, but what the Jews were wont to say against us, and he calls
Russinus a foolish Sycophant, for charging him with the opinion of the
Hebrews, about these parts of Daniel. And S. Hierome explaining himselse in
this manner, is acknowledged by Covell (Answ: to Bourges Page: 87.) and
Bankcroft (Confer: before his Majesty:) How then will you excuse your Church,
which in her sixth Article, says in general, of all the Books which you
esteem Apocryphal, among which are the History of Susanna, the Hymn of the
three Children, and that of the Dragon: (The other Books, as S. Hierome says,
the Church does read for example of life, and instruction of manners: but yet
it does not apply them to establish any Doctrine) How can she (I say) be
excused, since S. Hierome, even according to the Confession of your own
Brethren, does explain himself, that he uttered only what the Jews were wont
to say against us, and calls Ruffinus a foolish Sycophant for saying the
contrary? So as instead of S. Hierome, and the Church of God, you put on the
person of Ruffinus against S. Hierome, and of the Synagogue, against the Church
of Christ our Lord; And so your whole Canon of the Old Testament, relyes upon
the Authority of the Jews. Thus far Charit: Maint: Which you did not well to
conceal: And while you will not receive the Canon from the universal Church
before Luther, you send men to the Jews. Now, that S. Hierome received the
Epistle to the Hebrews for Canonical, appears out of his Epistle ad
Dardanum, where he says of this Epistle of S. Paul, and the Apocalypse of S.
John; Nos vtraque suscipimus; we receive them both, though we have heard him
say before (ad Paulinum) that the Epistle to the Hebrews was put out of the
number by the greatest part of men. But howsoever this were, particular
Opinyons do nothing concern the Definitions of the Church, as I said.

22. You say (N. 92.) How can we receive the Scripture upon the authority of
the Roman Church, which has delivered at several times, Scriptures in many
places, different and repugnant, for authentical and Canonical? Which is most
evident out of the place of Malachy, which is so quoted for the sacrifice of
the Mass, that either all the anc^ent Fathers had false Bibles, or yours is
false. Most evident likewise from the comparing of the story of Jacob in
Genesis, with that which is cited out of it in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
accordig to the vulgar Edition, but above all, to any one, who shall compare
the Bibles of Sixtu^ and Clement, so evident, that the wit of man cannot
disguise it.

23. Answer. It is intolerable in you, to presume, that your word must be
taken, without so much as offering any least proof, for what you say; whereas
you could not be ignorant, but that all difficultyes, which either Protestants,
or any other Heretics, could object against us, have been considered, and
confuted by learned Catholics. And why did you not cite, those different and
repugnant Texts, which you mention in Malachie? Yet the Reader at aventure, may
read Bellarmine (De Missa L. 1. C. 10.) and Corn: a Lapide upon (Malach 1.11.)
where they learnedly prove the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, out of that place,
and solidly answer all the objections to the contrary. For that, which you
mention of the Story of Jacob in Genesis compared with the Ep^^^^e to the
Hebrews; I wish you had so declared your objection, that I might have applied
a particular, and determinate answer thereto. Now I can only conjecture, what
you mean, and desire the Reader, if he desire satisfaction in this matter, to
peruse what Corn: a Lapide writes upon (Heb: 11.21.) where he learnedly answers
the difficulty, which may seem to be in this place, compared with the (47.
Chap: V. 31. of Genesis) see also the annotation of the Rhemes testament upon
the said place of S. Paul, and the annotation of the Doway translation upon
(Gen: 47.31.) who declare this very well; and the former she was that in your
Translation, you clearly falsify the Text of Scripture. I wonder you do not
blush to talk of the Bible of Sixtus and Clement, having seen the full Answer
which Ch: Ma: gives to that objection made also by Potter; which is a sign
you could not indeed confute what Ch: Ma: said therein, (Part: 2. Chap: 6. N. 3.)

24. Your (N. 93.94.95.96.67.) have been sufficiently answered already; yet I
will touch some Points. You say (N. 93.) If it were true that God had promised
to assist you, for the delivering of true Scripture, would this oblige him, or
would it follow from hence, that he had obliged himself to teach you, not only
sufficiently, but effectually, and irresistibly, the true sense of Scripture?

25. Answer. You will needs be still confounding effectually, and irresistibly:
whereof I spoke enough hertofore. For the present, I say, that God has obliged
himself, so to teach the Church effectually, the true interpretation of
Scripture, that we are infallibly certain, she is free from all error in
Faith; which is a privilege absolutely necessary; as those things are not
which you specify (N. 96.) That, he should not only guard them from all
errors, but guide them to all profitable Truths, such as the true senses of
all Scripture would be and that he should de end them irresislibly from all
vices, and infuse into them irresistibly all virtues. These things, I say are
not necessary, as true Faith is necessary for constituting one a member of the
Church; which has been proved hertofore, even out of Protestants. Who will
not wonder at these words of yours to Ch: Mat? If you say, he cannot do this
without taking away their free will in living; I say, neither can he
necessitate men to believe aright, without taking away their free will in
believing and in prefessing their belief. For who sees not, but that by this
means, you take away the infallibility of the Apostles, yea of our Savior
himself, whom you believe not to be God? Or else you must grant that men may be
infallible (by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost) without taking away their free
will: and so, you must either contradict yourselfe, or blaspheme against the
infallibility of the Apostles, and certain truth of Christian Religion.

26. The Answer which you give (N. 97.) to the place, which Ch: Ma: (N. 18.)
cited out of S. Austine, I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority
of the Church did move me, is easily confuted. That which moved the Saint, to
believe the Gospel, was not the authority of any particular Church, but of the
universal, which deserves as much credit, and is as infallible in one age, as
in another. For, if the whole Church of this age could err, what Privilege of
infallibility could we yield to the age before this (and so upward from one to
another) more than to this present age? and so we could not ground any
certainty, upon the Tradition of the whole Chur^^ of all ages, upon which even
yourselfe pretend to rely for the be^^ere of Scripture. Your other saying (The
Christian Tradition being as fall against Man^^ha^^s, as it was for the
Gospel, He (S. Austine) did well to conclude, that he had as much reason to
disbetieue Mantchaeus, as to believe the Gosp^ll) overthrowes the maine ground
of Protestants, that all things necessary to salvation, are contained in
Scripture alone. For now it seems you admit a Tradition against the Doctrine
of Manichaeus, distinct from that Tradition whereby the Church delivers the
Gospel, and yet in this second Chapter (Page: 114. N. 155.) You say, Scripture
alone and no unwritten Doctrine, having atte^^ation from Tradition truly
vniverfall, for this reason we conceive, as the Apostles persons, while they
were living, were the only Judges of Controversyes, so their writings, now they
are dead, are the only Rule for us to Judge them by. If being pressed, you tell
us perforce, that there was no other Tradition against the Doctrine of
Manichaeus, but the Tradition which delivered Scripture, and that they might be
convinced of error by Scripture alone, you manifestly contradict S. Austine
(Cont: Ep: Fund: Chap: 5. cited by Charity Maintained N. 18.) I would not
^elieue the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move me. Them
therefore, whom I obeyed saying, believe the Gospel, why should I not obey,
saying to me, do not believe Manichaeus? Where we see S. Austine professes to
disbelieue the Doctrine of Manichaeus, upon the same Authority, for which he
believed Scripture, which he professes to have been for the Authority of the
Church (as you also pretend to receive the Scripture from the Church) and
therefore both the Scripture, and Doctrine, or interpretation thereof, we must
receive from the Church: Which appears more by the immediately following words
of S. Austine alleged by Charity Maintained in the same (N. 18.) Choose what
thou please. If thou shall say, believe the Catholics; They warn me not to
give any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If
thou say, do not believe the Catholics, thou shall not do well, in forcing me
to the Faith of Manichaeus, because by the preaching of Catholics I believed
the Gospel it self. If thou say, you did well to believe them commending the
Gospel, but you did not well to believe them discomme^ding Manichaen^ Do
thou think me so very foolish, that without any reason at all I should believe
what thou will, and not believe, what thou will not? Thus far S. Austine. From
whose words, Cha: Ma: makes this reflection: Do not Protestants perfectly
resemble these men, to whom S. Austine spoke, when they would have men believe
the Roman Church delivering Scripture, but not to believe Her condemning
Luther, and the rest? Against whom, when they first opposed themselves to the
Roman Church, S. Austine may seem to have spoken no less prophetically, than
doctrinally, when he said. (Lib: de Utilit: cred Cap: 14.) Why should I not
most diligently inquire what Christ commanded, of them before all others, by
whose authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing?
Can thou better declare to me, what he said, whom I would not have thought to
have been, or to be, if the belief thereof had been recommended by thee to
me? This therefore I believed by fame strengthened with celebrity, consent,
antiquity. But every one may see, that you so few, so turbulent, so new, can
produce nothing deserving authority. What madness is this? Believe them, that
we ought to believe Christ: But learn of us, what Christ said. Why I beseech
thee? Surely if they were not at all, and could not teach me anything, I would
more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe Christ, than that I
should learn any thing concerning him, from any other, than them by whom I
believed him. If therefore, says Cha: Ma: we receive the knowledge of Christ,
and Scripture from the Church, from her also must we take his Doctrine, and
interpretation of Scripture.

27. The application of S. Austines words in your (N. 99.) to any particular
Church, is impertinent, and does not infringe the strength of S. Austines
Argument; who, as I have said, received the Gospel upon the credit of the
universal Church. and not upon the Authority of any particular Church, or
private person; and of the universal Church, he had all reason to say, that,
as for her Authority he believed the Gospel, so for the same authority, he
disbelieved the Doctrine of Manichaeus, which that universal Church condemned.
But you equivocate when you do not distinguish between all the Churches of All
Ages, and all the Churches, or universal Church, of every Age, which must be
no less infallible, than all the Churches of all Ages, and is distinguished
from every particular Church of every age; upon which mistake your whole
objection goes (N. 99.) about an Arian or a Grecian that they may pretend to
make use of S. Austines argument. But whereas you say, the ancient Goths or
Wandals were converted to Christianity by the Arians, it is but to do a secret
favor to the Arians your brethren. For the Goths were not converted by the
Arians from Gentilisme to Christianity, but being first converted, were
afterward perverted by the Arians, as may be seen in Baronius (Ann: 370.) This
answer confutes your passionate, bitter, declamation, vented in your (N. 101.)

28. Your (N. 100.) demands, whether Charity Maintained be well in his wits, to
say, that Protestants would have men be^eue the Roman Church del^vering
Scripture, whereas they accuse her to deliver many Books for Scripture, which
are not so? And do not bid men to receive any Book which she delivers, for
that reason because she delivers it.

29. Answer as above; that either you received the Scripture, upon the credit
of the Roman Church, and such Churches as agreed with her, or else you received
it merely upon your own fancy, admitting, and rejecting Books at your
pleasure; and to this day you can have no certainty of the Bible, unless you
receive it for that Reason, because the Church delivers it. And your admitting
some Books, and rejecting others, which the Church receives, does only prove
that you are formal Heretics.

30. You say (N. 103.) As to be vndersiandible is a condition requisite to a
Judge, so is not that alone sufficient to make a Judge; otherwise you might
make yourselfe Judge of Controversyes. I wonder you would spend time in such
toys. The maine Question being, whether the Church, or Scripture be Judge, or
Rule of Controversyes in Faith, Charity Maintained (N. 19.) proves, that the
Scripture cannot be such a Judge, because it is not intelligible to all, that
is, to unlearned persons, as the Church is, and therefore inferrs, that, not the
Scripture, but the Church, must be Judge. And is not that a good consequence?
Besides, you say, that Charity Maintained in the beginning of his (N. 19.)
which you impugn, undertook only to prove, that, Scripture is not a Judge:
Therefore you grant, that he proved all that he undertook in that place, though
he added, by way of supererogation, that the Church must be that Judge; which
was the chief thing he intended to prove in this Chapter, and which follows
evidently of the Scriptures not being Judge, it being supposed, that either the
Scripture, or Church must be. A grievous Crime in Charity Maintained to prove a
pertinent, and most important Truth!

31. The words of the Apostle (Rom: 14.5.) Let every one abound in his own
sense, are profanely applied by you, as if every one might follow his own
sense, for the interpretation of Scripture, which delivers Divine Revelations,
and you confess, that to disbelieue objects so revealed, is damnable in it
self. S. Paul speaks of things indifferent, and which, at that time, were
neither commanded, not absolutely forbidden to the Jews in the Old Law, which
then was mortua, but not mortifera, dead, but not deadly.

32. Your (N. 104.) till the (N. 106.) inclusiue, have been answered at large.
You suppose (N. 108.) and (N. 113.) that to find out the true Church, every one
must be able to examine the succession of visible Professors of the same
doctrine, through all Ages, or else to examine the Church by the conformity of
her doctrine, with the doctrine of the first Age, as you speak (N. 108.) Both
which we deny, and affirm, that the Catholic Church of every Age, carries
along with her, so many conspicuous Notes of the true Church, and all her
enemies appear with so many Marks of Error, that no man, who seriously
thinks of his Eternal Happyness, can choose, but clearly see the difference,
and behold a way so clear, ita vt stulti non errent per eam. This answer is
solid, and evident, for us. But you, who teach, that we receive Scripture from
the universal Tradition of the Churches of all Ages, and not for the Testimony
of the present Church, how will you enable all men to examine, whether the
Scripture, and much more whether every Book, and parcel of Scripture, has
been delivered by all Churches, even till you arrive to the Primitive Church,
and by it include the Apostles? Wherein we may use these your own words (N.
108.) This trial of necessity requires a great sufficiency of knowledge of the
monuments of Christian Antiquity, which no unlearned can have, because he that
has it, cannot be unlearned. You say also; How shall he (an unlearned man)
possibly be able to know whether the Church of Rome has had a perpetual
Succession of visible Professors, which held always the same doctrine which
they now hold, without holding any thing to the contrary; unless he has first
examined, what was the doctrine of the Church in the first Age, what in the
second, and so forth? And whether this be not a more difficult work, than to
stay at the first Age, and to examine the Church by the conformity of Her
Doctrine, with the Doctrine of the first Age, every man of ordinary
understanding may Judge. But I would know, how one can examine the Church by
the conformity of her Doctrine with the Doctrine of the first Age, except by
the monuments, and Tradition of all the Ages, which intervene betwixt the first
Age, and his, which no unlearned can do, because he that can do it, cannot be
unlearned? And so it seems, you will have unlearned men, despair of all
means to find the true Faith, Church, and salvation. Will you have them pass,
as it were persaltum, immediately from this present Age, to the first, or
Primitive Age of the Church, without the help of writings, or other means of
the middle Ages? What remedy therefore can there be to overcome these
difficultyes, except an infallible belief, that the Universal Church of every
Age cannot err? And that otherwise, all will be brought to vncertaintyes,
every man of ordinary understanding may Judge.

32. For Answer to your (N. 110. till the 122.) inclusiue, I say: No man endued
with reason, will deny the use of Reason, even in matters belonging to Faith.
But we deny, that Reason is not to yield, to Authority, when assisted by Gods
Grace, it has once showed us some infallible Guide, and Authority, to which
all must submitt, and so as it were cease to be different particular men, and
be in a manner, one understanding guided by one visible infallible Judge; for
want whereof, Protestants remain irreconciliably divided, into as many
opinions, as they are men of different understanding, and will, yea one man is
divided from himself, as he alters his Opinions. Reason then may dispose, or
manuduct us to Faith, but the Object into which Faith is resolved, is the
Divine Revelation, at which, Reason did point, and to which it must submitt:
Otherwise Faith were but Opinion; which even Dr: Potter affirms to be a good
consequence: And it should not be the Gift of God, but the Act of it should be
produced by the force of nature, and the Habit be an acquired, and not infused
Habit, which is evidently against Scripture, as I proved in the Introduction. I
wonder how you dare allege Scripture as you do; as if the places, which you
alledg (N. 116.) for trying of Spirits, did signify, that we are to try them by
humane Reason, and not by the Doctrine of the Church, and Holy Scripture
interpreted by Her. But in this you show yourselfe to have drunk, the very
quintessence of Socinianisme.

33. Charity Maintained had Reason to say (N. 29.) What good states men would
they be, who should ideate, or fancy such a Commonwealth as these men have
framed to themselves a Church? And (N. 22.) What confusion to the Church, what
danger to the Commonwealth, this denial of the Authority of the Church may
bring, I leave to the consideration of any judicious, indifferent man. For if
it be free for every one, to think as he pleases, who will hinder him, from
uttering his thoughts, in matters which he conceives belong to Faith, and to
conform his practice to his thoughts, and words? And by that means sow
discord in the Church, and sedition in the Commonwealth. And therefore what you
say (N. 122.) that men only interpret for themselves, is not always true, but
their self interpretation may indeed redound to the hurt of other, both
Private and Public Persons, and Communityes, if their thoughts, chance to
pitch upon some object, which may be cause of mischief.

34. Howsoever, (N. 118.) You seek to shift off the place of S. Austine, which
Charity Maintained cited (N. 21.) You see that you go about to overtrow all
Authority of Scripture, and that every man's mind may be to himself a rule,
what he is to allow, or disallow in every Scripture. (Lib: 32. cont: Faust:)
Yet it is certain by Reason, and Experience of Protestants, and other, old,
and modern Sectaryes, that to take away a Living Judge, is to make every man's
mind a Rule, what he is to allow, or disallow in every Scripture. For the
Circle, of which you speak here, and in many other places, I have showed
hertofore at large, that no such thing can with any probability be objected
against us, but most clearly, and unanswerably, against your Brethren.

35. It seems you were well furnished with idle time, when (N. 122. it should
be 121.) you could at large examine, and seriously exagitate, these words of
Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Page: 66. N. 22.) Behold what goodly safe
Propounders of Faith arise in place of Gods universal visible Church, which
must yield to a single Preacher; a neighbor; a man himself, if he can read,
or at least have ears to hear Scripture read. Which words (good safe
Propounders of Faith) who sees not to be spoken ironice, out of just
indignation, that men should reject the determination of Pope, or Church (as
Potter expressly does in that Page 247.) and then send us to the Declaration,
of a particular Preacher, of a Neighbor etc: Surely the Doctor having rejected
the Pope and Church, should have proposed, some better and safer means, and
did ill to propound such, as every one sees are fallible, and in no wise safe.
But I shall be guilty of your fault, if I stay longer upon such trifles.

36. Your (N. 123.) has been answered already, and in your (N. 124.) you do
not so much impugn Charity Maintained as Dr: Potter cited by Him (Part: 1.
Page: 67. N. 23.) in these words: Dr: Potter acknowledges, that besides the
Law, there was a Living Judge in the Jewish Church, endued with an absolutely
infallible direction in cases of moment; as all Points belonging to Divine
Faith are. The question then must be, not whether Dr: Potter spoke true, but
whether Charity Maintained cited him truly, as I am sure He did. For, the
Doctor, (Edit: 2. Page: 25. Lin: 2. a fine.) writes thus: The High Priest in
cases of moment had a certain Privilege from error, if he consulted the
divine Oracle by the judgment of Vrim (or by the breast plate of judgment,
wherein were Vrim and Thummim) whereby he had an absolutely infallible direction.
Thus He. And that you may see he speaks of such an infallibility, as He denies
to the Pope, and Church; Mark his words immediately following: If any such
promise from God to assist the Pope, could be produced, his decisions might
then justly pass for Oracles, without examination; Till then, his words with
us weigh so much as his reasons, no more Where you see, He grants to the high
Priest, so great and so large, a Privilege, that if any such promise from God
to assist the Pope could be produced, his decisions might then justly pass for
Oracles, without examination. Which is a large grant, and from which, every
good Christian may well infer, that, if such an infallibility were granted to
the high Priest, and Synagogue to the Jews, much more ought we to yield an
absolute infallibility, to the Vicar, and Church of Christ.

37, But (N. 124.) You answer, or Object, First; Where was that infallible
direction in the Jewish Church, when they should have received Christ for their
Messiah, and refused him? Or perhaps this was not a case of moment.

38. Answer. Possibili posito in esse, nullum sequitur absurdum. Nor is it any
wonder, that what was prophesied, should be performed. Perpetuity was not
promised to the Old Law, (of which it is said Ezech: 7.26. The Law shall perish
from the Priest) but to the Church of Christ; of which it is said, the gates of
hell shall not prevail against her. The Church is free, and signified by Sara,
wife to Abraham; the Synagogue was signified by Agar the bond woman (Gal:
4.24.) Agar was sent away, and repudiated, not Sara. The Church is universal,
in respect of all that shall be saved, because none can be saved out of it, as
even Calvin expressly grants, (Instit: Lib: 4. Cap: 1. N. 4.) Extra ejus
gremium nulla est speranda peccatorum remissio, nec vlla salus. But diverse
were saved out of the Synagogue. The Synagogue was not perfect, (Heb: 7.19.)
The Law brought nothing to perfection. And in this sense, the ceremonies and
Sacraments of the Synagogue, are called weak and poor elements (Gal. 4.9.)
But the Church of Christ is perfect, and the Sacraments of the New Law, not
only signify, but give Grace. For which cause S. Austine (in Psalm: 73.) says:
The Sacraments of the new Testament give salvation; the Sacraments of the Old
promised a Savior. The Synagogue contained a shadow of good things to come,
(Heb: 10.1.) The Church has the light itself, that is Christ, (John: 1.9:) No
wonder then, if the shadow fail, when the fullness of light appears; and no
wonder, if our Savior being present at the Council of the Jews, and having
so preached the Gospel, that after some hours he said, Consummatum est, It is
consummate: No wonder, I say, if the Jews might be permitted, at that time to
err. S. Leo (Sermon: 6. de Passion: says) Tu vero, (he speaks to Caiphas) a
quo jam alienabatur haec dignitas, ipse tibi es executor opprobrij, and ad
manifestandum finem veteris instituti, pertinet eadem diruptio Sacerdotij. He
speaks of Caiphas, tearing his garments. Contrarily you may remember, that the
Priests, being consulted by Herod, about the Messiah, did give a true answer
concerning him. Yet good Sir, you may reflect, that the Point for which the
high Priest, directly, and immediately said, He has blasphemed, was not because
he then expressly pretended to be the Messiah, but because he made himself the
Son of God; upon which, Caiphas did rend his garments, and afterward, they
accused him before Pilate, because he made himself the Son of God: and do not
you, with other Socinians, hold it to be indeed a blasphemy to say, that our
Savior Christ is the Son of God, and consubstantiall to the Eternal Father;
and do they not in their Catechism expressly say, that it is against
Scripture, and rectam rationem, right reason? Which wicked heresy of yours
being once supposed to be true, the high Priest may easily be excused from
error, and blasphemy, and so by this example, you in particular, ought not to
prove that he erred in a case of moment, but that he spoke truth. Neither can
you blame him, for taking the words of our Savior, (that, he was the Son of
God) in a litterall sense, seeing all orthodoxe Believers understand it so, as
indeed it is so to be understood. And in the mean time, are not you true
blasphemers, by whose Doctrine, Caiphas may be excused from blasphemy? And (o
impiety!) our Savior had blasphemed in making himself the Son of God, if your
horrible Doctrine were true.

39. Secondly, you answer, that Dr. Potter mght say very well, not that the
high Priest was infallible, (for certainly he was not) but that his
determination was to be of necessity obeyed, though for the justice of it there
was no necessity that it should be believed. But then, how could the Doctor
say, that the high Priest had a certain privilege from error, whereby he had
an absolutely infallible direction? Is not that to be not only obeyed, but of
necessity believed, which proceeds from an absolutely infallible derection? Or
how could the high Priests determination be of necessity obeyed, if his
determination had been repugnant to any Point of Faith, as it might have
happened, if he had no infallible direction? Or will you now grant that one
may, and must, dissemble in matters of Religion? If you grant this last, the
ground for which you excuse Protestants from schism, falls to the ground.

40. Thirdly, you answer; It is one thing to say, that the living judge in the
Jewish Church, had an infallible direction: another, that he was necessitated
to follow this direction. This is the Privilege which you challenge. But it is
that, not this, which the Doctor attributes to the Jews. As a man may truly
say, the wise men had an infallible direction to Christ, without saying or
thinking that they were constrained to follow it, and could not do otherwise.
This Answer is no more solid, and no less repugnant to Dr. Potter, than the
former. For he says: If any such promise from God to assiste the Pope could be
produced, his decisions might then justly pass for oracles, without
examination. Now how could any man's decisions pass for oracles, if the promise
from God to assist him, be not effectual, but that he may actually resist or
reject such an assistance, and so teach the contrary of that, toward which he
is assisted by God? Therefore the Doctor must be understood, of such an
assistance, as it is certain, the party assisted will follow, which is the
very Privilege, which, you say, we challenge, though we say not, that we are
necessitated, as you misreport us; for we know very well, that there is a great
difference, betwixt an absolute necessity, and infallibility of an effect, as I
have declared hertofore. And indeed, to say; that the high Priest had an
infallible assistance, which in fact might be resisted, is to attribute no more
to him, than to every man, for performing his Duty, if he concur with Gods
inspirations, and directions, or sufficient Grace. Yourselfe say (N. 148.) That
the whole depositum of truth was commtted to every particular Church, nay to
every particular man, which the Apostles converted. And yet no man, I think
will say, that there was any certainty, that it should be kept whole inviolate
by every man and every Church. Which words confirm my saying, that by your
interpretation, the Doctor attributes no more to the high Priest, than to every
man; which yet we have seen to be directly against his words, and meaning, and
that he ascribes that to the high Priest, which he denies to the Pope, to whom
he professes, that if he granted as much as God promised to the high Priest,
his (the Popes) decisions might justly pass for oracles, without examination:
Which surely is more, than is granted to every man; neither would either he, or
you, deny to the Pope that sufficient Grace, and assistance, to perform his
Duty, which Assistance you grant to every man. To your example of the wise men:
I answer; if God did efficaciously decree, that the birth of our B. Savior,
should be published to the world, by their eye-witnessing, he gave them such
direction, as in his infinite wisdom, he saw they would follow de facto;
though without either constraint, or necessity, as you would not deny to be
very possible, if you had been versed in solid Divinity, or read and
understood, our Catholic Authors upon the matter of Grace.

41. All that you have from the (N. 125. till 136.) inclusiue, is answered
already. Only I will say, that we do not prove the Church to be infallible,
because so it seems to us most fit, as you do, who rely merely upon humane
discourse; but seeing the Question between us, is, whether the Church, or
Scripture alone, be the infallible Rule, or Judge of Faith, if we prove that
the Church is useful for such a purpose, and that the Scripture alone cannot
possibly be such a Rule, it follows, that not the Scripture can be such a
Rule, but that the Church must be a Judge, of Controversyes. Thus all your
roving arguments through diverse numbers vanish into nothing.

42. In the end of your (N. 126.) you say that Charity Maintained inferred
vainly that with months and years, as new Canonical Scriptures grew to be
published, the Church altered Her Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversyes;
which yet is a true consequence, if, as Charity Maintained expressly says as
the Church by little and little received holy Scripture she was by the like
degrees divested of her possessed Infallibility. Protestants grant that after
the canon was perfited, infallibility ceased to be in the Church; and why must
they not say, that as Books of Scripture were written, so she by degrees lost
her infallibility, as being needeless for those points which grew to be
evidently declared by those Books? For which cause they teach that when the
whole Scripture was written, the Church wholly lost infallibility; and here
enters your conceypt that to him to whom the way is clear, a guide is not
necessary; Therefore the evidence of Scripture, made infallibility in the Church
unnecessary.

43. In your (N. 137. 138.) you dissemble the force of Ch: Ma: his Argument,
which is: the Church was once endued with infallibility; therefore you cannot
affirm, that she lost it, without alleging some evident Text of Scripture for
your assertion; which, with you who rely upon Scripture alone, ought to be a
convincing Argument. Your fond instance about the King of Sweden, with the rest
of that (N. 138.) has been answered already.

44. I need say little to your (N. 139.140.) having confuted at large your
distinction between being infallible in Fundamentalls, and an infallible Guide
in Fundamentalls. And to your words (N. 140.) directed to Charity Maintained;
For the Churches being deprived by the Scripture of infallibility, in some
Points, and not in others, that is a wild notion of your own, which we have
nothing to do with. I Answer: if you mean to defend the cause of Potter, or
other Protestants, and not of Socininians only, you must of necessity have to
do with that wild notion. For, seeing it must be granted, that before Scripture
was written, the Church was infallible in all matters belonging to Faith both
Fundamental, and not Fundamental (because otherwise we could not have
believed Her in any one, and so there had been no means to attain a Divine
infallible Faith) and that after the Canon of Scripture was persited, the
Church remains infallible in Fundamental Articles, but may err in Points not
Fundamental, (both which things are granted by Protestants:) I hope you will
not deny, but that the conclusion deduced from these Premises, must be; That
she lost part, and kept part of that infallibility, with which she was endued,
before Scripture was written: and that you have an obligation to show by some
evident Text of Scripture, that the Church, by the writing thereof, was deprived
of infallibility in Points not Fundamental, and conserved with infallibility
in Fundamental Articles; beside what I said even now, that according to your
instance of a way, the Church should have been deprived of infallibility, when
by writing of some Scriptures, some points were made clear in writing, which
before were believed only for the Authority of a Guide, that is, the Church.
And now, consider whether Charity Maintained may not say to you, as you with
your wanted humility speak to him, jam dic Posthume de tribus capellis.

45. Your (N, 141.) has been answered in my confutation of your (N. 124.)
concerning the infallibility of the high Priest and Jewish Church. in your (N.
142.) you say to Charity Maintained; For particular rites, and ceremonies, and
orders for government, our Savior only has left a general injunction by S.
Paul, let all things be done decently and in order. But what order is fittest,
i. e. what time, what Place, what Manner etc: is fittest, that he hathleft to
the discretion of the Governors of the Church. But if you mean, that he has
only concerning matters of Faith, prescribed in General, that we are to hear
the Church, and left it to the Church to determine what particulars we are to
beliue: The Church being nothing else but an aggregation of Believers, this in
effect is to say, He has left it to all believers to determine what
particulars they are to believe. Besides, it is so apparently false, that I
wonder you could content yourselfe, or think we should be contented with a
bare saying without any show or pretense of proof.

46. Answer. My hope was at the first general view of this section, to have
answered it in very few words. But upon particular examination I find it to
involve so many points of moment, that to unfold them, will require some little
more time, and pains. First, you cite Ch: Ma. imperfectly. His words (Part: 1.
P. 69. N. 23.) are; He (Dr. Potter) affirms, that the Jewish Sinagogue
retained infallibility in herself, notwithstanding the writing of the old
Testament; and will he so unworthily and ^^justly deprive the Church of Christ
of infallibility by reason of the New Testament? Expecially if we consider,
that in the Old Testament, Laws, Ceremonies, Rites, Punishments, Judgments,
Sacraments, Sacrifices etc: were more particularly and minutely delivered to
the Jews, than in the New Testament is done, our Savior leaving the
determination, or Declaration of particulars to his Spouse the Church, which
therefore stands in need of infallibility more than the Jewish Synagogue. To
these words you say: I pray walk not thus in generality, but tell us, what
particulars? And then you distinguish Rites, and Ceremonies, and Orders for
Government, from matters of Faith; which indeed is no distinction, if the
matter be duly considered. For, although diverse Rites and Ceremonies, may
chance to be of themselves indifferent, and neither forbidden, or commanded, to
be practiced, or omitted; yet to be assured, that indeed they are indifferent,
and not sinful, or superstitious, and so infectiue of the whole Church, we
need some infallible authority. And particularly this is true for the
Hierarchy, or Government of the Church (as I said hertofore) which is a
Fundamental point, if any can be Fundamental, to the constituting a Church.
For this cause Charity Maintained expressly said, that our aviour left to his
Church the determination, or declaration of particulars; but you thought fit to
leave out the word declaration, whereas we cannot certainly rely upon the
determination of any person, or community, without a power and infallibility to
make a Declaration, that the thing determined or ordained is lawful: and so a
Determination, or Ordination, must suppose, or imply in fact, a declaration. Do
not you pretend to leave us for our superstitious Rites, and Ceremonies,
because you could not in conscience conform yourselves to them? And here I
may put the Reader in mind of the words which I cited above out of Moulin
(Epist 3 to Dr. Andrews) Non potui dicere primatum Episcoporum esse juris
divini, quin Ecclesijs nostris, notam haereseos inurerem. Enimvero obsirmare
animum adversus ea quae sunt juris divini, and Deo jubentipertinaciter
refragari plane est haeresis, sive id Fidem attingat five disciplinam. Thus
your demand, what particulars Charity Mait^yned understood, is answered,
namely, that he understood all particulars, which occasion might require to be
ordained, determined and declared, by the Church; but in the mean time, where,
or when did Ch: Ma: say, or dream, that which you say is apparently false,
that our Savior has only concerning matters of Faith, prescribed in general,
that ^^^re to hear the Church, and left it to the Church to determine what
particulars we are to believe. Your conscience cannot but bear witness,
against your own words, that Charity Maintained has expressed a thousand
times our doctrine, that we are bound to believe, whatsoever is sufficiently
proposed as revealed by God; professing every where, that this is the Ground
for which he avouches, that of two disagreeing in matters of faith; one must be
in a damnable state: and that for this cause, we are bound to believe every
particular truth, contained in Scripture, or defined by the Church, which are
millions: And therefore not the Doctrine of Charity Maintained, but your
imputation is apparently false. Yet, to say the truth, that Doctrine which you
say is apparently false, and no less falsely imputed to us, might be very true,
if it should stand, or fall by the strength only of the argument which you
object against it, though perhaps it did seem to you a great subtility.

47. The Church, say you, being nothing else but an aggregation of Believers,
this in effect is to say, he has left to all believers to determine what
particulars they are to believe. To which I may answer, as you say to Charity
Maintained. I wonder you would impugn that, as apparently false, which must be
apparently true, if the ground of all your doctrine be true, That every man's
Reason prescribes to himself, and determines what he is to believe; and so
your kind of Church, being nothing but an aggregation of believers in that
manner, it follows, that it is left to all Believers, to determine, what
particulars they are to believe. The like may be said of the Council of
Apostles, which consisted of the Apostles, who determined not only, what
others, but what themselves were to believe, if they had not believed it
already, (as de facto they did believe it before the Council) and so the
Apostles had determined, what the Apostles were to believe. The same may be
applied to General Counsels, who determine even what they themselves are to
believe; and universally, if we do conceive any congregation, to be infallibly
assisted by God, they may declare, what themselves, and others are to believe,
though that congregation be nothing but an aggregation of such Believers.
Yourselfe confess, that, the Governers of the Church may determine Rites,
Ceremonies, etc: for the whole Congregation and so for themselves according to
your inference; yea, if you understand the matter as you should, in determining
Rites etc: they determine, what every one is not only to practice, but to
believe also, as I said above; and so all believers may determine in this
sense, what they are to believe. But the truth is, you err, even in
Philosophy, not considering, that when a thing is determined by a Community,
endued with sufficient Authority, to command, and define, the obligation falls
not, upon the whole collectiue, compared with the whole, that is adaequate with
it self, but as the whole respects a particular member, or part, from which it
is truly distinguished, as includens ab incluso, and the whole a singulis
partibns, in the manner, that a man's soul is distinguished, from a man.
Besides, the precept of Faith, or Believing, is not a pure Ecclesiastical
precept, but a Divine command, obliging All, and Every one, to believe
whatsoever the Church propounds as revealed by God, which thereby becomes an
Object of Faith. And I hope you will not deny, but that although it were
granted, that a man cannot oblige himself, nor a community it self, by their
own Authority, or command; yet God may, and does, oblige, all, and every one,
to believe, whatsoever is propounded as a Divine truth, by such an infallible
Propounder, as the Church is, which, in that sense, may truly be said to
determine what all are to believe. We may also add, that by the Church are
understood the Pastors and Prelates thereof, who are not the whole Church
collectiue, but may command, and define, for the whole Church. Lastly; what
does this your answer belong to the Point, of which Charity Maintained spoke?
That, there is a greater necessity of some infallible authority, in the Church
of Christ, than in the Synagogue of the Jews, because the Laws, Rites etc
were more particularly, and, as I may say, minutely determined in the Old, then
in the New, Law, which therefore stands in need of some Living Judge to
determine, for all the many varietyes, and different occasions, that may
present themselves.

48. Your (N. 143.) is answered in three words, that when S. Paul, (1. Cor.
16.11.) said, All these things chanced to them in figure; Every body sees,
that he meant not of the temporal, but of the Ecclesiastical or spiritual
state of the Jews, and so if they had one high Priest, who was endued with
infallibility, much more ought we to believe, that there is such an
infallibility in Gods Church: And the Reader, by comparing the words of Charity
Maintained, with your Objection, will of himself see, that you labor to
seek, but can find no solid matter against him. Neither did he ever say, that
the Ecclesiastical Government of the Jews was a Pattern for the
Ecclesiastical Government to Christians (as you would make him speak) but
expressly, that the Synagogue was a type and figure of the Church of Christ,
(for, those are his words.) Now to be only a type and figure argues
imperfection: To be a Pattern, expresses perfection, as being a Rule, model,
and an idea of that, in respect whereof, it is a Pattern.

49. You needed not in your (N. 144.) pretend to doubt what discourse Chapter Ma.
meant, when in the beginning of his (N. 24.) he said; This discourse is
excellently proved by ancient S. Irenaeus. For, it was easy to see, that he
spoke of that discourse which he held in his immediately precedent (N. 23.) His
discourse was, that the Church of the Old and New Law did exist (respective)
before any Scripture was written, as there he shows at large, and
consequently, that Tradition, and not scripturedid then beget faith; which is
also clearly confirmed, by the place which Chapter Ma. cited (N. 24.) out of S.
Irenaeus, whose meaning you do pervert against himself, and even against
yourselfe. The words of the Saint (Lib: 3. Cap: 4.) are; What if the Apostles
had not left Scriptures, ought we not to have followed the order of Tradition,
which they delivered to those, to whom they committed the Churches? To which
order many Nations yield assent, who believe in Christ, having salvation
written in their hearts by the spirit of God, without letters or ink, and
diligently keeping ancient Tradition. It is easy to receive the truth from Gods
Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully deposited in her, as in a rich
storehouse, all things belonging to truth. For what? If there should arise any
contention of some small question, ought we not to have recourse to the most
ancient Churches, and from them to receive what is certain and clear
concerning the present question? These be the words of S. Irenaeus cited by
Charity Maintained, which declare, that Tradition is sufficient, and powerful,
to produce Faith, even with facility, (as S. Irenaeus expresses himself)
though no Scripture had been written: And this he affirms, not by way of
conjecture, or discourse, what God would have done, if there had been no
Scriptures, but that, de facto, there was existent such a powerful Tradition,
as to it not one, nor some, nor few, but many nations did yield assent without
letters or ink, that is, without Scripture: And in this Chapter, (N. 159.) you
say; Irenaeus tells us of some barbarous Nations that believed the doctrine of
Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the word of God; for they
never heard of it and Faith comes by hearing. From whence you infer, That a
man may be saved, though he should not know, or not believe Scripture to be the
word of God, if he believe Christian Religion, wholly and entirely, and live
according to it. If this be true, does it not follow, that Scripture alone is
not the only, nor a necessary Rule of Faith, seeing by tradition alone, men may
be saved, though they should not know, or not believe Scripture to be the word
of God? And that by this concession, you directly blott out, the very title of
this Chapter, which is, Scripture the only Rule whereby to judge of
controversyes?

50. Now let us hear, what you can Object against Charity Maintained, in this
matter. You say: (N. 144.) In saying, what if the Apostles had not left
Scripture, ought we not to have fellowed the order of Tradition? And in saying,
that to this order many Nations yield assent, who believe in Christ, having
salvation written in their hearts, by the spirit of God, without letters or
ink, and diligently keeping ancient Tradition; does he (S. Irenaeus) not
plainly show, that the Tradition he speaks of, is nothing else, but the very
same that is written: Nothing but to belie^e in Christ? To which, whether
Scripture alone, to them that believe it, be not a sufficient Guide, I leave to
you to Judge.

51. Answer: First, this your Answer, though it were never so true, leaves
Charity Maintained in possession, of what he endeavored to prove out of S.
Irenaeus, against the Title of your Chapter (Scripture the only Rule whereby to
Judge of Controversyes) to wit, that Tradition, and therefore not only
Scripture, is such a Rule. For, dato non concesso, that Scripture contains all
Points necessary to be believed, it follows not that the Church also may not
be infallible, and guide us by Tradition, as by Gods unwritten Word. You teach
here, (N. 126.) That, all the necessary Parts of the Gospel are contained in
every one of the four Gospells; And yet you say, That they which had ^ll the
Books of the New Testament, had nothing superfluous: For, it was not
superfluous but profitable, that the same thing should be said diverse times,
and be testified by diverse witnesses. So, say I, it had not been superfluous,
but very profitable, that the same truth should be revealed by God in
Scripture, and by the infallible Tradition of the Church, which you must grant
to have happened in the time of the Apostles; when the first Books of
Scripture were Written. For, as Scripture was not superfluous, though it found
another infallible Rule before it, which also even according to Protestants,
remained for some time with it (namely till the Canon of Scripture was
perfited) so Tradition neither was, nor is, superfluous, though there be
another infallible Rule (Scripture) with it.

52. Secondly: When you say, That the Tradition S. Irenaeus speaks of, is
nothing else, but the very same what is written; nothing but to believe in
Christ; to which, whether Scripture alone, to them that believe it (you should
add, and understand it) be not a sufficient Guide, I leave to you to Judge: I
must answer, as you (N. 142.) speak to Charity Maintained; I pray walk not
thus in generality, but tell us, what you mean by believing? Only in general,
that he is the Messiah, and that without believing him, none can be saved? Or
else do you understand, by believing in Christ, all that has been taught by
him? If you mean the first only; you say nothing to the purpose; because other
Articles, are necessarily to be believed, beside that of Christ's being the
Messiah. If you mean the second; that is, all Points taught by our Savior,
and necessary to be believed, as you (N. 159.) say; S. Irenaeus tells us of
some babarus Nations, that believed the Doctrine of Christ; (which certainly
contains more than that one general Article of his being Messiah, as even
there you declare, that it comprehends the Believing of Christian Religion,
wholly and entirely; that is, (the matter of the Gospel) you know we deny,
that for all such truths, Scripture alone can be a sufficient Guide, and to
take the contrary without proof, is to beg the question. Nay, even for that
of believing in Christ, I wonder you would say, that you leave it to the
judgment of Charity Maintained, that Scripture alone is a sufficient Guide, (in
the Principles, and proceedings of Protestants) seeing you know that He knows,
and the whole world knows, how vastly they disagree about believing in Christ,
some believing him to be the Son of God, and Consubstantiall to his Father:
Others denying it: Some saying, he satisfied for our sins, others denying it,
as you know the Socinians do. So that, take away the Authority and
infallibility of Gods Church, the agreement of Christians in believing in
Christ, will terminate in the mere Name of Christ, and the Title of Savior,
with endless contentions, about the Thing signified by that Name, and Title.
Put then all your Assertions together, the strength of them will end in this
contradiction, that the only Rule of Faith is Scripture* and yet that a man may
be saved without believing it to be the Word of God, yea though he doubt or
reject it, being proposed by other Parts of the Church, as you expressly say in
the same (N. 159.)

53. But, you say, S. Irenaeus his words are just as if a man should say, if
God had not given us the light of the Sun, we must have made use of candles and
torches: If we had had no eyes, we must have felt out our way: If we had no
legs, we must have used crutches. And does not this in effect import, that
while we have the Sun, we need no candles? While we have our eyes, we need not
feel out our way? While we enjoy our legs, we need not crutches? And by like
reason, Irenaeus in saying, if we had had no Scripture, we must have followed
Tradition, and they that have none, do well to do so, does he not plainly
import, that to them that have Scripture, and belicue it, Tradition is
unnecessary? Which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain evidently
the whole Tradition.

54. Answer: You may understand the words of S. Irenaeus, and move others to
understand them as you please; if you will first suppose, your own doctrine to
be true, that is, if to beg the question, may pass for a good Rule, to
interpret Authors. If I say, you suppose, or take as granted, that Scripture is
the only Rule of Faith; and, that it contains evidently all things necessary
to salvation; you may compare it to the Sun, to Eyes, to legs; and the Church
to Candles; to feeling out our way; to crutches; yea (if she might err,) to
the Synagogue of Satan, and lastly to Nothing, because indeed every error in
Faith, destroys Faith, and Church. But if you conceive as you ought, that the
Church gives Being to the Scripture in order to us; that by Her Eyes, or
Testimony, we believe Scripture to be the word of God, as yourselfe grant; that
by Her subsistence, as I may say, it has been conserved and subsists; you
will be forced, to invert your similitudes, and interpretation of S. Irenaeus,
and say; do not his words import, that if candles should fail, the Sun will
last, and (as the Prophet David says Psalm: 18.) Nec est qui se abscondat a
calore ejus: And that in Sole posuit tabernaculum suum, that is, in
manifestatione Ecclesiam, says S. Austine. If through the difficulty and
obscurity of Scripture we cannot feel out our way, (as the disagreements of
Protestants show, they cannot) we may see by the eyes of the Church, by which
we did first see Scripture itself, and then, do not the words of S. Irenaeus
plainly import, the direct contrary of that which you infer? That to them who
have Tradition (as all they must have, who believe Scripture, which we receive
by Tradition) Scripture is unnecessary, (as you speak of Tradition) and so is
not to be the only Rule of Faith; nor is there any necessity at all, that it
contain evidently the whole Tradition, as you infer, which is most evidently
false, seeing S. John writes, that the world, could not contain all, that might
have been written, of our B. Savior. To say nothing, that one Tradition, and
that the chiefest of all other, in the account of Protestants, is, that
Scripture is the Word of God, which you profess cannot be proved by Scripture
itself.

55. And, now we have a clear Answer to your Objection out of S. Irenaeus, (as
if he had taught that Scripture contains evidently the whole Tradition.) You
cite not the place: But it is (Lib: 3. Cap: 1.) where he says: We have
received the disposition of our salvation from no others, but from them, by
whom the Gospel came unto us. Which Gospel truly the Apostles first
preached, and afterward by the will of God, delivered in writing, to us, to be
the Pillar and Foundation of our Faith. These words you allege, and in your
margent cite Bellarmine (de Verbo Dei Lib: 4. Cap: 11.) answering them much to
your advantage, as you pretend. But you dissemble his first Answer, which
demonstrates that S. Irenaeus does in no wise favor your pretense. Bellarmine
in Answer to Kemnitius who made this same Objection out of S. Irenaeus, says;
Respondeo, Irenaeum non dicere, nihil aliud Apostolos predicavisse, quam quod
scripserunt, sed solum scripsisse Evangelium quod antea praedicaverant, quod
est verum, and non contra nos. I answer, that S. Irenaeus does not assirme, the
Apostles to have preached nothing else beside that which they wrote: but only
that they wrote the Gospel which they had preached before, which is true, and
not against us. Now how can you impugn this Answer of Bellarmine, otherwise
than by begging the question, and supposing, that the Evangelists, cannot be
said to have Written the Gospel, unless they wrote all that the Apostles
preached? Which you know we deny, and the contrary is evident out of S. John,
as I said even now, and hertofore proved at large: Though it be also most true,
that they wrote all that was necessary to be written; but then you must prove,
that all that was necessary to be believed, or was preached, was necessary to
be written, (and not delivered by Gods unwritten Word, or Tradition, as it was
before any Scripture was extant) which you will never be able to prove out of
S. Irenaeus, or Holy Scripture. This Answer to the words of S. Irenaeus is
confirmed out of the same Chapter, where he says, Marcus Discipulus etc: Mark
the Disciple and interpreter of Peter did also deliver to us in writing those
things which were preached by Peter, and Luke the follower of Paul set down in
a Book the Gospel which was preached by him. (S. Paul.) And afterward John
the Disciple of our Lord, and who leaned upon his breast, did also write the
Gospel while he remained at Ephesus in Asia. Now it cannot be doubted, but
that S. Mark had many things from the mouth of S. Peter, and S. Luke from S.
Paul, which they did not set down in writing; and yet you see, it is said, he
(S. Luke) wrote Evangelium, the Gospel; and for S. John, he professes, that
our Savior did innumerable things, which are not written, and yet it is said,
edidi Evangelium, he set forth the Gospel, and the Apostles delivered
interpretations of Scripture to the first Christians, which are not set down
in writing, as yourselfe confess. If any say, S. Irenaeus calls Scripture the
Pillar and Foundation of our Faith. I answer: Those words cannot be referred,
Scripturis, to the Scriptures, (which is S. Irenaeus his word) but to the
Gospel, as appears by the Word, futurum, (fundamentum and columnam Fidei
nostrae futurum) seeing we cannot say, with congruity of Grammar, Scripturis
futurum, and therefore it must be referred to Evangelium, Gospel, Evangelium
columnam Fidei nostrae futurum, which (Gospel) is of a larger extent, than
Scripture; though no man denies, Scripture to be, in a good sense, the Pillar
and Fundation of truth. Of the second answer which Bellar gives, I have spoken
largely (Chap: 2.) and showed how egregiously you abuse him against his direct
intention, meaning, and words.

56 Thus you have an answer to your (N. 145.) Where you say, that at the most
we can infer from S. Irenaeus but only a suppositiue necessity of having an
infallble Guide, and that grounded upon a false supposition, in case, we had no
Scripture, but an absolute necessity hereof, and to them who have and believe
the Scripture, which is your assumption, cannot with any color from hence be
concluded, but rather the contrary. The Answer, I say, to this, is given
already; for, as I said, S. Irenaeus speaks not by way of discourse, or
conjecture, or as it were of prophecy, what God would have done, in case the
Apostles had left no Scriptures, but he speaks of Tradition really existing,
whereby the want of Scripture might have been supplied, and which he expressly
says, the Apostles delivered to those, to whom they committed the Churches;
Yea, he affirms, that, de facto, many Nations were converted, by yielding
assent to it; and so, de facto, there was, in that, and will be, in the like,
case, a necessity of an infallible Tradition, and a Living Guide: And although
that, or the like occasion, had not happened, yet the thing being contingent
(Yea and in your particular Doctrine, the Scripture being not a material
Object of Faith, which all are bound to believe, which in effect is, as if it
were not at all) the Church could not be to seek, whenever the occasion
might happen, but must be endued with a permanent Authority, and infallibility,
for all events; as it is contingent, that, for example, theft be committed in a
Commonwealth; yet there is not only a suppositiue, but an absolute necessity,
that the Commonwealth be endued with an absolute constant power, to punish
thieves etc: Neither ought you to say absolutely, (for as much as belongs to our
question) that it is a false supposition, to suppose that Scripture had not
been written. For, (besides that the Church of Christ was in being, some
years before any part of the New Testament was written) it is all one, that
there be no Scripture, and that we have it not, or have no reason to believe
it, yea or may reject it, as you say; seeing therefore, many Nations were saved,
without knowledge of Scripture, or any obligation to know it, as S. Irenaevs
supposes, it alone is, in order to use, and us, as if it had never been
written; and so, as I said, inferrs an absolute, and not only a suppositiue
necessity of some Living Guide. And this, it seems, you did perceive, when you
said, that Charity Maintained did not well, to infer an absolute necessity of
a Living Guide, to them who have, and believe the Scripture: Whereby you must
signify, that to those, who either have not Scripture, or have not sufficient
reason to believe it, it is all one, as if Scripture had never been written,
and consequently, that de facto there is an absolute necessity of an infallible
Guide. Nay, men could not have had sufficient reason to believe infallibly the
Scripture, except for the Authority of the Church of God, which therefore must
be believed to be absolutely infallible before any Scripture be believed; which
is directly contradictory to your saying, that the necessity of an infallible
Guide is grounded upon a false supposition, in case we had no Scripture. For,
contrarily, if we have and believe Scripture, we must first believe an
infallible Church, independently of that supposition, and upon which that
supposition of our believing Scripture must depend.

57. But it seems, this Authority of S. Irenaeus does yet vex you. And
therefore (N. 146. 147. 148.) you say: That in S. Irenaeus his time all the
Churches were at an agreement about the Fundamentalls of Faith, which unity was
a good assurance, that what they so agreed in, came from some one common
fountain, and they had no other then of Apostolic Preaching.

58. This I have answered hertofore, and told you, that when the Fathers
allege the Authority of the Church, or Tradition, they suppose the Church to
be absolutely infallible, and not only, that accidentally, she teaches at that
time the truth, which had been no proof, but a mere petitio principij. For,
if the Church might err, as you say she has done, the Heretics against whom
the Fathers wrote, would easily have answered, that all Churches might err,
and had erred, in such, or such particular Points; and how could you, or any
Protestant, impugn such an Answer, supposing once the Church could err? When
Luther appeared, he forsook the Faith, and Communion, of all Churches, upon
pretense, that they all agreed in errors against Scripture; and how do you now
tell us, that the agreement of Churches was a good assurance that what they so
agreed in, came from some one common fountain, and they had no other but
Apostolical Preaching. In this manner hertofore I retorted against you the
saying, which you allege out of Tertullian, ( Variasse debuerat etc: If the
Churches had erred, they could not but have varied, but that which is one
amongst so many, cannot be error, but Tradition:) That, seeing all Churches
agreed in a belief contrary to the Faith of Protestants, we must affirm, that
the thing which is one among so many, can not by error but Tradition. And your
words here, add a particular strength to my retortions, while you say, that the
agreement and unity of Churches about the Fundamentalls of Faith, is a good
assurance, that what they so agree in, comes from the common fountain of
Apostolic Preaching. For, those Heretics might have answered, that the
errors of the Church which they impugned, were not Fundamental (as we have
proved, that you say the errors of the Roman Church, and such as agreed with
Her when Luther appeared, were not Fundamental) and so the assurance, taken
from unity in Fundamentalls, could be no Argument against them. Besides, I pray
you, reflect on your saying, that, Protestants departed not from the whole
Church, because they were a part thereof, and they departed not from themselves,
and then you cannot but see, that those Heretics in S. Irenaeus his time,
might have said, all Churches are not at an agreement about matters of Faith,
seeing we who are a part of the Church, do not agree with the rest; and therefore
the agreement which you speak of, is of no force against us, but you must
prove by some other kind of Argument, that our doctrines are false; just as
Protestants answer us, when we object against them the agreement of all
Churches against the doctrine of Luther, when he first appeared. Wherefore I
must still infer, that it is not the actual, or accidental agreement, but
the constant ground thereof (that is, the infallibility of the Church) that must
assure us, what is Orthodoxe, and what is Heretical doctrine. Moreover,
whereas you say, In S. Irenaeus his time all the Churches were at an agreement
about the Fundamentalls of Faith: I beseech you, inform us, how it could be
otherwise then; how can it be otherwise now; how shall it be otherwise for the
time to come; or for any imaginable time, than that all Churches are at an
agreement in Fundamentalls of Faith? Seeing you profess through your whole
Book, that if they fail in Fundamentalls, they cease to be Churches; and so
it is as necessary for all Churches to agree in Fundamentalls, as for all men
to agree in the essence of man: And you might as well have said, that at S.
Irenaeus his time, the Definition did agree, or was all one with the Definitum,
as that all Churches agreed in Fundamentalls. If therefore it was easy to
receive the truth from Gods Church in S. Irenaeus his time, as he affirms, and
you grant, it will be no less easy to do it in these our times, seeing the
Church can never fail in Fundamental Points of Faith, and so it was easy for
Luther, and his companions, to have received the truth, or rather to have
retained the truths, they found in the Church, seeing she was a true Church, and
consequently did not err in Fundamental Points. From whence it follows, that
when S. Irenaeus says, the Apostles have most fully deposited in the Church,
as in a rich storehouse, all things belonging to truth, it must be understood,
that she cannot but keep that depositum sincere for Fundamental Points, even
according to Protestants; and you say here (N. 164.) The visible Church shall
always without fail propose so much of Gods Revelation, as is sufficient to
bring men to Heaven, for otherwise it will not be the visible Church, in which
sense, that depositum is not committed to private persons, though otherwise
never so qualifyed, and therefore all that you have (N. 148.) is of no force,
even in the Principles of Protestants. And then further, seeing indeed any
error against divine Revelation, is damnable, and without Repentance destroys
salvation, as you grant; it is impossible, that the Church (which must needs
enjoy all things necessary to salvation, as we have heard you even now saying,
the visible Church shall always without fail, propose so much of Gods
Revelation, as is sufficient to bring men to Heaven) It is, I say impossiblle,
that the Church can fall into any damnable Error, but must be universally
infallible. Which is unanswerably confirmed, by your doctrine, that it is
impossible to know what Points in particular be Fundamental, and so we cannot
know, that she fails not to propose so much of Gods Revelation, as is
sufficient to bring men to Heaven, unless we believe Her, to be infallible in
all Points of Faith, as well not Fundamental, as Fundamental. And here
again, how could you say, that in S. Irenaeus his time all the Churches were
at an agreement about the Fundamentalls of Faith, which unity was a good
assurance that what they so agreed in, came from some one common fountain, and
they had no other than Apostolic Preaching: How, I say, could you speak
thus, your doctrine considered, that we cannot know what Points are
Fundamental, and so we cannot know, whether Churches be at an agreement in
them, and consequently, cannot, from such an agreement in Fundamentalls, have a
good assurance, that what they so agreed in, came from the fountain of
Apostolic Preaching? Every where you are found clearly to contradict
yourselfe.

59. In answer to your (N. 149.150.151.152.153.) I will first set down the
words of Charity Maintained and then answer what you object. Thus says Charity
Maintained, (Part: 1. Page: 71. N. 25.) The doctrine of Protestants is
destructive of itself. For, either they have certain and infallible means
not to err in interpreting Scripture, or they have not. If not; then the
Scripture (to them) cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible Faith, nor a
meet Judge of Controversyes. If they have certain infallible means, and so
cannot err in their interterpretations of Scripture; then they are able with
infallibility to hear, examine, and determine all Controversyes of Faith, and
so they may be, and are, Judges of Controversyes, although they use the
Scripture as a Rule. And thus, against their own doctrine, they constitute
another Judge of Controversyes, beside Scripture alone.

60. Against this discourse, you object with great pomp of words: If we
(Catholics) have certain, and infallible means, for the choice of the Church,
then we are able with infallibility to determine all Controversyes of Faith,
although we pretend to make the Church our Guide. And then say you (N. 149.) We
constitute another Judge of Controversyes, besides the Church alone; nay every
one of us makes himself a chooser of his own Religion, and of his own sense
of the Churches decrees, which very thing we so highly condemn in Protestants.

61. Answer. we have certain means to believe with an infallible Faith, that
the Catholic Church is an infallible Judge of controversyes, as we have
proved hertofore at large, in diverse Occasions. But then to say, that by this
means, i.e. by believing the Church to be the Judge of controversyes, we are
able of our selves, with infallibility to determine all controversyes, and do
constitute another Judge of controversyes, besides the Church alone. I am so
far from understanding it that to me it seems no better than nonsense; as a
man, who in some cause, makes choice of a Judge, whom he believes to be just,
wise, and in every respect fit for such an office, cannot be said to constitute
another judge, beside him, of whom he makes choice, nor to make himself Judge.
Do you not teach, that the Church proposes to us Canonical Scripture, and that
Scripture is the sole Rule of Faith, whereby all controversyes are determined?
and yet you will not infer from thence, that the Church is a Rule of Faith,
whereby all controversyes are determined, and not Scripture alone. It is you,
who here (N. 153) say; for the latter part of this inference, that every one
makes himself judge of controversyes we acknowledge and embrace it. We do make
ourselves Judges of controuersyes. And this you must grant, not only for the
choice of your Religion, but for the sense of Scripture, and consequently for
determining all controversyes of Faith, and so you are Judges of controversyes,
as Ch: Ma: inferred; whereas Catholics in all controversyes, hold themselves
obliged to follow the determination of the Church, and not of their own
understanding, as you do. How far we may, and do make use of Reason in
matters of Religion, we have declared above. And even yourselfe (Page: 376. N.
56.) speaking of Scripture, say; Propose me any thing out of this Book, and
require whether I believe it, or not, and seem it never so incomprehensible to
humane reason, I will subscribe with hand and heart, as knowing no demonstration
can be stronger than this: God has said so; therefore it is true. Which words,
though they cannot be spoken sincerely, and with consequence, by you who
resolve Faith into humane probable Arguments of reason; yet they show, that
even in reason, Reason ought to submitt to Authority. We have also showed, the
difference between the Scripture, which is always the same, and the Decrees of
the Church, which, in all occasions, can clearly declare Her meaning, if any
difficulty occur, about her former Decrees, or Definitions.

62. But I pray, where did Charity Maintained frame this Argument, which you
(N. 150.) term a transparent fallacy? Protestants have no means to interpret,
without error, obscure and ambiguons places of Scripture; therefore plain
places of Scripture cannot be to them a sufficient ground of Faith. You know,
there neither is, nor can be any Question at all, whether plain places, be not
plain, to those, to whom they are plain; nor whether such plain places, may
not be a sufficient ground of Faith, in respect of persons, to whom, and
Matters, wherein, they are plain. The Point is, and you know it to be so,
whether scripture be plain, in all Points necessary to be believed, which we
deny, and you often affirm, but can never be able to prove; and I have
demonstrated, that even those Texts, which you pretend to be most plain, and
expressly allege for instances of such plainness, are not such, but contain
difficulty, if we respect the sense, and not the bare words, which may be
plain to Pagans, Jews, Turks, and to all who understand the language in
which Scripture was written. And therefore you do not satisfy your own Demand,
wherein you speak thus to Charity maintained. If you ask me, how I can be sure
that I know the true meaning of these (plain) places? I ask you again, can
you be sure, that you understand what I or any man else, says? They that heard
our Savior and the Apostles preach, could they have sufficient assurance, that
they understood at any time, what they would have them do? If not, to what end
did they hear them? If they could, why may not we be as well assured, that we
understand sufficiently, what we conceive plain in their writings?

63. Answer. If he who speaks, be not sufficiently understood, he may be
asked, and he who asks, may be satisfied, by a further declaration of the
speaker, which holds not in Scripture, as I am forced often to repeat,
Besides, when things are spoken, the present Time, Place, Argument, and other
circumstances, may give much more light, than when they are barely written,
divested of such helps. In which case, if a word can be found, but once, in
the whole Bible, to signify such, or such a thing, perhaps it may breed a
doubt, whether in other places it be not so taken; of which, no doubt would
have been made, in case that in all places it had the same signification, Yea,
we see, that the Apostles did not always understand our B. Saviors words, till
he vouchsafed to declare them. And I observe your own words; May we not be as
well assured, that we understand sufficiently, what we conceive plain, in
their (the Apostles) writings? Where insine, your certainty and evidence is
resolved into (what we conceive) which are your own words; and is a poor
ground, for an Act of infallible Faith; and, of Protestants disagreeing among
themselves, does not every one, conceive Scripture to be plain, in his favor?
And yet it is plain, that two contradictoryes cannot be true.

64. In your (N. 152.) you speak to Charity Maintained in this manner: In
saying, If they have certain means, and so cannot err, me thinks you
forgett yourselfe very much, and seem to make no difference, between having
certain means to do a thing, and the actual doing of it. As if you should
conclude, because all men have certain means of salvation, therefore all men
certainly must be saved, and cannot do otherwise; as if whosoever had a horse,
must presently get up and ride, whosoever had means to find out a way, could
not neglect those means, and so mistake it. If you ask, seeing we may possibly
err, bow can we be assured we do not? I ask you again, seeing your eyesight
may deceive you, how can you be sure you see the sun, when you see it? perhaps
you may be in a dream, and perhaps you, and all the men in the world have
been so, when they thought they were a wake, and then only awake, when they
thought they dreamed.

65. Answer: I ask, whether all points necessary to be be believed, are so
very evident in Scripture, that one cannot err in the meaning of them, but is
no less assured thereof, then he is sure he sees the Sun, when he sees it; Or,
they are not so evident? If they be so evident, it follows clearly, that the
means whereby they are immediately known (namely the very evidence of them) is
such, as no man can possibly err concerning them. For, it is impossible, that
our understanding can dissent, from a truth, represented with evidence. And so
you have no reason to blame Chapter Ma., seeing by the means whereby you understand
necessary Points of Faith in Scripture, it is impossible for you to err. If
necessary Points be not so evident, but that one may err concerning them; Then
you must use some means, for understanding them, beside the pretended
evidence, which they have of themselves, which indeed comes to be, not
evidence, but obscurity, if it leave the understanding, with a freedom to
dissent. Let therefore these means be such, as Protestants are wont to assign;
prayer, knowledge in languages, conferring one place with another etc. Which
depending upon humane industry, cannot exceed probability, (as we have heard
Whitaker de Eccles: contr. 2. Quest: 4. confessing) and cannot assure us of the
true sense of Scripture; which is against your sayings (N. 150.) That you have
certain means of not erring in and about the sense of those places, which are
so plain and clear, that they need no interpretation, and in such we say our
Faith is contained. For, if to understand such places you need the means and
help of Prayer, Language etc: it is clear, they are not so clear, that they
need no interpretation. And so you must be content to acknowledge, in these two
numbers, a contr^diction to yourselfe, and a causeless blaming Charity
Maintained in the former of them, if yourselfe speak Truth in the latter; that
is, you must either grant that one cannot err in necessary Points of Faith, or
else that the Scripture is not evident, but needs an interpreter of Scripture
for such Points; which if it need, seeing the means assigned by Protestants,
can affoard no more than probability only, which is not sufficient to erect an
act of divine Faith, it follows that we must have recourse to an infallible
Living Guide. Thus I have confuted your objection against Charity Maintained;
That He seems to make no difference, between having certain means to do a
thing, and the Actual doing of it. For, I have told you, that when the means
to do a thing, is seated in some cause, which has not freedom to the
contrary Action, there is good reason, not to distinguish between the enjoining
such means, and the doing of the thing, or at least not doing the contrary,
that is, in our case, not erring, against that which is evident in Scripture:
as whenever fire has all requisites, to burn a combustible matter, it
cannot but do so. Now our understanding is of that nature, that it cannot
dissent, from a truth evidently proposed for such; and therefore if all texts of
Scripture, containing necessary Points of Faith, be evident (as you say they
must be, and that otherwise they could not be necessary) our understanding,
cannot possibly dissent from them, and so not to err, and not to be able to
err, prove to be inseparable: which holds particularly, in your doctrine that
certainty cannot consist without evidence, and consequently our understanding
cannot disse^t from any thing which is presented to it as certain, because it
cannot dissent, or deny, that which to it is evident.

66. Your instances to the contrary, prove only, that either you did not
consider, what you object; or argue an excessive confidence, that the world
would, without examination, take for true, whatsoever you wrote. As if, say
you, to Ch: Ma: you should conclude, because all men have certain means of
salvation, therefore all men must certainly be saved and cannot do otherwise,
as if whosoever had ahorse must presently get up and ride: whosoever had means
to find out a way could not neglect those means and so mistake it. But all
these toys are answered already. For, the means to heaven, is, as our B.
Savior says, to keep the commandments, by our freewill, assisted with Gods
Grace, and therefore it does not follow, that, although we may, we must needs be
saved, because our will may resist Gods Grace; as also it is in your will not
to get up and ride, though you have a horse: but it is not in the power of our
understanding, to dissent from evident truth. Your similitude of finding a way,
may be turned against you, if it be supposed, that one has the way before his
eyes, and is certain that it is the way. In which case, he cannot mistake his
way, though by his freewill he may go out of it; as one may, with his will not
observe what God commands, but cannot possibly persuade himself that it is not
commanded, if it be evidently represented to his understanding, that it is
commanded: as one cannot but be sure, that he sees the sun, when he sees it;
which is your own example, to prove, that we may be assured that we do not
err: But then you do not well to say, that our eye sight may deceive us, or
that we may possibly err; it being impossible, that our eye, and
understanding, being well disposed, toward an object evident, can fail to
see, and understand actually, if such an object, be placed within the sphere,
or compass, of their actuity: And therefore, if Scripture be evident whosoever
can assent to it, cannot possibly dissent from it. Before I end this number,
you must be entreated to remember what you teach (Page; 329. N. 7.) that it is
necessary to Faith, that the object of it should not be so evidently certain,
as to necessitate our understanding to an Assent, that so there might be some
obedience in it, which can hardly have place where there is no possibility of
disobedience, as there is not where the understanding does all, and the will
nothing. Now, if the understanding be not necessitated, by the evidence of
Faith, or contents of Scripture; you must find some other means, to move the
understanding, namely, such as Protestants usually prescribe, which cannot
exceed probability, nor is sufficient for an Act of Faith. And so your
Arguments, and Similitudes, grounded upon the plain evidence of Scripture,
cannot be rightly applied by you, seeing it is not an evidence, sufficient to
assure the understanding, without some other means, which being but probable,
if you will arrive to certainty, you must still have recourse to the Church.

67. Your (N. 151.) going upon a false supposition, that our first Proofs, and
Arguments, for the infallibility of the Church, are taken from Scripture, need
no Answer, seeing we have proved the contrary, at large. It is true, that having
once found the true Church, and by Her authority, Canonical Scriptures, we do
with good reason, prove out of them the authority, and infallibility of the
same Church; with other particulars concerning her, which were not known by
the first general notion of her being the true Church; but this is done
without any pretense, of such evidence as must force every man's understanding
to assent, in that manner as the Principles of natural Sciences, do
necessitate us; and therefore, there always remains a necessity of a Living
Judge.

68. In your (N. 154.) I find nothing, but an Aggregatum of diverse Heads, of
which we have treated at large; as the infallibillty of Christian Faith; how
far the Motives or arguments of credibility, concur to an act of Faith; The
manner we hold in proving the Church, and believing those articles which she
proposes; what use there is of Reason in finding out the Church; that in vain
you distinguish between Christianity, and Popery, as you speak, seeing there
can be but one true Christian Church etc: And therefore, I will go forward,
having first touched in a word, that whereas you say to us, you should require
only a moral and modest Assent to the proposalls of the Church, and not a
Divine as you call it, and infallible Faith: It seems you confess, that your
Faith is not to be called Divine, as you profess it not to be infallible, and
therefore indeed not Divine, but a mere humane persuasion, even in those
Points, wherein you chance notto err.

69. To your (N. 155.156.157.158.159.160. of which for the substance I have
spoken hertofore) I will only say; That you are still taking upon you, to
declare the Doctrine of Protestants, in their name, without any commission from
them. Thus here you talk, as if no Protestants held, that Scripture may be
proved, to be the word of God, by Scripture it self, the contrary whereof we
have showed, in particular of Baron, and Potter. And Chapter Ma. (Part: 2. Chap: 3.
Page: 91.) cites Dr. Willet (in his meditation ypon the 122. Psalm Page: 91.)
who puts among whirle-points and buboles of new Doctrine (as he speaks) That
the word of God cannot possibly assure us what is the word of God. And
whatsoever you take upon you, yet Chapter Ma. had reason to say, that seeing it is,
to Protestants, a most necessary Point of Faith, to know what Books be
Scripture, and that this Point cannot be proved by Scripture; it follows, that
all matters of Faith, are not contained in Scripture: whereby it appears, that
God has not tied his testimony or Revelation, to his written word alone, but
that you must of necessity admit Tradition, or His unwritten Word, and so not
learn all necessary Points from Scripture. And if one Tradition must be
believed by Faith, you can bring no positive Rule, or reason, why there may not
be some other Traditions, without any prejudice to the perfection of Scripture.

70. In your (N. 160.) you impugn these words of Charity Maintained (Part: 1.
Page: 73. N. 26.) If Dr. Potter answer, that their Tenet, about the Scriptures
being the only judge of Controversyes is not a Fundamental Point of Faith;
then as he teaches, that the universal Church may err in Points not
Fundamental, so I hope he will not deny, but particular Churches and private
men, are much more obnoxious to error in such Points; and in particular in
this, that the Scripture alone is judge of Controversyes: And so the very
Principle upon which their whole Faith is grounded, remains to them
uncertain; and on the other side, for the self same reason, they are not
certain, but that the Church is judge of Controversyes. Against which
discourse you object; A pretty Sophisme depending upon this Principle, that
whosoever possibly may err, he cannot be certain, that he does not err. And
upon this ground what will hinder me from concluding, that seeing you also hold,
that neither particular Churches, nor private men are infallible even in
Fundamentalls, that even the Fundamentalls of Christianity, remain to you
uncertain? A judge may possibly err in judgment, can he therefore never have
assurance that he has judged right? A traveller may possibly mistake his way,
must I therefore be doubtful whether I am in the right way from my Hall to my
Chamber? Or can our London Carryer have no certainty, in the middle of the day,
when he is sober and in his wits, that he is in the way to London? These, you
see, are right worthy consequences, and yet as like your own as an egg to an
egg, or milk to milk.

71. Answer. I hope it will be found that you triumph before any possibility of
victory, on your behalf, and that your Objection will be turned against
yourselfe. Where find you in Charity Maintained any Argument depending upon
this principle, that whosoever possibly may err, he cannot be certain, that
he does not err? This is your fiction, not any principle of Chapter Ma. His
principle is in this. Whosoever possibly may err, by relying upon some
Principle, Ground, or Reason, he cannot be certain, that he does not err, as
long as he follows that Principle only, without addition of any other help,
or greater light, or certainty. For, if the Principle be of it self false,
fallible, or contingent, it cannot possibly, being left to itsel^e, produce an
infallible Assent; which is the very Ground for which you teach Christian Faith
to be fallible. But it does in no case follow from hence, that absolutely
whosoever may possibly err, he cannot be certain, that he does not err:
unless you add this necessary restriction; he cannot be certain that he does
not err, as long as he grounds himself, only upon that Principle, which he
believes to be fallible, and subject to error, though for other things, or
upon other certain and infallible Grounds, he may be, and is, sure, that he
neither does, nor can err, while he relyes upon those infallible Grounds.

72. For better understanding of this matter: We may distinguish a double
infallibility. The one may be termed Personal, or belonging to, or
accompanying the Person: The other we may call Real, or taken from the thing
itself. If God promise his assistance to some person, that he shall never
err, even in things of themselves obscure; this man shall be sure never to
err; not in virtue of any intrinsecall evident Principle, but by reason of
that Divine assistance. But if one have no such promise, or Privilege, yet is
directed by some Principle, evident to humane Reason, he is certain, that he
neither does, nor can, err, by a certainty, derived from evidence of the Thing
it self, as long as he relyes upon that certain ground. Now to our purpose.
You cannot be certain of this proposition (Scripture alone is the total Rule
of Faith) by evidence of sense, or some Principle known to natural Reason,
but only by certainty, proceeding from infallible supernatural Assistance: And
therefore, seeing you deny any such Assistance to the universal Church, and much
more to particular Churches, or private persons, for Points not Fundamental
(as you acknowledge this to be) it follows, that you can have no certainty of
it; which is the thing that Charity Maintained affirmed: and so it proves to be
very true, that whosoever may err, cannot be certain that he does not err,
if he depend, upon Grounds, subject to falsehood, and error; as contrarily,
whosoever does not err, because he relyes upon evident Principles, or upon
some extrinsecall Authority, being in it self, and being believed to be,
Infallible, he is sure he cannot err in such matters, though he may err in
other, known by some probable reason, or fallible Authority. If you say; A
thing may be certainly known, or believed, because it is evidently contained
in Scripture, which we believe to be infallible. This evasion answers not my
argument. For, if you imagine a thing to be so evident in Scripture, that there
is required no more than evidence of sense, or Reason, to see, and read, and
know the Grammatical signification of the word; then whosoever does so, he is
certain, not only that he does not, but that he cannot err, seeing he is
evidently certain, that he sees, reads, and understands the Grammatical
signification of the word. If beside the said knowledge, or ability to see,
read etc. there be other means required (as certainly there are) to know what
is (not the Grammatical signification, but) the meaning of the word, intended
by the Holy Ghost, in that place; then if those means be fallible, and only
probable, no man can, by the assistance of them alone, be certain, that he
does not err. But if the means be, and be believed to be infallible, he is
sure, that he neither does, nor can err, by using those means; and so to err
in a way (in which one is certain, that he does not err, and yet may err, as
long as he retains the means of that Certainty, and follows them) is an
impossible thing. Thus your own Objection turns upon yourselfe, and makes
good the discourse of Charity Maintained.

73. But you urge us, and say: Upon this Ground, what will hinder me from
concluding, that seeing you also hold, that neither particular Churches, nor
private men are in fallible, even in Fundamentalls, that even the Fundamentalls
of Christianity, remain to you uncertain.

74. Answer. Your inference were very good, if in the belief of the
Fundamentalls of Christianity, we did rely upon the Authority of particular
Churches, or private men. But we rely upon the Authority of the universal
Church, which is absolutely infallible. Contrarily, for you, who rely upon no
infallible Authority, of any Church, but upon your own fallible discourse, or
the Scripture interpreted by fallible means, nothing, I am sure, can hinder us
from concluding, that even the Fundamentalls of Christianity remain to you
uncertain. Still you are wounded with your own weapons. And to turn also
against you your own similitudes: A Judge may possibly err in judgment, if he
proceed only upon probable reasons, that he Judges according to Law; neither
can he have assurance that he has judged right, if his sentence be grounded
upon such reasons only. If in some other case he have assurance, that he has
judged right, it must be grounded upon certain, and evident reasons, which can
never fail, nor he ever can fall into error, by following such reasons, or
rules. Neither can your London Carryer, or any other, in the middle of the day,
when he is sober and in his wits, mistake the way, which he knows with
absolute certainty and evidence; as you above all others must grant, who say,
that we need no Guide for Controversyes of Faith, because, as you pretend, you
have a clear way, namely Scripture, which therefore if you can mistake, and
know the meaning thereof only probably, you must confess the necessity of some
Guide, to direct, and keep you in that way. Your own caution (in the middle
of the day) might have put you in mind, that Faith is obscure, and like a light
in a dark place, as S. Peter speaks; which therefore is a way, which may not
only be mistaken, but cannot be assuredly found, without the direction of some
infallible Guide. How many ways, do your Arguments strongly recoyle against
yourselfe, without the least hurt to your Adversary! Even your vain conclusion
(these you see are right worthy consequences, and yet they are as like your
own as an egg to an egg, or milk to milk) must be applied against
yourselfe, that as one egg is really different from another, so your
consequences are really different from those of Charity Maintained, though to
your friends they may perhaps have seemed to be all one: But indeed, being
examined, prove to be as like to those of Charity Maintained, as an apple to an
oyster.

75. By what I have said, your (N. 161.) is fully answered, and your Examples
appear to be clearly impertinent. For, these Propositions, the snow is black,
the fire is cold, etc: are false, and the contrary true, as is evident to sense
and reason; not so; that Scripture is the total Rule of Faith, the truth, or
falsehood whereof, must be tried by some other means, and you can have none
certain, if you take away the infallibility of Gods Church. And I wonder you
can say, concerning these words of Charity Maintayn. (for the self same reason
Protestants are not certain that the Church is not Judge of Controversyes) the
Ground of this Soph^sme is very like the former; viz: That we can be certain
of the fallhood of no Propositions, but these only which are damnable Errors.
For, you know, that we spoke not of whatsoever truth, or falsehood, but of a
Proposition, the truth or falsehood whereof, cannot be known, by sense, or
natural Reason, but only by Revelation, in which if the universal Church may
err, for Points not Fundamental, we cannot possibly have certainty of the
truth of them, as I have proved; and it is intolerable in you to make this
Argument, we may be certain that snow is not black, nor fire cold; therefore
we may be certain of truths, which can be known only by Revelation, for
Points in which you say the whole Church of Christ, and much more private men,
may err.

76. To your (N. 162.) I need only say, that a public and universal Authority
to decide Controversyes of Faith, and interpret Scriptures must be infallible;
otherwise it might either be disobeyed, or else men would be forced to obey
exteriourly, that which they judge in Conscience to be a damnable Error, as
hertofore I have declared, and showed a large difference between a Judge in
Civil causes, and Controversyes in matters of Faith, alleging to that
purpose, your own words (Page: 59. N. 17.) That in Matters of Religion, such a
Judge is required, whom we should be obliged to believe, to have judged right.
So that in Civil Controversyes, every honest understanding man is fit to be a
Judge; but in Religion, none but he that is infallible. And yet so far you
forget yourself as to object to us in this (N. 162.) I hope you will not deny,
but that the Judges have Authority to determine criminal and Civil
Controversyes; and yet I hope you will not say, that they are absolutely
infallible in their determinations. Infallble while they proceed according to
Law. How then can you distinguish between a Judge in Civil, and a Judge, in
Controversyes of Religion, unless you grant not only a conditional, but an
absolute infallibility to this latter, whereby he is sure never to err,
whereas a Judge in Civil matters may err, by not proceeding according to Law?
If therefore the Propositions, which were publikly defended in Oxford, (that the
Church has Authority to determine Controversyes in Faith, and to interpret
Scripture) be patient of your Explication, I can only say, that they either say
nothing, or teach men to dissemble in matters of Faith, by obeying the
Commandments of the Church, against their Conscience. I have read your friend
Irenaeus Philalethes (Dissertatione de Pace Ecclesiae) who teaches, that no man
ought now, after the time of the Apostles, who were infallible, to be punished
by Excommunication, as long as he follows the dictamen of his Conscience; and
how do you tell us, that now one may be excommunicated for an error in Faith?
Though you admit no infallible Judge, to declare the sense of Scripture; and
that those Texts which seem evident to some, appear obscure to others, as is
manifest, in the examples which you allege as evident, of our Saviors
Passion, and Resurection, which diverse Heretics have either denied, or
understood in a different way from the doctrine of Gods Church; and yourselfe
in particular, believe that his suffering, and Death, was not the Death and
Passion of God; and that his Sufferings did not merit, and satisfy for mankind;
and that he remains in Heaven, with a Body of a different nature, and Essence,
from that which he had upon Earth; which is to deny his Resurrection, for
substance, and Death, for the fruit thereof. You say; The Doctor (who defended
the said Conclusions together with the Article of the Church of England,
attributes to the Church, nay to particular Churches, and I subscribe to his
opinion, an Authority of determining Controversyes of Faith, according to plain
and evident Scripture and universal Tradition, and infallibility while they
proceed according to this Rule. But how does this agree, with the whole Scope
of your Book, that the Bible, the Bible, the Bible, is the only Rule; and with
your express words here, (N. 155.) that no unwritten Doctrine has attestatten
from Tradition truly universal? Seeing, beside Scripture, you grant a
Tradition, which you say gives an infallibility, to him who proceeds according
to it: Which shows that there is some infallible unwritten word, or Tradition.
You say: But what now if I should tell you, that in the year 1632. among
public Conclusions defended in Doway, one was, that, God predeterminates men
to All their Actions. I answer: That, if you will infer any thing from hence,
it must only be this; that, as the Question about Predetermination is not
defined by the Church, but left to be disputed in Schools, with an express
command of our Supreme Pastor, that one part do not censure another; so if you
grant, that, out of the said Propositions defended in Oxford, I may infer,
that the Scripture alone is not the Rule of Faith, or at least, that you are
not certain it is so, nor can condemn us Catholics for holding the contrary;
if, I say, you grant this, you overthrow that Ground, in which alone, all
Protestants pretend to agree, and of which if they be not absolutely certain,
the whole structure of their Faith must be ruinous. You overlash in supposing,
we say, that the Church cannot err, whether she use means or no. But we are
sure, that as the Holy Ghost promised Her the End, of not erring, so also he
will not fail, to move Her essectually to use such means, as shall be
needful for that End. Your (N. 163.) about a place of S. Austine, I have
answered very largly hertofore

77. In your (N. 164.) you say: Why may not the Roman Church be content to be a
Part of that visible Church which was extant when Luther began, and the Grecian
another? And if one must be the whole, why not the Greek Church as well as
Roman? There being not one Note of your Church, which agrees not to Her as well
as to your own,

78. Answer. If you speak of the true Church of Christ in Greece, she is so
far from being divided from the Roman, that she does not only agree with, but
submitts to* Her, and receives from her, Priests ordained in Rome it self, and
brought up in Catholic Countries. The Scismaticall Grecians, to their
division from the Roman Church, have added Heresy, as even Protestants
confess, and so are neither the whole Church, nor any Church, at all; it being
indeed, no less than a kind of blasphemy, to affirm, that, Conventicles of
Heretics, can be the true Church of Christ Dr: Lawde (Page: 24.) says of the
Error of the Grecians; I know and acknowledge, that Error of denying the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, to be a grievous error in Divinity.
And, (Page: 154.) I would feign know, what Article of the Faith does more
concern all Christians in general, than that of Filioque? Which Error of the
Grecians, has been condemned by three General Counsels, in which the
Grecians were present, and to which they gave consent; namely, the Council of
Lateran under Innoc: 3. Anno 1215. The Council of Lions under Gregory the 10.
Anno 1273. The Council of Florence Anno 1438. And you must consider, that the
Grecians hold General Counsels, to be Rules of Faith. Of this matter, Brierly
(Tract: 1. Sect: 7. Subdiv: 2. Marg: 11. Page: 202.) speaks very well, and
shows, even out of Protestant Writers, the beginning of the Errors of the
Grecians, and their defections from the Roman Church, and in particular says,
that, twelve times, or therabout, has the Greek Church reconciled itself to
Rome, and afterward fallen from thence, being the rupon now at last wholly
oppressed with barbarous Turcisme. And here I may well allege the saying of S.
Antonin: (Part: 4. Tit: 11. Cap: 7.) that since the Grecians divided themselves
from us, they do daily more and more fail in Wisdom, in temporal power, in
good life, neither has any of them wrought miracles. And yet, notwithstanding
all this, even the Schismatic Grecians, do agree with Catholics, almost in
all the Points, in which the Protestants disagree from us, as Brierly in the
same place, demonstrates, out of Protestant Authors: And the same is set down
in Charity Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 5. N. 48.) citing in particular Potter,
who (Page: 225.) denies not but they belie^e Transubstantiation. By all which it
appears, that of the Greek Schismatic Church, you say to us against truth
all, that there is not one Note of your Church which agrees not to her as well
as to your own: Seeing by the novelty of Her Errors, her Alterations,
Contradictions, and Heresy, she must want Antiquity, Unity, Perpetuity,
Universality for time, and place, as is obvious to every one to Judge, by what
we have said.

79. You say (N. 165.) Neither is it so easy to be determined as you pretend,
that Luther, and other Protestants, opposed the whole Church in matter of Faith.

80. Answer, we have lately heard you say (N. 152.) Perhaps you may be in a
dream; and perhaps you and all the men in the world have been so, when they
thought they were awake, and then only awake, when they thought they dreamed.
Which it seems, proves to be your own case; who pretend to be awake, and yet
dream, of men in the Moon, agreeing with Luther, when he first arose, which
either is a dream, or all those learned Protestants who are cited by Charity
Maintained (Part: 1. Chap: 5. N. 9. and N. 12.) were in a dream. As he who
said, It is impudency to say, that many learned men in Germany before Luther
did hold the doctrine of the Gospel. (And I may say, that far greater
impudency it were to affirm, that Germany did not agree with the rest of
Europe, and other Cristian Catholic natious, and consequently, that it is the
greatest impudency to deny, that he departed from the Communion of the visible
Catholic Church spredd over the whole world) As he who affirms it to be
ridiculous to think, that in the time before Luther, any had the purity of
Doctrine; as he who said, if there had been right b^l^evers which went before
Luther in his office, there had then been no need of a Lutheran Reformation;
as he who says, The Truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of, when
Martin Luther, and Vldericke Zuinglius first came unto the knowledge and
preaching of the Gospel; As he who says: We say, that before the days of
Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an universal Apostasy overspred^
the whole face of the earth; As he, who teaches, that from the year of Christ
three hundred and sixteen, the AntiChristian and Papisticall Reign had begun,
reigning universally, and without any debateable contradiction one thousand two
hundred sixty years. (that is, till Luthers time;) As he who affirms, the it
the true Church was interrupted by apostasy from the true Faith; As Calvin, who
says of Protestants in general; we have been forced to make a separation
from the whole world. As Luther who says; At the first I was alone. The
particular names and places of these Protestants, may be seen in the now cited
place of Charity maintained, with more other speaking to the same purpose. With
what modesty then ca^ you say, that, it is not easy to be determined that
Luther and other Protestants opposed the whole Visible Church in matters of
Faith? If any will interpret your words, so, as that you do not deny, but that
Luther opposed the whole Visible Church (it being evident that he did so) but
that the things wherein he opposed Her, were not matters of Faith; this
interpretation, will serve only, to make good that Luther was inexcusable, in
dividing himself from the whole Church, for matters not belonging to Faith.

CHAP: XII. THE ANSWER TO HIS THIRD CHAPTER ABOUT FVNDAMENTALL AND NOT
FVNDAMENTALL POINTS.
1. WHosoever peruses the Third Chapter of Ch: Ma: and considers impartially,
with what clearness and method it is written, and compares with it your
Answer, cannot but judge, that you proceed with much confusion, snatching at
words, or, periods, and amusing men with fond, unlearned subtiltyes, and by
Points, as if your chief care had been to divert, or as I may say, hood wink
the Reader, for the maine Controversy, by petty diversions. In proof of what I
say, I beseech the Reader to run over the first five numbers, or Sections of
Chapter ma. and he will find I do you no wrong.

2. I wonder, you will always be taking pleasure in toys and untruths. First:
(N. 4.) you affirm, that if we say we agree in matters of Faith it is
ridiculous, and that we define matters of Faith to be those wherein we agree. So
that, to say, you agree in matters of Faith, is to say you agree in those
things wherein you do agree. And then (N. 5.) That we are all agreed that only
those things wherein we do agree, are matters of faith; which you put in a
distinct letter as out Doctrine, and then add these words of your own: And
Protestants, if they were wise, Could do so to^; whereas you know it to be both
ridiculous, and untrue, that we have any such saying, and that we define
matters of Faith, to be all those Objects, which are sufficiently proposed by
the Church, as revealed by God, without dependence of any man's agreeing, or
disagreeing in them; though it be true, that by consequence, whosoever agrees
in such truths, must agree among themselves, for those truths; as,
proportionably, Quae sunt eadem vni tertio, sunteadem interse. And, our
deduction is this; Whosoever agree in the belief of all things revealed by
God, agree in all matters of Faith: Catholics agree in the belief of all
things revealed by God: Therefore they agree in all matters of Faith. But we are
not so foolish, as to say, that if a Catholic should inculpably deny a thing
revealed by God, and so disagree from other Catholics, that therefore our Faith
were changed, because all do not agree in those Objects, in which they may
chance inculpably to disagree. You define the Religion of Protestants to be the
Bible, and that all who believe all plain Texts thereof, are true Protestants,
and do agree in matters of Faith, and therefore must agree among themselves in
such Points. Now I ask, whether you will define matters of Faith to be those
wherein Protestants agree? If you say, yes; then I take your own words, and
say; this is ridiculous, and as if we should say, Protestants agree in those
things wherein they agree. If you answer, No; but that matters of Faith, are
those which are clearly contained in Scripture, whether or no, Protestants, or
any other believe them; then you both answer, and confute your own Objection,
and turn it against yourselfe. You say, it is ridiculous to say, we agree in
matters of Faith, and are all agreed that only those things wherein we agree are
matters of Faith; And yet you say, Protestants if they were wise, would do so
too: which is to say, Protestants if they were wise, would do that which you
say is ridiculous. Nay according to this your wholesome advise, if they will be
wise, they must not regard, what indeed is matter of Faith (as being revealed
by God) but only, that they procure to agree among themselves, and then say,
that they agree in matters of Faith; which is to say, they agree in those
things wherein they do agree: which is the thing you object against us.
Nevertheless, I know not well by what Logike you will infer, that we speak,
as if one would say, we agree in those things wherein we agree; unless perhaps,
by some such wild Syllogism as this: All matters of Faith are those wherein we
agree; but we agree in all matters of Faith; Therefore we agree in all those
things wherein we agree: as if you say; every man is a reasonable creature but
every reasonable creature is a man; Therefore every man is a man. If you would
to the purpose, you might say; whatsoever we agree in, is a matter of Faith;
but we agree in the belief of the Trinity etc. Therefore the belief of the
Trinity etc. is a matter of Faith. But howsoever this be; we utterly deny that
definition of Faith, and leave it to Protestants, that they may be wise
according to the wisdom of your advise, and definition.

3. To the rest of this (N. 5.) as also to your (N. 6.) I answer, that you
would gladly divert us to particular disputes: But it is sufficient to say in
general, That whatsoever is known to be proposed by the Church, as revealed
by God, is a Point of Faith in respect of him, to whom it is so proposed.
Neither it is pertinent to this present Work; to dispute in what subject
infallibility resides. Let me now tell you, that which may suffice for the
present, that, those three means of agreement, which you mention, (the Pope; A
Council with him; The universal Church) have never yet, nor ever shall, nor
ever can be found, to disagree. And it is no fair dealing in you, to omit,
what Ch: ma: has concerning this matter (Part: 2. Chapt: 5. N. 15. and 16.)
where he answers the objection, and discovers the falsifications of Potter, in
citing Catholic Authors, about this point. But to prove that the universal
Church cannot be infallible, or a means of agreement, you say (N. 6.) And
indeed what way of ending Controversyes can this be, when either part, may
pretend, that they are part of the Church, and they receive not the decree,
therefore the whole Church has not received it. Answer. I know no man has
greater obligation, to answer your Objection, than yourselfe; who teach, that
by universal Tradition, we know Scripture to be the word of God. For, if one
should say, what way of determining, what Scripture is the Word of God, can
this be, when if any deny it, they may pretend, that they are part of the
Church, and they receive not such, or such Scriptures, therefore the whole
Church (or universal Tradition) has not received them. If you answer, that
the number, or Authority, of a few is not considerable in comparison, or
opposition to all the rest, nor ought to prevail against the contrary
suffrages, as you speak (Page: 68. N. 43.) I answer; First, that if the Church
be fallible, it is not the number, but the weight of reason, which ought to
prevail. And secondly; you cannot but see, how easy it is for us, to say the
same; That, it imports not, if some, who are not of consideration, in respect
of all the rest, disagree from them. But the truth is, your Objection is of no
force, unless you help it out with your wonted refuge of begging the Question,
and supposing, the Church not to be infallible. For, if she be infallible,
whosoever oppose Her decrees, and Definitions, by doing so, become Heretics,
and cease to be members of the Church, nor can pretend that they are part of
the Church and they receive not the decree: Therefore the whole Church has not
received it: As I said above, that Schismatiques cannot pretend to be members
of the Church, after their separation. And this your subtility is directly
against Dr. Potter (Page: 57.) saying. Whosoever either wilfully opposes any
Catholic Verity maintained by this Church (or the Catholic visible Church)
as do Heretics, or perversely drvides himself from the Catholic Communion,
is do Schismatikes: the condition of both is damnable. The Scriptures and
Fathers cited here by the Mistaker, prove this, and no more: and therefore prone
nothing against Protestants, who never denied it. Now why do you not ask your
client, Potter? How any man can oppose the whole Church, or depart from Her
Communion, seeing they who oppose and depart, may pretend, that they are part of
the Church, and do not oppose, or depart from themselves: and therefore
Protestants, who the Doctor says, never denied it, must deny it, if they will
believe you; or you must deny yourselfe, if you will believe them. Your (N.
7.8.) are mere words without any proof, and deserve no other Answer.

4. Your whole (N. 9.) is plainly impertinent, Charity Maintained, (Part: 1.
Chap: 3. N. 1.) declared, how Protestants are wont to abuse the distinction of
Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental, to many purposes of theirs; and
among the rest, to this: That, if you object their bitter and continued discords
in matters of Faith, without any means of agreement, they instantly tell you,
they differ in points not Fundamental. In which words, it is clear, that Chapter
Ma. intends only to show, what use Protestants make of the said distinction;
and that he speaks truth, you neither do, nor can deny, the thing being
notorious. But you decline the matter, and say; I desire you to tell me,
whether they do so, or do not so, (that is whether they differ in points only
not Fundamental, or do nor differ in them) If they do so, I hope you will not
find fault with the Answer. But your hope in this, is persumption. For,
although it were granted, (which yet is very false) that they differ only in
Points not Fundamental; yet I have reason to find fault with the answer,
because they give it, to show that notwitstanding their disagreement in Points
not Fundamental, yet they are Brethren, and may all be in state of salvation;
which to affirm, is both very false, and very pernicious: seeing that error in
any Point revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed for such, is damnable, and
excludes salvation, even according to your own doctrine; and therefore this
Answer does not free them, from what Charity maintained objected, that they
abuse this distinction: and to this you should have answered, without declining
it, by impertinent diversions, and demands. The other part of your Dilemma is
this: If you say they do not so, (that is, differ, not only in not
Fundamentalls) but in Points Fundamental also; then they are not members of
the same Church one with another, no more than with you: And therefore why
should you object to any of them, their differences from each other, any more
then to yourselves, their more and greater differences from you? Thus you;
still flying a direct answerto Chapter Ma., and yet granting perforce all that he
desires. If, say you, Protestants differ in Points Fundamental, then they are
not members of the same Church one with another: And then, say I, they
perniciously abuse people, with this distinction, to persuade them the direct
contrary of that, which even yourselfe here infer: to persuade men, I say,
that they are members of the same Church, and capable of salvation, and
Brethren, though according to your supposition in this part of your Dilemma,
they differ in Points Fundamental. And this is that to which you should have
answered, whether they do not abuse this distinction, and either have
acquitted, them, or done Chapter Ma. Right by an open confession of his saying
truly, They abuse this distinction. You say, If Protestants differ in
Fundamentalls, they are not members of the same Church one with another, no
more than with us Catholics. If this beso; the more unreasonable,
inconsequent, and unjust are they, in pretending to be Brethren one to another,
and yet enemies to us: whereby you do still more and more make good, that they
abuse this distinction, in pretending to be Brethren one to another, and not to
us; especially if we call to mind, that many of their chiefest learned men, in
diverse most important matters, agree with us* against other Protestants, and
yet they must be Brethren, and we enemies, even in those very Points in which
they agree with us against other Protestants; which is very prodigious.

5. Your last words, either pass my understanding, or else are no better than
ridiculous. You say to us: Why should you object to any of them, their
differences from each other, any more than to yourselves, their more and
greater differences from you? For my part, I can draw no better Argument from
these words than this: we object to Protestants, who pretend to be Brethren of
the same Church, substance of Faith, and hope of salvation, that they differ in
Fundamental Points of Faith (for, as I said, you speak expressly of such
Points, in this second Part of your Dilemma) therefore we may as well object to
ourselves, their more and greater differences from us; from us, I say, who
daily proclaim to the world, that neither they, nor any other Heretics are
our Brethren, or of the same Faith, Church, and hope of salvation. How can we
object to ourselves a thing wherein we proceed with most evident consequence,
and Truth? If indeed we did pretend to be their Brethren, then we might, and
ought to object against ourselves, the great differences between them, and us;
as now with reason we make such an objection against them. But our case being
directly contrary to theirs, we are obliged to proceed in a contrary way, and
to profess, that there can be no communication, of light with darkeness, of
falsehood with truth, of Heresy with Catholic doctrine.

6. You say in your (N. 10.) What else do we understand by an vnfundamentall
error, but such a one with which a man may possibly be saved? I ask, whether
he may be saved with Repentance, or without it? If only with Repentance, you
make no difference between Fundamental and vnfundamentall Points; because with
repentance any error may be forgiven, be it never so Fundamental. If you
mean, a man may be saved with such an error, even without repentance, you
contradict yourselfe, who perpetually affirm, that, errors not Fundamental
are damnable in themselves, and cannot be pardoned, without repentance. And I
have proved it to be impossible, that any culpable error can be forgiven
without relinquishing it.

7. To yuur (N. 11.12, 13.14.) I have answered in several occasions. Only for
your (N. 11.) it must be remembered, that I have proved Communion in Liturgy,
Sacraments etc: to be essential to the Visible Church; which makes your
similitude of renouncing the vices of a friend, and yet not renouncing a
friend, to be impertinent; because vices are not essential to a friend, as
external Communion is essential to the Church; which therefore must needs be
forsaken, when one departs from that which is essential to her.

8. Your (N. 15.16.17.) contain no other difficulty, except that which
yourselfe create out of nothing, while you feign, this roving argument, and
then impute it to Cha: Ma: Whosoever disbelieues any thing known by himself
to be revealed by God, imputes falsehood to God and therefore errs Fundamentally.
But some Protestants disbelieue things; which other believe to be testified by
God; therefore they impute falsehood to God, and err Fundamentally. But why do
you seek to deceive the ignorant, with such Sophismes, as these? Does not
Charity Maintained speak expressly of the case wherein, there is Question
between two contradicting one another concerning some Point, which God has
revealed? And therefore one of the litigants, must really err against Divine
Revelation, on, and be a formal Heretic, if ignorance chance not to excuse
him; which though perhaps some will conceive, may happen in one or two or a
few, yet to believe, that whole congregations, and Churches, should be excused
by invincible ignorance-, notwithstanding all means of knowledge, that God
fails not to affoard, can be neither discreet Charity, nor charitable
discretion, but a dangerous, and pernicious occasion, and incitement, to
sloth, and neglect of seeking the true religion, upon confidence of finding a
lawful excuse, by ignorance. You say (Page: 21.) If any Protestant or Papist be
betrayed into, or kept in any Error, by any sin of his will (as it is to be
feared many millions are) such Error is as the cause of it, sinful and
damnable. And (Page: 19. and 20.) you deny not, but that the far greater part of
Protestants, fail in using sufficient diligence to find the truth, and that
their errors are damnable; therefore Ch: Ma: might well say, not only that, per
se loquendo, of two dissenting in matters revealed by God, one must oppose his
divine revelation, and Veracity (which is evidently true) but also, that de
facto it is so in many millions, yea in the far greater part of Protestants,
who therefore err culpably against the divine Testimony, and committ a deadly
sin, not because others, as you speak, believe a thing to be revealed by God
(which Chapter ma. never said, nor dreamed) but because they themselves ought to
have believed, that same thing to be revealed, which others did believe to be
such, and indeed was such. Thus then you ought to reform your distracted
Syllogism: Whosoever disbelieves any thing known, and which ought to be
known, by himself, to be revealed by God, imputes falsehood to God, and
therefore errs fundamentally: But some Protestants (you say millions, yea the
greater part) disbelieue those things, which others believe to be testified by
God, and which are, and ought to be known by themselves to be so testified;
Therfere some Protestants (yea millions, and the greater part of them) impute
falsehood to God, and err Fundamentally.

9. But yet, that it may further appear, how much you wrong Ch: Ma: I must set
down his words, which, (Chap: 3. N. 3.) are these: The difference among
Protestants consists not in this, that some believe some Points of which others
are ignorant, or not bound expressly to know (as the distinction ought to be
applied) but that some of them disbelieue, and directly, wittingly, and
willingly oppose what others believe to be testified by the word of God, wherein
there is no difference between Points Fundamental and not Fundamental:
Because till Points Fundamental be sufficiently proposed, as revealed by God,
it is not against Faith to reject them, or rather without sufficient
proposition it is not possible prudently to believe them: And the like is of
Points not fundamental, which as soon as they come to be sufficiently
propounded as divine Truths, they can no more be denied, than Points
Fundamental propounded after the same manner. What could be said more clearly,
to show, that Ch: Ma: spoke not of whatsoever kind of Objects, but expressly of
such, as are really testified by God, and not only believed to be such by
others, but also sufficiently proposed to a man's self as Divine Truths, and
which therefore bring with them, a most strict obligation to be believed? Your
little respect to truth, has forced me to be longer in this point, than I
expected, or desired to be. And I hope it appears, that you had no other
cause, except want of Charity to Charity Maintained, to fear that his heart
condemned him of a great calumny, and egregious sophistry, in imputing
Fundamental and damnable error to disagreeing Protestants; because forsooth,
some of them disbelieue, and wittingly oppose, what others do believe to be
testified by the word of God: Seeing Cha: Ma: expressly required, that what
others believed to be testified by God, should also be sufficiently proposed to
ones self, before he could be obliged to believe; which sufficient proposition
being supposed, yourselfe do not deny, but it is a damnable error, to
disbelieue any such truth.

10. Your (N. 18.) has two good propertyes, Falsehood; and Confusion, or
Obscurity. You cite Chapter Ma. speaking thus: The difference among Protestants
consists not in this, that some believe some Points of which others are
ignorant, or not bound expressly to know, and there you stop; but Charity
maintained added these words: but that some of them disbelieue, and directly,
and wittingly, and willingly oppose, what others do believe to be testified by
the word of God, wherein there is no difference between Points Fundamental, and
not Fundamental etc: Now I pray, is there not a maine difference, between
ignorance, or a not knowing, or Nescience of a thing which another believes,
and a positive opposition, or actual belief of the contrary to that which
another believes? How many truths are there which men do not know, and yet err
not against them, be cause their very ignorance keeps them from any judgment
concerning them, by way of Affirmation or negation; but they carry themselves
privatively, or in a certain manner passively, or abstractively, as if there
were no such objects?

11. But let us hear what you object against so manifest a truth. You say, I
would gladly know, whether you speak of Protestants differing in profession
only, or in opinion also. Answer. I understand not well what you mean, by
differing in profession only, or in opinion also. Do you mean, that they make
profession of differing in opinion, when indeed they do not differ? This were
to dissemble, and ly in matters of Religion. But whatsoever your meaning be; I
answer, that Charity Maintained spoke expressly of Protestants, differing in
opinion, one disbelieving what another believes, as you confess out of His
words: But you are willing to raise difficultyes, where otherwise none could
appear.

12. But then, you say, If they differ in opinion, then sure they are ignorant
of the truth of each others opinions: It being impossible and contradictious,
that a man should know one thing to be true, and believe the contrary, or know
it and not believe it. And if they do not know the Truth of each others
opinions, then, I hope, you will grant they are ignorant of it. If your meaning
were, they were not ignorant, that each other held; these opinions, or of the
sense of the opinions which they held; I answer, this is nothing to the
convincing of their understandings of the truth of them, and these remaining
vnconvinced of the truth of them, they are excusable if they do not believe.

13. Answer. Though it be much against my inclination, yet truth commands me to
say, that here you show, either great ignorance, or else write directly against
your own knowledge, where you will needs confound, pure ignorance, with
positive Error; the difference of which I showed even now: and what Logician
is ignorant, of the division of ignorance into Ignorantiam purae privation is,
and Ignorantiam pravae disposition is: that is, a mere want of knowledge of
some truth, or a positive error contrary to it? And by your leave, your saying
[ If they differ in opinion, they are ignorant of the truth of each others
opinions] is so far from being true (speaking of pure ignorance) that it
implies contradiction to say, He who errs, is ignorant; seeing to be purely
ignorant, in the said division of ignorance, is one member into which,
ignorance is divided; and one membrum dividens cannot in good Logic include
the other, and therefore error cannot include pure ignorance: For it were to
say, one has no knowledge at all, and yet has a false knowledge, or, a
privation is a positive entity, and a Nothing a Something. Your objection, He
who errs, knows not the contrary Truth, and if he know not the truth, he is
ignorant of it, is a mere mistake, or equivocation. For, that he who errs
knows not, or is ignorant of the contrary, by a pure ignorance or Nescience, I
deny: That he is ignorant by a positive error, or ignorance prauae
dispositionis, I grant: and so, when you assume, He who knows not the truth,
is ignorant of it, you must distinguish according to the double sense of
ignorance, which has been declared, and not speak with such confusion. This
same distinction I find in Dr. Potter (Page: 243.) where speaking of some
Fundamental Articles of Faith, he has these words: These are so absolutely
necessary to all Christians, for attaining the end of our Faith, that is, the
salvation of our souls; that a Christian may loose himself, not only by a
positive erring in them, or denying of them; but by a pure ignorance, or
nescience, or not knowing of them. Where you see, he distinguishes between
error, and not knowing: and therefore one may be ignorant of what another
believes, and yet not err against it, or disbelieue it: As it is one thing,
not to be hot, and another to be hold. Now Charity Maintained expressly
distinguishes between pure ignorance, and error; and therefore you do very ill,
first to confound them, and then upon that affected mistake frame your
Objections. The same equivocation you have (Page: 25.) where you make a show of
great subtility, but indeed the Reader will find nothing but vanity, as I
showed in that place.

14. You say to Charity Maintained (If your meaning were, they were not
ignorant, that each other held these opinions, or of the sense of the opinions
which they held etc:) I answer, that this saying of yours is nothing to the
purpose. For, though de facto Protestants are not ignorant, what opinion other
Protestants hold, and therefore their disagreement is more patent, and not only
against the opinions by whomsoever they might chance to be held, but also
against opinions known to be defended by them whom they will needs call
Brethren: Yet indeed it is merely accidental, and in no wise necessary to our
present purpose, that one Protestant should be conscious, or know that he
differs in opinion from another. For, if it were revealed to some in the
Indyes, that Christ is God, and Savior of the world, and he did assent to that
truth, while another in Europe, did dissent from the like Revelation
sufficiently proposed, this second does truly disbelieue, what the former
believes, no less than if he had known, that the other believes it; And
therefore Charity Maintained said; Protestants disbelieue, and wittixgly and
willingly oppose what others do believe to be testified by the word of God,
without saying unnecessarily, that they disbelieue, what they know others
believe, because, as I said, this knowledge is not necessary for our present
purpose, concerning the disagreement of Protestants, in matters of Faith. Much
less to the purpose, yea directly against syncerity, is your saying; That if
their understandings be not convinced, they are excusable if they do not
believe. Seeing Charity Maintained did speak of objects sufficiently proposed
as revealed by God; which are his express words, in this very number, which
you impugn.

15. In your (N. 19.20.21.23.) nothing occurrs of difficulty, which has not
been answered elsewhere: And you falsify Chapter Ma. when (N. 20.) you say he
concludes that there is nodifference between errors in Points Fundamental,
and not Fundamental; whereas he expressly says in his (N. 3.) (which here you
answer) and (N. 4.) that they do not differ in this, that both of them are
against Gods Revelation, and damnable, (which yourselfe often grant) yet you
know, that in other respects, he puts a maine difference between them, even in
the number next precedent, and declares the matter at large. Surely this is no
good dealing!

16. In your (N. 22.) you still voluntarily mistake the state of the Question;
though Charity Maintained had stated it very clearly (N. 3.) as we have seen;
i. e. that when we treat, whether error excludes salvation, we speak of
Points sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, and not in case of invincible
ignorance, want of instruction, or the like. This being presupposed, Charity
Maintained (N. 4.) says thus; Dr: Potter forgetting to what purpose
Protestants make use of their distinction, does sinally overthrow it, and
yields as much as we can desire. Speakinge (Page: 211.) of that measure and
quantity of Faith, without which, none can be saved, he says: It is enough to
believe some things by a virtuall Faith, or by a general, and as it were a
negative Faith, whereby they are not denied, or contradicted. Now, our question
is, in case that divine truth, although not Fundamental, be denied and
contradicted; and therefore, even according to Him, all such denial excludes
salvation. Thus Charity Maintained; whose words you cite very imperfectly in
this manner: It is enough (by Dr: Potters confession) to believe some things
negatively: i.e. not to deny them; therefore all denial of any divine Truth
excludes salvation. Thus say you; omitting these very next words of Charity
Maintained [now our question is, in case that divine Truths, although not
Fundamental, be denied and contradicted: And therefore even according to Him,
all such denial excludes salvation.] And that Dr: Potter always supposes a
sufficient Proposition, before one can be obliged, not to deny, or contradict
those Points of which he speaks, is evident; because one could not be obliged
under sin, not to contradict them, if they be not sufficiently proposed: Which
Proposition he requires Universally, in matters of Faith. And in this very
place he says; There is a certain measure and quantity of Faith without which
none can be saved; but every thing revealed belongs not to this measure. And
then he adds the a foresaid words; It is enough to believe some things by a
virtuall Faith, or by a negative Faith, whereby they are not denied. Where it
appears, that, as no man is obliged to believe those Fundamental Points,
without the belief whereof, none can be saved, unless they be sufficiently
proposed; so none can be obliged, not to contradict Points not Fundamental, if
they want sufficient Proposal. And this is yet further demonstrated by Charity
Maintained, who immediately after the words of which you take notice, and cite
as His (though imperfectly) says thus; After He (Dr: Potter) speaks more
plainly, (in the very next Page: 212.) It is true whatsoever is revealed in
Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in some sense,
Fundamental, in regard of the divine Authority of God, and his word, by which
it is recommended; that is, such as may not be denied or contradicted without
infidelity; such as every Christian is bound with humility, and reverence, to
believe whenever the knowledge thereof is offered to him: (mark, whenever
the knowledge thereof is offered to him.) And further, Page: 250. he says; where
the revealed will or word of God is sufficiently propounded, (observe,
sufficiently propounded) there he that opposes, is convinced of error, and he
who is thus convinced, is an Heretic, and Heresy is a work of the flesh,
which excludes from heaven (Galat: 5.20.21.) And hence it follows, that it
is Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he
believe all truths of God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God.
Mark, convinced that they are from God, which implies a sufficient proposal.
Now with what conscience could you conceal all these clear words of Potter,
which by Charity Maintained are set down immediately after those which you cite
out of Him (Charity Maintaryned) and impugn them? Yea the Doctor (Page: 213.)
in the very same thread of discourse which Charity Maintained alleged out of
his (Page: 211.) of which you take notice, and endeavor to defend, says;
Fundamental properly is that which Christians are obliged to believe by an
express and actual Faith. In other Points, that Faith which the Cardinal
Perron calls the Faith of adherency, or non-repugnance, may suffice; to wit,
an humble preparation of mind to believe all, or any thing revealed in
Scripture when it is sufficiently cleared. You see these words are in effect
the very same, which you answer [ it is enough by Dr: Potters confessing to
believe some things negatively etc:] and that He expressly requires, that a
thing be sufficiently cleared, before one can be obliged to a non-repugnance,
or a non-denyall of it. Which doctrine of Potter being once supposed, certainly
this is a good Argument. It is enough for salvation, not to deny some things,
when they shall be sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Therefore the
denial of them, when they are so proposed, is not enough for salvation, but
excludes it. Can you possibly have any thing to object against so manifest a
deduction, and truth, as this is?

17. You say, (N. 22.) it is As if you should say: One horse is enough for a
man to go a journey: Therefore without a Horse no man can go a journey: As if
some divine truths, viz: Those which are plainly revealed, might not be such,
as of necessity were not to be denied: And others for want of sufficient
declaration, denyable without danger.

18. Answer. You could not, even for a fee, have pleaded more effectually, in
favor of Charity Maintained, than now you do, while your intention is to
impugn Him. You grant that truths sufficiently declared, are such as of
necessity are not to be denied. But both Dr: Potter, and Charity Maintained in
the words of which we treat, expressly speak of truths sufficienty declared,
as I have proved; therefore, even by your own confession, they cannot be
denied; which is the inference of Charity Maintained. I confess my self to
find great difficulty, how to frame any answer to your example of a Horse;
because I cannot penetrate, what use, or application you intended, or could
make of it. Only I wish you to consider, that when Dr: Potter says, it is
enough to believe some things, by, as it were, a negative Faith, whereby they
are not denied, so that one have an humble preparation of mind to believe them,
when they are sufficiently cleared, that they are revealed, (as we have heard
him speak) he supposes, that it is necessary to salvation to have such a
preparation of mind: And then your similitude must go thus: A horse is
necessary for a man to go a journey; therefore without a horse no man can go a
journey; and so we may say; it is necessary (and not only sufficient) for
salvation, in preparation of mind not to reject, any Point sufficiently
propounded, as testified by God: Therefore, whosoever is not so prepared,
excludes himself from salvation; which is that we would have. Or else thus: A
horse is enough for a man to go a journey, not absolutely, but upon condition,
that he be not lame, or extremely weak, or otherwise unable, to travel.
Therefore, if a horse be lame, or otherwise unable, he is not enough for a man
to go a journey; which consequence will teach us to make this inference; it is
enough for salvation, that one believe some things with an implicit Faith, not
absolutely, but upon condition, that he be ready to embrace, and believe them
actually, and explicitly, when they shall be sufficiently propounded in
particular: Therefore an implicit Faith, is not sufficient for salvation, if he
want such a readiness of mind; which is our Conclusion. Never the less, if
your Faith be so strong, that you will needs have one horse (though lame, and
laden with as many diseases as a horse) to be enough, or sufficient, though
not necessary, for a man to go a journey, and for that cause, that this is no
good consequence, One horse is enough for a man to go a journey, therefore
without a horse no man can go a journey; you know, that not only Catholics,
but Potter; yourselfe; and all Protestants, (as we have heard you affirm
hertofore) and all Christians, must deny the parity; it being most certain,
and evident, that the belief of all Points Fundamental, is not enough for
salvation, but is of itself, (taken alone) as it were lame, and too weak
without a mind ready not to contradict, whatsoever is sufficiently propounded
as witnessed by God, which is absolutely necessary to salvation; and therefore
we must still conclude, that all denial of any Divine Truth, sufficiently
propounded, excludes salvation, though one be supposed to believe all Points
which are Fundamental of their own nature. These are the best considerations,
that I can draw from your example of a horse, which yet you see, make strongly
for us, against yourselfe.

14. You are pleased (N. 24.) to sum up, or, as you speak, bring out of the
clouds, the discourse of Charity Maintained in his (Chap: 3. N. 5.) and then
you censure it thus: Which is truly a very proper and convenient Argument ^o
close up a weak discourse, wherein both the Proposition^s are false for matter,
confused and disordered for the form, and the Conclusion utterly inconsequent.

20. Answer. You are so far from bringing out of the clouds, the discourse of
Charity Maintained, that you have cast over it a cloud, and darkness, which
neither you, nor any body else, will be able to remove from it, and place it in
its own former light, except by hearing his own words, which are these. I
will therefore conclude with this Argument. According to all Philosophy and
Divinity, the Unity and distinction of every thing follows the nature and
essence thereof; and therefore if the nature, and being of Faith be not taken
from the matter which a man believes, but from the motive for which he believes
(which is Gods Word or Revelation) we must likewise affirm, that the Unity and
Diversity of Faith, must be measured by Gods Revelation (which is a like for
all Objects) and not by the smalness, or greatness of the matter which we
believe. Now that the nature of Faith is not taken chiefly from the greatness,
or smalness of the things believed, is manifest, because otherwise one who
believes only Fundamental Points, and an other who together with them, does
also believe Points not Fundamental, should have Faith of (formal) different
natures; yea there should be as many (formal) differences of Faith, as there
are different Points which men believe, according to different capacities, or
instruction etc: And therefore we must say, that unity in Faith does not depend
upon Points Fundamental, but upon Gods Revelation, equally, or unequally,
proposed: And Protestants pretending an unity only by reason of their agreement
in Fundamental Points, do indeed induce as great a multiplicity of Faith, as
there is multitude of different objects, which are believed by them; and since
they disagree in things equally revealed by God, it is evident, that they
forsake the very formal motive of Faith, which is Gods Revelation, and
consequently loose all Faith, and unity therein. In which words we see Charity
Maintained speaks of that unity of Faith, which is taken from the Formal
Object, and which to oppose, is the proper cause of damnation, for erring
persons, in all Objects, whether they be great, or small, like, or unlike, of
themselves.

21 Now in this discourse, what false Propositions, what confusion can you
find? You say: Who knows not that the Essence of all Habits (and therefore of
Faith among the rest) is taken from their Act, and their Object? If the Habit
be general, from the Act and Object in general; if the Habit bespecall, from
the Act and Object inspeciall. Then for the motive to a thing, that it cannot
be of the essence of the thing to which is moves, who can doubt, that knows
that a motive is an efficient cause; and the efficient is always extrinsecall
to the effect?

22. Answer: To what purpose talk you of the Essence of Habits, seeing the
Discourse of Cha: Ma: concerned only the Act of Faith, whereby we believe some
Truths, because they are revealed by God, and upon this ground he proved, that
every contrary Act is damnable, and a grievous sin, which cannot be verifyed
of Habits, which of themselves are not sins? Now, who can deny, that an Act
of Faith takes its nature, Essence, and specification (as Philosophers speak)
from the Divine Revelation? And I hope you will not tell us that the Essence of
all Acts, is taken from their Act, and their Object, as if the Essence of the
Act were derived from the Act. Dr: Potter (Page: 139.) says expressly; The
formal Object or reason of Faith, the chief Motive, (mark, motive) the first
and farthest Principle into which it resolves, is only divine Revelation.
Observe, that Divine Revelation only, is the first and last, into which Faith
resolves, without mentioning that it is taken from the Act, yea excluding it by
the word only (only Divine Revelation.) And (Page: 143.) he says: The chief
Principle and ground on which Faith rests, and for which it firmly assents
unto those truths, which the Church propounds is divine Revelation made in
Scripture. Nothing less then this, nothing but this can erect or qualify an Act
of supernatural Faith, which must be absotutely undoubted and certain, and
without this, Faith is but opinion or persuasion, or at the most, acquired
humane belief. Which words not only declare, the Essence of Divine Faith, but
also express, how by that Essence, it is distinguished from other things, and
in particular from humane Faith, persuasion, and opinion, as Cha: Ma: said,
the unity and distinction of every thing follows, the Nature and Essence
thereof. Thus you see, that Cha: Ma: spoke truth, in affirming, that the Nature
and Being of Faith, is taken from the Motive for which a man believes; and that
Potter uses the word Motive directly in this sense, and to this purpose.

23. What do you mean in saying; If the habit be general, the essence is
taken from the Act and Object in general; If the Habit be special, from the
Act and Object in special? I am very sure, that every Habit, and Act, exists
in particular, though their Objects be never so general; and so the Acts to
which Habits incline, are particular Acts, producible by those Habits, and
nothing, taken only in general, can be producible.

24. Cha. Ma. and Dr. Potter said, that our motive to believe, is the Divine
Revelation, and, which is more, you affirm the same here, That Gods
Revelation is an equal Motive to induce us to believe all Objects revealed by
him: And yet you strangely object: That the Motive to a thing cannot be of the
essence of the thing to which it moves, who can doubt, that knows that a
motive is an efficient cause, and the efficient is always extrinsecall to the
effect?

25. Answer; First, The motive, or Formal Object, of which we speak, is not an
efficient cause, in respect of the Habit, or Act of Faith; but, if you will
reduce it, to one of the four kinds of Causes, which are commonly assigned,
some will say it is Causa formalis extrinseca: and perhaps others will say,
that you believe the motive to a thing to be an efficient cause, because
Aristotle defines the efficient cause, to be Principium motus, and you confound
motum and motivum; or motion, and motive. Secondly; Though a motive were an
efficient Cause, your Argument (That it cannot be of the essence of the thing
to which it moves, because the efficient cause is is always extrinsecall to
the effect) is of no moment. For no man ever dreamed, that the motive, or
formal Object of Faith, is of the intrinsecall essence of the act thereof, as
Genus and Differentia are intrinsecall to the Species, or Materia and Forma are
intrinsecall Composito physico, but that the act, takes its essence from the
formal Motive or object, and essentially is, or includes, a Refere^ce to it,
as every creature essentially has a Relation to God, who is the Prime and
supreme efficient cause of all things, and consequently, as you say,
extrinsecall to them. For this cause C: Ma: said not, that the Motive to
believe is the essence of Faith; but that the essence or nature of Faith is
taken from the Motive for which a man believes; Which words signify a
difference, not an identity, seeing a thing is not said to take from itself,
(but to be) its own Essence. Do not yourselfe say, that the Essence of all
Habits is taken from their Act and from their Object? And yet I suppose, you
will not grant, that the Act and Object are of the Essence of Habits, as
intrinsecall to them: Especially seeing natural Habits, are essiciently
produced by Acts, and Acts by Habits (even supernatural Acts) as by their
efficient causes: And therefore according to your words, are always extrinsecall
to the effect. And so you answer, and confute your own self.

26. You doubt what Cha: ma: did mean by these words (Gods Revelation is alike
for all Objects.) But his meaning is clear; that Gods Revelation is the same,
whether it be applied, to Points Fundamental, or not Fundamental, and can no
more be disbelieved, in one kind of these Objects, than in another, it being no
less impossible, that the Supreme Verity, and Veracity, can testify a
falsehood, in a small, than in a great matter; as your self here affirm
expressly, that Gods Revelation is an equal Motive, to induce us to believe
all Objects revealed by him. But you say; this sense is impertinent; which you
must give me leave to deny. For, if it be alike damnable, to reject Gods
testimony, whether the matter be in itself, great or small; it follows, that
whosoever dissents, from the least Point, sufficiently propounded to be
revealed by God, sins damnably, and is not capable of salvation, without
repentance; so that of two dissenting in an Object known to be a divine truth,
one of them cannot be saved, without repentance. And it is strange, that still
you will be altering the state of the Question, notwithstanding, that Cha: Ma:
expressly declared, that we speak of persons, to whom the Divine Revelation,
is sufficiently propounded for such. Where now are the false Propositions, the
disorder of form, the inconsequence of the Conclusion, which you so
contemptuously objected to Cha: ma:? But chiefly, where shall we find in all
these your diversions, and tergiversations, a direct Answer, to the discourse
of Cha: ma:, that the Essence, and unity, or diversity of Faith is chiefly to
be attended, in order to the Formal object, which is Divine Revelation, and
not in respect of the matter, of Fundamental, or not Fundamental Points; and
consequently, that it is impossible, that when two disagree in matters
sufficiently declared to them to be divine truths, both can be saved. Your (N.
25.) has been answered at large hertofore.

27. For the answer which in your (N. 26,) you give to the (N. 9.10.11.) of Ch:
Ma: if the Reader will take the pains, to peruse those numbers in Ch: Ma: he
will find, that there is a great difference, to take things from the Original
itself, and to receive them from a Copy, drawn by a partial hand, of an
insincere Adversary. Cha: Ma: proves the Church Catholic to be universally
infallible, because otherwise, she might either propose things contrary to
divine Revelation, or else propose for a revealed Truth, that which is not such,
which were a damnable sin, and Dr. Potter confesses that the Church cannot err
damnably.

28. To this you answer, that the Church may do these things by Ignorance or
mistake, and so without damnable sin. But this answer is confuted by what has
been said hertofore. For, if it be evident in Scripture, that the Church may
err in some Points, she cannot but know, that she exposes Herself to danger,
of error against the divine Testimony, and consequently sins damnable, unless
she has evident Scripture for what she proposes; which cannot happen when she
proposes a falsehood. If it be not evident in Scripture, that she may err in
some Points, then you, who take Scripture for the sole Rule of Faith, cannot be
sure, that she may err; especially if we reflect, that, Scripture assures us
(as Protestants grant) that she is Infallible in some (namely in Fundamental)
Points, and does not tell us what those Points in particular be. Besides, you
teach (Page: 277. N. 61.) that there is promised to the Church, not only an
assistance not to err in things absolutely necessary, but a farther assistance
is conditionally promised, even such an Assistance as shall lead us, if we be
not wanting to it and ourselves, into all, not only necessary, but very
profitable truth, and guarde us from all, not only destructive, but also
hurtful errors. And therefore to Char: Maint. saying, that a Church not erring
in Fundamentalls, does as much as our Savior exacts at her hands; as much as
lies in her power to do; you answer This is manifestly untrue. For, Gods
assistance is always ready to promote Her farther. It is ready, I say, but on
condition the Church does implore it: on condit on that when it is offered in
the Divine directions of Scripture and reason, the Church be not negligent to
follow it. Which words do not well agree with your answer, that, the Church may
err by Ignorance or Mistake and so without damnable sin; seeing on the one
side, every error against Divine Revelation, is of itself a damnable sin, and
on the other, the Church wants not sufficient assistance not to err, and in
fact shall be sure not to err if she be not negligent to follow Gods
Assistance when it is offered in the divine directions of Scriptuae and reason;
and therefore her Errors must needs be culpable, as proceeding only from her
own negligence. In this very (N. 26.) which I confute, yourselfe assirme, that
she cannot be excused from headlong and pernicious temerity in proposing Points
not Fundamental, to be believed by Christians, as matters of Faith, if it be
understood of such vnfundamentall Points, as she is not warranted to propose by
evident Text of Scripture. Indeed if she propose such, as matters of Faith
certainly true, she may well be questioned, quo warranto? She builds without a
foundation, and says, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord does not say so: which
cannot be excused from rashness and high presumption. But though she may err
in some point not Fundamental, yet may she have certainty enough in proposing
others, evidently and undeniably set down in Scripture, and consequently, may
be without all rashness proposed by the Church, as certain divine
revelatio^s. These be your words, which clearly overthrow, your own Answer.
For, I argue thus: If the Church proceed upon evident Scripture, she cannot
err in those things. If not; she always exposes herself to danger of error,
for the matter (which may prove false) and to certain actual error, for the
manner, by proposing as a Point of Faith certainly true, which yet is always
uncertain, if she in such things may be deceaved, as you say she may,
whenever she is not warranted by evident Text of Scripture. Thus by your own
grounds, the Church is either certain, that she errs not, as relying upon
evident Scripture; or if she have not such evidence, she is certain, that she
exposes herself, and others, to error against Divine Revelation, which cannot
be excused from a great sin of rashness and high presumption. And then, when
will your excuse of ignorance, or mistake, have place, which cannot happen when
she has evidence of Scripture, and will not excuse, when she wants such
evidence? And so there is no mean, between certainty, that she errs not; and
committing a sin, by exposinge Herself, to a known danger of error against
the Divine Revelation.

29. By the way; I would know, how your Doctrine, (That God has promised to
the Church such an assistance as shall lead us into all not only necessary, but
very prositable truth, if we be not wanting to it) agree, with what you say, in
your Answer to the Direction (N. 32.) It is not absolutely necessary, that God
should assist his Church any farther then to bring her to salvation? Is it not
necessary that God keep his promise? And how do you find fault with Cha. Ma.
for saying, that if the Church be infallible only in Fundamental Points, if
she err not in such Points, she performs as much as our Savior exacts at her
hands, seeing he exacts no more than that, which may bring her to salvation, and
it is not necessary that God assist her for more than salvation? Or if he
absolutely exact more than is necessary; men are bound to do more than is
necessary, and so more shall be necessary, than is necessary; because it is
necessary to do what we are bound to do.

30. You say to Chapter Ma; The ground of your error here, is your not
distinguishing, between Actual certainty, and Absolute infallibility. But in
this, you speak either against your own conscience, or against manifest
truth. For if you say, the meaning of Cha. ma. to be, that whosoever is
actually certain of one thing, must have an absolute infallibility in all
other matters, your Conscience cannot but tell you, that He could have no such
meaning, as if, because I am actually certain, what I am doing at this
instant, I must therefore be infallible, and know certainly, what every one is
doing in the Indyes. But if you mean, that it is an error in Ch: Ma: to say,
that if one have actual certainty of a thing, he must be infallible both in
that, and all other, for which he has the same, or like grounds, to make him
certain; then you err against manifest truth, it being evident, that if I
clearly see my self to have an undoubted Ground, to believe a thing, it is
impossible, that I should err in any other, for which I also evide^tly see,
that I have the same certain ground. This is our case. If I be actually
certain, by evidence of Scripture, of the truth of one thing, I am certain,
that I cannot err in any other Point, for which I have the like evidence of
Scripture; as he, who actually assents to a demonstration, known to be such,
can neither err in it, nor in any other, known to have the like certainty.
This being supposed, your examples prove against yourselfe, as I showed in an
other like occasion.

31. I have already particularly and at large, answered your (N. 27.28.29.) In
your (N. 30 33.34.) you impugn Ch: Ma. whose words I wish you had set down,
as you found them in Him, and not as you collect and offer them to the Reader;
whom therefore I must entreat, to peruse the Author himself. Chapter Ma. (N. 13.)
says, That, to limite the general promises of our Savior for his Church, to
Points Fundamental, as namely, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against Her, and that the Holy Ghost shall lead them into all truth etc. is to
destroy all Faith. For, by this manner of interpreting, and limiting words,
whatsoever is delivered in Scripture, concerning the infallibility of the
Apostles, or of Scripture it self, may be restrained, to infallibility in
Fundamental Points. And in this, Chapter Ma. has reason. For, seeing you have no
certain Rule of Faith, but Scripture; whatsoever you cannot prove by evident
Scripture, cannot be to you, certain, or a Point of Faith. Let us then take
these words (Matthew. 16.18.) The gates of Hell shall not prevail etc. Which our
B. Savior pronounced of the Church, and those other, (Jo: 16. V. 13.14.16.)
The spirit shall lead you into all truth, and shall abide with you for ever,
which promise, Potter says (Page: 153.) was made directly and primarily to the
Apostles (who had the spirits guidance in a more high and absolute manner, than
any since them) yet it was made to them for the behoof of the Church, and is
verifyed in the Church universal. The first words, The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against Her, Potter (Page 153.) limits they shall not prevail so
far, as to sever it from the foundation; that is, that She shall not err in
Fundamental Points. Now, I beseech you, produce some evident Text of
Scripture, declaring, that those words are not to be understood, as they sound,
that the Church shall be secure from all errors against Faith, even in Points
not Fundamental, (which errors are gates that lead to hell; seeing they are,
as you often confess, damnable in themselves, and so lead to hell and
damnation) but with this limitation, that she shall be secured for Points
Fundamental. Produce, I say, some such evident Text of Scripture, and not
topicall discourses of your own. In the mean time, while you are busy about
that impossible task, (of producing some such Text)

32. I will ponder the second place. The spirit shall lead you into all truth,
and shall abide with you for ever; which, Potter says, is understood of the
Apostles, and of the universal Church; but so, as being referred to the
Apostles, it signifyes all truths, Fundamental, and not Fundamental Points;
which is a harder explanation, than that of the former words out of S. Matthew:
The gates of hell etc. because you are engaged, to allege some evident Text of
Scripture, to prove that the very selfsame, as I may say, indivisible Text,
which is acknowledged to speak, both of the Apostles, and of the Church, must
be forced, and as it were racked, to speak one thing of the Apostles, and
another of the Church: All truth, for the Apostles; not all, but only
Fundamental, truth, for the Church. Bring, I say, some such evident Text of
Scripture. But, it seems, you did easily perceive, that no such place could be
pretended: and therefore in stead of Scripture, or the Word of God, you offer
only your own conceits, discourses, and seeming congruences, which are far
beneath that certainty, which is required for an act of divine Faith. There is
not, say you (N. 30.) the same reason for the Churches absolute Infallibility,
as for the Apostles and Scriptures. For, if the Church fall into error it may
be reformed by comparing it with the Rule of the Apostles doctrine, and
Scripture. But if the Apostles erred in delivering the Doctrine of Christianity
to whom shall we have recourse, for the discovering and correcting their error?

33. Answer. I have often said, that in matters, known by revelation only, and
depending on the free will, or decree of Almighty God, we are not to prove, by
humane reason, what he has decreed. Protestants grant, that, both the
Apostles, and the Church, are infallible for Fundamental Points. If then, one
should make use of your reason, and say: (There is not the same reason for the
Churches infallibility in Fundamental Points, as for the Apostles. For, if the
Church fall into such errors, it may be reformed by comparing it with the Rule
of the Apostles doctrine, and Scripture. But, if the Apostles have erred in
delivering the doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall we have recourse, for
the discovering and correcting their error?) What would you answer? Would you
grant, that the Church is not infallible in Fundamental Articles, because
there is not the same reason for Her infallibility in Fundamental Points, as
there is for the Apostles? That were to deny the common Doctrine of
Protestants, and the supposition. If you answer, that though there were not the
self same reason, or necessity, for the Churches infallibility, as for the
Apostles (which is all that that reason proves, and so is a Sophisme a dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, as if you should say; This Truth is not
proved by this particular reason, therefore there can be no reason for it) yet
we cannot doubt, but that there is some reason and cause, whatsoever it be, and
therefore you must be content, that Scripture declare God Almightyes Will, that
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church; in which Promise,
seeing there is no restraint to Fundamental Points, it becomes not you, to
divide the same sentence, into different meanings, as they are applied to the
Apostles, and as they have reference to the Church. Beside, if one would
imitate you, in determining concerning divine matters, according to humane
apprehension, and discourse, he might, in your own Grounds, quickly dispatch
all, and say; that seeing the errors of the universal Church, can be only not
Fundamental, there is no necessity, of having recourse to any, for the
discovering, and correcting them; and so you cannot infer, that the Apostles
for reforming errors in the Church, need be infallible in Points not
Fundamental, no more than you say the Church herself is. Thus (Page: 35. N.
7,) You say, Christians have, and shall have means sufficient to determine,
not all Controversyes, but all necessary to be determined: And what Rule, will
you, in your Grounds, give to determine, what Points are necessary to be
determined? except by saying, that eo ipso that they are not Fundamental, or
not necessary to salvation to be believed, they are not necessary to be
determined, as you say in the same place; If some Controversyes may for many
Ages be undetermined, and yet in the mean while men may be saved, why should,
or how can the Churches being furnished with effectual means to determine all
Controversyes in Religion, be necessary to salvation, the end itself, to which
these means are ordained, being, as Experience shows, not necessary? If then,
(may we say) the belief of vnfundamentall Points, be not necessary to
salvation (which is the end of our Faith) the means to beget such a Faith in
the Church, which you say must be the universal infallibility of the Apostles,
cannot be necessary. Which is confirmed by what you say in your Answer to the
Direction, (N. 32.) It is not absolutely necessary, that God should assist his
Church any farther than to bring her to salvation. How then can it be
necessary, in your ground, that the Church be assisted for Points not
Fundamental? Thus, while by your humane discourses, you will establish the
universal infallibility, of the Apostles, you destroy it, as not being
necessary, for discovering, or correcting, either Fundamental errors, from
which the Church is free, or vnfundamentall, which are not necessary, to be
corrected, or discovered. Morover, this very reason of yours, proves a
necessity of the Churches being universally infallible, supposing the truth
which we proved (Chap: 2.) that, Scripture alone contains not evidently, and
particularly, all Points necessary to be believed; and that even for those
which it contains, a Living Judge and Interpreter is necessary. For, this
truth supposed, I apply your Argument, thus: If any fall into error by a false
interpretation of Scripture, it may be discovered, and corrected by the Church.
But if the Church may err, to whom shall we have recourse, for correcting her
error? And here, incidently, I put you in mind, of the Argument which you
prize so much, as to glory, that you never could find any Catholic, who was
able to answer it; that if a particular man, or Church, may fall into error,
and yet remain a member of the Church universal, why may not the Church
universal err, and yet remain a true Church? The Answer, I say, is easy,
almost out of your own words, that there is not the same reason, for every
particular man's or Churches, infallibility, or security from error, as for that
of the Catholic Church. For, if private persons, or Churches, fall into error,
it may be reformed by comparing it with the Decrees and Definitions of the
universal Church. But if the Church may err, to whom shall we have recourse
to correct her error? As S. Hierom: says (Lib: 1. Comment: in Cap 5. Matthew:)
Si doctor erraverit, a quo alio doctore emendabitur? But of this I have said
enough heretofore. Lastly; give me leave to tell you, that in this, and other
Reasons, which we shall examine, you do extremely forget yourself, and the
state of our present Question, which is not now, whether there be the same
reason or necessity, for the Churches absolute infallibility, as for the
Apostles and Scriptures: But whether we can prove the universal infallibility
of the Apostles, and not of the Church, by the same Text of Scripture, which
speaks of both in the same manner. But let us hear your other reasons of
disparity, between the Apostles, and the Church, in Point of infallibility.

34. You say in the same: (N. 30.) There is not so much strength required in
the Edifice, as in the Foundation: And if but wise men have the ordering of the
building they will make it much a surer thing, that the Foundation, shall not
fail the building, then that the building shall not fall from the Foundation.
Now the Apostles, and Prophets, and Canonical Writers, are the Foundation of
the Church, according to that of S. Paul, built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets; therefore their stability, in reason ought to be greater
than the Churches which is built upon them.

35. Answer. Your conclusion (therefore their stability in reason ought etc:)
shows that you ground yourselfe on reason, not on revelation; and on a reason,
which is not so much as probable. For, you will not deny but that God might
have communicated absolute infallibility, both to the Apostles, and to the
Church; yet to the Church dependently of the preaching of the Apostles; and
then, what would you have said to your own ground, In reason more strength is
required in the Foundation, than in the Edifice, seeing in that case, both the
Foundation and Edifice, should have had an immovable, and firm strength, and
stability? Your reason (if you will have it prove any thing against us) must
go upon this principle; that nothing which depends, or which is builded, upon
another for its certainty, can be absolutely certain; which is a ground
evidently false. The Conclusion in a demonstratiue Argument, is abfolutly
certain, and yet depends on Premises. The Church is infallible in
Fundamentalls; and yet in that infallibility, is builded upon the Foundation of
the Apostles, and Prophets. The absolute infallibility of the Apostles, was
builded upon our B. Saviors Words, and even his infallibility, as man, was
builded upon the infallibility of his God head; and yet I hope you will not
say, that the Apostles, and our B. Savior, were not absolutely infallible,
because they were built upon another higher infallibility. And I return your
own words against you, if but wise men (or even men in their wits) have the
ordering of the building, they will make it as sure a thing that the building
shall not fall from the Foundation, as that the Foundation shall not fail the
building, if it be in their power to do both these things, with as much
certainty, and facility, as to do one of them. And no wonder; seeing the
stability of the Foundation is but a Means to the End, that the Edifice which
is builded upon it, be stable, and every wise man has greater regard to the
End then to the Means, in respect of which, the End may be called, the
Foundation upon which depends the Election of the Means; and in vain it is,
that the Foundation cannot fail the building, if the building may fall from
the Foundation, And if, for example, to build high, were a means to make the
building not fall from the Foundation, as digging deep, makes the Foundation
not fail the building, men would be as careful, to build high, as now they
make sure to digg low for better settling the Foundation, and every one would
aim at a tower of Babel. Now the Apostles received of the Holy Ghost
infallibility, not for themselves alone, but for the good of the Church, and it
is no less easy, for God, to bestow absolute infallibility, upon the Church,
than upon the Apostles; upon the Edifice, than upon the Foundation; and
therefore no wonder if the Church partake of the same stability, and
infallibility with Her Foundation, for the substance, not for the manner, that
is, as the Apostles were, so the Church is free, from all error, but so, as
the Church received Her Doctrine from the Apostles, and not the Apostles from
the Church. You find fault with Charity Maintained, who making right use of
this metaphore, argues that as a Foundation alone, is not a house, so to
believe Fundamentalls, or the Foundation alone, is not sufficient to constitute
a Church, or house of God, without the belief of all Points sufficiently
propounded, as revealed by God: and now yourselfe ground a matter of greatest
moment, (the infallibility of the Church) upon the same metaphore, very ill
applied, toward any other purpose, except to prove, the contradictory of that,
for which you allege it, and to confute yourselfe, as even now I have
demonstrated. And besides all this; seeing, in your Doctrine, we believe the
Scriptures, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, or that there were any such men
as the Apostles, for the Authority of the Church, or universal Tradition; the
Church, to you is the Foundation of your belief, that the Apostles were
infallible, and consequently, if your deduction be good, the infallibility of
the Church must be greater, than that of the Apostles, because the Foundation
must be stronger, than the Edifice; and so, your own argument, directly
overthrowes, that which you would prove by it.

36. By what I have now said, your other reason in the same place is answered;
That a dependent infallibility, (especially if the dependence be voluntary)
cannot be so certain, as that on which it depends: But the infallibility of
the Church, depends upon the infallibility of Apostles, as the straightness of
the thing regulated, upon the straightness of the Rule: and besides, this
dependence is voluntary, for it is in the power of the Church to deviate from
this Rule; being nothing else but an agregation of men, of which every one has
freewill, and is subject to passions and error. Therefore the Churches
infallibility, is not so certain as that of the Apostles.

37. Answer. How many flawes appear in these not many words? And to omit, that
of Dependence, this Reason is not distinct from the former taken from the
metaphor of a Foundation, to which must be applied the Reason for which we
assent to a thing, and which therefore is the foundation on which our assent
depends, I say; First. Your conclusion is not contrary to the Assertion of your
adversary. A foul fault in Logic, which teaches that always the conclusion
of the disputant, ought to be directly contradictory, to that which the
Defendant affirms, and not consistent with it. Otherwise the Opponent, would
be discovered, to fight with nobody. You conclude; Therefore the Churches
infallibility, is not so certain, as that of the Apostles. Which is nothing
against Charity Maintained, who proved only, that the Church is so certain,
and infallible in Her Definitions, that they cannot be false, forbearing to
dispute, whether one certainty, may be greater, then another: and therefore,
secondly, you mistake, or wittingly alter the question, passng from intension,
or degrees of certainty in order to the same Points, to extension of
infallibility to different kinds of objects: as if, though it were granted,
that the Apostles were more infallible than the Church intensiue, or in respect
of the same Points, in which both she and the Apostles are infallible (because
she depends on the Apostles) it must follow, that the Church cannot be
extensiue as infallible, as they were, that is, cannot be infallible in Points
both Fundamental, and not Fundamental; which is a very inconsequent
consequence; it being sufficient, that the A postles be more infallible than
the Church quoad modum; seeing she depends on them, and they not on her, as the
Apostles were not so infallible intensiue as our Savior; and yet you will not
infer, that their infallibility also must be so limited extensive, as not to
reach to vnfundamentall Points; and as the Church, for Fundamental Points, is
builded, and depends upon the Apostles, and so, quoad modum, not so infallible,
as they were; yet Protestants grant, that she is absolutely infallible in fuch
Points, though for them, she depend on the Apostles; and your reason is against
this infallibility, as well as against her infallibility in Points not
Fundamental, and therefore proves in neither. Thirdly: according to this your
discourse, no natural truth, can be inferred, with certainty, from the most
common, and known Principles of natural reason; as, Nothing can be, and not
be, at the same time. Every whole is greater than any one part included therein,
and the like; because, whatsoever is inferred from such known Axioms must
depend on them, and therefore not be certain, nor infallible. If then your
meaning be, that the Church is not absolutely infallible, because she depends
on the infallibility of the Apostles; your Reason is manifestly false: If you
mean, that she may be absolutely infallible, though not so infallible as the
Apostles, quoad modum, you speak not to the purpose, but grant as much as we
desire.

38. You say: It is in the power of the Church to deviate from this Rule (that
is, from the Doctrine, and infallibility of the Apostles) being nothing else out
an aggregation of men, of which every one has freewill, and is subject to
passions, and error. And were not the Apostles an aggregation of men, of which
every one had freewill, and was subject to passions and error, if they had
been left to themselves? And therefore by your Divinity, it was in their power
to deviate from the infallibility, which the Holy Ghost did offer to them. I
wonder you durst publish such Grounds of Atheism. But is the Church indeed,
nothing else but an aggregation of men subject to pa^sions and error? Has she
not a promise of divine assistance, even according to Protestants, against all
Fundamental errors? which surely is more than to be, nothing else, than an
aggregation of men, subject to passions, and errors even Fundamental? And as
for freewill: I ask, whether that be taken away, by the Churches infallibility
in Fundamental Points, or no. If not, then freewill, may well consist with
infallibility. If it be taken away; then what absurdity is it to say, that it
is taken away by infallibility in Points not Fudame^tall? In aword: whatsoever
you answer about infallibility and freewill in the Apostles, for all Points;
and in the Church for Fundamental articles; the same will serve to confute
your own Objection, and show, that you contradict your own doctrine, and the
Doctrine of Protestants, yea of all Christians, who believe the Apostles to be
infallible. But of this I have spoken hertofore, more than once, and will now
pass to the examination of your answer to the argument of Charity Maintained;
that by Potters manner of interpreting, those texts of Scripture, which speak
of the stability, and infallibility of the Church, and limiting it to Points
Fundamental, he may affirm, that the Apostles, and other Writers of
Canonical Scripture, were endued with infallibility, only in setting down
Points Fundamental. For, if it be urged, that all Scripture is divinely
inspired; Potter has affoarded you a ready answer, that Scripture is inspired,
only in those parts or parcells, wherein it delivers Fundamental Points. Of
these words of Charity Maintained you take no notice, but only say, that the
Scripture says, All Scripture is divinely inspired. Show but as much for the
Church: show where it is written, that all the decrees of the Church are
divinely inspired; and the Controversy will be at an end. But all this is not
to the purpose, to show by what Law, Rule, Privilege, or evident Text of
Scripture, you take upon you, to restrain general Promises (made for the
Church) to Points Fundamental, and not limite those words, All Scripture is
divinely inspired, to the same Fundamental Points. For, this you neither do,
nor are able to answer; but dissemble that Charity Maintained did expressly
prevent your alleging this very Text, All Scripture is divinely inspired. Nay,
beside this, you do not show, by what authority, you do not only restrain the
Praedicatum, (divinitus inspirata) but also the subjectum together with the
sign, all, (All Scripture) which not only may, but in your doctrine, must be
limited, in a strange manner; seeing you teach, that some Part of Scripture, is
infallible neither in Fundamental, nor vnfundamentall Points. For here, (N.
32.) you endeavor to prove that S. Paul has delivered some things as the
dictates of humane Reason and prudence, and not as Divine Revelation: And so it
will not be universally true, for any kind of Points, that All Scripture, is
divinely inspired. How then will you prove by these words, that Scripture is
infallible in all Points, if yourselfe limite the Subjectum of that
Proposition, which is Scripture, to certain Parts of Scripture, and that
indeed the Praedicatum, (divinely inspired) may be limited to Fundamental
Points, upon as good ground, as you limite the general promises of God, and
words of Scripture, which concern the infallibility of the Church?

39. But, (N. 33.) you will prove that Dr. Potter limits not the Apostles
infallibility to truths absolutely necessary to salvation, because he ascribes
to the Apostles the Spirits guidance, and consequently, infallibility in a more
high and absolute manner, than to any since them: and to prove this sequel,
you offer us a needless Syllogism. But I have showed, that the Apostles, may
have infallibility in a more high, absolute, and independent manner, than the
Church, although the Churches infallibility, reach to Points not Fundamental;
as Protestants will not deny, that the Apostles had infallibility in
Fundamental Points, in a more high manner, than the Church has; though yet
she be absolutely Infallible in all Fundamental articles. Yea, if you will
have the Doctor speak properly; to say, the Apostles had the guidance of the
Spirit in a more high manner than the Church, must suppose, that the Church
has that guidance, and consequently (as you infer) infallibility; though not
in so high a manner as the Apostles. I entreat the Reader to peruse Charity
Maintained (N. 13.) and judge whether he speaks not with all reason, and
proves what he says in this behalf; and if Potter declare himself otherwise,
and teach (notwithstanding his own confession, that what was promised to the
Apostles, is verifyed also in the universal Church) that the Church, may err
in Points not Fundamental, I can only favor him, and you, so far, as to tell
you, he contradicts himself.

40. Whatsoever you say to the contrary, Charity Maintained (N. 13.) spoke
truth, in affirming, that Potter, Speaks very dangerously toward this purpose
(of limitting the Apostles infallibility to Fundamental Points.) For though
the Doctor name the Church, when he says (Page: 152.) (that there are many
millions of truths in Nature, and History, whereof the Church is ignorant; and
that many truths lie vnrevealed in the infinite treasury of Gods wisdom,
where with the Church is not acquainted) yet his reasons, either prove nothing,
or else must comprise the Apostles, no less than the Church, as Charity
Maintained expressly observes (Page: 93.) though I grant that some of the
Doctors words, agree only to the Church, which is nothing against Charity
Maintained, that other of Potters words and reasons agree also to the Apostles,
and therefore I assure you he had no design in the (etc) at which you carp.
But let the Doctor say, and mean, what he best pleases; sure I am, that
neither he nor you, will ever be able to prove, by any evident Text of
Scripture, that the foresaid, or other general promises of infallibility,
extend to all sorts of Points for the Apostles, and to Fundamental Articles
only, for the Church. And this is the maine business in hand. Though in the
mean time, I must not omit to say, that your Syllogism is very captious, and
deceitful, which is: He that grants the Church infallible in Fundamentalls,
and ascribes to the Apostles the infallible guidance of the Spirit, in a more
high and absolute manner than to any since them, limits not the Apostles
infallibility to Fundamentalls: But Dr: Potter grants to the Church, such a
limited infallibility, and ascribes to the Apostles, the Spirits infallible
guidance in a more high, and absolute manner: Therefore he limits not the
Apostles infallibility to Fundamentalls. I say, the Major, of this Syllogism,
on which all depends, is deceitful. For though he that grants the Church
infallible in Fundamentalls, and ascribes to the Apostles the infallible
guidance of the Spirit, in a more high, and absolute manner than to any since
them, limits not the Apostles infallibility to Fundamentalls, by only, and
precisely, granting the Church infallible in Fundamentalls, and ascribing to
the Apostles, the guidance of the Spirit in a more high manner, yet he may do
it by some other way, and in particular, by the means of which now we speak,
that is, by restraining the self same words of Scripture, which without
distinction speak of the Apostles, and the Church, to Fundamental Points in
respect of the Church, and not in order to the Apostles, and this voluntarily,
without proof from any other evident Text of Scripture, which yet in the
Grounds of Protestants, were necessary in this case: As also, by proving the
fallibility of the Church by Arguments, which must involue the Apostles no
less than the Church, as even now I have proved. Howsoever; that you are not a
faithful interpreter of Dr: Potter, appears by your saying, He out of curtesy
grants you, that those words, the Spirit shall lead you into all Truth, and
shall abide with you for ever, though in their high and most absolute sense,
they agree only to the Apostles, yet in a conditional, limited, moderate,
secondary sense, they may be understood of the Church. For, where does Dr:
Potter say, that these words agree to the Church in a conditional sense? Which
conditional sense you interpret (N. 34.) to singify, if the Church adhere to
the direction of the Apostles, and so far as she does adhere to it; which
overthrowes the doctrine of Potter, and other Protestants, that the Church is
absolutely infallible, and cannot err in Fundamental Points; in which yet she
might err, if the promise of our Savior, were only conditional, and it would
give no more to the Church, than to any private person, who is sure not to
err, not only in Fundamental, but even in vnfundamentall Points, as far as he
adheres to the direction of the Apostles. And by this reflection, the
difficulty against Dr: Potter, and you, grows to be greater; how the same
words of Scripture, are understood both of the Apostles, and of the Church,
absolutely for Points Fundamental; and only conditionally, for the Church, in
Points not Fundamental: And how will you be able to prove, this various
acception of the same words, in order to the same Church (and not only in
respect of the Apostles, and the Church) by any other evident Text of
Scripture? You say to Cha: Ma: Do you not blush for shame at this Sophistry?
The Doctor says (which yet, I know, he never intended,) no more was promised
in this place; therefore he says, no more was promised. Are there not other
places besides this? And may not that be promised in other places, which is not
promised in this?

41. Answer. If the Doctor spoke beyond, or contrary to what he intended, I
cannot wonder; since, whosoever defends a bad cause, is subject to write
contradictions, which yet men intend no to do. You say, there may be other
places besides this. I answer: It is neither in your, nor in any man's power, to
alledg any place, which may not be interpreted, and restrained, as you limit
this of which we speak. Certainly, the Doctor being to prove the absolute
infallibility of the Apostles, was much to blame, for alleging ineffectuall
Texts, if He could have found better. Indeed I find in his (Page: 152.) these
words: That other promise of Christ's being with his (Matthew: 28.20.) unto the
end of the world, is properly meant (as some Ancients truly give the sense) of
his comfortable aid and assistance, supporting the weakness of his Apostles
and their Successors in their Ministry, or preaching of Christ. But it may
well be also applied, as it is by others, 5. Leo Scrm: 10, de Nativ: Cap: 5.
to the Church universal: Which is ever in such manner assisted by the good
Spirit, that it never totally falls from Christ. But as in the other Texts, so
in this, the Question returns to be asked, by what evident place, of
Scripture, can you, or He prove, that this Text speaks of an universal
Assistance for the Apostles, and only a limited direction for the Church,
seeing Potter grants, that it may well be also applied, as it is by others, to
the Church universal? You could say (N. 30.) Show where it is written, that
all the Decrees of the Church are divinely inspired, and the Controversy will
be at an end. And much more may we say to you; Show some evidenr Text of
Scripture, that the Apostles are infallible in all Points Fundamental, and not
Fundamental, the Church only in Fundamentalls, or that any Text of Scripture
makes any such distinction. I say much more may we say, Show etc. Because the
truth, Authority, and infallibility of the Church, is proved independently of
Scripture, as the infallibility of the Apostles, was proved before any
Scripture of the New Testament was written. But you, who hold, that we can
believe nothing, as a matter of Faith, unless it be evidently set down in
Scripture, are obliged, either to prove the difference of infallibility in the
Apostles and the Church, by some evident Text of Scripture, or else you cannot
be assured of it, as a thing revealed by God. You see how hard you were
pressed, and therefore were forced to give this noble answer; That Dr. Potter
out of courtesy grants us, that those words, The spirit shall lead you into all
truth, and shall abide with you for ever, in a conditional, limited, moderate,
secondary sense, may be understood of the Church. But I have showed, that you
misalledge the Doctor, who says expressly, that promise was directly and
primarily made to the Apostles, and is verifyed in the Church universal. Now I
ask, whether, or no, it be true; that this promise is verifyed in the Church?
If it be true, that is, if God has revealed it to be so, one would think it
were no point of ceremony, or courtesy, but a matter of necessity, to
acknowledge so much. It seems, you think the Doctor was of your disposition,
who (Page 69. N. 47.) say to Charity Maintained; You might have met with an
answerer, that would not have suffered you to have said so much Truth
together, but to me it is sufficient, that it is nothing to the purpose. But I
go on, and say, if it be not true, nor revealed, that those words are verifyed
of the Church, how durst Potter affirm, that they were verifyed of Her? Is it
lawful to add to the old, and coin new Revelations? Does not Potter say (Page:
222.) to add to it (he speaks of the Creed) is high presumption, almost as
great as to detract from it?

42. You say, The Apostles must be ledd into all such truths, as was requisite
to make them the Churches Founda^ions. Now, such they could not be without
freedom from etrour in all those things which they delivered constantly, is
certain revealed truths. And to prove, that the Apostles are the Foundation of
the Church, you allege (N. 30) S. Paul, saying, Built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets. (Fphes: 2.20.)

43. I reply; First, The Church must be led into such an all, as is necessary
to judge of controversyes, which yourself (Page: 35. N. 7.) confess to require
an universal infallibility. Secondly seeing Scripture contains not all points,
necessary to be believed, the Church must be endued with infallibility for such
points: Otherwise we could have no certainty concerning them. And if once you
grant her infallible, for Points not evide^t in Scripture, you cannot deny her
an Infallibility, derived, not from evidence of Scripture, but from the
assistance of the Holy Ghost. And as you say, the Apostles were universally
infallible, because the Church was builded on them; so every Christian is
builded upon the Church, and for that cause she must be universally infallible.
Thirdly; We are not said to be builded upon the writings of the Apostles, or
Scripture, but upon the Apostles, who were the Foundation of the Church, before
they wrote any thing, by their preaching, and verbum traditum, Tradition. So
that indeed, this Text (Ephesians: 2.20.) makes for us, and proves, that we are
builded on the unwritten word, and might have been so, though no Scripture,
had been written. Fourthly; you still mistake the Question, and seek
diversions but never go about to prove by some evident Text of Scripture that
the infallibility of the Apostles, may not be limited to Fundamental Points,
as your restrain to such Points the general Promises of infallibility, made
to the Church in holy Scripture, and limit the word Foundation, to the writings
of the Apostles, which I have showed to be a manifestly untrue limitation. S.
Paul (1. Tim: 3.) avouches the Church to be the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and
yet you deny Her to be universally infallible. How then can you prove by the
word Foundation, (which cansignify no more, than the pillar and Ground of
Truth) that the Apostles cannot err in any Point, but the Church may? Yea even
to make this place, (Ephesians: 2.20.) clear, and convincing in favor of the
Apostles, the authority of the Church is necessary, and the letter alone will
not suffice, if you will regard the doctrine, or authority, of some learned
prime Protestant. And therefore: Fifthly, you have cause to reslect on what
Cornelius a Lapide (upon this place) says: That Beza (and not he alone)
interprets, (upon the Foundation of the Apostles) to signify Christ, who is the
Foundation of the Apostles, Prophets and the whole Church; and he (Beza)
says, that it is Antichristian, to put an other foundation: For no man can
put an other Foundation beside that which is put, Jesus Christ. If this
exposition be admitted, the said Text (Ephesians: 2.20.) will not prove that the
Apostles, but only that our Savior (the Foundation of the Apostles, and of the
Church) was infallible, nor will the stability of a Foundation, expressed in
this place of Scripture, belong to the Apostles. And albeit indeed this
interpretation be not true, yet to you it ought not to seem evidently false,
being the Opinion of so great a Rabby; as also because it is very agreeable, to
the manner which Potestants hold, in impugning Catholic Doctrine, when for
example, they argue: The Scripture says, We have an Advocate Jesus Christ.
Therefore Saints, cannot be our Advocates, though in an infinitely lower degree,
than our Savior is: Especially if we reflect, that it is said of our Savior
with a Negative, or exclusive, particle, No man can put an other Foundation,
whereas in those words we have an Advocate, there is only an affirmation, that
Christ is our Advocate, but no negation, that any other is. Other examples
might be given in this kind, if this were a place for it. We do therefore grant
that the Apostles were Foundations of the Church, and that they received
Revelations immediately from our Savior, and the Church from them; so that, as
I said, she depends on them, not they on Her; and you wrong us, while (N. 30.)
in your first Sillogisme, you speak in such manner, as the Reader will conceive
that we make the infallibility of the Church equal, in all respects, to that
of the Apostles, the contrary whereof all Catholics believe, and prove. I omit
to observe, that you take occasion to descant upon these words (as well) which
are not found in Charity Maintained, though for the thing itself he might have
used them. Your (N. 31. and 32.) have been already confuted at large, and the
words of Dr. Stapleton considered, and defended with small credit to Dr.
Potter, and you.

44 You say: (N. 34.) he teaches the promises of Infallibility made to the
Apostles to be verifyed in the Church, but not in so absolute a manner. Now
what is opposed to absolute but limited or restrained?

45. Answer. first our Question, is not, what Dr. Potter said, but what he
did, or could prove; and in particular I say, it cannot be proved by any
evident Text of Scripture, that the words which he confesses to be verifyed in
the Church, are limited to fundamental points, in respect of her, and not as
they are referred to the Apostles. Secondly; whereas you say; what is opposed to
absolute, but limited or restrained? I reply; absolute may be taken in diverse
senses, according to the matter, argument, or subject, to which it is applied;
and therefore though some time it may be opposed to limited, yet not always. Do
not you (N. 33.) oppose to absolute, a conditional, moderate, secondary sense,
which being epithetons much different one from an other give us to understand,
that you are too resolute in asking, what is opposed to (but limited) seeing
more things than one may be opposed to it. What Logician will not tell you,
that in Logic, not Limited, but Relative, is opposed to absolute? And we may
also say, that the infallibility of the Apostles was absolute, that is,
independent, and the infallibility of the Church, dependent, as the Effect
depends on the Cause, and so is not absolute, in that sense, but has a
Relation of dependence to the infallibility of the Apostles, as to its Cause,
which particular Relation the Apostles have not to the Church.

46. You say also (N. 34.) that though it were supposed, that God had obliged
himself by promise, to give his Apostles infallibility, only in things
necessary to salvation, nevertheless it is utterly inconsequent, that he gave
them no more; or that we can have no assurance of any farther assistance, that
he gave them: Especially when he himself, both by his word, and by his works
has assured us, that he did assist them farther.

47. Answer; I know not to what purpose, or upon what occasion you utter these
words. Only I am sure, that they contain, both a manifest falsehood, and
contradiction to yourself, who say here (N. 33.) If we once suppose they (the
Apostles) may have erred in some things of this nature (in things which they
delivered constantly, as certain revealed Truths) it will be utterly
indiscernable what they have erred in, and what they have not. Now if God has
promised to give his Apostles infallibility only in things necessary to
salvation, (which here you expressly suppose,) it is clear we cannot be
certain of the truth of their writings in any one thing: Which supposed; (that
we cannot be certain that their writings are true) how can you say, that God
both by his word, and by his works has assured us, that he aid assist them
farther? Seeing (upon that supposition) the Scripture may be false, and recount
works never wrought, and so, it is consequent, that we can have no assurance
(by his written word) of any farther assistance that God gave them, (if it be
supposed that he gave them infallibility, only in things necessary to
salvation;) which is the contradictory to your assertion, and yet it is
evidently deduced from your own express words, and doctrine. Nay you could not
be sure, that the Apostles had infallibility, even for Fundamental Points, if
once it be supposed, that they, and consequently, their writings, were subject
to error in any thing. So far from truth is your saying (we could have
assurance of farther assistance!) Your (N. 35.36.) contain no difficulty,
which has not been answered heretofore.

48. I wish you had in your (N. 37.) set down at large the words of Charity
Maintained, whereby he proves (N. 15.) that according to the grounds of
Protestants, it is sufficient for salvation, that Scripture be infallible in
Fundamental Points only, as they limit to such Points, the infallibility of
the Church, and accordingly, interpret Scriptures, speaking thereof. The sum
of his Discourse is this: Put together these Doctrines: That Scripture cannot
err in Points Fundamental; that they clearly contain all such Points; that
Protestants can tell what Points in particular be Fundamental; it is manifest,
that it is sufficient for salvation, that Scripture be infallible only in
Points Fundamental. For seeing, all are obliged to believe explicitly all
Fundamental Articles, it is necessary to know which in particular be
Fundamental; which Protestants cannot know, except by Scripture, which alone
in their grounds, contains all that is necessary for us to know; and
therefore knowing by Scripture, what Points in particular be Fundamental, (as
N. 40. you say expressly, men may learn from the Scripture, that such Points
are Fundamental, others are not so) and that Scripture is infallible in all
Fundamentalls, they are sure that it is infallible in such particular necessary
Articles, though it were supposed to be fallible in other Points; by this
Argument: All Fundamental Points are delivered in Scripture with
infallibility; this is a Fundamental Point; therefore it is delivered in
Scripture with infallibility. And the Syllogism at which you say men would
laugh, is only your own; The Scripture is true in something; the Scripture
says that these Points only are Fundamental, therefore this is true, that
these are so. For, say you, every fresh-man in Logic knows that from mere
particulars nothing can be certainly concluded. But you should correct your
Syllogism, thus: All that is necessary, the Scripture delivers with
infallibility; but to know what Points in particular be Fundamental, is
necessary; therefore the Scripture delivers it with infallibility. Besides, you
say; If without dependence on Scripture Protestants did know what were
Fundamental, and what not, they might possibly believe the Scripture true in
Fundamentalls, and erroneous in other things. Now both you and Potter affirm,
that there is an universal Tradition, that the Creed contains all
Fundamental Points, and consequently, that in virtue of such a Tradition, men
may believe all Fundamental Points, without dependence, or knowledge of
Scripture, as also for universal Tradition you believe Scripture itself. Hear
your own words (Page: 198. N. 15.) The certainty I have of the Creed, that it
was from the Apostles, and contains the Principles of Faith, I ground it not
upon scripture; Therefore according to your own grounds, Protestants may
believe the Scripture to be true in Fundamentalls, and erroneous in other
things. And you did not well, to conceal this Argument, taken from the Creed,
which was expressly urged by Ch: Ma: in that very (N. 15.) which you answer. By
what I have said, it appears, that, (in the grounds of Protestants) the
knowledge of Fundamentalls need not have for Foundation, the universal truth
of Scripture, as you say, but only the truth thereof for all Fundamental
Points, and for knowing what Points in particular be Fundamental, as I have
declared. So we must conclude, that the Argument of Ch: Ma: stands good; that
if you limit the infallibility of the Church, you may upon the same ground,
limit the infallibility of the Apostles, and their writings, namely, the Holy
Scripture.

49. Your (N. 39.) goes upon a mere equivocation, or a voluntary mistake, you
being not ignorant that Charity Maintained said (N. 16.) that no Protestant,
can with assurance believe the universal Church in Points not fundame^tall,
because they believe that in such points she may err; which sequel is very
true, and clear. For how can I believe with assurance, an Authority believed
to be fallible. If she alledg some evident Reason, Scripture, etc: I believe
her, no more than I would believe any child, Turk, or Jewe, and so I attribute
nothing to her authority, nor can be said to believe her. Thus you say (N.
36.) We cannot believe the present Church in propounding Canonical Books,
upon her own Authority though we may for other reasons believe these Books to
be Canonical which she proposes. Your instances are against yourself. For if
the devil prove that there is a God, or a Geometritian demonstrate some
conclusion, I neither believe the devil, who I know, was a Lier from the
beginning, nor the Geometritian, whom I know to be fallible, but I assent for
the Reason which they give, by whomesoever it had been given: and therefore you
speak a contradictory, in saying (N. 38.) Though the Church being not
infallible I cannot believe Her in every thing she says, yet I can and must
believe her in every thing she proves, either by Scripturs, or universal
Tradition. This I say, implies a contradiction, to believe, one because he
proves; seeing the formal object, or Motive of Belief, is the Authority of the
speaker, and not the Reason which he gives, which may produce assents of
diverse kinds, according to the diversity of Reasons, as Demonstration,
Scripture etc: which may cause an infallible assent, not possible to be
produced by the authority of the Church, if it were fallible.

50. In your (N. 39.) First you cite the words of Charity Maintained thus: The
Churches infallible direction extending only to Fundamentalls, unless I know
them before I go to learn of her, I may be rather deluded than instructed by
her; and then you say: The Reason and connection of this consequence, I fear
neither I nor you do well understand. But you fear, where there is no cause
of fear. For, is it not a clear consequence, that if the Church be infallible
only in Fundamental points, and I have recourse to her about any matter, not
knowing it to be Fundamental, I cannot be sure, but that she may err therein?
We have hard yourselfe saying; of mere particulars nothing can be certainly
concluded, and (to use your own words) who would not laugh at him, who should
argue thus? the Church is infallible in some things; the Church says this is
true, Therefore it is true. Or thus: the Church is infallible only in
fundamental Points, The Church says, this particular is true, which I know
not whether, or not it be Fundamental, therefore the Church is infallible in
this. The conclusion should be: Therefore I cannot know that the Church is
infallible in this. You say, (N. 37.) that the Scripture must be universally
true, and not only in fundamentalls, because otherwise it could not be a
sufficient warrant to believe this thing, that these only points are
Fundamental, which shows, your opinion to be, that it would little avail us,
to know that Scripture is infallible in fundamentalls only, unless we could
know, what Points in particular are fundamental, and therefore you impugn
yourself, while you find fault with Ch: Ma: for saying, that if the Church be
infallible only in fundamentalls, we cannot believe her with certainty unless
we know, that such and such things are Fundamental. The residue of this Number
(39.) you spend in distinguishing between being infallible in fundamentalls and
being an infallible guide in fundamentalls; of which I have already spoken at
larg.

51. In your (N. 40.) you cite these words as out of Char. Maintayn. They that
know what Points are Fundamental, otherwise then by the Churches Authority,
learn not of the Church. Char. Maint. speaks more distinctly, and says: If
before they address themselves to the Church, they must know what points are
Fundamental, they learn not of her but will be as fit to teach, as to be taught
by her. How then are all Christians so often, so seriously, upon so dreadful
menaces, by Fathers, Scriptures, and our blessed Savior himself, counseled,
and commanded to seek, to hear, to obey the Church? Which he proves there at
large out of S. Austine, and S. Chryiostome. And is not all this very clear?
For, how can I be said to learn of the Church, that which I must know before
she can teach me, that is, what Points be Fundamental? Yes, say you, they may
learn of the Church, that the Scripture is the word of God, and from the
Scripture, that such Points are Fundamental, others are not so, and
consequently learn, even of the Church, even of your Church, that all is not
Fundamental, nay all is not true, which she teaches us to be.

52. Answer: First; can we indeed learn from the Scripture, that such Points
are Fundamental, others are not so? How then do you say, it is impossible to
give a Catalogue of Fundamental Points, seeing there is means to know that
such Points are Fundamental, others are not so? Secondly; You grant what
Charity Maintained said; That I cannot learn of the Church, that which I must
know before she teaches me; while you tell us, that men learn of the Church
one thing, that Scripture is the Word of God, and an other from Scripture,
namely, what Points be Fundamental, and so we are so far from learning of the
Church that fuch points are Fundamental, that we are as fit to teach her, as
she to teach us, which Points in particular be Fundamental, which we learn
from Scripture, not from her; just as you teach, that not from the Church, but
from Scripture, we learn all particular Points of Faith with certainty, though
we receive the Scripture from the Church. Thirdly; If it be a Fundamental
truth, that Scripture is the Word of God, I must know it to be such, before I
can be assured, that the Church cannot err therein, and so I cannot learn it
of the Church; and much less can I learn it of the Church, with certainty, if
it be not a Fundamental Point, in which you hold the Church may err: and
(Page: 116. N. 159.) you say, it is not a Fundamental point. Fourthly; Whereas
you say, That one may learn from the Church, that Scripture is the Word of
God, and from the Scripture, that all is not true which the Church teaches to
be so; I answer: if we believe Scripture to be the word of God, upon the sole
Authority of the Church, it is impossible, that I can prove out of Scripture,
that all is not true, which the Church teaches to be so. For, by this means
Scripture would be destructive of it self, if we believe it for an Authority,
which it self says may affirm a falsehood, and so we cannot believe it even
in this particular, that Scripture is the word of God. Yourself say here (N.
36.) An Authority subject to error can be no firm or stable Foundation of my
belief in any thing, and if it were in any thing, then this Authority being one
and the same in all proposalls, I should have the same reason to belicue all,
that I have to believe one: and therefore must either do unreasonably, in
believing any one thing, upon the sole warrant of this Authority, or
unreasonably in not believing all things equally warranted by it. Therefore you
either do unreasonably in believing the Scripture upon the sole warrant of the
Church, or unreasonably in not believing her in all her proposalls; and Luther
was, and all Protestants, are, unreasonable, in saying, that all is not true,
which the Church teaches to be so. You say (N. 40.) Neither do I see what
hinders, but a man may learn of a Church how to confute the errors of that
Church which taught him: As well as of my Master in Physic, or Mathematics, I
may learn those rules and Principles, by which I may confute my Masters
erroneous Conclusions. But if the ground which I have laid, and corfirmed out
of your own words, be considered, this your instance will prove against
yourself. For if I believe those Rules or Principles, because I believe my
Master cannot err, and not for the evidence of them in themselves, I do
unreasonably, in not believing whatsoever he proposes; Otherwise I may fear he
erred even in those Rules, if once I sinde him to err in any other thing. Now,
we receive with certainty, Scripture for the sole Authority of the Church, and
therefore we do unreasonably, if we believe her not, in all her proposalls.

53. Your (N. 41.42.) have been answered hertofore. In your (N. 43.) you speak
to Ch: Ma. in this manner: In the next place you tell us, out of S. Austine,
That that which has been always kept, is most rightly, esteemed to come from
the Apostles. Very right, and what then? Therefore the Church cannot err
indefining Controversyes. Sir I beseech you when you write again, do us the
favor, to write nothing but Syllogismes, for I find it still an extreme
trouble to find out the concealed propositions, which are to connect the parts
of your enthymems. As now for example I profess unto you, I am at my wits end,
and have done my best endeavor, to find some glue, or sodder, or cement, or
chain, or thread, or any thing to tie this antecedent and this consequent
together, and at length am forced to give it over, and cannot do it.

54. Answer; If you were in a condition to reply, I would advise you to write,
not Syllogismes, or enthymems, but with truth, Christian modesty, and humility.
If there be any obscurity in Charity Maintained, you did not find, but make it,
by breaking the thread of his discourse, and disjoyning into several Numbers of
Sections or Yours, that which is delivered in that one continued (N. 16.) which
you impugn. For having proved that according to the grounds of Protestants,
they before they address themselves to the Church, must know what Points are
Fundamental, they learn not of her, but will be as fit to teach, as to be
taught by her. And then to confute this Doctrine, of Protestants, he says; S.
Austine was of a very different mind from Protestants: If says he, (Epist:
118.) the Church through the whole world practice any of these things, to
dispute whether that ought to be done, is a most insolent madness. And in an
other place he says (Lib: 4. de Bapt: Chap: 24.) That which the whole Church
holds, and is not ordained by Counsels, but has always been kept, is most
rigthly believed to be delivered by Apostolical authority. Now Sr. I beseech
you, do us the favor to declare whether these words of S. Austine do not
prove, that we are to learn of the Church, and her Traditions; and not presume
to teach her? Which was the very thing which Cha: Ma: affirmed, and proved, not
by any Syllogism, or enthymem, but by a continued discourse, as men are wont
to do, which yet might be easily drawn into a Syllogism, or some other
Lawful Form of Logical Argument, if need were, as any true Discourse may be
so reduced.

55. All that you have (N, 44.45.46.) contains no difficulty which may not be
answered, out of the grounds, which I have Laid heretofore. Tertullian is
rightly alleged for Traditions in general; but to the Church belongs the
office, of judging in particular, what be Lawful, and Apostolical, or divine
Traditions, and not humane inve^tions. Neither can it be prejudicial to
Traditions in general, that some have been lost, as I hope you will not deny
some Books of Scripture to be Divine, though some have been lost, and some
conterfaited. In your (N. 46.) you thought it best to dissemble what Chapter Ma.
alleges out of Withaker (De Sacra Script: Page: 678. concerning an Authority of
S. Chrysostom for Traditions) I answer, that this is an inconsiderate speech,
and unworthy so great a Father.

56. In your (N. 47.) you spend many words about a sentence of S. Austine,
which, that you may overcome with more ease, you with a petty policy, divide
from the other places, which Ch: Ma: in the same (N. 16.) cites out of the same
Saint, one place strengthening an other. Whosoever reads with due
consideration, your long discourse will find, that your aim was, covertly to
vent your Socinianisme, against the Church, and openly contradict S. Austine,
while you pretend to answer the sentences, which Cha. ma. cited out of him,
which are these (Epist: 119.) the Church being placed betwixt much chafe, and
cockle, does tolerate many things; but yet she does not approve, nor
dissemble, nor do these things which are against Faith, or good life. you say;
That because S. Austine says, the Church does not approve, nor dissemble; nor
do these things which are against Faith or good life, Chapter Ma. concludes, that
it never has done so, nor ever can do so. And then you add: But though the
Argument hold in Logic a non posse and non esse, yet I never heard, that it is
would hold back again a non esse ad non posse. The Church cannot do this,
therefore it does it not, follows with good consequence: but the Church does
not this, therefore it shall never do it, this I believe will hardly follow:
In the Epistle next before to the same I anuarius, writing of the same matter,
he has these words: It remains that the thing you enquire of, must he of that
third kind of things, which are different in diverse places. Let every one
therefore do, that which he finds done in the Church to which he comes: for
none of them is against Faith or good manners. And why do you not infer from
hence, that no particular Church can bring up any custom that is against Faith
or good manners? Certainly this consequence has as good reason for it as the
former.

57. Answer; S. Austines meaning to be, that the Church neither does, nor can,
approve any thing against Faith, or good life, appears by the very (Epist: 1
18.) next before to the same Iannarius, as you speak; where he says: If the
Church through the whole world practice any of these things, to dispute whether
that ought to be so done, is a most insolent madness. Where you see the Saint
speaks not only de facto, but de jure, what ought to be done; and therefore, as
I said, no wonder if you divided the Sentences of S. Austine which you found
set down by Charity Maintained in the same (N. 16.) Besides, you should know,
that in matters belonging to doctrine of Faith, an indefinite Proposition
ordinarily is equivalent to an universal, as for example, God approves not
sin, the Church eres not in fundamental Points of Faith; Works of Christian
Piety require the assistance of Gods Grace; He that believes not, shall be
damned etc:? And indeed how could S. Austine say universally, of all times, and
places, without limitation, the Church does not this, but by supposing, that it
is certain, she will never do it, which must implie some particular Privilege
of Divine assistance, securing her from doing it. For if he spoke only of a
casual, and contingent thing, for a determinate time, he could not be sure of
what he affirmed, seeing it might be done in some place, without his knowledge:
and whosoever impartially considers these words, The Church does not this, will
confess that they signify, she never does it, and that something is attributed
to Her, which agrees not to private persons, casually not doing a thing. Which
also appears by the Antithesis he puts between the Church, and chafe and
cockle, that is imperfections, or superstitions, of which he speaks. Your
Argument taken from a particular Church, is of no force. For you confess S.
Austine speaks of things indifferent, and rhen I grant, that no particular
Church can bring up any custom against Faith or good manners, as long as she
practices only things indifferent, that is, neither commanded, nor prohibited.
But as for the thing it self, S. Austine never speaks of particular Churches,
as we have heard him speak of the universal, both in this place, of which we
treat, and in other sentences alleged by Chapter Ma. in the said (N. 16.) and
the Promises of our Savior, were made to the universal Church. Yea, you
confess that S. Austine speaking even in this place, of those things which he
dislikes, says that they were neither contained in Scripture, decreed by
Counsels, nor corroborated by the custom of the universal Church; which
words declare, that the Scripture, General Counsels, the Custom of the
universal Church, and consequently the Church of God, can never be said to
approve any such presumptions, as S. Austine calls them; which he never says
of particular Churches. And therefore when you say, that superstitions may in
time take such deep root, as to pass for universal customs of the Church,
you contradict S. Austine; and that the world may see you do it plainly, and
as I may say in actu signato, and not only exercito, but to his face, you take
his own words, Consuetudine vniversae Ecclesiae roboratum, corroborated by the
custom of the universal Church, and say, that some such superstition had not
already, even in S. Austines time (which circumstance of time is to be noted to
show how directly you contradict him) prevailed so far, as to be corroborated
by the custom of the universal Church, who can doubt, that considers, that
the practice of Communicating Infants, had even then got the credit, and
Authority, not oily of an universal custom, but also of an Apostolic
Tradition? And which is more, in other places of your Book, you ascribe this
very thing which you call superstition, not only to S. Austines time, but even
to himself, though both imputations be most false; and it is strange that
through your whole Book, you do not so much as once offer any one proof
thereof. And yet to show how causelessly, and intemperately you declaime against
the Church of S. Austines time, (that you might discredit every Church of every
Age, and so of all Ages, though Protestants commonly hold that the Church was
pure in S. Austines time) you confess he says, they were not against Faith,
and only unprofitable burdens. But of things that are apertissime contra Fidem,
sanamque doctrinam, he expressly declares that the truth is to be professed: Yea
even when there is question, not whether a vain thing be to be permitted, but
whether a good thing ought to be omitted, he says, Si aliquorum infirmitas
ita impediat, vt majora studiosoru^ lucra sperand a sint, quam calumniatorum
detrimenta metuenda, sine dubitatione faciend um est. Now if you be so
indiscretely zealous, as to say, that no inconvenient things, are in any case
to be tolerated, not for fear to offend, or for humane respects, but for
avoiding greater evil, you impugn our Savior (and not his Church only) who
(Matthew. 13.29.30.) forbids the servants to gather up the cockle, least perhaps
gathering up the cockle, you may root up the wheat also together with it.
Suffer both to grow until the harvest. And you do very wickedly, in comparing
the observing this advise of our Blessed Savior, to that which He reprehended
in the Scribes, and Pharisees, for teaching (and not only tolerating perforce)
vain things, as the washing of pots etc: Did not the Apostles tolerate, for
some time, even after they had received the holy Ghost, some Observances of the
Mosaicall Law, till they became to be deadly, as if without them the law of
Christ had not been sufficient to salvation for Gentills converted to
Christian Religion? And for that cause S. Paul says, stand, and be not
holden in again with the joake of servitude (Galat. 5. V. 1.) and therefore,
you do absurdly apply, against the Church of Christ, those words of the
Apostle; especially seeing you confess, that those foolish observances, which S.
Austine dislikes, were not against Faith, (as he says expressly, that it
cannot be found, quomodo contra Fidem sint) and (which is the maine point) that
they were never decreed by any general Council, or practiced, or approved by
the universal Church, which is only our Question. Yourself say (Page: 301. N.
101.) that S. Austine supposed, that the public service of God, wherein men
are to communicate is unpolluted, and no unlawful thing practiced in their
Communion, which was so true of their Communion that the Donatists who
separated did not deny it. And toward the end of the same number you say, The
Donatists separated from the whole world of Christians, united in one
Communion, professing the same Faith, serving God after the same manner, which
was a very great Argument, that they could not have just cause to leave them:
according to that of Ter^ullian, variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum, quod
autem apud multos vnum est, non est erratum sed traditum. Therefore, you must
either free the Church of that time, from error, or the Donatists from
Schism. I have been longer in answering this Objection, in regard it
contains hiddenly more Socinian venom, against the Church, than appears at
the first sight:

58. And now it will be easy to answer your (N. 48.) wherein you speak thus to
Charity Maintained. But (you will say) not with standing all this, S. Austin
here warrants us, that the Church can never either approve or dissemble, or
practice any thing against Faith or good life, and so long you may rest
securely upon it. What? Do you now grant that S. Austine here warrants us, that
the Church can never either approve, etc.? Which is the very thing, which even
now you objected against Cha: Ma: as if S. Austine had neither said so, not
that it could be deduced from what he said. You go forward and say; Yea, but
S. Austine tells us in the same place, that the Church may tolerate humane
presumptions and vain superstitions, and those urged more severely than the
commandments of God: and whether superstition be a sin or no, I appeal to
our Saviors words before cited and to the concent of your Schoolmen. Besides
if we consider it right, we shall find, that the Church is not truly said
only to tolerate these things, but rather, that a part, and a far greater
publicly avowed and practiced them, and urged them upon others with great
violence, and that continued still a part of the Church. Now why the whole
Church might not continue the Church, and yet do so, as well as a part of the
Church might continue a part of it, and yet do so, I desire you to inform me.

59. Answer; you seek to deceive the ignorant, by leading them into a
misunderstanding of the word tolerate, as if it did signify a voluntary
permission, of a thing, when it is in our power to hinder it; where as the
Church does only tolerate abuses, in that sense, as our Savior teaches, that
cockle is to be suffered, or, as I may say, tolerated to grow with the wheat,
least untimely weeding the cockle, spoil the good corn; that is, of two
unavoidable evils, it is not only lawful, but laudable, yea necessary, to
choose the lesser, which, taken formally with comparison to the greater is in
some sort, good, as in some proportion I declared heretofore, speaking of the
case of invincible, and inculpable Perplexity, as here the Church is
necessitated, without any fault of hers, either to suffer a less, or do a
greater evil, by untimely, and fruiteless rigor. Did not the Apostles; and
must not all Prelates permit many sins of diverse kinds, which they cannot
hinder without greater damage to the Christian Commonwealth, unless they were
Omnipotent, to rule the wills of men, and effectually draw them, only to good?
But you speak very unworthily of the universal Church of Christ, when you
would make the world believe, that the far greater part of Christians in S.
Austines time, was guilty of vain superstitions, and avowed and practiced
them, yea or even dissembled them in silence, when prudent Charity, and zeal,
could dictate the contrary. As for your parity, between the whole Church, and
particular members thereof, it has been confuted heretofore, infallibility
being promised to the Church, not to private persons; and you might make the
same Argument, to prove that the Apostles, might err in matters, which they
delivered as Points of Faith, and yet remain parts of the Church, as well as
particular men might err, and remain members of the Church, if their errors
were inculpable. If you say the Apostles were to teach others, and so could not
err, even inculpably; you know we say the same of the Church, which is Judge
of Controversyes, and was before Scripture, and from which we receive true
Tradition, Scripture, and the interpretation thereof. But if we suppose, that
those superstitious persons chanced to err, in any Point against Faith, and
remained obstinate therein, after sufficient Declaration of the Churches
Doctrine to the contrary, then they became formal Heretics, excluded from
being members of the Church, and so cannot be said, to be either the greater,
or lesser, or any, part thereof.

60. In your (N. 49.) You say: But now after all this ado, what if S. Austane^
says not this which is pretended of the Church, viz, that she neither
approves, nor dissembles, nor practices any thing against Faith or good life,
but only of good men of the Church? Certainly though some Copies read as you
would have it, yet you should not have dissembled, that others read the place
otherwise. viz. Ecclesia multa tolerat, and tamen quae sun^ contra Fidem and
bonam vitam, nec bonus approbat etc: The Church tolerater many things; and yet
what is against Faith or good life, a good man will neither approve, nor
dissemble, nor practice.

61. Answer: But who, beside yourself, has made all this ado? Which certainly
you would never have made, unless you had believed, that the Common Reading
goes as Charity Maintained cites it, and for that cause you found it necessary,
to take so much pains, spend so many words, and make so much ado, to answer
it. If an English Protestant, should cite the English Translation approved in
England, as the Text has it, were he obliged to take notice of every different
Lection, quoted in the Margin? And were not such English Protestants, obliged
to answer, according to the Reading, which, all things considered, the
Translators though fittest, and securest to be placed in the Text itself? If
the Text condemn, can the margent acquit him? I have procured to know what
diverse Editions have, and amongst the rest one of Basilea Anno 1556, and not
one of them all, has in the Text, nec bonus; only the Edition of Lovaine has
it in the margin. But you are much mistaken, if you conceive, that our Argument
looses its force, though we should read, nec bonus approbat. For (to omit your
own manner of arguing, else where, and even in this place, that good men are
part of the Church, and therefore it is impossible, that the whole Church, can
be said to approve, or dissemble, or practice those things) we ground our
proof, on such considerations, as I touched above, that the Church is said
only, to tolerate, and is contradistinguished, from those, who approve, or
practice the said abuses; as also she is opposed, to cock^e and chasse; yea,
yourfelf confess, that S. Austine affirms, that they were neither contained in
Scripture, de^reed by Counsels, nor corroborated by the Custom of the
universal Church; Which shows how innocent she was, from being obnoxious to
that imputation, of approving those presumptions: Which also appears by the
whole drift of S. Austines discourse; where still he makes a difference between
the Church, and those erring persons. Besides, when you would have him say, A
good man will neither approve, nor etc: by a good man, you must not understand,
every pious, or devout, or even holy person, who may be subject to such abuses,
as S. Austine speaks of; seeing you cite him saying; Multa hujusmodi propter
nonnullarum vel sanctarum, vel turbulentarum personarum scandala devitanda
liberius improbare non audeo. Many of these things for fear of scandalizing
many holy persons, or provoking those that are turbulent, I dare not freely
disollow: But by good men, you must of necessity understand, such as have
zeal, with knowledge, such as are of a right and settled true judgment, in
matters belonging to Faith, and Religion, and certainly such they cannot be, in
the opinyon of S. Augustine, who could think, that the Church can approve, any
error, or superstition; seeing we have heard him say (Ep: 118.) If the Church
through the whole world practice any of these things, to dispute whether that
ought to be done, is a most insolent madness. Will you have an understanding,
good man, to be guilty of most insolent madness? If a good man cannot approve
such things, much less, in truth, and in the opinion of S. Austine, the Church
could do it. So that read S. Austine as you please, the sentence, which
Charity Maintained alleged, proves the infallibility of Gods Church; neither
can you find any means to avoid this inference, except by unmasking
yourself, and saying as you do here (N. 44.) To deal ingeniously with you and
the world, I am not such an idolater of S. Austine, as to think a thing proved
sufficiently, because he says it, or that all his sentences ore oracles. And
so I may return your own words, and say: But now after all this ado, what if
S. Austine says what Charity Maintained affirms him to say, seeing you do not
much regard what S. Austine says?

62. For answer to your (N. 53.) I say that Charity Maintained had reason to
affirm, that seeing no private persons ought to presume, that they are endued
with greater infallibility, than the Church, which Protestants teach to be
infallible only in Fundamental Points, they cannot be sure, that they attain
the true sense of Scripture, unless they first know, what points in particular
be Fundamental; because in other they may erte, as they say the Church may.
Besides it has been showed, that, in the Principles of Protestants, it cannot
be convinced, that Scripture is infallible, except only in fundamental Points,
and so men cannot rely on Scripture, unless first they be sure, what points be
Fundamental. Neither is there the same reason, for understanding (not the bare
words, but) the sense of Scripture, intended by the Holy Ghost, as there is for
understanding some plain place in Aristotle, or conceyving some evident natural
truths, which are connaturall to humane reason, and are not capable of
different senses, as the words of Scripture are. Which may be proved, even by
the Examples which you bring as evident, as I have showed hertofore, that they
are not so: Neither can any Protestants learn them from Scripture alone with
such certainty, as is necessary to an Act of Faith, which according to all good
Christians must be infallible, and therefore you say only Protestants may be
certain enough of the Truth and certainty of one of the places which you alledg
as evident; but your enough, is not enough, for the absolute certainty of
Divine Faith. And therefore Charity Maintained did you no wrong at all, and much
less a palpable injury, as you speak, in saying, you cannot, with certainty,
learn of Scripture, fundamental Points of Faith; which is manifest by the
examples which you say are Truths Fundamental, because they are necessary
parts of the Gospel, and yet it is evident, that Protestents cannot agree
about their meaning, as I have demonstrated about these sentences; God is, and
is a rewarder of them that seek him: that there is no salvation but by Faith in
Christ: That by Repentance and Faith in Christ Remission of sins may be
obtained: That there shall be a Resurrection of the Body. Which are the
Instances which here you give, as Truths both Fundamental, and evident.

63. Your (N. 51.) has been answered in several occasions. And all that you
say (N. 52.) is directly nothing to the purpose, but passes from objects
considered in themselves (whereof Protestants confess some to be Fundamental,
others not) to accidental circumstances; as if Protestants did differ not in
Fundamental points, or in assigning a particular Catalogue of them, but only
in accidental circumstances, of ignorance, repentance, and the like. But of
this I have spoken hertofore: as also I have confuted your similitude about a
medicine of twenty ingredients etc: which therefore I think needless to repeete.

64. Your (N. 53.) I have answered in diverse places. Your (N. 54.) is nothing
but a long digression, to which the particular Answer would require a whole
Book, or volume, directly against the scope of this Work (which is only to
treat in general of the Church, and Scripture) and you know very well, that
Catholic Writers have fully answered all your Demands; as also you know, how
many doubts might be proposed to Protestants about Scripture, which to them is
the only rule of Faith, if I had a mind to digrees. Your (N.
55.56.57.58.59.60.61.62.63.64.65.) have been answered at large.

95. I desire the Reader to peruse the (N. 21.) of Charity Maintained, and he
will find that you make an argument, as his, which is nothing like his
discourse. He says not as you (N. 66.) cited him in these words: We may not
depart from the Church absolutely and in all things; Therefore we may not depart
fram it in any thing, which you call an Argument, a dicto simpliciter ad dictum
secundum quid. The Argument of Chapter Ma. is Dr. Potter teaches (Page: 75.) That
there neither was nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of
Christ, no more than from Christ himself: But if the Church could err in any
points of Faith, they may and must forsake her in those, and if such errors
should fall out to be concerning the Churches Lyturgie, Sacraments etc. they
must leave her external Communion, which being essential to the Church, they
must divide themselves from her, in that which isessentiall to make one a
member of the same Church, which I hope is more than to argue ad dictum
secundum quid. For what greater separation, can there be from the Church, than
in that which is essential to make one be united to her? Your saying, that a
man may leave the vice of his friend, or brother, and yet not leave his friend,
or brother, is impertinent, seeing vices are not essential to men, as external
Communion is, to make one a member of the Church.

66. You object; what Dr. Potter says of the Catholic Church (P. 75.) he
extends presently after, to every true, though never so corrupted part of it.
And why do you not conclude from hence, that no particular Church (according to
his judgment) can fall into any ertour and call this a demonstration too.

67. Answer: If the Doctor will not contradict himself; according to his
judgment, the Catholic Church cannot fall into error against any Truth
necessary to salvation, as a particular Church may, and therefore this, may,
but that, can never be forsaken: or if he will affirm, that no particular
Church can be forsaken; he must say, that no such Church can err in any point
necessary to salvation. For if she did so err, her Communion must be forsaken,
and I have showed external Communion, to be essential to the members of the
Church. Whereby is answered your (N. 67.) where you grant that we may not cease
to be of the Church, nor forsake it absolutely and totally no more than Christ
himself. Since therefore they absolutely forsake the Church, who disagree from
Her in profession of Faith, and divide themselves from her external Communion,
you must grant, that they can no more do so, than they can divide themselves
from Christ. I know not, to what purpose, or upon what occasion, you say to Ch:
Ma: In other places, you confess his doctrine to be, that even the Catholic
Church may err in Points not fundamental, which you do not pretend that he
ever imputed to Christ himself.

68. Your manner of alleging the words of Charity Maintained in your (N. 68.)
gives me still, occasion to wish you had alleged them, as you found them. You
make Charity Maintained speak thus: Dr. Potter either contradicts himself, or
else must grant the Church infallible; because he says, if we did not differ
from the Roman, we could not agree with the Catholic, which saying supposes
the Catholic Church cannot err. And then you say with your usual modesty:
This Argument to give it the right name, is an obscure and intriate nothing. I
confess that reading the words, which you impute to Charity Maintained, I found
difficulty to penetrate the force of his Argument. But the words of Charity
Main: are these. If, says Dr. Potter, we did not dissent in some opinions from
the present Roman Church, we could not agree with the Church truly Catholic.
These words cannot be true, unless he presupposes that the Church truly
Catholic, cannot err in Points not fundame^tall. For if she may err in such
points, the Roman Church which he affirms to err only in points not
fundame^tall, may agree with the Church truly Catholic, if she likewise may
err in points not fundame^tall. This is the Argument of Ch: Ma: and is it not
clear, that if the Church Catholic can err, for example, in the Doctrines
of Purgatory, Invocations of Saints, real presence, and the like, as de facto
Luther and his followers pretend she did err, and that they were reformers of
such errors, seeing the Roman Church may, and does hold the same Doctrines, the
Church universal and the Roman Church shall agree in the same (pretended)
errors, and so Potter said not truly, that if we agree with the Roman Church,
(for example about Purgatory, Prayers, to saints etc:) we cannot agree with the
Church Catholic? Will you deny the Axiom; Quae sunt eadem vni tertio sunt
eadem inter se? If then the universal, and the Roman Church agree in the
belief, of errors (as you falsely term them) do they not agree one with an
other? And so, contrary to Potters affirmation it must be said; If we did
dissent from these opinions of the present Roman Church, we could not agree
with the Church Catholic, if once it be supposed, that the Church holds
those, or the like vnfundamentall errors, as you grant she may; And further it
would follow, that seeing Protestants dissent from the Roman Church, they cannot
agree with the Catholic Church. But let us hear how you make good your
censure.

69. You say; let us suppose, either that the Catholic Church may err but
does not, but that the Roman actually does; or that the Catholic Church may
err, in some few things, but that the Roman errs in many more, And is it not
apparent in both these cases (which yet both suppose the Churches
infallibility) a man may truly say, unless I dissent in some opinions from the
Roman Church, I cannot agree with the Catholic? Either therefore you must
retract your imputation laid upon Dr. Potter, or do that which you condemn
in him, and be driven to say, that the same man may held some errors with the
Church of Rome, and at the same time with the Catholic Church not hold but
condemn them. For otherwise in neither of these cases it is possible for the
same man at the same time, to agree with the Roman and the Catholic.

70. Answer, Your conscience cannot but witness, that the Doctor when he said:
If we did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church, we could
not agree with the Church truly Cathelique, did not speak of accidental cases,
or voluntary suppositions, such as you put; but meant and spoke absolutely,
that if we did not dissent from the Present Roman Church, we could not agree
with the Church truly Catholic. For if he meant only of contingent cases,
without regard to any particular advantage, or prerogative of the Church
universal, he might have made suppositions, directly contrary to yours; that
the Roman Church may err, but does not, but the universal actually does; or
that the Roman Church does err in some few things, but the Catholic errs in
many more. For if once it be granted the Catholic Church to err; to say she
may err in many, or few, is a voluntary, ungrounded, conjecture, or
divination, and nothing to any purpose. Nay seeing, if once the Catholic Church
be supposed to err, she may multiply errors without end, and so, to day agree
with, to morrow disagree, from the Roman Church, and it must follow, that
according to your explication, the Doctors words may be in a perpetual
alteration, to day falls, to morrow true; which either was far from his
meaning, or his meaning was not only impertinent, but against his own scope
and Intention, which was to make the universal Church as it were the Model or
Rule to judge of the necessity, which Protestants had to forsake the Roman
Church, by reason of her dissenting from the Church Catholics which had been
no good reason, if the universal Church may err, and err as much and more,
than the Roman, or any other partioular Church. Which appears also by these
words of the Doctor in the same (Page: 97.) The Catholic Church is careful to
ground all her declarations upon the divine Authority of Gods written word. And
therefore whosoever wilfully opposed a judgment so well grounded, is justly
esteemed an Heretic. And (P: 132.) he says: For us: the mistaker (nor his
he Masters) will never prove, that we oppose either any declaration of the
Catholic Church, or any Fundamental or other truth of Scripture, and
therefore he does unjustly charge us with Schism or Herisie. Do not these
sayings, attribute more to the universal, than to particular Churches; and
more than a merely casualty, that either she does not actually err, or else
erres in fewer things, than the present Roman Church? And upon the whole
matter, is not that true, which Charity Maintained (N. 22.) said, That D.
Potter must either grant, that the Catholic Church cannot err in Points not
Fundamental, or confess a plain contradiction to himself in the said words:
If we did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church, we could
not agree with the Church truly Catholic? Would not Protestants take it in
ill part, if one should say: If we did not dissent in some opinions from
Protestants, we could not agree with the Church truly Catholic? And yet
according to your explication, and suppositions, it could not be ill taken,
because either the Church might be supposed not to err actually or in some few
things, but that the Protestants err in many more, it being manifest that some
of them err. By the way, when Potter says: (For us: the Mistaker will never
prove that we oppose any Declaration of the Catholic Church, or any truth of
Scripture) I would know, whom he understand by, us? Seeing it is evident, that
of Protestants, holding so many contrary Doctrines, some must of necessity,
oppose some Declaration of the Church, or truth of Scripture: and since they
have no certain Rule to know, which of them be in the wrong, and oppose some
Declaration of the Church, or Scripture, we must conclude, that no man desirous
of his salvation, can commit his soul to any of them all. Your Conclusion
(Either therefore you must retract your imputation laid upon Dr Potter, or do
that etc.) is obscure; but I am sure it is answered, seeing it goes upon your
falls explication of the Doctors words.

71. Your proceeding (N. 69.) puts me upon a necessity, of entreating the
Reader, to peruse the (N. 23.) of Charity Maintained which evidently
demonstrates, that it was wholly impertinent, for you to answer the places,
which He says, are wont to be all edged out of Scripture for the
infallibility of Gods Church; and your labor, and pains taken therein, are
lost in order to any other effect, except (contrary to your desires) to
stregthen the saying of Charity Maintained, which was; That our very difference
about the meaning of these Texts, shows the impossibility of agreement in
matters of Faith by Scripture alone. To which purpose He setts down, what
sense Catholics give them, and the different interpretation of Protestants,
from Catholics, and from one and other. While therefore, you profess to confute
the interpretation of Catholics (but indeed impugn also that of most
Protestants, and of Dr. Potter in particular) what do you else, but make good
the said Affirmation, and intention, and proof of Cha: Ma: that Scripture
alone is not sufficient to interpret it self? And you could not but see, that
Charity Maintained did not alledg any Text, to prove the Churches
infallibility, but only to show the difficulty of Scripture taken alone, by
those examples, which he alleges, and Protestants interpret in a different
sense from Catholics, and in which you differ from both. So that, even by
your disagreeing from Catholics, in the meaning of those places, you in fact,
and Deeds, prove the truth of that which your adversary affirmed: and the more
you object against Charity Maintained, the more you prejudice yourself, and
make good these his words: If words cannot persuade you, that in all
controversies you must rely upon the infallibility of the Church; at least
yeald your assent to Deeds. Which thing considered, I have no obligation at
all, to examine your Objections, against the interpretation of those Texts in
favor of the Churches infallibility, for which purpose they were not produced
by Charity Maintained, but only to prove, by an Argument drawn from
Experience, and Deeds, or matter of fact, that there must be some Living Guide,
to interpret Scripture; and you were wise enough, not to take notice of this
Argument, which was evident by experience, but dissemble the matter, and divert
the Reader, with discourses no less repugnant to Protestants, than Catholics;
and therefore your interpretations prove nothing, because they prove too much,
even in the common grounds, and tenets of Protestants. Nevertheless, by way of
supererogation, I will, examine all that you can object.

72. (N. 69.) you bring certain objections, in a different letter, as if they
were made eypressly by Ch: Ma: and yet I find them not in him, whatsoever they
be in themselves. Then, (N. 70.) you say; The Church may err and yet the gates
of Hell not privaile against her.

73. Answer; you know we deny this, and in diverse occasions have given good
reaso^sfor our denial. And what ca^ be more inco^siste^t, with being of a true
Church, than error against Faith, which Faith is the most essential
constitutiue, of the Church, or congregation of Faithful people. Yourself
teach, that every error repugnant to Divine Revelation, is damnable of itself;
and what can set the gates of Hell more open, than damnable sins? Neither can
you fly to ignorance, whereof you ca^ have no certainty, especially for the
whole universal Church, and yet we are certain by our Saviors Promise, that
the gates of Hell, cannot prevail against her; whereof we could not be
certain, if the Church may err damnably, and be excused only by ignorance,
which, as I said, is an uncertain hidden thing. Beside, The Church being
appointed, by our Savior Christ, to be the teacher of all Christians, it is
essentially necessary, that she cannot err, even by ignorance, but must be
believed to be infallible, in all matters, belonging to Faith; seeing otherwise
we cannot believe her with certainty in any point, fundamental, or not
fundamental, as you confess, in this Chapt. (N. 36.) that unless the Church be
infallible in all things we cannot rationally believe her for her own sake,
and upon her own word and Authority in any thing. For an authority subject to
error can be no firm or stable foundation of my belief in any thing. Now that
the office of the Church is to teach all Christians, you teach, (Page 119. N.
164.) in these words: Though the visible Church shall always, without fail
propose so much of Gods Revelation, as is sufficient to bring men to heaven;
for otherwise it will not be the visible Church, yet it may sometimes ad to
this Revelation things superfluous, nay gurtfull, nay in themselves damnable.
And in this Chapter (N. 78.) you say: That the true Church always shall be the
maintainer and Teacher of all necessary truths, you know we grant, and must
grant; for it is the Essence of the Church to be so, and any company of men
were no more a Church without it, then any thing can be a man, and not be
reasonable. But as a man may be still a man, though he want a hand or an eye,
which yet are profitable parts, so the Church may be still a Church, though it
be defective in some profitable truth. And as a man may be a man, that has some
biles, and botches on his body; so the Church may be the Church, though it have
many corruptions both in Doctrine and practice. Out of these sayings of yours,
this argument offers it self: The Church is essentially a Teacher of all
necessary truths (And consequently we are to believe her in such points;) But
the Church cannot be believed in necessary points, unless we believe her to be
infallible, in all that she proposes as matter of Faith: This also is our
Doctrine; Therefore we must believe her to be infallible in all points: So that
in denying the universal infallibility of the Church, you contradict both
truth, and your own Assertions.

74. And here I must put you in mind, of your saying, that there is
difference between being infallible in Fundamentalls, and an infalllible Guide
in Fundamentalls, and yet we have heard you say, that the Church is an
infallible Teacher of so much as is necessary for salvation, and what is to be
an infallible Teacher, or Proposer, but to be an infallible Guide? And then
further, seeing you say (P. 105. N. 139.) To make any Church an: infallible
Guide in Fundamentalls, would be to make it infallible in all things, which she
proposes and requires to be believed; we must necessarily infer, that de facto,
the Church which is an infallible Teacher, and Guide, is infallible in all
things which she proposes and requires to be believed.

75. This is not all that I am to deduce, from your said Assertions. You say
in this same Page and Number: No Church can possibly be fit to be a Guide, but
only a Church of some certain Denomination: To which Proposition, I subsume;
But we have heard you say that it is of the essence of the Church to be a
Teacher of all necessary Truths, and that she shall always without fail
propose so much as is sufficient to bring men to Heaven; Therefore you must
grant, that there is some infallible Church of one denomination; which is the
direct contradictory of your Title to this Chapter. Moreover; how do these
things agree with your saying here (N. 78.) If we grant that the Apostle calls
the Catholic Church the pillar and ground of Truth, and that not only because
it should, but because it always shall and will be so, yet after all this you
have done nothing, unless you, can show that by Truth here is certainly meant,
not only all necessary to salvation, but all that is profitable, absolutely and
simply All. How, I say, does this agree with your saying now cited out of your
(Page: 105. N. 139.) To make any Church an infallible guide in Fundamentalls,
would be to make it Infallible in all things, which she proposes and requires
to be believed; seeing you say also, that although it were granted that S. Paul
affirmed, that the Church shall, and will, be the Pillar of all necessary
truth, yet it does not follow, that she is so in all Truth? And now, how many
clustars, as I may say, of Contradictions, may be gathered from your own
words, related by me, in this small compass?

76. First; The Church is an infallible Teacher in Fundamentalls, and yet is
not an infallible guide; or if you grant her to be an infallible Guide; then
Secondly; you say; to make any Church an infallible Guide in Fundamentalls,
would be to make it infallible in all things, which she proposes, and requires
to be believed; and yet you say the Church is an infallible Teacher or guide in
all Fundamentalls, and deny her to be infallible in all things, which she
proposes, and requires to be believed. Thirdly; How can you make a distinction,
between the Churches being infallible in Fundamentalls, and an infallible Guide
in Fundamentalls, seeing you teach that she is both infallible in Fundamentalls,
and a Teacher of them? Fourthly. How do you say? That to be a Teacher of all
necessary truth is the Essence of the Church and that any company of men were
no more a Church without it, then any thing can be a man, and not be
reasonable. And yet in this Chapter (N. 39.) to prove, that there is a wide
difference between being infallible in Fundamentalls, and an infallible Guide
in Fundamentalls, you say; A man that were destitute of all means of
communicating his thoughts to others, might yet in himself be infallible, but
he could not be a Guide to others. A man or a Church that were invisible, so
that none could know how to repair to it for direction, could not be an
infallible Guide, and yet he might be in himself infallible? For, these
examples, if they be to any purpose, declare, that to be a Guide, or Teacher,
is accidental, and not the Essence of the Church (and for that purpose you
bring them) and yet I never imagined, that the Essence of any thing is
separable from it, as you say it is impossible a thing can be a man, and not be
reasonable. Fifthly; If it be essential to the Church to be an infallible
Teacher, or Guide in Funmentalls, which you say she cannot be, without an
universal infallibility in all Points, seeing every error destroys that
universal infallibility, which is essential to such a Teacher as the Church,
how can you say, that every error does not destroy the Church, but that she
may err, and yet the gates of hell not prevail against her? To what purpose
then, do you talk of eyes, and hands, which are not essential or necessary
parts of a man; or of biles and botches, which are accidental to his body, and
not necessaryly destructive thereof, as you must suppose; whereas infallibility
is essential to the Church of Christ, and is destroyed by error, which cannot
possibly consist with infallibility, that is, with certainty never to err.
Into how may inextricable difficulties, and contradictions do you cast
yourself, upon a resolution, not to acknowledge the infallibility of Gods
Church, the only means to clear all these perplexityes? And how
inconsequently, and perniciously, and you compare botches and biles, to error
against Faith, which you confess to be damnable sins, and without repentance
absolutely inconsistent with salvation?

77. But to return to the maine point. If the Church were not universally
infallible, Christian Faith could not be infallible, as I proved hertofore, and
so the gates of Hell, should prevail against Christianity, which by that
means, should come to want, a thing absolutely necessary to salvation,
necessitate medij, to wit, divine infallible Faith. Your Parity between a
particular man, or congregation, and the universal Church, has been answered
hertofore; and is confuted, by what we have said here; that infallibility is
essential to the universal Church; and nothing can exist without that which
is essential to it, but no such Privilege of infallibility, is necessary, or
is promised to particular men, or Churches. Finally, seeing that according to
Potter, and other Protestants, the Promise of our Savior, that the gates of
Hell shall not prevail against the Church, must be understood of the whole
Church, as well Primitive, as of consequent Ages; by what evident Text of
Scripture, can you prove, that the same words, must have different
significations, in order to the Primitive Church (which was infallible in all
Points of Faith) and the universal Church of following Ages? As in a like
occasion I said hertofore. Yourself (N. 72.) speak to Charity Maintained thus:
unless you will say, which is most ridiculous, that when our Savior said, He
will teach you etc: and he will show you etc: He meant one you in the former
clause, and an other you in the latter* If it be most ridiculous, that one word
should be referred to different Persons, I may say ad hominem, why ought it not
to seem most ridiculous, that in the same sentence, the same words, the gates
of Hell shall not privaile, must signify two different kinds, of not prevailing
(one against fundame^tall, and an other against vnfundamentall errors) in
order to one, and the same word, Church?

78. In your (N. 71.) you pretend to answer the Text which Ch: Ma: says may
be alleged for the infallibility of the Church, out S. Jo: (14. V. 16.17.) I
will ask the Father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide
with you for ever, the spirit of truth. And Jo: (16.13.) but when he, the
Spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth. You answer, first; that
one may fall into error, if this all truth be not simply all, but all of some
kind. Secondly, that one may fall into some error, even contrary to the truth
which is taught him, if it be taught him only sufficiently, and not
irresistibly, so that be may learn it if he will not, so that he must and
shall, whether be will or no. Now who can assertaine me, that the Spirits
teaching is not of this nature? Or how can you possibly reconcile it with your
Doctrine of free will in believing? Thirdly you say (N. 72.) that these
promises were made to the Apostles only.

79. Answer; These places were alleged by Dr. Potter, to prove that the Church
cannot err, against any Fundamental Truth. Which limitation I have confuted
already, and jointly your first Answer. Your Second, and Third are directly
against the Doctor, who (Page: 151.) teaches that the Promises which our Lord
has made unto his Church for his assistance, are intended to the Church
Catholic, and they are to be extended only to Points Fundamental. And then
he alleges the said text (Joan: 16.13. And Chap: 41.61.) adding, that, Though
that Promise was direstly and primarily made to the Apostles, yet it was made
to them for the behoof of the Church, and is verifyed in the Church universal.
Now if the Church cannot err fundamentally, she is taught by the holy Ghost,
not only sufficiently, but effectually. And if those Promises were made to the
Apostles, not only primarily as Potter affirms, but to them only, as you say,
how could the Doctor prove by them the Infallibility of the Church for all
Fundamentalls? Can a Text of Scripture prove that to which it nothing belongs?
As well, by this Text, interpreted as you do, he might have proved you, or
himself, or any other infallible in Fundamental Points! So that now I must
defend the Doctor against Mr. Chill., who among all English Protestants, was
picked out as a fit champion, to maintain the cause of Protestants, and defend
Potters Book. You are greatly mistaken, and offend against the known Rule
which Logicians give for Division, while you say, one may be taught only
sufficiently, and not irresistibly, as if these, were adequately the membra
dividentia, of being taught; whereas one may be taught effectually, and neither
sufficiently only, nor yet irresistibly, as has been declared more than once.
Do not yourself tell us here, that the said Promises were made to the
Apostles only? Who I hope you will say, were taught effectually, and not
sufficiently only: Otherwise we cannot be sure but that de facto, they deviated
from the direction of the Holy Ghost, and so we can have no certainty, that
their writings are infallible. Or if the doctrine of freewill, which you
Socinians also defend, can consist with the infallibility of the Apostles, how
can it be inconsistent with freewill in the Church? You say: The word in the
Original is hodegesei which signifyes to be a guide, and director only, not to
compel or necessitate. But what is this to any purpose against us, who teach
nothing against Freewill by our Doctrine of the infallible assistance of the
Holy Ghost? And yet I must say, that you use fraud, by writing so, as if the
word did signify a guide or director only, with exclusion of being
necessitated, whereas the Greek word is verified, whether one be a guide or
director, resistibly, or irresistibly. For in both cases, he is a guide: and so
Cornelius a Lapide interprets it, ducet recta via ad virtutem, quasi dux viae,
which one may do, either by leading, and leaving one to his liberty to follow,
or by forcing him to follow his guidance: and so the places which you alledg
out of Scripture, of men that had eyes to see and would not see, are to no
purpose, except to engage you, to answer them in case of the Apostles, whom, I
suppose, you will not deny, to have been secured from error, both
sufficiently, and effectually. Yea you take much (unprofitable) pains to
prove, that the said Texts were by our Savior meant only of the Apostles, by
reason of circumstances, which appropriate them to his Disciples.

80. But Dr. Potter has told you, that Though that promise directly and
primarily was made to the Apostles, yet it was made to them in behoof of the
Church, and is verified in the Church universal. For we may consider in the
Apostles, a double capacity: either as they are private, and particular
Persons; or as they respect, and represent, or bear the place of the Church,
and for her good receive some Power or privilege, and not merely with relation
to their own persons. And therefore, although some words in the places which
you allege, be referred to the Apostles only, yet it does not follow, that all
must be restrained to them: Otherwise you will destroy the whole Church of
Christ, and all Christianity. Nothing is more necessary in Christian Religion,
than Preaching to all Nations, and Baptizing, which our Savior enjoined
(Matthew. 28. Mark 16. Luke 24.) yet, by your manner of arguing, it may be proved
that they concerned the Apostles only. For it is said, (Mark 16.14.) Last he
appeared to those Eleven as they sat at the table, and he exprobrated their
incrudelity, and hardness of heart, because they did not believe them that had
seen him risen again: And (N. 15.16.) he said to them, Going into the world
preach the Gospel to all Creatures, He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved. Here you see, that although some circumstances be proper to the
Apostles, as sitting at table, and incrudelity, yet it does not follow, that
all must concern them only; as, that preaching, and baptizing, belongs to the
whole Church, I imagine you will not deny. In the same manner, (Matthew. 28. N.
16.17.18.19.20.) diverse things are specified, which belong to the Apostles
only, (as going into Galilee, adoring, doubting, and our Saviors speaking to
them) and yet his command, (Going, teach ye all Nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost) belongs to the
whole Church. The like Argument may be taken out of S. Luke (Cap. 24. N.
44.45.46.47.48.49.) where some thing is personal to the Apostles, and we must
not say, that penance to be preached in his name, and remission of sins unto
all Nations (as is said N. 47.) belonged to the Apostles only, though it be
expressly said, beginning from Jerusalem, which seems proper to the Persons
of the Apostles, and yet Preaching Penance (a thing common to the whole
Church) is set down in the same verse with (beginning from Jerusalem,) which
was personal to the Apostles. Thus, (Joan. 20.) Some particulars are spoken,
and done to the Apostles only; as (N. 21.) He said to them again: Peace be to
you; and (N. 22.) He breathed upon them; and yet (N. 23.) he gives them Power
to forgive sins; which Power did not cease with the Death of the Apostles.
These instances show, that you must answer your own Objections, and will force
you to confess, that it is no good way of arguing, that all things in the
Texts, which Chapter Ma:, and Dr. Potter, alledg out of S. John, for the
infallibility of the Church, must be appropriated to the Apostles, for the
substance, because some circumstances concern them alone; and that we must
prudently distinguish, between those two kinds of things; as certainly not to
be led into any error against Faith, is most necessary for the Church, which
God has appointed for Teacher of all Christians, and Judge of controversies.
And that the Apostles may be, and are, sometime considered as public persons,
and with relation to the Church, appears, out of S. Matthew. (Cap. 28.) where
some things belong to the Apostles only, (as going into Galilee etc.) and other
to the Church in them, or to them in the Church, as (beside Teaching and
Baptizing N. 19.) Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of
the world, which signifyes, that he would be with them in their Successors,
who were to continue for all Ages after the death of the Apostles, with whom he
could not be present in themselves, to the consummation of the world, who were
not to live to the worlds end; as you say here; Did he, or could he have said
to your Church, which then was not extant, I have many things to say unto you,
but you cannot bear them now? So we may apply the like words; Did he, or could
he say to his Apostles, I will be with you to the worlds end, when they were
not to be extant? But the truth is, when our Savior spoke to his Apostles, our
Church was then extant, in the Apostles; and the Apostles were to live to the
worlds end, in their successors, and so our Saviors promise is fulfilled, of
being always with the Apostles in their Successors.

81. You object to Charity Maintained, that In the very text by him alleged,
there are things promised which your Church cannot with any modesty pretend to.
For there it is said, the Spirit of Truth not only will guide you into all
Truth, but also will show you things to come. But this is answered by what has
been said already. Though it were granted, that some thing was promised to the
Apostles alone, it does not follow, that the whole promise was so restrained as
I have showed above. Besides, Christian Faith teaches us many things to come;
as the coming of Antichrist; the general judgment, and signs precedent to
it; The Resurrection of the dead; The eternal punishment of the wicked, and
reward of the just etc: For this cause S. Anselm (apud Cornelium a Lapide in 4.
Ephesians: N. 11.) teaches, that by Prophets in that Text are understood
interpreters of Scriptures, because per eas futura justorum gaudia, malorumque
supplicia hominibus praenunciant. If by showing things to come, you understand
the Gift of Prophecy; Do you hold it as certain that every one of the Apostles
had that Gift, as that they were infallible in matters of Faith? Are you
certain, that every Apostle, could have written the Apocalypse of S. John? So
that indeed if you will needs have a full parity, between being led into all
Truth, and knowing of things to come, you will be found, not to be certain
that the Apostles were infallible in matters of Faith. Morover, it is to be
observed, that to be infallible was essential to the office of Apostolate, or
teaching the Church, as the Gift of Prophecy is accidental, and was
communicated to others, as we read in the Acts; as also it was accidental to
speak all toungs, to have been called immediately by our Savior (as S. Matthias
was not, and yet was an Apostle) to have inflicted Censure of Excommunication,
with some visible punishment, and the like extraordinary ornaments, or
Priviledgs: And therefore no wonder, if infallibility in matters of Faith be
communicated to the Church, though the knowledge of things to come, were not:
though indeed de facto, God has, and ever will, communicate the Gift of
Prophecy, to his Church, as is certain by the undoubted Authority of the best
writers of all Ages. You see now, that neither Charity Maintained, nor other
Catholic writers, cite the said text by halfes, as you affirm (N. 72.)
seeing the latter clause (of showing things to come) makes nothing against them,
nor alters the sense of the text, as I have showed. But now good Sr. I beseech
you reflect, whom you impugn, while you would persuade men, that Charity
Maintained, and generally our writers of controversies, when they entreat of
this Argument, cite this text perpetually by hafes: seeing Dr. Potter (Page:
151.) cites this very same place and (leaves out those words will show you
things to come) for which you accuse us of citing that sentence by halfes:
especially if you call to mind, that he brings that text to prove, that the
Church cannot fail in Fundamental points, which as I said were no proof, if
it were meant of the Apostles only, as you would prove it was, by the words,
omitted by the Doctor no less than by C: Ma: (he will show you things to come.)
To all which I add; that seeing you say, that text concerned the Apostles only,
it must signify an infallibility both in Fundamental, and vnfundamentall
Points, and therefore seeing the Doctor confesses it to be verifyed in the
universal Church, she must be infallible in all Points. But it is no wonder
that you contradict your Client Potter since you so perpetually contradict
yourself.

82. In your (N. 71.) you seek to divert me to the controversyes about
public service in an unknown tongue, and communion under both kinds. But you
know, Catholic Writers have answered, all that can be objected against us, in
these two questoins; and whatsoever you can alledg, if it were of any moment,
as it cannot be, it could only show, that Scripture, even in that which to you
seems so plain, is indeed obscure, seeing so many learned, holy, and laborious
men, see no such evidence, as you pretend; yea they are certain, that your
pretended clear interpretation, is an Heresy, Yet because you allege against
us without any cause a greek word edoke, I must not omit to tell you with
truth, that Protestants in this Point of the Sacrament, shamefully falsify the
Greek Text, (1. Cor. 11. V. 27.) saying in their Translation; Whosoever shall
eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord: whereas the Greek word signifyes vel, or: and
so you should say; Whosoever shall eat this bread, Or drink the cup etc.
which fraud you use, to prove the necessity of Communion in both kinds.

83. Your (N. 73.74.) contain no difficulty, which has not been answered.
Only I may note, that you put some Objection in a different letter, which in
Cha. Ma. I find not. The Promise, that the Holy Ghost was to remain, with the
Apostles for ever, was not restrained to, yet is verifyed in them, because they
remain for ever in their successors, as you will say, they remain in their
Writings. Your friged interpretation of ever, that is, for the time of their
lives, is confuted by what has been cited, out of S. Matthew (Chap. 28.20.) I
am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world; And surely, the
end of the world, signifyes a larger extent, than the end of their lives, Nay,
you are not content with limiting all Promises made to them, to the term of
their life, but it seems you make it not absolute, but only conditional, even
for that short time. For you say, The spirit would abide with them, if they
kept their station, unto the very end of their lives. Behold an (if) a
condition, If they kept their station, which, if it be in their free will not
to do (as your, if, supposes it to be) then according to your Divinity, they
might fail, and all Promise, made to them prove ineffectuall: neither can we
be certain, that de facto, they have not failed, and fallen into error, in
their preaching, and writing Scripture. Nay, do you not teach, and labor to
prove, that the Apostles (even after the receiving of the Holy Spirit which you
confess was promised to abide with them for ever, that is, say you, for their
whole life, and that they should never want the spirits assistance, unto the
very end of their lives,) did err in a command clearly revealed to them,
about preaching the Gospel to Gentills? How then was that Promise performed,
if it were absolute? And if only conditional; you grant no more to them than
to any other; neither can we be certain, that they have not erred in other
things, as you say, they erred in that. Your alleging some Texts, to prove,
that the word (ever) may be taken for the whole time of a man's life, is not to
any purpose, unless you had also proved, that it is so understood, in the place
of which we speak. (Joan 14.16.) And seeing even by this example, the same words
are capable of different senses, and that Protestants cannot possibly give any
Rule, which Text is to be interpreted by what others, we must conclude, that
Scripture alone, cannot be a perfect Rule of Faith.

84. But now, in your (N. 75.) we find threats, that you will work wonders,
and that we may not be so much overseene, as to pass them without due
reflection, you say to Charity Maintained; This will seem strange news to you
at first hearing, and not far from a prodigy. But it is not strange, that
here you do that, which you do in diverse other occasions, that is, impeach
the infallibility of the Apostles, and consequently, deprive their preaching,
and writing, and all Christian Religion, of all certainty; though I grant it to
be very strange and a prodigy, that, notwithstanding this, you will pretend to
be a Christian, and that your Book is approved by, and published, among,
Christians. For, besides what I noted even now, about your conditional promise
made to the Apostles, If they kept their station; here you declare clearly,
and at large; that the Promise of which S. John speaks, was appropriated to
the Apostles (as you speak) and that, it is not absolute, but as you expressly
say, most clearly and expressly conditional; being both in the words before
restrained to those only, that love God and keep his commandments: And in the
words after flatly denied to all whom the scriptures style by the name of the
world, that is, as the very Antithesis gives us plainly to understand, to all
wicked and wordly men. Behold the place entire as it is set down in your own
Bible. If you love me keep my commandments, and I will ask my Father, and he
shall give you an other Paracle^e, that he may abide with your for ever, even
the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive. And then, speaking of the
Pope, you say; We can have no certainty that the Spirit of Truth is promised to
him but upon supposall, that he performs the condition, where unto the promise
of the Spirit of Truth is expressly limited, viz. That he love God and keep his
commandments; and of this, not knowing the Popes heart, we can have no
certainty at all. Does not this interpretation, and discourse, clearly declare,
that we can have no certainty of the Apostles infallibility, because not
knowing their hearts we can have no certainty at all, that when they preached,
and wrote, they did love God, and keep his commandments? Besides; in the
doctrine of Protestants, we cannot be certain by certainty of Faith, that the
Apostles kept the commandments, except first we believe Scripture and yet we
cannot believe Scripture itself, except first we believe the Apostles to be
infallible, and to have kept that condition of keeping the commandments;
Therefore we must believe Scripture, before we believe, the Apostles to keep
the commandments, and be infallible; and we must believe the Apostles to be
infallible and to keep the commandments, before we believe Scripture; which
is an inextricable Circle; and a contradiction implying finally, that we
believe Scripture for it self (which you confess no wise man will affirm) and
that the belief of Scripture, should be, cause of the belief of Scripture, and
the same thing be necessary to the first production of it self. Wherefore you
must either renounce this Interpretation, of a conditional Promise, made, yea
(as you expressly affirm) Appropriated to the Apostles, or else bid Scripture,
and all Christianity, fare well. And so you cannot have certainty of this
particular, that God requires the said condition of love, and Obedience.

85. But to answer directly; I say you miscite the words of S. John, while you
distinguish only by a comma (If you love me keep my commandments) from the
following words (And I will ask my Father, and he shall give you an other
Paraclete) whereas both in our, and in the Protestants English Bible, they are
distinct Sections, or Verses, thus; (N. 15) If you love me keep my
commandments; And then (N. 16.) And I will a^k the Father, and he will give
you an other Paraelete. Where it appears that the condition is not; If you
love me, I will ask the Father, and he will give you etc. as you set it down,
and there upon affirm that, the Promise is restrained to those only that love
God and keep his commandments; but the condition, or rather Assirmation, or
Consequence, is this: If you love me, keep my commandments: And so the sense
is very plain, and perfect, and the condition is terminated in the same (N.
15.) And that these words, If you love me, keep my commandments, render a
perfect sense, is manifest of it self, and by the like Texts of Scripture, as
in the same Evangelist (Cap. 15. N. 14.) You are my friends, if you do the
things that I command you; and (V. 10.) If you keep my precepts, you shall
abide in my Love. As contrarily, the holy Ghost is promised absolutely, in this
(C: 14. V. 26.) The Paraclete the Holy Ghost, shall teach you all things. And
in the argument, prefixed before this Chapter, in the Protestants English
Bible, printed (Ann: 1622.) it is said; (Christ N. 15. requires love and
Obedience. 16. Promises the Holy Ghost the comforter) without expressing any
dependence of the said Promise (V. 15.) upon love and obedience. V. 16. As
also Joan: 16.13. (which Text is alleged both by Charity Maintained and Dr.
Potter) it is said without any condition when he, the Spirit of Truth comes,
he shall teach you all Truth. And (Matthew: 16.18.) these words The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against her which both Charity Maintained, and the Doctor
cite, are absolute. And (Matthew: 28. V. 20.) behold (which particle holy
Scripture is wont to use, when it speaks of some great, or strange thing) I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world. Which wordsare both
absolutely, without any condition, and cannot be restrained to the lives of the
Apostles: and therefore, dato, non concesso, that the Promise had been made to
the Apostles, upon condition of Loving God; it does not follow, that the same
condition, must be required in every one of their successors; but for the
merit of the Apostles, it may be communicated to others, in whom the Apostles
live, and so what is granted to them, is a reward bestowed upon the Apostles;
as heroical acts, of particular men, are rewarded both in themselves, and in
their posterity for their sake, though their successors be destitute of that
worth, and desert, without which condition, their first progenitors would never
have attained that Dignity, or Prerogative, which afterward is derived to their
posterity absolutely, and without any such condition, as was required in the
beginning. Morover; though it were granted, that keeping the commandments,
were a necessary condition for receyving Infallibility; yet you will never be
able to prove, by any evident Text of Scripture, that it is necessary, in
respect of every particular person; it being sufficient, that it be veryfied of
the Church Catholic, of which even Dr. Potter (Page: 10.) says; that it is
not improbable only, but merely impossible, the Catholic Church should be
without Charity. Our blessed Savior, before he encharged the care of his
Church, upon S. Peter, exacted of him a triple profession of love; and will you
therefore have none to be lawful Pastors, except such as love God above all
things, and are in state of Grace, and free from deadly sin? Have you a mind
to fetch from Hell, the condemned, and seditious heresy of Wicliffe; That, If a
Bishop or Priest be in deadly sin, he does not indeed, either give Orders,
consecrate, or Baptize? As authority and Jurisdiction, are not of that nature
of things which require Charity, and the State of Grace, so neither is
infallibility, no more than working of Miracles, Gift of tongues, and the like,
which by Divines are called Gratiae gratis datae, and therefore you cannot
imagine, with any reason that the Holy Ghost cannot be given for some Effects,
to any who is not in state of Grace: and I hope you will, at least pretend, to
be more certain, that Scripture is of infallible Authority, than that every
Canonical Writer did love God, and keep the commandments, when they wrote
Scripture, yea of some Books of Scripture some call in Question, who were the
writers of them. I will not here stay, to put you in mind, that it is common
among Protestants, to deny the posfibility of keeping the commandments; must
they therefore deny the infallibility of the Apostles? They are so far from
doing so, that they hold the Church to be infallible in Fundamentalls,
notwithstanding the impossibility, in their opinion, of keeping the
commandments!

85. Now I hope it appears, that your two Syllogismes go upon a false ground,
that the promise made to the Apostles is conditional, and so prove nothing. As
also, that you breath too much gall, and vanity, in saying, that Charity
Maintained and generally all our Writers of Controversy, by whom this Text is
urged, with a bold Sacrilege, and horrible impiety, somewhat like Procrustes
his cruelty, perpetually cut of the head and foot, the beginning and end of it.
For I suppose, you will not hold Dr. Potter for a Writer of Controversy against
Protestants, and yet he cites this Text, and leaves out more than Charity
Maintained omitts, cutting of not only the head and foot, but also the breast
and middle thereof, thereby showing his judgment, that the other words, which
you cite out of the precedent (15. and the following 17. verse) make nothing to
that purpose, for which that Text is produced, that is, the infallibility of
the Apostles, and Church; and that you by citing those different verses without
distinction, not only join head and foot and the whole Body confusedly
together, which is no less monstrous than to cut them of, but do indeed
utterly destroy, and deprive it of all infalllibility by questioning the
infallibility of the Apostles, from whom this very Text must receive, all the
certainty it can have. Do not I maintain the most perfect kind of Charity, in
defending my adversary the Doctor, in this occasion, of being forsaken, and
even impugned, by whom alone he hoped to be relieved? And indeed Dr. Potter
only, and not Charity Maintained stands in need of defense, seeing he alleged
those texts which the Doctor cites only to show, in deeds, that Scripture
alone, is not sufficient to interpret itself, whereas D. Potter brought them
absolutely to prove the infallibility of the Church, in all Fundamental
Points, which is the common tenet of Protestants, and yet you overthrow it by
making our Saviors Promise not absolute, but depe^ding upon a volu^tary,
uncertain condition.

86. In your (N. 76.) you endeavor, diverse ways, to elude the Argument, which
is wont to be alleged for the infallibility of the Church, taken out of S.
Paul (1. Tim: 3.15.) where the Church is said to be the Pillar and Ground of
Truth.

87. First, you say; Charity Maintained, is somewhat too bold with S. Paul. For
it is neither impossible nor improbable, these words, the Pillar and ground of
truth, may have reference not to the Church, but to Timothy. But this
exposition, is not only against Calvin, and other Protestants, who expressly
refer those words to the Church, but also it cannot well agree with the Greek:
And even the Protestant English Translation reads it as we do, for as much as
belongs to our present purpose. Howesoever, it appears, by this very example,
how hard, and impossible it is, to determine Controversyes by Scripture alone,
which every one, will find means to interpret, for his best advantage, though
it be not done without violence to the Text. Neither is it heterogeneous, as
you argue, that S. Paul having called the Church a House, should call it
presently a Pillar. For you should consider, that he calls it a House, and
Pillar, in different respects: A House of God; the Pillar (not of God, but) of
Truth. You will not deny that the Primitive Apostolical Church, was
universally infallible, and so, was both the House of God, and Pillar of Truth;
and therefore it is nothing absonous, or heterogeneous, that the metaphor of a
House, and of a Pillar, be applied to the same thing. Cornelius a Lapide,
here, says: Alludit Apostolus ad Bethel, de qua viso ibi Domino, dixit Jacob
Genes: 28. vere non est hic aliud nisi Domus Dei, and porta Caeli. If therefore
in that place of Genesis to which the Apostle alludes, the same is said, to be
a House, and a Gate, in diverse respects, a House of God, a Gate of Heaven; why
may he not say of the Church, that it is a House of God, a Pillar of Truth?
What greater repugnance is there between a House, and a Pillar, than between a
House and a Gate? If men may take the liberty to interpret holy Scripture by
such light subtilityes, what certainty can ever be gathered from any Text? What
difficulty is there to conceive, that the Church should be the House, wherein
Gods resides, and reigns, by infallibly assisting it, and yet be a Pillar of
Truth, to teach others? Especially seeing God assists the Church, to the end she
may teach others? Passive taught; Active, teaches; as yourself avouch here (N.
78.) that it is the essence of the Church, to be always the maintayner and
teacher of all necessary truth. But yourself profess not to rely upon this
interpretation, and therefore,

88. Secondly; you put us in mind, that the Church which S. Paul here speaks
of, was that in which Timothy conversed, and that was a particular Church, and
not the Roman, and such we will not have to be universally infallible.

89. Answer; Although S. Paul spoke to Timothy, who conversed in the particular
Church of Ephesus, whereof he was Bishop; yet he puts him in mind, of his duty,
by a Motive and Reason, more universal, and certain (as Proofs are wont to
be) than could be taken, from that particular Church alone, that is, he gave a
Reason, which did concern it, as a member of the universal Church, which
being the Pillar, and Ground of Truth, could not but exact of Him, and every
Bishop, a zeal to imitate, with care and vprightness, their mother the Church,
in conserving, for their part, that Truth, which the Church teaches, and from
which she cannot swerve. To which very purpose, Cornelius a Lapide upon these
words (Quae est columna and firmamentum veritatis) says: Addit hoc Apostolus,
vt innuat Timotheo, magno cum studio ad haereses and errores devitandos and
refellendos, purae veritati intelligendae, and praedicandae in Ecclesia, sibi
incumbendum esse, adeoque se non judaizantium, aliorumque Novantium, sed
Ecclesiae fidem sequi and praedicare debere, vtpote quae sit basis veritatis.
And so I may retort your Argument, and say: S. paul speaks of a Church which
is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; but Protestants teach, that no particular
Church is such a Pillar, (even for things necessary to salvation, as they say
the universal Church is) Therefore S. Paul speaks not of a particular, but the
universal Church. And by this, I confute what you answer,

90. Thirdly, (N. 77.) That many Attributes in Scripture, are not notes of
performance, but of duty, and teach us not what the thing or Person is of
necessity, but what it should be. Ye are the salt of the Earth, said our
Savior to his Disciples: Not that this quality was inseparable from their
Persons, but because it was their office to be so. For if they must have been
so of necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put them in
sear of that which follows, if the salt has lost his savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? So the Church may be by duty, the Pillar and Ground, that is, the
Teacher of Truth, of all truth, not only necessary but profitable to salvation;
and yet she may neglect and violate this duty, and be in fact the teacher of
some Error.

91. Answer; Even now it has been said, that Potter, and other Protestants
commonly teach, that the universal Church, cannot err in Fundamantall
Articles, as a particular Church may; and yet every particular Church, by duty,
is a teacher of all Necessary Points; Therefore the universal Church must be
more; a teacher by duty, and performance. Your Proof, that to be the salt of
the earth, (which was spoken to the Apostles) signifyes only, that it was
infallibly certain, they should be so, tends plainly to Atheism, if the
denial of Scripture, and all Christianity, must bring to Atheism, as
certainly it must. For take away infallibility from the Apostles, what
certainty can you have, that in fact they have not neglected and violated their
duty, as you say the Church may. You still fall into the same mistake, that God
cannot effectually move us, to the performance of a thing, without
necessitating our will. Neither does it follow, that in vain our Savior put
them in fear of that which follows, if the salt has lost his savor etc: For
when God does promise a thing, he does not exclude means, or our endeavor, to
the application of which he can also move us effectually, without prejudice to
the freedom of our will. The Apostles in the Council which they held at
Jerusalem, were certain not to determine any Error; and yet they used great
diligence, examination, and dispute; (Act: 15.7.) I suppose you will not deny
that S. John was infallibly assisted in writting his Gospel, and yet S. Hierom
(in praef: in Evangel. Matthew:) says, that he could not be entreated to set on
that holy Work, but upon condition, that, indicto jejunio, in commune omnes
Deum deprecarentur, the Christians should have a fett fast, and all should
join in prayer to God. Do you not believe, that God did so assist the Writers
of Canonical Scripture, that they were infallible in their writings, and yet
that they might exercise an act of obedience, and freely (though infallibly)
follow the Direction of the Holy Ghost? It is clear, that you must either deny
freedom of will to the Writers, or infallibility to their writings, or grant,
that free will, and infallibility, are not incompatible. I might add to all
this, that men may loose themselves, not only by error in Faith, but also by an
ill life, whereby Preachers destroy by deeds, what they pretended to build in
words: Which Answer would evacuate the force of your Argument; but I have said
enough of this matter.

92. Fourthly; (N. 78.) you answer; that, we must prove, that by Truth in the
said Text, is meant all Truth, both Fundamental, and profitable; and that you
grant it to be the Essence of the Church, to be a maintayner and teacher of all
necessary truth. But this evasion, has been confuted already, out of your own
assertion, that we cannot believe the Church in Fundamental Articles, unless
she be infallible in all; and this vrges most clearly in your opinyon, who
profess it impossible, to know, what Points in particular be Fundamental. And
I beseech you consider, that S. Paul speaks of the primitive Church of those
times, which you will not deny to have been infallible; and therefore if he
speak of the universal Church (as in this Fourth Answer you suppose he does)
you must grant, that Church to be infallible in all Fundamental, and
vnfundamentall Points: And so this Text cannot be restrained to Fundamental
Truths.

93. Your (N. 79.80.) Pretends to answer the Argument, taken out of S. Paul
(Ephesians: 4.) He gave some Apostles, and some prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints, unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the Body of
Christ: Until we meet all into the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son
of God, into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ: That now we be not children wavering, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine in the wickedness of men, in craftines, to the circumvention of
Error. Out of which words it appears, that God has left to his Church,
Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of Saints, which comprises the whole
space of this world, until all be brought to the unity of Faith, (which is
necessary not only for the times of the Apostles, but also afterward) and in
such manner, as that we be not wavering, but have some firm infallible Ground,
on which to rely, in matters of Faith.

94. To this place you answer; that (He gave) is not to be understood (He
promised that he would give unto the worlds end) but that, not the
infallibility, of any Church, but Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists etc:
which Christ gave upon his Ascension, were designed by him, for the compassing
all these excellent purposes, by their preaching while they lived, and by their
writings for ever.

95. But this interpretation, and restriction of yours, is not only repugnant
to the Text itself, but against all Protestants, and I may say, against all
Christians, of whom not any deny, that our Savior promised to give Pastors,
Doctors, Preachers, Ministers etc: to the worlds end; if not for contributing
infallibility to the Church, at least for other good, and necessary purposes,
and effects, as teaching, preaching, governing, enacting Laws, inflicting
Censures, punishing, administering Sacraments etc: Calvin (Instit: Lib. 4. Cap
1. N. 5.) proves this at large, out of this same Text of S. Paul. Your Socinian
Brother Volkelius (de vera Relig: Lib: 6. Cap: 5.) cites even this place, and
says: Remansit Doctorum, Pastorumque officium, nec non alia quaedam. The same
is the doctrine of other learned Protestants, as I have set down heretofore in
particular, out of Brereley (Tract: 2. Cap: 2. Sect: 1.) In so much as Doctor
Saravia (in defens: Tract: de diversis Ministrorum gradibus Page: 10.) Professes
to wonder with amazement, that any Question should be made thereof. And who are
you, to oppose yourself against all other, and limit (He gave) tothe time of
the Apostles? Is any thing more common amongst Protestants, than that Preaching
of the word, and Administration of Sacraments (and consequently Preachers, and
Ministers of Sacraments) are essential to the true Church?

96. You object, that by, (he gave) to understand, he promised that he would
give to the worlds end is an interpretation, of which you say to Charity
Maintained, What reason have you for this conceypt? Can you show that the word,
edoke has this signification in other places, and that it must have it in this
place? Or will not this interpretation drive you presently to this blasphemous
absurdity, that God has not performed his promise? Unless you will say, which
for shame I think you will not, that you have now, and in all ages since Christ
have had Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists: For as for Pastors and
Doctors alone, they will not serve the turn. For if God promised to give all
these, then you must say he has given all, or else that he has broken his
promise. Neither may you pretend, that the Pastors and the Doctors were the
same with the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and therefore having
Pastors and Doctors you have all. For it is apparent, that by these names, are
denoted several Orders of men, clearly distinguished and diversifyed by the
Original Text; but much more plainly by your own Translations; for so you
read it, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Pastors and Doctors: And yet more plainly in the parallel place 1.
Cor: 12. to which we are referred by your vulgar Translation, God has set some
in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
therefore this subterfuge is stopped against you.

97. Answer; this which you are pleased to style a conceypt, is the conceypt of
all Protestants, as I have showed. That the word dedit has the signification
of a Promise, in other places will appear, to any that can but read the
Concordance of the Bible, as Joan: (Epist: 1. Cap: 5. N. 11.) Dedit nobis vitam
aeternam, which word dedit, says, Cornelius a Lapide upon this place,
significat firmitatem and certtudinem Promissionis divinae: Quod scilicet ita
certi simus de vita aeterna, si in Fide and obedientia Christi perseveremus,
perinde ac si actu ea nobis data esset, eamque reipsa possideremus: And S.
Austine in (Psalmo. 60. N. 6.) upon these words; Dedisti haereditatem
timentibus nomen tuum; says: Perseveremus in timore nominis Dei; aeternus
Pater non nos fallit; where it is clear the word, dedisti signifyes a Promise
of things; as Bellarmine also explicates the same dedisti, by, firmiter
promisisti. S. John (C. 10. V. 28.) says, Ego vitam aeternam do eis, where
Cornelius a Lapide says: Do ijs, quia nimirum promitto eis vitam aeternam.
And so we see that (Dedit Apostolos etc:) expresses the certainty of Gods
Promise, more tha^ if he had expressly said, I will give. But to what purpose,
should I say more? seeing there can be no more plain signification, of dedit,
than appointed, or constituted for his Church, Apostles etc: as appears by the
scope of the Apostle in this Chapter from the beginning, which was to exhort
Christians to Charity, and keeping the unity of Spirit in the bond of peace, as
one body and one Spirit; which exhortation as it is was directed to the Church
of all ages, so the means to perform it, must extend to the worlds end; and
this means S. Paul declares to be the Authority and offices of Apostles,
Pastors etc: to the consummation of Saints, and meeting in unity of Faith. And
the same intention of the Apostle appears, in that which you call the pararell
place (1. Cor: 12.) where that (as he said V. 24.) there might be no Schism
in the Body, he shows that every one ought to be content, with his own
degree, seeing God will have it so, that in his Church, there should be
different Degrees, functions, and Offices; and then (Verse: 27.) specifies
Apostles, Prophets etc: All which declares, that he spoke of the Church for
ever, to the worlds end, as Unity is ever necessary, against Division, and
Schism.

98. And now, who is found guilty of blasphemous absurdity? We have heard your
Volkelius say: Remansit Pastorum, Doctorumque officium, nec non alia quaedam;
and the same is the Doctrine of other Protestants. How then has God performed
his Promise, if for the performance thereof; it be necessary, that in all ages
there be Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, and that de facto there be not
such, as you say, there are not? whereas Catholics are certain the Church
shall never be destitute of such degrees; and therefore Protestants alone must
be driven to that blasphemous absurdity, that God has not performed his
promise. And I may turn against yourself your own argument, thus: Our Savior
Promised to his Church Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, as he Promised,
Pastors, and Doctors; But he promised Pastors and Doctors for ever, (as
Protestants teach:) Therefore he promised Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists
for ever. And then further: seeing our Savior promised infallibility, to those
of whom S. Paul speaks, as you suppose, we must firmly believe, that they who
shall remain to the worlds end, are endued with infallibility.

99. But here it is to be considered, that some things are essential to the
Being of Apostolate, or Office of an Apostle; other are accidental, without
which it may consist. Of the essence of Apostolate, is, power of Order and
Jurisdiction, in vtroque foro, as Divines speak; and infallibility for matters
belonging to Faith, without which, men could not be obliged, to believe them,
with an Act of divine Faith, which requires absolute certainty. Of the other
kind I have spoken, and given examples, above; and I hope you will not deny
power of excommunicating because it is not, as I may say, seconded, with a
visible delivering to Satan the person so censured; nor that Christians receive
not the holy Ghost, because they see no fiery toungs, nor speak all languages.
If then, power of Jurisdiction, and Governing, be esse^tially required to the
office of an Apostle (which power I hope you will not deny to remain in the
Church) and that accordingly, even the chief Protestant Saravia, (as is related
by Adamus Contzen (in Cap: 16. Matthew: V. 29. Quest: 1. N. 6.) teaches that the
essence of Apostolate requires, Officium praedicandi, administrandi Sacramenta,
and potestatem gubernandi, it cannot be denied, but that, Apostolate, or
Apostolical office, for the substance, is, and shall remain in the Church, to
the worlds end. And therefore you spoke unadvisedly (to say no more) in saying
to Charity Maintained; For shame you will not say, that you have now, and in
all Ages since Christ have had Apostles etc: and yet, as a Divine ought to have
done, you go not about to inform us, in what the Essence of Apostleship
consists. For if you will have it consist in this, That they were chosen by our
Savior immediately, you must exclude S. Matthias from the Apostolical College;
and if you respect only the name of Apostle, you must increase the number of
twelve, by adding Epaphroditus (Philip: 2.25.) and Andronicus, and Junia (Rom:
16.7.) who are said to be noble among the Apostles.

100. But doubtless we cannot pretend to have Prophets. Yes, we can; and with
good reason. Your Uolkelius (Lib: 6. Cap: 5.) says: Prophetarum nomine in
istis locis (1. Cor: 12.28. and Ephesians: 4.11.) non veteres illos Prophetas, sed
Apostolorum Socios intelligimus, qui eodem tempore in Ecclesia floruerunt,
quorum officium erat futura praedicere, vel ocultiora quaedam Religionis
Christianae misteria apud populum proponere. So he: though it be strange, that
he should say immediately after, that this office has ceased; seeing none
pretend more, than our new Reformers to declare so deep and hidden mysteryes
of Religion, that they were unknown to the whole Church before Luther. And
that by Prophets in this place, are understood interpreters of Scripture is the
Judgment of S. Hierom, S. Ambrose (or whosoever is the Author of that work) S.
Anselm, Haymo, S. Thomas, and others; in so much, as Suarez (disp: 8. de Fide
sect: 3. N. 4.5.) not only affirms, that the interpretation of Scripture is
called Prophecy, but that perhaps in the New Testament, this acception is more
frequent, than that other of revealing hidden things. And (beside what we have
cited out of Volkelius) this is also the interpretation of the Protestant
Marloratus (1. Cor: 12. V. 28. and in this place Ephesians: 4.11.) I need not
repeete what I said, that there are never wanting in Gods Church holy men,
endued with the Gift of Prophecy. Neither are they only Evangelists, who wrote
the Gospells, but as Uolkelius says loco citato; Evangelistae illi fuisse
videntur, qui Apostolis salutiferum sempiternae faelicitatis nuntium terrarum
Orbi afferentibus adhaerebant, eosque ea in rejuvabant. Seeing then we have
proved, that we have Apostles, there cannot want Evangelists in this sense: and
we see that Act. (21. V. 8.) Philip is called an Evangelist; and S. Paul: (2.
Timoth: 4. V. 5.) says to Timothy, Opus fac Evangelistae; so that not only
they were Evangelists, who wrote, but those also who declared, and published
the Gospel, to others: And Cornelius a Lapide cites the judgment of S. Ambros,
Theoph: and S. Anselme, that Evangelists are deacons, as Philip was; Nam
quamvis non sint Sacerdotes evangelizare tamen possunt ex cathedra, quemadmodum
and Stephanus, and Pilippus: And S. Anselm, observes that even in these times
Deacons sing the Gospel; and in their Ordination, they receive power to preach
the Gospel. But besides all this, I desire to know (when for explication of
dedit, he gave, you say it signifyes, that Christ gave at his Ascension,
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists) what you mean by at his Ascension?
Seeing at our Saviors Ascension, there were no Evangelists, who wrote any
Gospel of S. Matthew, that was the first, being written about eight years
after our Savior Ascension, and the Gospel of S. John was written about the
year our Lord ninetynine of; how then can you explicate (He gave) to signify
only what he actually left to his Church, and not with a reference to the
future, what he was to leave? The like Demand may be made, concerning the
Apostles; considering, that S. Matthias was presently chosen, and S. Paul some
two years after our Saviors Ascension, was extraordinarily called, to be an
Apostle? Lastly; the same Promise, may respect different objects, according to
their diversity of nature; and may be understood, perpetual in respect of
those, which are always necessary to the Church, and in order to others,
limited to a time, according to their exigence; and so God should not fail of
his promise, but perform it, according to the first intention thereof; as
Protestants are wont to say, that God promised the Gift of miracles for a time
only, and yet it cannot be denied, but that at the same time he gave a command
to preach, and baptize, and a promise, that he who believes, and is baptized
shall be saved; (Mark 16.) both which, were to last till the worlds end. You
say; can you show that the word edoke, has this signification in other places,
and that it must have it in this place? Whereby you signify, that though it had
this signification, in an hundred other places, yet that were not enough, to
show that it must have it in this; which is very true. For, to be affirmed in
Scripture but once, is as much as to be affirmed, a mill yon of times; and
seeing you can give no certain Rule, whether I must understand, that one place
by those many, or contrarily the greater number, by that one, it appears, even
by this, how hard a thing it is, to know the true sense of Scripture, without a
Living Guide; which was the end for which Charity Maintained alleged that Text
(Ephesians. 4.) and the other places of which we have spoken; all which, though
indeed they be clear enough for the infallibility of the Church, yet we see,
what evasions you seek to the contrary, yea and pretend, that your
interpretation is evidently true, and the interpretation both of Protestants,
and Catholics manifestly false.

101. The rest of (N. 80.) about the sufficiency of Scripture alone, has been
confuted in diverse occasions. Your instance, (that if Galen, Euclid. etc. had
writ complete bodies of the sciences they professed, perspicuously, and by
Divine inspiration, we would then hau: granted, that their works had been
sufficient to keep us from error, and from dissension in these matters) is but
a begging of the Question, that Scripture is the only Rule of Faith; and
because, exceptio firmat contrariam regulam, and that Scripture is not the
total Rule of Faith, we must retort your argument against yourself, and say,
that by Scripture, which alone is not a complete comprehension of all necessary
points, we cannot be kept from error and dissension in matters of Faith.
Besides those Authors might preserve us from error and dissension, in virtue
of Demonstrations, evident to natural Reason, wherein all men agree. But the
Objects of Faith are obscure, and Scripture not able to interpret itself,
though it were supposed to contain all matters of Faith (as it does not) and
therefore a Living interpreter, is necessary, besides the written word.

102 Your (N. 81.) contains nothing but Passion, with the quintessence of
Socinianisme, seeing you expressly profess, that you are willing to leave all men
to their liberty; and therefore needs no answer, except what has been given
hertofore. You do but cavil, at this saying of Charity Maintained (all which
words, or Texts, wont to be alleged for the infallibility of the Church, seem
clearly enough to prove that the Church is universally infallible,) as if it
had indeed seemed to him, that those Texts did only seem to prove; whereas it
is evident, and so He expressly declared himself, he said so, because he did
not bring them for proofs, but only to show, how hard, and impossible, it is
to determine matters by Scripture alone, seeing that which seems to one, to be
the plain meaning of Gods Word, seems not so to an other: though indeed the
said Texts do effectually prove the necessity of an infallible living Guide.
But as you began, upon a direct mistake, to examine the Texts which Charity
Maintained alleged, so it was very congruous, you should conclude with the
like error.

103. I might omit the following Numbers, as containing no real difficulty,
which has not been cleared hertofore. Yet I will note some passages, to
prevent all suspicion of guiltiness, tergiversation, or artificial
dissimulation of what I could not answer. Only I entreat the Reader to read
the words of Charity Maintained in himself, if he chance to find any
difficulty. In your (N. 84.) you falsify the words of Charity Maintained which
are (N. 23.) Scripture is to be understood literally (where you leave of, but
Charity Maintained adds.) as it sounds; and you cannot deny, but according to
the sound of the letter, or words, our interpretation of our Saviors Promises
without any limitation, is more agreeable to the sound of the words, which
express or sound no restraint, than that of Potter, which restraines them to
fundamental points. And therefore your telling us, that to literal is not
opposed Restrained, bu^ Figurative, is impertinent; seeing Charity Maintained
expressly spoke only of what did most suit with the sound of the letter; which
whosoever restraines without evident necessity, does as ill, or worse, than if
he reduced it to a figurative sense: yea a reality and a Figure may stand
together, as limited, and unlimited cannot.

104. I say to your (N. 87.) that you and Dr Potter do not agree about those
Texts concerning the infallibility of the Church, (as I have showed) and in
diverse other matters; which is a sign, you have no certain, clear Rule, or
means, for interpreting Scripture; as also appears by the innumerable other
disagreements of Protestants, which experience noe man will deny to be a good
proof. But, say you, If there be no possible means to agree about the sense
of these Texts, whilst we are left to ourselves, then it is impossible, that
Protestants should agree in your fense of them, that the Chureh is universally
infallible. Answer; You cannot, as long as you are left to yourselves, be
assured with an infallible Act of Faith, what the meaning of those Texts is, by
help only of those Means, which Protestants prescribe, for that purpose; seeing
they cannot exceed probability, as Protestants confess: whereas we rely upon
other infallible means, as Tradition, and Authority of the Church, which we
prove to be infallible, independently of Scripture (which you also profess to
receive from the Church) and then we may find in Scripture, Texts, which being
interpreted by the true Church, may bear witness to particulars concerning
her; (for there can be no better reason to believe one, than a belief that he
is infallible) as you will not deny, but that if once we believe Scripture to
be the word of God, we may prove by it felf, truths concerning itself, as that
it is divinely inspired, that it is profitable to teach, to correct etc. as
also you must grant, that the Apostolical primitive Church, which you hold to
be infallible, could bear witness to it self,

105. You urge Charity Maintained with this Demand: Why then said you of the
self same Texts, but in the Pags next before, these words seem clearly
enough to prove that the Church is universally infallible. A sirange
forge^fulness, that the same man, almost in the same breath should say of the
same words. They seem clearly enough to prove such a conclusion true, and yet
that three indifferent men, should have no possible means, while they follow
their own reason to agree inche truth of this conclusion.

106. Answer; is it not a strange thing, that you should not distinguish betwixt
videri, and videre: seeming, and seeing? seeming, does not signify certainty or
evidence, as seeing, does; and he who sees the sun shine at midday, will not
say, that it seems clear enough, that the Sun shines, but his very Act of
seeing, makes it certain and evident to him, that he sees. And if this be not
true, that Charity Maintained did not absolutely affirm, but only said, it
seems clear enough etc. Why do you (N. 81.) say to Him of the same words;
Seeing you modestly conclude from hence, not that your Church is, but only
seems to be universally infallible, meaning to yourself; Therefore I willingly
grant your Conclusion. But of the intention and meaning of Charity Maintained
in alleging the said Texts of Scripture, for the infallibility of the Church,
we have said enough already.

107. I wonder, you are so unjust, as to say, we prove the Church to be
infallible, because she is infallible, seeing our Doctrine is this; That we
first prove the Church to be infallible, and then infer, that whatsoever she
teaches being true, and that among other points she teaches, one is her own
infallibility, we may believe it even for her Authority, as I showed you must
say the same of Scripture, if once you believe it to be the word of God.

CHAP: XIII. THAT THE CREED CONTAINS NOT ALL POINTS NECESSARILY TO BE
BELIEVED: IN ANSWER TO HIS FOVRTH CHAPTER.
1. REpetition of the same thing, will not I hope, seem either needless, or
fruiteless when it is necessary for some good purpose, and effect. I do
therefore entreat the Reader now, as I have done heretofore, not to look on
the words, and arguments of Cha: Ma: as they are cited, and abbreviated, and
obscured, and in a word, disadvantaged (to say no worse) by Mr. Chillingworth,
but as they are delivered, by the Author himself.

2. Your first ten Numbers, or Sections, I omit, as containing nothing, which
has not been answered already. Only I wish, you had declared, what your
understand in your (N. 2.) by these words: Every one of the fundamental Rules
of good life and action is to be believed to come from God, and therefore
virtually includes an article of Faith. For if those Rules be revealed, they do
not only virtually include an article of Faith, but they are properly, and
formally, objects, and articles of Divine Faith. If they be not revealed by
God, they are no more articles, or objects of Faith, than a thing not visible,
can be the object of our eyes, or a thing without sound, or not audible, the
object of our ears, etc. You say, they come from God, and therefore include
virtually an Article of Faith. If you mean, they come from God, as he is the
efficient Cause of all things; that is common to all Creatures, and therefore
not sufficient to include an article of Faith: If they come from God, as
revealing, and testifying them to be true; they are formal Objects of Faith,
as I said, and do not only virtually include an Article of Faith. But it may
be feared, that in these words there lurkes some hidden poison; as if the rules
of good life and action, as they are known, by the light of natural Reason
(and not as they are revealed, and so become formal Objects of Faith) were
sufficient, to direct our life, for bringing us to salvation, and that no
supernatural knowledge were necessary. No less obscure are your other words,
that, Fundamental Doctrines of Faith, are such, as though they have influence
upon our lives, as every essential Doctrine of Christianity has, yet we are
commanded to believe them, and not to do them. For by these words, how do you
distinguish Credenda, from agenda, if both have influence upon our lives, and
in neither of them, the act of our understanding or assent, is that which we
do, but only it is the act which directs us to do other things, and so has
influence upon our lives? But these things I omit, and come to

3. Your (N. 11.) wherein you say to C: Ma: Your distinction between points
necessary to be believed, and necessary not to be disbelieved, is more subtle
than sound, a distinction without a difference. There being no point necessary
to be believed, which is not necessary not to be disbelieved. Answer: this last
is very true. For in that case, there concurrs both the Affirmative precept, of
exercicing an explicit act of Faith, and the Negative, of not disbelieving any
truth revealed by God. But that which you ad, nor no point to any man, at any
time, in any circumstances necessary not to be disbelieved, but it is to the
same man, at the same time in the same circumstances necessary to be believed
is manifestly untrue. For, when it is proposed to ones understanding, that God
has revealed some Truth, he may truly judge, that there is no affirmative
Precept, which obliges him, at that time to exercise any act of Faith, about
that partioular object; and therefore may resolve to abstain or forbear, to
produce any such assent of Faith, but think of something else (and may have
reason to do so, v.g. if some act of an other virtue be more pressing at that
time) and yet he should sin damnably, if he did positively dissent: And so,
at the same time it may be necessary not to disbelieue some Truth, and yet not
be necessary, actually to believe it. It is disputed in the schools, whether
the will can stay the understanding, from yealding assent, to a conclusion
deduced evidently, from evident Premises. But no man can doubt, whether the
will may draw our understanding, from a positive actual assent, to the Objects
of Faith, which are so obscure, that they require a pious affection in the
will, which therefore may dissent, and are so difficult, that for every act of
faith, we need the particular supernatural assistance of the Holy Ghost: and
then what wonder is it, that we may abstain from doing that, which is not in
our sole power to perform? and to which we are forced, neither metaphysically,
as I have showed, nor morally, because we suppose, there is no affirmative
precept, to exercise such an act of Faith, in those circumstances. It seems
you have a mind against all Divines to make no difference between the
affirmative, and Negative Precept of Faith, whereof Cha. Ma. speaks (Part 1.
Chap: 3. N. 2.) and what he says, may be applied to our present purpose, and
who will say, That every one, is always obliged to be exercising a positive
act of Faith, upon all those objects, which he can never disbelieue? May not a
man, reading or hearing some part of Scripture, only conceive it per primam
apprehensionem, without affirming or denying, as when one learnes without
Book, or only considers the phrase, or writes as at a copy, and the like.

4. You continue your discourse, and say to Charity Maintained, Yet that which
(I believe) you would have said, I acknowledge true, that many points which are
not necessary to be believed absolutely, are yet necessary to be believed upon
a supposition, that they are known to be revealed by God: that is, become then
necessary to be believed, when they are known to be Divine Revelations. But
Chapter Ma: has no reason to accept as a favor this explication of yours, which
contains false doctrine, as if all truths became necessary to be believed, by
an explicit, actual belief, when they are known to be divine Revelations;
which is not universally, or necessarily true, it being in rigor sufficient,
that they be not disbelieved. This was the scope of Charity Maintained; to
show, that to alledg the Creed, as containing all Fundamental Points, was
nothing to the purPose, for relief of Protestants, who differ in such manner,
as what one believes to be revealed by God, an other rejects, and disbelieves;
and therefore though it were granted that Protestants did agree in all the
articles of the Creed, (which thing I have demonstrated not to be true)
nevertheless, they could not all pretend to be saved because some of them must
be convinced to reject Divine Revelations. But now for the Point in hand; you
know all Christians believe, Every Text of Scripture to be revealed by God; are
they therefore obliged, to be still exercising an explicit act of Faith,
concerning them? Rather of the two, and speaking in general, and perse
loquendo, or ex natura rei, if they be not Fundamental articles, it may so
fall out, that you are never obliged to affoard them any such positive Assent;
and so you remain obliged never to dis believe them, and yet never obliged,
explicitly to believe them; which is a true proposition, against your
universal contradictory Doctrine, that No point to any man; at any time, can
be necessary not to be disbelieved, but it is to the same man, at the same
time, necessary to be believed.

5. The rest of this Number, as also your (N. 12.13.13. for this Number is put
twice 14.15.16. (there is no N. 17.) have been answered already. C. Mist. with
all Divines, supposes, that no man can be obliged to believe any point not
sufficiently propounded, as Dr. Potter also teaches, and is evident to the very
light of natural Reason. I beseech the Reader, for confuting your (N. 15.) to
peruse Chapter Ma. (N. 3.) And how do you tell us in this (N. 15.) that the
certainty you have of the Cteed is from constant Tradition; seeing you profess,
that we have no universal Tradition, except that which delivers to us the
Scripture? If you belief the Creed, that it was from the Apostles, and
contains the principles of Faith (as you say) for universal Tradition, and
not for Scripture, (as you expressly confess) you free men from obligation, of
reading, or knowing the Scripture, for all necessary points of belief, which by
this means, they may find independently of Scripture, and with as much
certainty, as you believe Scripture, which you profess to receive from
universal Tradition, for which you also believe the Creed. And so you
overthrow the most universal Doctrine of Protestants, that Scripture is
necessary, and that (not from Tradition) but from it alone, we must learn all
things belonging to salvation. And how did we hear you say (Page 178. N. 80.)
that the Apostles did by their preaching, while they lived, and by their
writings or Scripture after their death, do keep men in unity, seeing now you
acknowledge, a Tradition distinct from, and independent of Scripture, whereby we
may be kept in unity? Now, if we receive the Creed from the Church, we must
believe her to be infallible, and that to oppose any proposal of hers, is
damnable, though one believe the whole Creed; and therefore it is impertinent to
alledg the Creed, to assert unity of Faith among Protestants, while they differ
in other points of Faith, not contained in the Creed; and so Chapter Ma. said
truly, that it was both falls, and impertinent, to say, The Creed contains all
necessary points of Faith. But here I must entreat you to consider, how you
can say (as you do in this place) The certainty I have of the Creed, That it
was from the Apostles, and contains the principles of Faith, I ground it not
upon Scripture? Seeing (Page 149. N. 37.) you say expressly: Protestants ground
their belief, that such and such things only are fundamentalls, only upon
Scripture, and go about to prove their assertion true, only by Scripture. Can
Protestants ground their belief, that such and such things only are
fundamentalls, only upon Scripture, and yet not ground upon Scripture the
certainty, which they have that the Creed contains all fundamentalls, and so
know all fundamentalls independently of Scripture?

6. You say (N. 18.) That the last objection of Chapter Ma. stands upon a false and
dangerous supposition: That new heresies may arise. But with what conscience,
do you object this to Chapter Ma. who only repeats what Dr. Porter affirmed (Page
126.) about the arising of new Heresies, which is so manifest, that you
expressly take notice of it, and reject the Doctrine of the Doctor in that
behalf. I beseech the Reader to see Chapter Ma. where he demonstrates, that seeing
the Doctor confesses, that new Heresies may arise, and that therefore the Creed
was necessarily explained by other Creeds of Nyce etc. so it will need
particular explanation, against other emergent Heresies, and so is not, nor
ever will be, of itself alone, a sufficient Catalogue of all Points of Faith:
which deduction of Chapter Ma. is so clear, that you give only this answer: This
explication of (Dr. Potter) and restriction of this doctrine (that the Creed
contains a Catalogue of all necessary Points of Faith) whereof you make your
advantage was to my understanding unnecessary. And so you leave your client,
and acknowledge the Argument of Chapter Ma. to be convincing. As for the thing
itself; All that you object against D. Potter (whom I now defend against you)
can receive strength only from equivocation, the thing itself being clear;
That we admit no new Revelation, but only new application, or declaration, of
that which was revealed: which application is certainly necessary, before one
can be obliged to believe, unless you will have men believe they know not what.
Now whether you will call this application, or declaration, only a necessary
condition sine qua not, or part of the formal object of Faith, makes nothing
to our present purpose, but is learnedly handled by Catholic Divines.
Certain we are, that it is not the total, or principal, but only a partial,
and secondary object, if it belong at all to the formal object of our Belief:
neither can any man imagine, that the application to us, of Divine Revelations,
is the essential form, and last complement of an Article of Faith, if by last
complement and essential form, you mean that which is the chiefest, and most
principal, which is only the Divine Testimony or Revelation, and therefore you
show, either ignorance, or some worse thing, in supposing, that we make Divine
Revelation, to be the matter, and sufficient declaration to be the form of an
Article of Faith. No doubt but the Apostles declared, what our Savior had
revealed to them, but when, inimicus homo superseminavit zizania, and some
began to doubt, or broach errors against those revealed Truths, a declaration
was necessary, to be made, by that Means, which God has left to decide
Controversyes in Religion, as we said hertofore, about Canonical Books of
Holy Scripture.

7. I need say no more to your (N. 19.) than only, that seeing you and Dr.
Potter pretend, that the Creed contains only Credenda, and not Agenda, you
further men no more toward salvation, than one who would bring you half way to
your journeyes end, and then for your greater comfort tell you, that neither
he, or any other could conduct you, further; as in this place you do; first,
referring him to Scripture for full satisfaction; and then telling him, that to
give a particular Catalogue of Fundamental, is impossible. Of the difference
between the Catalogue, which Chapter Ma. gives, and that which you assign, I have
spoken hertofore.

8. Your (N. 20.) is but a passage to your following (N. 21.22.23.24.) Wherein
you heap words upon words, and Syllogism upon Syllogism, rather to amuse or
amaze, than instruct the Reader. But all will vanish into nothing, by these
considerations. 1. That the belief of some points may be necessary for the
Church, though not for every particular person, which therefore if the Creed
does not contain, it cannot be said to comprehend all necessary points. 2.
When question is, whether the Creed contain all Fundamental Articles, it must
be understood in such manner as by it alone, we may be sure to know all
Fundamental points, and consequently, 3. that by it alone we may know the true
sense of all such points. 4. That yet (as Chapter Ma shows N. 4.5.) it is
impossible to know by the Creed alone, the meaning of all necessary Articles,
as is manifest by the disagreement of Protestants from Catholics, and amongst
themselves. 5. That therefore the Creed, without Tradition, and interpretation
of the Church, is so far from enabling us, to believe all Fundamental
points, that men left to themselves, would be sure to take occasion thereby, of
many Errors, and Heresies, as experience has taught the world. But if you
take the Creed, with the Living voice, Tradition, and declaration of the
Church, it cannot avail you who reject the Authority of the Church. 6.
Whatsoever the ancient Fathers, or modern Writers, deliver concerning the
sufficiency of the Creed, for matters of Faith, they always take it, with the
Tradition of the Church; and so not the Creed alone, but the Creed with
Tradition, is that of which they speak, and therefore are so far from
speaking home to your purpose, that in every one of their sentences, they
oppose your Assertion, concerning the Creed; which is so clearly true, that
you proceed to the abandoning, and even opposing Dr. Potter, for mentioning the
explanation of the Creed, by Counsels, or the Church. Neither can you with any
shadow of reason, prove, that it was, necessary, the Creed should contain all
necessary points of Faith, unless first you beg an other Question, that the
Church is not infallible. For if she be infallible (as most certainly she is)
we shall be sure, that in all occasions, she will supply, what is not expressed
in the Creed, as we said of Scripture: neither is it our part to examine, why
the Apostles set not down all particulars, as it is clear, they have
delivered some points of less moment, than are diverse mysteryes of our
Saviors life, omitted by them; and will you ask them, why did you so? 7. We
may infer out of what has been said; That although the Articles contained in
the Creed, may seem to be comprised in a small compass, if we respect the
words; yet if we consider the sense, and such maine Articles as have connection
with them, they cannot be declared in few words; but must be declared by
Catechists, Pastors, Doctors, and, in a word, by the Church: in proof whereof
I referr the Reader to Ch^ma. (N. 4.5.6.) where he shall see how many necessary
points are employed in one of the Articles of the Creed.

9. These Observations being premised; together with what Charity Maintained,
notes N. 9. (That all points of Faith may be said to be contained in the Creed
in some sense; as, for example implicitly, generally, or in some such involved
manner. For when we believe the Catholic Church, we do implicitly believe
whatsoever she proposes as belonging to Faith. Or else by way of reduction
etc.) All your objections are answered. For when Charity Maintoyned (N. 8.)
affirms; That the Creed contains such general heads as were most fitting and
requisite for preaching the Faith of Christ to Jews, and Gentiles etc.; He
means not of the bare words, but of the sense, as he expressly declares (N. 4.
and 5.) which meaning we are to receive from the Church, declaring in all
occasions, what occurs necessary to salvation: and so, as I said, there was no
necessity, that all necessary points should be contained in the Creed,
otherwise than in some general manner, v.g. in the Article of the Church, as
herefore we said out of S. Austine, concerning Scripture; and as Repentance,
the Sacrament of Baptism, and Penance (which are to be reckoned inter Agenda)
are implied in the Article of Remission of sins; as Potter (Page 237.)
says, that the Eucharist is evidently included in the Communion of Saints,
and yet (Page 235.) he teaches, that the Sacraments are rather to be reckoned
among the Agenda of the Church, than the credenda: And, vitam aeternam, may
signify, not only, that we believe, but also that we Hope for that Life: yea Chapter
ma. (N. 5.) shows, that in the Article of our Saviors being Redeemer, are
contained many other chief points belonging to practice; or Agenda: As
likewise the Article of the Church contains, Government, Discipline, Power to
excommunicate, etc. so that there is no necessity to understand the Creed only
of speculatiue Objects: and then what reason can you give, why some Agenda are
implied, and not other? And so your discourse (N. 22.) which goes upon this
ground, that the Creed contains merely Credenda, vanishes into nothing, and
Chapter Ma. neither needs, nor can accept your explication of his words, when you
make him say (which was to comprehend all such general heads of Faith, which
being points of simple belief were most fit and requisite etc.) whereas He (N.
8.) which here you cite, has no such limitation to points of simple belief, as
may be seen not only in Chapter ma.; but also in the beginning of your (N. 21.)
where you profess to serdowne his words: Only in the end of his said (N. 8.)
he cites the Dostrine of Potter, that the Creed contaynes only credenda.
Neither will you be able to find, in all Chapter ma. that he ever reaches, that the
Creed contains only such Articles, as are merely speculatiue, but only
mentions it as taught by Potter: nor have you any reason to exact of him (Chapter
Ma.) that he should have added the particles, all, or some, seeing his
Propositions, though seeming indefinite, yet were sufficiently declared by the
matter and circumstances. And therefore I must put you in mind, that you take
too much upon you, when you give this Title to this Chapter. That the Creed
contains a^ necessary Points of mere belief. Now whosoever ponders those
Premises with attention, will see that your multitude and Aggregation of
Syllogismes, have only this, that they are more difficult to be understood,
than answered.

10. Your (N. 24.) is answered by only reading the whole (N. 9.) of Ch: Ma: you
cite it (N. 10.) For it will be found, that you are grounded only upon your
falsification of his words when you object, No proposition is implied in any
other, which is not deducible from it. But where does Ch: Ma: say the contrary?
He expressly speaks (N. 9.) of points which by evident and necessary
consequence, may be deduced from Articles both clearly, and particularly
contained in the Creed: and I hope you will not say, that every proposition
implied in an other, is deducible from it by evident and necessary consequence.

11. You urge: The Article of the Catholic Church, wherein you will have all
implied, implies nothing to any purpose of yours, unless out of mere favor we
will grant the sense of it to be, that the Church is infallible, and that yours
is the Church. Answer; Independently of the Creed, we prove the infallibility
of the Church; and we must not gather it at the first from the meaning of this
Article, but we learn the sense of this Article from the Church pre-believed
to be infallible. And seeing you profess to receive the Creed (and even
Scripture) from the Tradition of the Church, you cannot be certain, that the
contents thereof are true, unless first you believe the Church to be infallible.
Besides, by the Church, all Christians understand a Congregation of Faithful
people, capable of salvation; and yourself teach, that every error in Faith,
unrepented, brings damnation. How then can it be said, that the whole
universal Church can err in Faith? But you do very inopportunely talk,
whether Ours be the Church: seeing we speak only of the Church in general,
abstracting, for the present, from that other Question; though it be evident,
that if there were any true Church, which delivered to Christians the
Scripture, and Creed, when Luther appeared, it must be the Roman, and such as
agreed with her.

12. You go forward and say to Charity Maintained. The Apostles intention was
by your own confession particularly to deliver in the Creed such Articles of
belief as were fittest for those times. Now to deliver particularly, and to
deliver only implicitly, to be delivered particularly in the Creed and only to
be redu^^ble to it, I suppose are repugnances hardly reconciliable. Answer; I
know not well, what, nor whom, you can pretend to impugn. For, Ch: Ma: never
said that there are no Truths, particularly expresed in the Creed; yea (N. 5.
and 8.) he named diverse in particular expreseb in it, but he only affirmed,
that all are not so expressed in partilular, but some implicitly, others
reductiue, as he declares in those two Numbers. Now, that some things should be
delivered particularly, and other some only implicitly, and other only
reductively, can be no irreconciliable repugnance, seeing in all good Logic
repugnance must be in order to the same thing; as it is no repugnance, that one
writer, should proceed honestly, and speak to the purpose, and an other do
quite the contrary.

13. For answer to your (N. 25.26.27.28.29.) I have attentively considered, and
compared with my observations, all the Authorityes, or sentences, which you
alledg out of Catholic Writers, and find them to contain no difficulty, not
precluded and answered, by those observations. And who knows not, that all
Catholics believe, that all declarations of General Counsels, concerning
the Creed (and all other points of Faith) are necessarily to be believed? to
say nothing of the other observations. But I must be still entreating the
Reader to read in Charity Maintained his (N. 10.11.12.13.14.15.) which you
confusedly huddle up together.

14. In your (N. 30.) you grant as much, as can be desired by us, to prove,
that to alledg the Creeds containing all necessary, and Fundamental points, is
impertinent, to make either both Catholics, and Protestants, or all
Protestants, capable of salvation, though they believe the Creed, yet differ in
other revealed Truths. Thus you write in order to the (N. 10.) of Char: Ma:
Neither is there any discord between this Assertion of your doctors, and their
holding themselves obliged to believe all the Points which the Council of
Trent defines. For Protestants and Papists may both hold, that all points of
belief necessary to be known, and believed are summed up in the Creed: And yet
both the one and the other think themselves bound to believe whatsoever other
points they either know or believe to be revealed by God. For the Articles
which are necessary to be known, that they are revealed by God, may be very
few; and yet those which are necessary to be believed, when they are revealed
and known to be so, may be very many. These words show, that Prorestants do
but delude poor souls, when they tell them, that all Protestants have the
substance of Faith, because they believe the Creed; when in the mean time,
they disagree in other points revealed by God; and yourself say else where,
that, as things now stand, there is the like necessity, to believe all points
contained in Scripture, as well not Fundamental, as Fundamental. And therefore
it can little avail Protestants, to agree in the Creed, which yet they do not,
if we regard the sense, and not the mere sound of the words while, they
disagree, in so many other points belonging to Faith. The Truth is; This grant,
and declaration of yours, might well have freed me, from answering all the rest
which you have in this Chapter; and whatsoever else you prove, or disprove,
cannot be against the substance, of that, which Charity Maintained affirmed in
his fourth Chapter, which treates this Question about the Creed.

15. You pretend in your (N. 31.) to answer the (N. 11.) of Charity Maintained,
but you omit his discourse about the Decalogue of the commandments, to show a
simili, or paritate, that it is not necessary, that the Creed co^taine all
necessary points, seeing what is not expressed in it, may be known by other
means. It will not be amiss, to set down the words of Ch: Ma: which are: Who
is ignorant that Summaries, Epitomees, and the like brief Abstracts, are not
intended to specify all particulars of that science, or subject to which they
belong? For as the Creed is said to contain all points of Faith, so the
decalogue comprehends all Articles, as I may term them, which concern
Charity, and good life: and yet this cannot be so understood, as if we were
disobliged from performance of any duty, or the eschewing of any vice, unless
it be expressed in the ten Commandments. For (to omit the precepts of
receaving Sacraments, which belong to practice, or manners, and yet are not
contained in the Decalogue) there are many sins, even against the Law of
nature, and light of reason, which are not contained in the ten Commandments,
except only by similitude, analogy, reduction, or some such way. For example;
we find not expressed in the Decalogue, either diverse sins, as Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Pride, Sloth, Covetousnes in desiring either things superfluous,
or with too much greedines; or diverse of our chief obligations, as obedience
to princes, and all superiors, not only Ecclesiastical, but also Civil. And
the many Treatises of Civilians, Canonists, and Casuists are witnesses, that
diverse sins against the light of Reason, and Law of nature, are not
distinctly expressed in the ten commandments; although, when by other
diligences they are found to be unlawful, they may be reduced to some of the
commandments, and yet not so evidently, and particularly, but that diverse do
it in diverse manners. Thus far Charity Maintained. Of all this you thought sit
to take no notice, but only cavil at his words: (That Summaries, Epitomees,
and the like brief Abstractes, are not intended to specify all particulars of
that Science, or subject, to which they belong) against which you reply: Yes,
if they be intended for perfect Summaries, they must not omit any necessary
Doctrine of that Science whereof they are Summaries. Answer; the Creed is a
perfect summarie, of those Truths, which the Apostles intended to deliver
therein. Now for you to suppose, that their purpose, was to express all
necessary points of Faith, is to beg the Question, in stead of answering the
Argument of Charity Maintained, about the Decalogue of commandments; though
still I grant, that the Creed contains all necessary points of Faith, in that
sense, which I explicated in my Observations.

16. All that you have (N. 32.33.34.35.36.37.38.) makes nothing against the
Doctrine of Charity Maintained, but confirms it, because you confess, that
defacto, there are many points necessary to be believed, which belong not
immediately to practice: from whence it follows evidently, that Protestants do
but cosen poor people, in alleging the Creed to that purpose, for which they
make use or it, as I said. And besides, seeing the particular points, which
Charity Maintaymed specifies (N. 14.) are either necessary to be believed by
every particular person, or at least by the whole Church, which cannot err in
such points, we must say, the Creed does not contain all necessary Articles of
belief. Morover you cannot be sure, but that of those many important points,
which Charity Maintained shows not to be contained in the Creed, some are
fundamental; seeing you confess, that you cannot tell, which points in
particular be fundamental; and so, for ought you know, they are fundamental.
I observe, that you make mention of other particular points, touched by Charity
Mairtayned, but omit that of Original sin, because you do not believe it;
and yet Charity Maintained (N. 9.) told you, that S. Austine (de Pec. Orig.
Cont. Pelag. L. 2 Chap. 22.) teaches, that it belongs to the foundation of
Faith. Lastly and Chiefly; since the Creed alone without the Tradition and
declaration of the Church, cannot give us the true sense of itself, and that
in every one of its Articles, are implied diverse points not expressed, which
were afterward declared by General Councels, and which all are obliged to
believe; it follows, that even for those articles, which you call credenda,
the Creed is not sufficient of itself: To say nothing that for the maine point
Dr. Potter, and you, yield us as much as we desire, to wit, that the Creed
contains not all Fundamental points of Faith, as Faith directs our manners,
and practice; and so whatsoever you say of points merely speculatiue, imports
little, for the maine Substance, of clearing Protestants from falsehood, and
impertinency, in alleging the Creed, as they are wont to do; as if all were
done, which is required to Christians for matter of their understanding, and
belief, if they give assent to the Creed, though they differ in other articles
of Faith which direct our lives.

17. In your (N, 35. and 36.) you make a flourish about the Doctrine of Merit,
which is not a subject to be handled in this place, whereof every one may find
excellent Treatises, in many Catholic Writers. Only I say, 1. That it is
certain Protestants have always supposed, that they differ from us in this
point, and therefore that our disagreement is in that Fundamental point, that
God is a Remunerator, as S. Paul says, and to this end only, Charity
Maintained mentioned this point of Merit, not to impugn the doctrine of
Protestants, in this place, and therefore your discourse of this matter, is
plainly impertinent. 2. That you do not, or at least, will not understand
rightly, our Catholic Doctrine about Merit, which requires, both habitual
grace, and particular motion of the Holy Ghost, who therefore rewards his own
Gifts; and you wrong us in saying, we make God a rewarder only, and not a
giver. For this cause we acknowledge our works, of themselves, or of their
own nature, to have no proportion, with Grace, and Glory; and that by duty, we
are obliged to serve God, as far as he commands us; which hinders not, but
that, by his Grace, this very serving him, may be meritorious; a duty, and yet
a deserving; as the servant merits a reward for the works, which he is obliged
to do; which is much more evident, seeing de facto, God has not commanded, all
that he might have exacted of us in rigor. 3. As else where, so here you take
upon you, to declare the doctrine of Protestants, about merit, without any
commission from them, who are so divived among themselves, that it is
impossible for you, to speak as you think in behalf of them all, without
putting yourselfe, to maintain contradictions. For, how can they pretend to
any Merit, or Obedience, who teach, that it is impossible to keep the
Commandments; that all our works are deadly sins; that we have no free
will, and the like? 4. That you bring the very same arguments against the merit
of Just men, which your friend Uolkelius (de Uer. Relig. Lib. 5. Chap: 20.)
vrges against the Merit of our Blessed Savior; and therefore English
Protestants, who, against you Socinians, believe that Christ merited, and
satisfied for mankind, must answer your objections against us.

18. To your (N. 39.) I say: whosoever considers the words of Potter, (Page:
255.) will confess, that he both approves, and applauds, the words of Dr.
Usher cited by you: to which words I need only answer, that it is impossible,
that they, who agree in points receyvea in the whole Christian world, and yet
disagree in any point of Faith, be it never so small, can with such a belief
join holy obedience; seeing it is a deadly sin, and disobedience; and, as you
confess, damnable in it self, to hold any error, against whatsoever revealed
Truth: And so your discourse, in the beginning of your next (N. 40.) falls to
the ground; it being impossible, that agreement in Fundamental points only,
can join men in one communion of Faith, while they so differ in other matters,
as one side must be in a damnable error, and the same Heaven cannot contain
them both: whereby your Question (why should any error exclude any from the
Churches Communion which will not deprive him of eternal salvation?) Is
clearly inverted, and retorted, by saying: Why should not any error, exclude
any man from the Churches communion, which will deprive him of eternal
salvation? The Arguments, which you bring in this Number, and (N. 41.42.43.) to
prove, that every one of the four Gospells, contains all points necessary to
be believed, have been confuted at large, hertofore.

19. To your (N. 44. and 45.) I answer, that Dr. Vshers words, are as
universal as can be. wh^ he speaks of Propositions, which without all
controversy, are universally received in the whole Christian world. And if you
will needs have his other words (the sevrrall professions of Christianity, that
has any large spread in any part of the world) to be a Limitation of those
other which you have now cited, I am content, upon condition, that you confess
it to be also a contradiction to those former words of his. As for the thing
itself, Cha: Ma: names places of large extent, in which the Antitrinitarians
are rife; and I fear, he might have added too many in England, Holland, and
other places, where Heresy reigns; and even Dr. Porter cites Hooker, and
Morton, teaching, that the denial of our Saviors Divinity, is not a
Fundamental heresy, destructive of a true Church; neither does the Doctor
disprove them. Paulus Ueridicus, I grant, names the B. Trinity, among
coinopista, not as if Dr. Usher had affirmed it to be such, but as in Truth it
is, necessary for all; or rather indeed he affirms nothing, but only, as they
say, exempligratia, by way of supposition, which abstracts from the Truth of
the thing itself. For thus you cite his words: To consider your coinopista or
communiter credenda, Articles, as you call them, universally believed by these
several professions of Christianity, which have any large spread in the world:
These Articles, for example, may be the unity of the Godhead, the Trinity of
Persons, the Immortality of the soul etc: Where you see, he speaks only
exempli gratia, or by a may be, according to the Doctrine of Catholics, without
regarding, whether, or no, in the opinion of Dr. Usher, the denial of the
Trinity, exclude salvation. But it is both ridiculous, and unjust in you, to
call this the greatest objection of Charity Maintained, which he touched only
by the way, and in order to Dr. V^shers words. For concerning the thing
itself, Protestants, who deny the infallibility of Gods Church will not, I
fear, hold the denial of the Trinity to be a fu^dame^tall error; seeing so
many old heretics, have denied the Truth of that Article, and you, with your
Socinian brethren, do the same at this day, and pretend many texts ^f
Scripture for your Heresy. If (...) had at hand Paulus Ueridi^us, perhaps I
could discover somewh^t more against you. For I remember, he shows, how
according to Dr. Vshers discourse, and grounds, diverse Articles of Christian
Faith may be cassiered and cast out of the Church; and he finds so much matter
against the Doctor, as it is no wonder, if he in his short examination, took
no notice, of the contradiction, which Charity Maintained, touches, as he
(Charity Maintained) takes not notice, of all the advantages, or other
contradictions, which perhaps he might have found, and which Paulus Ueridicus
observes; but that was not the aim of Ch: Ma: in his answer to Potter.

20. In your (N. 46.) you say, There is no contradiction, that the same man, at
the same time, should believe contradictions. Which (N. 47.) you declare, or
temper, in this manner: Indeed that men should not assent to contradictions,
and that it is unreasonable to do so I willingly grant. But to say it is
impossible to be done, is against every man's experience, and almost as
unreasonable, as to do the thing, which is said to be impossible. For though
perhaps it may be very difficult, for a man in his right wits, to believe a
contradiction expressed in terms, especially if he believe it to be a
contradiction, yet for men being cowed and awed by superstition, to persuade
themselves upon slight and trivial grounds, that these, or these, though they
seem contradictions, yet indeed are not so, and so to believe them: or if the
plain repugnance of them be veiled and disguised a little, with some empty
unintelligible nonsense distinction; or if it be not expressed, but employed, not
direct, but by consequence, so that the parties, to whose Faith the
propositions are offered, are either innocently, or perhaps affectedly ignorant
of the contrariety of them for men in such cases easily to swallow and digest
contradictions, he that denies it possible, must be a mere stranger in the
world. Thus you; after your fashion, involuing things in obscurity, that one
cannot penetrate what you would say, but that you may have an evasion against
whatsoever may be obsected. As for the thing it self; There is no doubt, but
that men may believe things, which in themselves are contradictions; whereof we
need no other proof, then to show, that it happens so to yourselfe, if you
believe what you affirm, even in this matter, wherein I shall demonstrate to be
implied plain contradiction. But when men say with one voice, that we cannot
assent to contradictions, it is to be understood, if they be apprehended as
such; and therefore it might seem needless, to spend many words in confutation
of this heresy, as I may call it, against the first principle of Reason. Yet
because, your reasons may perhaps seem to some, to prove more; since even in
your explication or modification, you say only (perhaps) and (may be) of that
which all the world holds for certain, and for the ground of all certainty in
humane Reason; and because, if they be well considered, they strike at the
sublime mysteries of Christian Religion; and, in regard, this is an age of
Academiks, and Sceptiks, who willingly put all things to dispute, whereby, under
pretense of freedom in Reason, they take liberty against Religion; as also to
show, how little reason you had, to take this vain occasion of a fond
flourish, to show a Socinian wit; and lastly, because by this occasion I may
examine some other points, I will both confute your reasons, and show that you
contradict yourselfe.

21. Only I cannot for bear to reflect, how he, who resolves Faith into
Reason, so much extold by him, that he relyes thereon, as Catholics do upon the
infallibility of Gods Church, or Calvinists upon the private spirit, or on the
Grace of God, which both Catholics, and Protestants against Pelagius, believe
to be necessary, for every Act of Divine Faith, how, I say, this man, does now,
so extenvate Reason, that if it indeed were so miserable and foolish, as he
makes it, we might better believe our dreams, than our reason: whereby he
destroies all that himself builds upon Reason, and consequently Faith it
self, which in his principles, must be resolved into Reason: just as I said
hertofore, that although he seem in words, to extol Scripture, as a Perfect
Rule; the only ground of our Faith, containing evidently all necessary points,
and the like; yet indeed, by his wicked Tenets concerning it, he deprives it of
all authority, and makes it unable, to deliver us any thing, with absolute
certainty. A just judgment of God, to bring proud men to confusion, and entrap
them in their own snares, and prove their wisdom to be but foolishness, even
by crossing, and contradicting themselves, and overthrowing the maine
foundations of their pretended friends, or clients, as this man destroys the
maine ground, of Socinians, Reason; and the only Rule of Protestants,
Scripture! If contradictions may be true, you, or any other may write Books
with much security, and without fear of being confuted. For when you are
brought to the hard exigent of acknowledging contradictions, your answer will
be, that one may assent to contradictions, and so one, by all his pains taken
to confute you, shall only prove, what you grant and seek to prove. And in
particular, it will be impossible to confute the Reasons, whereby you endeavor
to prove this your assertion; because whatsoever is alleged, can infer no
greater absurdity, than that which you grant, that contradictoryes may be true.
And on the other side, it will not be in your power to confute any man; seeing
the most you can do, will be to drive him unto contradictions, which he (being
taught by you) will say, is no absurdity: and so all will be at a stand, and
become silent disputants: And it may be true, that even this your assertion
(contradictions may be true) may be said both to be true, and falls, or not
true. And by what Logic can you, or any who holds this Doctrine be confuted?
Not ostensiue, as Logicians speak; because this is primum principium of all
other; nor deducendo ad absurdum, or impossible, seeing the greatest absurdity,
that one can be brought to, is that which you grant. And there fore
Christianity maintained, (Page: 62.) said truly, that your Reasons, if you hold
them for good, must prove the contrary of that which you intended, that is,
your proofs that we may assent to contradictions, must suppose, that we cannot
assent to them: which if you do not suppose, you will never be able to convince
any man, in any thing. Besides, if your Reasons prove any thing, they prove,
that one may assent to formal contradictions, which yet you pretend to deny,
and therefore even in this respect, you in fact hold contradictions. But let us
hear your Reasons.

22. Your first, is this: Whatsoever a man believes true, that he may and must
believe; But there have been some who have believen and taught, that
contradictions might be true, against whom Aristoile disputes in the third of
his Metaphysics; Therefore it is not impossible that a man may believe
contradictions.

23. Answer: 1. We have heard you saying (N. 47.) Perhaps it may be very
difficult, for a man in his right wits, to believe a contradiction expressed in
terms, especially if he believe it to be a contradiction. Now I ask, whether
those men whom Aristotle impugnes were in their right wits, or no? If they
were; Then your Argument, if it prove any thing, proves that it is possible for
men in their right wits, to believe contradictions expressed in terms (for
Aristotle speaks of such co^tradictions.) And then how do you say; It is
difficult for a man in his right wits to believe a contradiction? Seeing in our
case, it is all one to be difficult, and impossible, since that which the light
of reason, tells us, is, that it is impossible, and not only difficult, and if
you deny it to be impossible you will not be able to prove it difficult;
neither did they whom Aristotle impugnes, make any distinction, between being
difficult, and impossible. So that this part of the Answer to my Dilemma,
which supposes those men to be in their wits, does indeed put them our of their
wits; because according to your own doctrine, they could not assent to
contradictions, if they were in their wits. But if those men were out of their
wits; surely you ought not to take mad men for Masters in Metaphysics; which
is no better than to suborne sleeping witnesses, as the Jews did, against our
Saviors resurrection, and as you do, to prove your chimericall Assertion. 2.
If you believe, that one may believe contradictions, how will you prove this
consequence; some have believed, and taught, that contradictions might be true;
Therefore he may and must believe contradictions. If you say; It implies
contradictions, that one should believe a thing to be true, and yet that it is
impossible for him to assent to it: it will be answered; what then? Do you not
suppose, and teach, even this which in this answer you take to be absurd, that
one may assent to contradictions; will you have it possible that one may assent
to contradictions, when you affirm it, and not possible, when an other says
the same? 3. If any said, and believed, that contradictions might be true,
they erred against the first and most known Principle of nature, and so, as
you infer; Contradictoryes were believed to be true, therefore they might be
believed to be true; I take the contrary truth; It is known by the light of
nature, that contradictories cannot be true, and infer; Therefore it is
impossible to believe them, being conceived to be Contradictoryes, if men be in
their wits. If you conceive Aristotle, did sufficiently confute those men, why
do you alledg their confessed falls doctrine, to prove that which you pretend to
be true? Certainly this is neither an honest kind of proceeding, nor a good way
of proving. If your opinion be, that he did not refell them effectually;
without doubt, it had been a Work, beseeming your wit, to have confuted
Aristotle, and defended those men, whose doctrine unless you maintaye, your
Argument taken from their conceypts, can be of no force at all. Neither had it
been needful for you, to have studied, what Title had been fittest for such a
Work. For, you might have remembered, that Simon Magus is said to have written
Books, which he called Contradictorios. (Uid. Baron. Ann. Christi 35. N. 23.) A
Title most agreeable to your genius, both because in this place you expressly
defend Contradictions, and in regard, that through your whole Book, you do
indeed fall into them, more frequently, than I could have imagined. Yet as for
those men whom Aristotle impugnes, it is one thing, that they said, they
believed Contradictions might be true, and an other that indeed they could
believe them, if they were in their right wits, and understood what were true
contradictories. In which respect Aristotle Metaphys: (Lib: 4. Cap: 3.) says:
Nonenim necesse est, quaecumque quis dicat, ea etiam putare. But this is not
the first time, that you confound the first, and second operation of the
understanding, or primam apprehensionem, and judicium. Never the less if you be
settled in a resolution to defend that men being out of their right wits may
believe Contradictories, I say, it imports nothing for our present purpose,
seeing I hope you will not say, that the fact of such men can concern Dr.
Usher, to whom Cha: Ma: objected, that some words of his did implie a
contradiction. Lastly, be pleased to reflect, that Aristotle speaks of express
and known Contradictions, and yourself confess, that it is difficult, and men
ought not to believe such, and therefore this first Reason of yours proves
either too much, or nothing at all, and so proves nothing at all, because it
proves too much. And I wonder how you say in your (N. 46. Page: 215.) Though
there can be no damnable Heresy, unless it contradict some necessary Truth,
yet there is no Contradiction but the same man may at once believe this Heresy
and this Truth; because there is no Contradiction that the same man at the same
time, should believe Contradictions. Let us suppose this to be, as it is, a
damnable Heresy; Christ is not the Savior of the world; the contradictory is:
Christ is the Savior of the world, which is a formal contradiction, and
expressed in terms, to which it seeemes by these words you may assent, and
consequently to express contradictions, which yet (N. 47.) you are forced to
moderate. But when you say; There is no contradiction but the same man may at
once believe this Heresy and this Truth, and add this reason, or proof
because there is no contradiction, that the same man at the same time should
believe contradictions, you must give me leave to speak and say, that you utter
plain nonsense, (yourself talk of some nonsense distinction) in proving that
one may believe contradictions, because there is no contradiction, that one
believe contradictions, which causall supposes, that we could not believe them,
if it were a contradiction to believe them; and consequently, that we cannot
believe contradictions; and yet in this very sentence, you say; There is no
contradiction but the same man, at the same time should believe contradictions.

24. Your second reason is delivered in these words: They which believe there
is no certainty in reason, must believe that contradictions may be true: For
otherwise there will be certainty in this Reason; This contradicts Truth,
therefore it is false. But there be now diverse in the world who believe there is
no certainty in reason: Therefore there be diverse in the world who believe
contradictions may be true.

25. Answer; 1. Certainly if there be any certainty in Reason, it is in this;
that contradictions cannot be true; and seeing you hold this not only not
certainly true, but to be false, it is clear, that you are one of those, who
believe there is no certainty in Reason; and consequently, you cannot be
certain, even of your own Assertion, that contradictions may be true. And so
while you draw an Argument, from those who believe there is no certainty in
Reason, you deprive your own Assertion of all certainty. 2. If once you
swallow that absurdity, of the truth of contradictoryes, when you say: This
Contradicts truth, therefore it is false, the answer might be; that it might
contradict truth, and yet not be falls, but true; because contradictions may be
true. And I beseech you tell us; whether you believe, that whatsoever
contradicts truth, is false: If you say it is not falls, you speak absurdly. For
what is falsehood but an error against truth? If you say, it must be falls, you
overthrow your own Doctrine, that contradictions may be true; because in
contradictions one part must be opposite to a truth, and consequently falls. 3.
That conceypt, that there is no certainty in Reason, being falls and injurious
to mankind, you cannot ground on it any truth, except this; that it is a very
fit Principle for your absurd Conclusion, that contradictoryes may be true,
and that, if you believe it to be true, you are in apernicious error: If you
hold it to be falls; why do you urge it against us this Sceptick doctrine? 4.
Your Argument proves, that one may assent not only to contradictories, not
perceived to be such, but to them expressed in plain terms; because otherwise
there would be certainty in this Reason; These be express contradictoryes;
Therefore they cannot both be true. Thus still your Reasons, either prove
nothing at all, or against your self.

26. Your third Reason. is: They which do captivate their understandings to the
belief of those things which to their understanding seem irreconciliable
contradictions, may as well believe real contradictions: (For the difficulty
of believing arises not from their being repugnant, but for their seeming to be
so) But you do captivate your understandings to the belief of those things
which seem to your understandings irreconciliable contradictions, Therefore it
is as possible and easy for you to believe those that indeed are so.

27. Answer: 1. What is this but to undermine Christian Religion, wherein we
submit and captivate our understandings to Mysteryes, which to humane reason
seem impossible, and for that very cause we are taught to captivate our
understanding to the obedience of Christ? And now you tell all Christians, that
by doing so, they believe Contradictions as well as if they believed real
contradictions, which Jews, Turks, Pagans, and all men in their right wits
know to be absurd, and impossible, and you confess to be unreasonable, and very
difficult, speaking of express contradictions; as here you speak of such;
since you expressly speak of things, which to ones understanding seem
irreconciliable contradictions. I desire the Reader to look upon Chr: Ma:
(Chap. 9.) concerning this matter. 2. Therefore, as in other Reasons, so in
this, seeing you speak of contradictions expressed in terms, you contradict
what yourself afterward (N. 47.) teach. 3. The necessity that all Christians
acknowledge of submitting our understanding to Faith, arises from this, that
they seem to contain contradictions; which could be no reason requiring the
captivating our Reason, if they did not suppose that contradictions cannot
bettue; and therefore this very reason, which you bring to prove, that men may
believe contradictions, must suppose, they cannot believe them. For if they
could, it would cost them little to believe, that which to them seemed a
contradiction. 4. You say, It is as possible and as easy for us to believe
those things that indeed are real contradictions, as to believe those things
which to our vnaerstanding seem contradictions: which words suppose that it is
both possible, and easy for us to believe those things which to us seem
contradictions; and yet (N. 47.) you say; it is very difficult for a man in his
right wits to believe express contradictions. Into how many contradictions, do
you fall, while you treat of conradictions? 5. Your Argument scarcely deserves
any Answer. For who is ignorant, that contradiction must involue two sides, one
affirming, the other denying; and therefore when one, allthings considered,
believes one part only, he is so far from believing things which to his
understanding seem contradictions, that he is certain, not to believe
contradictions; because he sees, that he believes one part only of the
contradiction, and rejects the other, and is also certain, that, as I said,
contradiction must involue two parts. And here I would demand, wherher you
believe indeed, that contradictions can be true? If you believe they may be
true, then Christian Religion may teach; Scripture may contain; God may
reveal, and must assent to contradictions, seeing he cannot but assent to all
truth. And are not these blasphemies? If you believe, contradictions cannot be
true; how will you have it possible for any man to believe that, which he
believes not to be true? You said in your first Reason, Whatsoever a man
believes true that he may and must believe: And certainly, I may better say:
Whatsoever a man believes, nor to be true; that he neither may, nor can
believe: and therefore seeing all men in their right wits, believe that
contradictoryes cannot be true, it is impossible that they should believe them.
But let us proceed to your

28. Fourth Reason. Some men, say you, may be confuted in their errors, and
persuaded out of them; but no man's error can be confuted, who together with
his error does not believe and grant some true principle that contradicts his
error: For nothing can be proved to him who grants nothing, neither can there
be (as all men know) any rational discourse but out of grounds agreed on by
both parts. Therefore it is not impossible but absolutely certain, that the
same man at the same time may believe contradictions.

29. Answer. First: If it were lawful to use such an expressio^, it might
well, be said, that it seems fatal for you, to be at variance with your
self. For, I pray you suppose one to believe, that contradictions may be true:
How will you persuade him out of his error? By showing him, that he grants
some true principle that contradicts his error? But if contradictories may be
true, and one may at the same time believe them, nothing will force him to
leave his error, though it appear to contradict some principle which he
grants, because he may believe both his supposed errous, and that principle to
betrue; yea he need not believe it to be an error though it contradict some
true principle, seeing both parts of contradictories may be true. Choose, which
you please. May contradictories be true, or be believed, or no? If they may;
then this Reason of yours proves nothing, as I have showed. Can they not be
true, nor be believed? then, to make good this Reason, you deny that for which
you alledg it; and must say that one cannot at the same time believe
contradictions; and that if he could do so, this Reason were of no force. A new
kind of Logic, to bring a Reason, to prove a Conclusion which must be falls, if
the Reason, or Proof for it be of any force? That is, ^o prove that
contradictions may be believed, you use an Argument, which (to have any force)
must suppose they may not be believed. How will you drive one from that which
he believes, by proposing a principle which even by your doctrine, he conceyves
may consist with that from which you would drive him? So, still that which I
said is true, That your Arguments, if they prove any thing, must suppose, or
prove, the direct contrary of that which you intend to prove by them, and so
not help, but overthrow yourself. Secondly; If your Reason be of any force, it
can only prove, that by ignorance, one may hold contradictoryes, which was
needless to be proved, it being a thing which no man denies. And then, you must
either acknowledge a contradiction, or else acknowledge, that you intended to
prove, that one may assent to express and known contradictions, but that your
Reason proved not so much, as you did mean to prove by it. For, if your
purpose was only to prove a possibility of assenting to contradictoryes, not
known to be such, you contradict yourself, in saying (N. 47.) Men should not
assent to contradictions, and that it is unreasonable to do so; seeing it is
evident, in case of probable, or invincible ignorance, a man may, and ought to
believe them, and it were unreasonable to do that which all the Reasons that
he can consider, tell him, that he is to do as he does, and that it is not in
his power to discover his error by any reasons, that can represent themselves
to his understanding. It cannot be denied but in that case he proceeds
prudently, and safely, and therefore not unreasonably, but as he should do:
and yourself confess, that men may innocently (as you speak) be ignorant of the
contradiction. Yourself tell us in your next Reason, that we cannot without
extreme madness, and uncharitableness, deny, that you believe the Bible, and
yet we believe that some part of your doctrine contradicts the Bible. Now seeing
this last is certain by evident experience of Protestants, who interpret
Scripture so, as what one affirms, an other denies to be the meaning thereof,
you must either grant, that men may rationally believe that kind of
contradictions, of which we speak, or else with extreme madness, and
incharitableness say, that no Protestant who contradicts an other about the
sense of Scripture, does as he should do, but is unreasonable in so doing.
Choose then, (I return to say,) whether you will say, your meaning was in this
fourth Reason, to speak of express contradictions, and confess that it comes
not home to that purpose; or else that you spoke not of such express
contradictions; and confess that in this (N. 46.) you contradict your (N. 47.)
wherein you say, One should not believe contradictions, and that it is
unreasonable to do so.

30. Your Fifth Reason we have mentioned already, That Protestants believe all
that is in the Bible to be true, and yet we say, that they believe diverse
Doctrines against the Bible, and consequently that they believe Contradictions.
But seeing this Reason, if it prove any thing, proves only, that men may assent
to Contradictions not known to be such, it is already answered, and confuted,
and demonstrated, to be guilty either of insufficiency, or to subsist by a
manifest Contradiction to that, for which you alledg it; as I a^swered to your
fourth Reason.

31. Your Sixth Reason, is equally full of impiety, malice, and ignorance: and
is answered in a word, That we absolutely are certain, there is implied no
Contradiction in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and therefore it cannot
serve to prove that men may believe Contradictions. And seeing it speaks only of
Contradictions, not expressed in terms, but only involved, it is liable to all
the same exceptions, which I have declared against your Fourth, and Fifth
Reason. Neither can any expect, or even endure, that here I should write a
Book of Transubstantiation. You know learned Catholic Writers, have answered,
all that can be objected against us, in that Mystery; and you should have
brought as well their answers, as your own objections, if your intention had
been to declare the Truth, and not only to be blasphemous. But still you
declare, more and more, that you undermine Christian Religion; it being evident
to any, who is not ignorant of Philosophy, that whosoever denies the
possibility of Transubstantiation, will much more deny other Mysteryes of
Christian Religion as in particular the blessed Trinity, and Incarnation of the
Son of God, as showed concerning the B. Trinity, out of Dr. Tailor, and by your
own Confession. Who can deny that one Body may be in two places, or two bodies
in one; or accidents remain, without substance, or Subject; if he believe,
that one individual Essence of God is in three Persons (in the B. Trinity) and
in the Incarnation two complete Natures, Divine and humane exist in one Person,
and a complete substance (the Humane Nature of our Savior Christ) not subsist
by itself, but by the subsistence of the second Person, it being no more
strange, or difficult, that, an accident should not exist in alio, than that a
complete substance should not subsistere per se; and far more unintelligible,
that one Nature should be in three persons, or two natures in one person, then
that one Body should be in diverse places; there being a more strict connection
between Nature, and Hypostasis, than between a Body, and a place. But your
conclusion of the (N. 46.) is so patently injurious to Christian Religion, that
it is intolerable. You say to Chapter Ma. If you can not compose the repugnance of
points implied in Transubstantiation and that after an intelligible manner,
then you must give me leave to believe, that either you do not believe
Transubstantiation, or else that it is no contradiction, that men should
subjugate their understanding to the belief of contradictions. And who I pray,
can undertake to answer all arguments, objected against the Blessed Trinity,
Incarnation, and other sublime mysteryes of Christian Religion, and compose all
seeming repugnance, after an intelligible manner, otherwise than by finally
captivating our understanding, to the obedience of says? And if you will not
be content without all be declared in an intelligible manner, is it not
Hypocrisy in you to say (page: 376. N 56.) of Scripture? Propose me any thing
out of this Book, and require whether I believe it or no, and seem it never so
incomprhenssible to Human Reason, I will subscribe it with hand and heart. For,
seeing you believe Christian Religion, only with a probable assent for Humane
prudentiall Motives; how can Mysteryes seeming incomprehensible, and repugnant,
to human Reason, be declared not to be repugnant, after an intelligible manner
and why should not a confessedly mere probability yeald to a seeming evidence,
in your grounds, who resolve Faith into Reason, only confessedly probable? And
here again I desire you to reflect on your saying; That it is no
Contradiction, that men should subjugate their understandings to the belief of
Contradictions; Is not this to say; that if it were a contradiction, to
subjugate our understanding to contradictions, we could not do it? And yet you
teach that we may believe contradictions, and consequently you should say;
though it be a contradiction, to subjugate our understandings to
contradictions, yet we may do it, because we may believe contradictions; and
so you must either deny that men can believe contradictions, or else confess
that the said same sentence (It is no contradiction, that men subjugate, their
understandings to the belief of Contradictions) destroys itself, as I have
showed. And besides, when you say; It is no Contradiction, that etc: you must
signify, that, to be a contradiction, is to be impossible; and that if it were
contradiction to believe contradictions, it were impossible to believe them:
Seeing then every one in his right wits judges it a contradiction, that the same
thing should be, and not be, at the same time; he must judge it impossible; and
if he judge it impossible, he cannot judge it de facto to be so; and
consequently, cannot judge contradictoryes to be true; because it is impossible
that a thing be, and not be for the same time, as all Contradictoryes say they
are. Into how many precipices do your subtiltyes cast you, and force you to
say, and unsay the same thing, in the same words?

32. Your seventh Reason (N. 47.) is this: That Charity Maintained cannot in
Charity think that Dr. Usher, and Dr. Potter did not believe what they said,
and therefore if their words implied a contradiction, we must grant that it is
not impossible, at once to believe contradictions?

33. Answer; If it be an Act of Charity to believe, that the Doctors believed
contradictions, it will be Charity in you to believe that they did it not
wittingly, which you say no man in his right wits, should do; and then your
reason procedes only in contradictions, not expressed, and is answered,
confuted and retorted against yourself in the same manner, as your Fourth;
Fifth; and Sixth reasons were.

34. Your (N. 47.) contains a modification of your saying, That one may assent
to Contradictions; but a modification, or explication, which contains a plain
contradiction, as I have showed in my answer to your fourth reason. And
therefore I will say no more of this matter, except to mention in a word, your
saying; To believe a contradiction expressed in terms, especially if we
believe it to be a contradiction etc: what an expression, or repetition is
here? When can one believe a contradiction to be a contradiction, if he
believe it not to be such, when it is expressed in terms, It is, it is not?
you talk also of nonsense Distinctions; because you love darkness; and in
disputation nothing vexes Protestants so much, as when Catholics take of the
obscurity of their objections, with clear and solid Distinctions, whereby they
instantly become silenced ministers. Lastly; (N. 46.) you grant that perhaps
Dr. Vshers words (Mark that his words, and (...) only he, but these his very
words) did suppose that a man may believe all Truths necessary to salvation,
and yet superinduce a damnable Heresy: which being once granted, Charity
Maintained had reason to say, that Dr. Usher did utter a contradiction, and
proved it, by this clear reason; That there can be no damnable Heresy, unless
it contradict some necessary Truth, which cannot happen in one who is supposed
to believe all necessary truths. Now, you grant expressly (Page: 215. N. 46)
That there can be no damnable Heresy, unless it contradict some necessary
Truth: And therefore you must grant, that it is contradiction to believe a
damnable Heresy, and yet believe all necessary Truths, in regard that if he
believe all necessary Truths, he must believe that Truth which is contradictory
to that Heresy, which also he believes, and so should believe two
contradictories at the same time. Which belief of (at least implied)
contradictions being supposed, it is easy afterward to bring one to open
contradictions, which you confess is very difficult, and unreasonable (you
should say impossible) for a man in his right wits to believe; and so you
forsake your two Dr. Usher, and Potter, in this Assertion, which you say (N.
47.) the one preached and printed, the other reprinted. Your second answer is,
that the latter part of Dr. Vshers words, is but a repetition of the former.
But this answer destroys the former (which yet you do not deny to be good, and
agreeable to the meaning of the Doctor.) For if the Second part be a
contradiction of the former, as according to your first answer it is, how can
it be only a repetition thereof? And you took not a fit example out of S.
Athanasius his Creed, to prove a mere repetition; you I say, who wickedly hold
that Creed (which indeed is a Catholic profession of the chiefest Articles of
Christian Religion to (be but an aggregate of Contradictions: And yet that
explication of S. Athanasius (Neither confounding the Persons etc:) was
necessary, against some Heresies, that granted a distinction of Persons, only
quoad nomina, and not in reality. For your other vulgar examples, to prove that
those latter words, may be only a repetition of the former, you must remember,
that in matters of Faith, all show or shadow of contradictions, or falsehood
must be carefully avoided, as certainly it is a pernicious thing, to give
occasion of believing, that a damnable Heresy, may stand with the belief of
all necessary Articles of Faith (and so a formal Heretic may be saved) and
nevertheless you do not deny, but that Dr. Vshers words may suppose this. Yet
Charity Maintained out of this poison gathered this wholesome doctrine in the
same (N. 17.) that, if one believing all Fundamental Articles in the Creed,
may superinduce damnable heresies; it follows that the fundamental truths
contrary to those damnable heresies, are not contained in the Creed. And so,
the Creed cannot be said, to contain all Points, necessary to be believed,
which is the maine Point in hand. You wonder that Chapter Ma. did nor epsy an
other contradiction in D. Vshers words, like to that which He noted; but if
that other be a contradiction, you say it is of the same nature with that which
was observed, and so it had been to multiply things without necessity. But
enough of this, which Chapter Ma. (N. 17.) professed to note only by the way, which
yet did either trouble you very much for the difficulty of his argument, or
else you are willing to take any occasion, of making a vain show of your
skill in Logic, and Metaphysick, but with how many contradictions, and little
credit to yourselfe, I hope the Reader has seen by the confutation of all
your Reasons.

35. In your number 48.49. you are highly offended with Chapter Ma., as if he had
said (N. 18.) that Dr. Potter patches up a Religion, of men agreeing in some
few, or one Article of belief, that Christ is our Savior, but for the rest
hold conceits, plainly contradictory: which you say is a shameless calumny,
not only because D. Potter in this point delivers not his own judgment, but
relates the opinion of others, M. Hocker and M. Morton, but especially even
these men (as they are related by Dr. Potter) to the constitution of the very
essence of a Church, in the lowest degree, require not only Faith in Christ
Jesus the Son of God, and Savior of the world, but also submission to his
Doctrine in mind and will. Now I beseech you, Sir, tell me ingenuously,
whether the Doctrine of Christ may be called without blasphemy scarcely one
point of Faith? Is it not manifest to all the world, that Christians of all
Professions agree with one consent in the belief of all those Books of
Scripture, which were not doubted of in the ancient Church, without danger of
damnation? And so the truths wherein they agree amount to many millions etc.

36. Answer. First, Ch: Ma: in the said (N. 18.) does not ground his Assertion,
upon the Doctrine of Hooker, and Morton, but upon the principles of Potter, and
Protestants; who hold, that men may be members of the same Church, if they
agree in fundamental Articles, though they should differ in never so many
other points: and you cannot deny this, not only to be true, but the very
ground, for which they hold themselves to be brethren, and capable of
salvation, notwithstanding their differences in matters not fundamental. From
whence it follows, that although it were granted, that Protestants agree in
many Points not fundamental, yet this is merely accidental, and nothing
against the Assertion of Ch: Ma: because if once you suppose them to agree in
all fundamentalls, and disagree in all other Points, they must still be members
of one Church. For in this mattet, more, or fewer, cannot alter their case, so
they keep with in the compass of non-fundamentalls: as contrarily, though they
were supposed to agree in those many millions which you mention, and in as many
millions more as you may please to imagine, of points not fundamental; yet if
they differ but in one fundamental, they cannot be members of the same Church;
and so your millions of such points, can avail nothing, either to constitute
men members of the same Church, or to hinder them from being so; and therefore if
you agree in never so many such points, it helps you no more, then if you
agreed in none at all, according to the ground, and Doctrine of Potter, and
Model of his Church: and therefore the saying of Ch: Ma: is very true, who speaks
reservedly, in this manner. According to this Model of Dr. Potters foundation,
consisting in the agreement, of scarcely one Point of Faith; what a strange
Church would he make, of men concurring in some one or few Articles of belief,
who yet for the rest should be holding conceits plainly contradictory: so
patching up a Religion of men, who agree only in the Article that Christ is our
Savior, but for the rest are like to the parts of a Chimera, having the head
of a man, the neck of a horse etc. For there is greater repugnancy between
assent and dissent, then between integrall parts, as head, neck etc. These
words, if you read them with attention, do not affirm what is de facto, but
only go upon a supposition, that is, what a Church he would make, if men
agreed only in fundame^tall points, and for the rest, should hold conceits
plainly contradictorie; and therefore he uses the word Model, which signifies,
not necessarily what is, but what would be, if Potter proceeded according to
his own grounds, taking them for a Model of his building. Thus Ch: Ma: does
not wrong Dr. Potter in imputing to him, the opinions of others, but you
misalledge Ch: Ma: that you may accuse him of calumny, created by yourselfe.

37. Secondly I answer; if Ch: Ma: had spoken, not upon mere supposition, but
by way of affirmation (as he did not) if he committed any fault, it was, in
yielding too much. For indeed Protestants do not agree, even in that
fundamental point, that Christ is our Savior, or in Faith in Jesus Christ the
Son of God and Savior of the world: Seeing I have showed in diverse occasions,
that they differ toto genere, in their explication, and belief of those
Articles; and accordingly, Morton teaches that the Churches of Arians (who
denied our Savior Christ to be God) are to be accounted the Church of God,
because they do hold the foundation of the Gospel which is Faith in Jesus
Christ the Sone of God and Savior of the world, as may be seen in Ch: Ma:
(Part. 1. Chap. 3. Page 103.) and since the belief of those Articles, is
required to the consticuting of the very essence of a Church in the Lowest
degree, and they do not agree in them, it follows, that they do not agree in
the very essence of a Church, in the lowest degree. As for Divine Precepts, and
Divine Promises, which you say are clearly delivered in Scripture, they belong
to Agenda, and not to Credenda according to your distinction; and so men may
agree in them, and disagree in points of simple belief.

38. Lastly: If you had a mind to defend Protestants, you should not alledg
their agreement, in such Points as they have received from us, but in those,
wherein Luther, and his fellows forsook the Faith of our Church, (with which
all true Christian Churches did clearly agee) and in those, Protestants are so
far from agreement among themselves, that in the chiefest matters, diverse of
the most learned of them, stand for, us against their pretended Brethren: and
universally, it is most true, that their agreement is only actual, and merely
accidental; in regard that they acknowledge no living, infallible Judge of
Controversyes, to make them agree, in case they should chance to doubt of those
points, wherein they casually agree, and so still in actu primo, they are in a
disposition to disagree: whereas Catholics, believing an infallible Judge,
are in a continual disposition, or a virtuall and potentiall agreement, even
in those things, wherein particular persons may happen not to agree: yea those
many millions of Truths, which you say are contained in Scripture, could not,
for ought Protestants know, be so much as one, if your doctrine were true, that
Scripture is not a material object of Faith, which men are obliged to believe.
And yet (such is your inconstancy, and spirit of contradicting yourself) you
say here: is it not manifest to all the world, that Christians of all
Professions do agree with one consent in the belief of all those Books of
Scripture, which were not doubted in the ancient Church without danger of
damnation? Nay is it not apparent, that no man at this time, can without
hypocrisy, pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must do so? Seeing
he can have no reason to believe in Christ, but he must have the same to
believe the Scripture. Sr. If all Christians consent in the belief of
Scripture, how is not Scripture believed? And if it be believed, how is it not
a material object of our belief, or the thing which we believe? Nay, you say,
no man at this time can pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must
believe the Books of Scripture: and so you declare, that if Christ be a
material object of our Faith, the Scripture must also be such.

39. But there remains yet an other contradiction, no less manifest, and more
strange, than this, which I now mentioned. Here you say expressly; no man can
pretend to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must believe Scripture: and
you prove this your Assertion; because he can have no reason to believe in
Christ, but he must have the same to believe the Scripture; which proof (to be
of any force) must suppose; that there is always an equal necessity for the
belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is an equal Reason:
Otherwise, one might have the same reason to believe in Scripture, which he
has to believe in Christ, and yet be obliged to believe in Christ, and not be
obliged, nor have an equal necessity, to believe the Scripture, under danger
of damnation. Is not all this clear? Now, I beseech you remember, what you
write, (Page 116. N. 159.) where you treat of this very matter, that is, of
the belief of Scripture, and of the belief of the contents thereof, that is
(among other Points) of our belief in Christ; and you endeavor to prove, that
God requires of us under pain of damnation only to believe the verities therein
contained, and not the Divine Authority of the Books wherein they are
contained. Behold your Assertion, contrary to that which we have heard you say,
that the undoubted Books of Scripture were not doubted of without danger of
damnation. But let us see, whether as you contradict yourself in your
Assertions, you do not the same, in the reason you give for them. You go
forward in the said (Page 116. N. 159.) and say: Not but that it: were now
very strange and unreasonable, if a man should believe the matters of these
Books, and not the Authority of the Books: and therefore if a man should
profess the not believing of these, I should have reason to fear he did not
believe that. But there is not always an equal necessity for the belief
whereof there is an equal reason. No? Is there not always an equal necessity
for the belief of etc. How then did you prove, that men cannot without danger
of damnation, doubt of the Books of Scripture, as he cannot doubt of Christ;
because he can have no reason to believe in Christ, but of necessity he must do
so, that is, believe the Scripture.

40. Yet, this is not all, that here offers itself about your Contradictions.
You say, we have the same reason to believe the undoubted Books of Scripture,
which we have for our belief in Christ. I suppose you mean universal
Tradition, for which you profess to receive the Scripture. How then were you
obliged to believe in Christ and teach that Christ is a material object of our
Faith, and yet that Scripture is not such an object, If universal Tradition,
be sufficient, to declare an Object to be revealed by God, and the same
universal Tr. dition deliver to us Christ, and Scripture, it is a
Contradiction to say, the one is revealed (and consequently is a material
object of our Faith) and not the other. Or if one be revealed, and not the
other, than you contradict your own saying, that there is the same reason for
believing them both; seeing the one has the Formal reason, or Motive of Faith,
namely divine Revelation, which the other must want, if you will needs deny it
to be a Material Object of Faith: And I hope to be revealed, and not revealed,
are very different, and not the same things, or Reasons.

41. In your (N. 50.) you fall Heavy upon Cha. Ma. for saying, that Protestants
are f^rre more bold to disagree even in matters of Faith, than Catholic
Divines in Questions merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church.
But Charity Maintained had good reason. For whereas Catholics have an
infallible means to know, what Points belong to Faith, they are Religiously
careful, and circumspect, not to broach any thing, which may in any remote
way, cross any least Article of Christian Religion; as contrarily, Protestants
having no certain Rule for interpreting Scripture, must needs be subject to
innumerable, and endless diversityes of opinions, which therefore they will
esteem to be no more than indifferent matters: and so you say in your answer
to the Direction (N. 30.) that the disputes of Protestants are touching such
controverted Questions of Religion, as may with probability be disputed on both
sides. And what is this, except to dispute of probabilityes, as men do in
Philosophy? For this cause, I have showed heretofore, that learned Protestants,
speaking of the points wherein they differ, call them small matters; Things
indifferent; Matters of no great moment; No great matters; Matters of nothing;
Matters not to be much respected; No part of Faith, but curious nicities.
Which shows, that Protestants, speak and proceed, with greater liberty, in
matters concerning Faith, than Catholics do in Philosophy call Questions,
which they would never handle, if they esteemed them, to be things so
contemptible, as Protestants declare, the matters in which they differ, to be.
Besides this; Catholics in Questions of Philosophy, bejond the Direction of
Faith, to which all Philosophy ought to submitt, have also the light of Reason,
and evident Principles of demonstrations, for their guide; whereas the
Mysteryes of Faith, being sublime, and obscure, and Protestants having no
infallible means, not to err in the interpretation of Scripture, they are
left to their own freedom, or rather fancy, incomparably more than Catholics
are left to themselves in Philosophical disputes, wherein they are restrained,
and kept within compass, both by Divine Faith, and Human Reason, subjected to
Faith. It is true, when they will defend their defection, and Schism, from all
Churches, extant when Luther appeared, they will seem to make great account,
of all points, though they be not Fundamental; but this very thing, does
indeed give them greater freedom, to multiply opinyons, and increase
dissentions, not only with us, but amongst themselves, upon pretense of piety,
and necessity to forsake all errors, either of Catholics, or Protestants. I
know not to what purpose you say: Is there not as great repugnancy between
your assent and dissent, your affirmation and negation your Est, Est, Non, Non,
as there is between theyrs? For this is not the Question, but whether, we do,
or have the freedom to dissent, as much as Protestants do, and have liberty,
to disagree both from us, and amongst themselves; and I have proved that we
have not: and then I hope there is not as great repugnancy, between our Est,
Est, as between the Est, and Non Est, of Protestants. The rest of this Number
makes nothing against what I have said, and therefore I Let it pass, though
there want not some points, which you could not easily defend.

42. To your (N. 51.52.) I answer; Chapter Ma. said truly, that while Protestants
stand only upon Fundamental Articles, they do by their own confession destroy
the Church, which is the House of God. For the fundation alone of a house, is
not a house, nor can they in such an imaginary Church any more expect
salvation, than the Fundation alone of a house is sit to affoard a man,
habitation. To this you say to Charity Maintained; I hope you will not be
difficult in granting, that that is a house, which has all the necessary parts
belonging to a house. Now by Fundamental Articles, we mean all those which
are necessary: Unless you will say that more is necessary, than that which is
necessary.

43. Answer; It is impossible, that yourself can be satisfied with this your
answer; seeing you know Charity Maintained disputes in that place expressly,
against Protestants, who pretend to Brotherhood, Unity of Faith, and Hope of
salvation, in virtue of their agreement in Fundamental Articles, though they
differ in many other Points of Faith. This state of the Question being
supposed, and evidently true; (...) you mean (for you speak very confusedly,
in saying only, By Fundamental Artitles, we mean all those which are
necessary) If I say, you mean that Fundamental and necessary points are the
same, and that all points sufficiently proposed as revealed by God are
necessary to be believed (and consequently Fundamental) you fight for Charity
Maintained, and grant, that Protestants disagreeing in points revealed, differ
in necessary and Fundamental points, and cannot be of the same Church, nor
hope for salvation. For you must give me leave to say; I hope you will not be
difficult in granting that it is not a house, or a Church which has not all
the necessary things belonging to a house, or church. If you say, that no
Points are necessary, but such as are Fundamental of their own nature, and
are to be believed explicitly; then also you grant, that which Charity
Maintained affirmed; that the Church, or house of Protestants, consists only in
the foundation, seeing they may differ in other Points not fundamental, and yet
remain a Church. But then how can this agree, with your Doctrine, that every
error against any revealed Truth, is of itself damnable? Can it be a house of
God, which opposes Gods Testimony, and is not capable of salvation without
repentance of its damnable errors? Have we not often cited Dr. Potter teaching
(Page: 212.) that whatsoever is revealed in Scripture is in some sense
Fundamental, that is such as may not be denied without infidelity And (Page:
250.) he says plainly: It is Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary
for his salvation, that he believe all revealed Truths of God, whereof he may be
convinced that they are from God. Do not these words declare, that though
Protestants were supposed to believe all Points fundamental of their own
nature, yet they are guilty of infidelity (according to Dr. Potter,) and want
something Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for salvation, as
long as they differ in any point sufficiently propounded, as revealed by God?
Finally, what will you resolve? If errors in points not fundamental, may
stand with the substance of the same Faith, Church, and hope of salvation in
those who agree in Fundamental Articles, then you must yeald to Charity
Maintained saying, that the Church of protestants is a House builded by the
foundation only, and yet you pretend to take in ill part this saying of his.
If you affirm, that for constituting the Church, or house of God, there is
also required agreement in points not Fundamental, you overthrow the maine
tenet of Protestants, that they are Brethren, and have the same substance of
Faith, though they differ in such vn-fundamentall points; and if you turn
about to agree with them, that men may be of the same Church, and hope for
salvation, for the only belief of fundamental points, though they differ in
non-fundamentalls, you contradict yourself, and Dr. Potter, who says it is
infidelity, and damnable, and a Fundamental error to disbelieve any point,
sufficiently propounded as revealed by God. So that upon the whole matter, you
perforce stand for Charity Maintained whom you impugn, and overthrow Potter,
Yourself, and Protestants, whom you undertake to defend. To all this I add;
that Charity Maintained might have said, not only that as the foundation of a
House is not a House, so the belief of only fundamental points, cannot make a
Church, but also that seeing it is fundamental to a Christians Faith, not to
deny any point revealed by God (as we have seen in Potters assertion) it
follows, that they who disagree in such points want the foundation of Faith,
and of a Church, and so cannot pretend to so much, in order to a Church, as a
foundation is, in respect of a House. You say that Chapter Ma. (Page: 131.) takes
notice, that Dr. Potter, by Fundamental Articles means all those which are
necessary. But, by your leave, in this you falsify both the Doctor, and Chapter Ma.
who cited the words of Potter as you acknowledge he does, that by fundamental
doctrines we understand such as are necessary in ordinary course to be
distinctly believed by every Christian that will be saved. In which words you
see, the Doctor says not that all necessary Articles are fundamental, but
only that all fundamental Articles are necessary to be believed distinctly,
and explicitly; and so he speaks (Page: 213.) Fundamental properly is that
which Christians are obliged to believe by an express and actual Faith. Now I
hope, Protestants will not deny, that it is necessary to believe every Text of
Scripture, and yet will not affirm that every Text of Scripture is a
Fundamental point, to be believed by an express and actual Faith; Therefore
necessary, and Fundamental according to the explication of the Doctor, do not
signify the same thing, nor are of the same extent.

44. In your (N. 53.54.55.56.57.58.59.60.61.62.63.) you show so much choler,
bitterness, and ill language, that the best answer will be to apply my self
only to the matter, desiring the Reader, to consider the points, which I shall
set down, and he will find your objections answered, by only applying my
considerations to them, as they come in order.

45. First. Before you can refer any considering man, as you speak, to the
Scripture for his satisfaction, you must assure him, that it is the word of
God, which you confess we can only learn from the Church, and then if he be
indeed a considering man, it will instantly infer, that the Church must be
infallible, or else that he cannot be infallibly true that Scripture is the
word of God, nor of any one truth contained therein; and as you say, he may know
that the Church holds such books to be canonical, so by the like Tradition he
may know, what she holds in points of Doctrine, and either believe her in them,
or not believe her in delivering the canon of Scripture. Besides of whom shall
he learn the sense of Scripture, or who will oblige him even to read
Scripture? Seeing in the principles of Protestants, he cannot learn any such
precept, except from Scripture itself; and he cannot be obliged to find that
precept in Scripture, unless aforehand he knows independently of Scripture,
that there is such a precept, which as I said, is against the principles of
Protestants. Moreover, yourself teach, that the Scripture is a necessary
introduction to Faith, and therefore a man must first learn the Church, and of
the Church, before you can in wisdom refer him to the Scripture. Which is also
conform to Dr. Potters assertions, if he will not contradict himself. For
(Page: 139.) he teaches that the Church works powerfully and probably as the
highest humane Testimony (and you say Faith is but probable in the highest
degree, and consequently, the Church Works powerfully enough to settle an Act
of your kind of Faith) upon Nouices (and we speak of such) weakelings, and
doubters in the Faith; to instruct and confirm them till they may acquaint
themselves with, and understand the Scripture. Therefore men must first be
referred to the Church, and not to the Scripture, as Potter in the same place
says expressly: The Testimony of the present Church, though it be not the
last resolution of our Faith, yet it is the first external motive to it.

46. Secondly, you say to Charity Maintained; To the next question; cannot
General Counsels err? You pretend he answers 19. they may err damnably. Let
the Reader see the place, and he shall find damnably is your addition.

47. Answer. Amongst the Errata, or faults of the Print, Charity Maintained
notes this, in the (Page: 136. Lin. 22.) Damnably. Corrige, damnably. I mean it
ought not to be in a different or Curciffe letter, because it is not Dr.
Potters word, though it follow out of his doctrine. All this says Charity
Maintained in the correction of the Errata: where you see, he was scrupulous,
not to add one word, which was not expressly the Doctors, though it be most
true, that it does not only follow out of his doctrine (as Ch: Ma: says) but
his words in this very place at which you carp, signify no less, yea more. For
Ch: Ma: cites these words out of Potter (Page: 167.) General Counsels may
weakly, or wilfully misapply, or misunderstand, or neglect Scripture, and so
err. Now what difference is there to say, a general Council may err by
wilfully misapplying, or misunderstanding, or neglecting, Scripture, and a
Council may err damnably? Is it not damnable, wilfully to misapply or
misunderstand, or neglect Scripture? Nay wilfully expresses more then damnably;
because one may err damnably, if his error be culpable by reason of some
weakeness, (which D. Potter distinguishes from wilfullnes) or for sloth,
humane respects, of hope, fear etc. and yet not be so culpable, as when it
proceeds from wilfulness: and therefore Charity Maintained might have said, that
in the doctrine of Potter, General Counsels may err more than damnably. Have
we not heard the Doctors words (Page 212.) whatsoever is Revealed in Scripture
is such as can not be denied or Contradicted without infidelity? And shall not
a wilful misapplying, or neglect of Gods Word be damnable, and more then
simply damnable, even infidelity? The Doctor teaches, that the universal
Church cannot err fundamentally, but he neither does, nor can say (according
to the doctrine of Protestants) that Counsels cannot err fundamentally, and
if Fundamentally, surely damnably. But why do I spend time in this? Yourselfe
here (N. 53.) confess, that to say Prelates of Gods Church meeting in a Lawful
Council may err damnably, is not false for the matter, but only it is false,
that Dr. Potters says it (A great wrong to say the Doctor speaks a truth,
which he himself teaches!) and so finally Charity Maintained said not so much
as he might have said of Potters assertion, and therefore was far enough from
doing him any wrong.

48. Thirdly. Seeing that one must not, at first, be referred to Scripture, as
we have proved, nor to General Counsels, which Dr. Potter says may err
weakly, and so be deceaved, and wilfully, and so deceive, nor that he can
consult with the whole Church collectiue or all together, as you grant the
Doctor says; what remains, but that he must deal a part with every
particular member of the Church? Which being also impossible, as is clear of it
self (and when you seek to prove it, you labor for your Adversary, who
says the very same thing) it remains, that all the ways which Potter can
propose, to a man, desirous to save his soul, are not only ineffectuall, but
impossible also, and only chalk out a way to desperation, and that He, and
other Protestants, must have patience to be told this truth, that they must not
wonder, if contradictories be deduced from their Assertions, which they must
often vary, even against their wills. Ch: Ma: never intended to make, or not
make, a difference between the universal Church, and the whole Church
militant, but only (Page 137.) cites the Doctors words, as he finds them, and
proves, that they cannot serve, for the effect, of quieting an afflicted soul,
not regarding whether those different words, which he uses, signify any
different thing, or not.

49. Fourthly; Seeing in pursuit of some good and infallible ground, whereon to
settle Divine Faith, Potter can admit none but the Scripture, or the universal
Church, and that Scripture cannot instruct us with certainty, independently of
the Church, as we have demonstrated; nor that the whole Church can be
consulted; it remains only, that he must wish one to find out some, who
believes all fundame^tall points, and follow him, and that then the first
question to pass between them should be, to know whether he knows all such
points, and if this cannot be known, it is clear the Doctor can give no
satisfaction, to any considering man, desirous to know the truth. It is pretty
that you tell us, the Doctor in all his Book, gives no such Answer as this,
procure to know whether he believe all fundamental points of Faith; as if Ch:
Ma: had pretended to relate a history, and not only to tell the Reader, what
Potter, must be forced to answer, according to his grounds; Though, I grant, he
will by doing so, be necessitated to contradict both Truth, and Himself: And
you will never be able to show, but that Potter must make such answers, as Ch:
ma: expressed, if the Doctor will be faithful to his own grounds. Your
discourse about probabilities, and even wagers, is impertinent; both because we
deny, that indeed Dr. Potters opinion about the Creed, has any probability at
all, and because Ch: Ma: speaks only of probabilities, and even wagers, which
is a good comparison, seeing a thing very probable, does not hinder but that the
contradictory may be very probable, and so be eaven or equal one to an other;
and your talking of probability in the highest degree, is your own addition,
or fiction, and not the Doctors Assertion, as may be seen in his (Page 241.)
and yourself expressly confess, (N. 4. and 5. Page 194.) that he affirmed it
only, to be very probable, that the Creed contains all necessary points, of
those, which you call Credenda. What you write so often about the uncertainty
that one is a Pope, has been answered at large.

50. Fifthly. Who can deny, but that whosoever desires to be saved, and knows
that to obtain salvation, it is necessary to believe explicitly all
fundamental points, will instantly judge it necessary, to know what those
points be, as de facto, Chapter Mist. urged to have a Catalogue of them? Now, if to
satisfy this demand, Dr. Potter gives us no other answer, but only some
Definitions, and Descriptions, or Explications of the name Fundamental,
without specifying, what they are in particular, and so not satisfy at all the
desire of any wise man, what can I help that? Or who can blame Ch: Ma: for
having said, as much as Dr. Potters Book could enable him to say? Neither has
he patched up any thing, out of the Doctors Book, which he (the Doctor) is
not obliged to grant, according to his own grounds, as I have said.

51. Sixthly; Seeing every article contained in the Creed is not Fundamental,
it would be demanded with Chapter Ma. How shall one know, which in particular be,
and which be not fundamental? You say, Dr. Potter would have answered: it is a
vain question: believe all, and you shall be sure to believe all that is
Fundamental. But by your leave, this business cannot be dispatched to soon.
For by occasion of your Answer, I must make some demands; whether every one is
obliged, to believe, or know explicitly those points of the Creed, which are
not fund^mentall. To say, every one is bound; were to make them properly
Fundamental. For we have heard Potter saying, Fundamental properly is that,
which Christians are obliged to believe by an express and actual Faith. If
one be not obliged, to believe explicitly those points of the Creed which are
not fundamental, then I am not bound to know the Creed, that I may know them.
Perhaps some may say, I am obliged to know the Creed, because it contains
fundamental points, which I am bound to know expressly, and so I shall, at
least per accidens, and by consequence, be obliged to know all points contained
in the Creed, as well not Fundamental as Fundamental. This Answer must
suppose, that I am obliged under damnation, to know that Symbol, which we call
the Creed of the Apostles; and seeing Protestants profess, that all things
necessary to Salvation, are contained in Scripture alone, they must show out of
some express, evident text of Scripture, such a command, which you know is
impossible to be done, since Scripture never mentions any such thing, as the
Apostles Creed, and therefore one cannot be obliged to know points not
Fundamental, in virtue of a precept to know the Creed, seeing Protestants
cannot believe any command, obliging men to know the Creed etc. Besides, All
the Arguments, which prove that the Creed was composed by the Apostles, or that
it contains all fundamental points, must be grounded upon the Authority of
the Church, which according to Potter, and other Protestants, may err in
points not fundamental, and none of them affirms, that it is a fundamental
point, which all under damnation, are bound explicitly to believe, that the
Apostles composed the Creed, or that it contains all fundamental points; and
then, men, cannot be sure, that all points contained in it, are true; and much
less can they be obliged, to believe explicitly, by an act of Faith, every
Article thereof, according to the grounds of Protestants. Moreover, suppose one
were persuaded, that all the Articles contained in the Creed were true, yet the
arguments which Potter brings, from the sayings of ancient Fathers, and modern
Divines, can only, in the opinion of him, and all other Protestants, be
probable, and so cannot oblige every one to know the Creed, but men may keep
their liberty. Melior est conditio possidentis. And Potter himself confesses
it to be only probable, that the Creed contains all fundamental points, and
so he cannot oblige men to know the Creed, because it only probably contains
all necessary Articles. If then you cannot prove, that any is obliged to know
the Creed, in vain do you say, believe all, and you shall be sure to believe
all that is Fundamental: but you must say the direct contrary; Men are not in
the Principles of Protestants obliged to believe the Creed; Therefore they are
not obliged to believe, by it, any point, Fundamental, or not Fundamental.
You say, Dr. Potter says no where, that all the Articles of the Creed, are
fundamental; Neither does Chapter Ma. ever affirm, that he says so; but the
thing being of it self true, (and you expressly confess it to be true) He had
reason, joining it with other principles of the Doctor, to frame such a
Dialague as he did, between Potter, and some desirous to find the Truth. And
now, I hope it appears, that you had no reason to accuse Ch, Ma. of
vn-ingenious dealing, sit for a Fair, or Comedy; of sirang immodesty; of
adding to the Doctors words; of injustice; of blind zeal, transporting him
beyond all bounds of honesty and discretion, and making him careless of
speaking either truth or sense: That he is a prevaricating Proxy: That he
patches together a most ridiculous answer; That it appears to his shame etc:
and finally you say; certainly if Dr. Potter does Answer thus, I will make bold
to say, he is a very fool. But if he does not, then: But. I for bear you.
These be your modest epethitons. You say, that we Catholics, interpret those
divine prescriptions (Matthew: 5.) to be no more than Counsels. But I pray, what
Catholic ever taught, that our Savior delivered only a Counsel, when he
said; whosoever shall say to his brother, thou fool, shall be guilty of hell
fire? But all the rest of your acerbity, is nothing to that fearful
denunciation which you utter against Chapter Ma. that our errors (as you call
them) you fear, will be certainly destructive to such as he is, that is, to
all those, who have eyes to see and will not see.

52. In your (N. 64.) you cavil, that Chapter Ma. promises to answer D. Potters
Arguments against that which he (Chapter Ma.) said before. But presently forgetting
himself, in stead of answering the Doctors Arguments, falls a confuting his
Answers to the Argument of Chapter Ma.

53. Answer, Chapter ma. (N. 20.) promises to answer, not the Arguments, as you
say, but the Objections of Dr. Potter, against that which we had said before,
which be does perform (N. 21.22.27.) and N. 23. he begins to answer the
Doctors positive Arguments alleged to prove, that the Creed contains all
fundamental Articles of Faith. And the Confutations of the Doctors objections
are so strong, that you abandon your Client, and tell us, that he rather
glances at then builds upon the^; that they were said ex abundanti, and
therefore that you conceive it superfluous to examine the exceptions of Chapter Ma.
against them. This is an excellent answer, if it could be as satisfactory, as
it is easy. I must entreat the Reader to peruse the (N. 21.22.27. of Chapter Ma.)
and he will find, that Dr. Potter needed a Defense, which will be suspected
you did not give, because indeed you could not: and therefore you fly to an
other Answer, which you will not find in Dr. Potter; That Scripture is not a
point necessary to be explicitly believed. And How ought Protestants to accept
this answer; who teach that we can believe nothing belonging to Christian
Faith, but by Scripture alone, which if they believe not Actually, nor are
bound to believe it, how can they Actually believe, or be obliged to believe
the contents thereof? If the Church in your opinyon, be not infallible, and
that me^ are not obliged to believe the Scripture to be the word of God, and
infallible (which to them, who believe is not it all one, as if it were not)
what certainty can Protestants have, either that the Creed contains all
fundamental Articles of simple belief, or that those which it contains, are
true? you say Gregory of Ualentia, seems to confess, the Creeds being
collected out of Scripture, and supposing the Authority of it. But Ualentia
(2.2. Disp. 1. Quest. 1. Punct. 4.) said only, that the Creed contains those
things, which are in different places contained in Scripture, which is
evidently true; but he says not; the Creed was collected out of Scripture,
which was written after the Creed was composed; one thinghe says, which had
been more for your purpose to observe, that in believing the Creed, we are to
regard the sense. Non enim (says he) sufficit haerere in cortice verborum.

54. Subtract from your (N. 65.) what has been answered already, or may be
answered by a mere denial, or which implies a begging of the Question, there
will remain only your saying (which yet I cannot say deserves any answer) that
Chapter Ma. speaks that which is hardly sense, in calling the Creed an abridgment
of some Articles of Faith. For I demand (say you) these some Articles which you
speak of, which are they? Those that are out of the Creed, or those that are in
it? Those that are in it, it comprehends at large, and therefore it is not an
abridgment of them: Those that are out of it, it comprehends not at all, and
therefore is not an abridgment of them. If you would call it now an abridgment
of the Faith, this would be sense, and signify thus much, That all the
necessary Articles of Christian Faith are comprised in it. For it is the proper
duty of abridgments, to leave out nothing necessary, and to take in nothing
unnecessary.

55. Answer; this your subtility is so far from being of any solidity, that it
overthrowes all abridgments, contradicts Dr. Potter, and yourselfe, and proves,
that the Creed performs not the proper dury of an abridgment, as you say it
is; and therefore you are injurious to, it and the composers thereof. First your
objection may be made against every Abredgment, by demanding, whether it be an
abridgment of those points that are out of it, or of those that are in it?
Those that are in it, it comprehends at large, and therefore it is not an
abridgment of them: Those that are out of it, it comprehends not at all, and
therefore it is not an abridgment of them. Secondly; you contradict Dr. Potter,
who says, (Page: 234.) The Creed is an abstract or Abridgment of such
necessary Doctrines as are delivered in Seripture, or collected ous of it: And
Charity Maintay. says, it is an abridgment of some articles, and so the words
of the Doctor are more restrained and limited, than those of Chapter Ma. who
specifyed not necessary Doctrines, but used the sign, some, which abstracts
from necessary or not necessary, and in that sense is more illimited, and may
be better divided into diverse members or parts, and so more capable of being
compendiated, than if it were more simple and individed, and as it were of it
self a compendium, before it could be compendiated. Now I pray you tell the
Doctor of Divinity, that he speaks that which is hardly sense: and demand of
him; these necessary Doctrines, of which you say the Creed is an abridgment,
which are they? Those that are out of the Creed, or those that are in it? Those
that are in it, it comprehends at large and therefore, it is not an abridgment
of them. Those that are out of it, it comprehends not at all, and therefore it
is not an abridgment of them. Thirdly: yourself in the beginning of this
Chapter (N. 1. and 5.) say, that the Doctors Assertion is, that the Creed is a
Summary of all those Doctrines (or Credenda) which all men are bound
particularly to believe, and this you endeavor to make good, through the whole
Chapter. Now, you must ask yourself; whether the Creed be a Summary of these
Doctrines, or Credenda, which are in it, or which are out of it etc. and so
apply your Argument against yourself, and the Doctor. In this very place you
say, if it be called an abridgment of the Faith, this would be sense. But if
this would be sense, I am sure your objection can have none. For then again
ask of yourselfe, whether it be an abridgment, of such points of the Faith, as
are in it, or as are out of it; and you will find that every syllable of your
own objection, must be answered by yourselfe. Besides, is it an abridgment of
all, or of some part of the Faith? You will not say it is an abridgment of all
the Faith, seeing you confess, that much of the Faith is not in the Creed,
namely those points which you call agenda, and you tell us, it cannot be an
abridgment of such articles as it co^prehends not. If then it be not an
abridgme^t of all articles of Faith, and yet is an abridgment of Faith, as you
confess; it must be an abridgment of some Articles of Faith, which are the
very words and proposition of Chapter ma. which you impugn and say, it is hardly
sense. Fourthly. Having told us that all the necessary Articles of the
Christian Faith are comprised in the Creed, you add; for this is the proper
duty of abridgme^ts to leave out nothing necessary, and to take in nothing
vnnecescessary. Now, you grant, that there are in the Creed, some articles not
necessary, or Fundamental, therefore the Creed or the composers thereof, faild in
the proper duty of abridgments, or if you deny this consequence you must deny
your own words, that the proper duty of abridgments is to take in nothing
unnecessary; or finally deny, that which you expressly grant, that in the Creed
there are some points vnfundamentall, and so heap contradiction upon
contradiction. On the other side, Agenda are necessary, and yet are not
contained in the Creed, and so neither part of your proper duty of abridgments
is true. The truth is you abuse the word necessary, not distinguishing between
necessary to be believed, and necessary to be set down in the Creed, For
neither is it necessary, that all necessary points of belief be expressed in the
Creed (as you confess Agenda are not) nor is it necessary, that no point
vnfundamentall, or unnecessary, be set down therein: only it was necessary for
the Apostles, to set down all that, which the Holy Ghost moved them to
express, with which it is also necessary for us to be content: notwithstanding
your topicall humane reasons to the contrary. But what answer shall we give to
your objection? Truly it is so easy a task, that I scarsely judge it necessary
to give any at all. For what is more easy, then to say? The Creed is an
abridgment of some Articles, not because it does not contain them, but because
it contains them not at large, with explanations, proofs, illustrations,
deductions, sequels, conclusions, and the like. For if one set down at large,
all that he pretends to abridg, he is not an Abbreviator, but an Amanuensis, or
Copist. And in this I may allege your self, who in this very Chapter (N. 31.)
say; Summaries must not omit any necessary Doctrine of that Science whereof they
are Summaries, though the Illustrations and Reasons of it they may omit. Thus
then the Creed may be an abridgment of some Articles, both fundamental, and
not fundamental, without any such nonsense, as you are pleased to object. But
surely it will seem somewhat strange to say, as you do, Those Articles that
are in the Creed it comprehends at large, and therefore it is not an abridgment
of them: as if nothing can be set down in the Creed, or any other writing,
clearly, and particularly, but it must be set down at large; which is to take
away all brief and compendious treatises; and therefore, as I said, your self
must answer your own objection. Out of what we have said, is answered your
(N. 66.) wherein you, and the Doctor, must either suppose, and beg the
question, in supposing that all points of simple belief are contained in the
Creed, or else his Argument is of no force at all.

56. To your (N. 67.68.) the Answer is very easy, that all those interrogations
of Potter, which you call plain and convincing Arguments, are nothing but
plain beggings of the question, and suppose that the whole way to heaven; all
Articles of Faith; the whole Counsel of God; all necessary matters; are
contained in the Creed; which you know is the thing controverted. The Doctor
should first have proved, that the Creed contains all necessary points, and
then have urged those his interrogations: May the Churches of after ages make
the narrow way to heaven narrower then our Savior left it etc. Do not you,
and the Doctor, acknowledge, that men cannot come to heaven by believing only
the contents of the Creed, but must also believe Agenda? and besides the Faith
of both these kinds of Articles, they must keep the commandments, and so the
Doctor, must answer his own interrogations: and he himself was guilty of
what I have said; I mean, that all his interrogations could be to no purpose,
unless first it be proved, that the Creed contains all necessary points. For
this cause (Page 222.) after he had, in a concionatory way, made his
interrogations, he says: All that can be replied to this discourse is this,
that the whole Faith of those times is not contained in the Apostles Creed, as
if a man should say, this is not the Apostles Creed, but a part of it. Now
Char. Maint. (Page 143. N. 25.) and in the following numbers, having answered
this, and other objections, and some of them in his second part (Chap. 7.)
through diverse numbers, it remains that all his interrogations were fully
answered; the very foundation, upon which they stood (that the Creed contains
all necessary points) being demolished, and in particular his interrogation,
What tyranny is it to impose any new necessary matters on the Faith of
Christians? Seeing yourselfe acknowledge, that he professes the Creed to
contain all necessary points of Faith, not absolutely, but as it was further
opened and explained in some parts (by occasion of emergent Heresies) in the
other Catholic Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesius, Chalcedon, and
Athanasius, which are his own words (Page: 216.) and therefore he must answer his
own demand, What tyranny is it to impose any new unnecessary matters etc.
Since the declaration of those Counsels, were long after the Apostles time:
and for this cause, you expressly profess, to forsake the Doctor, in this his
explication of the Creed, as we have seen hertofore.

57. To your (N. 69.70.71.72.73.) I answer; Chapter Ma. had reason to say, that
Potter citing the words of S. Paul (Act. 20. V. 27.) adds this gloss of his
own (needful for our salvation.) For the Apostle both in our translation, and
in the Protestant English Bible, has, profitable, not, needful, and yourselfe
here (N. 69.) grant the same. And speaking in rigor, that which is strictly
profitable, is not needful, or necessary, nor that which is properly needful,
is profitable, as profitable and needful, are membra contradistincta, as when
we distinguish Means to some End, that some are profitable, others necessary;
and you know it is in Logic no good division, wherein one of the membra
dividentia includes the other; and therefore, your saying to Ch: Ma: I hope you
will make no difficulty to grant that whatsoever is needful for salvation is
very profitable, is spoken with greater confidence, then truth. But for our
present purpose, seeing the Apostle (Uers. 20.) says, I have withdrawn nothing
that was profitable, and says not, I have withdrawn nothing that was
needful, it follows, that the Apostle taught, not only necessary, but also
profitable things; and thence I infer, that when he says (V. 27.) I have not
spared to declare unto you all the counsel of God, he meant not only of
necessary, but also of profitable points, and therefore of more the^ are
contained in the Creed. For which cause he (C Ma.) had reason to take notice of
this place in particular, which clearly shows, out of the very text of
Scripture, which Potter cites, his interrogations to be of no force, but only
to beg the question, by supposing untruly, that whatsoever the Apostles
revealed to the Church, is contained in the Creed. To salve this you say (N.
70.) It is not D. Potter that beggs the Question, but you that mistake it,
which is not here in this particular place, whether all points of simple
Belief necessary for the salvation of the primitive Christians were contained
in the Apostles Symbol? (for that and the proofs of it follow after in the
next ( Page 223. of Dr. Potter:) but whether any thing can be necessary for
Christians to believe now which was not so from the beginning.

58. Answer. Dr. Potter (Page: 216.217.) says: The Creed of the Apostles is
said generally by the Schoolmen and Fathers, to comprehend a perfect Catalogue
of Fundamental truths; and to imply a full rejection of Fundamental heresies:
and has been received by Orthodox Christians, as an absolute summarie of the
Christian Faith. For proof whereof, we will first argue ad hominem and teach
the Mistaker how to esteem of his Creed, out of his own Masters. And then
having alleged diverse Catholic Writers, to prove his Assertion, he adds; it
were easy to multiply testimonies to this effect, out of their late and ancient
school Doctors if it were not tedious. All agree that the Creed briefly
comprehends all Fundamental principles or rudiments of Faith; that it is a
distinctiue Character severing Orthodox believers from insidels and heretics,
that it is a full, perfect, and sufficient summary of the Catholic Faith. Thus
he. And immediately after says: Their judgment (that is the judgment of
Catholic Authors whom he alleged) herein that is for the purpos of proving the
Creed to contain all Fundamental Articles, seems full of reason. And his
reasons he setts down in these words immediately following: For how can it be
necessary for any Christian to have more in his Creed, then the Apostles had,
and the Church of their times? May the Church of after ages make the narrow way
to heaven, narrower then our Savior left it? And so he goes on with his
interrogations, and in the same context has these words of which we speak;
The Apostles profess they revealed to the Church the whole counsel of God
keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation: What Tyranny then is it to
impose any new necessary matters on the Faith of Christians? I pray you
consider, whether he does not speak expressly of the Apostles Creed, when he
says, How can it be necessary for any Chrictian to have more in this Creed
then the Apostles had, and the Church of their time? And do not you (N. 15.)
expressly understand these words of the Doctor of the Apostles Creed, as it is
a full comprehension of that part of the belief of the Apostles which
co^taines only the necessary articles of simple Faith? And consequently when
the Doctor asks, How can it be necessary for any Christian to have more in
his Creed then the Apostles had, his demand must be; How can it be necessary
for any Christian, to believe more then the Creed contains? Which evidently
supposes, that the Creed contains all things necessary; otherwise it might be
necessary, to believe some thing, not contained in the Creed. Besides, what
connection can there be in the Doctors words, taken in your sense, which will
make him argue in this manner? No Christian is obliged to believe more then the
Apostles believed, who certainly believed more then is contained in the Creed,
Therefore the judgment of those who teach that the Creed contains all
Fundamental points is full of reason. And indeed the Doctor had no occasion at
all, to prove, that it can not be necessary, for any Christian, to believe more
then the Apostles did believe, neither did Ch: Ma: say any such thing. And why
do you (N. 67.) exact of C Ma: an answer to D. Potters interrogations, if they
prove only, that no Christian is obliged to believe more then the Apostles
believed, which as I said Ch: Ma: never denied. Will you have him (C: Ma:)
confute his own judgment, and answer those arguments, which were intended only
to prove his own belief? Thus while you will be clearing the Doctor, from
begging the question, you make him with great pains, and pomp of words, make
many patheticall interrogations nothing to the purpose, and grant that which is
the only maine point, that those his interrogations, prove not, that all
fundamental points be contained in the Creed. Choose of these inconveniences
which you please. Truly I cannot imagine, that any man would have dreamed, that
Dr. Potter did not intend, by those interrogations, to prove that the Creed
contains all fundamental points; whether we consider the only question in
hand, or the clear connection, and thread of his words, as I have showed, and
that all his interrogations tended to make good, that no Christian can be
obliged to believe more, as necessary, then the Apostles believed to be
necessary; of which necessary points you say (N, 65.) the Creed is a full
comprehension, and consequently, that he intended to prove so much by his
interrogations, though, I grant, he faild in his proofs and performance of his
intention; which he perceiving, did afterward seek to corroborate them with
other reasons; which consideration, beside what has been said, does evidently
declare, that in his interrogations he intended to persuade us, that the Creed
contains all necessary points of Faith. For let us suppose with you, that his
purpos was only to prove, that no Christian is bound to believe more then the
Apostles believed, and not, that no Christian is bound to believe more then the
(...), with what connection, or sense, could Potter say immediately after those
interrogations? All that can be replied to this discourse is, that the whole
Faith of those times is not contained in the Apostles Creed; which (...) all
one as if a man should say, this is not the Apostles Creed, but a part of it.
For the Apostles and the Church of their times in giving it this name, do^ they
not plainly tell us that the Sum and Substance of their Credenda is
comprised in it? If Potter in his interrogations, meant only to prove, that no
Christian is bound to believe more the^ the Apostles believed, how did he
imagine, that it could be replied, against that discourse, and those
interrogations of his, that the whole Faith of those times is not contained in
the Apostles Creed, if, I say, his discourse according to your interpretation,
aimed at no such matter? Or to what purpos does the Doctor as soon as he had
said, that nothing could be replye to his discoursed, except that the whole
Faith of those times, is not contained in the Apostles Creed, instantly set
himself to prove, that the Creed contains the Sum, and substance of the
Credenda of the Apostles, and Church of their times? As if by proving this,
that reply were confuted, and his Interrogations made good; which yet had been
good (if they were understood of the whole extent of the Apostles belief)
though it were supposed, that the Creed contains not all fundamental points
of Faith. For whether it contained them or no, it is most true, that no
Christian is obliged, to believe more then the Apostles believed of things,
contained, and not contained, in the Creed. Look now whether I may not retort
the words which you direct against Charity Maintayn? Consider I pray a little
better, and then I hope you will acknowledge, that there was no Petitio
principij in Dr. Potter, but rather Ignoratio Elencht, in you.

59. You do but loose time, in proving, that S. Paul (Act: 20.) spoke to the
Pastors, yet that he spoke of what he taught not only them, but also the Laity
as well as them. And you wonder Charity Maintained should read the Text so
negligently, as not to observe it. Chapter Ma. never said, that the Apostle spoke
to the Pastors only, or that he instructed them only, but that the said words
were directed particularly to the Pastors or Governors of the Church, and
yourselfe grant the Apostle did all these things (of which he speaks) to the
Pastors among the rest, nay above the rest: and therefore C: Ma: did clearly
deduce, that the Doctor could not collect from those words, that the Apostle
spoke of things necessary, for all sorts of persons, to believe; seeing (Page;
244.) He acknowledges, that more knowledge is necessary in Bishops, and
Priests, to whom is committed the government of the Church, then in vulgar
Laics, as Charity Maintained observes; and consequently, he could not gather
out of those words, what points be necessary for all, and much less that all
necessary points are contained in the Creed. In a word, the Apostle spoke of
more then all are obliged to believe, and more then is contained in the Creed,
and therefore, Potter could not prove by those words, that if it were necessary
for every one, to believe more than is contained in the Creed, every one must
believe more, or as much, as the Pastors are obliged to believe.

60. No wonder if those Reasons of Dr. Potter, which you mention (N 74.) were
not particularly answered, being so clearly false, as they are answered by a
mere denial. For that the Ancient Church appointed her infants to be
instructed for matters of simple belief only in the Creed, and admitted her
Catechumens unto baptism and strangers to her communion, upon their only
profession of the Creed, is evidently false. For how many notorious heretics
pretend to believe the Creed? Which therefore alone, without other knowledge, and
circumstances of the persons, etc. could not be sufficient to admit strangers
into the communion of the Church: and who knows not that Catechumens are
instructed, in many more points of Faith, then are expressed in the Creed?
Infants, if you speak properly cannot be instructed in the Creed, or any other
part of Christian Faith? Their Patrini surely know more points of Faith, then
the Creed alone. But why did you not confute the answer, which you confess Ch:
Ma: gives to Potters Fourth Reason about the letters called formatae, which
contain more then the Creed, as may be seen in Charity Maintained (Par: 2. P:
171.) and it will be found, that you had reason to disse^ble his discourse,
which proves, that more was required to be believed then only the Creed, as
appears even by Potter himself, speaking of those letters (Page: 224.) in
these words: If in those letters he did profess entirely to adhere to the
Catholic Creeds, his profession and person was accepted as sound and Orthodox.
Where you see the belief of more Creeds was required, then of the Apostles
Creed only.

61. Although the rest of the numbers in this Chapter, contain no particular
difficulty, which may not be solved, by our former grounds, and therefore might
well be omitted, especially seeing you, and the Doctor, grant as much, as is
more then sufficient, for our maine purpos, that in vain Protestants allege
their belief of the Creed, to show that they agree in all Fundamental points
of Faith, and it appears very clear of it self, seeing it contains not all
essential points of Christian practice, yet I will cast an eye on your Numbers
(75.76.77.78.79.80.81.82.83.84.) as they lie in order. Diverse Points, which
have connection, or were circumstances of the Articles set down in the Creed,
might have been expressed, besides those which are specified in it, and therefore
Chapter Ma. may still ask, why some such are expressed, and others are not; and you
must finally answer, with Chapter Ma., that the Apostles set down those Points
Fundamental, and not Fundamental, which the Holy Ghost inspired them to
deliver; as you say, they were inspired to set down Credenda, and not Agenda,
though these be of no less importance, and necessity then those, and you still
beg the Question (N. 75.) that the end which the Apostles proposed, was to set
down all necessary points of Faith. The reasons which you give (N. 76.) why
some mysteries were omitted, and others set down, can only be congruences of
that which is done de facto, and not arguments convincing that they could not
have done otherwise, the^ they did, and if they had set down others, and not
these, there could not have wanted reasons for their so doing. That the three
Sages who came to adore our Savior, were also Kings, is no new invention of
Chapter Ma. but the judgment of the Ancient; as may be seen in Cornelius a Lapide
(in Matthew. Chap. 2.) citing by name the Saints, Ciprian, Basil, Chrisostom.
Hierom, Hilary, and Tertullian, Isidore, Beda, Idacius. The words which you
cited out of Gordonius Huntlaeus (Contr: 2. Cap. 10. N. 10.) that the Apostles
were not so forgetful, after the receiving of the holy Ghost, as to leave out
any prime and Principal Foundation of Faith, make nothing for your purpos;
seeing we dispute not whether any prime or principal foundation of Faith be
left out (for we acknowledge that the Creed expresses the Creator of all
things, and Redeemer of mankind, as also the Blessed Trinity, Resurrection,
Catholic Church, Remission of sins, and life everlasting, which of
themselves, are prime and principal foundations of our Faith, if they be
understood, according to the interpretation, and tradition of the Church) but
whether any necessary, (though not prime, and principal) be left out; and that
may well be necessary, which is not prime and principal, as many parts are
necessary to make a house, which are not the prime, and principal parts
thereof. Yet indeed Gordonius in that 10. Chapter, assigns the properties of
the foundation of Faith, that is, of that Authority upon which our Faith
relies; which he proves (Chap. 11.) not to be Scripture alone, and (C. 12.) not
to be the private spirit; but (Chap, 13.) to be the Church, and he says, the
Apostles could not leave out of their Creed (in quo continentur omnia prima
fundamenta Fidei) this primum and praencipuum Fidei fundamentum. Where you see
he speaks of the First foundations of Faith, and more things may be necessary
than the First foundations. Besides, we deny not, but all necessary points are
contained in the Creed, in some of those senses, which I have declared
hertofore: which being well considered (particularly that Article of the
Catholic Church) will demonstrate, that the Creed, together with those means,
which are affoarded us by tradition etc: for the true understanding thereof, and
undoubted supplying of what is not contained in it, is of no less use, and
profit, then if all points had been expressed, which indeed had been to little
purpos, yea would have proved noxious, by the malice of men, without the
declaration of the Church, for the Orthodox sense, and meaning of them.

62. You do not well in saying, that Charity Maintained denies this
consequence of Dr. Potter (That as well, nay better, they might have given no
Article but that of the Church, and sent us to the Church for all the rest. For
in setting down others besides that, and not all, they make us believe we have
all, when we have not all) and neither gives reason against it, nor satisfies
his reason for it. For Charity Maintained performs both those things, neither
of which you say he performs, as every one may see, who reads his (N. 29.) to
say nothing, that in good Logic the defendent is not obliged to give a reason,
why he denies a consequence, it being reason sufficient, that the opponent, or
disputant proves it not; though yet indeed Charity Maintained does show the
insufficiency of the Doctors inference, by giving the like consequences, which
confessedly cannot be good, and yourselfe endeavor to answer the reasons of
Charity Maintained, which he brought against the said inference of Potter. You
say, If our doctrine were true this short Creed, I believe the Roman Church to
be infallible, would have been better, that is, more effectual, to keep the
believers of it from heresy, and in the true Faith, then this Creed which now
we have: a proposition so evident, that I cannot see, how either you, or any of
your religion or indeed any sensible man can from his heart deny it. Yet because
you make show of doing so, or else, which I rather hope, do not rightly
aprehende the force of the Reason, I will endeavor briefly to add some light
and strength to it, by comparing the effects of those sever all supposed Creeds.

63. Answer: perhaps I shall say in the beginning, that which will make your
endeavor, prove vain. You say: If our doctrine were true, this short Creed, I
believe the Roman Church to be infallible, would have been botter, that is,
more effectual to keep the believes of it from heresy, and in the true
Faith, then this Creed which now we have. But this ground of yours is evidently
false. For the effect, or Fruit, or Goodness, or Betternesse (so to speak) of
the Creed, is not sufficiently explicated, by being more effectual to keep
men from heresy, and in the true Faith, but it implies also, some particular
articles, which are to be believed, in the belief of which, that we may not
err, the infallibility of the Church directs and secures us, which office she
might, and would, have performed, although this Article, I believe the
Catholic Church directs, and secures us, had not been expressed in the Creed:
yea that article, and the whole Creed, supposes the infallibility of the Church
to have been proved, and believed antecede^ter to the^, that so we may be
assured, all the conte^ts thereof, to be infallibly true. Now by the precise
belief of that Creed, which you propose, taken alone, we could not believe any
particular article of Faith; because this precise act, I believe the Church to
be infallible, terminates in that one object of the infallibility of the
Church, from which I grant the belief of other particular objects may be
derived, when the Church shall propose the^, but the^ ipso facto, we should
begin to believe other particular objects, and so have an other Creed, and not
that little one, of which you speak, and besides which, we are obliged to
believe other particular revealed Truths; and therefore we must still have some
other Creed, or Catechism, or what you would have it called, besides that one
article of the Catholic Church, as Charity Maintained observes (Page: 144.) and
consequently, though that article of the Church, have that great, and necessary
effect, of keeping us from heresy, and in the true Faith; yet it wants that
other property of a Creed, of setting down particular Truths. Whence it
follows, that that article alone cannot be a Creed, as men speak of Creeds,
and particular points may be a Creed, though that article of the Church were
not expressed, but presupposed, and proved independently, both of the Creed, and
Scripture, in manner declared heretofore. And here Dr. Potter should remember
his own doctrine, and the doctrine of most Protestants, that the Church cannot
err in Fundamental Articles of Faith, and therefore, according to your manner
of arguing, this short Creed I believe the Church to be infallible in all
Fundamental points, would have been better, that is, more effectual to keep
the believers of it from heresy and in the true Faith, then this Creed which
now we know: and so, either you must forsake the Doctor, about the Churches
infallibility in fundame^talls, or he must reject your argument and both of you
grant, that you prove nothing against Ch: Ma: but only contradict one another:
You confess, that the Creed contains not Agenda; why do you not say? It had
been better to refer us to the Church, then to set down in the Creed only
Credenda, which alone are not sufficient to bring any man to heaven; and so
make men think hey have all in the Creed, when the have scharsly half.
Motrover, If you respect only infallibility, or being more effectual to keep
men from heresy; in your grounds, neither the Articles of the Church, nor the
other articles, as they are now in the Creed, could have so great commodity,
and no danger (as you say, speaking of the Churches infallibility) as this one
general article, believe the Scripture to be infallible; and therefore, either
you must take this one article as the best Creed, (which no man will ever
grant) or answer your own argument, by saying: To believe the Scripture, is
too general an object, and that a Creed, or Catechism, must include some
other particular objects; or some such answer you must give, which will be
easily turned upon yourselfe. Thus your (N. 78. and 79.) which go upon your
first supposition, that that Creed is the better that keeps the believer of it
from heresy etc, remain confuted and the Syllogism which you make, proves a
mere paralogisme. For, that petite Creed, which you propose, would be so far
from having greater commodities (in order to the intent of Creeds) then this
other, that it could be no Creed at all, in that sense, in which hitherto the
ancient Fathers, and all Divines have spoken of Creeds, and of summaries of
Faith. If you have a mind to change the name, and meaning of Creeds, and to
substitute some one proposition, indeed I know no better, in order to use and
safety, then this The visible Church of Christ is infallible. For this being
once believed, I may learn what is true Scripture, what the sense thereof, what
points be necessary in all occasions; which commodity we cannot attain by
Scripture alone, as has been often said,

64. You say (N. 80.) That having compared the inference of Chapter ma. and Dr.
Potters together, you cannot discover any shadow of resemblance between them,
nor any show of reason why the perfection of the Apostles Creed should exclude
a necessity of some Body to deliver it. Much less why the whole Creeds
containing all things necessary, should make the belief of a part of it
unnecessary. As well for ought I understand, you might avouch this inference to
be as good, as Dr. Potters: The Apostles Creedcontaines all things necessary,
therefore there is no need to believe in God. Neither does it follow so well, as
Dr. Potters Argument follows, That if the Apostles Creed contains all things
necessary, that all other Creeds and Catechismes wherein are added diverse other
particulars, are superfluous. For these other particulars may be the duties of
obedience, they may be profitable points of Doctrine, they may be good
expositions of the Apostles Creed, and so not superfluous; and yet for all this
the Creed may still contain all points of belief that are simply necessary.
These therefore are poor consequences but no more like Dr. Potters, then an
apple is likean Oister.

65. Answer; Dr. Potter argued, that if the Apostles, did not deliver in the
Creed all necessary points, they might as well have given only that Article of
the Church. Which manner of arguing Chapter Ma. retorts, and says, we may rather
infer thus: If the Apostles delivered in the Creed, all necessary points, what
need we any Church to teach us? And consequently what need is there of the
Atticle concerning the Church? What need we the Creed of Nice, Constantinople,
etc. Superfluous are your Cathecismes, wherein besides the articles of the
Creed, you have diverse other particulars. These would be poor consequences,
and so. is yours. Thus Chapter Ma.; who, as you see, does not approve these
consequences, but expressly says, they are poor ones. Which consequences,
while you also, labor to disprove, you do but take pains for your adversary,
to your own cost. But at least you will say, there is no shadow of resemblance
between them, and that of Dr. Potters. Yes; there is this resemblance: That as
the Doctor argues: all necessary points are not contained in the Creed,
therefore, it had been as good, or better, to have no Article of the Creed, but
that of the Church, least that as he says (Page 226.) in setting down others
besides that, and yet not all, they may make us believe we have all, when we
have not all: So, contrarily, Ch: Ma: argues; That if all other necessary
points be contained in the Creed, what need we the Church to teach us, or that
Article of the Church? which deduction might be made good, by the Doctors
fear, least that if we have that Article of the Church, we may think that
alone sufficient, (wherein he might be confirmed by the commodityes which you
say are implied in the point of the Churches infallibility) and so be
careless, in seeking any other particular object, or article of Faith. Which
argument is like to that of the Doctors, except only, that indeed it is much
better than his, and may be made a kind of demonstration, by adding, that, in
your grounds, the article of the Church is not fundamental, or necessary to
salvation, and therefore whosoever believes all the articles of the Creed (if it
be supposed to contain all necessary points of Faith) may be saved, though he
believe not that of the Church, of which you say expressly in this your fourth
Chapter (N. 34.45.) that it is not a fundamental article, and consequently,
not necessary to salvation: yea, it is further inferred from hence, that D.
Potters argument is of no force; seeing it cannot be better to have one only
unnecessary article of Faith, then to have diverse fundamental articles (which
no man denies the Creed to contain) and want that one, not necessary, or
vnfundamentall point. You say, that you cannot discover any show of reason, why
the perfection of the Apostles Creed should exclude a necessity of some body to
deliver it. Neither can I discover, how this argument is not against yourselfe,
who teach that the Creed contains all necessary points of Faith, and that the
article, which does concern the Church, is none of those necessary points:
from whence it follow, that the perfection of the Creed, that is the belief of
all necessary articles, excludes a necessity of believing that article of the
Church. For it implies contradiction, that I should believe all that is
necessary to be believed, and yet some other points should be necessary, or
that a point not necessary, should be necessary. Neither is this, in your
grounds, to exclude a necessity of some body to deliver the Creed, but only, to
exclude a necessity of believing, that this must be done by a perpetual
visible Church, which you say (N. 34.) is not a fundamental article; and the
same you teach in diverse other places of your Book. You add, much less can I
discover any show of reason, why the whole Creeds containing all things
necessary should make the belief of a part of it unnecessary. As well, (for
ought I under stand) you might avouch this inference to be as good as Dr.
Potters: The Apostles Creed contains all things necessary, therefore their is no
need to believe in God. But who makes any such general or causall inference?
Because the whole Creed contains all things necessary, therefore the belief of
a part of it is unnecessary: rather we must say the contrary; Because it
contains diverse necessary points, therefore the belief of diverse of them is
necessary. I hope you will not deny this to be a good consequence; the Creed
contains all necessary articles, together with some not necessary; Therefore
the belief of some part of it is not necessary. And I wonder you would
parallel our belief in God, with that of the Church, since the one is the most
necessary article of all others, and the other, in your opinion, is not
necessary. The rest of your discourse in this Number, serves only to confirm
the argument of Chapter Ma. who never said absolutely, that if the Apostles Creed
contain all things necessary, all other Creeds, and Catechismes are
superfluous, but expressly called it a poor consequence, and yet that it was as
good as Potters, which must be to this effect: It is enough (upon the Doctors
supposition, not in truth) or it is only necessary, to believe the article of
the Church, Therefore it is superfluous to believe other articles contained in
the Creed.

66. In your (N. 81.) you are pleased to spend words in vain. D. Potter says,
As well, nay better, they might have given us no article but that, and sent us
to the Church for all the rest. Chapter Ma. having first proved, this inference, to
be of no force; by way of superrogation, grants the thing inferred, not
absolutely, but thus far (which words you leave out, and yet they overthrow
all that you say here) that, de facto, our B. Savior has sent us to the
Church; by her to be taught, and by her alone: because she was before the Creed
and Scriptures; and she to discharge this imposed office of instructing us had
delivered us the rCeed, holy Scripture, unwritten, Divine, Apostolical,
Ecclesiastical Traditions. Thus Chapter Ma. has granted you all that he pretended
to grant, as might have been apparent, if you had not omitted his first words
(Thus far) and not farther, nor so far, as you would needs make him to have
pretended.

67. Your (N. 82.83.) have been answered already. For if Dr. Potter meant, that
the article of the Church, might be sufficient, as containing all things
necessary to be believed, and that therefore we needed not the Creed, Chapter Ma.
says truly, it is no good argument; The Creed contains not all things
necessary, and that article of the Church, is in rigor sufficient; Therefore the
Creed is not profitable: or if the Doctor meant, that the article of the
Church were enough, because the Church afterward, would teach all things by
Creeds, or Catechismes etc. that were but to leave the Creed, and afterward to
come to it; and indeed to tell us, that the Church must do that, which had
been done already: and therefore in what sense soever you take the Doctors
argument, it was confuted by Chapter Ma. But now, while you pretend to stand for
the sufficiency of the Creed, in all necessary points of belief, you do
indeed overthrow it, while you speak to Chapter Ma., in this manner: Supposing the
Apostles had written ^hese Scriptures as they have written, wherein all the
Articles of their Creed are plainly delivered, and preached that doctrine which
they did preach, and done all other things as they have done, besides the
compossng their simbol: I say, if your doctrine weretrue, they had done a work
infinitely more beneficial to the Church of Christ, if they had never composed
their simbol, which is but an imperfect comprehension of the necessary points
of simple belief, and no distinctiue mark as a Simbol should be between those
that are true Christians, and those that are not so; but in steed thereof, had
delivered this one proposition, which would have been certainly effectual for
all the forsaid good inte^ts and purposes, the Roman Church shall be for ever
infallible in all things, which she proposes as matters of faith. who sees not
that according to this discourse of yours, the Apostles assuring us, that the
scripture is infallible, and evide^t in all necessary points, de facto have
done as much service to the Church, as you say they would have done, by that
article, I believe the Roman Church shall be for ever infallible. For this
evidence of Scripture being supposed, you teach, that there is no need of a
guide or an infallible Church, when the way is plain of it self. And if,
notwithstanding this your doctrine, of the sufficiency of Scripture alone, the
Creed is not unprofitable, and that the Apostles have done better service to
the Church, by giving us both the Creed, and Scripture: So I say, that one
article of the Church, together with the Creed, had been more profitable, and
of greater service, then that Article alone; yea the Church, as I said, must
have delivered some Creed, and it was a great service to us, that the Apostles
had done it to her hand. If you deny this, you must deny the Creed, and
Scripture, to be de facto more profitable, then the Scripture alone, and so the
Creed shall be of no profit. For I suppose, if either the Creed, or Scripture
be not profitable, you will say it is the Creed, rather then the Scripture. If
you say, the articles of the Creed being clearly, but diffusedly set down in
the Scripture, (as Potter speaks) have been afterward summed up and
contracted into the Apostles Creed, which therefore is of great use: I reply,
that by this answer, you teach us to confute your argument, by saying, that, as
Scripture is too large for a Creed, or an abridgment, so this one article of
the Church, is too short for a Creed, or abridgment of Faith, and must have
been enlarged, by some Creed, Cathecisme, etc. And as Potter, and you, limited
the promise of our Savior, to the Church, that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, to fundamental points, or to a sufficient, but not a
certainly effectual assistance, or some other way; the same would you have
done though he had specified the Roman Church.

78. Your last (N. 84.) contains nothing in effect, besides what you and
Potter have said, and has been confuted already. We deny not, but that the
Creed, contains all fundamental points in the sense, which I have declared
more then once, and which Catholic Writers intend, when they say it contains
all fuch articles: and the Reader will receive further satisfaction by perusing
the (N. 26.) of Ch* Ma., as it is delivered by himself; as also he will find
that you have omitted some points of importance, which Chapter Ma. has set down
(N. 27.) as in particular: That the very council of Nice which (says Whitg^ft
in his defense ( Page 3^0.) is of all wise and learned men reverenced, esteemed
and embraced, next unto the Scriptures themselves) decreed that, to those that
were chosen to the ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife
afterward, is affirmed by Protestants. Lastly; in answer to the direction, (N.
33.) you undo, all that Dr. Potter, and you have done, in laboring to prove,
that the Creed contains, all necessary articles, of simple Belief. For thus
you speak: The granting of this principle (that all things necessary to
s^lvation, are evidently contained in Scripture) plainly renders the whole
disppute touching the Creed unnecessary. For if all necessary things, of all
sorts, whether of simple belief, or practice be confessed to be clearly
contained in Scripture, what imports it whether those of one sort be contained
in the Creed?

CHAP: XIV. THE ANSWER TO HIS FIFTH CHAPTER ABOUT SCHISM.
1. OMitting to say any thing by way of preface, and introduction; your (N.
1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.) have been answered, particularly, and at large, in my
Chapter 7. The cavills, which (N. 10.11.12.) you use in avoiding the
Authorities of some Fathers, (which Ch: Ma: alleged N. 8. to prove, that it
can never be Lawful to separate from the Church) do prove more and more, the
impossibility of deciding controversies, by Scripture, or any one writing.
Whosoever considers the place cited by Chapter Ma. out of S. Austin (Cont: Parmen:
L. 2. C. 11.) There is no just necessity to divide unity, will find, that those
words must be universal and serve for the Major Proposition, to prove, that
the Donatists could have no necessity, to divide themselves from the Church; of
which division he says, that it appears, non esse quicqua^ gravius
Sacrilegio Schismatis. And if S. Austins proposition be not universal, his
argument, had been but Petitio princicipij, taking for granted, that which was
in controversy, namely, whether the Donatists had just cause to depart from
the Church. So that indeed, those words of S. Austin, There is no just
necessity to divide unity, must suppsose, that the Church cannot err, nor that
men can receive any spiritual hurt by her doctrine, and that she can neither
do, nor approve ill. All which has been declared hertofore, both for the
matter itself, and for the meaning of S. Austin, in diverse other sayings of
his. But it seems you wanted better matter, when you tell us, of want of
diligence in quoting the 62. Chapter of that book of S. Austine, which has but
23. in it. And when you say that the words which are indeed in the 11. Chapter
are not inferred out of any such promises as Chapter Ma. pretends. For, as lately
you did persecute the printer, for that which Chapter Ma. had put amongst the
Errata, so here you note, that which Chapter Ma. himself cited right (N. 21.) as
every one may see. Neither is it any better then ridiculous for you to say,
that the words of S. Austin, are not inferred out of any such premises, as Chapter
Ma. pretends; seeing he neither pretends nor mentions any other premises,
besides that which he in the immediately precedent Number had said, out of the
Holy Fathers, that Schism was a grievous sin; and I beseech you, from whence
can S. Austin infer, that there can be no just necessity, to divide unity,
except from a supposition, that Schism is a grievous sin, or as he speaks
here, non esse quicqua^ gravius Sacrilegio Schismatis. But it is a sign, you
are sinking, when you are glad to take hold, of any thing, be it never so weak.

2. The same answer, serves for your evasion to the words of S. Irenaeus cont,
heraet. (Lib. 4. Cap. 6^.) They cannot make any so important reforma^ion, as
the ^ll of the Schism is pern^^ous which must suppose, that the Church cannot
err, in matters of faith, whether they be great, or little, in their own
nature; and therefore he says expressly, God will judge all those who are out of
truth; that is who are out of the Church. Iudicabit omnes eos quisunt extra
veritatem, id est qui sunt extra Ecclesiam. And therefore much more will he
judge men, if for small matters they should part from the Church. And you see
he supposes all to be out of the Truth, who are out of the Church, which were
not true, if the Church could deliver falls Doctrine. For so one might be in the
Church, and not in the Truth. The example of the Quartodecimani, who, by the
ancient Fathers, are reckoned among Heretics, makes directly against
yourselfe. Neither does it import, that the controversy about keeping Easter,
may seem to be, only concerning a circumstance of time, and not immediately and
expressly, of a revealed Truth. For indeed, to say, it was necessary, to keep
Easter as the Jews did, for the circumstance of time, was a formal pernicious
heresy, no less, then to bring in a necessity of observing othr rites, of the
Jewish Law: and so the words, which you allege out of Petavius, make nothing
for you, against us. For this cause, the observation of Easter, at a certain
time, might be tolerated, as some rites of the Jews were, till they were
affirmed to be necessary; after which time, they were to be reputed, not only
dead, but deadly: and so would that custom, of keeping Easter have been, after
it was pretended to be kept as necessary. Of which point, and of the
excommunication inflicted by holy Pope Uictor, Chapter Ma. has spoken sufficiently
in his 2. part.

3. Your answer to the words of S. Denis of Alexandria, is evidently a mere
shift. For to say, as he does (apud Eusebium Hist. Eccles. L. 6. Cap. 25.) All
things should rather be endured, then to consent to the division of the Church
of God, must necessarily suppose, that it can never be lawful to part from the
Church: and if it were lawful to do so, it could not universally be a
virtue, rather to endure all torments, and death itself, then consent to it.
Who can deny, but that in common speech, to say, we ought rather to die, then
do such a thing, signifies the absolute unlawfulness thereof? Which in our case
appears more, by his comparing the dividing of the Church, to the offering
sacrifice to Idols. Those Martyrs, says he, being no less glorious, that
expose themselves to hinder the dismembring of the Church, then those that
suffer rather, then they will offer Sacrifice to Idols. In your (N. 13.) you
vainly distinguish, between the deficiency of the visible Church, and of the
Churches visibility, seeing visibility is essential to the Church: and I hope
you will grant, that nothing can exist, without that, which is essential to it.

4. Your (N. 15.16.17.18.19.) make no less against S, Austin; D. Potter; and
the most learned Protestants, then against Ch: Ma. All your objections are
answered, by considering, that we do not affirm, the Church to be at all
times a like conspicuous, glorious, and, as I may say, prosperous: but only,
That she shall be always so known, that men desirous of their salvation, may
be able to distinguish her, from all other congregations, and have recourse to
her, for matters belonging to Religion, seeing in the ordinary course (for we
speak not of extraordiry cases, or Miracles) we must learn of her. Fides ex
auditu. And your self (Page 149. N. 38.) say, I must learn of the Church or
some part of the Church, or I cannot know that there was such a man as Christ,
that he taught: such Doctrine, that he and his Apostles did such miracles in
confirmation of it, that the Scripture is Gods word, unless I be taught it. So
then the Church is, though not a certain Foundation and proof of my Faith, yet
a necessary introduction to it. How then do you (N. 17.) ask this Question?
If some one Christian lived alone among Pagans in some country, remote from
Christendom, shall we conceive it impossible for this man to be saved, because
he cannot have recourse to any cong regation for the affairs of his soul?
Seeing yourselfe tell us, that you must learn of the Church, or some part of
it, or you cannot know that there was such a man as Christ, and consequently
you suppose, a Christian living among Pagans, to have learned of the Church the
Christian Religion; wherein being once instructed he may afterward, be saved,
by an act of contrition, when he cannot actually receive any Sacrament; and so
he is not saved without dependence on the Church, of which he first learned the
Doctrine of Christ. Neither do I say, that every part, of the universal
Church, must always be visible to the whole, but that every part, must be
visible to some, and so the whole collection of Churches, will come to be
visible, in all places, and known to the whole world. Yea, every particular
Church, is of it self, visible to the whole, that is, from all parts of the
Church, it may receive writings, letters, messages, and messengers, though it
be not needful, that actually it do so, and so be actually visible to the
whole, as I said. That the true Church cannot be without the preaching of the
word, and right administration of Sacraments, is the common Doctrine of
Protestants; who say they are essential notes of the Church, as has been
declared hertofore. And though it were granted, that per accidens, these things
could not be actually performed in some particular case (which yet indeed
cannot happen, because even the profession of Faith is a real preaching) that
makes nothing, to prove, that the universal true Church, can be invisible,
which in the greatest persecutions, was visible, both to friends, and foes, and
became more conspicuous, even by persecution it self. Glorious S. Austin,
brings so many, and so clear texts of Scripture, for the Amplitude, and
Perpetuity of the Church, against the Donatists, that you may blush, to speak
so contemptibly of his Doctrine in this behalf, as you do (N. 16.) or to say,
as you do (N. 20.) that it appears not by his words, that he denied not only
the actual perishing, of the Church, but the possibility of it; seeing he vrges
the promises of God, and predictions of the Prophets, for the stability, and
perpetuity of Gods Church.

5. You say (N. 20.) All that S. Austine says is not true: and that you
believe heat of disputation against the Donatists, transported him so far, as
to urge against them more than was necessary, and perhaps more than was true.
As concerning the last speech of S. Austine, I cannot but wonder very much, why
he should think it absurd for any man to say, There are sheep which he knows
not, but God knows: and no less at you, for obtruding this sentence upon us as
pertinent proof of the Churches visibility. Answer: The words cited by Chapter Ma.
out of S. Augustine (De ovibus Cap. 1.) are these: Peradventure some one may
say, there are other sheep I know not where, with which I am not acquainted,
yet God has care of them. But he is too absurd in humane sense, that can
imagine such things. Which words of S. Austine are evidently true. For is he
not too absurd in humane sense, that can imagine one to be a member of the
Church, to which, visibility is essential, and yet not be visible to men, but
known to God alone?

6. Chapter Ma. (Page 165. N. 11.) says: These men do not consider, that while
they deny the perpetuity of a visible Church, they destroy their own present
Church, according to the Argument which S. Austin (Lib. 3. de Baptismo cont.
Donat. cap. 2.) urged against the Donatists in these words. If the Church were
lost in Cyprians (we may say Gregory's) time, from whence did Donatus (Luther)
appear? From what earth did he spring? From what sea is he come? From what
heaven did he drop? And in another place: How can they vaunt to have any
Church, if she have ceased ever since those times (Lib. 3. cont. Parm.?)

7. To this authority of S. Austin, you answer (N. 21.) Neither do I see, how
the trath of any present Church, depends upon the perpetual visioility, nay
nor upon the perpetuity of that which is past or future. For what sense is
there, that it should not be in the power of God Almighty to restore to a
flourishing estate a Church which oppression has made in visible? To repair
that which is ruined; to reform that which was corrupted, or to reviue that
which was dead? Nay what reason is there, but that by ordiuary means this may
be done, so long as the Scriptures by Divine providence are preserved in their
integrity and Authority? as the commonwealth, though never so far collapsed,
and overrunne with disorders, is yet in possibility of being reduced unto its
Original state, so long as the Ancient Laws and Fundamental Constitutions are
extant, and remain inviolate, from whence men may be directed how to make such
a reformation.

8. Answer: The Question is not, what is in the Power of God Almighty, or what
may be done depotentia absoluta, as Divines speak, but what may be performed,
in sensu composito, according to the course, and order, which de facto God has
been pleased to appoint: according to which, that which you mention, cannot be
done by Scriptures alone, as appears by what we have proved in diverse places.
For if the Church be supposed to be fallible, we can have no absolute
certainty, that Scriptures are the word of God, or preserved in their
integrity: Neither would this suffice, seeing they do not contain evidently
all points necessary to be believed; and though they did; we should be to seek
for the true meaning of them: as also no man can be obliged to believe, nor can
in prudence believe, any person whatsoever against the universal Church, and
ordinary Governors, and Pastors thereof; and such Persons might expect to be
entertained, with those pithy words of Tertullian (Lib. de prescript.) Qui
estis vos? Vnde and quando venistis? vbi tamdiu latuist is? Which words are
parallel to those of S Austin recited above. Vnde ergo Donatus apparuit? De qua
terra germinavit? Ex quo mari emersit? De quo Caelo cecidit? Your example of a
common wealth, has no parity, with our case: seeing you suppose, that
notwithstanding all disorder for practice, there remains still the same
certain knowledge of the Laws, and means for the interpretation of them,
which were before it was collapsed, and that the laws contain evidently, and
perfectly all things necessary for the constitution of a commonwealth; all
which we deny in order to Scripture, as has been often showed. And so you see
the reason, why the truth of the present Church, depends on the Perpetuity and
Incorruption of Gods Church for all ages; without which there could be no means
to rectify, the present Church.

9. What you say (N. 22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32.33.) either contains no
difficulty, or has been answered already, in my chapter of Schism: Only I
must entreat the Reader, not to trust your summing up in your Number 24. the
arguments of Chapter Ma., but to read them, in the Author himself.

10. All that you have (N. 37. and 38.) is answered out of Dr. Potters own
words (Page 76.) where speaking of the Church of Rome he says; Her communion
we forsake not, no more then the Body of Christ, whereof we acknowledge the
Church of Rome a member though corrupted: and this cleares us from the
imputation of Schism, whose property it is (witness the Donatiste and
Luciferians) to cut of from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation the
Church from which it separates. And if any zelots among us have proceeded to
heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their Charity and Wisdom can
not be justified. Do not these words clearly declare, that one is not a
Schismatic, if he separates from a Church in such manner, as he do not cut of
from the hope of salvation the Church from which he separates; and that the
Donatists, and Luciferians, were not Schismatics precisely because they
divided themselves from the Church, but because they added to their separation,
the cutting of from the hope of salvation, the Church from which they
separated? Two things then according to the Doctor, are necessary and
sufficient, to incur the sin of Schism; a separation, and a condemnation
of that community, from which that division is made. For both D. Potter and
those zelots, agreed in a separation, and in the pretended just cause thereof
(the corruptions of the Roman Church) and the only difference is the cutting or
not cutting her of from the hope of salvation; and consequently, this cutting
of, is that which condemns some of Schism, and cleares other from it, though
they agree in all the rest; and so your example (that though one symptom of
the plague be a fever, yet not every one that has a fever has the plague:
because he may by reason, (as you speak) of the absense of other requisits not
have the plague,) makes against your self, by applying it; That as he who has
a fever with other requisits for a plague, must have the plague, so the
cutting of from hope of salvation a Church, and separating from it, will make
up a complete Schism; and then the Syllogism, will not be that, which you
make, against all good Logic, but this: Whosoever divides himself from the
Roman Church, and cuts it of from the hope of salvation is a Schismaticke, but
those hoate Protestants of whom you speak, do all this: Therefore they are
Schismatics. Yea, seeing Chapter Ma. (Page 190.191.) shows, that even D. Potter
does also cut us of from hope of salvation, without repentance, by his own
rule, he makes himself guilty of formal Schism.

11. Your (N. 41.) is against Dr. Potter, who (Page: 126.) teaches, that to
limit the Church to the part of Donatus, was an error, in the nature and
manner of it, heretical against that Article of the Creed, wherein we profess
to believe the holy Catholic Church. And for that other Article Remission of
sins, seeing by Holy Scripture we learn, that some are elect to eternal
happiness, which they cannot attain without the remission of their sins, it
follows, that it is an Article of Faith, not only that God will forgive the
sins of all that repent, as you say it may be understood, but that de facto
there is Repentance, Remission of sins, and salvation. But these are not
Questions to be treated in this place: and by these examples it appears, to
how little purpos you, and the Doctor will have all fundamental points of
Faith, to be contained in the Creed, seeing you cannot agree, about the meaning
of them, without which the words are but words. Your instance about the stars,
and sun, which do not cease to be, although they be not always visible, is
nothing to the purpose, unless you could prove, that perpetual visibility, is
essential to the stars, or Sun, as it is to the true Church of Christ: and
I might add, that they are always visible to some people, and not wholly
invisible, as some Protestants dream, the Church to have been invisible, and
withdrawn to the hearts of some particular godly men, during the space, of one
thousand two hundred three score years, as Chapter Ma. shows (Page: 161.)

12. Your (N. 42.43.) need no answer. You will find, that the authority of S.
Cyprian, to which Chapter Ma. (N. 16. Page: 161.) refers the Reader, is very
pertinent, to prove, that it is unlawful, for those, that esteem themselves
moderate Protestants, to communicate, with those other, who say, the Church
perished; because these being formal Heretics (according to Dr. Potter) and
so out of the Church, it is impossible for those other, to remain in the true
Church, and yet communicate with them, who are out of the Church, according to
the said words of S. Cyprian (Epist: 76. ad Mag.) The Church is one, which
being but one cannot be with in and without. If she be with Novatianus, she was
not with Cornelius. But if she were with Cornelius, who succeedes Fabianus by
Lawful ordination, Novatianus is not in the Church. If then, the milder
Protestants, will pretend to be in the true Church, they cannot be with those
other, who, by teaching an heresy, against the Article of the Church, in our
Creed, put themselves out of the Church; otherwise those milder Protestants
should come to be both within, and without the Church. You tell us, that the
saying of S. Cypria^ has no more to do with our present business of proving
it unlawful to communicate with these men who hold the Church was not always
visible, then In nova fert animus. But I am sure, In nova fert animus, agrees
as fitly to your frequent changes of Religion, as it is impertinently applied
against Ch: Ma. Your last words (That S. Cyprians words are by neither of the
parts litigants esteemed any rule of Faith: and therefore the urging of them, and
such like authorityes serves only to make books great, and Controversies
endless) show what esteem you have of Antiquity, and the holy Fathers; how
diffident you are of your cause, if their authority might prevail; and how
unjustly you proceed, in alleging against us, the authority of Fathers, of
whom you make so small, and so ill account, as to say, the urging of them,
serves only, to make books great, and which is worse, controversies endless.

13. For answer to your (N. 45.) I must still entreat the Reader, to peruse
(N. 17.) of Chapter Ma. and withal to remember, what I have proved heretofore,
that it is impossible, to leave the external communion of the Church, and not
to leave the Church; external communion being of the essence of the Church.
And therefore your example, that a man may leave any fashion, or custom of a
College, and yet still remain a member of the College, is not to the purpose,
seeing a fashion, or custom of the College, may be merely accidental, to the
constituting one a member thereof: or, if you suppose, any custom to be of the
essence, and a Signum distinctivum of that College, from all other
communities, then the example makes against you; for in that case, to leave
that fashion, or custom were to leave the College.

14. Upon this error, that external communion, in profession of Faith,
Liturgy, Sacraments etc: is not essential to the Church, is grounded all that
you have (N. 47.) Neither is C. Ma. deceaved, in not distinguishing between a
local and moral forsaking any thing: But he says, and has proved, that
external communion, being essential to the Church, it is impossible, that
they can be of one Church, who are divided in that communion, but do forsake
one another morally, and locally also, refusing to be present, at their publik
worship of God: nor does he (C. Ma.) use any pretty Sophisme, and very fit to
persuade men that it is impossible for them to forsake any error they hold, or
any vice they are subject to; Because forsooth they cannot forfake themselves,
and vices and errors are things inherent in themselves. For (to turn your
own Instance against your self) if vices, and errors, were essential to a
man, it were impossible, to forsake them, and not forsake ones self; so, union
in external communion, being essential to the true Church, which is one, it
is impossible, to forsake her external communion, and not forsake her; as it
is impossible to forsake the company of Dr. Potter and keep company with the
Provost of Queens college (which is the example of Chapter Ma.) otherwise he
should be with, and not be, with himself, according to the foresaid words of S.
Ciprian, the Church being one, cannot be within, and without. It is not therefore
Charity Maintained, who distinguishes not between a local and moral forsaking
any thing, but it is you, who do not distinguish, between a real physical,
and a moral forsaking of a man's self; as if one could not cease, to be a
member of the Church, by heresy, or Schism, because he cannot cease to be
physically himself. Thus your (N. 48.) is answered; and as you are pleased to
repeat here again, In nova fert animus, so I, not to be too bold, with the
Reader, by a vain repeating of the self same words, may well add, as fitly
agreeing to you, the witty saying of Tertullian adver. valent. (Cap: 12.)
Ovidivs metamorphoseis suas delevisset, si hodie majorem cognovisset. Certain
it is that your changes of religion ought in reason, to be esteemed more
strange, and I am sure, more unreasonable, then all the metamorphosies in Ovid.

15. Your (N. 49.50.51.52.53.54.55.56.) give no occasion of matter to be
particularly confuted. Only to say to your (N. 50.) that it is certainly true,
that no two men or Churches divided in external communion can be both true
parts of the Catholic Church, if indeed their division be culpable, and
Schismatic. For in that case, the innocent part only, remains a true member
of the Catholic Church; because if both remained united to the Catholic
Church, they should also be united among themselves; Quae sunt vnita vni
tertio, sunt vnita interse. And Potter (Page: 76.) says; Whosoever professes
himself to forsake the communion of any one member of the Body of Christ, must
confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. How then do you say, it
is certainly false that no two men or Churches, divided in external communion,
can be both true parts of the Catholic Church? Seeing to be divided
Schismatically, from any one member of the Church, induces necessarily a
division from the whole, as the Doctor confesses. As for your (N. 55.) wherein
you say to Charity Maintained; the reason of this consequence which you say is
so clear, truly I cannot possibly discern. But the consequence, which Chapter Ma.
makes (N. 17. Page: 172.) of which you speak, seems so clear, that I believe
every Body will see it, if his words be set down as they are delivered by him,
and not abbreviated, and obscured by you. Thus he says: I observe, that
according to Dr. Potter the self same Church, which is the universal Church,
remaining the universal true Church of Christ, may fall into errors, and
corruptions; from whence it clearly follows, that it is impossible to leave
the external communion of the Church so corrupted, and retain external
communion with the Catholic Church; since the Church Catholic, and the Church
so corrupted, is the self same one Church. What consequence can there be more
clear? The Church Catholic, and the Church corrupted, is the same Church,
therefore, it is impossible, to forsake the external communion of the Church
corrupted, and not forsake, but retain external communion with the Church
Catholic.

16. To your (N. 56,) I will only say, That you conceal the words of Chapter Ma.,
so to impugn them more freely. His words are: When Luther appeared there were
not two distinct visible true Catholic Churches, holding contrary Doctrine,
and divided in external communion; one of the which true Churches did triumph
over all error and corruption in doctrine and practice, but the other was
stained with both. For to find this diversity of churches cannot stand with
reds of Histories, which are silent of any such matter. It is against Dr.
Potters own grounds, that the Church may err in points not fundamental. It
contradicts the words in which he said (Page: 155.) The Church may not hope to
triumph over all sin and error, till she be in Heaven. It evacuateth the
brag of Protestants, that Luther reformed the whole Church. Of these last words
you say, Let it be so, I see no harm will come of it. What indeed? Is it no
harm, that it may be said with truth, that your Protestants are proved,
bragging, false Liars, in saying Luther reformed the whole Church? But, (to
omit this) these words declare that Chapter Ma. speaks of two Churches, whereof one
did triumph over all error, and then adds, to find this diversity of two
Churches cannot stand with records of Histories etc: where the particles (this
diversity) are referred to two kinds of Churches, whereof one did triumph over
all sin and error; and yourselfe explicating the Doctors words say: To
triumph over error, is to be secure from it, to be out of danger of it, not to
be obnoxious to it. This supposed, the objection is clearly of no force, wherein
you say, To suppose a visible Church before Luther, which did not err, is not
to contradict this ground of D. Potters, that the Church may err. Unless you
will have us believe that May be and Must be is all one; which rule if it were
true, then sure all men would be honest, because all men may be so. And you
would not make so bad Arguments, unless you will pretend you cannot make
better. But this whole objection, is grounded upon concealing the words of Chapter
Ma., who spoke of a Church triumphing over all error, as we have seen by his
express words: and therefore when in the very next consequent period, he mentions
a Church free from error, it cannot be otherwise understood, then of such a
freedom, as he spoke of immediately before, that is of a Church, (as indeed the
true Church ought to be) free from all danger of falling, into any least
error, against Faith. Besides; suppose he had spoken of a Church, which
defacto did not err in any point fundamental, or not fundamental, from the
Apostles time to Luther; it had been no ill argument, to infer, that she could
not err; because morally speaking, and without a miracle, or particular
assistance, or infallible direction of the Holy Ghost, it had been impossible,
for so many men, in so many Ages, of so different dispositions, through the
whole world, to have agreed in the same belief, concerning matters, not
evident of themselves, but far exceeding the light of natural reason, and
seeming contrary to it; and therefore, if they had not been effectually
preserved from error, no doubt but some would have fallen into it: which is so
true, that Dr. Potter says (Page, 39.) it is a great vanity to hope or expect
that all learned men, in this life, should absolutely consent in all the
pieces, and partiticles of divine truth. The rest of this Number has been
particularly answered heretofore, and your weakening the strength of History,
and tradition serves only, to call in question all Religion, in your ground,
who believe Scripture for tradition.

17. In your (N. 57.) you say to those words of Chapter Ma. (N. 18. Our Savior
foretold that there would be in the Church tares with choice (...)) Look again
I pray, and you shall see, that the field he speaks of, is not the Church, but
the world. Answer; Chapter Ma. does not (as interpreting our Saviors Parable,
Matthew: 31.) say, that the field he speaks of is the Church, but that he
foretold, that there would be in the Church tares with choice corn; which is
very true, seeing he expressly makes the parable of the kingdom of Heaven (which
is the Church) saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is resembled to a man etc. and the
amplitude of the word (world) does not exclude the Church, for which, and her
Pastors he gave that wholesome Document; Sinite vtraque crescere, Let both
grow up; and I pray, where but in the Church, can there be the wheat, which our
Savior would not have rooted out? And because your own guiltiness, moves you
in this occasion to tax Catholics, because they punish obstinate Heretics;
you should reflect, that the tares are not to be gathered, when there is
danger, least by so doing, the wheat may be rooted out; and therefore, a
contrario sensu, if there be no such danger, yea that by sparing the cockle,
the good corn, will suffer, the cockle is rather to be taken away, than the
corn destroyed. In your (N. 58.) may be observed a strange kind of saying,
that God is infinitely merciful and therefore will not damn men for mere
errors, who desire to find the truth and cannot. Is it mercy not to damn men
for that which is no fault? And for which to damn one were injustice, and
therefore not to do it, is not mercy, but justice.

18. Your (N. 59.60.) have been answered at large, in the Chap: 7. about
Schism. Neither can these propositions be defended from a contradiction; The
Church of Rome wants nothing necessary to salvation, and yet it is necessary to
salvation to forsake her. For, as I have proved, even he who believes she
erred, yet is supposed to believe that, notwithstanding that error, still she
wants nothing necessary to salvation; and therefore the distinction of persons,
whereof one believes she errs, and the other believes she does not err, cannot
save this contradiction.

19. That which you say (N. 61.) is answered by these few lines. Almighty God
has promised to give his sufficient grace to avoid all deadly sin, and
consequently all damnable error, as you confess every error against any
revealed Truth to be, unless ignorance excuse it, which cannot happen, if, as
you affirm, such an assistance is promised to us as shall lead us, if we be
not wanting to it and ourselves, into all not only necessary but very
proficable truth, and guard us from all, not only destructive, but also
hurtful errors; because this assistance supposed, the Church, if she fall
into error, must be wanting to herself, and her ignorance can not be
invincible, but culpable, and damnable both in it self, and to her; and if her
errors be damnable, she wants some thing necessary to salvation, that is, the
true assent of Faith, contrary to that damnable error, and she has something
incompatible with salvation, namely, that damnable error; and so indeed that
truth, which you call only profitable, becomes necessary, and that error which
you suppose to be only hurtful, is destructive, if your Doctrine be ttue, that
God gives sufficient Grace, to avoid all sorts of error, and to lead to all
very profitable truths. And the^ further it follows, that you must recall your
Doctrine, and say, that if the Church may fall into error not damnable to her,
it must be in case it be invincible, and yet it cannot be invincible, if she
have sufficient Assistance, to lead her into all, not only necessary, but
profitable truth, and therefore you must deny, that she has such an assistance,
and we must conclude, that by not erring in any fundamental point, she
performs her duty to God, and so can not be forsaken without Schism. For you
do not deny the proposition of Ch: Ma: (N. 20.) that the external Communion
of the Church, cannot be forsaken, as long as she performs the duty which she
owes to God. Besides, how do you not contradict yourselfe,, in saying, Who is
there that can put her in sufficient caution, that these errors about
profitable matters may not bring forth others of higher quality, such as are
pernicious and pestilent, and undermine by secret consequences the very
Foundations of Religion and piety? For if the errors be such as you describe,
they come to be concerning things, not only profitable, but necessary, as
undermining the very foundations of Religion: and therefore to say she erres
culpably in them, is to say that she erres damnably, and fundamentally; and you
must say, she erres culpably, if she have assistance sufficient to avoid them.
By this discourse, and other points handled heretofore, is answered your (N.
62.63.) as also your (N. 64.65.66.67.68.69.70.71.72.73,) only it is to be
observed, that (N. 64.) you parallel the security of private men from error,
in fundamentalls, to that of the universal Church. And (N. 68.) you will not
see the reason of a consequence, deduced by Chapter Ma. which had been very clear,
if you had set down his words, which are these: (N. 22. P. 185.) Since it is
not lawful to leave the communion of the Church for abuses in life and
manners, because such miseries cannot be avoided in this world of temptation:
and since according to your Assertion, no Church may hope to triumph over all
sin and error (and I add what the Doctor says (Page: 39.) that it is a
great vanity, to hope, or expect, that all learned men, in this life should
absolutely consent, in all the pieces of Divine truth) you must grant, that as
she ought not to be left, by reason of sin; so neither by reason of errors
not fundame^tall, because both sin and error are (according to you)
impossible to be avoided, till she be in heaven: and that it is a great vanity
to hope or expect the contrary in this life. And is not this a clear
consequence? The Church cannot be forsaken for sins, because they cannot be
avoided in this life, therefore, seeing errors, at least in not fundamentalls,
cannot be avoided in this life, the Church cannot be forsaken for them.

20. To your (N. 72.) it is sufficient to say, that although we must not do
evil to avoid evil, yet when a position is such, as evil cannot but follow
of it, ex natura rei, it is a clear argument, that such a Position includes
falsehood, and error. Now as Chapter Ma. proves (N. 24.) your grounds do, of their
own nature, give scope to perpetual Schisms, and divisions: And then the
consequence is clear, that they are false and erroneous. His words (which you
by abbreviating make ineffectuall) are: they (who separate themselves) will
answet as you do prompt, that your Church may be forsaken, if she fall into
errors, though they be not Fundamental; and further that no Church must hope
to be free from such errors: which two grounds being once laid; it will not be
hard to infer, the consequence, that she may be forsaken.

21. All that (N. 74.75.76.77.) you utter with too much heat, is answered, by
putting you in mind, that Chapter Ma. never affirms, that Protestants say, the
cause of their separation, and their motive to it, was (absolutely and
independently of any separation) precisely because they did not cut her of from
hope of salvation (as you impose upon him) for which foolish reason even
Catholics might be said to be Schismatiks, from their own Church, because they
are sure she is not cut of from hope of salvation) but that, supposing their
separation from us upon other causes (for example, pretended corruptions) they
pretend to be excused from Schism, and say they did well to forsake her,
because they do not hold, that she is cut of from hope of salvation. Which to
be true, he (C: Ma:) shows out of Potters words. And yourselfe (P. 284 N 75.)
say to C: Ma: can you not perceive a difference between justifying his
separation from Schism, by this reason and making this the reason of his
separation. And whosoever reads Ch: Ma: [N. 27.] will find, that which I say
to be true. For he expressly says, that both they who do, and do not, cut of
the Church of Rome, from hope of salvation, agree in the effect of separation:
Only this effect of separation being supposed (without which there could be no
imaginable Schism) they do allege for their excuse, that they did it in a
different manner, because the one part, of which we speak, conceaved that,
though they did separate, yet they should be excused from Schism, because they
did not cut of, from hope of salvation, the Roman Church: and so, this was the
motive, or reason, for which they judged, they might separate from her, without
the sin of Schism, and consequently, they would not have done it, if they
had not had this reason, or motive, and consideration, whereby to excuse
themselves. Thus your examples of one saying to his Brother, I do well to
leave you, because you are my Brother, or of a subject, saying to his
Sovereign Lord, I do well to disobey you, because I acknowledge you to be my
lawful Sovereign, are mere perversions of Chapter Ma. his words, who says truly
against Potter, that if one should part from his Brother upon some cause, and
excuse such his departure from fault, because he still acknowledges him to be
his Brother, or if a subject should disobey his Sovereign, upon some motive,
and then should think to justify his fact, by saying, he still acknowledges
him, to be his lawful Sovereign, C: Ma: I say affirms, that such an excuse,
may justly seem very strange, and rather fit to aggravate, then to extenuate,
or excuse the departure, of the one, from his Brother, and disobedience, of the
other, to his Souveraigne. And yet this is our case. For, both the violent, and
moderate Protestants, agree in the same effect of separation, from the Roman
Church, and disobedience to her Pastors, with this only difference, that the
one sort, says, that she is cut of from the hope of Salvation, and the other
says she is not, and pretend to be excused from Schism, because they say so,
though they separate themselves from her, no less, then the other do.

22. To your (N. 78.79.) I answer, that when the Fathers, and Divines, teach,
that schism is a division fro that church, with which one agrees in matters of
faith, they do not distinguish, between points fundame^tall, and not
fu^dame^ntall, in order to the negative precept, of not disbelieving any point
sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, and so in fact, all points being
fu^dame^tall, in this sense (as both you, and Potter are forced to confess
more then once, though in other occasions you contradict it, as even in this
place you make such a distinction, and upon it ground your objection) whosoever
agree truly in all Fundamental points in this sense, agree in all points, of
truths, revealed by God, and sufficiently proposed for such. If Protestants
will feign to themselves, another kind of points, not fundamental, in order
to the Negative precept of Faith, Charity Maintained is not obliged to side
with them, but may and ought to say, that if Protestants pretend to agree with
us, in fundamental Points, they must a part rei agree with us, in all Points,
sufficiently proposed as divine Truths, and that agreement supposed, while they
depart from our Communion, they becocome most formal Schismatiks, as Schism
is distinguished from heresy. Thus your Sillogisme (which you pretend to
resemble the argument of Ch: Ma) is answered. For when you say; He that obeyes
God in all things, is innocent; Titus obeys God in somethings; Therefore he is
innocent. Your Minor should be, Titus obeys God in all things, as they who
agree in fundamental points of Faith, must agree in all things, that is, they
must not disagree in any revealed truth; for to agree in that sense, is
fundamental to the Faith of a Christian, as Potter confesses. By this also
your (N. 79.) is answered. Neither do your (N. 80. and 81.) contain any
difficulty, which is not answered by a mere denial. I wish the Reader for his
own good, to read what you omit in the (N. 29.) of C: Ma: where he shows,
that Luther was far enough from intending any reformation, with some other
points, which you omit, or involue in darkness, and which being read in him,
answer all your Objections.

23. Your (N. 82.) gives as great a deadly blow to Protestant Religion, as no
adversary could have give^ a greater. C: Ma: said, that Luther, and his
Associates, did wholly disagree in the particulars of their reformation; which
was a sign, that the thing upon which their thoughts first pitched was not any
particular Model or Idea of Relig o^, but a settled resolution to forsake the
Church of Rome. This you not only grant, but prove, that it could not be
otherwise, saying to Ch Ma. Certainly it is no great marveile that there was as
you say, disagreement between them in the particulars of their Reformation: Nay
morally speaking it was impossible it should be otherwise. And why? You give
the reason, in these remarkable words: the Declination from which (original
purity of religion) some conceaving to have begun though secretly in the
Apostles times the mystery of iniquity being then in work; and after their
departure to have showed itself more openly: others again believing that the
Church continued pure for some ages after the Apostles, and then declined: And
consequently, some aiming at an exact conformity with the Apostolic times:
others thinking, they should do God and men good service could they reduce the
Church to the condition of the fourth and fifth ages: some taking their
direction in this work of Reformation, only from Scripture; others from the
writings of Fathers, and the decrees of Counsels of the first five Ages:
certainly it is no great mervaile that there was, as you say, disagreement
between them, in the particulars of their Reformation; nay morally speaking it
was impossible it should be otherwise. Yet let me tell you, the difference
between them (especially in comparison of your Church and Religion) is not the
difference between good and bad, but between good and better. And they did
best, that followed Scripture interpreted by Catholic written Tradition: which
Rule the reformers of the Church of England proposed to themselves to follow. I
know not, whether the uncertainty, or misery, of Protestant religion, could
have been described in more lively colors, then you have set it out. For if
they be uncertain, from whence to begin their Reformation, and for that
cause, you confess it was impossible for them not to disagree in the
particulars thereof, it follows, that now they have no certainty, what
Reformation is true, or whether a Reformation, and not rather a Deformation, or
falsehood And indeed the different heads, even as you propose them, are so
confused, that it is not easy to understand, what they mean: and then, how
hard must it be, to take them for a distinct rule, how to proceed, in the
Reformation of the whole world! If the principles be doubtful, the conclusion
can not be certain. You make your Progenitors, to resemble perfectly, the
Genethliaci and judicarij Astrologers, who not agreeing in their Principles,
prove vain, and ridiculous in their predictions. You are like to a certain
man, who not long a go, in a city, which I could name, apprehending himself
in his climactericall year, could not be induced to eat, as despayring to
pass that Critical time, till he was told by a witty Physician, that he must
count his age, from the time of his conception, not of his nativity, as he had
done, according to which rate, finding, as he thought, his fatal year to be
past, was presently cured. Truly whosoever advisedly, and seriously, considers
this Number of yours, can not but forsake Protestantisme, if he mean not to
forsake his own soul. You endeavored, to perswademen, that by the ordinary
means, which are left us, a Church collapsed, may be restored to purity, which
certainly you make impossible to be done, by the Doctrine you deliver here;
Seeing, confessedly there is no certainty, upon what Grounds, or by what settled
directions, such a Reformation should proceed; nor from whence it should
begin. It is also strange to hear you say; They did best that followed
Scripture interpreted by Catholic written Tradition: Which Rule the Reformers
of the Church of England proposed to themselves to follow. What? do you now
tell us, that there be traditiue interpretations of Scripture? A thing
disclaymed by you, through your whole book, denying all other Traditions
except that, whereby we accept Scripture, as the word of God, but not the
interpretation of it, it being (as you say) evident of itself, and there being
no infallible Judge to declare it, or any points of Faith which are not
contained in it. Moreover by what commission, or coherence to yourself, say
you, (Page: 375. N. 56.) That the Bible, I say the Bible only, is the Religion
of Protestants? Seeing you tell us here, that some of them took their direction
in this work of Reformation, only from Scripture; others from the Writings of
the Fathers, and the Decrees of the Counsels, for the first five Ages: and
that they did best, that followed Scripture interpreted by Catholic written
Tradition? Here, yourselfe expressly distinguish, those who took their
direction only from Scripture, from others, who took it from the Writings of
the Fathers, and the Decrees of Counsels etc. The truth is you undertook to
defend Potter, and Protestants, only to have the occasion of venting
Socinianisme, and covertly overthrowing Protestantisme, and upon grounds, which
indeed overthrow all Religion. You say; Let me tell you the difference between
them (especially in comparison of your Church and Religion) is not the
difference between good and bad, but between good and better: Answer: in
matters of Faith, of two disagreeing, the one must be in an error, against
Divine Testimony, and the other in the right. I hope you will not say, that the
difference between an Assent of Faith, and an error against Faith, is not
between good and bad, but between good and better, as if error against Faith
were good, but not so good, as Faith. Now those different capital Principles,
of which you spoke, cannot choose but produce different, and opposite
conclusions, and Doctrines of which one must be an error.

24. In your (N. 83.84.85.86.87.89.90.91.92.93.94.95.96.) you spend many words,
with much unnecessary fervor against the answers which Chapter Ma. gives to two
similitudes, which D. Potter brings to excuse Protestants from the guilt of
Schism: which similitudes you allege in a cursiffe letter; but add words of
importance, which the Doctor has not. His words faithfully alleged by Ch:
Ma. (P. 194. N. 30) taken out of the Doctors (P: 81. 82.) are these: If a
monastery should reform it self, and should reduce into practice, ancient
good discipline, when others would not, in this case could it in reason be
charged with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule, and order?
Or as in a Society of men universally injected with soxie disease, they that
should free themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore said to
separate from the Society: so neither can the Reformed Churches be truly
accused for making a Schism from the Church, seeing all they did was to reform
themselves. You say this argument is pressing, and unanswerable. But, Examples,
and similitudes, are commonly said, rather to illustrate, then demonstrate,
and are often more captious, then solid, and convincing. You have no reason to
accuse Ch: Ma: for perverting them; for he first set down the very words of
Potter, and then sets down the case, with application to our present purpose,
never affirming, that the Doctor sets it down, in the manner, and in those
words, but contrarily, showing, that it should be so set down; which appears
by his express words (N. 31. Before you make your final resolution hear a
word of advice) And (N. 32.) Let me set before you these considerations. All
which words, in both these places, declare manifestly, that Ch: Ma: did not
pretend to set down verbatim the Doctors case, but to signify, what he ought
to have considered, and set down, and what de facto past in the division of
Luther from the Church. And lastly, he shows, that the case, being set down,
as it ought to have been, made against the Doctor, in favor of his adversary.
That all this is true, will appear by reading the discourse of Ch: Ma: [N.
31.32.33.34.]

25. And it was easy for Chapter Ma. to retort the similitudes, out of these
grounds, which he had proved: That there is a most strict divine command, not
to forsake the communion of Gods Church; Dr. Potter (Page; 76.) says: Whosoever
professes himself to forsake the communion of any one member of the Body of
Christ, must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole; and therefore
her (the Roman Churches) communion we forsake not, no more then the Body of
Christ: And that external communion, is essential, to make men members, of
the same Church: which he ( Chapter Ma.) shows (Page: 155. N. 5) and I have proved
heretofore. For, out of these two grounds, it follows, That it is de Jure
Divino, not to forsake the communion of the Church, which according to Dr.
Potter, were to forsake the body of Christ, and that to forsake the external
communion, which is essential to the Church, is to forsake the communion of
the Church. Now, the similitudes of the Doctor, to be of any force, must
suppose that there is no divine command, to remain in that Monastery, or
company of those infected persons, or else, that to leave their external
communion, were not to leave them; and so, in one word, the parity must be
absolutely denied; seeing it is supposed, that there is no divine precept for
remaining in that Monastery, or Hospital of sick people, or else, that to
remain in their company, were not essential to be a member of such
communities; and therefore you say very irreligiously (N. 84.) That as it is
possible to forsake other Societies, that is, their external communion, so
also it may be Lawful to forsake the communion of the Church, for her
pretended faults, and corruptions. But let us see, what you can object; and I
must here again entreat the Reader, to read Ch: Ma. and not take his answers,
not only at a second, but at an adversaries hand. For here you practice an art,
first to divide the Reasons of Chapter Ma. and then to set upon every single one a
part, whereas there is such a connection between his reasons, that one receaves
light, and strength from another. It seems you have a mind to cavil, when
you would seem to make a difference, between one Monastery compared with
other Monasteries of the same order, and one, or some few persons, compared
with the one Monastery in which they live: Whereas you cannot but judge that
there is the selfsame proportion, and that the reason, which may excuse, or
accuse, in the one, may do the like, in the other, or rather indeed, it is but
one, and the self same case, for as much as belongs to our present purpose.

26. You (N. 85.) in stead of a^swering the case as C. Ma. puts it, profess to
alter it, and to put it not just as Chapter Ma. would have it. Well, even taking
the case as you put it, I say, that if there were, as there is in our case, a
divine command, not to part from such a community, those observances, which you
suppose to be obliging, would cease to oblige, if they could not be kept,
without forsaking such a community: yea, though they did still oblige, it were
not Lawful, to leave that community, as I declared heretofore, in case of
minoris mali, and perplexity. But indeed Chapter Ma. speaks not of observances,
the omitting whereof did import sin, but in express terms, of a case, wherein
a Monastery did confessedly observe their substantial vows, and all
principiall Statutes, or constitutions of the order, though withsome neglect of
lesser Monastical Observances. Neither is the stream of Casuists against Chapter
Ma. in this; nor S. Paul, whom you cite, while he says, that we may not do
the least evil, that we may do the greatest good: Seeing in this case, the
omission of those observances, would be so far from being evil, that the
contrary would be a great offense, against God, and his Church. This very same
answer, serves for your other discourse, about a company, universally infected
with some disease, and needs only the application, from observance, to a
disease, which certainly we should rather endure, then make a breach, from such
a community, if by a divine precept, we be obliged to remain therein.

27. You cite (N. 87.) the words of Ch: Ma. disadvantagiously. He says indeed,
that those few that pretended a Reformation, were known to be led not with any
spirit of Reformation, but by some other sinister intention; which is very
true. And (N. 29.) he showed it out of Luthers own words, which you thought
fit to dissemble: and the same may be demonstrated of your other primitive,
prime, Reformers, if it were necessary. It is also very true, that by going out
of the Church, no man must hope to be free from those or the like errors, for
which they left her. For they may return to morrow, to their former opinions,
as heresy is always instable, and also to us Catholics; because out of the
true Church; they can have no certain rule of Faith, nor are assisted with
plenty of grace, for exercising acts thereof, as experience teaches us, in the
irreconciliable contentions of Protestants, and yourselfe say here (P: 277. N.
61.) The usual fecundity of errors is to bring forth others of a higher
quality, such as are pernicious and pestilent, and undermine by secret
consequences the very foundations of Religion and piety. It is pretty, to hear
you say, (N. 88.) that the Church is secured from fundamental errors, not by
any absolute promise of divine assistance, but by the repugnance of any error
fundamental to the essence and nature of a Church, as you may say, men are
secured from being unreasonable creatures, or beasts, because if they were
such, they could not be men. You know very well that when Charity Maintained
said, (N. 31.) You teach that no particular person or Church has any promise
of assistance in points fundamental) he meant of an absolute promise of
assistance, which Potter affirms the universal Church to have, for all
fundamental points, and yet grants it not to any particular Person, or Church,
and therefore you had no reason to call that true saying of Ch: Ma: a manifest
falsehood. Of Luthers opposing himself to all, I have spoken heretofore, and
answered the objection, you bring about that matter, in your (N. 89.)

28. Your (N. 91.) yealds as much as can be desired, against yourself, and all
Protestants, That many chief learned Protestants are forced to confess the
antiquity of our doctrine and practice; which you do not deny; but go about
to specify some particular points, of which learned Protestants do not
confess the antiquity; but indeed they are such, that any judicious
Protestant, will wonder, that you did mention them in particular, confessing
thereby, that for those which you do not express (and they are the chiefest
differences betwixt Protestants and us) antiquity stands for us, against
Protestants: though I must add withal, to make up the number, you are forced,
to bring in some things, which are not matters of Faith with us, and some other
points, which are even ridiculous. We deny, that any Catholic approved
Author, acknowledges the novelty of any of our Doctrines, or the Antiquity of
yours, except in that sense, as we are wont to say, such, were Ancient
Heresies, and Heretics. But you know Erasmus is no competent witness in our
account. Your (Number. 72.) contains no new difficulty.

29. To your (N. 93.) In answer; that the Profession of true Faith, is
essential to every member of the Church, as such, but Charity is not: and
therefore every error against Faith, is incompatible with such a Denomination,
but not sins against Charity. If the Church might err in any point of Faith,
it is true, that, ex natura rei, and considering only that error, or only that
one part of the supposition, in itself, her communion might be forsaken; and
yet it is also true, that taking into consideration all sides, and comparing
the greater Inconvenience, of leaving the communion of the Church, with a
lesser of professing an error not Fundamental, it is necessary, to remain in
her communion, as minus malum, and therefore, in case, and supposition, of
perplexity (not absolutely, and per se loquendo) to be perferred, and chosen:
so the saying of Chapter Ma. that the Church might be forsaken, if she could fall
into any error against Faith, is true per se loquendo, and not contrary to his
other saying, that upon that impossible supposition, it were less evil; and
therefore in case of perplexity, necessary not to forsake her: all which I
explicated heretofore at large. For avoiding of which inextricable Labyrinths,
and perplexities, and taking away all shadow of contradiction, we must believe,
the Church to be infallible, and secured from all error against Faith.

30. All that you have (N. 94.) has been answered heretofore, when we showed
that to depart from the external communion of the Church, was to depart from
the Church. Your (N. 97) contains no difficulty, except against yourself, who
cannot avoid the Authority brought by Char. Main. out of S. Optatus, except by
saying, his sayings are not rules of Faith; and I desire the Reader, to peruse
the words of Chapter Ma. (N. 35.) that the Protestants departed from the Roman
Church, and not the Roman Church from them, with some other reflections of
moment.

31. In your (N. 98.) you grant the thing which Chapter Ma: affirms, that the
Primacie if Peter is confessed by learned Protestants to be of great antiquity,
and for which the judgment of diverse most ancient Fathers is reproved by them,
as may be seen in Brereley (Tract: 1. Sect. 3. Subdivis. 10.) Which, to such
as bear due respect, to the agreement, of so many ancient, learned, and holy
Fathers, ought to prove that it is, not only ancient, but true. And I wonder
you can say, that having perused Brereley you cannot find any one Protestant
confessing any one Father to have concurred in opinion with us, that the Popes
Primacy is de Jure Divino, whereas he cites diverse Protestants, confessing
(forced by evedence of Truth) that diverse Fathers proved that Primacy, out of
the Power given, and Promise made by our Savior to S. Peter, and that upon Him
he builded his Church. And to speak Truth, it is no better than ridiculous, to
imagine, that all other Churches, did, or would or could in prejudice to the
Authority of particular Churches, confer upon the sea of Rome, an universal
power over them all, to admit Appeals against them, to reverse their decrees
etc. unless they had believed, such a Power to have been granted by a Higher
power. We see how zealously every one is bent, to preserve his own Right, and
is more inclined, to deny what is due to an other, than to give up his own.
And when, or where, did all Churches, vnitedly and jointly, offer up this
universal supreme Authority, to the Bishop of Rome?

32. To the authority cited by Ch: Ma: out of S. Cyprian (Epist. 55.) Heresies
have sprung, and Schisms been bred from no other cause, than for that the
Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and Judge is considered to be for
the time in the Church of God; You answer that S. Cyprian spoke not of
Cornelius but of Himself, and yet you confess (N. 91.) that Goulartius a
learned Protestant, grants that it is meant of Cornelius, and Pamelius in his
Annotations upon this Epistle of S. Cyprian brings diverse Arguments to prove
the same: Neither can it be denied but that in his Book de Vnitate Ecclesiae,
he affirms Heresies to spring from not acknowledging one Head, S. Peter. upon
whom our Savior builded his Church: Super illum vnum aedificat Ecclesiam suam.
Primatus Petro datur, vt vna Christi Ecclesia, and Cathedra vna monstretur.
Which is so manifest, that the Protestant Chroniclers, (cent. 3. col. 84. lin.
59.) say, Passim dicit Cyprianus super Petrum Ecclesiam fundatam esse, vr Lib.
1. Epist: 3. (which is the Epistle cited by C. Ma. and of which we now speak)
And Lib: 4. Epist: 9. etc. But although it were granted, that S. Cyprian in his
Epist 55. did speak of a particular Church, it is clear, that for avoiding
Schism in the whole Church, there is a necessity of one Head, if for that
cause one Head be necessary in every particular Church, as heretofore we cited
out of S. Hierom, that among the Apostles one was chosen, vt capite constituto
Schismatis tolleretur occasio. And even Dr. Covell a learned Protestant in his
examination etc. says; How can they think that equality would keep all the
Pastors in the world in peace and unity. For in all Societies Authority (which
cannot be where all are equal) must procure unity and obedience. Otherwise the
Church should be in a far worse case, then the meanest commonwealth. To which
purpose he alleges that Sentence, which we mentioned out of S. Hierom, vt
capite constituto Schismatis tolleretur occasio. You say; whether the words of
S. Cyprian condemn Luther, is another Question. Answer; If those words
condemn Luther of Schism, for withdrawing his Obedience from the Pope (which
Ch: Ma: affirms, and you for the present do not deny) it evidently implies,
that the Pope was Superior, to him, and all other Christians.

33. In your (N. 99.100.) you labor to elude these words of S. Optatus
(alleged by C. Ma: in the same N. 36.) Thou can not deny, but that thou
know, that in the City of Rome, there was first an Episcopal chair placed
for Peter, wherein Peter the head of all the Apostles sat, whereof also he was
called Cephas; in which one chair, unity was to be kept by all, least the
other Apostles might attribute to themselves, each one his particular chair;
and that he should be a Schismatique and a sinner, who against that one single
Chair should erect an other. (lib: 2. cont: Parmen:) You tell us; That the
Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of their faction, and that Optatus proves
them Schismatikes for so doing, upon this ground, of one Bishop in one Church.
But whosoever reads Optatus, will clearly see, that he expressly speaks of the
Catholic (not of a particular) Church, which he says, has quinque
ornamenta or dotes, the first whereof is a chair, on which chair (of the
Catholic and universal Church) he says S. Peter first sat, whom he calls
the Head of all the Apostles, whereof he was called Cephas; in which one
Chair, unity was to be kept by all. Now I beseech you, is it not clear, that
Optatus speaks of S. Peter, and of his Sea, not as of a particular Bishop, of a
particular Church, but as Head of the Catholic Church, by whose means unity
was to be conserved, and that Schism, and Heresy are to be discovered, by
opposition to that chair? which he calls singularem cathedram, and may well
signify not only a single, or particular, or individual chair, but indeed
singular, by reason of singular preeminence, and privilege above all other
Churches. For this cause, he speaks thus to the Donatist Parmenian: Contra quas
portas (inferorum) claves salutares accepisse legimus Petrum, cui a Christo
dictum est, Tibi dabo claves regni Caelorum, and portae inferorum non
vincenteas. Vnde est ergo quod claves regni vobis vsurpare contenditis, qui
contra cathedram Petri, vestris presumptionibus and audacijs, sacrilegio
militatis? To what purpose should he insist, upon these privileges of S.
Peter, and his Chair, if he meant no more than what is common to all
particular Churches? Or how does he afterward prove, that they whom the
Donatists opposed were ^in Ecclesia Sancta Catholica, per Cathedram Petri, quae
nostra est? But why do I labor, to prove, that which our Adversaries, your
Brethren, are forced to grant? For the Centurists (cent 4. col. 556. lin. 17.)
alledg Optatus calling Peter, Apostolorum caput, vnde and Cephas appellatur.
And indeed not only in the place alleged, but also (lib: 7.) he calls S. Peter
caput Apostolorum, And Fulk (in his Retentiue, Page: 248.) charge Optatus with
absurdity, for saying of Peter, Praeferri Apostolis omnibus meruit etc He
deserved to be preferred before all the Apostles. You say; When Optatus styles
S. Peter head of the Apostles, and says, that from thence he was called
Cephas; Perhaps he was abused into this opinion, by thinking Cephas derived
from the greek word Kephale: whereas it is a Syriack word and signisies a stone.
But what imports it upon what ground he called him head, seeing he called him
so, and believed him to be such? Beside, that which is the stone, Rock, or
Foundation, in a material Building, in a mystical Body is the Head, as the
vulgar saying is, Homo est arbor inversa, The root is to a tree, as the Head
is to a man; and therefore our Savior said, I will build my Church upon this
Rock, after he had said to S. Peter, that he was a Rock. In this manner the
Centurists, Cent: 3. col: 85. say, that Origines (Tract: 5. in Matthew:) dicit,
Petrus per promissionem meruit fieri Ecclesiae fundamentum, and yet that (Hom:
17, in Lucam) Petrum vocat Apostolorum Principem, where we see that S. Peter is
called both a Foundation, and a Prince, Chief, or Head.

34. But now, give me leave, to say plainly, that it is intolerable in you, to
impugn by Reasons, which you expressie only call probabilityes, a matter
delivered clearly in Scripture, testified by Antiquity, embraced by Nations,
and corroborated by the great Plea of Possession, peaceful, and time out of
mind; against all which, what wisdom is it to oppose, mere Topicall Socinian
conjectures? You say, First, That S. Peter should have authority over all the
Apostles, and yet exercise no one act of Authority over any one of them, and
that they should show to him no sign of subjection, me thinks is as strange, as
that a King of England for twenty fine years should do no Act of Regality, nor
receive any one acknowledgment of it:

35. Answer 1. I would ask, how you can assure us, that S. Peter exercised no
one act of authority over any one of the Apostles, unless first you suppose,
not only that all points of Faith, but also all matters of fact, are registered
in Scripture, which I hope you will not say, S. Luke in the Acts having set
down but a few things, and of few? 2. If you believe Scripture, you cannot
doubt, but that in diverse occasions, S. Peter exercised Actions, declaring him
to have an ordinary Charg, and Power proper to him. It was he, who spoke first
in the Apostles Council in Jerusalem; who proposed the Election of S.
Matthias; in warning Christians, that in the writings of S. Paul, there were
things difficult to be understood, which in my opinyon deserves to be noted,
declaring that the charg of the whole Church, was committed to him, even in
things relating to other Apostles; who is still named in the first place, and
named in such manner, as the rest are named as belonging to him, or of his
family, which appears (Mark: 1. Luc: 8. and 9. Act: 2. and 5.) It was He who
was wont to speak for the rest, and so S. Cyrill: upon those words, Joan: 6.
Domine ad quem ibimus? says: Per vnum qui praeerat omnes respondent. But of
the authority and prerogatives of S. Peter, Bellarmine writes at large de Rom:
Pontifice (Lib: 1. Cap: 17.18.19.20.21.22) to whom I referr the Reader. 3. The
Apostles being dead, or dispersed, no wonder, if S. Peter, either had no
occasion of exercising Jurisdiction over them, or at least there was not
occasion of writing it for posterity. Besides, all the Apostles having
jurisdictio^, over the whole world (which in them was extraordinary, but
ordinary in S. Peter) and being particularly assisted by the Holy Ghost for the
due performance of their office, no wonder if S. Peter had no occasion of
exercising his Power, in order to them, who wanted neither Power, nor knowledge,
nor will to correspond to the vocation of an Apostle; which consideration
confutes and retorts your similitude of a King, who certainly would not be
solicitous, to exercise any act of regality over those, who had as great Power
as he himself, and who he was assured, would make the best use of their Power,
if we imagine any such case in a Kingdom, as de facto it was true in the
Apostles, of whom S. Cyprian says (De Vnitate Ecclesiae) Loquitur Dominus ad
Petrum: Ego tibi dico, inquit, quia tu es Petrus, and super istam Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae inferorum non vincent eam. Et tibi dabo
claves regnicoelorum, and quae ligaveris super terram, erunt ligata in coelis;
and quaecumque solveris super terram, erunt soluta and in coelis. Et iterum
eidem post Resurrectionem suam dicit: Pasce Oves meas. Super illum vnum
aedificat Ecclesiam suam, and illi pascendas mandat oves suas. Et quamvis
Apostolis omnibus post Resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuat and dicat;
Sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto vos, accipite Spiritum Sanctum; Si cui
remiseritis peccata, remittentur illi; Si cui retinueritis, tenebuntur: tamen
vt vnitatem manifestaret, vnam cathedram constituit, and vnitatis ejusdem
origine^, ab vno incipiente^ sua authoritate disposuit. Hoc erant vtique and
caeteti Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and
potestatis, sed exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur. Primatus Petro datur, vt vna
Christi Ecclesia and cathedra vna monstretur. Behold, how the Apostles had
jurisdiction over the whole world, though in a different manner, from that
according to which it was conferred upon S. Peter, to descend to his
Successors.

36. Secondly. You object, As strange it is, that you so many ages after should
know this so certainly, and that the Apostles should be so ignorant that S.
Peter was Head of the rest, as to question which of them should be the
greatest, after that those words were spoken in their hearing by virtue whereof
S. Peter is pretended to have been made their Head: yet more strange that our
Savior should not bring them out of their error, by telling them S. Peter was
the man, but rather confirm it by saying, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
authority over them, but it should not be so among them. Answer: It is more
strange, that you should make this objection, who teach that the Apostles, even
after the receiving of the Holy Ghost, having had an express revelation, and
command from our Savior, were doubtful, whether they ought to preach to the
Gentills. For if they might err in Faith, and practice, notwithstanding so
direct a revelation, and precept, how can you wonder that before the receiving
of the Holy Ghost, they might contend among themselves, which of them were the
greater, although our Savior had promised to build his Church upon S. Perer,
(and why do you not say against yourself, it is strange, that you so many ages
after should know the Apostles did err in that matter.) Besides, Bellarmine de
Romano Pontifice (Lib: 1. cap: 28.) demonstrates, both by testimonies of
Fathers, and Scriptures, that S. Peter was not with the other Apostles, in that
contention of theirs, which of them was the greater, and so cannot be said, to
have been ignorant of his own authority, which our Savior had promised
(Matthew: 16.) and actually conferred (Joan: 21.) Yea perhaps the Apostles did
propose to themselves, some temporal kind of glory, or kingdom, as the
mother of S. James and S. John did, when she petitioned our Savior, that one
of her sons might sit at the right hand, the other at the left, in his
Kingdom, and did not think, of being Head of the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ's Militant Church. According to which consideration, it is no wonder, If
our Savior should not bring them out of their error, by telling them S. Peter
was the man (seeing indeed he was no such man, in order to a temporal Kingdom)
but rather confirmed it by saying, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise authority
over them, but it should not be so among them. Which sacred advice, had been
also good, and necessary, though their contention had been, about their
preeminence in the Church, which to seek ambitiously, is evil, though the
thing, to which they pretend, be good. And seeing our Savior was afterward to
commit the charge, of the whole Church, to S. Peter in express terms, by a
triple injunction of Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep, (Joan: 21.) his divine
wisdom thought fit (Matthew: 18.) to give them that holy advice of humility; it
being time enough, for them, to know, and reflect, that S. Peter was their
Head, by that express future declaration, of our Savior (Joan: 21.)

38. Thirdly. You would prove that S. Peter was not Head of the rest, because
the Scripture says, God has appointed first Apostles, secondly Prophets, but
says not, God has appointed First Peter, then the rest of the Apostles;
which, to speak truth is a childish reason: it being clear, that the
Scripture, in that place, does not compare the Apostles among themselves, but
with other degrees in the Church, as Prophets, Doctors etc. Otherwise, you
might prove, that one Magistrate can not be subordinate, and subject to
another, if one, for example, should say, the commonwealth, consists of
Magistrates, and people, because forsooth, in that division, you do not
express the authority of one Magistrate, above another.

39 Fourthly; you say, S. Paul professes himself to be nothing inferior to the
very chiefest Apostles; and (if S. Peter was Head of the Apostles) it was a
wonder, that S. Paul should so far forget S. Peter and himself, as that
mentioning him often, he should do it without any title of Honor. But I
beseech you, can you believe, that S. Paul would say of himself, that he was
not inferior to the chiefest of the Apostles, absolutely, and in all things?
He accounted himself to be the first and chiefest amongst sinners, and laments,
that he had been a persecutor of Christians; and will you needs understand him
to say, that in such respects, he was not inferior to the other Apostles, who
were innocent of those things? He was an Apostle, as the others were, and that
is all, you can understand by his words; and all that, makes just nothing to
the purpose. But S. Paul mentions S. Peter without any Title of honor. No more
does he give any title to S. James, though he were Bishop of Jerusalem, which
surely deserves some honor, if the simplicity, of those blessed times, had
been accustomed to testify honor by titles. Yourself say here, S. Peter might
be head of the Apostles, that is first in order, and honor among them, and not
have supreme Authority over them; and Protestants easily grant that he had that
Privilege of being first, in order, and honor; how then will your answer your
own objection, that it was a wonder S. Paul should mention him, without any
title of honor, seeing particular honor was due to him, even by our Saviors
command? For, from what other cause could it proceed? But shall I disclose to
you a mystery, on which it seems you do not reflect? Our Savior, whose words
are operative, and deeds; by calling S. Peter, Cephas, or a Rock, had also made
him such, and said Tues Petrus, Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, so that to name Peter, is to call him the Foundation, and head
of the Church, and all Christians; and with what greater title of honor, could
any body mention any Creature? we may therefore say, of S. Peter, as S. Ambrose
says, of the title of Martyr (De Uirginibus Lib. 1.) Quot homines tot
praecones, qui Martyrem praedidicant, dum loquuntnr. To name one a martyr, is a
title of honor; and so it is to name Peter, for the foresaied Reason.

40. You conclude; Though we should grant against all these probabilities, and
many more (fooleries, say I, not probabilities) that Optatus meant that S.
Peter was head of the Apostles, not in our, but your sense, and that S. Peter
indeed was so; yet still you are very far from showing, that in the judgment
of Optatus, the Bishop of Rome was to be at all, much less by Divine Right,
Successor to S. Peter in this his Headship and Authority. For what incongruity
is there, if we say, he might succeed S. Peter in that part of his care, the
Government of that particular Church, (as sure he did even while S. Peter was
living) and yet that neither he nor any man was to succeed in his Apostleship,
nor in his government of the Church universal? Especially seeing S. Peter and
the rest of the Apostles, by laying the foundation of the Church, were to be
the foundation of it, and accordingly are so called in Scripture. And therefore
as in abuilding it is incongruous that foundation should succeed foundation: so
it may be in the Church, that any other Apostle should succeed the first.

41. Answer; If you suppose (as for the present you do) that S. Peter by our
Saviors institution (and consequently by divine right) was Head of the
Apostles; you should not say, what incongruity is there, but what incongruity
is there not, if we say, that the Bishop of Rome, might succeed S. Peter, only
in the Government of that particular Church. For what can be more incongruous,
and foolish, than to imagine, that S. Peter was ordained by our Savior Head of
the Apostles, and the whole Church, only for his life time, when there was no
need, and, as we may say, little use thereof, seeing all the Apostles had
Jurisdiction over all Christians, and Power to preach the Gospel, through the
whole world; and so the necessity of such universal Power in S. Peter, must
have relation to future Ages, after the death of the Apostles; and if it must
still reside in some, in whom can you imagine it to be seated, except in him
whom you deny not to be Successor of S. Peter for the Church of Rome? And that
Optatus supposed the universal Power of S. Peter, to remain in his
Successors, appears by his words, which I have pondered above; as also because
he speaks of the Sea, or Chair of Rome, as of the Rule, whereby to judge of
heresies, and Schisms, not only for the time of S. Peter, but for ever; and
therefore he sets down a Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome only, and says:
Cathedra vnica quae est prima de dotibus, sedit prior Petrus: cui successit
Linus, Lino successit Clemens, Clementi Anacletus etc: and so goes on till his
own aim. And I would gladly know, by what text of Scripture you can prove
that the Power of S. Peter over the whole Church, was so particular, and
personal, to him, that it ceased with his person? Will you have us measure
matters of Faith, with your congruities, or incongruities? With your Socinian,
topicall, humane vain, discourses? What mean you by these words as sure he
the Bishop of Rome did even while S: Peter was living? I will not examine
here, whether, or in what manner Linus, and Cletus were Bishops of Rome,
before S. Peter's death (whereof may be seen Baronius Anno 69. who says, they
were not Romanae sedis episcopi, but only Coadjutores) I beseech you remember,
what you said (N. 98. and 99.) interpreting S. Cyprian and S. Optatus, that,
in one particular Church at once there ought to be but one Bishop; and
certainly it is no consequence, The Bishop of Rome appointed by S. Peter for
Rome, and supplying his place, and depending on him, was not head of the
Church, while S. Peter did live; therefore he could not be his successor, in
that universal power, after S. Peter's death. Neither do you so much as offer
to prove, that S. Peter ever relinquished his being the particular Bishop of
Rome, and therefore how can you say; the Bishop of Rome did succeed S. Peter,
while he was living, seeing no man can succeed a Bishop while that Bishop lives,
and is still Bishop of that particular Church, in which an other is pretended
to succeed him?

42. Your Argument. (That, as in building it is incongruous that foundations
should succeed foundations: so it may be in the Church, that any other Apostle
should succeed the first) is to give it the right name a nothing, or a mere
equivocation in the Metaphor of a foundation; whereas a Foundation in our case
signifies a Head, or chief, and if you hold it incongruous that foundations in
this sense should succeed foundations, you must say, that no King, Prince, or
magistrate can without incongruity, succeed one an other. Besides, The Apostles
were Foundations of the Church, by their Preaching, and Teaching (for not all
of them wrote, and they were foundations of the Church before any one of the^
wrote) and I hope you will not say, it is incongruous, that Preachers, and
Teachers should have Successors. Was not Judas an Apostle, and was not S.
Matthias chosen, not only after him, but expressly for him, or in his place, or
to succeed him? For so S. Peter (Act: 1.) applies that place of Scripture,
Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter: and the prayer of the Christians was, Ostende
quem elegeris ex his duobus vnum accipere locum ministerij hujus, and
Apostolatus, de quo praevaricatus est Judas. But what, if your very ground, or
foundation (That in building it is incongruous, that foundations should succeed
foundations) be false, as certainly it is? For, if you suppose the first
foundation to fail, or be taken away, may an other, be substituted, and
succeed it? The Apostles were Foundations, but being mortal, they faild, and
needed successors to supply their absence, and so your similitude returns
directly upon yourself. If you will follow, the metaphor of a foundation, in
all respects; how do you say; S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, by laying
the foundations of the Church, were to be the foundations of it, seeing you may
say, in building it is incongruous that a foundation should lay a foundation?
Will you have it lay itself? Why do you not also say, that as the foundation,
is under the building; so the Apostles, and all Pastors, Prelates, and
Superiors, are inferior to the rest of the Church? It seems though the
Scripture should be understood, (as indeed it ought) that Christ intended, that
S. Peter's successors should have jurisdiction, over the whole Church, you will
control God himself, and say, It is incongruous that foundation should succeed
foundation. You say else where, untruly, that Chapter Ma. trifles, about the word
foundation, which you confess to be metaphorical, and ambiguous, and yet here
you ground your whole Argument, upon that metaphor, ill applied; as, (beside
what has been said) not only the Apostles, but Prophets also, are called in
Scripture foundations; super fundamentum Apostolorum, and Prophetarum; and will
you except, that in a building, it is incongruous to have more than one firm
and perfect foundation, as certainly the Apostles were? But I spend too much
time in confuting such toys, as these.

43. Your (N. 101.102.) have been answered already. The Donatists for the cause
of their separation pretended, not only, that the men from whom they
separared, were defiled with the contagion of the Traditors (as you say) but
also that they erred in Faith, in believing that Baptism, might be conferred
by Heretics; to omit other things. Your calumny about a picture has been
confuted heretofore Your (N. 104.) contains no difficulty, which may not be
answered by former grounds.

44. To your (N. 105.) I answer, that seeing Potter accounts the errors of the
Roman Church to be damnable, to such, as are not excused by Ignorance, Chapter Ma.
had reason to say, the Doctor condemns all learned Catholics, who least of
all men can plead Ignorance. It is evidently true, that (as Chapter Ma. P. 205.206)
says, these two Propositions, cannot consist in the understanding of any one,
who considers what he says: After due examination I judge the Roman errors not
to be in themselves fundamental, or damnable; and yet I judge that according to
true reason, it is damnable to hold them. For, according to true reason, one is
to judge of things, as indeed they are in themselves; and therefore, if in
reason, I judge them not to be fundamental in themselves, I must in reason
conceive, that they are notfundamentall, being held by me; neither does there
in this case intervene any lie, seeing one professes that not to be damnable,
which he holds not to be damnable. But where does Chapter M. say, as you cite him;
These Assertions, the Roman errors are in themselves not damnable, and yet it
is damnable for me (who know them to be errors) to hold and confess them, are
absolutely inconsistent? For it is impossible, that any man can hold that which
he knows to be an error; because even by knowing it to be an error, he holds
it not, but dissents from it. He says only, that it cannot be damnable, to
hold an error not damnable (which is very true) but says not that one can
hold an error, which he knows to be an error.

45. You make Chapter Ma. speak in this ridiculous manner to Protestants; If you
erred in thinking that our Church holds errors, this error or erroneous
conscience might be rectifyed and deposed, by judging those errors not
damnable; and then you triumph, and spend many words in proving the very same
thing, which Chapter Ma. never denied, but expressly affirmed; namely, that the
errors of the Roman Church (upon a falls supposition that she had any) were not
damnable. These be his words in the said (N 206.) If you grant your conscience
to be erroneous, in judging that you cannot be saved in the Roman Church, by
reason of her errors, there is no other remedy, but that you must rectify
your erring conscience, by your other judgment, that her errors are not
fundamental. nor damnable. And this is no more charity, then you daily affoard
to such other Protestants, as you term brethren, whom you cannot deny to be
in some errors (unless you will hold that of contradictorie propositions both
may be true) and yet you do not judge it damnable to live in their communion,
because you hold their errors not to be fundamental. Is this to say; If you
erred in thinking that your Church holds errors, this error might be
rectified, by judging these errors not damnable? Is it not directly the
contrary, and supposes errors, though they be not damnable? Or do you think,
that Chapter Ma. holds Protestants not to be in error? All that Chapter Ma. says, is,
That if you err, in judging you cannot be saved, in the Roman Church, by
reason of her errors, you must rectify your conscience, by judging the
errors, not to be fundamental, or damnable, and therefore not excluding
salvation. Is this good dealing in you? And why do you say (N. 106.) A fifth
falsehood it is that we daily do this favor for Protestants, you must mean
(if you speak consequently) to judge they have no errors, because we judge
they have none damnable? Seeing Ch: Ma: said most expressly, that you do the
favor to other Protestants, whom you cannot deny to be in some errors, not
to judge it damnable to live in their communion, because you hold their errors
not to be fundamental. Once again I must ask, whether this be conscionable
dealing?

46. You are too resolute, in this (N. 106.) to impugn the saying of Ch: Ma:
That according to the Doctrine of all Divines, there is great difference betwixt
a speculatiue persuasion; and a practical dictamen of conscience. And I fear,
you do not well understand, this true Doctrine, when you say; These are but
diverse words signifying the same thing; neither is such a persuasion wholly
speculatiue, but tending to practice: nor such a dictamen wholly practical, but
grounded upon speculation. For, you should say the contrary, that a persuasion
purely speculatiue, is so far from tending to practice, that oftentimes, it is
joined with this judgment; I cannot frame my practice, according to this
speculation; and consequently my practice, can not be grounded upon such a
speculation, as Catholic Divines do learnedly explicate, particularly, in the
matter and form of Sacraments. But this is not a place, to handle this matter
at large; it being sufficient to have said, that a speculation, taken alone,
and abstracting from all other considerations, of all sides, oftentimes would
prove pernicious, if it were applied to practice. You falsify Ch: Ma: as if he
did affirm, that Protestants did only conceive in speculation, that the Church
of Rome erred in some Doctrines, and had not also a practical dictamen, that
it was damnable for them to continue in the profession of these errors. For,
Ch: Ma: says not, that Protestants did only conceive in speculation etc.? And
had not also a practical dictamen etc. but his words are: Although they had in
speculation conceaved, the vissble Church to err in some Doctrines of
themselves not damnable; yet with that speculatiue judgment, they might, and
ought, to have entertained this practical dictamen, that for points not
suhstantiall to Faith, they neither were bound, nor lawfully could, break the
bond of Charity, by breaking unity in Gods Church. You see Ch: Ma: declares
not, what dictamen Protestants had, but what they might, and ought, to have
had, which are as different things, as to say, one is an honest man, and might,
and ought to be such an one. Ch: Ma: says not, that Dr. Potter teaches, in
express words, that Luther was obliged to forsake the Church, for an
unnecessary light, but that it follows, upon his assertion that he was bound
to forsake her external communion, for poinrs not necessary to salvation.

47. In your (N. 107.) your example, that Euclide was not infallible, yet was
he certain enough, that twice two are four, is not to the purpos, because
such truths, are evident by the light of nature, as the mysteries of Christian
Faith are not. Otherwise how were it possible for you to disagree, so
irreconciliably, as the world sees, you do?

48. Ch: Ma: says (N. 41.) Since in cases of vncertaintyes we are not to leave
our Superior, nor cast of his obedience, or publicly oppose his decrees, your
Reformers, might easily have found a safe way, to satisfy their zealous
conscience, without a public breach: especially, if with their uncertainty, we
call to mind the peaceable possession, and prescription, which by the
confession of your own brethren, the Church, and Pope of Rome did for many
ages enjoy. To this you answer, by abbreviating the words of Ch: Ma: thus; Your
Church was in peaceable possession (you must mean of her Doctrine and the
Professors of it) and enjoyed prescription for many ages: and then you add:
Doctrine is not a thing that may be possessed: and the Professors of it were
the Church it self, and in nature of Possessours, (if we may speak
improperly) rather then the thing possessed, with whom no man has Reason to
be offended, if they think fit to quit their own possession. But by what
commission, or warrant, do you say to Ch: Ma: (you must mean of her Doctrine
and the Professors of it) as if his words must needs be so restrained? Whereas
the Church of Rome was in possession of Right, not to be opposed in her
Doctrine by private persons; she was in possession, of the good Name, and
Estimation, of being a true Church, for which she is commended by S. Paul; The
Pope was in possession, of power, and jurisdiction, over all Christians; of
making laws, Accepting appeals gathering Counsels etc. And both the Pope,
and Church, were in possession, of the Professors of her Doctrine, that is,
Christians were their subjects, who could not be seduced by fraud, Schism,
Heresy, or violence, without offense to God, and man: as you will not deny, all
lawful Communities, to have Right, that their subjects, should not withdraw,
and divide themselves, from such a mystical Body. Neither is it pertinent,
whether in this place we take possession, as it is defined; Detentio rei
corporalis, corporis, anim^jurisque adminiculo, it being sufficient for our
present purpose, that it be that which is called quasi possessio, the having
any thing; as we are said, to have hands, feet, life etc. You say, the
Professors of the Doctrine were in nature of Possessors (if we may speak
improperly) rather then the thing possessed, with whom no man has Reason to
be offended, if they think fit to quit their own possession. Answer: It is
strange, that no man has reason to be offended, if men quit the possession, or
forsake the true Doctrine, the grace of God, or virtue, or honesty, because he
is supposed to possess them, or for a man, to deprive himself, of some member
of his body, or even of life it self. Your last words; That the possession
which the Gouvernours of our Church had for some ages, of the party gouverned
was not peaceable, but got by fraud and held by violence, are most injurious
to Truth, to Gods Church, and to God himself; as if our Saviors promise, of a
stable Church, should be verified, only by fraud and violence, seeing as I have
often said, there was no visible Church upon earth, except the Roman, and those
who agreed with her against the Doctrines which Luther did broach, as Ch: Ma:
shows here (Page 173.) and you do not deny (Page: 274. N. 56.) where I observe
by the way, that you say, I know not who they be that say Luther reformed the
whole Church; whereas Ch: Ma: cites diverse Protestants that say so.

49. In your (N. 108.) There is nothing, but a perpetual begging of the
Question, and taking that for true, which you know we deny; and talking of
odious matters, as of the oath of Allegiance, and Supremacy, which only shows
your charity to us, and zeal to add affliction upon the afflicted, if it had
been in your power, and which you would have wished unwritten, if you were now
a live. You say our rule out of Uincentius Lyrinensis advers: Haere;: Cap: 27.
(Indeed it is a matter of great moment, and both most profitable to be learned,
and necessary to be remembered, and which we ought again and again to
illustrate and inculcate with weighty heaps of examples, that almost all
Catholics may know, that they ought to receive the Doctors with the Church,
and not forsake the Faith of the Church with the Doctors) is to no purpos
against them, that followed Luther, seeing they pretend, and are ready to
justify, that they forsook not with the Doctors the Faith, but only the
corruption of the Church. But I pray, do you not teach, and proclayme, and
thereby pretend to excuse your Schism, that the whole Church before Luther was
corrupted in Faith; and so by leaving her pretended corruptions, you left her
Faith, and those doctrines which she believed? To your (N. 109.) it is easy to
answer, that about interlining Potters words in the (page: 209. N. 42.) you will
find among the Errata, that Ch: Ma: only asks what the Doctor means. You do
not well to explicate Hooker about external obedience against ones internal
judgment, by paying money upon the judges sentence, which is a thing not evil
of it self; but in matters of Faith, to yeald external obedience against his
internal belief. is perse loquendo, evil. Your (N. 110.) about the words of
Hooker, has been answered in all those places, where I have showed, that
Protestants, can have no certainty out of Scripture against Catholics, (as
appears by the agreement of many of them with us) and therefore, (according to
the principles of Hooker) Luther and his followers, were bound to obey the
Pastors of that universal Church, which he found, before his revolt: and so
you have no reason to accuse Brereley, or Ch: Ma: of any ill dealing in
alleging Hooker as they do, who I do not wonder if sometime he speak
inconsequently, seeing all Protestants are forced to do so in this matter. And
heretofore, I have proved at large, out of the grounds which Hooker lays, that
Protestants cannot be excused from Schism. You know your (N. 111.) is answered
by a mere denial, of that which you affirm, without any proof.

50. You say (N. 112.) that Chapter Ma. (N. 43.) has some objections against
Luthers Person but none against his cause. But the Reader will find, the
contrary to be true, That they concern his cause, in so high a degree, as no
man, desirous to embrace the truth, and save his solue, or has the fear of
God, can believe, that Luther was a man sent to reform the world by preaching
the true doctrine. I beseech the Reader to peruse that whole (N. 43.) of Chapter
Ma. yet, I cannot for bear to set down these words of Luther (Tom. 2. Germ.
Fol. 9. and Tom. 2. Wit. Anno. 1562. de abrog. Missa private. Fol. 244.) How
often did my trembling heart beat with in me, and reprehending me object
against me that most strong Argument. Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds
err? Were so many Ages ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so many into
Hell to be damned eternally with the? And Tom 5. Annot. Breviss: Do thou, who
art but one and of no account take upon the so great matters? What if thou
being but one, offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all, to err, why
may be not permit the to err? to This belong those arguments, the Church, the
Church, the Fathers, the Fathers, the Counsels, and Customs, the multitudes
and greatness of wise men; whom do not these Mountains of Arguments, these
clouds yea these seas of Examples overthrow? And these thoughts wrought so
deep in his soul, that he often wished, and desired, that he had (Colloq.
Menfal, Fol. 158.) never begun this business; wishing yet further that his
writings were burned and buried in eternal oblivion, Praef. in Tom: German.
Jen. Your glancing at the lives of some Popes, makes only against yourselfe,
considering that God did not use these men to begin a new pretended
Reformation as Luther did, but they continued in that Sea, and Place, which had
been established by our Savior; and therefore the bad lives of some Popes,
which had been enough to overthrow that Sea, if it were not settled most
immoveably by the absolute Divine promise, thou art Peter etc: and the Gates of
hell shall not prevail etc. yield us an argument, against Luther, and all
those, who opposed not the vices of particular Popes, but their place, and
Authority, and the Church of Rome. The words with which you close this Number,
contain nothing but calumny, falsehood, and bitterness, and show with what
spirit you were possessed. In your (N. 112. it should be 113.) you grant all that
Chapter Ma. endeavored to prove; and I have showed that in this grant, you
contradict yourselfe. You say that in a Work which C. Ma. professes to have
written merely against Protestants, all that might have been spared which (N.
45.) he wrote against them that flatter themselves with a conceit, that they
are not guilty of Schism, because they were not the first authors thereof. But
by your leave, seeing those men keep themselves within the Communion of the
Protestants, Charity Maintained had reason, to write as he did, that they might
be induced, to forsake that Communion, in which to persever, in them were the
most formal sin of Schism, which consistes in forsaking the external
Communion of Catholics with whom such men pretend to agree, in belief.
Besides, perhaps they are not Catholics so far, as to believe, they are obliged
to forsake the external communion of Protestants, and return to us; which if
they believe not, they are not Catholics, in all points even of Faith, which
teaches us, that it is Schismatic, and damnable to be divided, from the
external Communion of the true Church: and I pray God this kind of men would
reflect on this your grant, and consider, that their condition is lamentable in
the opinion, both of Catholics, and Protestants.

CHAP: XV. THE ANSWER TO HIS SIXTH CHAPTER ABOUT HERESY.
1. THe nearer I come to an end, the swifter the motion of my pen may be; in
regard that the more is past, the more Points I find answered, even for that
which remains.

2. Charity Maintained (Chap. 6. N. 1.) has these words: Almighty God having
ordained Man, to a supernatural End, of Beatitude, by supernatural means, it
was requisite, that his understanding should be enabled to apprehend that End
and means, by a supernatural knowledge. This saying you approve (N. 2.) if Chapter
Ma. mean by knowledge, an apprehension, or belief. But if he take the word
properly and exactly, Faith is not knowledge, no more then three is four, but
eminently contained in it, so that he that knows, believes, and something
more, but he that believes many times does not know, nay if he does barely, and
merely believe, he does never know.

3. Answer; accordingly to the right method, and order of doctrine, Chapter Ma.
takes knowledge in general, as an act of the understanding, or Congnoscitiue,
and knowing Power of our soul, which must be knowledge, as it is distinguished
from an act of the Will; and so in that Axiom of Philosophers, and Divines,
Nihil volitnm, quod non cognitum, nothing is willed or desired, which is not
known, knowledge is taken in general, for an act of the understanding, or
cognoscitiue Power without distinguishing between acts: evide^t, obscure,
probable contain distinct, or confused. And if this be a true, and proper
acception, of knowledge, taken in general, certainly in the same sense, it must
be true in the particular species of knowledge, as all genericall natures, are
properly, found in every species, and so we say, of knowledge, some is evident,
some obscure etc, and I would gladly know; what other genus; you would find, to
those, and other particular species. It was therefore necessary for Chapter Ma.
while he spoke in general, and abstracted from evident, or obscure assents, to
speak as he did: but then descending to particular species, he distinguishes
faith, which must be obscure, from evident knowledge, but not absolutely from
knowledge; and therefore you cite him amiss, when you affirm, that He requires
that the object of Faith must be both naturally and supernaturally unknown,
whereas he says, it should be void even of supernatural evidence (which is
not all one as to say, it must be void of supernatural knowledge) and when he
said, our assent to divine truths must be unknowing (for so it should have
been written, and not unknown, which belongs to the object, not to the act of
assent) he explicated it, or inevident by humane discourse. So that here is no
retractation, of what he said of knowledge in general; but whereas you would
prove a retractation by his words, Faith differs from science in regard of the
objects obscurity, though I find not these formal words in Chapter Ma. yet I must
say they prove not your purpose. For knowledge, being a Genus to Science, it
does not follow, Faith differs from Science, therefore it differs from, (or is
not) knowledge; but contrarily, science being aknowledg, it cannot be
distinguished from Faith by knowledge taken in general (seeing Faith is also a
knowledge (...) Difference v.g. by being an evident knowledge, and ther^^^ to
clear all, when Chapter M. (N. 3.) teaches that Faith liffers fro Sea in the adds,
natural sciences, to declare the evide^ce of such knowledge. For Theolegy, in
the opinion of diverse, is a science, though it has not the evide^ce which
natural sciences have, in regard, that one premisse at least must be an Act of
Faith, and obscure. All which considered; you show too much confidence (some
would say ignotance) in saying so resolutely as you do, to Chapter Ma. That
science and knowledge properly taken are Synonimous terms, I think is a thing
so plain, that you will not require any proof of it. For it is clear, that
knowledge, is Genus to science, taken properly and strictly, and therefore they
cannot be synonimous terms. Nay, though knowledge were taken for one species of
knowledge, not as it is genus to different species, but as it is determined to
signify an evide^t knowledge, yet it is not Synonimous with science taken
properly, as Philosophers speak of it, not that (...), for knowledge produced by
demonstration, but it is of a larger compass, and comprehends all evident
assents, and among the rest, the most general Principles of nature, as also
the immediate Principles and premises of science itself. I mean of a
demonstratiue conclusion. As, for the signification of the word, knowledge, in
our English phrase, it depends on the circumstances, in which it is used,
whether, or no, it be, termined to an evident knowledge, or may also signify any
asse^t, though it be obscure. If one should say, I know no such man as Jesus
Christ, not any such thing as Christian Religion, would you approve his saying,
by your speculation, that he knows nothing of Christ, or Christianity, because
he believes it, and belief or Faith is not knowledge, as you speak? But if an
other, to show the fervor of his Faith, should say, I do rather know, than
believe, the truth of Christian Religion, he would be understood to take
knowledge for an evident assent, distinct from Faith which is obscure. If you
consult holy Scripture you will find S. Paul to say (2. Tim. 1.12.) scio cui
credidi, I know whom I have believed, as even your Protestant English
Translation has it. And (1. Cor. 13.12.) videmus nunc per speculum in
aenigmate; your English Translation has; Now we see through a glass; And yet
seeing seems more to signify evidence, and to be opposite to believing, then
only knowing. And (Joan: 14.9.) the English Protestants Bible has: have I been
so long with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip: and Beza in Latin,
Non cognovisti me? And, (Job. 19.25.) your English Bible also has; I know that
my redeemer lives. Innumerable other Texts, may be seen, in the Concordance
of the bible, to this purpose, wherein knowledge is applied to objects of Faith.
And S. Austine, (Lib. 1. de Doctr. Christ.) says: non verendum dicere, nos
scire, quae idoneis testibus novimus. But I may justly be thought to have said
too much, in this Question, which may seem, de nomine, if your presumptuous
and insincere dealing had not forced me, and if I had not taken occasion, to
explicate some other points, by occasion of the word (knowledge) from which I
now pass to the Matter.

4. You affirm, the saying of Chapter Ma. to be good, if he mean by knowledge,
apprehension, or belief; wherein you are greatly mistaken, if you take
apprehension particularly and strictly as it is a species, and the first
operation of the understanding, distinct from the second, which is Judgment, or
affirmation, or negation, and the third which is discourse; For, Faith is an
assent or Judgment, that a thing is, or is not, which apprehension, is not, nay
(to use your own expression) if he does barely and merely apprehend, he does
never affirm, or deny; and in our case one may apprehend an object revealed,
without Judging it to be true, or falls. A learned Heretic, or infidel, may
apprehend the objects of our Faith, better than some true believer; but the
difference is in the act of judging, or assenting, which the one does; the
other does not. If you take apprehension in general, as it abstracts from, and
is common to the three particular species, or acts of the understanding,
apprehension, judgment, and discourse, as Chapter Ma. does, when he says man's
understanding must be enabled to apprehend that End, and Means by a
supernatural knowledge, you do not distinguish it, from knowledge in general,
or as it is common to all the particular species of acts in the understanding,
evident, obscure; certain, probable, etc. and then you fall into that very
thing, which you object against your adversary, that Faith is knowledge, taking
knowledge, in general, as I explicated above. Yet all this, is nothing to the
Philosophy, which you deliver in these words. Faith is not knowledge, no more
then three is four, but eminently contained in it. But if you consider well,
you will find, that three taken materially is contained formally in four, or
if you take them, as they are distinct species, the one is not contained in the
other, but are indivisibly distinct in nature, and essence, and exclusive one
of another: and therefore your inference so that, he that knows, believes, and
something more, but he that believes many times does not know cannot be good,
taking knowledge (as you do, and upon which acception you ground your
objection) for an evident knowledge, as if an evident assent did necessarily and
universally include belief, that is an obscure, or inevident assent, either
formally, as is manifest it does not, or eminently, seeing an humane natural
knowledge, though it be evident, is not more perfect than an inevident,
certain, and supernatural act of divine Faith: and yourself pretend, that you
are ready to renounce, all evidence of whatsoever human reason, in comparison
of any truth revealed in Scripture You say, a knowledge of a thing absolutely
vnknownen, is a plain implicancy, but you say so to no purpose, since Chapter Ma.
never said, that Faith is knowledge, as knowledge is taken for any particular
species of knowledge which is evident. But in the mean time look, how you can
reconcile your own words, he that knows believes, and something more, whereof
I have spoken already. Finally; Faith must be an evident knowledge, in your
opinion, who hold it to be an evident conclusion, clearly deduced from evident
premises, and so you impugn yourself, not your adversary. Your (N. 3.4.5.)
have been answered already. Only I observe that, Hooker cited in your margent,
for any thing that can be gathered by his words, understands no more, than that
Faith is not so absolutely certain as knowledge, speaking of certainty joynd
with evidence wherein all men cannot but agree; whereas the certainty, of
Faith, is of a different kind of certainty derived from the Diviue Testimony,
and special motion of the Holy Ghost, and such as does not necessitate us to
an assent, because it implies obscurity; which makes nothing for your purpose,
who teach that Faith has no absolute certainty, either evident, or obscure.

5. In answer to your (N. 6.) you know, C. Ma: never resolves Faith into
Tradition, in your sense, as it signifies mere humane testimony, but teaches,
that the infallible Proposer of Divine Uerityes, is the Church of every age;
and other arguments of credibility are, of themselves, only preparations, and
dispositions, to an act of Faith; but the Church we believe to be infallible,
by the same means, whereby the Apostles proved themselves to be infallible, as
I showed (Chap 5.) Thus the first contradiction, which you impute to C. Ma. is
of no force; as also the second, which goes upon a very falls, and injurious
assertion that Charit: Ma: professes to have no assurance, but that Protestants
dying Protestants may possibly die with Contrition, and be saved, whereof I
treated (Chap: 8.)

6. Your (N. 7.) gives us a strange kind of Philosophy, while you say, That
obscure and evident are affections not of our assent, but of the object of it,
not of our belief, but of the thing believed; whereas the direct contrary is
true. For, objects, or things in themselves, are neither evide^t, nor obscure,
but by acts of ours, and from the^, receive an extrinsecall denomination, of
evident, obscure, certain, or probable: Otherwise the same object should be,
in itself, at the same time, obscure, evident, certain, probable, doubtful,
confused, distinct, perfect, imperfect, as at the same time, it may chance to
terminate, different kinds of acts: and even God, who is infinite Light, should
be obscure, yea imperfect, because in this life we can know him only ex part,
and imperfectly. Yourself in this very next (N. 8.) say; We cannot be
infallibly certain of the Truth of the things which we believe, unless our
evidence of it were of the highest degree; where you declare, that evidence, is
ours, and not inherent in the objects, as green or blew are, and therefore our
sight is not green or blew (as you (N. 7.) infer it must be, if our assent
itself could be called obscure) and yet it is more abfurd, to say, our sight is
green, there that the object v.g. God himself, is obscure, probable,
uncertain, confused, imperfect, because he may be known by such different
acts. And this your example is retorted against yourself. For as the same
object, without any alteration in itself, may beseene clearly, and dimly by
different acts of our Eye, which makes it clear that the more or less
cleareness is in the act of seeing, not in the thing seen; so we must say of
our understanding, which is the Eye of our soul, that evidence, probability
etc. are in the Acts of that Eye, and not in the objects which are understood.
Whereby it appears, that you had no reason to please yourself so much in this
ignorance of yours as to vpbraied Chapter Ma. and say: In other places I answer
your words, but here I must answer your meaning. The word unknown, as I noted
above, which you cite out of Chapter Ma. should have been put to the Errata, and
corrected unknowing, as it appears by the word with which he joins it, and by
which he declares it, saying (or inevident) and by the words which follow, that
Faith absolutely should be obscure in itself. The rest of this Number has been
answered at larg heretofore, neither is there any particular difficulty in your
(N. 8.)

7. In your (N. 9.10.) you say to Chapter Ma. For your making Prudence not only a
commendation of a believer, but also essential to it, and part of the
definition of it, in that Questionless you were mistaken. Answer; C. Ma. says
not that Prudence is essential to Faith, and part of the definition of it nor
in the definition which he gives (N. 8.) prudence is so much as mentioned. Yet
for the thing itself, seeing I have proved in the Introduction, that Faith is
supernatural in essence, and cannot be produced, but by the special grace of
the holy Ghost (whatsoever you may think to the contrary) and that the Holy
Ghost cannot move to an action, all things considered, imprudent; it follows,
that an act of Faith, cannot be imprudent, as it is impossible it should be
supernatural in essence, and not involue an order, or reference, to a
supernatural cause. Now your self here (N. 9.) confess, that without
credible reasons, and inducements, our choice even of the true Faith, is not to
be commended as prudent, but to be condemned of rashness and levity. I say, an
act of Faith must always be prudent, not that every one, must be able to give
to others an account of his faith, as you interpret the matter, but that the
capacity of the believer, and all other circumstances, considered, the belief
of such a man, is indeed prudent. I wonder what could move you (N. 10.) to say
to Charity Maintained; It is against Truth and Charity to say as you do that
they: with cannot do so (that is cannot give a Reason and account of their
Faith) either are not at all, or to no purpos true believers: whereas Charity
Maintained has no such matter.

8. In your (N. 11.12.) you say It is not Heresy to oppose au Truth proposed by
the Church, but only such a Truth, as is an essential part of the Gospel of
Christ.

9. Answer: you have no constancy in your doctrine. Here you say, Heresy
cannot be without error against some essential part of the Gospel of Christ.
And; every error against any Doctrine revealed by God, is not a damnable
Heresy, unless it be revealed publicly, plainly with a command that all
should believe it. By essential, I suppose you mean Necessary, and
Fundamental, as contrarily (Page 140. N. 26.) you say not Fundamental, ^. e.
no essential point of Christianity. But contrary to this your doctrine, in
other places you teach, that whatsoever is opposite to Scripture, is an Heresy;
as (Page: 101. N. 127.) you say; If Scripture be sufficient to inform us what
is the Faith, it must of necessity be also sufficient to teach us what is
Heresy; seeing Heresy is nothing but a manifest deviation from and opposition to
the Faith. But you will not deny, that every text of Scripture is sufficient to
make a thing a matter of faith; therefore you cannot deny, but that error
against any such text, being a deviation from, and an opposition to Faith, must
necessarily be heresy: which is more clear in your grounds, who teach, that
it is impossible, to know what points in Scripture be fundamental, and
consequently what is Heresy, if you take it for a deviation, only from
fundame^tall points. And this you declare clearly in the same Number, (Page:
102.) Saying: If any man should obstinatly contradic^t the truth of any thing
plainly delivered in Scripture, who does not see, that every one who believes
the Scripture, has a sufficient means to discover, and condemn, and avoid
that Heresy, without any need of an infallible guide? You teach also, that, as
things are ordered, there is equal necessity of believing all things contained
in Scripture, whether they be Fundamental, or not Fundamental: and nothing is
more frequent in your Book, than that it is a damnable sin, to disbelieue
any one truth, sufficiently propounded to be revealed by God, and what sin
can it be but the sin of Heresy, which is opposite to the Theological virtue
of Faith? Potter also, speaks clearly to this purpose, saying (Page: 98.) He is
justly esteemed an Heretic, who yealds not to Scripture sufficiently
propounded, and yet it is clear, that in Scripture there are millions of
truths, not Fundamental. And (Page: 128.) An obstinate standing out against
evident Scripture cleared unto him makes an Heretic: And (Page: 247.) If a man
by reading the Scriptures be convinced of the truth, this is a sufficient
proposition to prove him that gainesayeth any such truth, to be an Heretic,
and obstinate opposer of the Faith: And (Page: 212.) It is true, whatsoever is
revealed in Scripture or propounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in some
sense Fundamental, in regard of the Divine Authority of God and his word, by
which it is recommended: that is, such, as may not be denied or contradicted
without in fidelity: Such as every Christian is bound with humility, and
reverence to believe whenever the knowledge thereof is offered to him. And
further (Page: 250.) Where the revealed will or word of God is sufficiently
propounded; there he that opposes is convinced of error, and he who is thus
convinced, is an Heretic, and Heresy is a work of the flesh, which excludes
from heaven (Gal: 5.20.21.) And hence it follows, that it is Fundament all to
a Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all
revealed truths of God, whereof he may be convinced that they are of God. And
(Page: 57.) Whosoever either wilfully opposes any Catholic verity maintained by
this Church, the fellowship of the Saints (or the Catholic visible Church) as
do Heretics; (...) perversely divides himself fromthe Catholic communion, as
do Schismatiks: the condition of both these is damnable. And Field (L. 2. C.
3,) speaks plainly: Freedom from Fundamental error, may be found among
Heretics; Therefore error, against points not fundame^ntall is Heresy, seeing
they be may Heretics, and yet be free from fundame^tall error. Fulk (in his
Rejoinder to Bristow P. 82.) The parliament determined Heresy by contrariety to
the Canonical Scripture. Can you expect a greater authority then that of the
Parliament? But no wonder, if Heresies be familiar and ripe among you, if they
consist only in fundamental errors, and that, you are not able to determine,
what errors be fundamental, and the^ who will be careful to avoid they know
not what: For the rest of this number, I need only say, that it is unreasonable
in you to desire a proof, of that which here you expressly grant to be true,
and is clear of itself; that either the Protestant, or Roman Church, must
err against the word, and testimony of God, seeing they hold contradictories,
in matters belonging to faith; and it is a fond thing in you to say, that Ch:
Ma: has for his reason, their contradiction only, seeing we always speak of
contradiction in matter of Faith. Your (N. 13.) contains no difficulty,
supposing we have already proved, the infallibility of the Church, as we have
done in diverse places.

10. To your (N. 14.) I answer; that if Luther were an Heretic, who can deny,
but that they who followed, and persist in the same Doctrine, must also be
such; seeing it is a foolery, to think, that all of them can be excused by
ignorance? Besides we speak, per se loquendo that the Doctrine of it self
being Heretical, the defenders of it must also be Heretics, abst^acting from
ignorance, etc. And so your distinction, out of S. Austin, of Haeretici, and
Heraeticorum sequace is not pertinent; neither did Charity Maintained ever
affirm, that alls Arians, who followed their teachers, were excused from
formal Heresy by Salvianus, and I am sure, Ch: Ma: himself is far from any
such opinion; yea even Dr. Potter, who (Page: 119.) alleges the words of
Salvianus, says he speaks of some Arian Heretics; from whence it does not
follow, that he spoke of all those, who followed their teachers; and those of
whom he spoke, he does not absolutely excuse, but says, How they shall be
punished in the last day of judgment, for this error of their false opinion,
none but the judge himself can know: Qualiter pro hoc ipso falsae opinionis
errore in die Judicij puniendi sunt, nullus potest scire nisi Judex, as Potter
cites him in the margent: Which words if one take in rigor, suppose, they are
to be punished, and that they have sinned, but that none can tell how, or how
far, or how much, their ignorance might lessen their punishment. Your saying to
Ch: Ma: You yourselfe though you pronounce the leaders among the Artans formal
Heretics (which words you put in a different letter as if they were his words,
though I find them not in him) yet confess that Salvian was at least
doubtful (that at least is your own word) whether these Arians who in
simplicity followed their teachers, might not be excused by ignorance. And
about this suspension of his you also seem suspended, for you neither approve
nor condemn it. Thus you, not without some tincture of your Gall. For Ch: Ma:
being only to declare Salvians mind, had neither reason, nor occasion, to
declare, in this place, his own opinion, how far ignorance, may excuse some
particular persons, which he did (Part: 1. Cap: 1. N. 3. and 5. and Part 2.
Page: 102.) in the Conclusion of his Book, where you will find, but very cold
comfort, for such as hope to be saved by ignorance.

11. That which follows, is more against Potter, then against Ch: Ma:, who
grounds his argument, upon the express words of the Doctor, That to confine
the Church to one part, and place, as the Donatists did to Africa, was an
error, In the matter and nature of it properly Heretical, against that
Article of the Creed, wherein we profess to believe the Holy Catholic Church.
To which Major proposition he adds this Minor. But Luthers Reformation, or
Church (if one man may be called a Church) was not universal, but confined, to
that place, which contained Luthers body; (a less compass then Africa.)
Therefore his Reformation, or doctrine can not be excused from formal Heresy.
This Deduction to me seems no less then demonstratiue, supposing the express
grant of Dr. Potter for the Major proposition, and yet you are pleased to call
it a rope of Sand, and an vnsyllogisticall syllogism, and say it is even cosen
German to this; To deny the Resurrection is properly an heresy; but the
preaching of the Gospel at the beginning was not universal; Therefore it
^^nnot be excused from formal heresy. For as he whose Reformation is but
particular may yet not deny the Resurrection, so may he also not deny the
Churches universality; and as the Apostles who preached the Gospel in the
beginning did believe the Church universal, though their preaching at the
beginning was not so; so Luther also might, and did believe the Church
universal, though his Reformation were but particular. But good Sir, how then
do you defend your client, the Doctor from this your argument? To say, the
visible Church is confined to one place, is properly an heresy, as Potter
affirms it to be; But the preaching of the Gospel at the beginning was but
in one place, therefore it was formal Heresy. As also from your other: To deny
the Resurrection is properly an Heresy etc. Be pleased then, to do your Doctor
the favor, to reflect, That considering the Predictions of the Prophets, of
the Amplitude, Propagation, and Promise of our Savior, for the stability of
his Church, to say, that after sixteen hundred years, it was reduced, not
only to that compass, which contained Luthers body, but that it was corrupted,
with many, and damnable errors, that is, in true Divinity, to a No-Church;
yea, and that many chief Protestants expressly affirm, that it wholly perished,
is a vast Heresy; unless you would rather call it, by the name of infidelity;
the consideration whereof, did bring some chief learned Protestants to renounce
Christian Religion. And so your argument, drawn from the first preaching of
the Apostles, is of no force, and cosen German to this: To deny, that diverse
Churches, and Nations did receive the Faith of Christ (as S. Paul testifies of
the Church of Rome in particular) is properly an Heresy, against the express
words of Scripture; but at the very first preaching of the Apostles, Rome, and
many other places, did not receive the Faith of Christ, but only some of those
who heard their first Sermons, Therefore their first preaching was Heresy. And
for you to say, that the Church is only universal de jure, because it ought to
be so, is no less ridiculous, then impious, against the promise of our
Savior, which was that she was de facto to be universal, and not, that she
ought to be universal, and perpetual, as every man ought to be virtuous, and
as the Donatists did not deny she ought to be universal, as Chapter Ma. shows (N.
17. Page 242.) of which Number you take notice, for some other matter, but
dissemble this point, which yourselfe also affirm (Page: 300. N. 99.) in these
words: The Truth is the Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of their faction:
not with intent to make him Bishop of the whole Church, but of that Church in
particular. And although in this you be much deceaved, because the intention of
the Donatists, was not that which you feign, for your own purpose, but under
pretense to take care of their Brethren in that City, though indeed that the
world might account them Catholics, by communicating with the Bishop of Rome,
with whom to communicate, was taken by the Ancient Fathers, for an assured
sign of being a true Catholic. They had also, as S. Austin (de vnitate
Ecclesiae C. 3.) witnesses, a pretended Church, in the house and territory of
a Spanish Lady, called Lucilla. And the same Saint speaking of the conference,
he had with Fortunius the Donatist, says (Epist. 163.) Here did he first
attempt to affirm, that his communion was spread over the whole earth etc. But
because the thing was evidently false, they got out of this discourse by
confusion of Language: Whereby nevertheless they sufficiently declared, that
they did not hold, that the true Church ought necessarily to be confined, to
one place, but only by mere necessity, were forced to yield, that it was so in
fact, because their Sect, which they held to be the only true Church, was not
spead over the whole world. In which point Fortunius, and the rest, were more
modest than he who should affirm, that Luthers reformation, in the very
beginning, was spread over the whole earth, being at that time, by many
degrees, not so far diffused, as the Sect of the Donatists. This is the
discourse of Chapter Ma. in the said (N. 17.) whereof you thought safest, to take
no notice, as indeed destructive of your argument. As for your objection, that
the greater part of the world* is not Christian, etc. every Christian, and in
particular, Dr. Potter must answer it; seeing all Christians read in the Holy
Scripture, in omnem terram exivit Sonus eorum, which is to be performed, not in
an instant, but in due time, as the Prophets and Apostles did avouch it should,
and, which is most for our present purpose, none must deny, but that it is
impossible for her to fail from all places, which is more then even the
Donatists taught, who pretended, that she remained at least in Africa. Now, as
for your Syllogismes, make them like to that of Chapter Ma., and they will not be
like a rope of sand, or vnsyllogisticall, but will appear in this manner: To
deny the Resurrection is to teach an Heresy, but some have denied the
Resurrection; Therefore some have taught an heresy, as Chapter Ma. said; To deny
the Church to be de facto universal, for all times, is to teach Ann: heresy,
as even Dr. Potter affirms but Luther at his first being when he said of
himself, Primo solus eram, denied the Church to be universal; Therefore he
taught an heresy. But enough of this, whereof I have more heretofore. Your bold
speech against S. Austine, that he was most palpably mistaken, I omit, as being
but agreeable to your Socinian Spirit.

12. Your (N. 15.) requires no other answer, except a desire, that the Reader
will peruse the (N. 17.) of Chapter Ma., which you pretend to answer, but leave out
points deserving particular consideration, for the matter of which we spoke in
the last Number. You say to Chapter Ma. that he prosecutes the similitude of
Protestants with the Donatists: with as much spite and malice as could be
devised; But, by your leave, who is ignorant, that the Donatists, hated the
name of a monastical life; constrained Religious Nuns to forsake their
Profession; cast the Eucharist to Beasts; demolished Altars; persecuted
Catholics, in all kinds, and detracted from their good name, accusing them
for Traditors, (you know who have murdered innocent, holy, learned
Catholics, under a most false pretense of Treason) as also that the Donatists
appealed from Ecclesiastical, to secular Judges, in spiritual causes? And do
not Protestants follow them in these things? Which yet Ch: Ma: did not mention.
Your Number 16. about the accusation of Donatists, that Catholics set up
pictures upon the Altar, has been answered at large, heretofore.

13. Your (N. 17.) objects to Ch: Ma: a contradiction, as if he said, the
Donatists held the Church to have perished, and yet that the Protestants are
worse then Donatists, who said that the Church remained at least in Africa. But
certainly no Logic will teach, that it is a contradiction, to say according
to Donatists the Church through the whole world perished, except in those who
were in their communion, or in Africa, and yet remained in Africa, yea the
first part infers the second, that their Church remained in Africa. And you
must object the like contradiction to S. Austin (cited, and approved by Potter
(Page: 125.) and so the Doctot must be involved in the same contradiction)
saying (de un it. Eccles: cap: 13.) Periisse dicunt de coetero mundo Ecclesiam,
and in part Donati in sola Africa mansisse. And you know very well, that Ch:
Ma: in that place, speaks not of the perishing, or extinction of the Church,
absolutely but expressly, as it was asserted by the Donatists.

14. All that you have (N. 18.) has been answered, in several places, and it
seems you are too well furnished with leisure, when (N. 19.) to the demand of
Ch: Ma: (Page: 251. How can the Church more truly be said to perish, then when
she is permitted to maintain a damnable Heresy?) You answer, she may more
truly be said to perish, when she is not only permitted to do so, but de
facto does maintain a damnable Heresy; as if when we say, God permitted one to
fall, into such a sin, it did not signify, that de facto he fell into it. But
here you discover, a secret poison, that Faith is not the gift of God, nor
requires his particular assistance to persever therein, which if it were
subtracted, and so we be permitted to fall, we shall be too sure to fall de
facto; otherwise it follows, that by our own natural forces, we may believe,
and persever in Faith. In the rest of your instances, that the Church may be
more truly said to perish, if she fall into Heresy Fundamental of it self,
you do but trifle, seeing that either one truth, cannot be more true then an
other, as diverse teach; or else you know, that for our purpose, it is more then
sufficient, that it be certainly, and absolutely, and vnavoydably true, that the
Church must perish, if she fall into any damnable error. But the truth is, you
use this art, to divert the Reader, from the Demand of Ch: Ma: that he might
not observe, your not giving Answer thereto: and therefore, I must return to
make the same demand; Whether the Church, were not truly said to perish, if she
did fall into any damnable Heresy? Or whether Heresy may consist with
salvation? Or whether it be not Heresy, to reject any truth sufficiently
propounded as delivered by the word of God? Where I must put you in mind, that
you forget your own Doctrine; that Scripture is not an object of our Faith,
but that one may be saved, though he reject it, and yet here you say of the
Church; She may more truly be said to perish, when she rejects even those
truths, out of which her heresies may be reformed, as if she should directly
deny the Scripture to be the Word of God. How will you avoid, but that
according to this last saying of yours, yourselfe and your associats, are no
members of any Church, seeing you teach that the Scripture may be denied, to be
the word of God, as not being a material object of Faith? Or how must not your
errors be desperate without possibility of being reformed, since you may
reject those means by which alone, according to Protestants, they can be
reformed? Or how could you say truly, That a Church lapsed may be recovered,
and reformed by Scripture, if you be not obliged to believe Scripture itself,
by an act of Faith, or as an object of Faith?

15. In your (N. 20.) you do but repeat, what you say else where; That if the
visible Church be an infallible guide, it is strange, the Scripture does
nowhere say so, in plain terms. To which I answer, as heretofore, that we
prove the infallibility of the Church, independently of Scripture: That
Scripture also speaks clearly enough thereof; That I may as well ask of you,
why the Apostles, and Evangelists have not delivered clearly, these or the like
Propositions? Scripture alone contains all things belonging to Faith; That it
is evident in all necessary points etc. or, Be sure to believe a certain man,
who will come to oppose the errors of the Roman Church, called Luther etc. Nay,
though the Scripture had said, believe the Roman Church in all things, which
she proposes, you would not have wanted evasions, by saying, we should believe
her, as far as she agreed with Scripture, or in Fundamental points only, as
now Protestants say of the universal Church.

16. Ch: Ma: (Page: 251. N. 18.) says: The Holy Scriptures and ancient Fathers
assign separation from the visible Church as a mark of Heresy, which he
proves by some textes of Scripture; as (1. Joan: 2.19.) They went out from us;
And (Actor: 15.24.) Some went out from us; and (Actor: 20.30.) Out of you shall
arise men speaking perverse things. This, say you, is certainly a strange and
unheard of strain of Logic, unless we will say that every text when in it is
said that some body, goes out from some body affoards an argument for this
purpos: and yet you confess that Heretics do always separate from the
visible Church; but that they who do so are not always Heretics. Now if all
Heretics separate from the visible Church, and yet do not separate from every
some body (for they do not separate from themselves, and their own
Associates) it is a sign, that their is great difference, betwixt some some
body, and orhers some body, between separating from the Church, or the
Congregation of the Faithful, and from every other some body. But if I prove
these propositions; every Heretik separates from the Church, and, every one
that separates from the Church is an Heretik, to be convertible, you will yeald
such a separation to be a Mark of Heresy. This is easily done, by taking your
own grant, That Heretics do always separate from the Church. For Heresy being
an error against some revealed truth, if the Church also may err against any
such truth, there is no necessity, that an Heretik should separate from the
Church, but may very well agree with her in such error, and so the first part
of your assertion (that Heretics do always separate from the Church) would
be false: or if the Church cannot err; every one who separates from her, in
matters of Faith, must be guilty of an error against Faith, and so be an
Heretik: if therefore the first part of your assertion be true, you must grant,
that the second is false; and that, as every Heretik separates from the Church,
so conversive every one, who separates from the Church, in matters of belief,
is an Heretik; and then it is no wonder, if Scripture, and Fathers, assign a
separation, or going out of the Church, as a mark of Heresy. Which may be
further declared in this manner. If all Heretics separate from the Church, the
reason must be, because there is in the Church, something incompatible with
their Heresy, which can be nothing, but the true Doctrine and Belief, which
she holds, and is opposite to the error, which makes the^ Heretics, and which
whosoever hold, are Heretics, and consequently, whosoever leaves the Church, by
occasion of such errors, are Heretics, and if they had not held such errors,
they had remained in the Church; Therefore, for the same reason, for which all
Heretics forsake the Church, we must necessarily infer, that whosoever forsake
the Churches doctrine are Heretics; that is, for the errors, which they hold
against the truth, which the Church is supposed to believe; and if she be
supposed to believe an error, an heretic may believe the same and so go out
of her, no more, than she goes out of herself. For this cause, our Savior
said (Matthew. 24.26.) If therefore they shall say unto you behold he is in the
desert, go you not forth: Of which words Henoch Clapham (in his souveraigne
remedy against Schism Page: 23.) says, that thereby our Savior forbids going
out unto such desert and corner Ghospells; which declares that going out of the
Church is Heresy, or Schism, and not only, that all Heretics, or Schismatics
go out. And now I hope you being convinced by Reason, will be better disposed
to receive authority, and the true exposition of the text alleged above by
Ch: Ma: of which you say; For the first place, there is no certainty that it
speaks of Heretics, but no Christians, and Antichrists, of such as denied
Jesus to be the Christ. Answer: That S. John speaks of Heretics, will appear
by reading Cornelius a Lapide upon this psace, who cites holy Fathers to the
same purpos. See also the annotation of the Rhemes Testament, upon this Chapter
of S. John. (Uers: 18.) showing out of S. Cypria^, that all who separate
themselves from the Church, are called without exception Antichrists. Pantaleon
(in Epist: nuncupator. Chrongraph:) says, Tertium locum assignabimus
Haereticis, qui exierunt de electo Dei populo, at non erant ex illo. And in
Osiander (Epitom: Histor: Ecclesias: cent: 1. lib: 3. cap: 1.) says Nota,
Haereticiex Ecclesia progrediuntur.

17. The second place, say you, It is certain you must not say it speaks of
Heretics; for it speaks only of some who believed and taught an error, when it
was yet a question, and not evident, and therefore according to your Doctrine, no
formal Heresy. Answer; I see no such certainty, as you pretend, that the text,
(Act: 15.24.) Some went out from us, must not speak of Heretics, that is of
persons, who held an error against a revealed truth, of which some might have
been sufficiently informed, before the Council, and Definition, or Declaration
of the Apostles; and that some did proceed, in a turbulent, and as a man may
say, Heretical manner, appears by reading the same Chapter in the Acts. And
for our present purpose, it is sufficient, that separation from the Church, is
a sign, at least of a material Heresy, or Heretic; since the being a
formal Heretic, depends upon individual, personal, and accidental
circumstances, of which to judge in particular, is the part of prudence, not of
Faith; though if once the party know, that his opinyon, is contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church, and will yet persist therein, and rather leave the
Church, than forsake it, he cannot be excused from pride, singularity, and
Heresy.

18. You say; The third says indeed, that of the Professors of Christianity
some shall arise that shall teach Heresy: But not one of them all that says,
or intimates, that whosoever separates from the visible Church, in what state
soever is certainly an Heretic. Answer; we have showed, that as you say, all
that are Heretics go out of the Church, so you must grant that whosoever
separates (for matter of Doctrine) from the visible Church, is an Heretic.
And holy Scripture mentioning so particularly and frequently, going out, or
separation, does clearly put a particular emphasis, and force therein, as a mark
of falls believers, and seducers. And this to be the sense, of the Holy Fathers,
Ch: Ma. has proved; and now we will make good his Proofs, by confuting your
evasions to the contrary. And I must entreat the Reader, to consider the words
of the Fathers, as they are cited in Charity Maintained, with the Inferences
which he deduces from them, and not as they are interpreted by you.

19. In your (N. 21.) you endeavor to answer some Fathers, alleged by Chapter Ma.
(N. 18.) to prove, that separation from the visible Church, is a mark of
Heresy, namely, Uincentius Lirinensis, saying (Lib. Advers. Her. Chap. 34.)
who ever began heresies, who did not first separate himself from the
Universality Antiquity, and Consent of the Catholic Church? And S. Prosper
(Dimid. Temp. Chap. 5.) A Christian communicating with the Catholic Church,
is a Catholic, and he who is divided fro^^ her, is an Heretic, and
Antichrist. S. Cyprian (Lib. de Unit. Eccles.) Not we departed from them, but
they from us; and since Heresies and Schisms are bred afterward, while they
make themselves diverse conventicles, they have forsaken the head and Origin of
truth.

20. To these Authorityes, you answer; That the first and last are merely
impertinent, neither of them affirming, or intimating, that separation from the
present visible Church is a mark of Heresy: and the former speaking plainly of
separation from universality, Consent, and Antiquity. And lastly the latter
part of Prospers words cannot be generally true, according to your own
grounds; For you say a man may be divided from the Church upon m^ere Schism
without any mixture of Heresy: And a man may be justly excommunicated for many
other sufficient causes besides Heresy. Lastly a man may be divided by an
unjust excommunication, and be both before and after a very good Catholic;
and therefore you cannot maintain it universally true, That he who is divided
from the Church is an Heretic, and Antichrist.

21. Answer; I have often put you in mind, and the thing is evident of it
self, and still to be repeated, that Luther separated not only from the Roman
Church, but from all true Churches of the whole world, who all agreed with the
Roman, as also from all true Churches of many precedent Ages, which if you once
suppose to have erred, against the Word of God, the Rule of those Fathers, That
separation from the Church is a mark of Heresy, had been plainly impertinent,
and of no use at all. For still the Question would have remained, whether the
Church of all Ages had erred, as well as the present Church; since we cannot
know what the Ancient Church taught, except upon the credit, and Tradition of
middle ages till our time, which passage if it be stopped, and bridge broken, we
must live in ignorance; and not be able irregularly, and per saltum, to reach
immediately, from the last to the first. Besides, you hold, all Churches of all
Ages to be fallible, and not to deliver universally any other point, except
that Scripture is the Word of God; and therefore it is a mere evasion in you
to make a difference, for matters of doctrine, between the whole present
visible Church, and the Churches of all Ages; and if separation from these be a
mark of Heresy, separation from that must also be such: Yea S. Cyprian speaks
expressly of the, then present, Church: Not we departed from them, but they
from us; and since Heresies and Schisms are bred aftherwards, while they make
themselves diverse Conventicles, they have forsaken the head and origin of
Truth. As for S. Prosper; you do not defend, but impugn him. But I wonder you
will offer your Reader, such toys, as you produce for good Arguments, against
the words of that Saint, which are both evidently true, and coherent with
themselves. For, as whosoever communicates with the universal Church in Faith,
and external communion, is a Catholic, (which was the first part of S.
Prospers sentence) so it is universally true, that, whosoever is divided from
the Church in Faith, and external communion, is an Heretic, as S. Prosper
affirms in the latter part of his speech, and which you know is the thing
which Charity Maintained intends to prove; and which makes your talking of
mere Schism without any mixture of Heresy, to be wholly impertinent; seeing we
treat of division both in Faith, and external communion: though it be also
true, that Schism is wont to end in Heresy, as Cha. Ma. (Part. 1. Chap. 5. N
3.) declares out of S. Hierom, and others. No less impertinent, is your
objection, taken from persons divided from the Church, by the Censure of
Excommunication, which is a kind of Division, in many respects, far different
from separation by Schism, or Heresy, (as has been declared heretofore at
large) and which is not incurred at all, in the sight of God, if the
Excommunication be unjust. Agreeable to this doctrine of these Fathers, is that
excellent document of S. Optatus (Lib. 1. contra Parm.) how to judge who be
Schismatiques, and Heretics: Uidendum est, quis in radice cum toto orb
manserit: quis for as exierit: quis cathedram sederit alteram quaeante non
fuerit: quis altar contra altar erexerit: quis ordinationem fecerit,
salvoaltero ordinato (were there not Protestant Bishops set up in the place of
Catholic Bishops. yet living, in England?) quis jaceat sub sententia Joannis
Apostoli, qui dixit multos Antichristos for as exituros: quia non erant,
(inquit) nostri: nam si nostri essent, mansissent nobiscum. If you examine the
proceeding of your first Protestants by the Rule of this holy, and ancient
Father, you cannot but condemn them of Schism, and Heresy.

22. Your (N, 22.) being but a passage to the next Section; I need only say,
that there is great difference, between Catholics, and Protestants in order
to the admitting, or rejecting, some doctrine of some particular Fathers, seeing
we, for interpreting Scripture, and all Points of Faith, acknowledge an
infallible guide, to whom even the Fathers themselves humbly submit; but when
you forsake the Fathers, be they never so many, the comparison runs not
between them, and Gods Church, but between them, and every single Protestant;
and who will not sooner believe the Holy Fathers, for the interpretation of
Scripture, than such men, as can neither agree amongst themselves, nor with the
whole Church of God? And if you will but hear, what your own knowledge, and
conscience, tells you, you will confess, that you acknowledged, the ancient
Fathers to stand for us.

23. Your (N. 23.) is employed in answering some Authorityes, alleged by Chapter
Ma., out of S. Hierom, wherein you show the little reckon you make of the holy
Fathers; since you do covertly, or rather, expressly, tax this blessed Saint of
writing over-truths, and you know what it is to write beyond truth, which in
true Philosophy consist in indivisibili, and what is beyond it, must be against
it. The words of S. Hierom (Ep 57. ad Damas.) are these: I am in the Communion
of the Chair of Peter; I know the Church is built upon that Rock. Whosoever
shall eat the Lamb out of this house he is profane. If any shall not be in
the Ark of Noah, he shall perish in the time of the deluge. Whosoever does not
gather with thee, does scatter, that is, he that is not of Christ is of
Antichrist. And (Lib. 1. Apolog.) which does he call his Faith? That of the
Roman Church? Or that which is contained in the Books of Origin? If he answer,
the Roman; then we are Catholics who have translated nothing of the error of
Origin. And yet further (Ibid. Lib. 3.) know thou that the Roman Faith
commended by the voice of the Apostle does not receive these delusions, though
an Angel should denounce otherwise, than it has once been preached.

24. To these words of S. Hierom you answer. First, that he writing to Damasus
a Pope, might be apt to write over-truths. An answer not deserving a
confutation! Secondly, you say, S. Hierom chose rather to believe the Epistle
to the Hebrews Canonical, upon the Authority of the Eastern Church, then to
reject it from the Canon upon the Authority of the Roman. But this has been
answered heretofore; neither was there ever any decree of the Roman Church,
Pope, or Council, excluding, that Epistle from the Canon, or rejecting any
Book, of the old, or New Testament, which was afterward admitted. Thirdly, you
ask; How was it possible that S. Hierom should ever believe that Liberius
Bispop of Rome either was or could have been wrought over by the solicitation
of Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquileiae, and brought after two years banishment
to subscribe Heresy? Sr. It is a sign you want solid Objections, when you fly
to so far fetched evasions; and your proceeding is inexcusable, in
dissembling the Answer which Chapter Ma. (Part. 2. Chap. 3, N. 30.) gives out of
Baronius, Ann. 357. and Bellarmine (De Roman. Pont. Lib. 4. Cap. 9.) who
affirm, that Liberius never subscribed to Arianisme, or any error against
Faith, but only to a Point which concerned matter of fact; and even greater
Protestants than you, doubt of that which you will needs have to be undoubted.
But indeed this old Objection is directly nothing to the purpose, of proving
that Liberius did ever define ex cathedra, any error against Faith, but only
that de facto, by force of fear, theates, banishment, and other sufferings, he
did subscribe against S. Athanasius, as S. Peter denied our Savior, without
forfeit of his Faith (though he failed in the profession thereof) our Savior
having said, Oravi pro te Petre, vtnon deficiat Fides tua: or, as the same
Apostle was reprehended by S. Paul, even after, the coming of the holy Ghost,
and yet I hope you will not deny, but that one might have said, I am in the
co^munio of the Chair of Peter, I know that the Church is built upon tkat Rock;
whosoever gathers not with thee scatters; and the same I say* S. Hierom
might have said of, and to Liberius, defining, as Pope, not as failing in
fact, as a man; and we see, that both before, and after, that forced act, he
was constant, not only in the true faith, which he never lost, but also in the
profession thereof, and what he did by force, and fear, must no more be
imputed to him, as Pope, than a confession extorted by torture, can be of
force, without a voluntary ratification. Our Savior said, men were to obey
the words of the Scribes, and Pharisees, not their deeds. Is it not a doctrine
of your own, (Page 144: N. 31.) that the doctrine of the Apostles was either
falls or uncertain, in no part of that which they delivered ^onstantly? And
certain it is, that Liberius did not make good his subscription (if ever he
subscribed to an error) but revoked it, as soon as he was at liberty, and (as
I may say) taken of the Torture; as always before, he had defended the
Catholic truth. If Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols; who will therefore say,
that he believed, or defined Idolary to be Lawful? And universally, if you
will judge men's Faith by their Actions, whosoever committs theft, murder, or
any other sin against the commandments, must be condemned for an Heretic,
as believing theft to be Lawful. Finally, if you will have the strength of of
S. Hieroms Argument, to cosist in this, that Damasus was in the right, only
actually, and accidentally, the Saint had begged the Question, and proved his
own Doctrine to be true, because Damasus held with him, and that which Damasus
held, de facto was true, though Damasus might err, as other Bishops might;
whereas it is clear, that S. Hierom (as his words express) grounds himself,
upon that firm and stable Rock, of which our Savior said, Thou art a Rock,
and upon this Rock. etc. And this last overthrowes the evasion to which you
^llie (N. 24.) for interpreting the words of S. Ambros.

25. For your (N. 25.26.27.) I wonder how you could dissemble what Chapter Ma. has
(Part. 2. Chap. 2. N. 31.) whereof see also Bellarm in (De Romans Pont. Lib. 4.
Cap. 7.) where this matter is handled at large. And who will not make a
difference between S. Cyprian, being disinterressed, and delivering a general
Doctrine, and prescriptions against all Heretics, and S. Cyprian, speaking in
a particular point, wherein he was engaged, and which Protestants confess to
have been an error, condemned by the whole Church, against the Donatists
(namely the rebaptization of such, as had been baptized by Heretics) and by
those very Bishops, who once adhered to S. Cyprian, as Charity. Maint. in the
place cited even now, shows out of S. Hierom. And you do but deceive your
Reader, in not making a difference, between a Decree of Pope Stephen, and a
Definition of Faith, which difference you might have learned in that very
place, which you cite out of Bellarmine, and we have now alleged. In fine, all
must answer the difficulty about S. Cyprian, seeing he was in an error against
Faith, and therefore could be excused only by ignorance, or pardoned by
repentance. In vain (N. 26.) you tax the translation of Chapter Ma. as if he
should not have said out of S. Cyprian Epist. 55. ad Cornel. (They are hold to
sail to the Chair of Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence
Priestly Unity has spruing. Neither do they consider, that they are Romans,
whose Faith was commended, by the preaching of the Apostle, to whom falsehood
cannot have access) but should have said, to whom perfidiousness cannot have
access. But this you say without proof, against the scope and connection of
S. Cyprians words, which speak of Faith commended by S. Paul (not of Fidelity)
and consequently of falsehood or perfidiousness, or error contrary to Faith;
not of perfidiousness, contrary to the Moral virtue of fidelity. For what
congruity is there in this speech? The Faith of the Romans is commended by the
Apostle, therefore perfidiousness, or perfidious dealing cannot have access to
them, as if all who believe aright, must also besincere, and upright honest
men! Whereas the consequence is very good and clear, that if their Faith, be
true, error against Faith, or falsehood, cannot be approved by them. You would
prove that in vain S. Cyprian had exhorted Cornelius to take heed of those
Heretics, if he had conceived the Bishop of Rome, to be infallible for
matters of Faith; as if the certainty of attayning an end did exclude Means of
Exhortations, Prayer, and the like: or as if God could not effectually move us,
to what he best pleases, unless he also make us believe, that we may tempt him,
by omitting all diligence of our own, toward the attaining of that, to which
he moves us, or interposes a Promise, that he will grant it us. You say, if we
believe the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, the Prerogative of the Church
of Rome of being the principal Church, was grounded upon this reason, because
the City was the principal and imperial City. But I conceive yourself cannot
believe, that the Greek Church, would or could yeald such a spiritual
Prerogative to the Latin Church, upon so slight a ground; though that might be
a kind of congruence, supposing an other higher and stronger Reason, to wit,
that S. Peter had lived and died Bishop of that City, which was, as I may
say, the Primate of Cities. Yet I am not sorry, to hear you say: We do not
altogether deny, but that the Church of Rome might be called the chair of
Peter, in regard he is said to have preached the Gospel there. For, to omit,
that you dare not deny, that S. Peter was at Rome (which some Protestants
impudently deny) you give so poor a reason, why the Church of Rome, has been
particularly, by the Fathers, called the chair of Peter, that every one may
see, there must be some better ground for it, than that which you allege, of
his preaching in that City, as it is granted, that he not only preached in,
but was Bishop of the City of Antioch, and he preached in many other places,
which yet are not wont to be called the Chair of Peter. I beseech the Reader
to peruse that learned Book called Anti-Mortonus (against the Grand imposture
of D. Morton) 4. about the Council of Chalcedon; and he will find what Power
was acknowledged to be in the Bishop of Rome above all Bishops through the
whole world: to say nothing for the present, that no Council without the
confirmation of the Pope is of validity.

26. Your (N. 28. 29. 30.) contain long discourses, upon occasion of a place
cited by Chapter Ma. out of S. Irenaeus, who (Lib. 3. Cont. Hoeres. Chap: 36.)
says: Because it were long to number the successions of all Churches we
declaring the Tradition of the most great, most ancient, and most known
Church, founded by the most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, which Tradition
it has from the Apostles, coming to us, by succession of Bishops, confound
all those who any way either by evil complacence of themselves, or vain
glory, or by blindness, or ill opinion do gather conventicles otherwise then
they ought. For to this Church for a more powerful principality, it is
necessary that all Churches resort, that is, all faithful people of what place
soever, in which (Roman Church) the Tradition which is from the Apostles has
always been conserved from those who are every where.

27. To this authority of S. Irenaeus you give diverse answers, which upon
examination, will be found insufficient, and contrary to yourself. You say: the
words set down by Ch: Ma: show, that what Authority in the matter S. Irenaeus
attributed to the Roman Church in particular, the same for the kind (though
p^rhaps not in the same degree) he attributed to all other Apostolic
Churches; Answer, S. Irenaeus is so far from affirming an equality between
the Roman, and other Churches: that he expressly prefers her before the rest, in
such manner, as though the rest had then had no Being, yet all Heretics might
have been confuted by her sole authority. For, seeing he acknowledges it
needless, to number the successions of other Churches; in order to the force of
his Argument, he might as well have supposed them not to exist, as not to be
necessarily taken notice of; which he never said of any other Apostolic
Church. Beside, since he takes the Roman, for as good as all other Apostolic
Churches, and (for the same reason) of all other Churches of that time (whose
successors he held it needless to reckon) it being impossible that all
Churches should fail in Faith, we must conclude, even out of S. Irenaeus his
Reason, that the Roman Church cannot fail in points of Belief. And (as for
you) I wonder how you would end your (N. 28.) in these words If v. Irenaeus
thought the Testimony of the Roman Church in this point only humane and
fallible, then surely he could never think, either adhering to it a certain
mark of a Catholic, or separation from it a certain mark of a Heretic)
For, seeing Cyou hold hristian Faith te be no more than probable, and that the
Tradition for which you receive Scripture, is humane and fallible, how can you,
(these your assertions supposed) affirm, that a testimony humane and fallible
may not be sufficient, to prove one a Catholic or Heretic? Unless you will
say, he is no Heretic who rejects Scripture, and all Christianity, nor that
he is a Catholic, who believes them, because you profess that the motives for
which you believe them are fallible.

28. You find fault, with the noble Translatresse of Cardinal Perron, for
rendering, Ad hane Ecclesiam necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam. To this
Church it is necessary that every Church should agree. But if you will but
consult Cowpers Dictionary you will find, that you have no reason against that
noble Translatresse. See I say, the word Conveni, and you will find: Convenit
in eum haec Contumelia. Cic. This reproach touches him justly. Convenient hae
vites ad quemvis agrum: Cato. Uarro. These vines prove well in all grounds.
Conveniebat in tuam vaginam machaera militis. Plautus. The solidours sword was
meet for thy Scabbard. Convenit optime ad pedem cothurnus. Cic. The slippar is
as meet for the foot as may be. Will you say; This reproach resorts to him;
vines resort to the field, the sword resorts to the scabbard, the slippar
resorts to the foot? Neither is that Translation either contrary, or
different, from the Translation of Ch: Ma: for as much as concerns the matter,
and meaning of S. Irenaeus (To this Church it is necessary, that all Churches
resort) For why should all Churches resort to this (Roman) Church, but that
they may be instructed by her, and agree with her in matters concerning Faith,
not that they may correct, control, and disagree from her? Otherwise it had
been a strange Argument to convince Heretics by the Roman Church, if he had
not taken that Church, as a model, and Rule with which they ought to agree.
Neither does resort signify a corporal going to Rome, but a recourse for
instruction, either by going thither themselves, or by other means, as you
must say of those who are round about. But you say, if S. Irenaeus had said,
By showing the tradition of the Roman Church we confound all Heretics. For to
this Church, all Churches must agree, what had this been, but to give for a
reason, that which was more questionable then the thing in question: as being
neither evident in itself and plainly denied by his adversaries, and not at all
proved, nor offered to be proved here or else where by Irenaeus. To speak thus
therefore had been weak and ridiculous. Answer: This your Objection, proves too
much, even in your own principles, and therefore proves nothing. For whether
you translate it, agree, or resort, you must suppose, that S. Irenaeus
conceyved that the Tradition of the Roman Church, was sufficient to confute all
Heretics, and consequently that this sufficiency was not more questionable,
then the thing in question. For if it were so, you make (to use your own words)
his spea^h weak and ridiculous, and worse than a begging of the Question; and
yet yourself do not deny, but that his Argument was probable, and sufficient to
confound those particular Heretics, (surely not by a weak and ridiculous
Reason:) Yea S. Irenaeus affirms it to be sufficient to confute not only
those, but all Heretics (all those says he, who any way either by ev^ll
complacence etc.) and therefore He must suppose as a principle, believed by
all orthodox Christians, that the Tradition of the Roman Church, was powerful
against all Heresies. And I am glad to see you at length reflect, that if S.
Irenaeus did not prove, that all Churches must agree with the Roman, his
Argument had been weak and ridiculous. For by this your consideration, I infer,
that the Answer which you and other Protestants are wont to give to S. Austine,
or other Fathers is insufficient, to wit; That they alledg against Heretics
the Authority of the Church, not because they believed her to be infallible,
but because she was at that time pure in her Doctrines; which had been only to
beg the Question, or as you say, to give for a reason, that which was more
questionable, then the thing in Question; and I beseech the Reader, to consider
well this point, as a thing effectual to make good my confutation of
Chillingworths evasions, in diverse occasions, and lately in our debate about S.
Optatus. And even here you beg the Question, though you read it (resort) for
the same reason, that you say S. Irenaeus had begd the Question, if we read
(agree.) In the speech which you feign S. Irenaeus to make (as yourself would
have him speak) you say: To this Church, by reason it is placed in the
Imperial City, whether all men's affairs do necessarily draw them, or by
reason of the powerful Principality it has over all the adjacent Churches,
there is, and always has been a necessity ^f a perpetual recourse of all the
faithful round about: who if there has been any alteration in the Church of
Rome, could not in all probality but have observed it. But they to the
contrary, have always observed in this Church the very Tradition which came
from the Apostles and no other; where you make good, that powerful argument of
Catholics against Protestants; That it was impossible so many errors, and
corruptions, should creep insensibly into the belief of the Roman Church;
seeing (as you say) to this Church by reason it is placed in the Imperial
City, whither all men's affares do necessarily draw them, or by reason of the
powerful Principality it has over all the adjacent Churches, there is etc.
Who if there had been any alteration in this Church of Rome, could not in all
probability but have observed it. But they to the contrary, have always
observed in this Church the very Tradition which came from the Apostles and no
other. Which retortion grows to be more strong, if we consider, that from
Christ our Lord and Savior, to the time of S. Irenaeus there passed about the
same number of years, which are numbered between S. Austine* and S. Gregory the
Great, and yet Protestants commonly grant, that in S. Austines time the Church
was free from those (falsely pretended) errors, which they say were found in
the time of S. Gregory: and therefore you must either grant, That S. Irenaeus
did vainly impugn those old Heretics, and that you against reason approve
his Argument against them, or else that our new sectaries cannot possibly avoid
the Argument, which we Catholics urge, to prove, that it was impossible, so
many, so great, and so manifest corruptions, should in so short a time, possess
the whole Church of God; especially seeing, to the contrary, all men, in all,
and every one of those Ages, did conceive, that they could observe in the
Church of Rome the very Tradition which came from the Apostles, and no other.
And if notwithstanding this, you say, That between the time of S. Austine, and
the Popedom of S. Gregory, so many errors might enter, without being espied:
you make the argument of S. Irenaeus to be of no force at all, and so you must
either agree, with Papists, against your Protestant Brethren; or disagree both
from S. Irenaeus, and yourself, with whom you cannot agree, unless you
relinquish those your pretended Brethren: and finally we must conclude, that no
convincing argument could be brought against Heretics, drawn from the
Tradition of the Roman Church, if once we grant that she is not infallible in
her traditions wherein if she be infallible, adhering to her will be a certain
mark of a Catholic, and separation from her a certain mark of an Heretic.

29. You tax Ch: Ma: for translating vndique; every where, and of what place
soever, in stead of round about. For that it was necessary for all the Faith
full of what place soever to resort to Rome is not true. That the Apostolic
Tradition has always been conserved from those who are every where, is not
sense. Now in stead of conservata read observata, and translate vndique truly
round about, and then the sense will be both plain and good; for then is must
be rendered thus. For to this Church, by reason of a more powerful
principality, there is a necessity all the Churches, that is, all the Faithful
round about, should resort, in which the Apostlique Tradition has been always
observed by those who were round about.

30. Answer; if you take the freedom, to make, or create, what premises, you
please, you may be sure, to infer what conclusion you like best. That vndique
may signify, every where (as Ch: Ma: translates it*) from all places, parts,
and corners, you will find in Thomas Thomasius and Cowper: and who made you
Emperor of words to command a restraint of their signification, as may best
suite with your ends? S. Austine (super Psalm. 86.) has thrice, Vndique in
this signification. For having said; Duodecim seeds quid sibi velint,
videamus: he adds; Sacramentum est cujusdam vniversitatis, quia per totum orbem
terrarum futura erat Ecclesia. Et ideo quia vndique venitur ad judicandum,
duodecim seeds sunt: sicut quia vndique intratur in illam civitatem duodecim
portae sunt. And; Ab omnibus quatuor ventis vocatur Ecclesia. Quomodo vocatur?
Vndique in Trinitate vocatur. Non vocatur nisi per baptismum in nomine Patris,
and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti. Will you now limit vndique to places round
about, or adjacent, and not grant that it signifies the whole world? The
learned Fevardentius, in his Annotations upon this place of S. Irenaeus, not
only affirms, that by eos, qui sunt vndique fideles, all Churches of the whole
world are understood, but proves it with much clearness, and erudition;
observing, among other things, that it is said, Ad hanc Ecclesiam. not, ad
vrbis amplitudinem, populorum frequentiam, non ad imperij culmen, non ad
Caesarum majestem, sed ad hanc Ecclesiam. Thus your first objection, being
proved to be grounded merely upon a confidence that vndique: must be taken, in
this place, as you would have it; and withal perceiving that even this will
not come home to your purpose, without an other voluntary alteration (for it is
no less difficult a sense, to say, The Apostolic Tradition has always been
conserved there from those who are every where, than to say, The Apostolic
Tradition has always been conserved there from those who are round about) you
fall upon a conjecture, that in all probability, in stead of conservata, it
should be observata, although no copy, either printed, or manuscript, reads it
in that manner: and suppose, it were observata, the difficulty would still
remain, what observata might signify, whether observed, that is kept, and
maintained, (and then it were all one with conserved) or observed, that is,
marked, found, perceived, or the like; as you would have it; not considering,
that by this conceypt, you wholly alter the Argument of S. Irenaeus, and
substitute an other; For whereas that holy Bishop, and Martyr, grounds his
proof against Heretics, upon the Authority and succession of the Roman
Church, you make him urge these Heretics, only by the Testimony of people
round about that City, because they never observed any alteration of doctrine
in that Church, which, therefore according to this your fiction, must be judged
by the neighboring people, and not they directed by her; which kind of
reasoning had been, a mere begging the Question, and no effectual confutation
of those Heretics, who would instantly answer, that both Rome, and the
adjacent people had altered the Apostlike Tradition, by holding doctrines
contrary to theirs; nor could they have been confured otherwise, than by
supposing, that the Roman Church was by the Promise of our Savior Christ,
secured from all error against Faith: and (to use your own lately recited
words) to say, that the people about Rome would have observed it, if there had
been any alteration in the Church of Rome, had been but to give for a reason,
that which was more questionable then the thing in question; as being (still to
use your own words) not evident in it self (according to the principles of
Protestants who de facto hold, that many errors crept into the Church without
being observed) and plainly denied by S. Irenaeus his adversaries, and not
proved by him; especially, if we consider, that (as yourself speak) The Church
of Rome had a Powerful principality over all the adjacent Churches, it had
been more probable, that she might have led them into error, which they would
have embraced as an Apostolical Tradition, than that they would or could, have
corrected her, if indeed she had been conceyved to be subject to error, no
less than the adjacent Churches. Now as for the difficulty of those words: In
which the Tradition which is from the Apostles has always been conserved from
those who were every where, yourself must answer it, seeing you hold your
conjecture of, observata, to be but probable, and that all hitherto have read
it, and do still read it, conservata; and that even though you read it
observata, it will be a hard sense to say; In which Church, the Tradition which
is from the Apostles, has always been observed from those who are every
where: and if in stead of, from, you say, by, has been observed by those who
are every where (though in that acception you must take (Ab) in a different
sense, when it is said, ab Apostolis, from, and when it is said ab his qui
sunt vndique, by) we may also say, has been conserved by those who are every
where, and the sense will be, that in the Roman Church, there has always been
the Tradition from the Apostles, which has also been conserved in all
Churches, and in which they must agree with Her propter potentiorem
Principalitatem, and because she has an evident and certain succession, as
being founded upon a Rock: and in this sense we may also say, that the
Tradition receyved from all Churches has been conserved in the Roman Church,
as the center of Ecclesiastical unity, (to use the words of the most learned
Perron, in his Reply Lib. 1. cap: 26.)

31. In your (N. 30.) after other discourses, which contain no difficulty,
which may not be answered, by what has been said in diverse occasions, you
come to your old cramben of the Chiliasts or Millenaries, of which you say;
Justine martyr (in Dial. cum Tryphon.) Professes that all good and Orthodoxe
Christians of his time believed it, and those that did not, he reckons amongst
Heretics. Sr. we have no ^eason to believe your word, without some proof.
And that you may not ^^use my proof against you, as proceeding from one, who
being a party, may be suspected of partiality. I oppose to you a learned
Protestant, Doctor Ham: in his Uiew of etc: (Page: 87.88.89.) who, convinced by
evidence of truth, not only confesses, and proves the weakeness of that place
in S. Iustine, to conclude any thing against Catholic Tradition, but also
demonstrates, that your allegation is an egregious falsification, while you
say, Iustine martyr professes that all good and Orthodox Christians of his
time believed it, and those that did not he reckons amongst Heretics. For S.
Justine expressly affirms, that many do not acknowledge this doctrine of the
1000. years, and those many Christians, that are of pure and pious opinyon or
judgment; and that those whom he calls, nominall Christians, Atheists, impious
heretical leaders, are they, who denied the resurrection, not those that
acknowledge the resurrection, and denied the Millennium. And the Doctor
concludes in these very words: By Iustine it cannot be concluded, that the
1000. years was a matter of Catholic belief in his time, but only favored by
him, and many others, and consequently, though that were after condemned in the
Church, would it not be from this testimony inferred that a Catholic Doctrine.
(much less a Tradition) were condemned. And he gives us a Rule, whereby we may
answer all that can be objected out of S. Irenaeus, or any other ancient
Author; saying (Page 91.) I confess I acknowledge my opinion, that there were in
that age men otherwise minded, as out of Justin it appeared. I could cite an
other, highly qualifyed Protestant, who this very year 1651. has putin print,
that Justin confesses, that some good and honest Christians did not acknowledge
that Doctrine of the Millenaries, which the Doctor (Page: 88.) shows very well,
not to be repugnant to an other saying of S. Justin, to which this last Author
says it is repugnant. Now I beseech you consider, how you can impugn Gods
Church, by a pretended tradition, which not only Catholics, but even learned
Protestants, out of S. Justines words, deny to have been Catholic or
universal, in his time, and which this Doctor avouches, not to be asserted as
vniverfall by the Lord Faulkland himself; whereby this Objection so often
repeeted in your Book, comes to just nothing: and I have wondered that so
worme-eaten, and obsolete a thing, as this is, should be revived, and urged as
a Demonstration against the Traditions of the Church. But it is Gods Goodness,
to confound the enemies of his Church, by their own wisdom, and confute them
by their own arguments: and is it not a great proof for the infallibility of
the Church, that these her adversaries, after all labor, and study, can alledg
only such a toy as this, to prove the fallibility of the Church for so many
Ages, wherein she could not but have fallen into many mote, and greater,
errors, if she had been subject to accept, and deliver falls, or apocryphal
Traditions? If you have a mind to speak to the purpose, you must produce some
clear and undoubted Tradition, or some Definition of a Pope, or Council, for
this of the Chiliasts, or any other error. But this is as impossible for you
to do, as that God can break his Promise, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her, and that he will be with her to the worlds end. You say;
If this Tradition of a thousand years was not conserved, and observed in the
Church of Rome, had Irenaeus known so much, he must have retracted this
commendation of that Church. Not so, by your leave; but, as a true child of
Gods Church, if he had been persuaded his opinyon to be against her Tradition,
he would have retracted his opinyon, and not his commendation of the Church,
upon which he builded his Doctrine against those Heretics, whom he impugned:
otherwise his argument taken from her Tradition, had been of no force, but
petitio principij, proving their Heresies to be false, because the Church of
Rome, which in those particulars did not err, taught the particular opinyons
of those men to be false. Especially, since by the confession of S. Justin,
Many Christians of pure and pious judgment, held the contrary.

33. Having considered with attention, all the rest that you have in this (N.
30.) I find nothing which has not been answered, either by me, or by Ch: Ma:
(Part: 2. Chap: 2. N. 32.) for as much as belongs to Him; and as for your vain
affected flourish against the most learned Cardinal Perron, it is both
impertinent to my purpose, and really so slight, that I could not have
imagined, you would in modesty have premised these fond words: The words of the
Cardinal I will here insert, and with short censures dispell, and let his
Idolaters see that Truth is not afraid of Giants. In a word, I must say; That
you do not distinguish between matter of Faith, and of Fact; nor consider, that
although error against Faith, defended with obstinacy, be, per se loquendo, a
sufficient cause of excommunication, yet it may be also necessary, in prudence,
for some circumstances, to abstain from inflicting such a censure: and in the
case of Pope Uictor, the success showed, that even for matter of fact, he was
in the right. For after his death, the Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, and
Ephesus (which Protestants receive as Lawful General Councels) excommunicated
those, who held the same Custom with the Provinces, which Uictor had
excommunicated. I have no time to take notice of your seditious speech (Page:
35. letter (f)) that inferiors may excommunicate superiors, if they did any
thing which deserved it. By which Doctrine you, or any other Socinian might
have excommunicated the^, who excommunicated all such as held the 39. Articles
to contain any error, as is known you believed them to contain diverse.

33. To your (N. 31.32.33.34.35.) I answer; that in the Authorityes alleged
out of the Fathers by Chapter Ma. you will still find a particular pre-eminence of
the Roman Church; and you could not have done us a greater favor, than to
touch the matter of Appeals to Rome, from the whole world, if it had been
handled by Chapter Ma. as it was not, and therefore I must refer the Reader to
Catholic Writers, and in particular to the learned Cardinals, Bellarmine and
Perron, from whom he may receive full satisfaction. Only to what you say (N.
31.) that S. Austine (Lib. 1. retractat. Chap. 26.) retracts what he had said,
that the Church was builded upon Peter, I must answer, that (Chap. 26. Retract)
there is no such matter as you mention, and what he has (Chap. 21.) is so
answered by Bell. (De Romans Pont. Lib. 1. Chap. 10.) as your objection will be
found to make rather for, than against us. In your (N. 32. you have no reason
to find fault with Chapter Ma. for translating Apostolicae Cathedrae semper viguit
principatus, the principality of the sea Apostolic did always flourish,
seeing it is clear that S. Austine, in that place, attributes a particular
privilege to the Sea of Rome, as the Chair of Peter and a Rock which the proud
Gates of Hell do not overcome, as he speaks (In psalm. Con. partem Donati.)
Whereby it appears, that he makes but one chief Apostolic Sea: and it
seems this Translation of Chapter Ma. was so good, that yourself could not
perceive or tax it, till an excess of desire to trifle, made you at length put
it in your margent: it not occurring time enough to find a place in the Text.
Maximianus, of whom you speak (N. 36.) is cited by Onuphrius Lib de primatu
Petri, part prima, and by Adamus Tannerus a known learned Divine (Tom. 3.
Disp. 1. de Fide. Quest. 5. Dub. 3.) Epistola ad Orientales, in these words:
Omnes fines terrae, quae Dominum sincere receperunt, and vbique terrarum
Catholici veram fidem profitentes in potestatem Romanorum Pontificum tanquam in
solemn recipient etc: Hunc enim (Petrum) de caeteris mortalibus ex toto
terrarum orb conditor orbis elegit, cui Cathedram magisterij principaliter
possidendam perpetuo privilegij jure concessit; vt quis quis Divinum aliquid,
aut profundum nosse desiderat, ad hujus praeceptionis oraculum, doctrinam que
recurrat. You say; Of that Maximianus who succeeded Nestorius I find no such
thing in the Counsels: Neither can I believe that any Patriarch of
Constantinople twelve hundred years a go was so base a parasite of the Sea of
Rome. But if that be true, which you often inculcate, that deeds are better
witnesses than words, even that Maximianus, who succeeded your wicked great
Grandfather Nestorius, in the Sea of Constantinople, was a monk, and a holy
man, and far from being a parasite; and an Embassage was sent to Rome from
him; the Emperor; and people; in congratulation of the victory gotten chiefly
by means of Pope Caelestinus, against Nestorius: all which declared, the
Authority of the Roman Church 1200, years ago, though you tell us you cannot
believe it; and though you take notice of Maximianus, who succeeded Nestorius,
yet you thought fit to dissemble this Embassage etc. Whereof more may be seen
in Baronius. Ann: 431.432. Your answer given (N. 37.) to the Anthority cited by
Chapter Ma. out of John Patriarch of Constantinople cannot satisfy any who reads
his words, and your answer; which is so evident, that I need say no more.

34. For answer to your (N. 38.39.40.41.) if in any occasion, particularly in
this, I must entreat the Reader, not to trust your summing up the Discourse,
of Ch: Ma: (N. 20.21.22.23.) but to trust only his own eyes, which if he do,
I am sure he will find all that you object against us, in the said Numbers,
to be answered already, when we proved, that Faith is the Gift of God; and
that, in the ordinary course of Gods Providence, it is exauditu, by the
preaching of Pastors, Prelates, Doctors etc. And the necessity of a perpetual
succession of Bishops, in the true Church: besides, what has been said
heretofore, appears by the confession of the best learned Protestants, as may
be seen in Brereley (Tract: 2. Sect: 6. and Tract: 2. Cap: 3. Sect: 4. and
Tract: 2. Cap: 2. Sect: 3. Subdivis: 2.) No man can doubt, but that God may
teach us in what manner he pleases, but seeing, de facto, he will have men to be
taught by men, and that Faith is his Gift (as we proved in the Introduction) we
shall be sure, never to attain this inward gift, otherwise, than by those
outward means; nor can we believe the Doctrine of Christ, without the
Introduction of Teachers appointed, and taught by his Holy Spirit. Neither does
if follow, that by this means, one should be necessitated to be an Heretic,
because, that there should have been a perpe ^uall Succession of believers, in
all points Orthodox is not a thing which is in our power, as you argue most
weakly; and seeing Protestants teach, that Heresy is a deviation from
Scripture, and that it is not in the power of man to conserve Scripture
incorrupted, Protestants may be Heretics, whether they will or no, if your
objection were of any force. And why do you not make this argument? Men cannot
sin unless they exist, and be in their right wits; But that a man be in his
right wits, or exist, is not in his Power (for who can be his own creator?)
Therefore, sinning or not sinning depends not on these things. As therefore men
may be Heretics, and sinners; because de facto God conserves Scripture, and
preserves men in their being; so, seeing he has promised to conserve his
Church, without error against Faith, and gives every one sufficient grace, to
follow her Directions, if they refuse to do so, they become Heretics, by
their own free will, not by any necessity. Your saying (By this reason you
should say, as well, that no man can be a good Bishop or Pastor, or King, or
Magistrate, or Father that succeeds a bad one) is manifestly impertinent; seeing
the Direction of Faith, is not the personal life, but the publik Definition,
and doctrine of such as God has appointed to be our Guides, and whom he has
commanded us to obey.

36. Seeing your (N. 39.) contains only a heap, or rabble, of demands without
telling us, what you hold, I were much to blame, If I would spend time about
the^; especially I having proved out of Fathers, and learned Protestants, that
the true Church, cannot subsist without a succession of Bishops, which is the
point you desire should be proved, before you answer the argument of Chapter Ma.,
and your own demands; whereof I must tell you in general, some are
ridiculous, some dangerous and tending to confusion, some beg the Question,
some contain shrewd insinuations against the necessity of Bishops; some are
evidently falls, and all, of no force against us. You ask whether Ch: Ma: in
saying the Donatists Sect was confined to Africa, do not forget himself, and
contradict what he said (N: 17.) that they had some of their Sect residing in
Rome? But this is a poor contradiction. For, even D. Potter (Page: 125.) cites
S. Austine affirming, that the Donatists held the Church to have perished
through the whole world, except in their Sect in Africa, and (Page: 126.) the
Doctor denies not, but they had some of their Sect in Rome, and you expressly
affirm it; yet because they were so few, as could not make any considerable
number, it may well be said, that their Sect de facto was confined to Africa,
as they were wont to say, and as Ch: Ma: must speak, in their sense,
concerning them: and he is expressly warranted by S. Optatus Lib: 2. saying,
that the Donatists Bishop in Rome was Episcopus sine populo. Non enim grex aut
populus appellandi fuerant pauci, qui inter quadraginta, and quod excurrit,
basilicas locum vbi colligerent non habebant.

37. All that is material in your [N: 40.] has been answered heretofore, to
your small credit. You have no reason to alter the Translation of Chapter Ma., of
the words of Tertullian, How is it likely that so many and so great Churches
should err in one Faith? Quid vetisimile est, vt tot ac tantae in vnam Fidem
erraverint? Which you say should be translated, should err into one Faith. For
it is certain, that your obscure expression, should err into one Faith, must
signify, that it is not likely so many different Churches agreeing, should
err in that Faith, in which they agree, which is according to the clear
expression of Ch: Ma: And it is clear, that the reason, why they could not
err into one Faith, must be, because error could not consist with one Faith;
for if it could, they might err into one Faith; and so your Translation, if it
be good, must be beholding to his expression. You say in the (Page: 362.) that
the Roman Church is Catholic to herself alone, and Heretical to all the rest
of Christian Churches, and in this (Page: 332. N. 11.) you say, It is not Heresy
to oppose any Truth propounded by the Church, but only such a Truth as is an
essential part of the Gospel of Christ: Which sentences put together
conclude, the Roman Church to want what is essential to a Church, and yet you
expressly teach in other parts of your Book, that she errs not in essential or
fundame^tall points. How will you save yourself from a contradiction in this?
As also, in your saying, that it is not Heresy to oppose any truth, but only
such a truth as in an essential part of the Gospel? Do you not profess
through your whole Book that voluntary error against any revealed truth, is a
damnable sin? And what sin can it be except the sin of Heresy? But of
this particular, else where. Never was there Writer so repugnant to himself as
you are! Now, for your (N. 41.) If the true Church cannot be without Succession
of Bishops, whatsoever Church wants them, cannot be, a true Church, as if
speech were necessary to the being of a man (as it is not) want of it would be
a sure argument that he is not a man; and so your argument (that though speech
be a certain sign of a living man yet want of it is no sure Argument that he
is dead) is retorted against yourselfe.

37. You would draw me in your (N. 42.) to enter upon an unreasonable
discourse, wherein you do not so much impugn the Catholic Church, as all
Christianity; and you are still like yourself, in despising S. Austine, and
saying, that the places alleged out of him by Ch: Ma: (N. 24.) deserve not the
name of a proof, and yet S. Austine, (Lib: de Pastorib: Cap: 8.) says in
express terms, the thing for which he was alleged, namely, that not all
Heretics are spread over the face of the ^arth, but that Faithful people are
dispersed through the whole world. And the arguments which you bring to the
contrary, are answered by these words of S. Austine in the same place: Not all
Heretics are spread over the face of the Earth, and yet there are Heretics
spread over the whole face of the earth, some here, some there; yet they are
wanting in no place, they know not one an other. One Sect for example in
Africa' an other Heresy in the East, an other in Aegipt, an other in
Mesopotamia. In diverse places they are diverse. One Mother Pride has begot them
all, as one Mother the Catholic Church has brought forth all faithful
people dispersed throughout the whole world. No wonder then, if Pride breed
Dissension, and Charity union. To this true distinction of S. Austine, we may
add, that sometime when the Fathers speak, of the multitude of some particular
Sects, they mean of some particular place, or Country, but not comparing those
Heretics, with the whole universal Church, diffused through the whole world.
You tell us, S. Austine says (Ep. 48. ad Uinc:) the Professors of error
surpassed the Number of the Professors of Truth in proportion, as the sands of
the Sea do the stars of the Heaven. But I find in that Epistle these words
of S. Austine: Fortasse non frustra dictum sit de Semine Abrahae, sicut stellae
Coeli, and sicut arena quae est ad oram maris: vt in stellis Coeli pauciores,
firmiores, clarioresque intelligantur, in arena autem maritimi Litoris magna
multitudo infirmorum atque carnalium: In which words it seems, that S Austine
speaks not of Professors of error (as you say) but of perfect and imperfect
Catholics; which is nothing to our purpose.

38. Your (N. 43.44.) contain nothing which has not been answered, or else is
of no consideration. You find fault with Chapter Ma: that being to prove
Protestants to be guilty of Heresy, he strikes into an other accusation of
them, that the Faith even of the Truth they hold, is not indeed true Faith. But
put case it were not, does it follow, that the having of this Faith makes them
Heretics? Aristotle believed there were Intelligences which moved the
spheres he believed this with an humane persuasion, and will you make
Aristotle an heretic because he believed so? Answer: Ch: Ma: having proved
Protestants to be guilty of heresy, and consequently, not capable of
salvation, because Heresy is a deadly sin; if every Heresy have also this
effect, that it destroys all true supernatural Faith, even of all those
points wherein they do not err, and that true supernatural Faith is
necessary to salvation, how could Chapter Ma. without prevarication forbear, to
infer, that seeing Protestants are proved to be guilty of Heresy, they must be
subject to the inseparable effect thereof, which is to be deprived of all
supernatural Faith, and so be incapable of Salvation upon a double Title, that
is, both for a positive error against Faith, and for want of supernatural
infallible Faith, caused by that error? Whatsoever you are pleased to say, yet
I believe every one beside your self, will conceive that Ch: Ma: did not
digress, if indeed it be true, that every Heresy destroys all Faith, as he
proved it does, but never dreamed, that every Heresy makes the true belief
(though only humane) of all other Articles, to be Heresy; or that Aristotle
was an Heretic, because he believed only with an humane persuasion, that
there were Intelligences which moved the spheres: but if he, or any other,
believed all the mysteryes of Christian Faith, only with an humane persuasion,
as he believed those Intelligences, no good Christian can believe, that such a
persuasion were sufficient for salvation; and so your Argument turns against
yourself. Neither have you any reason to say, that Ch: Ma: has disjoined his
discourse upon this Point. For it was necessary, that first the grounds should
be laid, and the nature of Faith declared, before he could by degrees prove
Protestants to be Heretics, and thereby to be deprived of all supernatural
Faith, necessary to salvation.

39. Your (N. 45.46.) have been answered in diverse occasions. You overlash
exorbitantly, when (N. 47.) you say to Ch: Ma: Do you not see and feel, how
void of reason, and how full of imprety your sophistry is? And why? Let the
Reader judge of the cause. Ch: Ma: says, Every Protestant as I suppose, is
persuaded, that his own opinions are true, and that he has used such means,
as are wont to be prescribed for understanding of Scripture, as prayer,
conferring of diverse Texts etc: This supposition (not affirmation) being
premised, that Protestants have used such means as themselves prescribe for
interpreting, and yet that they disagree in many importantmatters of Faith, it
clearly follows that the means which they prescribe are not certain, nor
effectual, seeing they being put in practice, attain not that End for the
procuring whereof they were prescribed. From whence will follow this
principally intended conclusion, that the only effectual means, to compass
that end, must be to acknowledge an infallible Living Guide. And I pray, what
impiety or sophistry is there in this? You say, The first of those
suppositions, (that every Protestant is persuaded, that his opinions are true)
must needs be true, but the second is apparently false: I mean, that every
Protestant is persuaded, that he has used those means which are prescribed
for understanding of Scripture. But that which you collect from these
suppositions is clearly inconsequent, and by as good Logic you might
conclude, that Logic and Geometry stands upon no certain grounds, because the
disagreements of Logicians and Geometricians show, that some of them are
deceived.

40. Answer; If every Protestant be not persuaded, that he has used those
means, which are prescribed for understanding of Scripture, you will not be
able to defend, that the first part of the supposition must needs be true, to
wit, that every Protestant is persuaded, that his opinions are true. For if he
be not persuaded, that he has used such means, he cannot pretend to be sure
that his opinions are true, and then it is clear, that he who professes not to
be sure that Protastant Religion is true, is no Protestant, nor of any
Religion, if he doubt of all, or be not certain of any. And, that which Ch:
Ma: collects from those suppositions, to be clearly consequent, appears, even
by your instances to the contrary, which are retorted; thus: If you suppose
men to follow the Rules and Principles of Logic, and Geometry, and yet
disagree (and consequently some of them to be deceyved) you must conclude, that
Logic, and Geometry stand upon no certain grounds. Now our supposition (for
the present) is, that Protestants make use of those means, which they
prescribe for understanding Scripture, and yet disagree among themselves (and
consequently some of them must be deceived) Therefore we must conclude, that
those means are not certain, nor that they have any certain ground, whereon
to rely, for understanding Scripture, which is the Conclusion of Ch: Ma: In
the same manner I answer, and, retort your other instances; That if Christians
were supposed to use aright all the means they have, for finding the truth in
matters of Faith, and men be supposed to proceed according to the true Rules of
Reason and men did disagree, we might well infer, that neither Christian
Religion, nor Reason, stand upon certain grounds: and the same retortion may
be applied to your other instances, But Sr., though you say it is false, that
every Protestant, is persuaded that he has used those means which are
prescribed for understanding Scripture; yet it might seem a hard censure in
you (who pretend so much charity, the property whereof, you say, is to judge
the best) to judge, that of so very many disagreeing Protestants, some have not
used the means which they prescribe to themselves for understanding Scripture,
and if they have, it being clear by their disagreeing, that some are in an
error, it follows, that the means are in themselves defective, uncertain,
and insufficient.

41. And in this occasion, I must not omit to declare the Reason why Almighty
God, does not concur with Heretics, to the converting of Nations to
Christian Religion; because indeed they might afterward, upon examination,
discover that the grounds of those by whom they were converted, cannot support
a certainty in Faith, as they expected, and so they would judge themselves
rather to have been deluded, or (to use your own word) tantalized, than
converted; and might be tempted, to revolt from Christ, till they could find
some Rock, to which God himself has promised eternal stability. Besides seeing
Protestant Religion, cannot be wholly true, as consisting of contrary Sects, if
God did ordinarily cooperate with them in order to so supernatural a work, he
might seem to give them the credit of true Teachers, and to countenance, and
confirm a falsehood, which is impossible for him to do. And even from hence,
we may gather a posteriori, that Protestant Religion is not true, seeing God
does not take them for his instruments to convert Nations, or work Miracles.

42. All that you say (N. 48.) has been answered heretofore at large. To your
(N. 49.) whether he who erres against any one revealed truth loses all Divine
Faith (as Ch: Ma: said (N. 29.) Catholic Divines generally reach) I answer.
First; That in reason, Protestants ought to make greater account of the
Authority of Catholic Divines (besides whom there were no Orthodox Doctors
before Luther, and so to deprive them of estimation and authority, cannot be
done without prejuduce to the universal and Catholic Church, and all
Christianity) than any Catholic, or any prudent man can make of learned
Protestants, who in their opposition to Catholics, are contrary to all
Christian Churches, before Luther, and write, to maintain such their
opposition; whereas Catholic Divines, who wrote before Luther, could not have
any purpose to impugn Protestants; yea the disagreement of Protestants among
themselves, and agreement with us, against their pretended Brethren, must needs
very much diminish their authority: and if they remain with any estimation, or
authority, it makes for us, with whom the chiefest among them agree in many,
and great points, of Faith. You say; D. Potter alleged not the mere Authority
of Pappus and Flacius to prove this disagreement of Catholics among
themselves, but proved it with the formal words of Bellarmine, faithfully
collected by Pappus. But I pray you, that this collection was faithful, or to
the purpose, how does Dr. Potter prove, otherwise than by taking it upon the
credit and Authority of Pappus, seeing the Doctor does not alledg, so much as
any one instance in particular? As for the pretended disagreements among
Catholics; they can be only in matters disputable, or not defined by the
Church, from which definition if any should swerve, he were no Catholic; and
for other matters, we are content, that Pappus muster not only 237., but as
many more points, as he pleases. For by such a multiplication, he will only
make an Addition to his own manifest Impertinences: as your alleging the
Example of Brereley is a mere impertinence, it being clear, that he alleges
the disagreeing of Protestants among themselves, not only in by-matters, or in
the manner, or reason of their Assertions, but even in the conclusions
themselves; and not only as disagreeing among themselves, but as directly
agreeing with us, against other Protestants, in the very conclusions: whereof I
desire the Reader, for his own good, and full satisfaction, to peruse Brereley
in his Advertisment to him that shall answer his treatise, and his preface to
the Christian Reader, Catholic, or Protestant.

43. Secondly, Though you are pleased to call it weakness in Ch: Ma: to urge
Protestants with the authority of Catholic Divines; yet you can have no
pretense to slight, men of their fame, and learning, when they are considered,
not as disagreeing from Protestants (nor in a Question controverted between
them and us) but are seconded by the chiefest, and learned of them,
(Protestants.) For what does it import Protestants, that Heresy, or
infidelity, destroies all Divine Faith, unless they will tacitly confess, or
fear, that they are guilty of those crimes? Let us hear the verdit of some
principal Protestants. Luther (in Capit: 7. Matthew.) says, Heretics, are
not Christians. And; Faith must be round that is, in all Articles believing
howsoever little matters. And in tria Symbola Christian Faith must be entire
and perfect every way. For albeit it may be weak and faint: yet it must needs
be entire and true. And Epist. ad Albertum: He does not satisfy, if in other
things he confess Christ and his word. For who denies Christ in one Article or
word, denies him in all, seeing there is one only Christ, the same in all. The
Magdeburgians (in Praefat: Centur: 6.) They are Antichrists, and devils. Beza
de puniendis haereticis; They are infidels and Apostates. Mort: (Lib: 1.
Apolog. Cap: 7.) Either you must give the name of Catholics to Protestants, or
we must deny them the name of Christians. Yourself (Page: 23. N, 27.) speaking
of Uerityes, contained in the undoubted Books of Scripture, say; He that does
not believe all can hardly believe any, neither have we reason to believe he
does so; Which is more than Catholic Divines teach, who affirm, that an
heretic may believe some articles of Faith, by an humane opinion, not purelie
for Divine Revelation; and so you also must understand, that he who does not
believe all that is contained in the undoubted Books of Scripture, can hardly
believe any for the Authority of Scripture, but if he believe them, it must be
with mixture of some other reason, and so fall far short of Divine,
supernatural, Faith. Wittenbergenses, in Refutat. Ortodox: Consensus: As he
who keeps all the Law, but offends in one, is (witness saint James) guilty
of all: So who believes not, one word of Christ, though he seems to believe
the other articles of the Creed, yet believes nothing, and is damned, and
incredulous. Schlusselburgh (Lib. 1. Theolog. Calvin. Art. 1.) Most truly wrote
S. Chrisostom in 1. Gallat. He corupteth the whole doctrine, who subuerteth it
in the least Article. Most truly said Ambrose E: pist: ad demetriadem; he is
out of the number of the Faithful, and lot of Saints, who dissenteth in any
point from the Catholic Truth. Calvin (Ephesians: 4. V. 5.) upon that: One God,
one Faith, writes thus: As often as thou read the word, one, understand it
put emphatically, as if he had said, Christ cannot be divided, Faith cannot
not be parted. Perkins (in Explicat. Symboli Colum: 512) Thus indeed fares the
matter, that a man failing in one article fails and erreth in all. Whereupon
Faith is termed an entire copulative. As I said of your words, so I say of
these, that they contain more than Catholics affirm, and to give them a
true sense, they must be understood, that he fails and erreth, in as much, as
he believes not with a divine but only with an humane Faith. Spalatensis
(contra Suarem (C. 1. N. 7) Divine Faith perishes wholly by the least
detraction, and consequently, it is no true Church, no not visible, in which
entire Faith is not kept in publik profession.

44. The same is the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers: Tertullian (de praescrip:
Cap: 2.) says: Heresies are to destroy Faith, and bring everlasting death.
And (Cap 37.) If they be heretics, they can be no Christians. S. Cyprian
(Epist: 73.) says, that both by the testimony of the Gospel and Apostle,
Heretics are called Antichrists. S. Austine, (Enchirid: Cap: 5.) Christ, in
name only, is found with any Heretics. S. Chrysostom cited by Ch: Ma: (N. 33.
in Galat 17.) says, that the least error in matter of Faith, destroieth
Faith. Let them hear (says this holy Father) what S. Paul says: Namely that
they who brought in some small error had overthrown the Gospel. For, to
show how a small thing ill mingled does corrupt the whole, he said, that the
Gospel was subverted. For as he who clips a little of the stamp from the kings
money, makes the whole piece of no value: so whosoever takes away the least
particle of sound Faith, is wholly corrupted. But enough of this. You do but
cavil, and yourself know you do so, in saying to Ch: Ma: that there is not
one Catholic Divine, who delivers for true Doctrine this position of yours
thus nakedly set down, That any error against any one revealed truth destroies
all divine Faith. For you cannot be ignorant, that when this Question is
propounded by Divines, it is necessarily understood, of culpable error;
otherwise it could be no Question. And whereas you say, There is not one
Catholic Divine; who delivers etc. Your self did read in Ch: Ma: S. Thomas
delivering that Doctrine in the same manner (2. 2. Q. 5. a 3.) For having
propounded the Question; Whether he who denies one Article of Faith, may
retain Faith of other Articles; in his Conclusion he says: It is impossible,
that Faith, even informed (or Faith without Charity) remain in him, who does
not believe some one Article of Faith, although he confess all the rest to be
true. What say you to this? Is not S. Thomas, one Catholic Divine, or is he
not, one, instar omnium? And yet he both proposes, and answers this Question,
supposing, not expressing, that he speaks of culpable error; and afterward he
speaks expressly of Heretics, as also Ch: Ma: in this very Number, expressly
specifies Protestants, whom you know we believe to err culpably, against many
revealed Truths. You go forward, and speak to Ch: Ma: in this manner: They
(Catholic Divines) all require (not yourself excepted) that this truth must
not only be revealed, but revealed publicly, and (all things considered)
sufficiently propounded, to the erring party, to be one of those, which God
under pain of damnation commands all men to believe. But you are more bold,
than well advised, in taking upon you to know, what all Catholic Divines hold
and you are even ridiculous, in telling Ch: Ma: what his opinion is. I beseech
you produce any one Catholic Divine teaching, that all Divines hold that the
error which destroys all divine Faith, must be revealed publicly. Who is
ignorant, that many great Divines teach, that he were properly an Heretic,
who should reject, or disbelieue a private Divine Revelation sufficiently
known to be such, by never so secret means? Do not yourself here cite Estius
(whom you style one of the most rational and profound Doctors of our Church)
saying: It is impertinent to Faith, by what means we believe the prime verity.
For many of the Ancients, as Adam, Abraham, Melchisedeck, Job, receyved the
Faith by special Revelation? Do you not remember, that Zachary was punished,
for his slowness, in believing a revelation, made privately to him, and of a
particular object? You speak very confusedly when you say. They (Catholic
Divines) require, that this Truth be one of those which God under pain of
Damnation commands all men to believe. For, all Catholic Divines, agree, that
it is Heresy, to deny any revealed truth proposed by the Church, though other
wise it be not coma^ded to be believed; and you do not only teach, through your
whole Book, that it is damnable, to disbelieue any Truth sufficiciently
propounded as revealed by God, but you say further, that whatsoever, one is
obliged, not to disbelieue, at any time, at the same time, he is oblged, to
believe it, which latter part though it be false, (as I have showed heretofore)
yet it shows, that you must affirm, that God under pain of damnation
commands all men to believe (positively and explicitly) all truths
sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: so that this your saying, is not
only confused, but false, in the opinyon of Catholic Divines, and much more
in your opinyon.

45. You say Thomas Aquinas vainly supposes against reason and experience,
that by the commission of any deadly sin, the Habit of Charity is quite
extirpated. But against this proud Pelagian conceypt of yours, I have proved in
the Introduction, that Charity being a supernatural Habit, infused only by the
Holy Ghost, and not acquired by any natural Acts, cannot be known by humane
experience, to be present or absent; and being a love of God above all things,
cannot possibly consist with any least deadly sin. I desire the Reader to see
of this matter S. Thomas, (2. 2. Q. 24. a 12. Corp:) where he cites S. Aug:
saying: Quod homo Deo sibi praesente illuminatur, absente autem continuo
tenebratur, a quo non locorum intervallo, sed voluntatis aversione disceditur.

46. Concerning the second Reason of S. Thomas you say to C: Ma: Though you cry
it up for an Achilles, and think like the Gorgons head it will turn us all
into stone, and insult upon Dr. Potter as if he durst not come near it, yet in
very truth, having considered it well, I find it a serious, grave, prolix, and
profound nothing. I could answer it in a word, by telling you, that it beggs
without all proof or color of proof, the main Question between us that the
infallibility of your Church is either the formal motive, or rule, or a
necessary condition of Faith: which you know we flatly deny, and all that is
built upon it has nothing but wind for foundation.

47. Answer: What Reader will not conceive out of your words, that Chapter Ma. had
used some such vain brag, as you express by Achilles, Gorgons head, insulting
etc: Whereas he without any, evenleast commendation, says positively, that S.
Thomas proves his conclusion, first by a parity with Charity, which is
destroyed by every deadly sin, and then by a farther reason, which there he
setts down, at large in the words of that holy Saint (2. 2. Q. 5. A. 3.) and
is comprised in this Sum (Ad 2.) A man does believe all the articles of faith
for one and the selfsame reason, to wit, for the prime verity proposed to us in
the Scripture, understood aright according to the Doctrine of the Church: and
therefore whosoever falls from this reason or motive, is totally deprived of
Faith. Your pride is intolerable, in despising the Reason of S. Thomas, as a
serious, grave, prolix nothing; and your saying is ridiculous, that he beggs
the main Question between us, about the infallibility of the Church. For how
could he beg that Question, which when he wrote, was granted, and taught, by
all Divines? But you do not understand the force of his Argument, which
consists in this; that if one assent to one Object, for some motive or Reason,
and assent not to another, for which there is the same motive or reason, it
appears that he Assents to this other, not for that motive common to both, but
for some other particular Reason. Now, though S. Thomas specify the authority
of the Church, because, de facto she is the proposer of diviue Truths, yet his
argument is the same, though it be applied to Scripture. And therefore the same
holy Doctor (1. Part. Q. 1. A. 8. Ad 2.) without mentioning the Church, says:
Innititur sides nostra revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae qui Canonicos
Libros scripserunt: and we have heard yourself saying (Page: 23.) He that does
not believe all the undoubted parts of the undoubted Books of Scripture, can
hardly believe any, neither have were ason to believe he does so. Yea D. Lawd
(P. 344.) says expressly: We believe all the Articles of Christian Faith, for
the same formal reason in all, namely, because they are revealed from and by
God, and sufficiently applied in his word, an by his Churches Ministration.

48. To this answer, which I have confuted, you add, to use your words, a larg
confutation of this vain fancy out of Estius, upon (3. se^. 23. did. 13. But
Estius is so far from saying the Doctrine of S. Thomas, to be a vain fancy,
that he says: The Question is on both sides by the Doctors probably
disputed. Which is sufficient for our main Question, that according to this
Doctor, the Protestants cannot pretend to be a true Church, which must
certainly, and not only probably, have Divine supernatural Faith, which is
absolutely necessary to salvation, necessitate medij. Besides, his last express
words show that the Faith which remains in an Heretic, is not sufficient for
salvation, and therefore Protestants and all Heretics, even for want of
necessary Faith cannot be saved. His words are: Neque tamen propterea fatendum
erit Haereticos aut Judaeos Fidem habere, sed Fidei partem aliquam. Fides enim
significat aliquod integrum, and omnibus suis partibus completum: vt sit idem
Fides simpliciter, and Fides Catholica: Quae nimirum absolute hominem fidelem
and Catholicum constituat. Vnde Hereticus simpliciter infidelis esse, (Mark)
and Fidem amisisse, and juxta Apostolum (1. Tim. 1.) Fidei naufragium fecisse
dicitur, licet quaedam ea teneat firmitate assensus, and promtitudine
voluntatis qua ab alijs omnia quae fidei sunt tenentur. Neither is the argument
of S. Thomas sufficiently confuted by Estius in saying; It is impertinent to
Faith, by what means we believe the prime Uerity. For although now the
ordinary means be the Testimony and preaching of the Church, yet it is certain
that by other means, faith has been given heretofore and is given still. This
discourse, I say does not confute the Argument of S. Thomas, being understood,
as I declared, formally; that whosoever disbelieves any article sufficiently
propounded as a divine Truth, the same man cannot believe an other sufficiently
propounded to him by the same means, whatsoever that means be.

49. To the other argument of S. Thomas, taken from a parity of faith, with the
Habit of Charity, which is lost by every deadly sin, Estius does not answer,
and I am sure he would have been far from saying, as you do that by the
commission of any deadly sin the habit of Charity is not quite extirpated.
And this Argument is stronger, than perhaps appears at the first sight. For,
Faith has no less connection, and relation, to the object of Faith, than
Charity to the object of Charity. And therefore as Charity does so love God
above all things that it cannot stand with any sin, whereby God is grievously
offended, so we must say of the habit of Faith, that it is not compatible with
any error, whereby his Prime Uerity is culpably rejected: and as it is
essential to Charity, as long as it exists, to overcome all temptations
against the Love of God; so Faith must of its own nature, beat down, and
reject all error, against the Divine Testimony, or Revelation, that both, for
will, and understanding, we may say: Nonne Deo subjecta erit anima mea? which
entire submission, and subjection, is evidently more necessary in Faith, than
in Charity, against which some sins may be venial, whereas every error
against any truth, sufficiently propounded as revealed by God, is a deadly
sin nor can be excused, ob parvitatem materiae.

50. You conclude and say to Chapter Ma. Your Corollaries drawn from it (the
Doctrine of S. Thomas) That every error against Faith involves opposition
against Gods testimony, That Protestants have no Faith no certainty, and that
you have all Faith, must together with it fall to the ground. Which words are
either nonsense, or evidently false. For who ever denied (not your self
excepted) that every error against Faith involves an opposition against Gods
testimony, which is the very essence, of error against Faith, that is, of
Heresy?

51. Your (N. 50.51.52.) have been answered heretofore; and are answered by
this one consideration; That your Faith is not raised above the probable
motives or Arguments of Credibility, which being evident, your kind of Faith,
must be evident: but our Catholic Faith, is an assent above the said
motives, and is certain, though not evident, as I have declared else where: and
by this means your imitation of the Argument of Ch: Ma: (to prove that the
pretended faith of Protestants implied not obscurity) falls to the ground,
because we believe with a greater certainty, than is derived from the sole
motives of credibility: so that your Faith must have evidence, but cannot have
certainty: The Faith of Protestants, who pretended to be assured, what Books
be Canonical, by the private spirit, must be certain and evident (and
consequently not obscure) and therefore Calvin (Lib: Institut: Cap: 7. Sect: 2.)
says, that by the spirit men may discern true Scripture, as we discern
lucem a tenebris, album a nigro, suaue ab amaro, light from darkness, white
from black, sweet from sower: And so the Faith of Catholics only remains
both certain and obscure, as Christian Faith ought to be.

52. Your (N. 53.54.55.) have been either answered already, or else contain
mere sayings, without any proof. That the Jews before our Saviors time,
conserved the Scripture, is no wonder, since at that time they were the true
Church; and afterward, it was not in their power to corrupt it at their
pleasure, in regard the Apostles, and other converted to Christian Religion,
could manifestly have convinced them, as shameless falsaries. But what has
this to do with that Church, which was the universal Church of Christ, before
Luther; and if it be fallible, and so could have been permitted to corrupt
Scripture, you can at this time have no certainty of the Bible? That Luther
opposed the Roman Church appears by what I said heretofore: and is
demonstrated by Ch: Ma: (Part 1. Chap: 5. N. 29.) and yourself (N. 73.)
describe the man in such manner, as makes the matter credible of it self.

53. You tell us (N. 56.) that the Bible only is the Religion of Protestants.
Of this we have said enough heretofore. Now I will only put you in mind;
First; that this cannot agree with your Doctrine, that Scripture is not a
material object of Faith, nor which men are obliged to believe. For if it only
be the Religion and Faith of Protestants, and yet be not a point or object of
Faith which you are bound to believe, it follows, that Protestants have no
Religion, or Point of Faith at all. Secondly; We have heard you say (Page: 287.
N. 82.) that some Protestants took for the model, or Idaea of their
Reformation, not Scripture only, but also the Decrees of Counsels, and the
Writings of the Fathers of the first five Ages. Thirdly; you say; Whatsoever
else they (Protestants) believe besides Scripture, and the plain, irrefragable,
indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold it as a matter of Opinion,
but as matter of Faith and Religion, neither can they with coherence to their
own grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief of it of others,
without most high and most Schismatic presumption. It is strange, that the
Approbators of your Book, and other Protestants, did not see a thing very
evident; That in these words, you declare Protestant pretended Bishops, and the
Church of England, to have been guilty of most high and most Schismatic
presumption, for requiring the belief of the 39. Articles, some of which you
believe, neither to be contained in Scripture, nor to be the plain,
irrefragable, indubitable consequences of it, but to be falls, and repugnant to
it. So that we have reason, more and more, to be even amazed, that such a Book,
could at such a time be published.

54. Your [N. 57) and the rest till your (N. 72.) inclusiue, have been answered
in different occasions, respective. Unfortunate man! Who will not compassionate
your disorder of mind, and pen, when (N. 66.) you are not ashamed to say of
Catholics? It is too too apparent, that your Church has got and still
maintains her authority over men's consciences, by counterfeiting false
stories, by obtruding on the world supposititious writings, by corrupting the
monuments of former times, and defacing out of them all which any way makes
against you, by wars, by perfecutions, by Massacres, by Treasons, by
Rebellions; in short, by all manner of carnal means whether violent or
fraudulent. If Luther found the Roman Church, and such as were united with her,
(that is all Orthodox Christian Churches) in such a state as you describe, what
a scandal must it needs have been to Jews, Turks, Pagans, and all the enemies
of Christian Religion?

55. Whosoever reads your (N, 73.) will find that you abandon Luther, and that
you grant very much in favor of the Roman Church, as will appear by reading
Ch: Ma: here (N. 32.) and I observe that you confess, with Luther, that in the
Papacy are many good things, that have come from them to us; and then why do
you always deny, that you receive Scripture from us, which is one of those
many good things that have come from us to you, as Luther expressly confesses?

56. In your (N. 74.) you involue, and make things seem obscure, which are
very clear. You cite Chapter Ma. as if he said, in general, certainty and
prudence are certain grounds, of supernaturality, which is evidently falls: it
being manifest, that some natural knowledge, may be certain and prudent. You
say also, that Ch: Ma: makes persuasion and opinion all one. And why? because
he says the Faith of Protestants is but an human persuasion or opinion; as if
you should have said, when you say, this, or, that, we make this and that all
one: or in saying, such a one studied in Oxford or Cambridg, we make Oxford or
Cambridg all one. The truth is, Chapter Ma. neither intended to make them all one,
or different; it being sufficient for his purpose, that the Faith of
Protestants, was not a certain, divine, assent; call it otherwise what you
please. You ask; how we can assure you, that our Faith is not our persuasion,
or opinion, that our Churches doctrine is true? Or if you grant it your
persuasion, why is it not the persuasion of men, and in respect of the subjest
of it, an humane persuasion! You desire also to know, what sense there is in
pretending that our persuasion is, not inregard of the object only and cause of
it, but in nature and essence of it supernatural?

57. Answer; we believe with certainty, that the Churches doctrine is true,
because such our belief depends upon infallible and certain grounds, as has
been showed heretofore: and we are certain that every Act of Faith necessary
for salvation, is supernatural in essence, not by sensible experience, and
natural reason, on which you are still harping, but by infallible principles
of Faith; because the particular assistance of the Holy Ghost is universally,
and in all occasions, necessary for us to believe (as I proved in the
Introduction) which demonstrates, that the essence of Faith is supernatural.
Your saying; (that if it be our persuasion, why is it not the persuasion of
men, and in respect of the subject of it, an humane persuasion?) deserves no
answer. Is not even the Beatificall vision, in men, as in the subject thereof?
And yet I hope you will not call it, a mere humane Act, and much less an
humane persuasion: besides our Faith being absolutely certain, cannot be
called, only a persuasion.

58. Your (N. 75.) contains nothing which is not answered by former Grounds;
and in particular by your own Doctrine, that every culpable error, against any
revealed truth is damnable, yea and repugnant to some fundamental necessary
Article; from whence it must follow, that of two dissenting in revealed Truths,
he who culpably erres, sins damnably, and cannot be saved, without
repentance. Your gloss of S. Chrysostom is plainly against his words; seeing he
speaks expressly of small errors, which he says destroy all Faith; as we
have heard the famous Protestant Sclusselburg saying of this very place of S.
Chrysostom; Most truly wrote Chrsiostome in 1. Galat. He corrupts, the whole
Doctrine, who subverteth it in the least article.

CHAP: XVI. THE ANSWER TO HIS SEVENTH CHAPTER? That Protestants are not bound
by the CHARITY WHICH THEY OWE TO THEMSELVES to reunite themselves to the ROMAN
CHVRCH.
1. I May well begin my Answer to this Chapter, with your own words delivered
in the beginning of your answer to the preface of Ch: Ma:, where you say: If
beginnings be ominous as they say they are C: Ma: has cause to look for great
store of vningenuous dealing from you, the very first words you speak of him,
vz. (That the first four Paragraphs of his seventh Chapter, are wholly spent
in an vnecessary introduction unto a truth, which I presume never was, nor will
be by any man in his wits, either denied or questioned; and that is; That every
man in wisdom and Charity to himself, is to take the safest way to his
eternal Salvation) being a most unjust and immodest imputation. For, the first
three Paragraphs of Ch: Ma: are employed in delivering such Doctrines, as
Divines esteem necessary to be known, and for that cause treat of them at
large; and I believe if the Reader peruse those paragraphs, he will Judge them
not unnecessary; and (which here is chiefly considered) it is very untrue,
that they are spent to prove; that every man in wisdom, and Charity to himself,
is to take the safest way to his eternal Salvation, which Ch: Ma: never
affirmed, and is in itself evidently false: Otherwise every one were obliged in
all occasions to embrace the best, and not be content with that which is good;
to live according to the Evangelicall Counsels, and not judge the keeping of
the commandments to be sufficient for salvation; which were to turn all
Counsels (or things not of obligation in themselves) to commands, and could
produce only scruples, perplexities, and perhaps might end in despair. What
then did Ch: Ma: teach? He having (N. 3.) declared at large, two kinds of
things necessary to salvation, necessitate tantum praecepti, or also
necessitate medij, delivers these words (N. 4.) Out of the foresaid difference
follows an other, that (generally speaking) in things necessary, only because
they are commanded, it is sufficient for avoiding sin, that we proceed
prudently, and by the conduct of some probable opinion, maturely weighed, and
approved by men of virtue, learning, and wisdom. Neither are we always obliged
to follow the most strict and severe, or secure part, as long as the Doctrine
which we embrace, proceeds upon such reasons, as may warrant it to be truly
probable, and prudent, though the contrary part want not also probable grounds.
For, in humane affairs and discourse, evidence and certainty cannot be always
expected. But when we treat not precisely of avoiding sin, but moreover of
procuring some thing without which I cannot be saved; I am obliged by the Law
and Order of Charity to procure as great certainty as morally I am able; and am
not to follow every probable opinion, or dictamen, but tutiorem partem, the
safer part, because if my probability prove falc, I shall not probably, but
certainly come short of salvation. Nay in such case* I shall incur a new
sin against the virtue of Charity to wards myself, which obliges every one
not to expose his soul to the hazard of eternal perdition, when it is in his
power, with the assisstance of Gods Grace, to make the matter sure. Thus said
Ch: Ma: which may be confirmed out of S. Austine (Lib. 1. de Baptismo Cap. 3.)
graviter peccaret in rebus ad salutem animae pertinentibus, vel eo solo quod
certis in certa praeponeret. He speaks of Baptism, which the world knows he
held to be necessary to salvation. And what say you now? Is this to say
universally, that every one is obliged to take the safest way to his salvation?
Is it not to say the direct contrary, that not in all kinds of things, one is
bound to take the safest part, as shall be further explicated hereafter.

2. I desire the Reader so see what Ch: Ma: says (N. 7.8.9.10, 11.) and he
will find you could not answer so briefly, as (N. 3.) you pretend you could
do. For I have proved that by your own confession we err not fundamentally,
and you grant that Protestants err damnably (which we deny of Catholics)
therefore we are more safe tha^ you, seeing both of us consent, that you err
damnably, and we absolutely deny that we do so.

3. I was glad to hear you confess perforce (N. 2.) that in the Arguments,
which Ch: Ma: delivers (N. 12.) there is something that has some probability to
persuade some Protestants to forsake some of their opinions, or others to leave
their commumion. For this is to grant, that according to a probable, and
consequently a prudent opinion, some Protestants, your pretended Brethren, are
Heretics, and that the rest, sin grievously, in not forsaking the communion
of those other; which, upon the matter, is to yeald, that all Protestants (upon
one of these two accounts or titles] are in state of damnation; and is not this
to contradict the title of your Book? The Protestant Religion a safe way to
salvation. But I could not but wonder, how you could induce yourself, to say,
so absolutely, To prove Protestants in state of sin while they remain
separate from the Roman Church there is not one word or syllable (in that N.
12.) seeing if they forsake those opinions, eo ipso, they come to agree therein
with the Roman Church; and if they persist in their errors, and for that
cause, be forsaken by their Brethren, these forsakers in that respect, come to
agree with the Roman Church, and divide themselves from those other
Protestants. Besides; if once it be granted, that Protestants are obliged to
forsake one an other, no man to whom the salvation of his soul is dear, will
not spedily return to that Church, from which all of them departed, whatsoever
you may speculate, or fancy to the contrary. As for your instance, that
Catholics differ about the Doctrine of Perdetermination, or absolute
Election; it is not to the purpose; seeing all Catholics, profess to hold them
no otherwise, than as they may consist with freewill, which those Protestants
of whom Chapter Ma. speaks deny, and therefore his Inferences are of force against
Protestants, not against Catholics. There is no doubt, but that the
consequences of men's opinions, may, and will, be imputed to them, when they
might see them, if it were not for some fault of their own, as even yourself
grant in this place.

4. To your N. 5. (so it should be, but is omitted) It is vanity in you to say,
It was needless to prove that due order is to be observed in any thing much
more in Charity, seeing all Divines treating of Charity propose this Question:
and in particular S. Thomas (2.2. Q. 26. Art: 1.) asks expressly, Vtrum in
charitate sit ordo; and for proof thereof he alleges the same Text (Cant: 1.)
which Ch: Ma: alleges, Ordinavit in me Charitatem; and yet, you with your
wonted confidence, say; It if stood in need of proof, I fear this place of
the Canticles, would be no enforcing demonstration of it. But Cornelius a
Lapide from this place, proves literally and learnedly, that in Charity there
is an order to be kept,

5. 2. You say to Ch: Ma:; The reason alleged by you, why we ought to love one
object more then an other, because one thing participates the Divine Goodness
more then an other, is fantastical, and repugnant to what you say presently
after. For by this Rule no man should love himself more then all the world;
Unless he were first vainly persuaded that he does more participate the Divine
Goodness then all the world. But the true reason why one thing ought to be
loved more then an other is, because one thing is better then another, or
because it is better to us, or because God Commands us to do so, or because
God himself does so, and we are to conform our affections to the will of God.

6. Answer: It can be nothing, but excess of pride in you, to call the reason
of Ch: Ma: fantastical, it being nothing different from that which S. Thomas,
in the place alleged, assigns, and all his Commentators follow: and which is
strange, you yourself give the same, as we shall see instantly. Your error
arises, from ignorance, of a double Order in Charity, Physical, and moral.
The first, is taken from the perfection of the object in itself; the second, is
considered in order to the obligation, which God has imposed upon us to love
things in that manner and order, as he has appointed: and therefore, although
we cannot love ourselves, more than all the world, by the Physical order of
which we spoke, as if we did conceive ourselves to be of our own nature, more
perfect than all Creatures; yet we are obliged by the moral order, or
obligation, which God has imposed, to prefer the spiritual good of our own
soul, before the whole world: and so your objection appears very vain, and
must be answered by yourself, who give for a reason, because one thing is
better than an other; and I beseech you, is it not all one to say; One thing is
better than an other; and one thing participates of God more than an other? And
then as I said, you must answer your own Objection; that by this rule no man
should love himself more than all the world, unless he were first vainly
persuaded, that he does more participate the Divine Goodness, then all the
world. In your other reason, (because one thing is better to us, then an other)
you forget that we speak of Charity, not of Hope, which respects a thing, as
good to us, and therefore in this reason, you pass from one virtue to an other,
and give a reason nothing to our present purpose. In your last reason (because
God himself does so, and we are to conform our affections to the will of God)
you either speak nonsense, or else you say the same which Ch: Ma: said, and
which you were pleased to call a fantastical reason. For God loves things as
they are in themselves, or as one thing is better then an other (which was your
other reason, though indeed, not distinct from this, which yet you pretend to
be different) or as one thing does more participate of the Divine Goodness or
perfection (which though you call fantastical, yet it is the same with your
own first reason and with this last) and therefore to conform our affections
to the will of God, is no other reason, than that which you call fantastical.
To these absurdities your pride brings you!

7. 3. You say; It is not true, that all Objects which we believe, do equally
participate the Divine Testimony or Revelation. But you ought to be ashamed to
conceal the immediately following words of Ch: Ma: which declare the matter
most evidently. For (says he) For Divine Testimony, or Revelation, we believe
a like all things propounded for such. For it is as impossible for God, to
speak an untruth, in a small, as in a great matter. Is not this true? Is not
the contrary, plain blasphemy?

8. In your (N. 6.) you say 1. It is not true that we are to wish or desire to
God a nature infinite, independent, immense: for it is impossible I should
desire to any person that which he has already, if I know he has it.

9. Answer; Ch: Ma: speaks in the phrase of the holy Scripture, and spiritual
men, who, to show the ardent love they bear to God, and deep complacence they
take in the Perfections, and Attributes, which they know he enjoyes, declare
their affection, by wishing them to him; as he in the Panegyric could say to
his Emperor, etiam praesens desideraris. Desire in our soul, is like to
hunger and thrist in our body; and yet we read (Eccl. 24.29.) Qui edunt me,
adhuc esurient; and qui bibunt me, adhuc sitient. S. Thomas (1.2. Q. 33. art.
2.) proposes this Question; vtrum delectatio causet sui sitim vel desiderium,
mark how he declares thirst to signify a desire and (in corp.) answers; si per
sitim vel desiderium intelligatur sola intensio affectus tollens fastidium, sic
delectationes spirituales maxim faciunt sitim vel desiderium suiipsarum, and
adds; cum pervenitur ad consummationem in ipsis. Behold a desire of-things,
present and possessed! Which he declares by the words which I cited out of
(Eccles. 24.) Qui bibunt me adhuc sitient; and proves it; Quia etiam de Angelis
qui perfect Deum cognoscunt, and delectantur in ipso, dicitur (1. Pet. 1.)
quod desiderant in eum conspicere. Upon which words Cornelius a Lapide says
devoutely; Angeli in Spiritum Sanctum prospicere desiderant, id est,
desideranter and cupide prospiciunt, desiderando satiantur, and satiando
desiderant; and cites to the same purpose these elegant words of S. Gregory
(18. Moral. C. 28.) Deum Angeli vident, and videre desiderant, and sitiunt
intueri, and intuentur. Ne autem sit in desiderio anxietas, desiderantes
satiantur: and ne sit in satietate fastidium desiderant. Et desiderant sine
labor, quia desiderium satietas comitatur; and satiantur sine fastidio, quia
ipsa satietas ex desiderio semper accenditur. And these other out of venerable Bede: Contemplatio divinae praesentiae ita Angelos beatificat, vt ejus semper
visa gloria satientur, and semper ejus dulcedinem quasi novam insatiabiliter
esuriant.

10. 2. You say to Ch: Ma: Whereas you say, That in things necessary to
salvation, no man ought in any case, or in any respect whatsoever, to prefer
the spiritual good of the whole world before his own soul: in saying this
you seem to me to condemn one of the greatest Acts of Charity, of one of the
greatest Saints that ever was, I mean S. Paul, who for his brethren desired to
be Anathema from Christ. And as for the Text alleged by you in confirmation of
your saying, what does it avail a man, if he gain the whole world, and
sustain the damage of his own soul? It is nothing to the purpose: For
without all Question it is not profitable for a man to do so but the Question
is, whether it be not Lawful for a man to forgo and part with his own
particular profit, to procure the universal, spiritual, and eternal benefit
of other?

11. Answer: I must truly affirm, that all the difficulty I can have in
confuting you, is to conjecture, what you would have, or how to reconcile your
Contradictions. Ch: Ma: said; In things necessary to salvation, no man ought
in any case, to prefer the spiritual good of others, before his own soul.
And is not this evide^tly true? Has not God committed to every man the care of
his own soul, and commanded him not to damn it for all eternity? And have we
not heard you saying, (N. 5.) that the true Reason why one thing ought to be
loved more then an other is because God commands us so do so No man can be
damned, or forfeit his salvation, except by sin; and I hope you will not say,
it is lawefull to sin, which were to say, it were a sin, and yet were no
sin. Even in this place, to the saying of Ch: Ma: It is directly against
Charity to ourselves, to adventure the omitting of any means necessary to
salvations, you answer; this is true: But so this is also, that it is directly
against the same Charity, to adventure the omitting any thing, that may any way
help or conduce to my salvation, that may make the way to it more secure or
less dangerous. I have proved above, this last part of your saying to be
false; but for the present, I say, if to omit any thing necessary to salvation,
be against the virtue of Charity to ourselves, it must be a sin, and
therefore not to be committed in any case, for any respect, of the temporal,
or spiritual good of the whole world; and so yourself contradict yourself, and
by saying it is against Charity, to omit any thing, that may any way conduce to
our salvation, a fortiori you make good the saying of Ch: Ma: that in things
necessary to salvation, no man ought in any case to prefer the spiritual good
of the whole world before his own soul. In alleging that Text of S. Paul,
you do as Heretics are wont to do, impugning clear truths, or evident
places of Scripture, by some obscure and difficult Text, as this of S. Paul is
held by all Interpreters to be. Sure I am, that it can serve your turn, in
this sense only, that S. Paul, for the good of others, did heartily,
effectually, and all things considered, wish to be deprived of salvation, and
separated from Christ, and I am sure, that this cannot be affirmed without
blasphemy, seeing it must implie, that S. Paul, did effectually desire to commit
a deadly sin, without the committing whereof, he knew very well, he could not
de facto, and effectually be separated from Christ, and salvation. Diverse
expositions of this Text may be seen in Cornelius a Lapide. For the present,
it is sufficient to have proved, that it is very ill applied by you: and (which
may seem strange) though here you say the desire of S. Paul was one of the
greatest acts of Charity, yet (Page: 219. N. 49.) you say; On condition the
ruptures made by them (Errors) might be composed, I do heartily wish, that the
cement were made of my dearest blood, and only not to be an Anathema from
Christ. In the same manner is confuted your evasion of the text (Matthew 16. V.
26.) seeing one cannot loose his soul except by deadly sin, and our Savior
in that Chapter does expressly teach us to carry our cross, least otherwise, we
incur eternal damnation, and I hope you will not deny cut that we are
obliged to avoid sin, and Hell: nor that our Savior persuaded to that which
was both profitable and best. Indeed your boldness in interpreting Scripture is
intolerable. I will end this Number, with observing; First; your little
fervor and constancy in your own Faith; which you express in your next (N.
6.) in these words: Sure I am, for my part, that I have done my true endeavor
to find it true, (that obedience is due to the Roman Church) and am still
willing to do so. For is it possible that after so many changes, and even
after the writing of your Book, you are yet ready to leave Protestancy? What
account ought others to make of your Book, since yourself are so willing to
abjure it? Secondly; I must observe your charity toward us Catholics, of
whom in the close of this (N. 6.) you say: To, live and die in it (the Roman
Church) is as dangerous as to shoot a gulf which though some good ignorant
souls may do and escape, yet it may well be feared that not one in a hundred
but miscarries. And now who can accuse us, for want of Charity toward
Protestants, since you, a chosen champion for them, are so uncharitable toward
us, yea toward many of the chiefest Protestants, who, as I have often said,
agree with us, against their other pretended Brethren?

12. In your (N. 7.) there is no difficulty requiring Answer: yet I will not
wholly omit it. I deny, that your ignorance, of being obliged to obey the Roman
Church can be probable, as I have proved heretofore. And besides this, you
should consider, that seeing eve^ according to your own confession, the
ministry of the Church, is a necessary condition to beget Faith, and that
Faith is ex auditu; the precept of obeying the Church implies a command to obey
that Authority, without which (in the ordinary course) we cannot attain that
which is absolutely necessary to salvation, and consequently, the obligation,
we have, to seek, and obey the true Church, is not only because we are
commanded to do so, but we are commanded to do so, because it imports a matter
necessary for our salvation.

13. You say to Ch: Ma: Whereas you say, that besides these things necessary
because commanded, there are other things, which are commanded because
necessary: of which number you make Divine infallible Faith, Baptism in Act
for Children, and in desire for those who are come to the use of Reason and the
Sacrament of confession, for those who have committed mortal sin: In these
words you seem to me to deliver a strange Pardox viZ. That Faith, and Baptism
and confession are not therefore necessary for us, because God appointed them,
but are therefore appointed by God because they were necessary for us,
antecedently to his appointment; which if it were true, I wonder what it was
beside God that made them necessary, and made it necessary for God to command
them!

14. Answer: First; although the words of Ch: Ma: had been the same, which you
set down, yet your collection from them, is so foolish and false, that the
Reader cannot but take it ill, that you should imagine him to be so weak, as
not to perceive it. Suppose, I say, Ch: Ma: had said as you allege him, that
there are things which are commanded because necessary; does it follow that
they are appointed as necessary by any but by God, who commands them, by
appointing them to be necessary? Does Ch: Ma: say, as you would have him?
Faith etc. are not therefore necessary for us, because God appointed the^, but
are therefore appointed by God, because they were necessary for us antecede^tly
to his appointment? He says only (even as you cite him) that they were
commanded because necessary, not that they were necessary antecedently to his
appointment, as you falsify him turning commanded, into appointed, and making
him say absurdly; Other things are appointed (by God) because they were
necessary for us, antecedently to his appointment. But your malice, will be yet
more pate^t by setting down the very words of Ch: Ma: which are these (N. 3.)
Some other things are said to be necessary to salvation necessitate medij;
because they are means appointed by God (mark appointed by God, and how then
could you say, I wonder what it was beside God that made them necessary?) to
attain our End of eternal salvation, in so strickt a manner, that it were
presumption to hope for salvation without them. And as the former means are
said to be necessary, because they are commanded; so the latter are commonly
said to be commanded, because they are necessary; that is; Although there were
no other special precept (mark special precept) concerning them; yet
supposing they be once appointed as means absolutely necessary to salvation,
there cannot but rise an obligation of procuring to have them, in virtue of
that universal precept of Charity, which obliges every man to procure the
salvation of his own soul. These words of Ch: Ma: are so clear and true,
that you may blush, for having endeavored to put upon them, any such absurd
sense, or paradox, as we have heard you express. The remainder of this Number
about the Faith, and Baptism of infants, is an Argument not belonging to this
place, or Work, and every one may find it treated learnedly, and largely, by
Bellarmine, and other Catholic Writers.

15. Your (N. 8.) lays a heavy charge upon Ch: Ma:, who, you say, delivers
this false and wicked Doctrine, that for the procuring our own salvation we
are always bound under pain of mortal sin to take the safest way, but for
avoiding sin we are not bound to do so, but may follow the opinion of any
probable doctors, though the contrary may be certainly free from sin, and
theirs doubtful.

16. But you plainly falsify the words and meaning of Ch: Ma:, as appears by
what I cited above out of his (N. 4.) for he never affirms, that for the
procuring our own salvation we are always bound under pain of mortal sin
to take the safest way (which is evidently false, as I showed above) but that
for avoiding sin we are not bound to do so, but may follow the opinion of any
probable Doctors, though the contrary may be certainly free from sin, and
theirs be doubtful: Whereas he speaks not of a doubtful conscience (which to
follow, is always a sin) but of a truly probable, and prudent opinion, which
whosoever follows, shall not only probably, but certainly avoid sin; (as it
is not merely probable, but certain, that from probable premises, a probable
conclusion must follow) and sin according to the Doctrine of Ch: Ma: is
always to be avoided; though no man can deny, but that, to avoid sin, more
certainty must be had in some things, than in other, according to the quality
of them; as, for example, one is obliged under sin, to use greater diligence
for attaining the knowledge of fundamental, than vnfundamentall points of
Faith; and in general no man of discretion can deny that more certainty is to
be sought in the choice of the true Faith, and Religion, then in a suit of Law,
or deliberation whether some positive Law oblige or no; or other cases
disputable on both sides, and not touchin^ upon any thing, absolutely, and
indispensably necessary to salvation: and so still it is true, that we must
avoid sin to the uttermost of our power, and this (if we speak of deadly
sin) is absolutely necessary to salvation. You say; Religion is one of those
things which is necessary only because it is commanded: For if none were
commanded under pain of damnation, how could it be damnable to be of any? But,
by your leave, in this you show great ignorance; not distinguishing between a
command of a thing, which is not appointed by God, as a means, absolutely
necessary to salvation; and of a thing, which is appointed as simply necessary,
as v.g. true Faith, Religion, Repentance of sins etc: as, in proportion, you
say, that some things are necessary to be believed, because they are revealed;
and other revealed, because they are necessary. And if one should object, and
say to you, if nothing were revealed, nothing could be necessary to be
believed, would you not say he did but cavil? The rest of this Number, tastes
of nothing but gall, and bitterness, and is such, as if you were now alive, you
would have wished unwritten. Seeing our salvation, is either endangered, or
secured, according to the proportion, that we are in danger of sin, or
secured from it, with what consequence, can you so hypocrytically talk, of
taking always the absolutely safest way, for avoiding all sin, and yet
teach, that men are not always obliged to take the safest means for
salvation, especially since you also teach, that to avoid sin to the
uttermost of our power is a necessary means of salvation? Neither do you
consider, that while you pretend to teach, that for avoiding sin, it is not
sufficient to follow a truly probable, and prudent opinion, you do much more
confirm, the chief Purpose, and Intent of Cha: Ma: which was to prove, that
in things absolutely, and indispensably, necessary to salvation, men are
obliged to seek and embrace the safer patte; and in the mean time, I pray you,
see if by your Divinity, you can persuade all litigants to part with their
goods (though they prudently and probably Judge they maintain a just cause)
because, forsooth, it is safer to yeald, than overcome, seeing it is not
impossible but the Adversary may be in the right. And though, here you talk
magnificently, of the necessity men have to avoid sin to the uttermost of
their power, as a necessary means of salvation, yet (Page: 19. N. 26.) you were
content to say: I am verily persuaded, that God will not impute errors to them
as sins who use such a measure of industry in finding truth, as humane
prudence, and ordinary discretion (their abilities and oportunities, their
distractions and hindrances, and all other things considered) shall advise
them, in a matter of such consequence. Lastly; who will not wonder, to see you
so much depress Probability, in moral cases, seeing you teach, that even
Christian Faith, upon which salvation depends, does not excede Probability?

17. Your (N. 9.10.11.12.13.14.15.) are answered out of grounds laid
heretofore: And in particular that Cha: Ma: (N. 5.) said very truly, that
seeing all Protestants pretend the like certainty, and go upon the same
grounds, and have the same Rules for interpreting Scripture, and yet cannot
agree, it is a sign, that their very Rules, and grounds, are uncertain, and
insufficient to settle an Act of Faith; as I declared above; and if this could
truly be said of Protestants, and Papists; of all Christians; of all
Religions; of all Reason; it is clear, that they could not truly pretend to
any certainty. But, God be ever blessed for it, we Catholics have Rules, and
an infallible Authority, the Church, most able to erect, a certain, infallible
belief. With what conscience can you say, that Arcudius acknowledges, that the
Eucharist was in Cyprians time given to infants, and esteemed necessary, or at
least profitable for them? For this disjunctiue, (necessary, or at least
profitable) may signify, that Arcudius doubts whether it were not esteemed
necessary, which never came to his thoughts. Yea he proves expressly and
largely that it is not necessary. We grant, that it might be profitable to
infants, by producing Grace in their souls, but, it being not necessary, the
Church for just causes, may think fit, not to administer it to them. Your
talking of an humane Law, obliging men to confess their secret sins, and even
sinful thoughts, will. I believe rather cause laughter, than any belief, that
such a Law could oblige; and therefore seeing you do not deny, but that the
Protestant Centurie Writers, alleged by Cha: Ma: (N. 5.) acknowledge, that in
the times of Cyprian, and Tertullian, private confession even of Thought was
used, and commanded, and thought necessary, we must infer, that it was held
necessary, as commanded by God; yea, seeing you say, it might be then commanded,
and being commanded be thought necessary, shows that you dare not deny, but
that private, or auricular Confession, was used, as a thing commanded, even in
those primitive Ages. You know the story of the Protestants in Germany, who
finding by experience, the huge inconveniences, that accompanied the want of
Confession, supplicated the Emperor, that he would command it by some Law; but
were deservedly rejected with scorn, as if men would think themselves obliged
to obey his Law, who had rejected the Law of God, in that matter. To all which
if we add, that you believe not, that true Priests have power to absolve from
sin; and if they had, yet Protestants not being true Priests, what Law of
man, can be of force, to oblige men to confess even their thoughts?

18. Your (N. 16.17.18.) touch only, upon what has been handled in other
places, and need no Answer here. How little hope of salvation Protestants can
conceive from the Doctrine of Cha: Ma: and how impossible it is for them to
repent, and not relinquish their errors, has been showed at large heretofore

19. Though your (N. 19.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.) contain no new
difficulty, yet I answer them briefly by these considerations; that S. Austine,
and other Catholics, never granted that the Donatists had true Divine Faith,
but only, that they believing diverse, or most, of the Truths, which Catholics
believed, had the same Faith or Belief materially; as the Jews believe many
Truths, contained in the Old Testament, which Christians believe, and yet
cannot be said to have true supernatural saving Faith; that you are very
ignorant of Catholic Divinity, if you conceive (as by your words it seems you
do) that we hold an Heretical, or Schismatic Bishop, not to administer
valide (though illicite) such Sacraments as depend only upon Potestas Ordinis;
and therefore you say vainly to Char: Ma: Which Doctrine if you can reconcile
with the present Doctrine of the Roman Church, Eris mihi magnus Apollo; That
Dr: Potter citing the doctrine, or saying of the Donatists, in a different
letter, ought not to have said more, than the words of S. Austine in the
margent (upon which the Doctor grounds himself) did express, which was only
Baptism, not salvation, whatsoever otherwise the Donatists held, against the
salvation of Catholics: That Dr: Potters words, that Protestants cut us not
of from the hope of salvation, and therefore are excused from Schism, have
been considered heretofore, and your defense of them confuted: That whosoever
reads the (N. 8. and 9.) of Cha: Ma: will find, that your answer is in no wise
satisfactorie, consisting merely of Points, which you know we deny, our
Argument being grounded upon the Confession of the most, and best learned
Protestants, who deny not salvation to us, which we cannot yeald to them; and
so in the judgment of both parts, we are safe, but you are not: That the Act
of Rebaptization was sacrilegious, and the error that it was lawful, an
Heresy, after the matter was declared by the Church: And concerning S.
Cyprian; see what has been said heretofore, and also by Cha: Ma: (Part: 2.
Chap 4. N. 4.) which you were willing to conceal. In your (N. 27.) you say,
(as S. Austine says, that Catholics approve the Doctrine of Donatists, but
abhor their Heresy of Rebaptization, etc:) But you should say (in stead, of
Doctrine) Baptism, as Cha: Ma: has it. For how can S. Austine approve the
Doctrine of Donatists, and yet hold that they taught an Heresy, of
Rebaptization?

20. In your (N. 29.) you say to Cha: Ma: I conceive, you were led into
error;, by m^^^aking a supposition of a confession, for a confession; a
Rhetorical concession of the Doctors, for a positive assertion. He says
indeed of your errors, Though of themselves they be not damnable to them which
believe as they profess, ye^ for us to profess what we believe not, were
without question damnable. But to say, though your errors be not damnable, we
may not profess them, is not to say, your errors are not damnable, but only
though they be not. As if you should say, though the Church err in points not
fundamental, yet you may not separate from it: Or, though we do err ^in
believing Christ really present, yet our error frees us from Idolatry: or, as
if a Protestant should say, Though you do not commit Idolatry in adoring the
Host, yet being uncertain of the Priests intention to consecrate, at least you
expose yourself to the danger of it: I presume you would not think it fairly
done, if any man should interpret either this last speech as an acknowledgment,
that you do not commit idolatry, or the former as confessions, that you do
err in points not fundamental, that you do err in believing the real
presence. And therefore you ought not so to have mistaken D. Potters words, as
if he had confessed the errors of your Church not damnable, when he says no
more but this, Though they be so, or, suppose or put the case they be so, yet
being errors, we that know the^ may not profess the to be divine truths.

21. Answer: is It possible that a man should speak so correctingly, and
magisterially as you do in this place, and yet be so palpably mistake^, as you
are? you say Dr. Potter says of our errors, Though of themselves they be not
damnable to them which believe as they profess, yet for us to profess etc.
(upon which words you ground your whole discourse) and yet both you, and the
Doctor, disclaim from these words (though of themselves they be not damnable)
and put them among the errata of the Printer in both your Books, to be
corrected thus; though in the issue they be not damnable; so as you obtrude to
us the fault of the Print, for the words of Dr. Potter, and will needs have Ch:
Ma: partaker of your gross mistake, in a point upon which you say a great part
of his Book is grounded. Now, then the print being corrected, in this manner,
(though in the issue they be not damnable to them which believe as they
profess) I beseech you, does not (though) signify that indeed they are not
damnable to them, which believe as they profess? And is not this the constant
doctrine of Dr. Potter and yourself, that Catholics who in simplicity of heart
believe as they profess, may be saved? And therefore your own correction, and
this very place of the Doctor so corrected, returns upon yourself, and proves
that he spoke not as upon a supposition of a confession, but upon a confession,
concession, and positive assertion, and that you should have understood it so,
though it had been as He and you cite it (though of themselves they be not
damnable.) And who is ignorant, That the word (though) joynd with a verb of the
present tense implies a thing existent in truth; and if you will express only a
supposition, you must use an other Tense, and say, though your errors were not
damnable in themselves, yet etc:, or though your errors were supposed not to be
damnable etc: and your declaring (Though they be so) by (suppose, or put the
case they be so) is against the common sense, of all that understand English.
Neither will any Catholic say; though the Church err in points not
fundamental, yet you may not separate from her: but, though the Church did
err in points not fundamental, or suppose the Church did err in such points,
yet you may not separate from her. For between the Present, and
Preter-imperfect-tense, in our case there is as great difference, as between a
positive Affirmation, and a mere suppositio^, which as Phiosophers speak nihil
ponit in esse. The like I say of your other example, though we do err in
believing Christ really present yet that whosoever did speak in that manner,
could not be excused from denying the reast presence; and the same is evident
in your other examples, which therefore still return against yourself. If one
should say; though Christian Religion be superstitious and falls, yet many
Christian men lead a moral life, would any Christian take such a speech, in
any other sense, than that Christian Religion is false? Or if one should say;
Though Mr. Chilling worth deny the blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the
Son of God, original sin, etc: yet he pretends to be a Protestant, and to
defend their cause against Ch: Ma:; who would not understand that speech, as an
assertion, and not only as a Supposition, that you deny the Trinity? Or if one
should say to an other; though thou be a knave, and my enemy, yet I will pray
for the; were this a mere supposition? And here it may seem some what
strange, that the Doctor both in the first and second Edition of his Book,
should have (though of themselves they be not damnable) and you also in your
first Edition (for I have not the second, and therefore cannot examine it)
should have the same (yea and ground your discourse against Ch: Ma: upon it)
and yet in the correction of the Errata, both of you have (in the issue:)
neither can I see any reason hereof, except, because, that strength of truth,
and coherence with some Principles of Protestants, made you say, that our
errors are not damnable of themselves, and yet upon further advise, finding
this confession also, disadvantagious, you though best to turn (of themselves)
into (in the issue:) But the truth is, that in these matters of damnable,
fundamental, not fundamental errors; of the infallibility of the universal
Church; of the nature of Heresy, and the like; Protestants have no settled
grounds, but must say, and unsay, as they are pressed by different, or contrary
occasions, (as has been noted else where) and therefore it imports little, what
you cite out of Potter against us, seeing that can only show, that he is forced
to contradict himself, as also other Protestants are. Now how full the Doctor,
yourself, and other chiefest Protestants are in favor of us, and our
salvation, has been proved heretofore, at large, out of their own words.

22. Your (N. 30.31.32.33.34.) do only demonstrate, that you undertake to
declare the Doctine of Protestants (about good works, repentance, justification
etc:) without any commission from them; which you could not but see, and
therefore are forced (N. 33.) to say: If this doctrine (about justification by
Faith only) be otherwise expounded then I have here expounded, I will not
under take the justificatio^ of it. And therefore you had no reason to affirm,
that C: Ma: spoke without sense in saying that according to the rigid
Calvinists, Faith is either so strong, that once had, it can never be lost; or
so more then weak, and so much nothing, that it can never be gotten. For
seeing, that Faith which Calvinists hold to be justifying, can never be lost, if
once it be gotten, this Disjunctiue must needs be evidently true, either it
cannot be gotten, or if it be gotten, it cannot be lost. That which you
untimely talk here, of the subject wherein God has placed the Authority of
defining matters of Faith, has been answered already, as much as this Work can
permit, without descending to particular Controversies against the purpose, and
Intention of Cha: Ma: who yet (Part: 2. Chap: 5. N. 15.16.21.) answers all the
particular Authorities of Catholics, which Potter objects about this matter,
and shows his ill dealing in alleging them. But this is not the first time,
that you dissemble, what Cha: Ma: delivers in his second Part, though yet you
make use of it, when it may serve your turn, which certainly is no just kind
of proceeding. But to return to your defense of other chief Protestants;
whereas Cha: Ma: said here (N. 12. out of his Chap: 3. N. 19.) that
justification by Faith alone is by some Protestants avouched to be the soul of
the Church, the principal Origin of salvation; of all other points of Doctrine
the chiefest and weightiest; yet you say here (N. 32.) For my part. I do
hartly wish, that by public Authority it were so ordered that no man should
ever preach or print this Dostrine that Faith alone justifies, unless he joins
these together with it, that universal obedience is necessary to salvation (if
the Commandments cannot be kept, how can the observation of them, or universal
obedience, be taught as necessary to salvation?) And besides that those
Chapters of S. Paul which entreat of justification by Faith, without the works
of the Law (mark here how impertinently Protestants apply the Authority of S.
Paul against justification by works, seeing Mr. Chillingworth declares that he
speaks of the works of the law) were never read in the Church, but when the 13.
Chap. of the 1. Epist. to the Corinth: concerning the absolute necessity of
Charity should be to prevent misprision, read together with them. So diffide^t
are you of this soul of the Church, this principal origin of salvation of
Protestants! Your last lines are so obscure, and confused, that after
consideration by myself, and with others, I can draw from them nothing, but
nonsense; and for such I must leave them. Concerning our greater safety I have
touched in the Preface to the Reader, some Points, taken from your express
doctrine, and words which here I judge needles to repeete.

23. For Conclusion of my Book, I disposed myself to give a particular Answer
to the conclusion of yours (wherein you are not ashamed to say, that you are
well assured that Chapter Ma. had in his hands your Book twelue-months before it
was published, which upon my certain knowledge is must untrue.) But upon
careful examination thereof, I find that labor to be needless. You would
make the Reader believe that Ch: Ma: omitted to answer some material points of
Dr. Potters Book; and, that you had observed all the Directions which were
given in that little Treatise, entitled: A Direction be to observed by N. N. If
he mean to proceed in answering the Book entitled Mercy and Truth, or
Charity Maintained by Catholics etc: But both these affirmations, are fully
and truly answered, by an absolute denial, that either of them is true, as any
man will judge, who shall consider the Answer of Cha: Ma: to Dr. Potter, and
this my answer to you. And as for the latter in particular; How can it be
denied, that you proceed in a destructive way (which in that Direction you were
warned to avoid) who deny Christian Religion to be infallibly true? And how
can Christian Faith be supernatural, if it be only a probable Conclusion,
evidently deduced from evident probable Premises? And I wonder with what face
you can say here And lastly: that thief archer of all hearts knows, that you
had no other end in writing this Book, but to confirm the truth of the divine
and infallible Religion of our dearest lord and Savior Christ Jesus, seeing you
have endeavored nothing more, through your whole Book, than to prove that
Christian Religion is not infallible? That you have contradicted Dr. Potter,
has been showed heretofore in several occasions: And the same, (I mean, that
you have not observed those Directions) might be demonstrated, in every
particular, if it were worth the labor; but for that Direction, which was,
(not to contradict yourself) you have trangressed it so notoriously, as I
should never have believed, if my own experience had not convinced me thereof;
which made it, as hard to give an answer to your Book, as it is to make on
coat fitting the moon in all its changes (which is your own similitude)
which I confess was one of the greatest difficultyes in answering; to find you
so various, obscure, contrary, and contradicting yourself (accordingly as you
were pressed with different Arguments) that I could not but often say with much
Truth.

Quis teneat vultus mutantem Protea Nodus?

FINIS.
INDEX.
In which Pr. signifies the Preface: I. the Introduction: C. the Chapter: N.
the Number: P. the Page.

A.
Absolution validly given by an Heretic, if he be a true Priest, and has
intention to administer the Sacrament. C. 4. N. 42. P. 377. 578.

Absurdityes in Catholic Faith falsely supposed by Chil: c. 1. n. 76. p. 90.
but proved by his own tenets to be truly in his Faith. N. 77. and p. 97. n. 84
and seq:

Accidents dispose to effects more noble then themselves: yea held by many to
be real ^uses of substances. c 1. n 79. 80. p 94. 95.

Acts proper to necessary Powers must needs be produced, if the means to work
be complete: but free Powers may with complete means suspend the act. c 11.
n 65. p 694. and seq. The essence of acts ignorantly discoursed of by Chil: c
12. n 21. p 721. and seq.

Advertisements for whomsoever shall undertake to answer this Book not to
follow Chil: his stepps in commencing new controversies. Pr. n. 5. 6. p. 2. 3.

If the Apostles could err in any point of Religion they can be certainly
believed in none c. 2. n. 95. p. 200. c. 12. n. 47. p. 742. and alibi. Out
Saviors Words to them as private persons, and as representing the Church mus^
be differently understood. c. 12. n. 80. p. 767. and seq: Their authority must
be believed before we can believe what they spoke or wrote c. 3. n. 22. p. 294.
n. 31. p. 300. and passim. Apostles for the essential are and always must be
in the Church c. 12. n. 99. p. 782. All the Apostles commanded to preach, none
to write. c. 2. n. 25. p. 131. The Apostles being the salt of the earth
atheistically explicated by Chil: c. 12. n. 91. p. 777.

Apprehension taken for the first operation of the understanding agrees not to
Faith, which is an assent, or judgment: taken in general, as knowledge often
is, it agrees to Faith as knowledge does. c. 15. n. 4. p. 886, 887.

How arguments of credibility may be elevated to produce certainty, and in what
sense they are the word and voice of God. c. 1. n. 79.80. p. 95.96.

Attrition without absolution insufficient for salvation. What conditions it
must have to obtain absolution, c. 8. n. 3. p. 597. and seq.

S. Austin rejected and alleged by Chil: for the self same point: and showed
to be adversary to Chil: c. 2. n. 193. p. 265. and seq. His advise for the
understanding of Scripture. n. 201. p. 269. his sense of Tradition and of the
practice of the Church n. 209. p. 274. c. 11. n. 26. p. 667. and seq. Why he
is an eyesoare to the Socinians. c. 7. n. 123. p. 544. He is defended against
Chil: his forgery. c. 12. n. 57. p. 749. and seq: c. 2. n. 207. p. 273. and
alibi saepius.

B.
Baptism acknowledged by Protestants ne^essary, and as required by Scripture
and Antiquity, c. 4. n. 60. p. 389. and seq: It is to be given to children by
the authority and practice of the Church ibidem. p. 389. and seq: The
difference and absurdityes amongst Protestants concerning Baptism. c. 2. n.
39. p. 146. and seq: It is validly administered by Jew or Gentill, if they
intend to do what Christians do. c. 4. n. 42. p. 377. 378. Baptism in tho
Doctrine of diverse Protestants pardons all sins past, present, and to come c.
2. n. 85. p. 187.

Beatificall vision, if Faith be natural, and only probable, is also natural,
and may be a mere fiction. c. 1. n. 113. p. 118. 119.

To believe only that Jesus is the son of God is acknowledged even by
heretics insufficient for salvation. c. 2. n. 169. p. 245. 246. Who believes
not one point sufficiently propounded can have no supernatural Faith about any
other c. 11. n. 13. p. 658. c. 15. n. 43. p. 922. and seq: This proved by
Heretics and Catholics, ibidem. Not to believe any revealed truth
sufficiently propounded is a mortal sin n. 49. p. 927. I believe not the
speaker, when I only asse^t for the reason he gives, or for some other
authority cited by him c. 12. n. 49. p. 744. and alibi.

Bellarmine viudicated from Chil: his cavills c. 2. n. 98. p. 201. and seq:

What Bishop or Episcopus signifyes cannot evidently be known by Scripture
alone. c. 2. n. 11. p. 126. That Bishops in the Church are not juris divini is
an heresy c. 5. n. 4. p. 429. and seq: Doctor Andrewe^ his contradictio^ in
this point ibidem. Bishops have no succession in England ibidem

Books published to forwarne Chil: to clear himself of his vnchristia^
doctrines, which he would never be induced to do pr. n. 4. p. 2.

C
Caiphas in Chillingworthes doctrine spoke truth when he wickedly said that our
Savior blasphemed c. 11. n. 38. p. 675.

Canon of Scripture cleared from Chill: his malicious imputation c. 11. n. 22.
(it should be 21.) p. 663. and seq:

The Canonicalness of the books of Scripture is to be taken from the
declaration of the Church c. 11. n. 6. 7 p. 653. (falsely put 953) and passim
alibi: every Canonical writer wrote all that was necessary for the end
inspired him by the holy Ghost, not all that was necessary for salvation, or
for the Church to believe c. 2. n. 136 p. 223 and seq: ac alibi.

Causabons miserable end c. 6 n. 9 p. 444

Catholics by the confession of Protestants may be saved c. 2 n. 83 p. 185 c.
7 n. 145 p. 563 and seq: ac alibi.

No visible Church but the Catholic Roman out of which Luther departed c. 7
n. ^1 p. 522

Reasons why the Catholic Church is not to be forsaken, n. 124 p. 545. 546 If
she could err, her errors were rather to be professed, then her Communion
forsaken n. 132 p. 551 and deinceps.

Catholics judge charitably that Protestancy unrepented destroys salvation:
and Piotesta^ts, if they hold their Religion true, should judge the like of
Catholics c. 9 n. 2 p 624 Catholics guided by the infallibility of the
Church cannot be prejudiced by translations of Scripture, nor fear
corruptions. c. 11 n. 16 p. 659

The Catholic Church an easy way to find Christ's doctrine. c. 3 n. 89 p. 348
She is infallible, or all Christianity a fiction. c. 4 n. 1 p. 352

Not Catholics, but Luthera^s exposed to idolatry c. 4 n. 65 p. 393.
Catholics freed by Protestants from that imputation Ib. p 395

Catholics prove their Faith without a circle. Toto c. 5 but Sectaryes
cannot. Ibid: And particularly n. 14 15 p. 437 438 Also c. 2 n. 55 p. 158

Catholics falsely charged by Chill: that they hold Faith to have no degrees
of perfection. c. 1 n. 43 44 p. 68 69

Catholic writers falsely cited by Potter as holding that Catholics and
Protestants do not differ in the essence of Religion. c. 7 n. 148 p. 567

Catholics, though falsely suposed to err, their error must be invincible c.
7 n. 158 p. 578 and seq:

Causes by divine power may be elevated to produce effects nobler then
themselves, as also by concauses c. 1 n. 79 p. 94

Certainty in the vnder^^anding forces not the will c. 1 n. 62 p. 80 and seq:

Ceremonies, vide Rites.

Charity Maintained alleged and impugned by Chil: either with falsification,
or ommitting his arguments, or with some other fraud, is often showed through
this whole Book. His Book is not answered by Chil: but new heresies
broached, and old fetched from Hell to overthrow all Christianity. Pr: n. 3 p.
1. 2

Charity highly broaken by Protestants in judginge Catholics uncharitable c.
9 n. 7 p. 628 It is ordered either according to the Phisic all perfection of
the things loved or the moral obligation of loving, imposed by God c. 16 n. 6
p. 935 936

Chillingworths Tenets and consequences.

He holds that Faith is only a probable rational assent I. n. 16 p. 11 and
seq: and c. 10 n. 13 p. 640 641 That to hold Christian faith infallible is
presumptuous, uncharitable, erroneous doctrine, of dangerous and pernicious
consequence c. 1 n. 1 p. 37 And that it excludes all progress in charity n. 71
p. 86 That Faith may stand with Heresy I. n. 51 p. 35 He rejects grace with
Pelagius, and free will with Calvin c. 1 n. 65 p. 82 and seq: Many hideous
Tenets of his concerning Faith discovered in all the first Chap: He holds that
Charity may stand with deadly sin I. n. ^1 p. 35 c 15 n. 45 p. 925 That the
contents of Scripture are not more certain then humane Histories I. n. 18 p.
13 14 That we are not bound to believe Scripture to be of Divine authority c. 2
n. 58 p. 159 and alibi. And it is evident in his grounds that God is no more to
be believed then man, if God give no better reason for what he says, then man
does c. 1 n. 101 p. 108 That it is no matter if controversies concerning truths
only profitable be continued and increased c. 2 n. 78 p. 182 That Scripture is
no material object of Taith, and that there is no obligation to believe it c.
3 n. 4 p. 281 and in other numb: before and after. Also c. 13 n. 39 p 818 That
the Apostles after the cominge of the Holy Ghost erred in a point clearly
revealed c. 7 n. 24 p. 472. 473 c. 3 n. 28 p. 298 He brings all Christian Faith
to a humane invention c. 3 n. 83 p. 344 and seq: He puts such a contrition for
salvation, which a sinner cannot possbly have at the hour of death c. 4 n. 50
p. 384 That all Scripture is not divinely inspired c. 12 n. 38 p. 735 That our
Saviors promise that the Holy Ghost should remain with the Apostles was not
for their successo^s but only for the term of their lives: nor that but
conditionally c. 12 n. 83 p. 771 He revives VViclifs Heresy n. 85 p. 774. That
contradictoryes may both be true, with many horrid impietyes which strike at
the root of Christian Religion c. 13 n. 20 p. 802 and seq: His insolent
treaty of S. Tho: of Aqui: c. 15 n. 45 46 47 p. 925 926 His little considence
in his own Religion c. 16 n. 11 p. 939 His absurdity in contending that it is
all one to say: Though such a thing be so: and though it were so. n. 21 p. 945
946 His impudent calling God to witness of his sincerity in writing his
Book, to confirm the infallible Religion of our Savior, which he strives in
his whole Book to prove fallible c. 16 n. 23 p. 948

Many other of his pernicious Tenets appear in this whole Book, and his
errors against Scripture, toto c. 3. His contradictions are so frequently
showed, that no particular place needs be cited. The like is of his continual
begging the question or asking impertinently, in place of proof why may not
such athing be; with out any proof.

Church.

To follow the Church, is to follow Scripture, which recommends the Church unto
us c. 2 n. 201 p. 270 To her recourse must be had not to be deceaved in
interpreting Scripture Ibid: Her universal practice is to be held an
Apostolical Tradition Ibid: Many things are to be done for her authority
without express Scripture n. 209 p. 274 She ceases not to be a Church for
sins of Manners, but of Faith c. 7 n. 85 p. 517 and seq:

Unity necessary to be members of one Church, must be in all points
sufficiently proposed, sundamentall, or not fundamental n. 74 p. 505 and seq:
And in external Communion Ibid: which in divine service is unlawful with
those of a different Faith n. 82 p. 511 It is all one to leave the Church and
to Ieaue her external Communion: nor can any separate from her and remain a
part of her n. 73 p. 503 and sequen: He not only separates from the Church, who
separates from her external Communion, but alsomorally from himself n. 110 p.
532 and seq: No Church, no Schism n. 93.94 p. 523

If the Church be infallible in fundamentalls, she must also be so in
vnfundamentalls. n. 126 p. 547 548 He can be no member of the Church who
disbeleeves any point sufficiently proposed as revealed by God c. 10 n. 5 p.
635 Nor can the Church remain a Church with any such error n. 6 p. 635 and
seq: She being infallible it is damnable to oppose her n. 9 p. 637 638 She
determines controversies as emergent occasions require: and is for them eudued
with infallibility n. 11 p. 639 640 Her fallibility for one age discredits her
for all c. 11 n. 26 p. 667

The true Church easy to be found, by her notes in every age n. 31 p. 670 and
seq: Many disparityes between the Church and the Synagogue n. 38 p. 674 The
Church having approved Scripture for Canonical proves out of it particular
truths concerning her self n. 67 p. 697 In what sense she is an infallible
keeper of Scripture c. 3 n. 52 p. 320 and seq: She never questioned, or
rejected any thing of Scripture which the had once defined for Canonical n. 54
p. 322 The true Church wanted not evident notes and proofs before Scripture
was c. 4 n. 24 p. 365 and toto c. 5 She is via ordinaria the means for matter
of Religion c. 4 n. 67 p. 396 and seq: The Church was before Scripture Ibid:
and passim alibi. She was never divested of infallibility c. 4 n. 72 p. 399 and
sequen: She cannot perish nor be invisible, nor deceaved in points belonging to
Salvation. She is the ordinary means to teach, and therefore to be sought n.
79. p. 403 and sequen: Infallibility granted her, for all points belonging to
Religion; but nor for curiosityes n. 95 p. 418 and sequen: She used
disputations and discourse for her definitions n. 99 p. 424 42^ She essentially
requires unity in Faith and in in the external worship of God. Divivision from
her in Faith is heresy; in external communion is Schism c. 7 n. 2. 3 p. 458
459 460 If she be not infallible but falls into error all must shun her
communion n. 22 p. 471 472 She is endued by Christ with all requisits for the
whole mystical body, for every degree, for every particular person c. 2 n. 2
p. 122 and seq: She is recommended by him for the interpretation of Scripture,
and who refuses it, resists him, n. 28 p. 124 She must have infallible means
to declare with certainty, things though only profitable, n. 73 p. 176 and seq:
It would be damnable in her to neglect truths only profitable, n. 77 p. 181 If
she should out of negligence mistake or be ignorant, her error would be
damnable, c. 14 n. 17 p. 724 and seq: She is extensiue of equal infallibility
with the Apostles, but not intensiue. i.e. in the manner, number; 35 p. 731 and
seq: If her authority be c^^taine for Scripture, it must be the like for
whatsoevet she proposes, n. 52 p. 746 She being once prooved to be infallible,
may give irrefragable testimony of her own infallibility, n. 107 p. 787

How the Church is always visible, c. 14 n. 4 p. 848. 849 What right and
power she had, and for many ages had been peaceable possessed of at Luthers
cominge, n. 48 p. 880.

The commandments may be kept with the grace of God, but not without it, J. n.
26. p. 20. 2.

No communion in Divine service can be lawful with those of a different Faith,
c. 7 n. 82 p. 511 Who leaves to communicate in what all agree, leaves the
communion of all. And in what all, otherwise divided, do agree must be true,
n. 118 p. 538. 539. Communion of Protestants is composed of contradictory
members, and consistent with all sorts of Heretics, n. 67 p. 501 and sequen:

In what sense a Community can oblige it self, c. 11. n. 47 p. 680

Private Confession averred by Protestants to be necessary, and that otherwise
Christ had given the power of the eyes in vain, c. 2 n. 17 p. 128 It is a
Divine precept, c. 16 n. 17 p. 943

Consequences, probably only deduced out of points of Faith are not points of
Faith, c 10 n. 21 p. 646

Contradictoryes not understood to be such, may be be believed, c. 1. n. 54. p.
76. Concerning centradictoryes, Chill: Doctrine is discussed, disproved, and
the bad consequences of it showed, c. 13. n. 20. p. 802. and sequentibus.

The Council of Trent sufficient to convince the truth of Catholic Religion,
J. n. 10. p. 7. General counsels if not infallible cannot end controversies
of Faith, c. 2. n. 45. p. 483. The Doctrine of Lawd concerning General
Counsels and sequels drawn from it in favor of Catholics, c. 7. n 40. p.
481. and sequen: Also from the Doctrine of Chil: and Potter concerning the
same, n. 160. P. 579, and sequen: and n 48 p. 48^.

Of the Creed through all the c. 13. It is averred by Chil. to be received by
universal tradition, independent of Scripture, and that the principles of
Faith may be known by it independent also of Scripture, and yet teaches that
only Scripture is received by universal Tradition, and that it is necessary to
know the principles of Faith. c. 13. n. 5. p. 791. Proved that it cannot be a
sufficient Rule of Faith, seeinge Potter graunts it needs a new declaration for
emergent heresies, n. 6. p. 792.

D
Doctrine may be taught effectually, and yet resistibly, c. 12. n. 79. p. 766.

The Donatists had a Bishop at Rome to seem true Catholics by communicating
with the Bishop of Rome, c. 15, n. 11. p. 894 Their hatted to Catholics
imitated by Protestants, n. 12. p. 895. They were justly said to be confind to
Africa, having no where else any considerable number, n. 36. (it should have
been 35.) p. 916. (which is put, 816.) They had no Divine Faith, c. 16. n. 19.
p. 943. 944. Their heresy of rebaptization, Ibid:

A doubt properly taken destroys probability, c. 1. n. 53. p. 75. 76.
Reflected upon and embraced it is not vnvoluntary, n. 54. p. 76. Apprchended
but rejected is no voluntary doubt, Ibid:

E
Errors in themselves not damnable cannot be damnable to be held, c. 14. n.
44. p. 877. 878.

The Evangelists did not themselves put the Titles of their Gospells, c. 2. n.
158. p. 235. Evangelists always in the Church, c. 12. n. 100. p. 783.

Eucharist altered in matter and form by heretics, c. 2. n. 40. p. 147. 148.
Never held necessary by the Church to be given to Infants, n. 207. p. 273. If
in the Eucharist Christ be present, Protestants expose themselves more to
sin, then Catholics, if he be not present, c. 4. n. 65. p. 394. 395.

Evidence of things contained in Scripture, diversely understood, e. 2. n. 6. p.
123. and seq: In what sense Catholics may affirm that all things necessary
for the church are evidently contained in Scripture, n. 9. p. 125. Evidence to
Sectaryes is what they fancye, c. 7. n. 56. p. 491.

Of Evils the lesser may, and must be to llerated for avoiding greater, c. 12.
n. 57. p. 751. And n. 59. p. 753. Uide Perplexity.

Excommunicaton does not first separate a Schismatique from the church, but
presupposes his own voluntary*separation; which also may remain a though the
excommunication were taken of, c. 7. n. 64. p. 499. and deinceps. Chilling:
must separate from the church of England which exeommunicates whosoever
affirms that the 39. Articles, contain superst^^^o^ or error, n. 66. p. 501.
The difference betwixt excommunication and Schism n. 64. p. 499. and n, 104.
p. 529.

F
Faith of Christians proved infallible, c. 1. per totum. Without a circle, c.
5. per tonum. Infallible Faith strictly commanded as the first stepp to all
merit, c. 1. n. 95. p. 103 The infallibility of it is taught by the light of
reason, and instinct of nature, as that there is a God, n. 2. 3. 4. p. 38. 39.
Acknowledged by Protestants, n. 5. p. 39. and sequent: It is proved by
Scripture, by Fathers; by reason, n. 9. p. 30. and sequen: It is required for
acts of supernatural virtues, and consequently it self is supernatural, n.
98. p. 105. It takes its essence from Divine Revelation c. 12. n. 20 (it is put
14) p. 720. It is of its essence indivisible, but divisible in intension c. 1
n. 44 p. 68 and seq: It is an intellectual virtue repugnant to error n. 28 p.
59 It determines to truth, and corrects reason, c. 1. n. 29 p. 60 Compared with
natural science an act of Faith is most certain: but the acts of Faith
compared amongst themselves may exceed one another in graduall perfection c. 1
n. 44 p. 68 and seq: Supernatural Faith may be without Charity, but cannot
overcome the world without it n. 61 p. 80 Nor is it an efficient cause of the
habit of Charity n. 67 p. 83 84 The certainty of it takes not away free will n.
62 p. 81 and seq: The infallibility of Faith is only requisite for the general
grounds^ for the particular application or matter of fact a moral certainty
suffices: c. 4 n. 11 p. 357 and seq: and n. 30 p. 376 377 what is necessary for
the e^ercising a true act of Faith n. 13 p. 359

Heretics opposite doctrines about Faith c. 1 n. 1 p. 38 Potter and Chil:
directly opposite about the infallibility of it n. 6 p. 40 The Faith of Chil:
and the sequels of it in his own grounds paraleld with the Catholic, and
convinced to be most prejudicial to salvation n 75 p. 88 89 90

Fallibility of Christian Faith is scandalous to Jews, Turks and Painims n. 1
p. 37 It brings to Athisme Ib: and n. 100 p. 107 casts into agonyes and
perplexityes. Those that hold it dare not declare themselves Ib: Chil: would
seem to admit of infallibility n. 39 p. 66 67 and supernaturality n. 93 p.
103 His examples to show that fallible Faith is sufficient for salvation, are
examined and convinced to prove the contrary A nu: 102 p. 109 ad finem capit.
Fallible Faith is always ready to destroy it self n. 105 p. 111 112 It was
cause of Chil: so often changes; Ibid: He acknowledges that in such a Faith
nothing ca^ be settled n. 22 p. 54 55 He obliges to vnsetlednes n. 25 p. 57 and
professed himself was so n. 24 p. 56 This kind of Faith brings liberty of life
n. 26 p. 58 destroys Christian belief in all points n. 8 p. 41 (fall^y put
45) is a certain way to perdition n. 106 p. 113 and seq: and with its
fallibility infallibly damnes n. 31 p. 63

Faith of Sectaryes runns in a circle c. 5 n. 14.15 p. 437 438

Faith of Miracles mistaken by Chill: for saving Faith c. 1 n. 48 p. 72 and n.
96 p. 104 105

Free Will accorded with grace I. n. 5 p. 3 n. 8 p. 5 n. 9 p. 6 n. 13 p. 8

Concerning Fundamentalls, and not fundamentalls, toto c. 6 Fundamental and
not fundame^tall po^nts are distinguished by their material objects c. 7 n.
170 p. 585 etc. what is understood by them c. 6 n. 1 p. 440

Fundamentalls must be known by Protestants in particular n. 18 p. 449 450 Yet
have they no means for it Ibid: The Creed can be no Catalogue of them n. 12 p.
446 Chil: holds a particular Catalogue of fundamenmentalls unnecessary and
impossible; and contradicts himself much in it n. 6 p. 442 and seq:
Contradictions of Protestants concerning fundamentalls c. 6 n. 2. 3 p. 441

To know fundame^talls, only Catholics have certain means c. 6 n. 29 (it is
put 59) p. 456. 457 This means is the Church, which manifests them as
necessity requires, and this serves for an exact Catalogue of them n. 18 p. 449
450

G
How we desire to God his own perfections c. 16 n. 9 p. 936 937

Goths converted from Gentilisme by Catholics, perverted by Arians c. 11 n.
77 p. 669

Actual Grace necessary for all actions of piety I. n. 12 p. 7 and seq: To
believe, n. 16 p. 10 and seq: To hope, n. 22 p. 17 and seq: For Charity, n. 23
24 p. 18 For keeping the commandments, and overcoming temptations n. 25 p. 19
and seq: For Repentance, n. 27.28 p. 26 For Perseverance, n. 29 p. 22 and seq:

Habitual grace necessary to keep the commandments n. 34 p. 24 and seq: It is
a participation of the whole divine nature n. 40 p. 27 The Elogiums of it out
of H. Fathers n. 41 p. 27 28 Proved to be supernatural and inherent in us n.
42 p. 28 and seq: It is inconsistent with mortal sin n. 45 46 p. 32

How the Grecians have often submitted to the Roman Church, and agree with her
against Protestants c. 11 n. 78 p. 704 and seq:

Only a living guide and infallible ca^ keep me^ from straying in Faith. The
necessity of such a Guide proved through this whole Book.

H
Three sorts of Habits c. 8. n. 11 p. 605 etc. The difference betwixt infused
and acquired Habits J. n. 4. p. 3 What dependence the real entityes of
natural Habits have one of another, or of natural acts, or of supernatuall
acts or habits c. 8 n. 12 p. 607 etc Supernatural Habits are nor produced by
acts as natural are, but infused by God, not to facilitate, but to enable to
produce acts, and are properly rather Powers then Habits n. 13 14 p. 609 610
They are not discernable sensibly Ibid: and J. n. 50 p. 35 Nor acquired or
destroyed as are the natural, real habits, which are only properly habits, by
little and little, but all at once c. 8 n. 15 p. 611 what it is that is
reversed in vicious or moral habits by repentance n. 11 p. 605 etc. Habitual
sin may remain without the Physical habits of vice, and these without
habitual sin Ibid: If real habits of vice be habitual sin, the real
habits of natural virtues must be sanctity though acquired by force of nature,
which is Pelagianisme n. 15 p. 611 The efficient cause of the Habit of Faith is
not actual grace J. n. 21 p. 16

Heresy is a more grievous sin then a mere external false profession c. 7
n. 134 p. 555 Acknowledged for heresy by Protestants to say that the Church
Militant may possibly be dryven out of the world n. 143 p. 563 It is a mark of
heresy to separate from the Church, and proved such by places of Fathers c. 15
n. 16 p. 897 and seq:

Of two disagreeing in a point sufficiently proposed to both as revealed, one
is an hererique c. 12 n. 8. 9 p. 713 714 Heretics old and new by strange
glosses of Scripture destroy all the chief points of Christianity c. 2 n. 31 p.
137 and seq: They are batten of spiritual Children n. 73 p. 77 The reason of
this, and why they work no Miracles c. 15 n. 41 p. 921

The Hierarchy of Protestant, Bishops and Priests overthrown by Chill: c. 4 n.
31 p. 369 and seq:

S. Hierome cleared about the Cannon of Scripture c. 11 n. 21 p. 664 and seq:

I
Jews and Sectaryes remaining such may by Chil: repentance be saved c. 10 n. 3
p 633

Mere Ignorance and positive error distinguished: and Chill: gross mistakes
in this point c. 12 n. 10 p. 714 and seq:

The use and worship of Images allowed by Protestants c. 7 n. 122 p. 543

Indulgences in Catholic Doctrine consistent with the fear of Purgatory and
Hell c. 2 n. 84 85 p. 186 187 By them is not pardoned the guilt of sin, much
less sins to come Ibid:

Who is in himself Infallible has the ground of an infallible guide, and may
exercise it if accidental impediments be removed c. 4 n. 88 p. 414 415

Intention required by Protestants for administering Sacraments c. 4 n. 32 p.
372 It is sufficient if it be to do what the Church intends n. 33 p. 372 373
Other things essentially required may more easily chance to be wanting in the
administration of Sacraments then intention n. 31 p. 371

S. Irenaeus notoriously falsified by Chill^ c. 2 n. 161 p. 237 and seq: His
true sense concerning the unwritten word c. 11 n. 50 p. 683 and seq: His
argument for the infallibility of the Church of Rome made good against Chill:
c. 15 n. 27 p. 906 and seq:

Of the necessity of a living infallible judge c. 2 per totum, and c. 4 ac
alibi saepe

Justice is a supernatural quality infused, against Pelagius; in herent in us
against Calvin I. n. 39 p. 27 Proved to be so n. 42 p. 28 and seq: It is
inconsistent with deadly sin n. 45 p. 32 and seq:

S. Justine defended against Chill: by the testimonies of leatned Protestants
c. 15 n. 31 p. 911 etc.

K
Knowledge is differently taken, but in general any act of the understanding,
though obscure, as Faith, may be called knowledge c. 15 n. 3 p. 884 and seq:

L
Doctor Lawds discourse about General Counsels c. 7 n. 40 p. 481 and seq: His
testimony, and of other chief Protestants cited by him, that Roman Catholics
have what is necessary for salvation n. 151 p. 572

Liberius Pope never subscribed to herefie, and what he subscribed in matter of
fact against S. Athanasius he revoaked as soon as he was at liberty c. 15 n.
24 p. 903

Luthers Tenet; that to hold an obligation of keeping the commandments is to
deny Christ and abolim Faith J. n. 25 p. 19 That laws and good works are more
to be shunned then sins, Jbid: His desperate remorse for leaving the church,
c. 7. n. 14. p. 468. and c. 14. n. 50. p. 882. His division from the whose
church proved out of Protestants, c. 7. n. 116. p. 537. His shamless
falsification of Rom: 3.28. and Chill: conscienceless endeavor to make it
good, c. 11. n. 16. p. 6^9

M
Maximinianus Patriarche of Constantinople his testimony for the Principality
of the Roman Church, c. 15. n. 33. p. 914. 915.

Merit by good works excludes not grace c. 15. n 17. p. 800.

Milenaryes Doctrine never decreed nor delivered by the church, c. 9. n. 5. p.
626. and c. 15. n 31. p. 911. etc. Chill: imposture upon S. Justine Martyr
concerning it, confuted by testimonies of Protestants, Ibi.

Miracles perpetually wrought by the church do not only confirm some
particular point, but all her Doctrine; and to say the contrary is injurious ^s
God, and makes the Doctrine of the Apostles, and of all the church unfit to
convert people, c. 5. n. 7. p. 433. 434. Showed by Scripture to be proofs of
true Faith, n. 9. p. 435. To deny the^ is to oppose our Savior and his
Apostles, and to undermine all Christianity, n. 8. p. 434. Wrought before
Protestants were dreamt of in confirmation of particular points in which they
disagree from Catholics, Ibid: Yet they are not necessary for every point of
christian doctrine, c. 3. n. 33. p. 301. Acknowledged by Luther to have been in
the church through all ages, for these 1500. years. c 5. n. 4. p. 429. By them
have been converted Jews and Gentles, yet cannot move Protestants, c. 3. n.
76. p. 338. Chill. holds that true Miracles may be wrought to delude men, n 76.
p. 337 and c. 2 n. 186 p. 261.

N
Nature to conserve itself embraces by instinct great natural difficultyes,
as less evils then its own destruction, c. 1 n. 114. p. 119. To affirm that
it is as easy to obey the Gospel as to perform, what the common instinct of
nature commands, is injurious to our Saviors merits, Ibid. As natu^^^ instinct
for its natural conservatio^ is cer^^^^^ and invariable, so must the light of
Faith be for supernatural conservation, Ibid.

Diverse understandings of things Necessary to salvation, c. 2. n. 1. p. 122.
and seq.

Notes of credibility authorize the writers before their writings, c. 5. n. 1.
p. 426. and seq. and n. 5. p. 431. 432. They authorize the church independently
of Scripture and fall primarily upon her, not upon Scripture, Jbid. What
church they authorize is to be infallibly believed in all points, n. 6. p. 433.
God of his goodness could not permit them be found as they are in the
catholic Roman church, if her Faith could be false, n. 7. p. 433. and n. 10.
11. 12. p. 436. 437. These notes cannot be pretended by Protestant^ and other
Sectaryes, n. 4. p. 429. 430.

O
Objects are not obsure, evident, certain^, probable etc. in themselves, but
only so denominated extrinsecally by the acts to which those affections are
proper. c. 15. n. 6. p. 888. 889.

Observations to a^swear many of Chil. objections about the creed, c. 13. n. 8
p. 793. 794.

Aprobable Opinion may be safely followed in things necessary for salvation,
only necessitate Praecepti, but not in such as are necessitane Medij, c. 16. n.
1. p. 933. and n. 16. p. 941.

P
In case of perplexity what is to be done, c. 7. n. 132. p. 551 and seq. and c.
12. n 57. p. 751. and n 59. p 753.

A speculatiue Persuasion differs much from a practical, c. 14. n. 46. p. 879.

S. Peter and the Apostles vindicated from the error imputed to them by Chill.
c. 3. n. 34. 35. p. 303. 304.

S Peter's Primacie over all the Apostles, c. 14. n. 35 p. 871. and seq. He was
not present when the Apostles contended who was the greater, n. 36. p. 873. His
name Peter is a title of great honor, n. 39. p. 874. his power over all the
church descended to his successors, n. 41. p 875. and seq.

Points necessary and principal rightly declared, c. 2. n. 128 p. 218. 219.
the most points of catholic Religion held by some Protestants, or other, n.
91. 92. p. 193 194. 195. and alibi. Those by which catholics are made most
odious to the vulgar held by chiefest Protestant Doctors, n. 92. p. 195.

The Pope held infallible by Potter if he has but the assistance which the
high Priest of the Jews had, c. 11. n. 36. p. 673. This saying of Potter
falsely and foolishly interpred by Chill: n. 39. 40. p. 675. many disparities
betwixt the Church and the Synagogue, n. 38. p. 674. and seq:

The Primacie of the Church of Rome is de Jure Divino, c. 14. n. 31. p. 868. It
is acknowledged by Protestants to be according to order, wisely appointed, and
necessary to be retained; yea that no common government can be hoped for
without it, c. 7. n. 13. p. 467. (falsely put 167.) and n. 60. p. 496.

Profession of an error, if it it be merely exexternall is a less sin then
internal Heresy, n. 133. (falsely put 123.) p. 554.

By Prophesye is not only understood the fortellinge of things, but also the
interpretation of Scripture; and in both senses is found in the Church, c. 12.
n. 81. p. 769. 770. which has always had such Prophets, n. 100. p. 783

An indefinite Proposition in matters of Faith is equivalent to an universal,
c. 12. n. 57. p. 749.

Protestants were not first forced by excomunication to separate from the
Church, but their precede^t obstinat separation forced the Church to
excommunicate them, c. 7 n. 62. p. 497. and seq: For this separation they could
have no grownd, n. 169. p. 584. the learned of them taxing of igno^ance and
absurdity those that deny salvation to Roman Catholics, n. 151. p. 573. Nor
can they have any evidence against Catholic Doctrine, n. 52. p. 490. and seq:
Whose objections were answered long before Protestants appeared in the world,
n. 59. p. 495. Their arguments to prove that by Scripture alone the Articles of
Faith are to be known, fully answered, c. 2. n. 57. p. 159. and seq: and
alibi. Learned Protestants confess that the Fathers agree with us against
them, c. 2. n. 90. p. 192.

They make their own reason not Scripture, as they pretend, the Rule of Faith
and judge of controversies, c. 11. n. 61. p. 692. Whence they must needs have a
Chimericall Church patched up of as many members repugnant in Faith as are
their fancies concerning all sorts of Articles, c. 13. n. 35. p. 815. and seq:
Hence Grotius one of the learnedest of them despaired of their union except
under the Pope. c. 7. n. 13. p. 467. For once divided from the Roman Church
they must make endless divisions amongst themselves, n. 15. p. 468. and seq:
And they take more liberty to disagree in matters of Faith then Catholics in
Philosophical questions, c. 13. n. 41. p. 819. 820. Because having left the
true Church their only Guide is their fancy: Ib: their Church being not so much
as a foundation is for a house. n. 43 p. 820. and seq: This causes them to
destroy all Churches, and say that none can be free from damnable errors
against Divine Revelation, and must needs make every man an Independent, and be
daily changing his Tenets, c. 7. n. 154. p. 574. and seq: For Protestants Faith
has no infallible general grounds as that of Catholics has into which it
is resolved, c. 4. n 20. p. 364. Hence their many contradictions and
disagreeings amongst themselves, of which diverse I note in particular
occasions. By their own fault they have brought upon themselves an obligation
to search all Scripture, and ca^ free themselves from it only by submitting to
the Roman Church, c. 2. n 62. p. 165. to which they prudently can only adhere,
c. 4. n. 21. p. 364. 365.

By their Doctrine of all sins past, present, and to come, pardoned in
Baptism, and of their certain predestinating Faith, they take away all fear
of sinning, c. 2. n. 84. p 186. and seq: Showed by diverse considerations, that
they can give no relief to an af^icted Soul, but only chalk out a way to
desperation, c. 13. n. 43. p. 823. and seq: If they use the means they have to
find true Faith, and yet disagree, the means must ueeds be insufficient; if
they do not use them, they cannot be sure that they are in the truth, c. 15.
n. 40. p. 920, 921.

Prudence necessary for true Faith, c. 1. n. 88. p. 100. and 101. What, and
why, c. 15. n. 7. p. 889. It requires not ability to give reasons, Jb: and c.
1. n. 89. p 102 What we seem prude^tly to believe, if indeed it be not so,
although we cannot discover our imprudence, is not believed with an act of
Divine Faith, yet may facilitate for it, Jb: not all pruent acts are
supernatural, but all supernatural are prudent, n. 92. p. 102 (the 2. for it
is put twice.)

Q
Quartadecimans heresy, c. 9. n. 5. p. 626.

R
Reason not established by infallible Faith, is continually subject to changes,
c. 1. n. 105. 106. p. 112. etc. Unable to wade through maine difficultyes in
Scripture, or to convince it self of the misteryes of our Faith, which are so
much above it, c. 3. n. 75 76. p. 337, 338. It requires an infallible living
Guide, Ib: Its duty concerning Faith, c. 11. n 32. p. 671. and seq: It is
quite destroyed by Chill: c. 1 3. n. 21. p. 803. 804.

Religion is convinced by the instinct of nature to be a worship of God
certainly true, c. 1. n. 100. p. 107.

Of Repentance, toto c 8. None true without grace, I. n. 27.28. p. 21. 22. True
repentance absolutely necessary for salvation, c. 8. n. 3. p. 598. It instantly
obtaines pardon. n. 16. p. 612. and seq: And perfect repentance destroys in
the habits acquired by finfull acts the moral denomiration of sinful, but not
the Physical or real being of it, n. 11 p. 605.606. With which real being,
both true repentance and grace may, and do commonly stand. n. 12 p 607. and
seq:

Diverse opinions of heretics concerning repentance, n. 2 p. 597. Chill:
general repentance contradicts his own grounds, n. 5 p. 601. Drives to
disperation. Ib: and n. 6 p. 602. It cannot stand with the Tenets of
Protestants that only Faith justifyes, and that the commandments cannot be
kept, Ib: n. 7. It implies that no sinner can be converted nor baptized in his
blood by martyrdom n. 8 It is showed to be impossible by the nature of the
habits which he requires to be rooted out, and is always full of perplexity,
n. 9. 10. p. 603 604 605.

Reproduandion or factum facere implies not evident contradiction; but factum
infectum facere, does, c. 11 n. 12 p. 657.

Resolution of Catholic Faith without a circle, toto c. 5. But Protestants
and their pretended Brethren runn in a circle, Ib: and particularly n. 13 14
15 p. 437 438.

Rites or ceremonies of themselves indifferent, may be without sin observed,
but if they be held as necessary the observance may be deadly, c. 14 n. 2 p.
847. That it be certainly known that they are useful and not hurtful the
infallible declaration of the church is required, c. 11 n. 46 p. 678. 679.

The Roman Church assisted above all other by the holy Ghost not to err, c. 7
n. 58 p. 492. 493. By her is understood not only that of the Diocese of Rome,
but all that agree with her, in which sense she is called the Catholic or
universal Church, n. 84 p. 515. and seq: In this sense she was the only
visible on earth when Luther apostared, who therefore was properly a
Schismatique. Ib: She is acknowledged by Protestants to have been pure for the
first 500 years, n. 18. p 492. 493. Impossible she should immediately after
that ty me fall into the corruptions pretended by the^, and none take notice of
it, Ib: and p 494 they also confess that she wa^ts nothing for salvation, n.
147. 148. p. 564. and seq: ac alibi. Proved to any judicious man that we are
secure for salvation, n. 158 p. 578. and seq:

S
Sacraments destroyed by Heretics both for matter and form, c. 2 n. 40. p.
147. 148.

Salvation depends not of chance, c. 4, n. 45. 46. p. 378. 379. It requires
obedience to the true Church, c. 16 n. 12 p 939. And preparation of mind to
believe all revealed points sufficiently proposed c. 12. n. 16 p. 717. and seq:
The salvation of our own soul is to be preferred before the good of the whole
world, c. 16. n. 11 p. 937. 938.

Of Schism, all the 7. c. Schism as distinct from heresy supposes agreement
in Faith, n. 75 p. 506. 507. It is a sin against Charity which unites the
members of the Church, n. 98 p. 526. 527. It is destructive of the whole
Church, n. 133. (falsely put 123.) p. 554. It differs much from excommunication,
n. 64. p. 499. and n. ^04 p. 529. 530. and is not caused by it, but is before
it, n 62 p. 407 and seq: No cause of Schism can be given by the Church, n. 5
p. 460. 461. and n. 23 p. 472. 473. (falsely put 472) and passim, Pretense of
reformation cannot excuse it, n. 11 p. 465. To say that they from whom it
separates are not cut off from hope of salvation, does not excuse, but rather
makes the Schism more greavous, n. 10 p. 463. 464. Potters co^tradiction^
affirming that the Roma^cehurch has all that's necessary for salvation, and yet
that her external communion may be left without Schism. n. 8 p. 463. By his
own Tenets they are proved Schismatiques who separate from the communion of
the Church of Rome, n. 7 p. 462 and seq: Schism unlawfully begunn cannot be
lawfully continued by others, n. 96 p. 524. 525. Schism may accidentally be
more prejudicial then Heresy, n. 134 p. 555. It is ill defined by Chil: n. 19
p. 470 and n. 23 p. 472. He falsely calls it a separation of some part of the
Church, n. 173 p. 589 and seq:

Of Chill: errors against Scripture toto c. 3. In his grounds it is of less
assurance then profane authors, n. 44 p. 313. It is a material object of our
Faith (n. 2. p. 279 and se:) even independently of its contents, n. 20 p. 292.
293 and seq: with his contradictions. Prorestants must believe it before they
can believe the contents, n. 21 p. 293. If they were not obliged to believe it,
they should not be obliged to believe the contents, n. 4 p. 281. 282.

Scripture affirmed by some Protestants to to be known by it self to be the
word of God; denied by others. c. 2. n. 88. p. 190. 191. It is hard to be
understood, n. 27 p. 135 and n. 71 p. 174. where it is showed by 2. Pet.
3.15.16. The reason why it is so, touched. n 71 p. 174. and declared in
sequentibus. Protestants would make men believe, that it is clear, yet do
they assign many rules necessary for the understanding of it, which few can
possibly observe, n. 43 p 151. Nor are they sufficient, as is demonstrated by
the unanswerable arguments of Dr. Hierome Taylour, n 44 p. 152 and seq: and
appears by the irreconciliable disagreements amongst themselves. n 91 P. 193
and seq: By their thinking that the ancient Fathers erred in holding Doctrine
contrary to theirs, by the agreeing of many chief Protestants with us against
their Brethren, n 90. 91. p 192. 193. According to Chill: every man though
unlearned must know every Text of Scripture, yet he supposes that even the
learned are not obliged to it n 26 p. 134. Out of his Tenets Scripture proved
insufficient to be any Rule of Faith, n 94 p 198 199 and c. 3 per totum.

In what sense it may be affirmed by Catholics that Scripture contains
evidently all things necessary, c. 2 n 7. 8. 9. p. 124. 125. Scripture needs
not be plain to every privates man's capacity, the Church being always extant
to interpret and direct, c. 4 n. 9 p. 355. 356. The necessity of this
Interpreter proved in the chief misteryes of Christianity, c. 2. n. 30. 31 p.
136 and seq:

The difference betwixt Scripture and the definitions of the Church, c. 4 n. 99
P. 424.

Scripture cannot be compared for matter of Faith to the corporal eye; but the
understanding together with some supernatural comprincipium of the act, may, c
11 n. 10 11 p 654 and seq:

Sin and indeliberation are inconsistent, c 1 n 71 p 85. 86. It can neither
be committed without knowledge, nor repented whilst it is actually committing,
c 8 n 20 p 617 and seq: One sin not repented draws on others 1. n 35. 36 p
24. 25. God gives fewer helps to people in mortal sin then in the stare of
grace, n 38 p 25. 26. A mortal sin is worse then the torments of hell, n 47
p 34 Sin in a thing not necessary necessitate medij is avoided by following a
probable opinion, c. 16 n 16 p 941

About the edition of Sixtus 5. his Bible, c. 3 n 56 p 325

The Socinianisme of Chill: the way to Atheism, c 1 n 100 p 107

D. Stapleron vindicated from Potters falsification, c 4 n 95 p 418 and seq:
His Doctrine about the Churches infallibility, Jb: and n 99 p 424

T
Temptations may be overcome by the grace of God, but not without it, I. n. 26
p. 20. 21. Texts of Scripture answered.

Many concerning the chief points of Christianity alleged by Chill: to prove
the evide^ce of Scripture in things necessary, showed even by the errors of
old and new Heretics, to require a living infallible judge, c 2 n 32 p 140
and seq:

Deuteronomy: 4.2. Ye shall not add to the word etc. answered c 2 n 61 p 161. 162

Act: 17.11. of the Berea^s deaily searching the Scriptures, answered n 64 p
168

Apoc: 24 v. 18. 19. If any man shall ad to these things etc. n. 65 p 169. 170
and seq:

S. John 5.39. search the Scriptures, n 62 p 162 and seq:

S. John 20.31. These are written that ye may believe, n. 63 p. 166. and seq:
and n. 168 p. 245 and seq:

S. Luke 1. v. 1. 2. 3. Act: 1. v. 1. 2. explicated, n. 99 p. 203 and seq: S.
Paul Rom: 14 5. profanely applied by Chill: c. 11 n. 31 p. 670.

S. Paul 1. Tim: 3.15. about the infallibility of the universal Church c. 12
n. 89 p. 777.

S. Paul, 2. Tim: 3. v. 14. 15. 16. 17. All Scripture inspired of God is
profitable to teach etc: c. 2 n. 66 p. 170 and seq: and n. 175 176 p. 250 and
seq:

How a Tipe or figure differs from a pattern c. 11 n. 48 p. 682

The Title of Chill: Book, Protestant Religion a safe way to salvation, proved
not to agree to it, and showed what he should have putt. Pr. n. 12 p 6 and seq:

Against Tradition no dispute, c ^ n 209 p 274 and seq: Tradition without
Scripture, but not Scripture wthout Tradition sufficient to begett Faith, c 11
n 49 p 682. Tradition proved out of holy Fathers, c 2 n 165 p 240 and seq: and
n 202 p 270 and seq: Whitaker very angry with S. Chrysostom about Tradition, n
202 p 271 Tradition wholly destroyed by Chill: although he would seem to rely
upon it c 3 n 80 p 341 and seq: and n 85. 86 p 345 and seq: Yet it is confessed
by many Heteriques to be the only ground for many chief points of Christianity.
c 2 n 42 p 149 150. 151. Traditions unwritten amongst the Jews, n 61 p 161

Transubstantiation is of less difficulty to natural reason then the mystery
of the B. Trinity, c 11 n 12 p 657

V
Pope Uictor was in the right, c. 15. n 32. (falsely put 33.) p. 913.

The Understanding cannot dissenr from a truth represented with evidence: yet
the will may do contrary to it, c. 11. n. 65. 66. p. 694. and seq:

Universal taken by Potter in a Logical sense and ignorantly opposed to
Catholic, c. 7. n. 148. p. 565.

W
The difference betwixt a Way evidently known by sense from that which is
known by Scripture, c. 4. n. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. p. 415. and seq:

The Will is not always able to follow the understanding without grace. c. 1
n. 113 p. 118

Good works acknowledged by Chill: to be required in Scripture for salvation,
c. 2 n. 36. 37 p. 144. 145

Holy VVriters do no less deliver Counsels then commands by Divine
inspiration, c. 3. n. 38. p. 306. and seq:

Why no one VVriting taken alone in its own nature, is sufficient to keep
from error, c. 2. n. 178. 179. 180. p. 252. 253. 254. and n. 181 p. 256 and
seq: this showed a fortiori of writings containing divine and sublime
misteryes', n. 184 p. 258 and seq: If writings by a singular miracle be always
and by all vneerstood a like, it is not for the nature of the writings, but by
the Power of God supernaturally supplying what should be done by a living
infallible interpreter or judge, n. 186. 187. p. 261. 262. 263.

X
Xenaias a fugitive slave, unbaptized, faining Christianity crept into a
Bishoprique, and was the first that made wart against Images, c. 7. n. 122. p.
543.

ERRATA.
Many of which are left out, but such as is hoped will not trouble the
understanding Reader. No wonder if a stranger to our language did often
mistake, Where either Page or is put false, it is corrected in the Index, when
any such place is cited.

Page Line Error Correction pr 8 3 this for for this pr 9 15 prove to so to do
all. prove to do so to all. 13 19 oath other 39 21 Christians Christian 61 24
degree degrees 106 14 not be not to be 130 7 collectinei collectiue 173 5 of
sared said of 187 38 every a very 192 11 on no 220 31 o of 222 11 of if 225 2
appear your appear by your. 226 9 cae case. 240 7 and necessity and hold the
necessity. 267 10 Augustrana. Augustana 267 34 A rist. Christ 277 4 y by 282 1
het the 314 12 rihes no higher rises no higher 315 21 the exercising to a^ act
to the exercising a^ act 365 34 Goind God in 377 38 wared waved 394 7 that that
then that 438 34 avoid avoid not 458 9 ormall formal 468 0 About
Fundamental [points c. 6. Protestants guilty of [schisme c. 7 459 18 just
brande justly branded 531 1 you yet 533 20 member number 539 13 Greg. Millius
in Ar[gume^ta Georg. Millius in Au[gustana. 556 24 officiously officious ly 557
38 his submit to to submit his 588 7 errors error 590 25 deest i.e. 590 28
deest 3. 602 38 afterfor their after sorrow 616 22 to object whereof his the
object hereof is 617 21 preceede proceed sins 638 12 it he 619 4 pertinent
penitent 627 15 is it 632 2 Chillingwort: I. Chillingworth) 639 4 proosd
proposed 641 11 but wavering and fear[full assent a but a wavering and
fe(arfull asse^t 707 19 could would 716 17 hold cold 748 4 of Sections or or
Sections of 766 1 if he will not, so if he will, not so 781 16 it is was it was
801 24 Seurrall several 807 38 urge it against urge against 811 35 as thewed
as I showed 823 8 it will he will 823 9 he cannot it cannot 826 23 to soon so
soon 828 38 is not it all one it not, is all one 838 19 prencipuum praecipium
856 1.2 recs records 868 16 if Peter of Peter 876 1 aim time 877 3-4 may
another may not another 885 32 not dele 890 1 an any 920 36 and men and yet 935
5 It if If it


