A SCOURGE To the REBELLIOUS OR A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of St.
Antholin, in the City of London June the 28th. 1685. By Steph. Willoughby, M. A.

For behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea,
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn
them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor
branch.

Mal. 4.1. Pax bello potior. Entered according to ORDER.



LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, for the Author, MDCLXXXV

The Epistle DEDICATORY, To the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas Lrod
Bishop of Lincoln.
My Lord,
I need not tell the World of your unwearied Diligence, to find out a Blessed
Name in the Book of Life, that herald's your Praises above the Wings of Common
Fame, and sets you in a degree of Glory there; neither need I trouble you with
any other Apology for what I have done than even the for lorne Estate of our
divided Isle; the hideous Noise of a Rebellion blackens the Land with dread,
least Apostasy, or the Invasion of a revived Julian should disturb the Peace
of our Sion; and though Ruin threaten my welfair in this distractted Age; yet I
declare, I had rather follow Presbytery to the Gibbet, than be a Mourner at the
Funeral Solemnity of Episcopacie to the Grave. I confess indeed my Oblation
might have deserved better Entertainment, if it had the management of a riper
Wit: But I Will beg of all men to believe that my Genius feeds upon Pulse and
Water, though I fear they will allow me no more favor than usually men do to
those whom the Press makes Common; I Will submit to Providence; and your
Lordship's Candor, in the perusal of my little Book; and if it should render
you any Satisfaction next to God's Glory, I have gained my only end, and that
as the Almighty has given an Ability to suchan examplary piece of Piety as
you; so that you may be a continual Succor to all the languishing Members of
an Holy Jesus, until the day shall come, when sorrow shall be no more; but
Triumph and Bliss the Period of your Mortal Race, is the Hearty Prayer of your

Lordship's Most Faithful Servant, and Obedient Son, S. Willoughby.

A SCOURGE to the REBELLIOUS Or a SERMON Preached At the Parish Church of St.
Antholin. on the 28th. of June, 1685.
Jonah. 2.4. Yet Forty Days and Ninevch shall be overthrown.


NOthing can favor a Christian in his journey to an immortal Canaan while he
courts the false pleasures of a fading World the best whereof decay's in the
bud, and dy's when they begin to be: The example is every Sinner, but
particularly the man in Paradise, that was baited with an Apple, and hooked in,
to a state of dying: Hence the Apostle may seem to have alluded in his Epistle
to the Romans what fruit had you in those things; whereof you are now ashamed?
for the end of those things is Death. Such were the Ninevites in my Text, to
whom a learned Orator, Jonah, the holy Prophet, came, pressing Repentance with
the threats of Ruin; Nineveh shall be overthrown, Jonah 3.5.7.
so the people believed God, and proclaimed an universal Fast; The Marble
Palace, and the Clay Cottage were hung in Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes, lest
Nineveh should be overthrown.

In which Words observe, 1. A Prediction, with a Limitation. Yet Forty Days.
2. A Denunciation of Desolation. Nineveh shall be overthrown.


Whence these following Doctrines do arise, 1. That Sin brings Judgment. 2.
That God usually warns all the Rebels of Heaven, of their approaching danger;
as a method he takes to avert a final Destruction beyond the Grave.


3ly. That it is not the outward bravery of an Earthly Sphere, not the Pomp and
Pageantry of a sading World, that can guard us, if we sin, from the frowns of
Heaven; or shield us from the Fatal Blow; For Nineveh, though outwardly adorned
with galantry, yet being inwardly blackened with deformity; therefore exactis
quadraginta diebus, Nineveh delebitur.

Yet forty Days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

1st. That Sin brings Judgment.

Sin, and Sorrow, Irreligion, and the Scourge do meet in Families or Villages,
Towns or Provinces, Cities or Commonwealths: When the first beats the Drum for
Battle the last begins the March, and leaves the sinner in a Field of Blood:
For as by one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; so Death passed
upon all men, Romans 5.4.
for that all have sinned. This is the Harbinger of Ruin, and the Forerunner
of a dreadful Day, when the unregenerate shall pass the Gates of Death, and
tremble at the Bar of Judgment; when all the miscarriages that ever have been
committed in the darkest Corners of the Land, shall appear before God and
Angels; Joel 3.16.
Then the Lord shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, the
Heavens and the Earth shall shake: Sin is the Fountain, Guilt and Punishment
are the streams; that is the Cause, this is the Effect. Now all we that aim at
the Haven of an Eternal Rest must pass by that Scylla, and this Charybdis; for
says Solomon: Prv. 6.7.
Can a man take Fire in his bosom and his Clothes not be burned? which implys
that there is no sin without sorrow; nay, destruction certainly follows, unless
Heavens assisting Grace reform our Lives, and conform our Obedience, to all the
Precepts of an holy Jesus. But desolation follows Sin from the one part of the
Earth unto the other; it ransacks the corners and cranies of a sinful Land:
Psalm. 107.34.
The Almighty turns Revers into a Wilderness, and Water-spring into a dry
Ground; a fruitful Land into Barrennes for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein Josh. 7.29.
'Twas Achan's sin that brought him under the burden of a painful End. God
will pour out his Wrath upon the Families that call not upon his Name: Hos.
9.11.
This made Ephraim's Glory flee away from the Birth-Womb and Conception: This
made Sodom and Gomorah fuel for Divine Vengeance in a dreadful burning. Here
Sin enters the Gates and Ruin throws down the Bull-warks and Strongholds;
demolishes the lofty Fabrics, and makes the poor sinners Captives to the
scorching Flames Amos 1.2.
This make the Habitation of the Shepherds mourn, and the top of Carmel wither.

Hence it plainly appears that Sin brings Judgment: but for the further
Prosecution of my present undertaking, let us consider,

1st. After what manner does the Almighty afflict mankind for sin? I Answer.

By how many methods we take to sin, by so many ways God is able to send his
Judgments sometimes by Water; thus an universal Deluge once came upon an
unrepenting World, and brought perdition in a raging Wave. Thus he overwhelmed
Pharaoh, and all his Host in the Red Sea: He has Hailstones to kill the
Amorites and 2 Kings 19. ver. 35.
Angels, one of which will, destroy in one Night, an hundred, fourscore and
five thousand of the Host of the Assyrians: the Earth is the Lord's, and all
that therein is; he has made it open its jaws to swallow up Corah, and his
fellow Rebels. Lice, Frogs, and Flies, were the Egyptian Plagues; sometimes
by a Civil War, with seuds and disorder in their own dwellings: thus, when the
Amonites had destroyed the Inhabitants of Mount Seir, they at last preyed upon
one another, whilst the Earth was bedewed with Blood, overspread with the
relicts of the spoil. The Almighty's Wisdom is not limited to one particular
way: His ways are in the Seas, his paths are in the deep Waters; Job. 28.7.8.
The Vultur's Eye has not seen them, the Lyon's Whelp has not trodden them,
nor the fierce Lion passed by them; therefore we may add a Note of Admiration
with the Apostle. Romans 11.33
O, the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out?

2ly. The time when?

When the Sins of the people are ripe: therefore God told Ibraham, that his
Seed should not, possess the Amorites land till the fourth Generation; and the
Reason was given this, (viz.) Because the Iniquity of the Amorites was not yet
full.

3ly. What are the sins that are most destructive to a Nation, or a Kingdom?
such indeed, are all the Breaches of the Moral Law; and therefore for breach of
Covenant God threat'ned Judah: Jer. 22.6, 7, 8.
Thus says the Lord unto the King's House of Judah; thou art Gilead unto me,
and the Head of Lebanon, yet surely I will make thee a Wilderness and Cities
that are not inhabited; I will prepare destroyers against thee; many Nations
shall pass by this City, and shall say, wherefore has the Lord done this, to
this City? then shall they answer, because they have forsaken the Covenant of
the Lord.

But, I shall confine my self to those that are most common, and therefore seem
to be most destructive here.

First, Swearing.

An Oath (says the Apostle) is the end of all strife, and there is scarce found
any other means, or, to be sure, none to be compared with this, to determine
Controversies between man and man; without which, no Justice can appear to be;
no humane Society can stand: It Is twofold, either Assertory or Promisory: Now
it is a grievous sin, when men shall make use of the Name of God, either lightly
or wantonly, or to bind an Argument, and make it a Period to a Lie. Or,

2ly. If a man has no regard to his absolute Necessity, but wilfully acts
contrary to his Promise made, ratified and confirmed by Oath; then he renders
abuses to the sacred Name of Majesty, vilifies and contemns Omnipotency, and
incurrs a severe penalty annexed to, and denounced against the breach of this
moral Precept: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. And
when men are once arrived to such a height of wickedness as to make this
customary (breathing out Blasphemy, as if they intend to infect the Air and
poison succeeding Generations with their Plagues and Damning) what remains, but
that their own Curses shall return again? for God will not hold them guiltless
that take his Name in vain; and the Zech. 5.3.4.
flying Roll shall torment them, etc. This makes a Nation sorrow; for Jer. 23.10
because of swearing, the Land mourns.

2. Pride.

The lofty Mountains shall be barren, when the lower Valleys are laden and
enriched with store. God resists the Proud and gives grace to the Humble;
Shame is her handmaid that waits upon her to the gates of ruin; Prove. 11.7.
For when Pride comes, then comes Shame: and it is observed that the Mistress
always walks before her Attendants, Prove. 16.18.
So Pride goes before Destruction; and an haughty Spirit before a fall.

3ly. Carnal Security.

When men are lulled asleep on the lap of a carnal Security, and lie snoaring
upon a bed of Time, without any regard to a furture Being; like the indulgeing
Sardanupalus; Ede, bibe lude post mortem mula volupi
Epicure, that took his repasts in the present Tense, and would have no joys
beyond the Grave: It Is then high time, if ever, to shake off such a drousiness,
lest it prove a Lethargy unto an eternal slumber Such was the cuse of the man
in the Gospel, Who though he had heaped up treasures for many years, yet the
same Night in which he though he had been most secure in the entry munt of his
worldly Goods, his foul was nequired of him; then what were those things which
he had possessed.

And such are the common vanities of our depraved Age, that allure poor Souls
with their flattering smiles, and counterfeit delights, until they tickle them
to Death. Therefore says our Savior, love not the World, nor the things of the
World; for whosoever loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him. Why
then do we slumber out our days in this transitory Sphere, among such vanities,
that only lead down to the Chambers of Death? Knowing that even it must be
dissolved as well as we; the Sun shall be dark'ned, and the Moon shall withdraw
her shining; the Stars shall fall, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken;
all most become a prepared Mass and a funeral Pile for the Breath of the Lords
displeasure, that like a stream of Brimstone does kindle Tophet: Though Sentence
against an Evil Work is not executed speedily why should the Hearts of the Sons
of men, be fally set to do wickedly? But let such Security have an early
Summons, Isa. 30.33.
For such shall know while they say, Jud. 81 7.
peace, peace, sudden destruction a shall come upon them, as upon a Woman in
travess and they shall not escape. But,

4ly. And lastly

Division, or breach of Uniformity is another National, overturningand
Soul-destroying sin.

One asked a Thessalian, who were most welcome to his Countrymen? He answered,
they who were most peaceable and declined War. Now that the breach of
Uniformity is a Soul-destroying and National overturning sin, will appear under
a twofold Consideration.

1. In that it is directly contrary to the welfare of the Church, and secondly
to State too.

As for the first.

Herein all will pretend to one common Faith, and yet ingross all the Heresies
of past Ages, and study inventions to find out more: All are extremely wrapped
up in their own persuasions, impatient to hear of any error that belongs to
them; zealous to enthrone their judgments, and prefer their fantasies to pass
into public Ordinances and become the established forms of Religion here: Nay,
there is scarce an Heresy but will pretend to some Antiquity to authorize its
Being.

Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33.
Thus the Millenaries fetch theirs from Papias.

August. cont. Donat. Tom. 7. lib 2. p. 396.
The Anabaptists from Agrippinus.

Epiph. Har. 62. p. 513.
The Socinians are as Old as Sabellius. And these Reprobatarians from Simon
Magus and the Manichees.

But so directly does Schism oppose the welfare of our Church, * Lam. 1.2.
That her tears hang sore upon her cheeks because of it. Hence it is that she
complains, Her friends have dealt treacherously with her and that amongst all
her Lovers she has few to comfort her; Illa te aiu portavit in utero, aiu
aluit etc. Hier Ep. 47.
she that once bore them in her own Bowels, and nourished them in her own Womb,
and even courts them now with a sweet harmony to return again; she that
delights in no Throne save that of Bliss, in no Attendants but men, Tongued
like Angels, Winged like Eagles, and hearted like Doves; now sings Lachrimae
for her lost Delinquents, her Priests sigh, and her Virgins mourn, so that we
may say with St. Hierom Quis unqua^ mortaliu^ juxta viperam securos somnos
capit, quae etsi non percutiat, certe solicitat. Epiph. 47.
who can sleep secure that bordereth so upon the Viper? who if he sting not
surely solicites and endangereth out seduction.

Now the first pretense that our Dissenters had was to seek only the liberty of
their own Consciences: but now nothing more than the Soveraignity over other
men's, in a Damnable Rebellion a Rebellion that wants an Argument to justify
its Being; do they fight for the Protestant Religion? that is kept secure from
their invasion, by the overruling providence of Heaven, and wants nothing
save only the Conformity of those that would destroy it. Is Religion grounded
on those Precepts which our blessed Jesus left behind? So are all the Articles
of our Faith; no Diminution nor Addition; and as for those few remain which
they approve not of, we only borrow from he best of men, who lived in the time
when a bishop and a Martyr were both one,

Hence it is, that they who interrupt the peace of a true Religion by
nourishing a Faction (if they own a God) might acknowledge that they disobey
his voice, when he says, follow peace and holiness; and what follows but the
total exclusion of immortal joys, without which peace no man shall see the
Lord: And how far from peace are the present Opposers of our Sion? who defile
the Press with unworthy Pens, and ravish the Pulpit with profane Tongues.

Our blessed Lord tells us of a sort of People among the Jews, called
Pharisees, who took away the Key of Knowledge, locked up the Law, and shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men; * Mat. 23.13.
that their Proselytes could as soon enter the Secreta Jehovae, the privacies
of Heaven, as the Presence Chamber of God's revealed Will: and such are (by a
Geneva Translation) the present opposers of our quiet; they lead Captive silly
Women laden with their sins, lock up the Kingdom of Heaven by their obstinacy,
and all the hopes of future joys by resisting Supremacy; Romans 13.
for whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive unto themselves Damnation. Now if this be the way that
leads unto life, the path in which the Redeemed of the Lord do walk, then
farewell Heaven and Religion too.

But Secondly.

This is a National-overturning sin, and therefore prejudicial to State too.

Our Savior faith, If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom
cannot stand. But Division is the greater sin when it strikes at the root of
that Government which is established by such laws as Justice and Modesty can
possibly requir; such as have abated the Royal dues for the interest of them
that will be at peace; and what is the issue of this Division, but Distraction
in a Common Wealth? Hence Feuds and Discords, Detestations and Revilings do
arise. The Son dishonours his Father, and the Daughter arises against her
Mother, * Mich. 8.5, 6.
Brother delivers up Brother to death, * Mat. 10.21.
and the Father the Son, and the Children arise against their Parents, and
cause them to be put to Death; * Luke 12.52.
five in one house are divided, three against two, and two against three. Hence
it is that the Rich become Poor, and they that were once of a low Degree, would
pride it in the Feathers of other Birds: Even when the spoylers come upon high
places, * Ec. 10.6, 7.
Reloycing and Lamentations do both attend the bloody Victorys in a Civil War;
and as Division is sinful, so our Conquests and Triumphs are mournful; for by
how much greater is the spoil, so much less is our Acquaintance here, and much
of that blood which we draw from others, is part of that which runs in our
own Veins: Thus the Lord does Fan us as with a Fan in the Gates of our land;
bereave us of our Children, our Widows are increased above the sand of the
Seas, and the spoyler at Noon is brought upon us, and all because we have
sinned against him.

But who are the Actors in this bloody Tragedy? Genesis 49.7.
Cursed be their Anger for it is fierce, and their Wrath for it is cruel. This
once brought sorrow to the Greeks, as Nestor said of the strife betwixt
Agamemnon and Achilles: Hom. il. lib. 1.
Plutrach calls it the Wound and Plague, and Socrates the Ax and Sword, Basil
the Rottenness and Rust, and Chrysostom the Moth and Canker of the Soul. Object.
Anger may be in some measure allowable, if it be in the behalf of God, and the
defense of Goodness: Only as Exodus 32.
Moses was wroth with Israel for their Idolatry, Numb. 16.15.
with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their Conspiracy; 1 Samuel 19.14.
As Elias against Israel, for their Apostasy; and as Jer. 6.11.
Jeremiah was against the Jews for their Impiety: But Anger amongst us is
another thing, the Coal is blown up; and the Land is in a combustion now. He
whom the Lord has sent to Crown the Earth with Peace, and the Land with
Fatness, is disturbed in his own Throne: Malignants knock at his Royal Gates.
He that strengthens the Realm, and fortifies Dominions with a standing Army, to
secure us from the Invasion of Foreign Enemies, cannot be at rest for his
homebred Rebels; but they, like ambitious Phaaeton would mount the Fiery
Chariot, drawn with Fury and Revenge, and ramble through our British Spheres,
that they who followed, might wade in Blood. But he that sheddeth Man's Blood,
by Man shall his Blood be shed.

And this shall suffice concerning the first Doctrine, viz. That Sin brings
Judgment.

I proceed to the second.

Viz. That God usually warns all the Rebels of Heaven of their approaching
danger, as a Method he takes to avert a final ruin beyond the Grave.

Now that the Almighty's Arm is not stretched out for the Punishment of Evil
Doers, without an early Summons to repent, that Iniquity may not be their ruin,
appears from the words I have hitherto insisted on, where there is first a
Prediction: Yet Forty Days.

2ly. A Desolation: Nineveh shall be overthrown.

Such is God's Patience to frail Mortality, * Pet. 3.20.
that he spared the Old World with long-suffering in the Days of Noah, * Ps.
95.10.
and provoking Israel Forty Years. Forty Years long was I grieved with this
Generation; and Rebellious Nineveh, Forty Days. But if the hearts of men be so
obdurate, that they will not turn before a Tamen, or a remarkable Warning come;
then God will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, prepared his Arrows,
Instruments of Death, against his Persecutors.

Now the Almighty is said to warn all the Rebels of Heaven, etc.

1st. By his Ministers; such was Jonah to Nineveh, and Noah to the Old World:
He gave them Commission to cry aloud, and spare not; to lift up their Voice
like a Trumpet, to tell the People their Sins. Ezekiel. 3.18, 19, 20 21.
Son of man, says the Lord, I have made thee a Watchman unto the House of
Israel; therefore hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning from me,
when I say to the Wicked, thou shall surely Dye, and thou give him not
warning to save his life, the same wicked man shall dye in his Iniquity, but
his blood will I require at thine hand. And if the obstinacy of sinners be such
that they bring not forth Fruit meet for Repentance: Then let the Ministers of
God denounce Judgment; Hos. 6.7. and Isa. 3.11.
For I have hewn them says the Lord, by the Prophets, I have slain them by the
words of my mouth: VVoe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for
thereward of his hands shall be given him.

But 2ly.

The Almighty warns a People by calling the Faithful to their long home.

At their departure, it is time that a whole Land should mourn, for a dismal
desolation is at hand: They being the Props and Pillars, Horsemen and the
Chariots of Israel, Walls and Bull-warks, both of Church and State, To stand as
Moses in the Gap, to turn away God's wrathful Indignation. Such is the
prevailing Efficacy that attends the Ministry, that Eliphaz the Temanite said
of Job, Joh. 4.4.
Thy words have upholden him that is falling, and thou have strengthened the
feeble Knees: The wicked are spared from destruction, because of the
intercession of these holy ones: I deny not, but these may be taken away in a
common Calamity. But had there been Fifty Righteous in Sodom; nay, if there had
lacked Five of the Number; if there had been but Forty Five; take Five from
that; if there had been but Forty there; nay, twice Ten more; if there had been
but Twenty there; (yet Ten more;) if there had been but Ten there; Sodom would
not have been laid waste in Ashes: Genesis 18.32.
For says God, I will not destroy it for Tens sake. So tenderly affected is the
Lord with good men, that he will hear their Prayers for the Wicked: Numb. 25.
For thus says the Lord, Phinehas the Son of Eleazer, the Son of Aaron the
Priest, has turned my wrath away from the Children of Israel (While he was
zealous for my sake among them) that I consumed not the Children of Israel in
my jealousy.

Hence it appears, that the dissolution of good men, is a prelude to our
dissolation, and a timely warning to all unrepenting Sinners.

3ly. God usually warns a People by some remarkable Judgment, visiting our
Offenses with a Rod, and our sins with Scourges, speaking unto us in this
Language, that we may speedily return from our wickedness, lest a worse
Judgment fall upon us; for our Savior says, Luke 13.5
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. The Almighty warns us.

I form the Light, says God, and create Darkness, Isa. 4, 5.7.
I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these things.

As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of the wicked, but
that they turn from their Evil ways and live; and he graciously indents with
his departing people: Turn ye, turn ye, from your Evil ways; for why will ye
dye, O House of Israel? Again, Ezekiel. 33.11.
My people, says God, are bent to Backsliding from me, but how shall I give
thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as
Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me; my
repentings are kindled together.

I should now insist upon the third Reason, which is,

Righteous art thou O Lord, and true are thy Judgments.

viz.

* That it is not the outward bravery of an Earthly Sphere, not the Pomp and
Pageantry of a fading world, that can guard us (if we sin) from the Frowns of
Heaven, or shield us from the Fatal Blow.

What, if Nineveh had the best Situation for the Salubrity of Air, and
Fertility of Ground, yet had sin remained Forty Days longer, and even Nineveh
had been destroyed; her stately Structures could not privilege her from Ruin,
nor her strongest holds from Destruction; nor could all her Embellished Arts
tempt or allure the angry Angel to withdraw his resolute Arm.

Suppose this to have been the Worlds Wonder, or the Princes amongst all
Nations under Heaven: Yet Forty Days, and sin would have levelled her with the
Dust, and laid all her Pomp and Glory in the Grave. Suppose this City had been
surrounded with the Walls of Brass, and circled round with Trenches, whose
Bottoms were lower than three times the Alps are high; yet even they could not
beat back the Heavens revenging blow, and the Reason may be given.

Job. 34.9.
is as equal at the Palace Gates of Princes, as at the Cottage Doors of the
meanest Peasants; the lofty Pine and the tall Cedar; the Bramble and the Shrub
are all one: But in every Nation, Act. 10.34.35. Colos. 3.25. 2 Cron. 19.7
he that fears him, and works Righteousness is accepted with him, and he
that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he has done, and there is no
respect of Persons.

Ninevites discern their approaching Ruin; Then they cried mightily unto God,
yea, they turned every one from his evil way; who can tell say they, but that
God may turn from his Anger, Jonah. 3.9, 10.
and we not perish. And it is said that God saw their works, and repented of the
evil that be had said he would do unto them, and did it not.

But to conclude by way of Use and Application.

Jacob said of his Son Joseph's Coat; an evil beast has devoured him: So may we
say of our Sins, for they are the Grand Devourers both of Church and State; we
had been at peace with one another, had not our sins, the troublers of our
Israel challenged the Almighty into Martial Arms, for impietas ad arma vocat,
and the dread we have of a final Ruin, openly proclaims hic fuit iniquitas; hic
hostilitas; that here has been some reigning and damning Sins; for here has
lived the Atheist, and the debauched good Fellow; the sensual and the secure
Man; the Oppressor and the Godly Hypocrite; the Unjust and Violent; the
Profane and Ignorant; a Plundering Achan, and an Oppressing Ahab; a Covetous
Nabal, and a Fratricidious Cain; a Backbiting Ziba, and a Cursing Shimei; a
Scoffing Cham, and a Profane Esau. Thus we have drank Iniquity like water, and
declined Sin, throughout all the Cases.

In the Nominative, by Profaneness. In the Genitive, by Pride. In the Dative,
by a Carnal Security. In the Accusative, by Hypocrisy. In the Vocative, by an
Insurrection. In the Ablative, by a Damnable Rebellion.
I should have left a Case for Destruction too, but that comes in the Plural
Number.

First, To all ye wretchedly Profane, Ezekiel 5.4. Ezekiel. 28.16.
and therefore says God, I will bring up a Company upon them, and will give
them to be removed, and spoiled, Heb. 12.19. Ezekiel. 23.42.47.
and the Company shall stone them with Stones, and dispatch them with their
Swords, and they shall slay their Sons and their Daughters, and burn up their
Houses with Fire.

2ly. To all ye that are proud, God will deck himself with Majesty, and array
himself with glory; he will cast abroad the Rage of his Wrath and behold every
one that is proud and abase him.

3ly. To all ye that are carnally secure. Thus the secure People of * Laish
were awakened, Jud. 18 27, 28.
when the Edge of the Danites Sword came upon them, and when they burnt the
City with Fire.

4ly To all ye Hypocrites.

* Your hopes shall perish, Job. 8.13.
and ye shall not come into the presence of the Lord. * Woe unto you
Hypocrites, Mat. 23.14.
for ye devour Widows Houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers; therefore
ye shall receive the greater Damnation

5ly. To all ye that make Insurrection.

Thus Judgment fell upon the fair Metropolis of the Dissenting Jews, Jerusalem
has been a City hurtful unto Kings; and because they have moved Sedition
within the same, therefore was this City destroyed; hide me from the gathering
together of the froward and from the Insurrection of the Wicked Doers.

6ly. and lastly, to all ye Rebels.

There is a near affinity between an Insurrection and a Rebellion; the first
being the seed, the last the harvest: for grant Schism to be sown in a
Conventicle, and you may presently reap a Rebellion in a Common Wealth. Isa.
30.1.
But woe to the Rebellious Children who take Council, but not of me, and that
cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin.

Such are the fearful aggravations of England's miscarriages, that we have
sinned against mercys, and many great deliverances; against Truth and all
Goodnss; these shadow our Gospel-land with Clouds and thick darkness, and
obscure the path that leads unto Life that few there be who find it. Hence it
was that Britain, like the Land of Egypt, even as the Garden of the Lord,
became once a second Rama, where in many Rachaels wept for their slain Infants
and would not be comforted because they were not; and it is even now just with
the Almighty that Rebels be made Instruments of our Ruin, and Voyals of
Vengeance to our mourning Isle. Changing our Cornets of Peace and Joy into
Trumpets of War and Sorrow; our Pens into Pikes, and our Maces into Swords:
They like Sampson, value not their own Destruction; therefore are come to
Engrave the History of a Rebellion with the Sword, and with such Ink, as
Draco's Laws were wrote in Blood.

Piety, and yet disgraced with Infirmities, and charged with a load of Guilt,
where is our Repentance?

When we lie under the burden of a Griping Conscience or the heavy pressure of
Gods, displeasure, when we are under any temptation, or in danger of falling
into any sin. In a word; when any Judgment, whether Spiritual or Temporal,
threatens our ruin; it is then time, that the Guilty should cry aloud with a
hearty sorrow for sin, Save Lord, or we perish; and why should we distrust, but
that the same God that has given us a Being, and protected us from our Births,
to this Moment, will also give us a sincere Repentance, beat back our Enemies,
and guide our Feet into the way of Peace? for we know he has a return for the
wandering Shulamite, and a Kiss for the home-come Prodigal.

The Psalmist once lay under the frowns of heaven, and was shrouded with a
cloudy Day, when from Adultery he fell into Blood and Wounds; he killed Vriah
the Hittite with the Sword of the Children of Ammon, tho Nathan said thou art
the Man and shall surely dye, yet, such is the Lord's Mercy, that after
Repentance comes Pardon. Says David I have sinned against the Lord; then says
the holy Prophet, the Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye: Joy then
to the repenting sinner, to him that has clipped the Wings of Faith, and dashed
in pieces the Comforts of his saving hopes, and turned Gods Glory to Dishonor:
for says the Apostle, * such were some of you, meaning the Corinthians. But ye
are washed but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, by the Spirit of our God: To this End, the Blessed Blood of the Paschal
Lamb was once spilled that our Scarlet Sins might change their deepest Dye, and
be made as white as Snow; even such as brought him from his Throne and nailed
him to the cursed Tree: by his blood he has cancelled all obligations and made
us heirs of an eternal inheritance: This is the fountain of Mercy, that flows
continually to refresh the drooping Spirits of afflicted Souls, * Where the
Spirit and the Bride says come, and he that is a thirst come, * and let
whosoever will, come and take of the Water of Life freely. From this Fountain,
the Redeemed of the Lord return, and come with singing unto Sion.

But 3ly. and lastly

Let us herein admire God's Love, that he warns us, before he smites us, Yet
Forty Days, etc. his Love, insnatching our Britain from the Jaws of Death and
staving off Destruction from our Habitations here. When Sodom burned, Lot took
Sanctuary in a little Village, and when Jerusalem was laid waste, some few
Inhabitants had a Pella too.

Sing O Heavens, and rejoice O Earth, that our Zoar is yet the house of God and
the Gate of Heaven; thither, thither, will we flee and be at rest, For God is
in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed, God shall help her,
and that right early. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice
in the strength of our Salvation, that our Land is not yet soaked with Blood,
nor our dust with the Fatness of the slain; that Monarchy triumphs yet above
Anarchy, and Shields the Throne from Cruelty and Usurpation, and our Sion from
Destruction; that Episcopacie is yet the Cherub that guards the Paradise of God
from all Invaders, landed on our Christian Shore: but least an over indulging
Care of securing our outward Peace, should seem to lesten our Christian
Charity, and tempt us to a loss of that within; let us send (as we are taught)
humble beseeches unto God, that in his own good time he would bind up the
breaches, delineate the blemishes, and raise up the lapsed Reputation of his
divided Spouse; and all for the honor, as well as merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior.

To whom with the Father, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

