THE PROJECTORS. A Comedy

By, John Wilson.

Aetatemhabet, ipse de se loquatur.

Imprimatur, Roger L'Estrange. Jan. 13. 1664.

LONDON, Printed for John Playsere, at the White Lion, in the Upper Walk of the
New Exchange; And William Crook, at the Three Bibles on Fleet-Bridge. 1665.

PROLOGUE.
IT is so hard to please, when things must be
Moldy with Age, or gilt with Novelty;
That, in effect, it is but a Cross, or Pile,
In all that is written, whether well, or ill:
Nor have we ventured on this liberty,
That we suspect your judgments -- no -- they are free;
Free, as that Reason that informed 'em first,
And, were those common cloggs of Interest
Once shaken off, would be the same again;
What shall I say? -- shall I enter at ye then?
A poor inducement! -- If ye will not do it,
Out of good Nature, let me bribe ye to it:
I -- now ye hearken -- But mistake me not;
We give no money back -- That were a plot
Upon our selves -- Yet we have as good a shift;
Ye that would learn to thrive, we'll teach ye Thrift;
And ye that would get more -- Why faith -- for you,
We have -- The Lord knows what -- new Projects too;
And you' -- I forget my self -- To run too far,
May chance to cloy ye, ere you see your fare.
The Persons
Sir Gudgeon Credulous. A Projecting Knight, Suitor to Mrs. Codsgood. Jocose. A
Courtier. Ferdinand. His Son. Suckdry. An Usu^er. All in for Projects.
Squeeze. An Exchange Broker. Gotam. A Citizen.
Driver. Jocose's Servant. Lean chops. Suckdrie's Servant. Servant.
Mrs. Godsgood. A Widow. Mrs. Gotam. Wife to Gotam. Mrs. Squeeze. Wife to
Squeeze. Nancy. Suckdry's Daughter.
The Scene LONDON.

THE Projectours.
ACT. I.
SCAENA. I.
Enter Suckdry, solus, (as coming from a Journey.) Suck. NOw send that all
things be well at home, -- But troth, I half doubt it, my mind so misgives me:
-- It could not be for nothing sure, that the Rats eat a hole in my pocket last
night, and a Crow kept scraping, and kawing at me this morning: -- uh -- my
fears are out, -- This Rogue has given me the slip, and is run away with my
cloak bag. --

Enter Lean-chops with a cloak-bag under his arm. Oh Lean-chops! -- art thou
come --

I profess thou did half fright me, -- This London is so villainous a wide
place, I was afraid I had lost thee, and must have been at the charge of crying
thee; -- Art thou come Rogue?


Lean. As you see Sir: -- But it seems, must thank this, for your care and my
welcome: -- And yet I Will undertake it might have lept safe on a Dunghill, for
any thing that is in it.


Suck. Away sirrah, -- I have often told you of your surly proud heart, --
sirrah, sirrah, he that scorns a little, shall never be master of a great deal;
-- No more I say, but stand forth, and lets see whether we have lost any thing
by the journey. --

He takes out a Roll, and reads. Lazarus Suckdry! ( -- I God wot, a poor man --
as poor as Lazarus! -- I must be contended, --) Here I am: -- Zachary
Lean-chops!


Lean. Here sir.


Suck. It Is well, -- Lets on: -- Item, one horse, -- three shoes and a half, --
two stirrups, -- one saddle, -- one bridle, -- one girth, -- one crupper, and
half a saddle-cloth.


Lean. All safe and forthcoming.


Suck. Very well, -- observe, -- one doublet with a new pair of Foreskirts, --
one pair of Breeches with a blew Codpiece Point, -- one pair of Stockings, --


Lean. Without feet Sir. --


Suck. No matter, no matter, -- It Is not seen, -- one pair of Boots, -- one
Spur, and Spur-leather, -- one pair of Gloves, -- one Basket-hilt sword, -- one
Girdle-hanger, -- one Hatt, -- one Band, -- one Coat, -- one jump, -- and one
switch. --


Lean. All in view.


Suck. Item, In the cloak-bag, -- one Sessions Suit and Cloak, -- one pair of
blew Stockings, with orange colored garters, and roses, -- Three shoes, -- one
Comb, with five teeth, -- one razor, -- half a washing ball, and a piece of a
Glass, -- let me see, is it fast? -- all safe? -- ha? --


Lean. As you left it: -- He deserves to to be damned after it, that would
venture a hanging by stealing any often:


[Aside. Suck. Come Lean-chops, come, -- This place is a little too public, --
We'll look over the rest when we come home.


Lean. Unless we chance to meet a Rag-man by the way; and then -- Rags to Rags,
and Rubbish to Rubbish. [Aside


Suck. Follow me, -- and have a care, -- Here comes a couple. --

Enter Joeose Driver. One does not know what they may do. -- Have a care, I
say, -- Have a care. --


Joc. Mr. Suckdry! -- Your servant, -- welcome to Town:


Suck. Thank you good Sir, -- uh, -- uh, -- he believes I have money in my
Cloak-bagge, -- would I were well rid of him. [Aside walking.


Jo. How do you? -- you do not look well, -- let me give you a glass of wine;
-- 'twill comfort your heart.


Suck. Wine! -- uh -- uh -- I dare not, -- my Doctor tells me it is naught for
me. -- I was right: -- He thinks I have got money, and would make me drunk, to
steal my Cloak-bag, -- uh -- uh.


[Aside. Jo. Come, -- it shall cost you nothing.


Suck. Another time, -- uh, -- uh, -- This Rogue Lean-chops has smelt (...) my
gold at home, and told him where it lies buried. -- uh, -- uh. -- [Aside.


Jo. What ailes you Sir.


Suck. Uh, -- uh, -- sick, -- A sit of the Chollick. -- I must home.


Jo. But perhas I have somewhat to say to you, may deserve your stay: -- You
have a daughter?


Suck. A poor Girl God wot, -- What of her?


Jo. Call her not poor -- she that is virtuous, and handsome, is rich enough.


Suck. Ah Sir, -- But every man is not of your opinion -- Alas poor child! she
wants a Portion: -- There Is something else required, besides virtue, and
handsomness. -- This, may bring admirers, that, sweet-hearts, but it is money,
money that gets the husband.


Jo. Let not that trouble you: -- I have a Son, and though I say it, a handsome
fellow; One, that throw him where you will, shall live in the world.


Suck. But I can give nothing with my daughter, -- poor wench, She Is a right
Philosopher; She carries all she has about her: -- Good Sir do not abuse our
Poverty, -- uh, -- uh. --


Jo. Nor do I: -- Here Is my hand, I Am in earnest: -- What say you?


Suck. I have told you already: -- she has no money:


Jo. And I have answered it: -- Shall we bring 'em together?


Suck. For that, as you please, -- you know her Portion, -- uh, -- uh: -- I am
sick, and cannot stay to talk it longer now: -- Farewell Sir, -- This is a Trap
to catch my gold, -- But he may be mistaken, -- Old Rats are not so easily
taken, as young Cats think, -- uh, -- uh: [Aside] [Exeunt Suck-Lean.

Jocose, Farewell: -- my Son and I Will see you within a few days.


Dri. But (with your leave Sir) I hope you are not in earnest.


Jo. No? -- But I am: -- And if I can but compass it, shall think it the best
days work I ever yet did in my life: -- This fellow (as poor as he seems) tell
him but of a good Mortgage shall lend you ten thousand pound upon it, at a days
warning; and yet would have the world believe him to be a poor man: And such,
in troth he is, since he dares not enjoy what he has: for (O my Conscience)
were he now sick in earnest, he would rather die, to save charges, then be at
the expense of a Glister.


Dri. A man would wonder at it, -- Yet such I Have heard of.


Jo. But beyond him, I think few: -- I have had this design in my head a long
time, and made him many a Mortgage, and kept touch with him at his day, merely
to beget an opinion in him that I had great dealings in the world; when yet I
have found enough to do, to keep my head above water.


Dri. Do not despair Sir: -- But think how I may be serviceable to you, and see
what I Will do, -- A Mountebanck's Zany, shall not be at more command, nor half
so nimble, as I Will be industrious.


Jo. I do believe thee, and perhaps may have occasion to try you sooner then
you think of ^t:


Dri. Never too soon; nor nothing too much to serve so good and bountiful a
Master:


Jo. Well then, to be serious, -- I have a great while gone the plain
downright honest way, but I find, that begets nothing, but laughter; And
therefore, I Am even resolved to follow the rest of the world, That is to say,
feed the humors of fools, and if they will set up windmils in their heads,
contribute my assistance to cut out the sails; -- When saw you Sir Gudgeon
Credulous?


Dri. Very lately; -- But so big with contemplation, there was no coming near
him, -- It Is true, he cried, How does your Master? -- Remember me to him, --
Gave me the State Nod, -- and Exit.


Jo. It Is such a Political Hocus! such a Frippery of Shreds, and parings, that
I can liken him to nothing better, then a Tailors Cushion; no two pieces of the
same color: -- To day this, to morrow, that, the next, a third thing, But what
that is, no man knows; it is past all men's understanding, and his own too; for
(to speak truth) he never had more, then a man might well trusse up in an
Egge-shell, and room to spare: in a word, I may say of him (as it is said of
Nature, concerning Monsters) He was produced, not intended.


Dri. Nor have you mistook your Character -- I have known him A Mathematician,
a Pol, a Star-gazer, a Quack, a Chaldean, a Schoolman, a Philosopher, an Ass,
a broken Grammarian, and most abominable Poet, and yet fick of all, but the
Ass: and now at last (if I mistake him not) a most confident, ignorant
Projectour.


Jo. And that, he may thank me for, -- I saw he was past the remedy of a
Mortar, and if I should have pretended to a miracle, to have reduced him,
'twould have been hardly believed; And therefore I even let him alone, and as I
saw occasion, work't him to my own purpose: -- me thinks you might be useful to
me in it.


Dri. And will: -- I am your servant, command it;


Jo. Here dwells hard by, one Mistress Gods-good, a rich Widow, to whom I have
made some long pretenses; nor had they been (as I am told) altogether
succesless, if this Cockscombs Estate had not hung in my light: -- she believes
him what he is, an Ass, but yet a golden Ass, and cry's, that is enough to
cover his other faults: Now could I flea him of that fine skin, I need not
trouble my self to make him ridiculous, and consequently, do mine own work.


Dri. And truly he is in a fair way to it. -- And now give me leave to tell you,
you could have thought of nothing wherein I could have served you better.


Jo. I know thou have been bred a Scholar, and thy invention not ill: -- But
can thou Cant?


Dri. How think you Sir, -- Suppose I should tell him I had studied the
Emporeuticks, Lemnicks, Camnicks, and Plegnicks, could demonstrate the Minimum
quod sit, of Homocrecious, and Heterocrasious; and stripping Materia Prima to
her smock, discover the most private recesses, and occult qualities, of
Ignicadrillica, Metallorgonica, Euricatactica, and Hydropanta pressoria, Do you
believe (I say) he would be able to understand more of it, than I do my self,
which is just nothing? If you call this Canting, let me alone with him.


Jo. Excellent! -- Then to subdivide 'um into as undemonstrable (yet seemingly
probable) Projects, -- We shall make such sport!


Enter Ferdinand. Dri. And get good money I warrant you Sir, -- But see! my
young Master, -- yet me thinks not so merry at heart as we are.


Jo. Now Nando! -- What news with you: -- Thou art as spruce, as if thou had
been with thy young Widow, yet look as heavy, as she had turned thee to
lead: -- How goes it?


Fer. Why faith Sir, I just came from her.


Jo. And what? -- How did she receive thee?


Fer. So, so, -- The City way, -- But at last I had laughed her into a pretty
good humor, 'till (as the Devil would have it) in dropped her Uncle, and quite
dampt all, with a noise of Joyntures, and I know not what, A disease, I think I
shall be last troubled with: -- To be short, she did in effect tell me, she was
handsome, and would never marry, but to better her Fortune.


Jo. Let her go, let her go; -- If thou will not be wanting to thy self, I le
put thee upon a better, and one that shall never cheat thee by pretending to be
richer then she is; for in a word, she is not worth one groat.


Fer. What do you mean Sir?


Jo. A good wife, and (for ought I ever heard) may make a virtuous wife.


Fer. No ready money Sir? -- me thinks, half one half 'tother, were somewhat
like:


Jo. Let not that trouble you: -- Her Father is rich, very rich, and has no
other child to leave his Estate to, and shall rather put her off, to an
ordinary Fortune, with nothing, then give an hundred pound, to marry her to the
best Estate in London.


Fer. And who may this be good Sir?


Jo. Old Suckdry's daughter.


Fer. I could like it well: -- But how is it to be done?


Jo. Not, with that tossing Feather, Lewd Peruwig, Laced Band, Flanting Linen,
Embroidered Belt, wide Slops, Shop of Ribbons, and vile Porte-canons.


Fer. Why Sir, you have seen them all before:


Jo. Nor am I angry with thee, for doing as other people do, -- no, -- I had
rather have thee comport thy self to every man's humor: -- With old men,
severe; with young, jocund; with the humoursome, morose; with women, galliard;
with thy companions, pleasant; and with a niggardly Rascal, more sordid than
himself; at least, appear so; -- And so would I have thee treat this fellow.


Fer. If that were all, I could easily follow your directions.


Jo. And you may not repent it: -- Go, -- be ruled by me; -- Strip all this
trumpery, -- it is enough to fright him: -- should he see thee now, he would swear
the feathers were more worth than the Bird: -- Go I say, and get me some little
odd hat, but quite out of fashion; a diminutive Band, no cuffs, hair shorter
than your eyebrows, at most, not beyond your ears, close breeches, greazy
Gloves, Gresham Shoes, Leather Shoe-tyes, and for your Cloak, no matter if it
be of another Parish, he will like it the better.


Fer. My acquaintance would laugh at me.


Jo. Get thou the money, and laugh at them boy: -- Then for your discourse, --
get me together all the base, ill, sordid tricks of a covetous wretch, and
deliver them as morals; -- wonder at the ignorance of the age that knows not
those honest thrifty Rules, or if it do, its shame in not practicing them.


Fer. Well Sir, I see you are in earnest, -- and for once I Will try what I can
do: -- But I doubt --


Jo. Do -- and never doubt it: -- about it straight, while it is hot, and leave
the rest to me.


Fer. You have commanded, and I shall not dispute: -- But if I bring it to
pass, I may well swear, miracles are not ceast.


[Exit. Jo. Come -- let us be gone, -- thou know the plague's in the City,
and if I stay longer, it is odds but I may be infected.


Enter Sir Gudgeon Credulous. Dri. I hope Sir, you do not fear Sir Gudgeon
Credulous?


Jo. O no, -- he is a good preservative against it.


Dri. I told you he was as big as he could hold, -- Do you not observe Sir, how
hard he wrings his brows, to the manifest hazard of disblocking his Peruwig? --
Will you not speak to him?


Jo. Presently, -- let us view him a little.


Sir Good. It must take without doubt, and the profit be infinite, -- No man
knows what: -- But for the manner of doing it: -- This way? -- No -- It may be
certain, but it is too far about the bush. -- That way? -- No: -- for though it
be the shorter cut, we may yet be too hasty in the experiment. -- The Other way?
-- Neither, -- the charge will be too vast: -- Hang charge, we shall quickly
fetched up again, -- All I fear is, The thing will be so considerable, it may
chance to be begged from us; and against that, there is no other fence, but to
swear it is worth nothing -- That was well thought on. -- Then after this, comes
my Widow -- I shall be but too rich -- one Jupiter! there could be no less
then then ten Jupiters, Lords of my Nativity.


Jo. Sir Gu. Credulous! -- save you! -- I see there is hopes of the business you
mind it so well. -- Have you made any experiment?


Sir Good. Yes. -- But I do not find it altogether answer expectation: --
However, it is but early days yet.


Jo. Pray be very curious in it, and Driver (to whom I have committed the
management of my interest) shall assist you: I must tell you, he is no ordinary
Artist.


Sir Gu. Better and better -- then he has seen it?


Dr. Seen it Sir! -- If I should tell your Worship all I have seen, I should
despair of the work, 'twould so put you out of patience.


Sir Gu. Good Driver! -- and how? and when?


Dr. Did not I tell you, you would not have patience? -- Good sir let things do
themselves: -- one minutes over-hast, is enough to put us a twelvemonth back:
-- for it fares here as with the Philosophers Stone, the least error in the
work, and we must begin all anew.


Sir Gu. Honest Mr. Driver -- I will be ruled. --


Enter Gotam, a Note book under his arm. Got. It Is he -- I have his name here
fast in my Book in good black and white. -- Let me see -- E, F, G, H, J, J, J
-- Jo, Jo, Jo -- Jocose -- Here it is -- Jocose -- page 150. -- Mr. Jocose for
himself and Wife -- 108 l. 7 s. 9 d. ob. -- A good round sum, would I had it, I
could be content to bate him the single money.


Jo. But hark you Driver -- Thou see this Pagan Cousin of mine, and know
his business; -- prithee put him off with some whim or other.


Dr. I warrant you sir, -- leave him to me.


Jo. Cousin! your servant -- I was just sending my man to speak with you, but
he knows the business, and can tell't you, as well as my self. -- Come Sir
Gudgeon -- I le wait on you.


Exeunt Sir Gu. and Jocose. Got. Your servant sir -- I thank you.


Dr. Now Mr. Gotam, you may see what it is to have a Friend at Court -- You
thought, I warrant, my Master had forgotten you.


Got. Why, truly sir, this money has been due a pretty while; -- long before his
Wife died, I am certain.


Dr. No more of that. -- Suppose he put you on a business shall make you for
ever, -- And be worth ye: -- thou have hardly faith enough to believe, what!


Got. Aa! -- good Mr. Driver. -- As how I pray?


Dr. Why thus, -- my Master, you know, has great friends, and therefore doubts
not, but by their assistance to procure a Patent of Privilege, to engross a
business solely to himself. -- I must confess it will scarce amount to more
then a Coppy-hold Project. --


Got. What do you mean by that?


Dr. That is to say, it will not exceed Ten Thousand pound a year, -- and I can
assure you, if ever there were an ingenious Invention, it is this, -- and in
this my Master intends to take you in with him, and let you go what share you
please. -- You shall do no worse then himself.


Got. Ah sir, my Cousin is an honest Gentleman, and I have had long experience
of his love: -- How do ye call it?


Dr. It Is an Ignicke, Hydre^icke, and Hydroterricke invention, consisting of
Heat without Fire or Smoke: and certainly, Nature and Art, melted down into the
same body, could not produce such another Diacat h^licon, that shall equally
serve to all purposes; Roast, Bake, Boil, Wash, Brew, dry Malt, Hops, Wheat,
Oats, and generally every thing else (as I told you before) without the help of
Fire or Smoke: -- Now sir, you know the business, and may consider of it.


Got. Consider! -- I apprehend it already, and find it too great to be dally'd
with: -- Why it will destroy all the Woodmongers upon the River, and reduce
them to their first Dungboats again. -- How have you done touching the charge?


Dr. Truly you have hit upon one of the main points, -- and part of the reason
why my Master made you privy to it; -- for as on one hand, we must take in some
Sharers to lessen the charge, so on the other, it behooves us to consider how many
we may admit, for fear of diminishing the profits.


Got. Most true -- we'll carry't on between our selves: -- It will fall to my
turn to be Churchwarden this next year, and then I shall have the Custody of
the Parish Stock, if that will serve you, command it, -- we shall be able (I
hope) to fetch it up again before my time be out.


Dr. By much: -- But the business is now on foot, and must not stand still for
fear of spoiling; and therefore we must be provided of present money; because,
you know, some fees must be scattered among Servants and Clerks, and some other
will go to making of Trials, -- things will not come without charge.


Got. You say right, -- and now I think on it, I may be able to bring in my
Neighbor Squeeze, the Exchange Broker, and by his means old Mr. Suckdry, and
Mrs. Godsgood; there is money enough at an hours warning, if one could tell how to
get it.


Dri. Pray about it, and I Will see you tomorrow; -- if you go forth leave word
where I may find you. -- Ferewell, -- I must follow my Master, -- the Knight
and he are gone to see a proof of what I told you. Exit Dri.


Got. Farewell, -- but Mum. -- Certain I rize with the right end upward to day,
I have had such good luck; -- I shall be an Alderman I see, in spite of all
three-half penny Stars: -- I think a Brass-jack-line would hang as well of my
shoulders as on another man's; -- certain it must. -- But see -- my Wife. --

Enter Mistress Gotam. This Hyterridinctido will be news to her, -- in faith
will it. -- Sweet heart! -- well met.


Mrs. Got. I had as liefe ha'found you at home; -- the main chance goes well
forward in the mean time, and you never in your Shop: -- God held! a Beggar I
found thee, and a Beggar thoult leave me.


Got. Nay Wife, -- I have good news for thee, -- I have been with my Cousin.


Mrs. Got. And has he paid you the money? -- I am sure't has been due ever since
my first Husbands time.


Got. It Is sure enough, -- not too hasty Wife, -- we are beholding to him, --
you know he took notice of me at Court, showed you the Privy Lodgings, got you
a place at the Play, gave you a Bottle of the Kings Wine, and a Court Tart, and
sends us Venison twice in a season Wife. --


Mrs. Got. Better he had sent his money, and I could have got the other my self;
-- marry gipp, -- this is one of your old excuses; you think you have got a
Wife can maintain you, and now forsooth you must walk like a Gentleman: --
Sirrah, sirrah, look out and mind your business, or I Will make you look out.


Got. Good faith I do.


Mrs. Got. Yes -- among your Gills too much: -- what was that you said to our
maid 'tother night in the Kitchen, when you thought I was a bed? -- I heard
you, -- you might have come up a pair of stairs higher if you had pleased; --
I do'nt wonder now she'as lost her stomach.


Got. This is nothing but thy jealous head.


Mrs. Got. Jealous! -- Come up here! -- You can be merry enough abroad, when
you are amongst your flirts, but at home you're as sad and lumpish as a Gibb'd
Cat; -- I can tell you the reason, -- Thou art sad because thou can not bury
me: -- I half doubt the Rats-bane you bought 'tother day was not altogether for
the Rats: -- Do you understand that, Gentleman?


Got. Not I in troth.


Mrs. Got. No, you will not, -- you can understand your Gossips well enough. --
It Is a fine thing, you must be perpetually hopping after them; and I forsooth!
I cannot walk in the fields with a Friend, -- but whoop! the house is too
little for you. -- My first Husband was another kind of man; my finger could
not ache but he I woo's! -- nothing was too good for me. -- When will you say,
Dear wife, Honey wife, Sugar wife, how do thou? do want any thing? would
have a new Gown? go abroad? walk to Islington? see the Bears? -- Go whither
thou will; do what thou have a mind to, -- I am not jealous: -- Here was a
Husband! [She cries.


Got. Prithee have done, -- I told thee I had been with my Cousin, and have
good news for thee.


Mrs. Got. As what I warrant?


Got. What! -- Such as shall make thee a Lady within this Twelvemonth: -- My
Cousin and I are engaged in a business cannot be less worth then Fifteen
Thousand Pound a Year honestly: -- Now Wife! -- where is your Loving Husband?


Mrs. Got. Whatever I say in my passion, thou art -- It Is but only to make the
better. -- But hark ye my dear, -- shall not we not keep a Coach then?


Got. A Coach! -- Yes, -- and Eight Horses, -- and our Country House new built.
-- Come -- follow me, and I Will tell thee the rest within, which I would have
thee communicate to your friend Mrs. Godsgood, and bring her in for a share,
while I do the same to my Neighbor Squeeze the Exchange Broker: -- Come --


Mrs. Got. Any thing good Husband, -- I Will be thy best Wife.


-- Exeunt. ACT. II.
SCAENA. 1.
Enter Lean-chops (solus.) Lean. Well -- of my Conscience there was never so
unluckey a fellow as my self; -- Service do you call it? Certainly, if
Damnation be only Poena Sensus, that were a fitter name for it: -- Here I live
with a Master that has Wealth enough; But so fearful, sad, pensive, suspicious
a fellow, that he disquiets both himself, and every one else. -- Art (I have
heard say) has but Seven Liberal Sciences, but he has a Thousand Illiberal. --
There lives not a more base, nigarly, unsatiable Pinch penny, nor a more
gaping, griping, Polling, extorting, devouring Cormorant: -- A sponge sucks not
up faster, and yet a Pumice gives back easier. -- The sign is always with him
in the Clutches; and a Kites Pouncke truss not more readily. -- He shall watch
you a young Heir, as diligently, as a ^aven a dying Horse, and yet swallow him
with more tears then a Crocodile. -- He never sleeps but he Seals up the Nose
of his Bellows, least they loose breath, and has almost broke his Brains, to
find the like device for his Chimney, and his Throat -- A Gamester has not
studied the advantage of Dice half so much, as he, a sordid Parcimony, which
yet he calls Thrift; And will tell you to a Crum, how much difference there is
in point of loss, between a hundred dozen of bread broken with the hand, and
cut with a knife: -- The Devil's in him, and I am as weary of him, as of our
last Journey, which both of us performed on the same horse. -- As thus, -- In
the morning (about two hours before him) out gets Peel-Garlick, he joggs after,
overtakes me, rides through the next Town, and a little beyond it, leaves
Palfry a grazing for me, and marches on himself; in like manner, I get up,
overtake him, ride on, and leave him on this side the next Town, and so order
our business, that he rides out in the morning, and into the Inn at night, and
through every Town by the way. Nor need we fear any man's stealing him:
Smithfield at the end of a long Vacation cannot show such another Wall-ey'd,
Crest-falne, Saddle-back't, Flat-rib d, Gut-founder'd, Shoulder-pitcht,
Spurgall'd, Hip-shotten, Greese-moulten jade; besides Splint, Spavin, Glanders,
Farce, String-halt, Sprains, Scratches, Malander, and Wind-galls innumerable.
-- Like the fools Hobbyhorse; were it not for the name of a horse, a man had
as lief go a foot: -- and thus we jogg on in grief together. -- But hold, -- I
hear him, -- somewhat's amiss.


Enter Suckdry. Suck. Undone, undone, -- whither should I run? -- whither
should I not run? -- Stop there, -- whom? what? where? -- I know not --
Lean-chops!


Lean. Sir, -- what ails you?


Suck. Oh -- A lost undone man: -- what a deal of misery a day brings forth? --
I have lost my money, and what should I live longer: -- hunger and poverty will
be my end.


Lean. How much have you lost Sir?


Suck. I believe thou know as well as I, -- Ah -- a whole half piece, -- Gone,
gone, gone; and I undone. -- I believe thou have found it; -- open your coat, --
Lets see your right hand, -- your left hand, -- both hands, -- your third hand,
-- vh, -- no hopes, -- undone undone.


Lean. Pray sir search, -- perhaps it may be about you -- you have many
pockets. [They search, and find it in a dirty cloth.


Suck. Impossible, -- impossibble, -- vh!


Lean. Why see now, -- may not you be ashamed to use me thus, and for nothing
too?


Suck. Ashamed! -- what should a poor man do with shame? -- Get in, get in. --


Lean. It Is past three of the Clock, and I have eat nothing today.


Suck. This Rogues mind is nothing but his Gut; -- A good thrifty servant, that
minded his Masters profit, would have gone to the Cooks, and cheapen'd every
joint, tasted all, but bought none, and made a good meal on it. -- One would
think sirrah, you might not be ashamed to do what your Master has done before
you. -- Get in, I say, and look to the house.


Lean. There Is no fear that any one will carry't away, and for any thing in it,
there is nothing but Cob-webs.


Suck. What Is that he mutters? No marvel sirrah, if for your sake I am not made
an Alderman! -- I will have the Cob-webs preserved, they are good for a cut
finger. -- Get in I say -- How the slave stirs? -- If I come to ye, I le mend
your Snails pace.


Lean. One were better be hanged then endure this life.


Suck. How he mumbles the Devils Pater Noster? -- Sirrah get in, and stir one
foot till I call ye, and thou have as good have broke thy neck. -- So, -- He Is
gone. -- Exit. Lean. And I Will go visit my gold: -- I am afraid I have spoken
in my sleep, or dropped some word or other that may discover it; or that this
Rogue has eyes in his Poll, and observed where I buried it, -- but if he has,
I Will so dig 'um out: -- I have reason enough to suspect it -- men speak more
heartily to me then they were wont; are more free in their salutes; stop, and
talk with me; shake me by the hand, ask me how I do, whither I am going, what is
my business, if they may serve me, and the like, -- nay, Mr. Jocose the other day
would have given me Wine, and preferred his Son should marry my Daughter,
without a Portion too! -- Ah, Ha, -- I do not like when rich men speak kindly
to a poor man; they offer bread with one hand, but carry a stone in the other. --
But I loose time, -- my gold, my gold: -- this must be the place: -- All Is
safe, and I Am alive again: -- All hail! --

[A board sinks, and his bags are discovered. Thou that giv'st form to every
thing. -- Thou sun of life, -- Thou Guardian that protect'st us; -- Thou Regent
of the world, that disposest's all things as thou best pleasest's and without
whom, humane society would quickly fall in pieces: -- For whatever else may be
called the Girdle, I am sure thou art the Buckle that hold st it together. --
There -- rest in peace my better [He covers it again. Angels; and while I call
ye mine, let the world frown, laugh, point, or hiss, one glance of yours is
worth it all; and I shall want nothing, but too few Arms to hug my self: -- I
shall be courted by every man, welcome every where (at least from the teeth
outward) for in this world, Gold seasons and relishes every thing, and men are
received, not for the Asses, but the Goddes's sake. -- It Is like having a
handsome Wife, every man is, or would be your Servant. -- Hoe! Lean-chops,
Lean-chops.


Enter Lean-chops. Lean. Your pleasure Sir?


Suck. I am going abroad Lean-chops, -- shut the door after me, bolt it, and
bar it, and see you let no one in, in my absence -- Put out the fire (if there
be any) for fear some body seeing the smoke may come to borrow some. -- If any
one come for water, say the Pipe's cut off, -- or to borrow a Pot, Knife,
Pestle and Mortar, or the like, say they were stole last night. -- But hark ye,
-- I charge ye not to open the door to give them an answer, but whisper't
through the keyhole: For I tell you again, I will have no body come into my
house while I Am abroad; -- No, -- no living soul: -- Nay though good Fortune
her self knocked at door, don't let her in.


Lean. She Will have care enough of that her self, -- she has been often near us
(but I think there is a Cross upon the door) she never came in yet.


Suck. Sirrah, sirrah hold your peace and do as I bid you; -- 'T would better
become you to know more, and speak less: -- See it be done. -- [Knock within.
See who is at door, but let not one in, till you have brought me word. -- [Exit
Lean-chops. What a misery it is to be thought rich, -- one or other is
perpetually haunting him, -- while the poor man yet, is rich in this, that he is
troubled with none of it: -- He fears neither Thieves, nor Quartering of
Soldiers; he is exempt from rates, and Parishduties; He sleeps securely
without Bolts, and is subject to no man's envy; every man's Trencher is his
Table, every place his own Country, and lives in peace with all men, but the
Justice, the Constable, and the Beadle. --

Enter Lean-chops. How no! Who was it?


Lean. Mr. Squeeze, your Exchange Broker -- he would sain speak with you.


Suck. O let him in by all means, -- he is a good man, and never comes empty
handed, -- make haste before he be gone sirrah --

[Exit. This Rogue will never learn wit, -- one would have thought he had lived
long enough with me to have been able to distinguish persons, -- I must even
discard him, -- 'Twill save charges. --


Enter Squeeze, Sir Gudgeon Credulous, Mrs. Gods-good, Gotam. Squeez. I Will show
you the way Gentlemen, I have some Interest in my pocket for him, and will pay
him that first, -- 'twill make him more supple. -- I was just coming sir to
wait on you with some money that I had received for you, and met with these
Gentlemen coming to me about a like business, and I even brought them with me.
-- It Is -- [They whisper.


Suck. O they are weleome, they are welcome, and chiefly your self: -- It came
in good time, for I profess, I had hardly a groat in the house.


Got. How? -- Then our business is done already: -- what is worse then ill luck?
[To Squeez.


Squeez. Please you to tell it over. -- The overplus is for continuance. [He
whispers it.


Suck. Do'nt speak so loud, -- I understand you. [Goes aside and counts it.


Squeez. Let him alone a while, -- let him handle the money, -- He means, he
has never a Groat he would spare by his good will.


[They whisper. Suck. It Is all right and well, -- only here is a Parliament
Sixpence, pray change it.


Squeez. How was I mistaken? -- There sir.


Suck. Hark you Neighbor, -- what is their business?


Squeez. Such as you never dealt in before, -- the most ingenuou'st Invention
was ever yet found out. -- I Will undertake after the first Year you may make
Cent. per Cent. of your money every three months, besides a certain Bank ready
upon all occasions.


Suck. Say you so good Mr. Squeeze? -- As how? As how?


Squeez. They Will tell you that themselves; -- You know Mr. Gotam? he has been
always held a sober man.


Suck. Indeed has he, and well to pass: -- He is of the Livory, and in a short
time will be Master of his Company; -- He married the Widovv Minee; I knew her
first Husband, -- he was a thriving man.


Squeez. Marry was he. -- But the business is of so great a concernment, that
it is not one or two ordinary men's purses are able to carry it on. -- The other
is Sir Gudgeon Credulous, a worthy, wise Knight, and in his own Country of
the Peace, and Quorum.


Suck. He seems no other.


Squeez. There is a Gentlewoman too, one Mistress Gods-good.


Suck. O, -- I have heard of her, -- A rich Widovv.


Squeez. That she is of my knowledge; I deal for her, -- All persons concerned,
-- but the main Wheel of the work is Mr. Jocose. -- Faith sir, I Would have you
come in too; -- As poor a man as I am, I am resolved to go in Five hundred
pounds.


Suck. But what shall you come out Neighbor? What? etc.


Squeez. No man knows what! -- You had best speak to 'um.


Suck. How much would they have from me?


Squeez. That shall be as you please, whither any thing or nothing: -- only at
present they would borrow of you Two Thousand pound.


Suck. Two thousand pound! -- Do you know what you say?


Squeez. Yes, 2000 lib. -- You are too quick for me, -- I meant upon good
security.


Suck. O -- that alters the case. -- Life is frail, man mortal, -- but good
Security may do much; -- What is the Security? -- Citizens, or Country
Gentlemen? -- You know my way, -- I must have a Judgment at least.


Squeez. Pray talk with 'em your self.


Suck. You're welcome Mistress, -- Sir Gudgeon Credulous, I understand, -- And
you Mr. Gotam, -- Your business with me?


Sir Good. The same sir. -- I thought Mr. Squeeze had informed you?


Got. If he has not, we shall.


Suck. Why truly -- he has given me a small touch often.


Sir Good. Then thus Sir, -- We are all persons jointly concerned in the same
business; and we look upon the whole charge (what is past and to come) may
amount to 9000 li. -- somewhat under a years profits: -- Of this I am out
already 4000 li. The Widow Gods-good advances 1500 li. more; -- Mr. Gotam 1000
li. Mr. Squeeze 500 li. -- And to make up the sum, we would borrow of you 2000
li. -- upon good Security. --


Suck. Alas sir! -- 2000 li. -- I am a poor man: 2000 li. and I are not so near
of kin, but we may marry to morrow. -- But if your security be like, and
you will be civil to me, I have some friends: -- Pray Sir what is your security?
[Spoken whiningly.


Sir Gu. Would the Court of Aldermens were as good: -- Security!


Enter Lean-chops. Lean. Sir there is a Gentleman at door enquires for you.


Got. For me? -- It may be Mr. Jocose, -- Pray desire him to come in, -- I am
glad he found me out, -- Now you will be able to see the very guts of the business.


Suck. What share goes he?


Sir. Gu. Alas Sir, None; -- It Is enough for him that the invention was, and
the Patent will be his: -- There Is reason in all things: --

Enter Driver. Oh Mr. Driver! Where Is your Master?


Got. Where Is my Cousin?


Dr. He intended to have been with you himself, but being unluckily takenill of
the Gout, he sent me to your house, where I heard of your being here. --


Suck. A good rich disease -- I warrant I shall never be troubled with it.


Dr. All that he bad me signify to you was, -- That the work went well on, and
only wanted more workmen, and more materials.


Sir Gu. We are about it now, and have provided very well for the time. -- And
now you are come, pray save me a labor, and let this Gentleman understand the
business.


Dr. Which Sir? -- That of the Plegnick Screw, The Handquern, or the
Horse-Wind-Water-Mill?


Sir. Gu. Ha! -- Ha! --


Suck. Have you more then one?


Sir. Gu. Diverse, diverse, which is the reason of the excessive charge, --
Though troth, it was more then I knew before -- [Aside -- But -- The more the
merrier: Prithee lets have that, that is now in operation -- I think you called
it, The Metallorgan icum Ignicadrillicum.


Dr. You mean that of a constant heat, without fire or smoke.


Sir. Gu. The same, The same.


Suck. How is it possible? -- which way?


Dr. Tell you that, and tell you all; -- Every Art has it is Occult quality,
which once demonstrated, would cease to be a secret, and some other might
chance to get between us and home: -- However, since here are none but friends,
and all wellwillers, I will give ye some small hints often, which to be short,
is singly effected by a new kind of motion (for you know, motion is the cause
of heat,) And this meeting with matter ready disposed, shall either work
naturally by it self, or in cases extraordinary, by an Antiperistasis: -- and
be, not only Equi-sufficent, Equicheap, Equi-excellent, as all minor Projects
pretend to, but more cheap, more sufficient, and super-excellent, which when we
are better acquainted, I will easily demonstrate.


Suck. I Will promise you, if this be able to be made good, 'twill save abundance
of Wood and Coals.


Dr. That Is least; -- What say you to this? -- First there can be no danger of
firing; for as I told you before, it is done without fire. -- Secondly, You are
not troubled with smoke, the greatest enemy to man's health. -- Thirdly, No
Soot shall fall into the Pot, nor Fat be lost in the Fire. Fourthly, It shall
so preserve the radical moisture, juice, and substance of Hops, and Malt, that
whereas now, they retain in a manner, only their fixed salt, and excrementitious
dead substance, this shall so conserve their Balsamical spirits, That the
Brewer shall be able to afford twelve shilling Beer, at half a Crown a Barrel,
and get more by it then he does now: -- Fifthly, As you well observed, no charge
of fuel. -- Sixthly, (Which one were enough by it self) It is an invention, or
rather a new mavelous Art, useful to all, and injurious to none, and such as
besides the eternising our-names to Posterity, shall give us at present,
Honor, Fame, Friends, Wealth, and (as a consequent of that) every thing. [The
rest whisper while [Squeeze and Suckdry discourse.


Sq. What think you of this Sir?


Suck. Of My Word no contemptible buisness. -- I hear he has more on foot; and
why may n't we get one to our selves?


Sq. Perhaps you may: -- And the lending this money may be a good introduction
to the other.


Suck. Don't you think they would take half money, and half Jewels?


Sq. Perhaps they might, but then you must enlarge the su^, or they may want
money to carry on the work.


Suck. You say right: -- What Is their Security?


Squeez. Of My Conscience if you would but stand upon it, they would go near to
Mortgage to you, a third or a fourth part of the clear Profits.


Suck. Softly, -- Don't talk of a Fourth, -- I Will make 'um believe I will have
a moiety; though rather then fail, I could be contented with less.


Sq. If I might advise you Sir -- [They whisper.


Dri. Why truly to tell you truth, -- we have made very few proofs of the rest:
-- But if you will call at my Mastres's, I Will give you that account of 'em may
be worth your trouble: -- There will be enough for you all.


Sir Gu. But hark ye Mr. Driver, -- Don't you bob me off, with a third rate
Project now? --


Dr. Sir Gudgeon! that you should think so!


Suck. Do you propose it to 'um: [To Squeeze.


Squeez. I shall Sir. -- Mr. Gotam you know we propounded 2000. l. for Mr.
Suckdry: -- I have done the Work, and he shall be contented with a third part
of the profits for Security, -- I hope you will consider me in my Share.
[Aside.


Got. And all the reason in the World; -- You hear Gentlemen what he says.


Sr. Gu. I would have him secured, -- But I would not though leave a twenty
shilling piece in pawn for a groat.


Suck. Alas Sir, It Is none of my money, it is my Friends, and I Will account truly
between you both: -- If you intend honestly you cannot give too great Security.


Dr. You may do it, I Will undertake my Master shall not oppose it.


Sir Gu. Then get ready the Writings; -- I hope we shall have a good account in
a short time.


Suck. As soon as you please; -- I Will about it straight; -- We may be all made
and send us but good luck.


Sir Gu. Well Sir, Farewell for the present. [Exeunt all but [Suck. and Dr.


Suck. Farewell good Gentlemen; -- But stay Mr. Driver, -- pray stay, -- let me
speak with you, -- methought you were saying your Master had a great many other
Projects; -- Surely, -- surely, he must be a very rich man.


Dr. Why faith Sir, he is well enough, though he be at a great deal of charge;
for now and then an Engine breaks, and an experiment fails; should all take
right, he would be too rich, but that is almost impossible; he that will get,
must now and then venture to loss. -- This is our comfort, the first good hit,
pays for all miscarriages.


Suck. That Is well, -- But pray tell me, -- What children has your Master? --


Dr. One Son Sir, and that is all: -- I have often asked him why he toiles
himself to leave so great an estate, when the tenth part of what he has
already would serve my Young Master, and to spare.


Suck. No ill sign, -- I like him the better, -- But do think he was in
earnest when he proposed a match between his son, and my daughter?


Dr. Yes truly, if he said it, you may believe him; -- But alas! What should
my young Master do with all that Wealth you two are like to leave him?


Suck. Keep it, keep it, and breed more: -- Prithee tell me, do think thy
Master would settle a good swinging Project upon him in possession?


Dri. Yes truly, I believe he may.


Suck. Then hark you, -- Pick me out a good round one, and it may not be the
worse for thee; -- It Is the first part of Faulconrie to hold fast, and if thy
young Master has that good quality, I dare trust him for the rest, -- or he
may quickly learn it. --


Dr. I shall be glad with all my heart to be an instrument, in the business; --
And now upon second thoughts, I think your daughter may make an excellent wife
for him.


Suck. Your reason good Mr. Driver, -- Your reason?


Dr. Because I have so often heard him protest against your great matches, (as
he calls 'em) and compares 'em to an ill pudding, all blood, and no fat.


Suck. I Will be sworn, a hopeful young man; -- But tell me (Prithee be true to
me) what kind of wife does he most affect, if he might have his choice?


Dr. What? -- Even a good honest man's daughter that shall bring him no charge,
nor put him in fear of being eat out by her kindred -- One that shall never
send her Husband on a How do you, or keep more Coaches in Town, then he has plows
going in the Country -- One that shall not spend his Michaelmas Rents, in
Midsomer Moon, and cost him more in sails, and rigging, then the Hull's worth.


Suck. It Is a hundred pitties, but thou were Supervisor General of the Female
sex.


Dr. Faith Sir, I card not much if I were, I should be the better able to serve
my friends -- But this is not all.


Suck. Prithee on -- I like it well.


Dr. One that is not haunted with Perfumers, Lacemen, Milleners, Silkmen,
Jewellers, Mercers, Exchange-men, Semsters, and Hey day! And can be contented
with her husbands Tailor. -- One that understands not the way of smooth chinn'd
pages, and can find both Lacquies, and women, in a single Chambermaid -- One
that was never read beyond Aqua fortis, and tinning glass, and is as much
gravelled at Spanish Paper, and Talcke as a Country Vicar, at an Hebrew
Pedigree: -- One that has no Aunts, nor she Cosins to visit, and goes not above
thrice a week to the Drawers for new patterns -- One (to be short) that is all
her self, and thinks it no scorn, to be her own Semstress, and Tirewoman.


Suck. Say thou me so my heart? -- And if I have not a girl that fits him, she
is not like her Father: -- Come Master Driver -- Be but assistant in striking
up this match, and thou shall never know what it may be worth thee: -- Come, --
A man must promise at large, though he perform at leisure; hope makes men
diligent. [Aside, Exeunt.


ACT. III.
SCAENA. 1.
Enter Jocose, Ferdinand, in a Precisian habit, and Driver. Jocose. I -- This
is something! -- I protest I should hardly have known thee my self! -- But one
thing -- I do not like this hat, -- it is so high Crowned, he will swear it is
mere waste, and three Ounces of stuff might have been well saved.


Fer. That may be quickly mended, either by getting another, or circumcising
this; -- it lies under the band, and will never be seen, or if it should, he will
like it the better.


Dr. Never doubt it Sir. -- It must take -- for I have read him such a Lecture
of my young Masters frugalitie, that he is out of all patience till he see him,
-- and if you can but out-cant him now, the work's done.


Fer. That must be left to chance, -- And yet it is not impossible, but I may
make my party good with him: -- Have I lived in Genoa (where the Jews come
laughing in, and go crying out, as having met with greater Jews then
themselves,) and do you think I shall not be able to deal with him? -- I
warrant ye:


Jo. Well said Nando, -- A good confidence is half the thing.


Fer. But when must this robbery be?


Dr. I expect him here instantly, though not purposely about this business; for
my design was to have it come on, as it were by the By, and of it self.


Jo. What other business has he?


Dr. O Sir! -- To see how the main work goes forward; Besides, he expects you
should settle a good lusty Project upon my young Master; and I am wide of the
mark, if he is not hammering at another for himself. -- And to tell you truth,
so they are all,


Jo. Now send that thou have not engaged us further, then we shall be able to
get off fairly.


Dr. Pray Sir trust me -- Have I desired you to appear in it? Or been wanting
to it in any thing my self?


Jo. Well, I refer it to thee; -- But must you have all the sport? were it not
possible that I might at least laugh inwardly.


Dri. I was just making it my request to you, that you would so dispose your
self, as to overhear the discourse, and perhaps it may not be unworth your
while -- for the men having considered that two heads are better than one, have
communicated it to their wives, and asked their Advise in the point, and they
are so a Gogg upon it, that they must have their Projects too, and amongst them,
you will find your Widow, -- I never saw things hit more luckily, -- it is
impossible but you must carry her,


Jo. Do you expect 'um here?


Dr. I wonder they stay so long, -- and when they come, what they will say; --
[Knock within.

That knock, may chance to be their's.


Jo. Take the occasion of leaving 'em alone, -- for perhaps they may be more
free amongst themselves then if either of us were present.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir here are some Gentlewomen that enquire for your self,
or Mr. Driver.


Dr. It must be them.


Jo. Desire 'em to walk in. -- [Exit Servant.

Do you tell 'em I am a little busy, but you will go and acquaint me with it; --
You shall find me in that Window.


[Exit Jocose and Ferdinand. Dr. So, -- And now for the good Women, -- But what
to say to 'em, tell he that can, he must be better read in these books then I
am. --


Enter Mrs. Godsgood, Mrs. Gotam, Mrs. Squeeze, Nancy. Dr. Lady's! -- Your
servant, -- And had you not commanded the contrary, I had saved you this
trouble by waiting on you my self.


Mrs. Go. No Sir, it is our own business, and we thought least notice might be
taken of it, by discoursing it here.


Mrs. Sq. Yes indeed, 'twas all our opinions: -- Only I must confess the Widow
here would have preferred a little state, before convenience.


Mrs. G. G. But since I was overruled; -- Pray Sir, Where Is your Master.


Dr. I ll let him know you are here, and he will wait on you presently.


Mrs. Got. I think this Gentleman would be able to do our business as well.


Mrs. Sq. Yes truly, -- He looks like a likely man.


Mrs. G. G. However if Mr. Jocose were present too, 'twere no whit the worse.


Dr. Be pleased to repose your selves a while, and it will not be long 'ere my
Master wait on you.


Omnes. Your Servant Sir. [Exit Driver.


Mrs. G. G. Come Neighbors, I think it were not amiss if we agreed among our
selves what we would have, before they come.


Mrs. Got. Now truly and indeed, 'twas well moved.


Mrs. Sq. I like it well, pray begin.


Mrs. Got. Trust me not I, -- but I Will do as good, -- I Will put in now and then;
-- Pray Mrs. Godsgood.


Mrs. Sq. However you mistook me, I mean it so; -- pray Madam, -- No pray
forsooth -- will you?


Mrs. Sq. Not I indeed, -- how say you? -- The Widow. --


Omnes. The Widow, -- the Widow. --


Mrs. G. G. Then in obedience to your Commands, -- And may this present meeting
be happy and prosperous, to our selves and the whole Commonwealth of Women; and
that we propose those things that may be for the Common good and dignity of the
Sex: -- You cannot be ignorant how much your husbands have incroacht upon you,
or (to speak truth) how much we have all lost, by letting the men ingross all
business to themselves, without so much as asking our advice, as if we
(forsooth) were no part of them, and made to no other end, but to sit at home
and prick our fingers.


Mrs. Got. I indeed, -- a public grievance.


Mrs. Sq. The more's the pity.


Mr. G. G. Pray Sisters, -- Has not every pitiful Corporation it is Counsel,
the meanest Parish it is Vestry, and our very Fumblers their Common Hall? And
shall women only loose their privilege? Shall we alone do nothing?


Mrs. Got. Had we no more wit then to be ruled by our husbands, we should n't,
-- but for all that we (now and then) do our parts, and sometimes too, more
then comes to our shares.


Mrs. Sq. Thank themselves, that will not be quiet when it is well.


Mrs. G. G. Pray no interruptions in the middle of a speech: There will be time
enough for all. -- Nor would I set up a new thing, only revive an ancient and
laudable (though somewhat antiquated) Custom. -- I have heard of an old Emperor,
somewhere or other, that ordained, That as he had his Counsel of men, so his
wife, should have hers, of women, which should be independent, and without
appeal to 'tother. --


Mrs. Got. Marry away with him, -- An old man! -- What should we do with him?
-- And I have heard of a place too, where they hung up the men, after they come
to threescore, as things past their labor, and consequently useless. --


Mrs. G. G. Yet again! --


Mrs. Sq. No more of that good Sister, for if I mistake not the story, they
were more severe upon us, and burnt us for Witches at Forty. --


Mrs. G. G. Hey day! -- Pray Sisters.


Mrs. Sq. Peace, -- Silence.


Mrs. Got. With all my heart; -- No offense I hope.


Mrs. Sq. None on my part I assure you.


Mrs. G G. More still! -- This Council, as I told you, (whether in jest or
earnest it matters not) They called the She Senate, and this is that which our
present interest should prick us forward to restore. -- Nor let it be any rubb
in the way, that Women are forbid to speak in Public, that being meant of a
Congregation of men, and I speak only of an Assembly of Women, -- for
otherwise, if we were ever to hold our tongues, to what use were they given us?
Those tongues, I say, that if they might, would speak sense as well as their
own; and upon a good occasion, could be as loud -- Think you (I warrant) they
were given us to no other end, but to lick our teeth, and cheapen Eggs? -- I
think not, -- and why should we not use 'em then? -- No doubt but we may, and
perhaps too, to as much purpose as the men; for could we look into their
Councels, it is ten to one but we should find many things our selves would
have been ashamed of. -- How common is it with them to be five days in
vvording the Question, and as many more e're they can put it right, and perhaps
at last, make nothing of it: -- Whereas we, are plain down right, we think what
we please, and speak what we think. -- How does this Consultation thwart that,
a third both, a fourth all, as if they met only to justify the Proverb, So
many men, so many minds; Whereas we, if the reins were in our hands, if we
did not manage them better, I am sure it could not be worse.


Mrs. Got. Well opened, -- pray proceed.


Mrs. G. G. I think this enough for Introduction; -- The next thing I would
have considered is, of what persons this Council should consist.


Mrs. Got. Of whom but women?


Mr. Sq. All that will, -- what else?


Mrs. G. G. That would be rather a Tumult than a Council.


Mrs. Got. And to select a few, and exclude the rest, would be -- What do you
call it? -- The men have a hard word for it -- Oli -- Oli -- Oligar, -- fie
upon it, I cannot hit it, -- Oil and Garlic I think they called, -- it is either
that, or somewhat near it; -- A very mark of tyranny.


Mrs. G. G. Pray no more interruptions, -- If you do not like it refer it to
another time; -- And first, (if I might advise) I would have no maids of this
council.


Nan. No maids! -- Why I pray? were you never one your self, or was it so long
since, you have forgot it?


Mrs. G. G. Pray give me leave, -- I say no maids, because we may happen to
speak that among our selves, that may not be fit for them to hear.


Nan. Goodly, goodly, -- As if we could not tell how the Market went, tho'we
neither bought nor sold in it.


Mrs. Got. Well said little Gentlewoman, -- stand up for your Privilege.


Mrs. Sq. I warrant they are not so ill bred, but they know what is, what, as
well as our selves; -- How say you Mrs. Nancy, do not you know a pudding, from
a Cart Wheel?


Nan. I think I do!


Mrs. Sq. Did not I tell you so?


Mrs. Got. But how will you know, which are Maids, and which not; -- Do not all
go for Maids till they are married?


Mrs Sq. And are not some afterward? -- What think you of those that have
overgrown old fellows to their husbands? -- may not they be called Maids,
though perhaps much against their will?


Mrs. G. G. However for honors sake we'll think 'em otherwise: But my meaning
was, that none be received, but such as are, or have been married.


Mrs. Got. Well distinguished, -- And yet perhaps it might be no hurt, if they
sat behind the hangings, though they gave no voice; -- 'twould make ^em the
abler against they came to it themselves.


Mrs. G. G. For that, as you please; -- But pray no more interruptions: -- The
next, I would have none admitted that have been shod round: -- And amongst them
I would place such as are past fifty, who like old Garrisons are fit for nothing
but to be Lighted, and the rather too, to make room for others.


Mrs. Got. And good reason, -- pray on:


Mrs. G. G. Then I would have none admitted, that had not first purged her self
by her corporal Oath, that she had never made her Husband a Cuckold: -- Unless
she be very ugly, and that in such cases it be taken for granted, that she has
not.


Mrs. Got. Now out upon it!


Mrs. Sq. This Widow I see would make a very Tyrant.


Mrs. Got. Confess and be hanged, -- I am for none often,


Mrs. Sq. Nor I neither; -- Here Is a fetch with all my heart. --


Mrs. G. G. At least you may qualify it by Proviso, That if it be done to
oblige a Gentleman, she may notwithstanding, etc.


Mrs. Got. That alters the case a little; -- But I am clearly for throwing out
both.


Mrs. Sq. And so am I, -- At least for laying the debate aside till a full
house.


Mrs. G. G. What you please, -- I do but offer -- Next, That if any discover
the secrets of the house abroad, That such Person or Persons, have their
tongues committed, to a three days silence, without Bail or Mainprise.


Mrs. Got. Insufferable!


Mrs. Sq. A tyranny never heard of before!


Mrs. G. G. Pray have patience, -- Next, that none be permitted to speak
irreverentlie of their Husbands, in as much, as be the men what they will, the
Wifes honor, depends upon theirs, to traduce them, were, but in effect, to
disgrace our selves.


Mrs. Got. Oh! Worse and worse.


Mrs. Sq. Abominable, and not to be endured. [They walk and fume. Driver and
Jocose (appear above.)


Dr. You see Sir

How hard your Widow's beset, I think 'twere not amiss if you relieved her.


Jo. And so I will, -- She Is better qualified then I expected, -- Follow me. --


Mrs. Got. Not speak irreventlie as you call it! -- Do you think it reasonable,
that my sham-leg'd Monsieur should say what he please of me, and I, nothing? Or
fit (I woo's that he be ever rambling abroad, When (though I say it my self) I
am as able a Woman, for the matter of the point of that, as any Woman in the
two next Parishes; -- And I must sit still and blow my nails forsooth?


Mrs. Sq. Or that mine should be perpetually abusing and striking me, -- I am
sure he has so pomell'd me about the Head, that I am hardly able, to bear a cup
of drink, as they say: -- For look you, do you see, when I am troubled, I go to
the salutation, with two or three neighbors, or so, and call for our Gills of
sack a piece, (alas you know, it is not much) and then we sit and chat over it,
and look yed'ye see, I am now and then troubled with a Rheum in my side, and
go lame a little, and then when I come home, my Rogue says I am drunk, and
stink of Aquavitae; when alas, it is well known, it is mere grief, mere grief
makes me in that condition; -- Aa -- you don't know this husband of mine -- he
were a very devil, but that he wears his horns, -- And is this to be born think
you.


Jo. Hold a little, -- not yet. --) [To Driver offering to enter.


Mrs. Got. No by my troth is it not. -- Come, come, serve him as I did mines;
-- He stroke me the other day; and I set out my throat as loud as I could, that
he had murdered me for what I had; and as the neighbors came in, I made 'em
believe I was in a sown, and held him so long in suspense, that from that day
forward; I got the staff into mine own hand; -- Ah my poor first husband, he
was a man of a thousand, I could have made him believe the Cow was made of
Wood, -- But how do you think I brought him to it; -- Even by complaining first,
and pretending he did this and that in his drink, which he (good man) never
thought of; and if ever he denied it, 'twas but bringing my maid to witness,
and I was sure to be asked pardon.


Mrs. Sq. I -- here were a woman for the Chair! --


Mrs. G. G. Withal my heart. --


Mrs. Sq. Then for the Quorum, -- if two Women and a Goose make a Market, I see
no reason, why three, may not make a Council, at least to determine, though not
to hear?


Mrs. Got. I agree with you; -- And truly I think so we should all; -- But for
this Widow, -- She Is insufferable! -- Come neighbor Squeeze, I see we must be
well advised, whom we trust the Chair with, -- She may in time betray our
liberties.


Enter Jocose, Driver. Jo. Madam, Your servant, -- me thought I heard you
somewhat hot, -- could n't you agree?


Mrs. Got. No indeed Sir, Nor is it likely.


Mrs. Sq. Truly I think 'twere not amiss if we entreated this Gentleman to take
up the business.


Mrs. G. G. You could not have thought better; -- Pray Sir will you give your
self a small trouble to oblige us.


Jo. Alas Madam it is too large a Parish for me; However I shall look upon your
intreaty's as commands; -- What may it be?


Mrs. Sq. Why thus an't please you. --


Mrs. Got. No, pray let me.


Jo. Hold, -- suppose we walked in; we should be less subject to disturbance, --
Will It please you Madam, --


Omnes. With all our hearts. [Jocose leads off Godsgood, They follow, manet
Driver.


Dr. Call you me this Matrimony! -- Help the good man say I, for I am sure they
need it; -- And yet certain there must be some little, I know not what in it,
that I am ignorant of, or they would not be so hot upon it, That like bold
Seamen, having escaped one Wrack, they dare yet venture on another: -- Whatev'r
it be, I envy it no man, bless him with it say I -- I had rather believe my
share of it, then run the experiment; -- For as far as I have ever observed,
Between a quiet, and an unquiet Woman, there is only this difference, That he
that has the first, rides an ambling horse to the Devil, and he that has the
second a Trotter. --

Enter Sir Gudgeon Credulous, and Gotam. Sir, Your Servant.


Sir Gu. Honest Mr. Driver, -- And how? -- What news? -- Ha 'you been as good
as your Word?


Dr. Yes Sir, -- here are some, -- And you may take your choice. [Shews his bag.


Sir. Gu. Aa! -- Mr. Driver, -- You were ever my friend: -- But prithee
satisfy me by discoursing the reason of 'em, as why, some are more lucky in
their hits, then others. --


Dr. You must know Sir, that inventions came by degrees, but have ever had this
ill fortune, to be fatal to the first Inventors, who have only discovered a new
shore to shipwreck their persons on it, or bury their fortunes in it.


Got. How shall we do then?


Dr. Well enough, -- We have this advantage, that others have gone before us,
and broke the ice to our hands; -- However we must not be so hasty as to expect
all things should be done at once; -- No, -- Nature makes no leaps, and
Invention which is the handmaid of Nature, must but follow her, and take
pattern, from her.


Sir Gu. Nay I grant ye, time perfects every thing; Nor can it be thought, that
our invention should be so absolute, as that it were impossible to be improved.


Dr. You have hit the point, and learnedlie; -- However for demonstration: --
The Spade and Shovel were Primitive Inventions, and from thence came the Plow;
-- In like manner from the Rake, the Harrow; -- From the Pestle and Mortar all
sort of Mills, whether Horizontal, or Plegnick; Horse, Hand, Wind, Water, or
otherwise; -- From the Wheel-barrow; Carts and Coaches; -- From the scraping of
a Hen, Letters; -- From Pease-Hulls in the Kennel, the Invention of Shiping; --
And from a Kites tail, the Rudders to 'um; -- I should have mentioned an other
thing, which how simple soever at first, 't has been since improved to a
wonder.


Got. As what good Sir?


Dr. Why thus -- You know men originallie lapt Water like dogs, but finding
that a little troublesome, They soop't from their hands; -- from thence came
Wooden dishes, thence earthen Pitchers, Thence Black-Jacks, thence Flagons,
thence Kanns, thence Horns, thence Pewter cups, thence Glasses, and as an
Eumechanick from the whole, Silver and gold Tankards.


Sr. Good. I le be sworn thou have cut out the buisness notably.


Got. Marry has he; -- A shrewd fellow. -- But hark you, -- Have you remembered
me?


Dr. Presently -- I was just coming to ye, -- And shall only tell you by way
of Prolegomena, That Inventions are of two sorts (to wit) either such as are
destructive to humane Society (as the Invention of vvalking invisible, and
making Ships and Boats sail in the Air, as well as on the Water, which we
call Cacamechana) or such as are advantageous and useful; and of this kind, I
think I can show you as much choice, as any man whatever he be.


Sir Gu. I must confess I am for those, -- let us see.


Got. I, I -- Those, those.


Dr. You see Gentlemen, I am not shie to you, I dare trust you to peruse my
papers! [They turn over his papers.


Sir Gu. Aa! Good Mr. Driver -- What are these?


Dr. Let me see -- most Excellent things! -- You know Sir, we English men
chiefly buzzle our heads about two things, That is to say, Religion, and Trade;
-- And truly you have luckily hit upon both, -- The one, is a Project for a
Divinitie-Mill, that shall go by any wind, and never stand still.


Sir Gu. But of what use?


Dr. Marry -- To grind Controversy, and that so fine, and subtle, it shall
hardly be perceptible, -- And I Will undertake, make more Proselites, than ever
did Cha^cers Friar with his shoulder blade of the lost sheep.


Sir Gu. Lay that by, -- I Will fit you a Chapman. -- [T'other.


Dr. Why -- this -- It Is the height of Art! -- An Emporentick Invention, of
making Cloth without Wool.


Got. How Is that? -- Cloth without Wool; -- Make me but that good, and Write
your own Conditions.


Sir Gu. With your favor Sir, -- I was in before you -- Pray go on -- How is
it to be done?


Dr. Why thus -- I shall discover all. --


Sir Gu. Not to your friend? -- good Master Driver.


Dr. Then thus -- You must gather the Atoms into a Glass well ground, and
then thread 'em upon a fine imperceptible Loome, and when they are once Wove,
it is easy milling 'em to what consistence you please.


Sir Gu. But how shall we do for this Loome?


Dr. Did you never hear of Uulcan^ Net? -- You must take Copy by that.


Sir Gu. Cry y'mecrcie good Mr. Driver, -- This shall be mine; -- I have a
Glass (as one would say) made for the purpose, -- A most excellent Optic, --
It shall make you an Atome show as big as a Quarter Staff.


Dr. Alas Sir the Thread will be too big, and fit for nothing but to Thrumme
Coverlets; whereas my design in it was to alter the affairs of Christendom, by
breaking the Spanish trade of fine Wool, and the Duch new manufactures.


Sir. Gu. I apprehend you, -- The Price?


Dr. Why troth Sir it will not go, under five hundred pound and a quarter share.


Sir. Gu. No more, -- I ll give thee a note to my Goldsmith -- Honest Mr.
Driver. [He goes aside and writes.


Got. Here -- here Mr. Driver, -- What are these?


Dr. A rare invention for the sealing of Butter, without the charge of Butter
Prints; -- The same for Ginger-Bread. --


Got. Go on -- This!


Dr. This -- A Whirligig for Dreining the Sea, for Treasure Trove: -- But to
this there belongs another -- oh -- I have it, -- A devise to stop up the
Rivers, that they shall n't run in, till the Work be over: -- But this will be
a work of time, and charge.


Got. However, the profit will answer it.


Dr. Here are others would do as well, or better -- You grasp at too great
things. -- An invention for the making Books sell at treble the rate they would
have done otherwise. --


Got. As how good Sir? -- my brother shall be in for this.


Dr. By a fine new Title and Picture before it; or if that fail, getting 'um
suppressed, and somewhat else which I shall only tell the Bookseller himself. --
A new Engine for the better sowing of Wheat, and setting of Leeks; -- A
Proposition for the Farming the Excize upon Jews-Trumps, and Town Tops. --


Sir Gu. Not forgetting Nine-Pinns, and Shovel-Board Tables I beseech ye.


Got. As how I pray -- can that amount to any thing?


Dr. Almost incredible, -- There Is a great mystery in t, -- for look you Sir;
Do but consider how many more boys, then men there are, and then make the
conjecture -- Where Is this, -- oh -- Here -- Be happy. -- Here Is an Invention
will do thy Work: -- Thou may even shut up Shop, or do what thou will.


Got. I can turn it over to another, which will be all one, -- What is it?


Dr. Why, it is a Project to incorporate the Gold-finders, and makes 'um turn
Salt-Peeter-men; for besides that the materials will be exceeding cheap, the
learned, upon experiment have found, it makes the best Gunpowder, by reason of
its Nitrous quality, and the refuse, most incomparable soape; An Invention
must necessarily destroy the trade of Potashes, and consequently bring all the
Soap boilers in London under your girdle.


Got. I Am satisfi^d, -- Not a word to Sir Gudgeon; -- Lets shake him off, and
you and I Will drive the Bargain by our selves; -- Pray Sir use me as kindly as
you can, and I promise to consider you better as the Profits shall arise.


Dr. Well Sir I shall not press too hard upon a young beginner, -- I hope you will
be as good as your Word.


Got. If I am not. -- [Sir Gu. gives Dr. a note.


Sir Gu. Here Sir, -- If to morrow be any thing fair, I Will begin the
experiment, and perhaps, make some small essay this night upon the Moon.


Dr. I know not what excellent quality your Glass may have above others, --
But if I might advise you, I would defer it to the Dog-daies.


Sir Gu. The goodness of my Glass will supply a small defect, -- I Will tell you
what; -- But you will happily believe it, -- I have discovered with it a Flea in
the Bears tail, and a Louse in Caput Algol -- Anglice, Medusa's head, -- It Is
but trying -- Come -- I am out of patience till I set it on foot: -- My service
to your Master, -- I cannot stay to talk with him now: -- Farewell.


Dr. Your Servant Sir. [Exeunt severally.


ACT. IV.
Enter Squeeze, Driver. Dr. GOod Mr. Squeeze no more, -- I am so full of
business I can hardly tell which to set about first.


Squeez. But I am afraid, these will scarce turn to account.


Dr. How! -- not turn to account! -- Is the sole engrossing of all Love Letters
(whither in Verse or Prose) within the Realm of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, so cheap in our eyes? -- Besides that
unimaginable Project of procuring a fifth Term, and the multiplication of
Offices, according to the augmentation of Suits, so slight with you? -- O the
boundless Avarice of insatiate men!


Sq. Nay good Mr. Driver.


Dr. What! -- nothing content you, unless you fine for Sheriff the first year.
-- Gi me't again.


Sq. Pray Sir, -- Are you angry because my Wit is not so ripe as yours; --
Great things are not so easily apprehended: -- Suppose I offered that of a fifth
Term, to the Innes of Court, and Doctors Commons, do you think they would
advance any thing considerable upon it?


Dr. Think! -- About it, and be thankful, -- We shall have you now once in a
twelvemonth not know your old friends; -- But if you do, it shall be a warning
to me, how I ever --


Squeez. What do you take me for -- pray no more. -- Fare you well. -- [Exit
Squeez.


Dr. Your Servant. --

So, so -- the wheels go merrily round: -- And now for my main game, Mr.
Suckdry, -- if I can but squeeze that Sponge into my young Masters pocket, the
work's done, -- let me see --

[Noise within. He must not take me unprovided, -- Hark! -- it is he. --

[He turns over his bundle. Enter Suckdry. A Project for the reprinting of Tom
Thumb with Marginal Notes and Cuts; And that every man within this Kingdom, buy
it of the Patentee, at the rate of Twelve pence, or come up to Town to show
cause why he will not.


Suck. Good -- I will not disturb him yet.


Dr. Another -- for raising six pence upon every thousand of Bricks; and two
pence a joint, for every joint of Meat that shall be dressed on Friday's and
Saturday's.


Suck. Excellent! -- This fellow will be rich, he minds his business.


Dr. That every Usurer pay twelve pence per pound out of all interest money,
toward Charitable uses, and that the Patentee have the disposing often.


Suck. Oh! -- He Will spoil all again. [He starts.


Dr. Whose there? -- Mr. Suckdry! -- Your servant, -- you see I am at work for
you; -- But this is not the business I have designed for you -- Hmh -- it is
come at last -- Here it is -- A thing shall bring you in a vast deal of money
without any charge, -- besides the primary charge.


Suck. As what, good Mr. Driver? What?


Dri. Why it is a Wooden-Horse, so contrived with Screws and devices, that he
shall out-travel a Dromedary, carry the burden of fifteen Camels, run you a
thousand mile without drawing bit, and which is more then all this; not cost
you two pence a year the keeping.


Suck. Ha, Ha, He -- in faith -- in faith! prithee on, -- Is there no difficulty
in the work?


Dr. The greatest, will be to set him a going: But I think I have sufficiently
provided for that: -- I Will tell you how I have ordered it: -- Turn one Pin, he
shall Trot, another Amble, a third* Gallop; a fourth, Fly; And all this
performed by Germane Clock-Work: -- Don Quixotes Rosinante, was an Ass;
Reynaldo's Bayart, a mere Slugge; and Clavellino the swift, a very Cow to him;
-- I might mention Alexander Beucephalus, the Cid's Bajeca, the Moors Zebra,
Rogero's Frontino, Astolpho's Hippogryphon, Orlando's Briliadoro; The Muses
Pegase, the Suns Horses, and Zancho's Dapple, -- But they are not to be named
the same day together; -- One thing more I could tell you -- But --


Suck. Good Mr. Driver -- out with it: -- No Butts (among friends) I pray.


Dr. It Is but shoeing him with Cork, and he shall tread as firm, and strike as
true a stroke on the water, as he does on land; and which is more, care for
neither tide nor weather, and run in the winds eye: -- A devise, must of
necessity break the Packet Boats, and consequently engross the whole dispatch
for Ireland, France and Holland.


Suck. And do you think you could prevail with your Master to part with this
horse?


Dr. Yes certainly for his Sons good -- Though as I told you before, he has
more already then he knows well how to spend.


Suck. No more of that -- Prithee let me speak with him -- He shall have Bags,
Daughter, Devil and all.


Dri. I Will wait on you again imediatelie. -- [Exit Dr.


Suck. Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping, -- So -- so -- It Is an
excellent shaped horse, and must be good, -- Why may not I improve this Project
now, and make him carry as much on his back, as the Trojan horse did in his
belly; at least, as many Citizens and their Wives at once, as the great Bed at
Ware, will hold at twice, -- 'twas well thought on --


Enter Dr. and Ferd. Dr. This is my young Master Sir, will you please to be
known to him.


Suck. A towardly young man -- save you Sir --


Fer. Your friend and Ferdinand -- Pray no Complements.


Suck. An humble young man, and sparing of his very words -- I ll try his
temper -- With your favor Sir -- I have long desired your acquaintance, and
having a further inclination to continue it, I must crave leave to ask you a
few questions. --


Fer. The fewer the better, -- as near as I could, I would not waste either
time or breath.


Suck. Excellent! -- pray Sir what do you take to be the greatest virtue in the
world?


Ferd. Thrift.


Suck. Short, but pithy -- Admirable! But might not I be so much beholding to
you, as to give me your reason for t?


Fer. It would better become me to learn from you -- However, since you desire
it, I shall tell you what first moved me to it.


Suck. I am beholding to you -- pray begin.


Fer. Then truly Sir I find it founded upon Nature, -- The Sun the Moon, the
Stars, are sparing of their light, and do not always shine; The Earth is
barren in some places, that it may be fruitful in others -- And the Sea, has
its ebbs and neaps, as well as flowings and Spring tides; -- And in a Word,
from the beginning 'twas ever so.


Suck. Excellent again! let me not interrupt you.


Fer. Nor is this all; It has been the general practice of all times -- The
golden age, to save charges, were clad in skins, drank Water, eat Acorns, and
to show their innocence, wiped their noses on their sleeves: -- The
Philosophers, they were sparing -- The Brachmans, went naked, -- Diogenes lived
in a Tub -- Pythagoras, on Carrets and Cabbage; -- Plato wondered, a man could
eat two meals a day; -- And Epicurus (whatever we think of him) was as great a
Prince with a tossed in the dripping Pan, as a fat Citizen with his shoulder of
mutton and Capon: -- The Stoics, were abstenious to a miracle, and if ever
they exceeded, 'twas never at their own charge; Nor have they walked alone, The
learned tread hard after 'um; for either (like the ancient Druids) they commit
nothing to writing, or if they do, it is so close and aenigmatical, that no body
can pick any thing out of 't: -- But I burden you.


Suck. By no means, -- good Sir on.


Fer. To come nearer home, we all cry up Charity, and no doubt, do well in it;
But who makes any use of it? at least, any more then needs must; we bless it is
true, but without a Cross, And for good Works we do no more then will just
serve (if yet that) for fear of supererogating, -- Pray tell me, was it for
nothing think you that we found a late style of the Keepers of the Liberty; or
that the Keeper of a Park had his name to no purpose, -- surely no -- The Age
is arrived to that height of thrift, that they find more's got by selling their
Bucks, then by eating them themselves, or giving 'um their friends.


Suck. Right: -- I have not found more thrift, no not in Spain or Italy.


Fer. And now you mention Spain, give me leave to put off my hat to that
Venerable name -- The Spaniard! -- the frugal Spaniard! -- that shall make you
five meals upon one Hen, Feast his Family with three Pilchards, and carry a
pound of Mutton in triumph on a Skiver! -- But I forget my self, I am sure now
I weary you -- yet if you have ever so much time to spare, read but Sir Jeffery
Drop-nose his discourse upon Save-alls, or his new method of skinning of
Flints, and perhaps you may not think your time ill spent.


Suck. Ha -- Ha -- what was that? -- Books -- Books?


Fer. Yes Sir, a good thrifty Author and well received.


Suck. Uh -- Have a care, -- No Books I beseech you -- They cost money -- Read
men -- Read men. -- Hang these liberal Sciences, This is no time for 'em --
Study Thrift, -- Study Thrift, -- It Is strange, you that are so great Master in
the Theory, should be so much out in the Practick! -- let me read to you.


Fer. With all my heart, and I readily embrace it.


Suck. 'Twas well said -- And first, for your person. -- Have nothing about you
that may be spared, nay though it be not worth a farthing; for if you would but
seriously consider, how much one poor farthing, Use upon Use, in 200 years
amounts to, you would not lay it out upon waste: -- Next, eat little, drink
less, and sleep much, to save fire and candlelight; And if ever you are sick,
be your own Doctor, and never exceed above a half-pennie worth of Sena: -- Then
for your clothes, make no new, but beg an old suit as for a poor friend of
yours, but fit it up for your self; but short and close, lest your wife, taking
example by you, run out as much in train.


Fer. But suppose, Sir, I kept her always in mourning, would it not do well,
think ye, to save Linen, and washing?


Suck. Very good, and well observed -- And hark you -- never let her be too
forward in making Babie-clouts; perhaps the Child may be still-born, and then,
there is so much saved -- And since you have named mourning, let me advise you,
never give any upon your will, they will then mourn indeed: and for your wife,
make her no more new clothes than needs must -- As long as the Cat's skin is
burnt, you shall have her keep home, let it be once sleek'd and she is
presently a Catterwauling -- Then for your housekeeping -- Be ever exact in
keeping Fasting-daies, and Hollie-day Eves; for besides that you complie with
the Discipline of the Church, you save your own purse -- And for your provision
-- Be sure to buie the worst of every thing, (as rotten Eggs, mouldie Wheat,
stinking Beef, and the like) for besides that it is much cheaper, your family
will eat the less, and for that reason also, let your meat be either bloudraw,
or over-rosted; and as near as you can dine late, that they may have no stomach
to Supper.


Fer. Then, Sir, -- If you will give me leave --


Suck. Good leave have you -- proceed --


Fer. If your Friend come to dine with you -- Ask him by way of prevention,
when he will be so kind as to come and dine with you -- But if he chance to
surprise you, Treat him not, but tell him you will make no Stranger of him --
Either he has an appetite, or he has not; if he has, hungers the best sauce, if
he has not, it is all lost -- If he be your friend, he will be contented with what
you have; if not, it is too much.


Suck. Or rather take pattern from the Prudent Dutch, tell him your house is
visited, and so carry him to the next Inn, and there eat upon his purse, -- Two
men's meals well saved -- But one thing more which I had quite forgot -- If ever
you should chance to keep Servants, change 'em often; they are generally
diligent in their new clothes -- And for their service -- Let every one perform
two Offices at least; following herein the example of the same thrifty Dutch,
with whom (generally) one and the same person supplies the several Offices of
Chaplain and Barber.


Fer. How unfortunate am I, that have been so long a stranger to such excellent
Morals -- Pray, Sir, oblige me once more.


Suck. Ha, ha, he -- Shall I turn prodigal in my old age?


Fer. Of Counsel you may, Sir -- it costs you nothing.


Suck. Well-well-well, -- Since I must -- Make the Ant your pattern for laying
up, and the Limbeck your example for giving it out again -- The Limbeck! (peace
be with him that first invented it) The Limbeck, I say, that be it never so
full, gives back again, but drop by drop -- Which that you may the better do,
let me advise you, first, to avoid Lawsuits, it being like a Sheep's flying
for shelter to a Bramble, where commonly he leaves the better part of his
Fleece behind him -- Next, give no money to Servants, it being in effect a
paying for your entertainment -- and as little, upon hopes of return,
Ingratitude reigns -- Then, never fish with a golden hook for fear you lose it,
or that the profit do not countervail the hazard and charge -- But this I would
have you -- when you have any business doing, let your hand be either fumbling
about your little pocket, or playing with some gold -- Ah! -- it makes a man so
nimble when he believes it will be his presently -- But when it is done, give
him never a groat; only shake him by the hand, invite him to your house, and
tell him your wife and he are Town-born children; let him say what he will when
you're gone, you have saved your money, and the loser may be allowed the liberty of
speaking -- Let the world call it sordid, or what they please; He that can do
this, may be presumed to be content with it, and consequently, happy; for
happiness consists in nothing more, than in being content -- Populus me
sibilat, at mihi plaudo -- A good saying, and the only piece of all the Poets
I ever understood -- And hark ye, if thou marri'st my daughter, it shall be the
posie of her Wedding-ring.


Fer. How, Sir! marry your daughter -- why I scarce ever saw her.


Suck. No matter, no matter -- she shall be ruled by me.


Fer. Alas, Sir -- charge of children will come on -- And I have heard say, A
Wife's as chargeable, as an old Tenement, 'twill cost you half your rent to
keep it wind-tight and water-tight.


Suck. Well, well, well -- thou shall be at the charge of repairs during my
life, and after my death, shall have all -- All I have -- All-All-All.


Dr. Troth Sir my young Master is bound to you, -- Come Sir, speak comfortablie
to the old Gentleman.


Fer. I can only thank you Sir, and tell you, that I am wholly at your dispose.


Dr. Why that is well said. --


Enter Jocose, Mrs. Godsgood. Suck. Mr. Jocose! in pudding time! Do you
remember what you said to me, touching your son, and my daughter? truly, --
truly, I like the young man so well, that if I had twenty daughters he should
have 'em all, -- All -- Body and bones, and all I have after my death: -- I
truly every groat, -- unless it be four old Harry groats, which I have thus
disposed in my Will, viz. one groat to the poor of St. Giles's, and St. Andrews
Holborne, to be equally divided amongst 'um; A second, to the Hospitals of St.
Bartholmews, Christ Church, and St. Thomas, to be equally divided as before;
Provided always, that (within the first six months after my decease) they set
up my name amongst their benefactors; -- A third to charitable uses in general,
to be disposed, as to my Executors shall seem meet; A fourth toward my Funeral
Expenses, -- I think there will be no great need of a Sermon: -- A man must do
some good you know.


Jo. And may he never thrive that shall go about to subvert so pious an
intention; -- And now for my son, -- You have my consent.


Suck. I thank you, -- But do you hear Mr. Driver, -- Don't you forget the horse
now; -- no more but mum. --


Dr. I apprehend you Sir: -- Your nod's enough.


Suck. Come Son, for that must be thy name now; -- Come -- go home with me, --
and good Mr. Driver let it be your care to get us a gentle reader, he will not
expect so much as another, -- But for the Clerk, you may let him alone, -- one
of us can say Amen, as well as he: -- There Is so much saved. --


Dr. It shall be done Sir. --


Suck. Farewell, good Sir, -- we will make no Wedding of it -- Tailor's Lists, and
blew Points, shall be both Garters, and Favors --


Fer. So much the better -- Your servant.


[Exeunt Suck. Ferd. and Driver. Mr. G. G. Send them good luck.


Jo. And none for me, good Widow?


Mr. G. G. O by any means -- your Project deserves it.


Jo. Am I unkind to you then, that I Would have you take your money again? -- No --
you are rather beholding to me that have not made those advantages of you, that
had I loved your money better than your person, I might have done.


Mrs. G. G. In that respect I must confess I am -- But pray tell me -- How came
this humor about?


Jo. You may best answer that your self -- You know I loved you, and could not
be ignorant, but that I looked upon Sir Gudgeon Credulous as a block in my way,
which once removed, I might have the better hopes of kissing the Mistress my
self: pray what did you most fancy in him, his person, his parts, or his
estate?


Mrs. G. G. I was never so greedy to expect all three -- I could for a need
have excused the two former, to have been well secured of the last.


Jo. A right Widow.


Mrs. G. G. You men (alas for you) you never mind those little things of Estate
-- You are above Ordinances -- You are altogether for Virtue.


Jo. Not so far neither, good Widow -- A little of both does no hurt -- They do
as well together as ill asunder --

Enter Sir Gudgeon. -- But see! your Haberdasher of small Projects --


Sir Good. Yours, Sir, -- Madam -- who thought to have found your Ladyship here?


Mrs. G. G. Can you blame me, that am so far dipped in your Projects, to enquire
at least how things went.


Sir Good. You might have trusted that to me -- I dare warrant you a good
return, and in few days. -- A little time must needs make us either Princes,
or Beggars -- I hope the first.


Mrs. G. G. But suppose the latter?


Sir Good. It Is not to be supposed -- Let me tell the Widow of mine, -- Be
happy.


Mrs. G. G. It Is the thing we all wish -- But how came you to be so confident
of a sudden?


Sir Good. Because it is impossible we should be otherwise -- The work goes
pleasantly on -- And hark ye, Widow, I am resolved to present thee a piece of
Scarlet, for thy own wearing, shall not have a lock of Wool in it -- And yet
good substantial Cloth.


Mrs. G. G. But who makes it, Sir Gudgeon?


Sir Good. What matters that, so you have it -- I am promised an Artist, shall
do wonders.


Mrs. G. G. A small Philosopher I hope?


Sir Good. It Is not material whether he be or no -- I love to trust every man
in his way, -- what care I whether my Tailor be a good Musician, or my
Coachman be able to Con a Ship: -- it is enough to me that he perform what I
intend him for. -- For my own part I am so well assured of the thing, that I
could wish I were no Knight, but had staid to have been made a Lord for
altogether -- And so let me say to thee once again, Widow of mine -- be happy.


Jo. For that of Happy, be so as long as you can -- But pray take me along
with ye -- No longer Widow, nor yours I beseech you.


Sir Good. How Is this! -- Who dare say the contrary? -- He were better --


Jo. Have broken your Worship's pate: -- With this Lady's leave -- That dare
I: -- or if you will not believe it -- pray, Madam, lend me your Busk.


Sir Good. Mr. Jocose! -- it is impossible! -- I never thought you would have
served me thus.


Jo. And why not -- would you engross all to your self? -- He projects, and She
projects too. -- Good, Sir Gudgeon, -- there is Conscience in every thing. --


Sir Good. It Is well you are my friend -- But do n't ye presume too far.


Jo. Further than this Lady I shall not -- and yet so far (with her good
favor) I ever shall.


Sir Good. But you may come short home -- You know the necessity of attending
more grand Affairs lies upon me -- But --


Jo. Does the fool prate?


Mrs. G. G. Nay, Mr. Jocose. [Sir Gudgeon runs out.


Jo. I obey -- And now, Madam, I leave it to your own judgment, how much I was
out in my Character -- And if there remains any thing to your further
satisfaction, pray let me know it.


Mrs. G. G. I Will consider of it within. [Exeunt.


ACT. V.
Enter Mrs. Gotam, Mrs. Squeeze, (severally.) Mrs. Sq. MRs. Gotam, well met --
whither so fast?


Mrs Got. Marry to find out this Rogue that has abused my Husband -- I tell
thee what, Squeeze, He and his Staff-men have made such a stink in our house,
that all the neighbors are up, and cry, A Wedding, a Wedding -- I have been
this half hour a shaking the Bride-laces off my petticoat.


Mrs. Sq. Why, what is the matter? --


Mrs. Got. Hang him for a fool -- He cries, it is a new way of making Gunpowder
-- But when he is in a condition of receiving it, I Will ring him such a peal -- I
ll Gunpowder him --.


Mrs. Sq. And mine is as bad of the t'otherside -- He Is so full of business he is
even mad -- He talks of nothing but Sonnets, Madrigalds, Acrosticks,
Love Letters, Wedding-Posies, and I know not what -- Well, if thy Husband's
Project be the beginning of Love, I am confident mine is the end often.


Mrs. Got. O that these men must do all things by themselves, and never advise
with their Wives till it be too late -- But I Will make my Gentleman know a piece
of my mind before I have done with him. --


Enter Gotam, (sputtering.) Mrs. Sq. Peace, peace -- here he comes. --


Got. Uh -- Hum -- Puth -- 'Ta'd need be profitable, I am sure it is not very
toothsome.


Mrs. Got. And whither, Gentleman? whither so fast? -- Your Wife's nothing with
you -- But I Have a Crow to pluck w'ye -- Where Is my Coach and the eight Horses
you talked of, and the new Dining Room to our Country House -- Do You think to
rob me thus.


Got. Nay, good wife -- dear honey -- they are all a coming: -- Do not see
what pains I have been taking -- and all to make thee a Lady -- Prithee --
it is all for thee -- Good faith it is.


Mrs. Got. Marry fough -- All what?


Got. What ever I bring to perfection -- Thou must have patience -- It Is but an
Embrio yet.


Mrs. Got. Pray leave me off your Brewing, unless it were to better purpose --
I was finely holpt up when I married you, and refused more likely men every
way, and such as would have maintained me like a woman -- But the devil owed me
a good turn: --


Got. Nay, dear wife -- thou art always in this Key -- What encouragement can
it be to a man, when his wife believes nothing but what she should not?


Mrs. Got. Say -- speak -- what should I believe, or what should I not believe?
-- you will teach me, will you?


Got. No, good wife -- But we may hear one another though.


Mrs. Got. I ve heard too much -- Thou lets every one lead thee by the Nose,
and make thee an Ass and a Beast -- And I could find in my heart to make thee
too -- (Look better to your business) Come come -- where be the Keys of the
Chest? give 'em me.


Got. What to do?


Mrs. Got. What to do with my own? -- why was it not al mine? -- And do thou
grutch me my own? -- Go go - try thy Experiments with what thou broughtst thy
self, unless they were better or more likely.


Enter Mr. Driver. Got. Mr. Driver! -- Never in better season.


Dr. Why how now Mrs. Gotam, -- Sitting in judgment upon your Husband?


Mrs. Got. If I do -- it is my own husband -- and one that (if you please Sir)
has been fooled enough by you.


Got. Nay Wife -- you will not spoil all? -- the Gentleman is a Civil Gentleman,
and an excellent person in his way.


Mrs. Got. I ll excellent ye both -- What fine Project is this you have put my
Husband upon? -- Had your Master no one to fool but his own flesh and blood?


Dr. What does your Wife mean Mr. Gotam?


Got. Alas Sir, if you lived at our house you would never ask that question -- it is
her ordinary exercise to keep her self in breath.


Mrs. Got. I Will breath you -- must you abuse me too! remember this Gentleman.
--


Dr. But may not I know whence all this heat?


Mrs. Got. You know but too well -- And as you have brought him on, pray bring
him off, or I ll make the house too hot for you and your Master too -- I Will
powder you. --


Dr. And why -- How goes it forward?


Got. In plain Troth Sir (between our selves) I half doubt the Woman's mad, --
She has thrown all the Tubs about house, and raised the Neighbous about our
ears.


Dr. And you think you have done a wise action now, to discover in one minute,
what some men might have studied their whole lives for, but never found.


Mr. Got. Indeed Sir! -- And do you believe there was any thing in it?


Dr. It matters not whither there were or no -- Your own folly [He tares a
paper. will best teach you -- There -- There Is the Counter-part of your
Articles; and to let you see how much I scorn to take advantage of you, I
discharge you of all moneys due by virtue of'um.


Got. You Have done well Wife -- yo've made a fair hand ^n't.


Mrs. Got. Nay pray Sir.


Enter Squeeze (singing.) Dr. Not a word more -- I have done with it. --


Squeez. And will thou gang with me my Jo?
And will thou gang with me?
Now for thy Daddy's Benison,
I prithee now gang with me.

Dri. I -- here is your diligent man, -- He has traverst Scotland already. -- Now
Mr. Squeeze, how goes all affairs?


Sq. Why, as a man may say, on Wheels -- I had no sooner set up my Bills, and
hung out a large Label, with this Inscription in Capital Letters, --

Young Men Advance, and Maidens eke draw near, Here dwells Loves
Epistoliographer. I say I had no sooner hung it out, then my house was too
little to hold the company. OF my Conscience I think Wapping, Ratcliff, and
East Smith-old were never so drained since the last great show -- I Will
undertake, 'twould have made two Ginger-bread women for ever.


Dr. See here Mr. Gotam! -- see what industry can do! -- And yet I vallu'd your
device at least 50 per Cent. more then this.


Got. I Am an unluckie fellow -- this a man gets by making his Wife acquainted
with his business.


Mrs. Got. Nay prithee sweet heart lets home again -- I Will try to recover all.


Got. Impossible, -- or if it wern't, the Neighbors have smoked it. -- O Mr.
Squeeze! what luck you have!


Squeez. My faith I do pretty well, and at small expense -- I Will be sworn the
Packet of Letters, Familiar Epistles, Academy of Complements, and two or three
of the new Poets, is the greatest charge I have been at -- and I am confident I
shall, in a short time, be able to bring it into a lesser compass, by Printing
some blank Copies of the several kinds, that shall indifferent lie serve to
every occasion.


Dr. A pretty device and well found out.


Sq. But the main thing I built on, troubles me -- You remember the Fifth Term.
--


Dr. And what of that?


Sq. I have offered it to all the Inns of Court, Chancerie, and Commons, and
none bids me any thing for it -- for they that have any thing to do, cry four
is enough, and they that have not, though they shrug their shoulders, and look
smilingly on it, yet whither it be, that to others keep 'um so low, or that they
fear they would in a short time engross this too, though they seem to wish well
to it, yet they bid me not a farthing. --


Dr. No matter -- You Will find enough in this; -- You must not be too covetous.


Mrs. Got. But good Mr. Driver -- Will you assist us at least in the Soap
business.


Dr. They go together -- make one, and the other follows: -- But I Will meddle no
more in it -- I am too full else-waie.


Got. Pray consider often -- and we will take a turn or two in the Garden the
while -- Perhaps I may light udon some new proposals. -- Mr. Squeeze shall I
beg your company?


Sq. With all my heart. [Exeunt, all but Driver.


Dr. Well, I am gone so far -- but how to get clear again, there s the question,
-- I brought it on, and I hope my Master has by this time thought of some
device or other to bring it off. -- Enter Sir Gudgeon. Sir Gudgeon Credulous!
Your Servant.


Sir Good. Oh Mr. Driver! How have you served me? -- I have been trying your
Experiment at least 40 ways, and I Am sure my glass as good as any in
Christendom, but the Devil of a thread can I make hold, 'twas as rotten as
dirt -- An old black, died out of a rotten Scarlet, and that too, burnt in the
die, is Iron to it.


Dr. Sure Sir you're mistaken:


Sir Good. No, no, no -- it is but too true.


Dr. Or did not take the right way:


Sir Good. Oh no -- I was exact to the Thousand part of a hair.


Dr. Or perhaps over did your work, and so calcined 'um -- Of My Conscience if
the truth were known this was it -- And yet it is strange, so grave a
Philosopher, that has written so profoundly of Cobwebs, and Perry, should be so
much out in his first rudiments.


Sir Good. I know not, but it is as I tell you.


Dr. You see what it is when men cannot be contented to do, but they must
over-do -- It Is well I did not trust you with the business of Malleable Glass
-- Suppressing Mountebanks, -- and Enlarging the City Charter -- If I had, 't
ad been all one.


Sir Good. How Is that, good Mr. Driver? -- Pray lets hear 'um -- They may make
amends for the other.


Dr. No, no more -- I Will never trust a man again that cannot go by himself -- One
of your Years and Intellectuals, and not read without a Fescue!


Sir Good. Come, come -- lets try to recover't again.


Dr. Never, never -- I know, though I have not seen your work, you have spoiled
the design; for things of this nature are so nice, and kickish, the least Error
renders them irretriveable. -- A man had better fix Mercury in a blowing Mill,
then offer to think on it.


Sir Good. What remedy then?


Enter Jocose leading Mrs. Godsgood, Sir Good. walks. Dr. Patience, Sir Gudgen,
patience.


Sir Good. Hugh -- Patience -- And had I more, here is that would exercise it all.


Jo. And now no longer Widow, be as merry as a good Husband can make thee.


Mrs. G. G. I have but your own word for it; and yet hope I shall have no cause
to repent the action; 'Twas well said -- And I l promise thee (as near as I
can) I Will give thee none -- But see, Sir Gudgeon Credulous! -- He Is come to
give thee joy.


Sir Good. Joy -- Choke 'um -- [Aside.


Mrs. G. G. Save you, Sir Gudgin -- You Have been a great stranger -- I see I
might have even done what I would for all you -- you are a kind Suitor!


Sir Good. She jears me too! -- Is it not enough to have injured me, but you
must tell me so?


Mrs. G. G. I injured you! -- forbid it -- Pray how goes on our common business?


Sir Good. All evaporated -- gone -- gone -- quite lost --


Mrs. G. G. Why -- as I understand you, there was to be neither fire nor smoke
in 't.


Sir Good. I know not -- The Devil was in it -- And my new Drape -- quite defunct.


Mrs. G. G. And do you think it was kindly done to engage me in such a business?


Sir Good. 'Twas no more then what I did my self -- But I see (now it is too
late) that I am merely trickt out of my money, my Widow, and all -- But some
body shall dearly rue it.


Jo. That Is not I, Sir Gudgeon -- Is it?


Sir Good. No matter whether it be or no -- There are other bodies in the world
besides your self.


Jo. Yes that there are -- There are Bodies Politic, as London and
Westminster; and Bodies Simple, as Sir Gudgeon and his Participants.


Sir Good. Do You hear this, Mr. Driver? -- I shall order you in faith, if there be
any Law between the Mount in Cornwall and Berwick Stairs.


Dr. However, Sir, I am to thank you that you have been pleased to lend me some
money to defend the Suit.


Sir Good. Well -- look to t -- I say no more. --


[He offers to go out, Jo. stops him. Jo. No departing in wrath, good Sir
Gudgeon -- One does not know what you may do to your self -- You had better
stay a while and take a little advise with you: -- Go -- go down into the
Country and awe your poor neighbors with my Lords nod, or his whisper in your
ear at parting -- Study Longitude and the Philosophers Stone; The North-West
Passage, and the Square of a Circle -- So brave a Sir Poll, trouble himself
with trifles! -- By no means -- no -- no -- Embark for the Indies in a
Cock-boat, or to France on a Mil-stone; Plant a Colonie in Terra Incognita, or
settle an Intelligence with the Emperor of Utopia -- These were fit for Sir
Gudgeon! -- -- Hae tibi sunt arts!


Sir Good. Well, Sir, we^l -- It Is your time now.


Jo. Or if you love the smoke of the Town better -- Enter your self a Vertuoso,
and sit in Judgment on every man but your self -- Never open your mouth with
less than a Caball, and yet speak little, for fear you be understood -- However
let your sententious Tooth-pick speak for you, that you could say more, if you
durst trust the Company, or were not under an Oath of secrefie: -- Sir Gudgeon
beat his brains about ordinary matters! -- fie -- fie --


Enter Suckdrie hugging himself. Sir Good. You do well, Sir --


Suck. Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping -- O rare! -- Mr. Driver --


Jo. See! here is another of your Brethren -- Prithee, Driver, entertain him,
while I look to the Knight.


Sir Gu. So -- keep me a prisoner too -- you fear nothing.


Suck. Well met -- well met, Sir Gudgeon -- I sent you home the Boy and the
Girl -- Ha --? [To Jocose.


Jo. They are within.


Suck. But hark, Mr. Driver -- A word -- Ha'ye fitted out the Horse yet?


Dr, And over-fitted too -- What Is worse then ill luck? -- Certain we are
bewitched.


Suck. As how, as how, as how, Mr. Driver? -- no hurt I hope, good Mr. Driver?


Dr. Yes faith, Sir -- But it could not be helped.


Suck. What? what? what? what? what I pray?


Do. Why faith as he was coming full speed down Highgate-hill, he tript upon a
stone, fell, and broke his leg short off.


Suck. Uh -- undone for ever -- No good to be done with him now? -- Speak --
Ha? --


Dr. Why truly -- he may be made serve again -- To the Court of Guard, or so
-- But I fear me, not without some charge.


Suck. Uh -- Charge -- What a fool was I to be so forward in this Match, till I
had seen what would have come of the other?


Dr. How, Sir? -- is my young Master so cheap with you already?


Enter Ferdinand leading Nancy, both in rich apparel. Suck. Why that is some
comfort yet -- He Will save it up again by little. -- Oh? Driver! -- What Is this
I see -- surely this house is the Land of Visions -- My Daughter in beaten
Satin -- Held me -- I faint -- I faint -- Uh --


Fer. Come, my dear -- And now no more of your No pray I thank ye's -- 'Twas
well carried.


Nan. While I was at my Fathers, blame me not if I obei'd him, and now his
Election has made me yours, I hope I shall not so mistake the person, as to pay
you less.


Fer. That Is a pretty Rogue.


Nan. O my father -- Good Sir, help --


Fer. Certain he never gat her -- Nay were she not my wife, I Would swear it --
What Is the matter? -- stand off and give him Air.


Suck. Uh -- Hu -- my son and all! -- And all to be daubed! -- Is this the
thriftie Gentleman? -- Uh -- How apt is even the best ground to run into weeds?
-- Uh -- Uh --


Fer. Come, pray Sir, do not disquiet your self, or judge me by my outside --
it is the way to be mistaken a second time.


Suck. Is this founded upon Nature? -- This the habit of the ancient
Philosophers? -- It had not been amiss, if while they pretended to instruct
others, they had yet taught themselves.


Fer. Let me supply that defect, if yet you doubt it.


Suck. This the keeping your wife in mourning, to save Linen and washing? --
This the burnt Cats skin we talked of? -- defend her from what follows.


Fer. Pray Sir hear me -- And though I did a while put a force upon my Nature
to humor you, be not now disturbed that I am yet at last come to my self again.


Suck. Vh, -- vh He believes these things are death to me, and will murder me,
though it be but to scatter that little which with so much pains I have raked
together.


Ferd. Do not misconceive me, -- It Is my desire you may live and enjoie what
you have. -- The Earth, though she conveighs the water through her veins, is
allowed yet, to suck in as much as may refresh her self.


Suck. I was right -- He is resolved to break my heart.


Fer. Pray Sir hear me, and set not up your rest on that, which simply
considered, is not that blessing the world takes it for. -- No,-Wealth not
enjoyed, is but a dead heap of muck, and the same unactive lump in the Chest,
it was in the Mine. -- Were you master of all the most mighty could wish, did
you not only possess riches, but tread on 'um -- should fortune cover you with
gold, and were your wealth as boundless as your eye, yet had you not a heart to
use't, you would but from thence learn to covet more, and those false desires
having no limit, would become as infinite as error.


Suck. Vh -- vh -- no mercy!


Fer. Let me prevail -- good Sir -- You cannot but hear a man that pleads
against his own interest -- You have enough; why should you deny your self, at
least, a moderate use of it? Why should ye be fearful to approach it, and yet
be jealous of others? (like the sensitive Plant, shrink at the touch, and cramp
into a Convulsion) Why should ye use your wealth (as Anglers their little fish)
(...) to bait for more? Or why degrade your self from that (...) wherein Nature
set ye, by a voluntary sale of your (...) Slaverie? -- In a word, why should
you possess that with pain, which others behold with envy? Such as (in it
self) rather threatens, then profits, and thus obtained becomes not the end,
but change of misery. -- Come -- Pray Sir.


Suck. How shall I believe him? -- He said as much on the other side e're while
-- Give me leave. [Suck. offers to go out, Jocose stops him.


Jo. I Will be his security -- Pray stay a little, -- All will be well --

Enter Squeeze, Gotam, and their Wives. Oh Gentlemen you're welcome -- Now Sir
Gudgeon, what think you of reconciling all interests?


Sir Gu. You're in your own house -- You may do what you list.


Jo. No more of that, I pray -- I must have all friends though to my own loss.
-- And therefore, to be short, let me tell you Sir Gudgeon, that finding you so
inclined to Projects, I thought you might be instrumental to mine, and I have
compast 'um -- This, He points to the Widow and Nancy
for my self, and that for my Son -- for any thing beyond that, I am wholly a
stranger to t -- For I ever looked upon Projectors, like the Dogs in the Fable,
that burst themselves, by endeavoring to drink up the Pond, that they might
the easier come at the carcass, that floated on the middle often. --


Mrs. Got. And do you think to carry't off thus? -- Do look like a
Sheep-biter and see thy self laughed at?


[To her Husband. Jo. Pray Gentlewoman -- with your good patience a little --
The Use may chance to be more comfortable then the Doctrine -- For once I Will be
the Author of an ill Court-President, You shall all have your Money again.


Sir Gu. Say you so Mr. Jocose! -- Now send us more such Courtiers -- Come
Gentlemen we will be friends before his mind alter -- It Is ten to one but he
had been too hard for us.


Got. Indeed might he have been.


Suck. And so he has been for me.


Sq. I shall loose nothing by it.


Jo. What say ye Gentlemen, do you like my motion?


Sir Gu. I -- I -- Mr. Suckdry shall be ruled by me.


Suck. That Is more then you know though.


Omnes. Come -- pray Sir.


Sir Gu. 'T'as taught us wit.


Jo. And I hope you will consider your tutor Driver.


Sir Gu. Well -- well -- leave him to me.


Jo. And so, you're pleased? -- And you, -- And you, -- And you, -- And I hope
[They answer several. The same of The Pit.
you -- since now at last you find,
Who ploughs the Clouds, shall only reap the Wind.



[Exeunt Omnes. ERRATA.
BEfore the three first Acts you will find Scaen. 1. Wherein the Printer mistook
his Copy; be pleased to blot 'em: each Act being but one Scaene, and the Stage
throughout the whole Play kept full, -- The rest, being at most but literal,
leaves to your favor.

Epilogue.
PLAYS, are but Morals, and the Ancients,
That first wrapped Truth in Tales, had their intents.
Full well they knew, nothing discovered Vice,
Like its own Picture -- So we hope of this:
How ill Suckdrie appears! How odly those,
That grasp at Shadows, and the Substance lose!
Take you the Moral right -- and say -- The Stage
Then does its Work, when it reforms the Age.
FINIS.

