POTENTISS IACOBVS DG MAGNAE BRITAN GALLIAE ET HIBERN REX FIDEI DEFENSOR
BEATI PACIFICI

HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

THe right high and most mighty Monarch JAMES by the Grace of God King of
great Britain France and Ireland and Defendor of the Faith



THE HISTORY OF Great Britain, BEING THE LIFE AND REIGN OF King JAMES THE
FIRST, RELATING To what passed from his first Access to the Crown, till his
Death.

By ARTHUR WILSON, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lownds, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
White Lion near Saint Paul's little North-door. 1653.

THE PROEME.
I Am not ignorant, or insensible, from what Precipice, and into what Gulf I am
falling; not like one in a Dream, who starts at the horror of the Object,
which his own imagination creates: But deeply affected with those serious and
real impressions, which Time and Experience (the two great Luminaries of
Reason) have fixed upon me. Methinks I see the various, cloudy, and sad
distorted Fancies of these Times, (that flutter up and down betwixt the
Twilight of Ignorance, and Self-conceitedness) bandy themselves against this
Work; led on by Prejudice, which they muster up, and gather together, happily
from the dross of those Fragments, or vapors of Story, that (like crude, and
undigested Matter) have something tainted that precious Order, which Truth (the
Commandress of the Soul) loves to appear, and be admired in. Making it a Crime
even to name Kings; as if from that Name nothing could result, but such
dreadful Apparitions as would blast and throw an odious tincture upon them, to
the defacing and besmearing of Virtue and Innocence; when these will sit
Triumphing upon a Throne, in despite of Envy, pleading their own Cause; the
Beams of that Majesty being too bright and splendid to be overcast with the
Mantle of Malice, though clouded and interwoven with all the false Pretenses
she can put on.

And yet I see no Reason why Princes (towering in the height of their own Power)
should think themselves so far above ordinary Mortals, that their Actions are
to be incomprehensible. This is but a weakness, contracted in the high place
they look down from, which makes all things beneath them seem little, yea very
little to them. And though Men at so great a distance from them, are not able
to discern every particular Plume that carries them about, yet their often
Circumgyrations, and Turnings, are Obvious, many times stooping after a mean
and inconsiderable Quarry: By which they show, that they are carried up by the
Airy Body of Admiration, and that those gross Materials which tend to their
Composition, are as subject to distempered Passions, as the meanest of the
People.

Yet as they live in a Sphere above others, if their Minds be suitable to that
Height, if they aim more at Piety than Policy, if Religion be set up in their
Hearts for her Humbleness, rather than her Ornaments, more for her Beauty, than
Bravery, If Mercy and Justice (instead of Wild Beasts) be Supporters of the
Throne, and Ensigns of Royalty; If Truth in her plain Attire ( the loveliest
Object of the Soul) be not turned out of the Presence, and her painted Enemy
sit perching under the Cloth of Estate; If Virtue and Goodness be venerated
from an internal Principle in them, rather than the specious outside of them:
Who will not admire, and reverence such Majesty? But when they shall so much
debase that sublime and supereminent Region they are placed in, and come down
below that Dignity, to drive a Trade of petty things, thinking it a great
Conquest to deceive; protesting to do what they never intend, and intending
what they rather should protest against: To what low Condition do they bring
themselves?

We see all the Motions of Superior Bodies, in what excellent Order and
Perfection they move; and if some Exhalation starts up among them, from gross
and putrid Matter, whose Course is not yet known, what horrid trepidations
bring they with them? and what Prodigious Calamities are they the forerunners
of? Yet they hold not that Station long, but blaze a little there, and then
extinguish; and all that can be said of them, is, That we know not for what
mischievous intent these Meteors did appear: Whereas the other Celestial Bodies
beget no wonder, are no Prodigies, but keep a constant Course in their own
Spheres, and are not contaminated with things below them, yet they retain a
Powerful Influence over them. So Princes should always shine in Glory, and a
Noble Soul, that loathes to soil it self in sordid things, is the true splendour
of it. But when they grovel here for trash and trumpery, and trade away that
gallant stock of Love housed in their Peoples Hearts, for some false Coin,
minted by Passion, mutable Affection, or misled Reason, they do degrade
themselves. And then the only difference betwixt a King, and a mean Man, is,
That the one, by his Trade, cosens a few; the other a great many, but himself
most.

Thus we can look up to things above us, easily discerning the Cracks and Flaws
in Vessels of the purest Metal, by that luster that comes from them; but if we
cast an impartial Eye into our own Bosoms, we may doubtless discover in our
selves so much of Human Frailty, even of a grosser Nature, that may make Pity
the Mistress of our Passion, rather than Pride, and mourn for our own, rather
than glory in the Miscarriages of Others. Shrouds are the fittest Ornaments for
dead Bodies; and who will rip up wounds that Time has closed? A little Urn
will hold a great Man's Ashes; and why should we bedribble with our Pens, the
Dust that rests there? there is now no fear that it will rise, and fly upon our
faces.

Histories are like Anatomies, especially when they reflect on Persons: He must
be a skilful Artist, that can dissect a Body well. If Ignorance or Malice
attempts to hack, hew, or bespatter it, 'twill be most inhuman and barbarous;
it must be done by a gentle hand, with Authority and Knowledge, lest instead of
discovering the Similar Parts, they mangle and deface them, and so dissect and
open only their own follies; When the true end of this dissection, is, to show
the ways and passages of the Body, where Obstructions have been, where Diseases
have bred, and by this Pattern learn to remove the accretion of bad Humors, and
apply fitting Remedies for prevention of such Evils: So History must not
cauterise, and slash with Malice, those Noble Parts, the true end of whose
discovery is to better Mankind. For Examples of baseness, and unworthiness, if
truly and genuinely related, may deter and hinder the violent Career of such as
mind no other happiness than what this vapor of vainglory can contribute; and
esteem a good Name more among men, than acceptance with God. But yet in these
Relations, some grains of Human infirmity must in reason be allowed to
Greatness, because they have the means to more Temptations. And though there
are very many guilty, and many Men may justly suffer by the Law, yet there are
but few allowed to be dissected. Therefore he that is too rash in the Censure
of others, snatching Reports from the lips of Fame, and venting them for Truths
(without some probability or knowledge to enlighten and direct) digs in the
Bowels of another Man, and wounds himself.

But the Metaphor still holds; for as the dissimilar parts of the body, head,
hands, feet, etc. are apparently known; and the Similar parts, as veins,
sinews, nerves, etc. are easily discovered; so the motions and operations of
the more secret and hidden parts are controverted, and hard to find out, as the
Circulation of the Blood, etc. Yet we find the effects of it tend to life and
preservation, the end; though there be some dispute in the motion or means to
it. So in this Work; the chief part of what is written, is either apparently
known, or easily discovered, and those things that never saw the Light yet, may
be collected, and inferred, finding their Operations tend to one and the same
end: For I expect all men will not be of my mind, and look to be Anatomized my
self by the Hand of Opinion and blinded Passion, that strike at whatsoever
comes cross to them. Yet this I will say boldly, I have made Truth my aim, and
though I fly high, and may rove, I am sure not to light very far from the Mark.

For this Piece is not culled out of several Authors, of intricate Opinions,
and different Judgments, as a confused, and ruffled Skein, where, with
difficulty, an useful Thread may be picked out, which Livie complains of, and
wonders at in the Authors that wrote before him. But these like Simples were
gathered as they sprung up in the Garden of the Times (where Weeds and Flowers
grow together) with intention to compose something for the Public health; for
above thirty years before the Ingredients were mingled, in that long Series of
Time, weighing every Grain and Scruple, that there might be a due proportion,
and quantity as well as quality of them for the Composition of it; and this not
only acted by a natural Propensity, but I may say the hand of Providence
brought many things to my knowledge, that were not in my hopes or thoughts to
procure. And I confess there are some things in it may seem bitter, and sharp
to some, and though they be so, the Body many times requires such Medicines, to
dispel and check the peccant humors, and I doubt not but it will do the more
good to those that are distempered: But sound and gallant Minds have no need,
and are above the operations of it. As Titus Vespasian said, when one spoke ill
of him, Ego cum nihil faciam dignum propter quod contumelia afficiar, mendacia
nihil curo; He was above false Reports, and if they were true, he had more
reason to be angry with himself, than the Relator. The good Emperor Theodosius
commanded no man should be punished that spoke against him; for what was spoken
lightly was to be laughed at, what spightfully, to be pardoned, what angerly, to
be pitied; and if truly, he would thank him for it. Nor did I ever read, that
Tacitus was blamed for personating Tiberius Dissimulation, Nero's Cruelty,
Seianus Pride, Livia's and Messalina's Adulteries, nay, Domitians Tyranny and
Baseness, though he was his Creature advanced by him. But they that intend
Truth, must take this Counsel of his, Sed incorruptam fidem professis, nec
amore quisquam, and sine odio dicendus est; they must write without the
passions of Love or Hate. And I am sure I have as little cause to be partial as
He, though I have more to enlarge my self in Apology, having more Adversaries
to encounter with; He living in (as he says) Rara temporum felicitate, where
Men might think what they pleased, and speak what they thought; Whereas these
Times are as full of perplexed and disasterous Divisions, as the calamities of
a Civil War (when the poison of Malice lies raging and foaming in men's breasts,
like the troubled Sea after a Tempest) can possibly produce. And this Disunion
springs from that stock of Pride in us, when we put a greater valuation upon
our Opinions, stamped, and made current by Custom, than upon Reason, that Regent
of the Understanding, that should bring all things in obedience to it.

Nor can I discover all the Contrivances hatched, and brooded in the secret
corners of Princes Councils. All things are not revealed at a time. This
Groundwork may serve for others to build on, and it is easier to add to a
Pattern than to make one.

The Jews, to whom the Oracles of Truth were committed, calculated their Times
and Seasons by Lunary motions, the Solar were found out long after by
Pythagoras, and now we have new apprehensions inserted by Copernicus, that may
be as useful, tending to one time and end, though various ways. So by degrees,
there may be greater Discoveries made, than is yet here related. And what is
doubtful, give me leave with Tacitus only to touch at, who (speaking of
Domitians attempting to get the Power of the German Army under his command)
says, Qua cogitatione Bellum adversus Patrem cogitaverit, an opes, viresque
adversus fratrem in incerto fuit. Whether he intended War against his Father by
it, or to strengthen himself against his Brother, when time served, is not
certainly known; for who can dive into the Abyss of Princes intentions? And in
another place speaking of Domitian's juggling with Agricola, Sive verum istud,
sive ex ingenio Principis fictum ac compositum est. Whether this were true, or
surmised, probably, as correspondent to the Prince's disposition, I cannot
affirm. Yet where he finds out his extravagancies (of Knowledge) he asserts them
punctually. So some things in Princes actions may be left to conjecture, if
there be any ingenuity in the Declaration of them. And I hope some will come
after me, that will imbellish, and perfect the way with a more cunning and
exquisite hand, though I must confess I have done my best, dressing this Story
with the best Ornaments I could, to entice, and allure the Reader, leaving out
many long and tedious Discourses, that often damp the Spirits, and make them
Loiterers. And it were to be wished, that Philosophy had some intermixtures of
History; and that Divinity (the Mistress of Arts) were temptingly adorned, that
she might entice her Lovers the more to observe her. The Jesuits dress their
Morality and History with all the Eloquence they can, and cunningly mix and
intermingle with it, the fine Baits of Popish Theology, for people to nibble
on, hoping to gain them by such tempting Allurements. And I am not of Marcus
Aurelius's mind, that thankt Rusticus, that by his example, he had given over
the study of Elegant, and fine Language; unless he reflected upon such crabbed
pieces, as are interlarded with huge lushious words, that give no good relish
to the sense, or such high affected strains (wherein words are crowded) that
serve rather to amuse than inform the Understanding. But Elegancies in
expression (though I am not able to reach them my self) I admire in others,
especially if they run in a smooth Chanel, and keep that mediocrity that they
overflow not the bank.

But while I am pleading for Mediocrity, I find my self in a Labyrinth (betwixt
too little Pamphlets, our Kings Court, and his Kitchen) and I know not by what
Clue to avoid it. They are like two extremes, Scylla, and Charybdis, therefore
to pass by, and not be endangered by them, I will shape my Course in the
middle, betwixt both, and Truth shall be my Gale: For I protest, without
passion, I lean to no Faction or side; but set down plainly what my Conscience
and Knowledge dictates to me. Nor do I intend to asperse Noble Families; Where
is there one (as that famous Orator, the Lord Verulam, said) that like a fair
Pomegronate has not some corrupted Cornel? And may not that be picked out from
the rest, but it must taint them all? And how can Truth be known, but by the
good savor it leaves behind? For a good Name is like a precious Ointment.
Never any thing of History should be left to Posterity, if men may not be
spoken of when they are dead. And if their Actions be genuinely related, there
will be an intermixture of Good and Bad, professedly allowed, according to the
good or ill Comportment of the person presented (though, as I said, tenderly to
be dealt with) for Man is of no Angelical nature. But it is easy to daub over
the foulest Deformities, and make them appear Beautiful: For as Ulpian said of
the Laws of his time, so I say of Historical Relations, Nulla veritas ita
diserte ulla de re cavere potest, ut malitios a calliditas locum fraudi non
inveniat. But this stirring of the Waters, is only to make the Truth less
perspicuous, when time shall settle them, all things will appear clearly.
Records, and public Actions, within Memory, cannot sink, though the Dregs and
muddy water (thrown in to trouble them) may. But I will steer steady, and avoid
them both, hoping to arrive at some happy Port, if I can pass the Shallows of
Ignorance, or Rocks of Prejudice, that lie in the Way.

The Authors PICTURE drawn by Himself.
AS others print their Pictures, I will place
My Mind in Frontispiece, plain as my Face;
And every Line that is here drawn, shall be
To pencil out my Souls Physiognomy,
Which on a Radiant height is fixed. My Brow
Frowns not for these Miscarriages below,
Unless I mean to limit, and confine,
The Almighty Wisdom to conceits of mine.
Yet have no envious Eyes against the Crown,
Nor did I strive to pull the Mitre down;
Both may be good; But when Heads swell, men say,
The rest of the poor Members pine away,
Like Ricket-Bodies, upwards overgrown,
Which is no wholesome Constitution.
The grave mild Presbyter I could admit,
And am no Foe to the Independent yet;
For I have levelled my intents to be
Subservient unto Reason's Sovereignty;
And none of these State-Passions ever shall rise
Within my Brain, to rule, and tyrannize:
For by Truth's sacred Lamp (which I admire?)
My Zeal is kindled, not Fanatic fire.
But I Will avoid those vapors, whose swollen spite,
And foaming Poison, would put out this light.
Vain Fuellers! they think (who does not know it)
Their light's above't, because their walk's below it.
Such blazing Lights like Exhalations climb,
Then fall, and their best matter proves but slime:
For where conceited Goodness finds no want,
Their Holiness becomes Luxuriant.
Now my great trouble is, that I have shown
Other men's faults, with so many of my own;
And all my care shall be, to shake off quite
The Old Man's load, for him whose burthen's light,
And grow to a full stature, till I be
Formed like to Christ, or Christ be formed in me.
Such Pieces are Grav'n by a Hand Divine.
For which, I Will give my God this Heart of mine.
Contemnit linguas vita probanda malas.
UERA EFIGIES PRUDENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS ELIZABETHAE ANGLIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBE
REGINAE ETc.
ELIZABETHA REGINA.
Lo hear her Type who was of Late
Spains foil, faiths shield and queen of state
In brief of women near was seen
So great a Prince so good a queen.


Are to be sold by ROger Daniell at the angel in lumbard street

THE LIFE and REIGN OF JAMES THE FIRST KING OF Great Britain.
THE various hand of Time began now to sheath the Sword of War, An. Reg. 1.
that had been long disputing the Controversy, An. Christi 1603
which Religion and Policy (that Princes mix together) had for many years so
fiercely maintained. The wearing out of that old, but glorious, and most happy
Piece of Sovereignty, the late Queen, bating the Spanish Violence, and ending
with the Irish-Rebellion, and submission of Tirone, as if the old Genius of
Iron-handed-War were departed, and a New one Crowned with a Palm of Peace, had
taken possession of the English Nation; James the sixth, King of Scotland, was
proclaimed King of England. For though Princes that find here a Mortal
Felicity, love not the noise of a Successor in their lifetime, yet they are
willing (for the Peace of their people) to have One, when they can hear no more
of it. That which the Queen could not endure from others, She was well pleased
to express her self, and bequeath in her last Will, as a Legacy to this, then
Happy Nation. He was thirty six years of Age when he came to the Crown. How
dangerous the passage had been from his very Infancy to his Middle Age, is not
only written in many Histories, but the untamed and untractable Spirits of most
of that Nation, are a sufficient Witness and Record. The wise Queen found many
petty Titles, but none of that Power; any other Hand that should have reached
for the Crown, might a caught a Cloud of Confusion; and those Supporters, and
Props, that held up her Greatness (loath to submit to Equals) made Scaffolds to
his Triumphs. In the Wane, or last Quarter of the late Queen, the Court Motions
tended (by an Oblique Aspect) toward this Northern Star, and some of her great
Council in her Presence, would glance at the King of Scots as her Successor,
which would make her break into Passion, saying, Was this imputed to Essex as a
Crime, and is it less in you? Yea, Cecil himself, held his Correspondencies,
which he was once like to be trapt in. For the Queen taking the Air upon
Black Heath by Greenwich, a Post summoned her to enquire from what Quarter his
business came, and hearing from Scotland, She staid her Coach to receive the
Packet; but the Secretary, Sir Robert Cecil, (being in the Coach with Her)
fearful, that some of his secret Conveyances might be discovered, having an
active Wit, calls for a knife suddenly to open it, lest put offs, and delays,
might beget Suspicion, and when he came to cut it, he told the Queen, it
looked, and smelt ill-favouredly, coming out of many nasty Budgets, and was fit
to be opened, and aired before She saw it; which reason meeting with her
disaffection to ill Scents, hindered her smelling out his underhand Contrivances.

Secretary Cecil Proclaimed King James.
But now he may do it openly, for he was the first that publicly read, and
proclaimed the late Queens Will; Posts are sent in have, yet in so calm and
quiet a manner, as if the loss of so precious a Mistress had stupefied the
people. And now the Great-ones strive who shall be most Obsequious, and Court
their Happy Hopes. That Party that had been Opposite to the late Earl of Essex
(whose death as some thought shortened the Queens life) strove to ingratiate
themselves, by suppressing them, that had any Relation to him, assuring the
King (that always counted him his Martyr) that he aimed at the Crown himself,
and Princes apt to be jealous soon take such impressions. And now I have
stirred the Ashes of great Essex, I must revive his memory with this short
Character; for Reports flying upon the Airy wing of the Times, have variously
exalted, or depressed him, as the Serene for him, or the cloudy fancy against
him, waved up and down. He had a Gallant and Noble Spirit, full of Vrbanity and
innate Courtesy, which too much took the Popular Eye, and being a great
ingrosser of Fame, it procured him many Enemies, which made his Spirit boil
into passion, and that was more suitable to his Enemies Designs than his own,
for they lighted their candle by his fire, and this heat being blown by some
fiery Spirits about him, gave to the goodness of his Nature, a tincture of
Revenge, which his Enemies made reflect upon the Queen, so 1 1 2 OVID RETRIBVAM
DOMINO PRO OMNIBVS QVAE TRIBVIT MIHI
3 Jacobus (...) Mag Brit Fra and Hib Rex
3 IACOBVS DEI GRATIA MAGNAE BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET HYBERNIAE REX
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

BEATI PACIFICI

royal blazon or coat of arms 4 IACOBVS DG MAG BRITA FR ET HI REX
5 MAG BRIT FRA ET HI VX ELIZABETHA FILIAR^
5 NOBILIS SPE FIDE VERITATE

FRAN-PERRY DEL-ET SCVLP

that the Coal he strove to bring to burn his Enemies Nests, kindled his own
Funeral Pile.

But our King coming through the North, (Banqueting and Feasting by the way)
the applause of the people in so obsequious and submissive a manner (still
admiring Change) was checked by an honest plain Scotsman (unused to hear such
humble Acclamations) with a Prophetical expression; This people will spoil a
good King. The King as unused, so tired with Multitudes, especially in his
Hunting (which he did as he went) caused an inhibition to be published, to
restrain the people from hunting him. Happily being fearful of so great a
Concourse, as this Novelty produced, the old Hatred betwixt the Borderers not
yet forgotten, might make him apprehend it to be of a greater extent: though it
was generally imputed to a desire of enjoying his Recreations without
interruption.

At Theobalds, The King comes to Theobalds.
Secretary Cecil's House, the Lord Chancellor Egerton, the Lord Buckhurst
Treasurer, the Earl of Notingham Admiral, and others of the Council to the
deceased Queen, met him; and they with him found the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of
Mar, the Lord Hume, and the Lord Kinloss. These with others were made of his
Privy Council. The Bishops forgot not to strengthen themselves, and their
Party, against their opposites, the Non-Conformists, who had gotten new courage
upon their hopes of the Kings compliance with them, and the King to please both
sides, went in a smooth way betwixt them, at first, not leaving out the third
Party, the Popish, the most dangerous, whom he closed with also, by
entertaining into his Councils the Lord Thomas Howard, and the Lord Henry
Howard, the one Son, the other Brother to the late Duke of Norfolk, who would
have been his Father, but became a Sufferer for his Mother: The one a
plain-hearted man, the other of a subtle and fine Wit, of great Reading and
Knowledge, excellent for outward Courtship, famous for secret Insinuation, and
cunning Flattery; the first a suspected, (though it was otherwise) the last a
known Papist, bred up so from his Infancy, yet then converted (as he pretended)
by the King, being the closest way to work his own ends. On these he heaped
Honors, making the Son Earl of Suffolk, and the Brother Earl of Northampton.
And this Gentleness of the King to the Popish party, was so pleasant to them,
that they sucked in the sweet hopes of alteration in Religion, and drunk so deep
thereof, that they were almost intoxicated.

Now every man that had but a Spark of Hope, Changes beget hopes.
struck fire to light himself in the way to Advancement, though it were to the
Consumption both of his Estate and Being. The Court being a kind of Lottery,
where men that venture much may draw a Blank, and such as have little may get
the Prize. Those whose Hopes were almost quenched, like Water cast upon Lime,
burn inward till it breaks out into Flame; so hard it is for uncomposed Spirits
(missing their aims) to settle upon the Basis of solid Reason. The Earl of
Southampton, covered long with the Ashes of great Essex his Ruins, was sent for
from the Tower, and the King looked upon him with a smiling countenance, though
displeasing happily to the new Baron of Essingden, Sir Robert Cecil; yet it was
much more to the Lords, Cobham and Gray, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, who were
forbidden their attendance. This damp upon them, being Spirits full of
acrimony, made them break into Murmur, A Conspiracy against the King.
then into Conspiracy, associating themselves with two Romish Priests (men that
could not live upon lingering Hopes) and other discontented persons, which every
Change produces. The ground of the Design was to set up the Lady Arabella (a
Branch sprung from the same Stem by another Line) and to alter Religion and
Government; disposing already to themselves the principal places of Honor and
Profit. The Lord Gray should get leave to transport two thousand men into
Holland, with whom he should seize upon the King and Prince; Sir Walter
Rawleigh was to treat with Count Arembergh for procuring of Moneys, and Cobham
to go to the Archduke and the King of Spain, to persuade their Assistance.
This Embrion proved abortive, and they brought their Plea to excuse their
attempting it, as complete a One; That the King was not yet crowned. The
Arraignment was at Winchester, where strong proofs meeting weak denyals, they
with others were found guilty of High Treason. George Brook, the Lord Cobham's
Brother, and the two Priests suffered for it, the rest found Mercy; the King
being loath to soil the first steps to his Crown with more blood. But their
Pardon carried them to the Tower, where the Lord Gray some years after dyed,
and in his Death extinguished his Family. The Lord Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham,
and others, discharged of imprisonment, lived miserable and poor, Cobham at
home, and the rest abroad. And Rawleigh while he was a Prisoner, having the
Idea of the World in his contemplation, brought it to some perfection, in his
excellent and incomparable History, but when Liberty turned it to Action, it
taught him to roam, so, as the event proved fatal to him.

A censure upon it.
This Conspiracy put on such a face, that few or none could discover, or know
what to make of it: That the muddy waters were stirred, was apparent, but it
was with such a mixture, that little could be visible in it. The Lord Gray,
Cobham, and Sir Walter Rawleigh were Protestants, why should they strive to
alter Religion, though the Priests, Markham, Bainham, and others might? But it
seems they joined together in a Politic way, every one intending his own ends;
Discontent being the Groundwork, upon which they built this slight
Superstructure, A great mischief intended to the Kings Majesty at his first
entrance into the Kingdom of England before his Coronation; Watson and Clark
Priests administering Oaths of secrecy and applanding the project. It came to
nothing by Gods mercy. The Kings Majesty's clemency toward the Conspiratours
after judgment past upon them. No treason in England attempted but had a Romish
Priest in the practice.
Watson Seducing Noblemen


that being hudled together, could not stand long. Rawleigh's greatest Accuser
was a Letter of Cobhams, which some say after he denied to be his hand. Some of
the Conspirators (it may be) desired to seem formidable, venting their Anger so
for being slighted; others strove to make themselves so, that they might have
the glory of enlarging the Roman Power, and they joined together, thinking
their single strength would not prevail. In this Cloud looking for Juno, they
begot a Monster, which having neither head nor foot, some part lived, the other
dyed.

While these were provoked with Neglects, others were encouraged with Favors:
Many of the Gentry that came out of Scotland, with the King, were advanced to
Honors, as well as those he found here, to show the Northern soil as fruitful
that way as the Southern; But Knights swarmed in every corner; the Sword ranged
about, and men bowed in obedience to it, more in Peace than in War; this Airy
Title blew up many a fair Estate. The Scots naturally, by long converse,
affecting the French Vanity, drew on a Garb of Gallantry (meeting with a
plentiful soil, and an open-handed Prince) The English, excellent for
imitation, loath to be exceeded in their own Country, maintained their follies
at their own charge. All this came accompanied with a great Plague, which
happened this year in London, whereof above thirty thousand dyed; Yet who will
not venture for a Crown? For in the heat of it, on the five and twentieth of
July, The King and Queen Crowned.
being the day dedicated to Saint James, the King, with his Wife Queen Anne,
were both crowned at Westminster, fulfilling that old Prophecy, or rather
Fancy, current among the Scots (as they report) before Edward the first brought
the Royal Chair out of Scotland, with the Stone in it, and placed it at
Westminster to Crown our Kings in. Which Stone some old Saws deliver to be the
same that Jacob rested his head on.

Ni fallat Fatum
Scoti hunc quocunque locatum
Inveniunt lapidem,
Regnare tenentur ibidem.
Englished.

Fate has designed,
That wheresoe'r this Stone
The Scots shall find,
There they shall hold the Throne.
But how the Stream of Time runs through the Chanel of these Prophetical
Fancies, experience shows: For it is true, if the Scots came so near the Throne,
as to enjoy the Stone, or Chair where the English Kings are Inaugurated, they
may hold the Crown. But being only grounded upon Conjecture, these Conceits are
commonly made up before they are half molded, or like Abortives, are shaped
after they are born.

When these Ceremonies were past, the King retired from this crowd of
Infection, gave some admission to Ambassadors, that from all the neighboring
Princes and States came to congratulate his happy Inauguration: For besides the
ordinary Ceremony among Princes, their Reason might tell them, that if his
Predecessors were able to graple with the growing Monarchy of him that coveted
to be Universal, and to assist and relieve her Neighbors and Confederates from
his oppression; He would be much more formidable, bringing with him, if nothing
else, Bodies of men, Warlike and industrious, hardened with cold and labor, and
active in the difficultest attempts (however of late, by what Divine Judgment I
know not, utterly disheartened) to be Helpers, who were formerly Hinderers to
all the English Expeditions; so that in him they courted their own
Conveniences: For certainly, if ever the English Monarchy were in its true
Glory and Greatness, it was by this Union. But there is a Period set to all
Empires.

The Prince, Prince Henry made Knight of the Garter.
a little before this, was installed Knight of the Garter, the Earl of
Southampton, and the young Earl of Essex, were restored to the right of Blood
and Inheritance; and Honors were conferred so thick, as if the King intended a
new kind of Conquest, by a proceeding, that tended to their, and his own Ruin:
For, to subdue the greatness of the Nobility (who formerly could sweep such a
Party of People to them, with their long trains and dependencies, that they
were able to graple with Kings) He by a multiplicity of them made them cheap
and invalid in the Vulgar opinion; For nothing is more destructive to Monarchy,
than lessening the Nobility; upon their decline the Commons rise, and Anarchy
increases.

Tirone comes over.
And now the old Irish Rebel Tirone coming over (led by his Conqueror the Lord
Monjoy) had not only Pardon, but Civilities, and all outward expressions to
gain him; the edg of the Peoples hatred being abated by a Proclamation, that no
man should show him the least dis-respect. The Lord Monjoy, as a reward for his
good service, was created Earl of Devonshire. And having given way to
Creations, they break in upon us like a Deluge. The King being an inexhaustible
Fountain of Honor, cannot be drained dry, when other means of gratifying his
servants may fail. Those he brought with him wanted means more than Honor,
those he found here wanted Honor more than Means; Noblemen created.
He could, and did supply both to excess. Sir Robert Cecil, the first English
Trumpet that proclaimed HONORAT: Do CAROL BLVNT CO: DEVON BAR MOVNTIOY
The RIght honorable CHARLES BLVNT Earl of Deuon Baron Mountioy and Knight of
the Garter.

him was made Baron of Essingdon, and soon after Viscount Cranborn, and Earl of
Salisbury; Sir Robert Sidney Baron of Penshurst, and not long after Viscount
Lisle; Sir William Knowles Baron of Grayes, Sir Edward Wotton Baron of Morley,
Sir Thomas Egerton (Lord Chancellor) Baron of Elsmere, Sir William Russel Baron
of Thornaugh, Sir Henry Gray Baron of Grobie, Sir John Petre Baron of Writtle,
Sir John Harington Baron of Exton, Sir Henry D'Envers Baron of Dantsey, Sir
Thomas Gerrard Baron of Gerrard Bromely, Sir Robert Spencer Baron of
Worm-Leighton. The Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer, he made Earl of Dorset, and
his old Servant Sir George Hume, Earl of Dunbar. These, with Suffolk and
Northampton, were Nobles of the finest metal, and first stamp, and most of them
he placed as Jewels about his Throne. But these were but as an Essay; for they
after grew to such a Volume, that some unhappy fancy pasted up a Pasquil in
Paul's, wherein he pretended an Art to help weak memories to a competent
knowledge of the names of the Nobility.

As the Papist was different from the Protestant Religion on one side,
Reformation in the Church sought for.
so was the Puritan (as they then called pious and good men) on the other; both
which were active to attain their own ends; and the King had the command of
himself, not bitterly to oppose, but gently to sweeten their hopes for His:
thinking himself unsecure betwixt them. The latter were now solicitous for a
more clear Reformation. This the Bishops opposed, as trenching too much upon
them, and the King listened to (having experience of it in Scotland) how much
it had incroached upon Him: For He thought their dissenting from the
established Government of the Church, was but to get that Power into a great
many men's hands, which was now but in one, and that one had dependence upon
him, with whom He might better grapple. The Prelates distilling this Maxim into
the King, No Bishop, no Monarch; so strengthening the Miter by the same Power
that upholds the Crown: Yet to satisfy the importunity, a Conference is
appointed at Hampton Court, Conference at Hampton Court.
where the Bishops Opponents, Doctor Reynolds, Doctor Sparks, Mr. Knewstubs,
and Mr. Chadderton, men eminent in Learning and Piety, in themselves, as well
as in the opinion of the people, did desire in the name of the rest of their
party, That the Doctrine of the Church might be preserved in Purity; That good
and faithful Pastors might be planted in all Churches; That Church Government
might be sincerely administered; That the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted
to more increase of Godliness. Out of some of these Particulars, they insisted
upon the Bishops power of Confirmation, which they would have every Minister
capable of in his own Parish. They disputed against the Cross in Baptism, the
Ring in Marriage, the Surplice, the Oath ex officio, and other things that
stuck with them, which they hoped to get all purged away, because the King was
of a Northern constitution, where no such things were practiced, not yet having
felt the Kings pulse, whom the Southern Air of the Bishops breaths had so
wrought upon, that He himself answers most of their Demands: Sometimes gently,
applying Lenitives, where he found Ingenuity (for he was Learned and Eloquent)
other times Corrosives, telling them these Oppositions proceeded more from
stubborness in Opinion, than tenderness of Conscience; and so betwixt his
Arguments, and Kingly Authority, menaced them to a Conformity, which proved a
way of Silencing them for the present (and some of them were content to
acquiesce for the future) and the King managed this Discourse with such power
(which they expected not from him, and therefore more danted at) That Whitgift
Arch. Bishop of Canterbury (though a holy, grave, and pious man) highly pleased
with it, with a sugared bait (which Princes are apt enough to swallow) said, He
was verily persuaded, Archbishop Whitgift dies.
that the King spoke by the Spirit of God. This Conference was on the
fourteenth of January, and this good man expired the nine and twentieth of
February following, in David's fullness of days, leaving a Name like a sweet
perfume behind him. And Bancroft, a sturdy piece, succeeded him, but not with
the same Spirit; for what Whitgift strove to do by Sweetness and Gentleness,
Bancroft did persevere in with Rigor and Severity. Thus the Bishops having
gotten the Victory, strove to maintain it, and though not on the sudden, yet
by degrees, they press so hard upon the Non-conformists (whom they held under
the yoke of a Law) that many of them are forced to seek Foreign Refuge. They
prevailed not only for themselves here, but by their means (not long after) the
King looked back into Scotland, and put the Keys there again into the Bishops
hands, unlocking the passage to the enjoyment of their Temporal Estates, which
swelled them so high, that in his Sons time, the Women of Scotland pulled them
out of their tottering seats.

On the other side, the late Conspiracy of Cobham and Gray, had so chilled the
Kings blood, that he begins to take notice of the swarms of Priests that flockt
into the Kingdom: For though the Conspirators were of several Religions, yet in
their correspondence with Foreign Princes, Religion was the pretense. For in
every alteration of Kingdoms, few are so modest but they will throw in the Hook
of their vain Hopes, thinking to get something in the troubled Stream. The
Jesuits were not slack (coming with the Seal of the Fisher) in spreading their
Nets; but a Proclamation broke through them. The King being contented to let
them alone, till they came too near him, willing to comply rather than
exasperate; the safety of his own person, made him look to the safety of
Religion; and to secure both, He found this the best Remedy, Declaring, to all
the World, the cause of this Restriction.

VINVIT QVI PATITVR

OBIIT ANNO AETATIS SVAE 73



Having (after some time spent in settling the Politic affairs of this Realm)
of late bestowed no small labor in composing certain Differences We found
among Our Clergy, about Rites and Ceremonies heretofore established in this
Church of England, and reduced the same to such an order and form, A
Proclamation against Jesuits.
as We doubt not but every spirit, that is led only with piety, and not with
humor, should be therein satisfied; It appeared unto Us in debating these
Matters, that a greater Contagion to Our Religion than could proceed from these
light differences, was eminent, by persons, common Enemies to them both;
namely, the great numbers of Priests, both Seminaries and Jesuits, abounding in
this Realm, as well of such as were here before Our coming to the Crown, as of
such as have resorted hither since, using their Functions and Professions with
greater liberty than heretofore they durst have done; partly upon a vain
confidence of some Innovation in matters of Religion, to be done by Us, which
We never intended, nor gave any man cause to suspect, and partly from the
assurance of Our general Pardon, granted according to the Custom of Our
Progenitors, at Our Coronation, for offenses past in the days of the late
Queen, which Pardons many of the said Priests have procured under Our Great
Seal, and holding themselves thereby free from danger of the Laws, do with
great audacity exercise all offices of their Profession, both saying Masses,
and persuading Our Subjects from the Religion established, reconciling them to
the Church of Rome, and by consequence seducing them from their Duty and
Obedience to Us. Wherefore We hold Our self obliged both in Consequence and
Wisdom, to use all good means to keep Our Subjects from being affected with
superstitious Opinions, which are not only pernicious to their own souls, but
the ready way to corrupt their Duty and Allegiance; which cannot be any way so
safely performed, as by keeping from them the Instruments of that infection,
which are Priests of all sorts, ordained in Foreign parts, by Authority
prohibited by the Laws of the Land; concerning whom, therefore We have thought
fit to publish to all Our Subjects this open Declaration of Our pleasure, etc.
Willing and Commanding all manner of Jesuits, Seminaries, and other Priests
whatsoever, having Ordination from any Authority by the Laws of this Realm
prohibited, to take notice that Our pleasure is, that they do before the
nineteenth of March next, depart forth of Our Realm and Dominions. And to that
purpose it shall be lawful for all Officers of Our Ports, to suffer the said
Priests to depart into Foreign parts, between this and said nineteenth day of
March: Admonishing and assuring all such Jesuits, Seminaries, and Priests, of
what sort soever, that if any of them after the said time shall be taken within
this Realm, or any of Our Dominions, or departing now upon this Our pleasure
signified, shall hereafter return into this Our Realm, or any of Our Dominions
again, they shall be left to the penalty of the Laws here being in force
concerning them, without hope of any favor, or remission from Us, etc. Which
though, perhaps, it may appear to some a great severity toward that sort of
Our Subjects, yet doubt We not when it shall be considered with indifferent
judgment, what cause has moved Us to use this Providence, all men will
justify Us therein. For to whom is it unknown, into what peril Our Person was
like to be drawn, and Our Realm unto Confusion, not many Months since, by
Conspiracy? First conceived by persons of that sort. Which when other Princes
shall duly observe, We assure Our selves they will no way conceive, that this
alteration proceeds from any change of disposition, but out of providence to
prevent the perils otherwise inevitable; Considering their absolute submission
to Foreign Jurisdiction at their first taking Orders, does leave so conditional
an authority to Kings over their Subjects, as the same Power by which they were
made, may dispense at pleasure, with the strictest Bond of Loyalty and Love,
between a King his People

Among which Foreign Powers, though We acknowledge Our self personally so much
beholden to the now Bishop of Rome, for his kind Offices, and private temporal
Carriages toward Us, in many things, as We shall be ever ready to requite the
same toward him (as Bishop of Rome, in state and condition of a Secular
Prince) Yet when we consider and observe the course and Clame of that See, We
have no reason to imagine, that Princes of Our Religion and Profession, can
expect any assurance long to continue, unless it might be assented by mediation
of other Christian Princes, that some good course might be taken (by a general
Council, free, and lawfully called) to pluck up those Roots of Dangers, and
Iealousies, which arise about Religion, as well between Prince and Prince, as
between them and their Subjects, and to make it manifest, that no State or
Potentate, either has, or can challenge power to dispose of earthly Kingdoms
or Monarchies, or to dispense with Subjects obedience to their natural
Sovereigns: In which charitable Action, there is no Prince living that will be
readier than We shall be to concur, even to the uttermost of Our Power, not
only out of particular disposition to live peaceably with all States and
Princes of Christendom, but because such a settled Amity might (by an Union in
Religion) be established among Christian Princes, as might enable Us all to
resist the common Enemy.

Given at Our Palace at Westminster the two and twentieth day of February, in
the first year of Our Reign, etc.

This did something allay the heat and hopes of the Jesuits, and their
correspondents, but it made way for dark, and more secret Contrivances, which
afterward they put in practice.

On the contrary, another Proclamation came out for Uniformity in Religion
according to the Law established, to reduce those to Conformity that had not
received satisfaction at the last Conference. A Proclamation for Uniformity.
The Bishops thought themselves unsecure, while so many opposites (unblameable
in their conversations) by their Pens and Preaching gained upon the people,
striking at the very Root of Hierarchy, that it was a hard Question, whether
the Jesuits, whose Principles would advance their Greatness, or these that
would pluck it down, were most odious to them. And now Proclamations are the
activest Agents, some go abroad to please the people, some the King. All
Monopolies (like diseases) that crept in, when the good old Queen had not
strength enough to keep them out, must be purged away, and such protections as
licentious liberty had granted to hinder proceedings in Law, must be taken off:
Saltpeter-men, that will dig up any man's house by authority (where they are not
well fee'd) must be restrained; and Purveyors, Cart-takers, and such insolent
Officers as were grievances to the people, must be cried down by Proclamation.
A Prince that is invited, or comes newly to a Kingdom, must have his Chariot
wheels smooth shod. And yet the liberty of Hunting must be forbidden, the Kings
Game preserved, and a strict Proclamation threatens the disobeyers. Indeed,
take this Kings Reign from the beginning to the end, and you shall find
Proclamations current Coin, and the people took them for good payment a great
while, till the multitude of them lessened their valuation.

The Bishops could not be so wary, A Sermon against Ceremonies.
but some Courtier or other would commend a Preacher to the King, if they knew
any of excellent parts, so that some preached before him that were averse to
the Bishops ways. Among the rest one Mr. Burges, an excellent Preacher, and a
pious man, moderately touching upon the Ceremonies, said, They were like the
Roman Senators Glasses, which were not worth a man's life or livelihood: For
(says he) this Senator invited Augustus Caesar to a Dinner, and as he was
coming to the Feast, he heard a horrid Outcry, and saw some company drawing a
man after them, that made that noise: the Emperor demanded the cause of that
violence; it was answered, their Master had condemned this man to the Fishponds
for breaking a Glass which he set a high value and esteem upon, Caesar
commanded a stay of the Execution, and when he came to the House, he asked the
Senator, whether he had Glasses worth a man's life? Who answered (being a great
lover of such things) that he had Glasses he valued at the price of a Province.
Let me see them (says Augustus) and he brought him up to a room well
furnished. The Emperor saw them beautiful to the eye, but knew withal they
might be the cause of much mischief, therefore he broke them all, with this
expression, Better all these perish than one man. I will leave it (says he) to
your Majesty to apply. But the Bishops, got this and some other things against
him, by the end, and silenced him for venting any more such comparisons. So
that for many years after he practiced Physic, and grew an excellent
Physician. Put upon second considerations he was admitted again to Preach,
retaining both his Piety and Integrity (though he writ a book for the moderate
use of the Ceremonies) ending his days in a good old age, at Sutton Cofeld in
Warwickshire, after a journey into the Palatinate, as shall be expressed in its
time.

The fifth of August this year had a new title given to it. The fifth of August
made Holyday.
The Kings Deliveries in the North must resound here. Whether the Gowries
attempted upon the Kings person, or the King on theirs, is variously reported.
It may be, he retained something of his Predecessor, and great Parent, Henry
the seventh, that made Religion give way to Policy, oftentimes cursing and
thundering out the Churches fulminations against his own Ministers, that they
might be received with the more intimate familiarity with his Foreign Enemies,
for the better discovery of their designs. I will not say the celebration of
this Holy Day had so much Profaneness, for Fame may be a slanderer. But where
there is a strength of Policy, there is often a power of worldly wisdom that
manages, and sways it. The King forgot not the services there done him, or the
secret contrivances acted for him; for Erskin and Ramsey, two of his then
deliverers, were not long after rewarded with wealth and honor, the one made
Earl of Kellie, the other Earl of Holderness,; the first, prime Gentleman of
the Bedchamber to the King; and second got to his Bedfellow one of the prime
Beauties of the Kingdom, daughter to Robert Earl of Sussex; and both of them
had their Masters purse at command, yet in our time, the one died poor with
many children, the other poor and childless.

The Kings first going abroad was privately to visit some of his houses; for
naturally he did not love to be looked on, and those formalities of State,
which set a luster upon Princes in the peoples eyes, were but so many burdens
to him: for his private recreations at home, and his hunting exercises abroad,
both with the least disturbance were his delights. While he remained in the
Tower, he took pleasure in baiting Lions, but when he came abroad, he was so
troubled with swarms, that he feared to be baited by the people. And the
Parliament now drawing on, which was summoned to be the nineteenth of March,
The King, The King and Queen ride through the City.
with the Queen and Prince, four days before, rode from the Tower to Whitehall;
the City and Suburbs being one great Pageant, wherein he must give his ears
leave to suck in their gilded Oratory, though never so nauseous to the stomach.
He was not like his Predecessor, the late Queen of famous memory, that with a
well-pleased affection met her peoples Acclamations, thinking most highly of
her self, when she was born up on the wings of their humble supplications. He
endured this days brunt with patience, being assured he should never have such
another, and his triumphal riding to the Parliament that followed: But
afterward in his public appearances (especially in his sports) the accesses
of the people made him so impatient, that he often dispersed them with frowns,
that we may not say with curses. So various are the natures of Princes, and
their actions so remarkable, that he may pass for a good man, that will not
pass for a good Prince.

The Speech he made to the Parliament, both Houses being met, and the first,
cannot be waved, though it be somewhat long, and printed in his own Works; By
the crisis and constitution of it, the temper of his mind may be discovered;
For if ever he spoke really to his Parliament it was then; And I shall not
comment upon it: For I know Princes are made of those frail Elements that other
men are, but this much I will say; He had strong abilities in some things, that
did dignifie the doer of them, and in other things such weaknesses, as would
have much advanced his Wisdom to have left undone. But if worldly Greatness,
and Glory, may well make Princes more loath to leave them, than they that have
less, we must give them some allowance of fear to lose them. The Speech was to
this effect.

It did no sooner please God to lighten his hand, The Kings Speech to the
Parliament.
and relent the violence of his devouring Angel against the poor people of this
City, but as soon I did resolve to call this Parliament, and that for three
chief and principal Reasons. The first whereof is (and which of it self,
although there were no more, is not only a sufficient, but a most full and
necessary Ground and Reason for convening of this Assembly) the first Reason, I
say, is, That you who are here present assembled to represent the Body of this
whole Kingdom, and of all sorts of people within the same, may with your own
ears hear, and that I out of my own mouth may deliver unto you the assurance of
my due thankfulness for your so joyful and general applause, to the declaring
and receiving of me in this Seat (which God by my Birthright, and lineal
Descent had in the fullness of time provided for me) and that immediately after
it pleased God to call your late Sovereign of famous memory, full of days, but
fuller of immortal Trophies of Honor, out of this transitory life. Not that I
am able to express by Words, or utter by Eloquence, the vive Image of my own
inward thankfulness, but only that out of my own mouth, you may rest assured to
expect that measure of thankfulness at my hands, which is according to the
infiniteness of your deserts, and to my inclination, and ability, for requital
of the same. Shall I ever? nay, can I ever be able, or rather so unable in
memory, as to forget your unexpected readiness and alacrity, your ever
memorable resolution, and your most wonderful conjunction, and harmony of your
hearts, in declaring and embracing me as your undoubted, and lawful King and
Governor? Or shall it ever be blotted out of my mind, how at my first entry
into this Kingdom, the people of all sorts rid and ran, nay, rather, flew to
meet me? Their eyes flaming nothing but sparkles of affection,, their mouths
and tongues uttering nothing but sounds of joy; their hands, feet, and all the
rest of their members, in their gestures, discovering a passionate longing, and
earnestness to meet, and embrace their new Sovereign. Quid ergo retribuam?
Shall I allow in my self that which I could never bear with in another? No, I
must plainly and freely confess here, in all your audiences, that I did ever
naturally so far mislike a tongue too smooth, and diligent in paying their
Creditors, with lip-payment, and verbal thanks, as I ever suspected that sort
of people, meant not to pay their Debtors in more substantial sort of coin. And
therefore for expressing of my thankfulness, I must resort unto the other two
Reasons of my convening of this Parliament, by them in action to utter my
thankfulness: Both the said reasons having but one ground, which is the deeds,
whereby all the days of my life I am by Gods grace to express my said
thankfulness unto you, but divided in this, That in the first of these two,
mine actions of thanks are so inseparably conjoined with my person, as they are
in a manner become individually annexed to the same. In the other reason, mine
actions are such, as I may either do them, or leave them undone, although by
Gods grace I hope never to be weary of the doing them.

As to the first, it is the Blessings which God has in my Person bestowed upon
you all, wherein I protest, I do more glory at the same for your weal, than for
any particular respect of my own reputation, or advancement therein.

The first then of these Blessings, which God has jointly Outward Peace; that
is, Peace abroad with all Foreign Neighbors: For I thank God, I may justly
say, that never since I was a King, I either received wrong of any other
Christian Prince or State, or did wrong to any: I have ever, I praise God, yet
kept Peace and Amity with all, which has been so far tied to my person, as at
my coming here you are witnesses, I found the State embarked in a great and
tedious War, and only by mine arrival here, and by the Peace in my person, is
now Amity kept, where War was before, which is no small blessing to a Christian
Commonwealth: For by peace abroad with their neighbors the Towns flourish,
the Merchants become rich, the Trade does increase, and the People of all sorts
in the Land enjoy free Liberty to exercise themselves in their several
vocations, without peril or disturbance. Not that I think this Outward peace so
unseparably tied to my Person, as I dare assuredly promise to my self, and to
you, the certain continuance thereof; But thus far I can very well assure you,
and in the Word of a King promise unto you, that I shall never give the first
occasion of the breach thereof, neither shall I ever be moved for any
particular, or private passion of mind, to interrupt your public peace, except
I be forced thereunto, either for reparation of the honor of the Kingdom, or
else by necessity for the weal and preservation of the same: In which case, a
secure and honorable War must be preferred before an unsecure and
dishonorable peace. Yet do I hope, by my experience of the by past blessings
of peace, which God has so long ever since my birth bestowed upon me, that he
will not be weary to continue the same, nor repent him of his grace toward me;
transferring that sentence of King David's upon his by past Victories of War, to
mine of peace; That that God who preserved me from the devouring jaws of the
Bear, and of the Lion, and delivered them into my hand, shall now also grant me
Victory over that uncircumcised Philistine.

But although outward peace be a great blessing, peace within, as Civil Wars
are more cruel and unnatural than Wars abroad. And therefore the second great
blessing that God has with my Person sent unto you, is Peace within, and that
in a double form: First, by my dedescent lineally out of the loins of Henry the
seventh, is reunited and confirmed in me the Union of the two Princely Roses
of the two Houses of Lancaster and York, whereof that King of happy memory was
the first Uniter, as he was also the first ground-layer of the other peace (The
lamentable and miserable events, by the civil and bloody dissension betwixt
these two Houses, was so great, and so late, as it need not be renewed unto
your memories) which as it was first settled and united in Him, so it is now
reunited and confirmed in Me; being justly and lineally descended, not only of
that happy conjunction, but of both the Branches thereof in any Times before.
But the Union of these two Princely Houses is nothing comparable to the Union
of the two ancient and famous Kingdoms, which is the other Inward peace annexed
to my Person.

And here I must crave your patience for a little space, to give me leave to
discourse more particularly of the Benefits that do arise of that Union which
is made in my blood, being a matter that belongs most properly to me to speak
of, as the Head, wherein that great Body is united. And first, if we were to
look no higher than to Natural and Physical Reasons, we may easily be persuaded
of the great Benefits that by this Union do redound to the whole Island: for if
twenty thousand men be a strong Army, is not the double thereof, forty
thousand, a stronger Army? If a Baron enricheth himself with double as many
Lands as he had before, is he not double the greater? Nature teaches Us, that
Mountains are made of Motes; and that at first, Kingdoms being divided, and
every particular Town, or little Country (as Tyrants or Usurpers could obtain
the possession of a Signory apart) many of these little Kingdoms are now in
process of Time, by the Ordinance of God, joined into great Monarchies, whereby
they are become powerful within themselves, to defend themselves from all
Outward invasions, and their Head and Governor thereby enabled to redeem them
from Foreign Assaults, and punish private transgressions within. Do we not yet
remember that this Kingdom was divided into seven little Kingdoms, besides
Wales? And is it not now the stronger by their Union? And has not the Union of
Wales to England added a greater strength thereto! Which though it was a great
Principality, was nothing comparable, in greatness and power, to the ancient
and famous Kingdom of Scotland. But what shall we stick upon any Natural
appearance, when it is manifest that God by his Almighty Providence has
pre-ordained it so to be? Has not God first united these two Kingdoms, both in
Language, and Religion, and similitude of Manners? Yea, has he not made Us all
in one Island, compassed with one Sea, and of it self by Nature so indivisible,
as almost those that were borderers themselves on the late Borders, cannot
distinguish, nor know, or discern their own Limits? These two Countries being
separated neither by Sea, nor great River, Mountain, nor other strength of
Nature, but only by little small Brooks, or demolished little Walls, so as
rather they were divided in apprehension, than in effect; and now in the end
and fullness of time united, the right and title of both in my Person, alike
lineally descended of both the Crowns, whereby it is now become a little World
within it self, being entrenched and fortified round about with a natural, and
yet admirable strong Pond or Ditch, whereby all the former fears of this Nation
are quite cut off: The other part of the Island being ever before now, not only
the Place of Landing to all Strangers that were to make Invasion here, but
likewise moved by the Enemies of this State, by untimely Incursions to make
enforced diversion from their Conquests, for defending themselves at home, and
keeping sure their Backdoor, as then it was called, which was the greatest
hindrance and Let my Predecessors of this Nation ever had, in disturbing them
from their many famous and glorious Conquests abroad: What God has conjoined
then, let no man separate. I am the Husband, and all the whole Island is my
lawful Wife; I am the Head, and it is my Body; I am the Shepherd, and it is my
Flock: I hope therefore no man will be so unreasonable as to think that I, that
am a Christian King under the Gospel, should be a Polygamist, and Husband to
two Wives; that I being the Head, should have a divided and monstrous Body; or
that being the Shepherd of so fair a Flock (whose Fold has no wall to sense
it, but the four Seas) should have my Flock parted in two. But as I am assured,
that no honest Subject, of whatsoever degree, within my whole Dominions, is
less glad of this joyful Union, than I am; so may the frivolous objection of
any that would be hinderers of this Work (which God has in my Person already
established) be easily answered; which can be none, except such as are either
blinded with ignorance, or else transported with malice, being unable to live
in a well-governed Commonwealth, and only delighting to fish in troubled
waters: For if they would stand upon their reputation, and privileges of any of
the Kingdoms; I pray you, were not both the Kingdoms Monarchies from the
beginning? And consequently, could ever the Body be counted without the Head,
which was ever unseparably joined thereunto? So that as the honor and
privileges of any of the Kingdoms could not be divided from their Sovereign;
so are they now confounded and joined in my Person, who am equal and alike
kindly Head to both. When this Kingdom of England was divided into so many
petty Kingdoms (as I told you before) one of them eat up another, till they
were all united into One. And yet, can Wiltshire or Devonshire, which were of
the West Saxons (although their Kingdom was of longest durance, and did by
Conquest overcome diverse of the rest of the little Kingdoms) make Claim to
Priority of place or Honor before Su^sex, Essex, or other Shires, which were
Conquered by them? And have We not the like experience in the Kingdom of
France, being composed of diverse Dutchies, and one after another Conquered by
the Sword? For even as little Brooks lose their Names by running and falling
into great Rivers, and the very name and memory of great Rivers swallowed up in
the Ocean: so by the conjunction of diverse little Kingdoms into One, are all
these private differences and questions swallowed up. And since the success was
happy of the Saxon Kingdoms Conquered by the Spear of Bellona; how much greater
reason have We to expect a happy issue of this greater Union, which is only
fastened and bound up by the Wedding-Ring of Astrea? And as God has made
Scotland (the one half of this Island) to enjoy my birth, and the first and
most imperfect half of my life; and you here to enjoy the perfect and last half
thereof: so can I not think, that any would be so injurious to me, no not in
their thoughts and wishes, as to cut asunder the one half of Me from the other.
But in this matter I have far enough insisted, resting assured, that in your
hearts and minds you all applaud this my Discourse.

blessings (before rehearsed) of inward, and outward peace be great: yet seeing
that in all good things, a great part of their goodness and estimation is lost,
if they have not appearance of perpetuity or long continuance; so has it
pleased Almighty God to accompany my person also with that favor, having
healthful and hopeful Issue of my bod (whereof some are here present) for
continuance and propagation of that undoubted Right which is in my person;
under whom I doubt not but it will please God to prosper and continue for many
years this Union, and all other blessings of inward and outward Peace, which I
have brought with me.

peace outward, nor peace inward, nor any other blessing that can follow
thereupon, nor appearance of the perpetuity thereof, by propagation in
posterity, are but weak pillars, and rotten reeds to lead unto, if God does not
strengthen, and by the staff of his blessing make them durable; for in vain
does the Watchman watch the City, if the Lord be not the principal defense
thereof; in vain does the Builder build the house, if God give not the success;
and in vain (as Paul says) does Paul plant, and Apollo water, if God give not
the increase: for all worldly blessings are but like swift passing shadows,
fading flowers, or chaff blown before the wind, if by the profession of true
Religion, and works according thereunto, God be not moved to maintain and
settle the Thrones of Princes. And although since mine entry into this Kingdom,
I have both by meeting with diverse of the Ecclesiastical state, and likewise by
diverse Proclamations clearly declared my mind in points of Religion, yet do I
not think it amiss in this so solemn an Audience to take occasion to discover
somewhat of the secrets of my heart in that matter. For I shall never (with
Gods grace) be ashamed to make public profession thereof upon all occasions,
lest God should be ashamed of me before Men and Angels; especially lest at this
time men might presume further upon the misknowledg of my meaning to trouble
this Parliament than were convenient.

At my first coming, although I found but one Religion, and that which by my
self is professed, publicly allowed, and by the Law maintained; yet found I
another sort of Religion, besides a private Sect, lurking within the bowels of
this Nation. The first is the true Religion, which by me is professed, and by
Law is established: The second is, the falsely called Catholics, but truly
Papists: The third which I call a Sect rather than a Religion, is the Puritans
and Novelists, who do not so far differ from us in points of Religion, as in
their confused form of policy and parity, being ever discontented with the
present Government, and impatient to suffer any superiority, which makes their
Sects insufferable in any well governed Commonwealth. But as for my course
toward them, I remit it to my Proclamations made upon that subject. And now
for the Papists, I must put a difference betwixt mine own private profession of
my salvation, and my politic Government of the Realm for the weal and
quietness thereof. As for my own profession, you have me your head now among
you of the same Religion that the Body is of; As I am no stranger to you in
Blood, no more am I a stranger to you in Faith, or in matters concerning the
House of God. And although this my profession be according to my education,
wherein (I thank God) I sucked the milk of Gods Truth, with the milk of my
Nurse; yet I do here protest unto you, that I would never (for such a conceit
of Constancy, or other prejudicate opinion) have so firmly kept my first
profession, if I had not found it agreeable to all reason, and to the rule of
my conscience. But I was never violent, nor unreasonable in my profession: I
acknowledge the Roman Church to be our Mother Church, although defiled with some
infirmities and corruptions, as the Jews were, before they Crucified Christ.
And as I am no enemy to the life of a sick man, because I would have his body
purged of ill humors; no more am I an enemy to their Church, because I would
have them reform their errors, not wishing the down-throwing of the Temple, but
that it might be purged, and cleansed from corruption: otherwise how can they
wish us to enter, if their house be not first made clean? But as I would be
lother to dispense in the least point of mine own conscience, for any worldly
respect, than the foolishest Precisian of them all, so would I be as sorry to
streighten the politic Government of the bodies and minds of all my Subjects
to my private Opinions: Nay, my mind was ever so free from persecution, or
inthralling of my Subjects in matters of conscience, as I hope those of that
profession within this Kingdom have a proof since my coming, that I was so far
from increasing their burdens with Rehoboam, as I have so much as either time,
occasion, or law could permit, lightened them. And even now at this time, have I
been careful to revise and consider deeply upon the Laws made against them,
that some overture might be made to the present Parliament for clearing these
Laws by reason (which is the soul of the Law) in case they have been in times
past, further, or more rigorously extended by Judges, than the meaning of the
Law was, or might tend to the hurt as well of the Innocent as of the guilty
persons. And as to the persons of my Subjects which are of that profession, I
must divide them into two ranks, Clericks and Laics: for the Laics, I ever
thought them far more excusable than the other sort, because their Religion
contains such an ignorant, doubtful, and implicit kind of Faith grounded
upon their Church, that except they do generally believe whatsoever their
Teachers please to affirm, they can not be thought guilty of these particular
Points of Heresies, and Corruptions, which their Teachers so wilfully profess.
And again, I must subdivide the Laics into two ranks; which are, either quiet
and well-minded men, peaceable Subjects, who either being old, retain their
first drunk-in liquor, upon a certain shamefacedness to be thought curious, or
changeable: Or being young men, through evil education, have been nursed and
brought up upon such venom, instead of wholesome nutriment; And this sort of
People, I would be sorry to punish their Bodies for the error of their minds,
the reformation whereof must only come of God, and the true Spirit. But the
other rank of Laics, who either through curiosity, affectation of novelty, or
coffeehouse, have changed their Coats, only to be factious, stirrers of
sedition, and perturbers of the Commonwealth, th^s gives a ground to Me (the
Magistrate) to take better heed to their proceedings, and to correct their
obstinacy.

But for the Clericks, I must directly say and affirm, that as long as they
maintain one special point of their Doctrine, and another of their Practiec,
they are no way sufferable to remain in this Kingdom. The point of Doctrine is,
that arrogant and ambitious Supremacy of their Head the Pope, whereby he not
only claims to be Spiritual Head of all Christians, but also to have an
Imperial Civil power over all Kings and Emperors, dethroning and decrowning
Princes with his foot as pleases him, and dispensing and disposing of all
Kingdoms and Empires at his Appetite. The other Point which they observe, in
continual Practice, is the Assassinates and Murders of Kings; thinking it no
sin, but rather a matter of salvation, to do all actions of Rebellion and
Hostility against their Natural Sovereign Lord, if he be once cursed, his
Subjects discharged of their Fidelity, and his Kingdom given a prey, by that
three-Crowned Monarch, or rather Monster, their Head. And in this Point I have
no occasion to speak further here, saving that I could wish from my heart it
would please God to make me one of the Members of such a general Christian
Union in Religion, as (laying wilfulness aside on both hands) we might meet in
the midst, which is the center, and perfection of all things. For if they would
leave, and be ashamed of such new REVERENDISS: DNS TOBIAS ARCHIEPISCOPVS
EBORACENSIS ET ANGLIAE PRIMA^
Exerit Hic Sanctos, viva ub imagine vultus
Ecce Senex: Vtinam fas sit et inde loqui.
Qui dum Zelus iners Boreali friget in Orb;
Emicuit gelidis flamma corusca plagis:
Christiadae nautae, Mundi qui fluctuat^ dis,
Erranti et dubio Stellae Polaris adest.
Duplex cum Tibi sit Sanctorum Nomen Vtru
In vitam pariter conuenit, Alme, tuam.
and gross Corruptions of theirs* as themselves cannot maintain, nor deny to be
worthy of Reformation, I would for my own part be content to meet them in the
Midway, so that all Novelties might be renounced on either side. For as my
Faith is the True, Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith, grounded upon the
express Word of God; so will I ever yield all reverence to Antiquity, in the
Points of Ecclesiastical Polity: And by that means shall I ever, with Gods
grace, keep my self from either being an Heretic in Faith, or Schismatic in
matters of Policy.

But of one thing would I have the Papists of this Land to be admonished, that
they presume not so much upon my lenity (because I would be loath to be thought
a Persecutor) as thereupon to think it lawful for them daily to increase their
number and strength in this Kingdom; whereby, if not in my time, at least in
the time of my Posterity, they may be in hope to erect their Religion again.
No, let them assure themselves, that as I am a Friend to their Persons, if they
be good Subjects; so I am a vowed Enemy, and do denounce Mortal War to their
Errors. And as I would be sorry to be driven, by their ill behavior, from the
protection and conservation of their bodies and lives; so will I never cease,
as far as I can, to tread down their Errors, and wrong Opinions. For I could
not permit the increase and growing of their Religion, without betraying my
self, and my own Conscence, and this whole Island, as well the part I am come
from, as the part I remain in, in betraying their Liberties, and reducing them
to the former slavish yoke, which both had cast off before I came among them;
as also the Liberty of the Crown in my Posterity, which I should leave again
under a new Slavery, being left free to me by my Predecessors. And therefore I
would wish all good Subjects that are deceived with this Corruption, if they
find any beginnings in themselves of knowledge, and love to the truth, to foster
the same by all lawful means, and to beware of quenching the Spirit that
works within them. And if they can find as yet no motion tending that way, to
be studious to read and confer with learned Men, and to use all such means as
may further their Resolution; assuring them, that as long as they are
disconformable in Religion to us, they cannot be but half my Subjects, be able
to do but half service, and I shall want the best half of them, which is their
souls.

And here I have occasion to speak to you, my Lords the Bishops; Tobie Matthew.
for as you my Lord of Durham, said very learnedly today in your Sermon,
Correction without Instruction is but Tyranny: So ought you, and all the Clergy
under you, to be more careful, vigilant and careful than you have been, to win
souls to God, as well by your exemplary Life, as Doctrine. And since you see
how careful they are, sparing neither labor, pains, nor extreme peril of their
Persons, to pervert, (the Devil is so busy a Bishop;) ye should be the more
careful, and wakeful in your Charges. Follow the Rule prescribed you by Saint
Paul, Be careful to exhort and instruct, in season, and out of season: And
where you have been any way sluggish before, now waken your selves up again
with a new diligence, remitting the success to God, who calling them either at
the second, third, tenth, or twelfth hour, as they are alike welcome to him, so
shall they be to me his Lieutenant here.

The third Reason of my Convening you at this time, which contains such
Actions of my Thankfulness toward you, as I may either do, or leave undone,
yet shall, with Gods grace, ever press to perform all the days of my life. It
consists in these two Points; In making of Laws at certain Times, which is only
at such Times as this, in Parliament; or in the careful Execution of the Laws
at other Times. As for the Making of them, I will thus far faithfully promise
unto you, that I will ever prefer the Weal of the Body above any particular or
private ends of my Own, thinking ever the Weal of the Commonwealth to be the
greatest Weal, and worldly felicity: A Point wherein a lawful King does
directly differ from a Tyrant. But at this time I am only thus far to forwarn
you in that Point, that you beware to seek the making of too many Laws, for two
especial Reasons; First, because In corruptissima Republica plurimae leges; And
the execution of some good Laws is far more profitable in a Commonwealth, than
to burden men's memories with making too many of them. And next, because the
making of too many Laws in one Parliament, will bring in Confusion, for want of
leisure, wisely to deliberate before you conclude; for the Bishop said well to
day, That to Deliberation a large time would be given, but to Execution a
greater promptness was required. As for the Execution of good Law, it has been
very wisely and honorably foreseen, and ordered by my Predecessors in this
Kingdom, in planting such a number of Judges, and all sorts of Magistrates, in
convenient places, for execution of the same. And therefore must I now turn to
you that are Judges, and Magistrates under me, as mine Eyes and Ears in this
case: I can say no otherwise to you, than as Ezekias the good King of Judah said
to their Judges, Remember that the Thrones you sit on are Gods, and neither
yours nor mine. And as you must be answerable to me, so must both you and I be
answerable to God for the due Execution of Our Offices. That Place is no Place
for you to utter your Affections in; you must not there hate your foe, nor love
your friend; fear the offending of the greater party, or pity the misery of the
meaner; ye must be blind, and not see distinctions of Persons; handless, not to
receive Bribes; but keep that just Temper and Medium in all your Proceedings,
that like a just Balance, ye may neither sway to the right hand, nor to the
left. Three principal Qualities are required in you, Knowledge, Courage, and
Sincerity; that you may discern with Knowledge, execute with Courage, and do
both in upright Sincerity. And for my part, I do vow and protest here in the
presence of God, and of this Honorable Audience, I never shall be weary, nor
omit occasion wherein I may show my carefulness of the Execution of good Laws:
And as I wish you that are Judges, not to be weary in your Office, in doing of
it; so shall I never be weary, with Gods grace, to take account of you, which
is properly my calling.

And thus having told you the three causes of my Convening of this Parliament,
all three tending only to utter my thankfulness, but in diverse forms; the first
by word, the other two by action, I do confess, that when I have done, and
performed all that in this Speech I have promised, Inutilis servus sum. When I
have done all that I can for you, I do nothing but that which I am bound to do,
and am accountable to God for the contrary. For the difference betwixt a
Rightful King, and an Usurping Tyrant, is this; That the proud and ambitious
Tyrant does think his Kingdom and People are ordained for satisfaction of his
desires, and unreasonable appetite; The righteous and just King does by the
contrary, acknowledge himself to be ordained for procuring the wealth and
prosperity of his People, and that his greatest and principal worldly felicity
must consist in their prosperity: If you be rich, I cannot be poor; if you be
happy, I cannot but be fortunate; and I protest, that your welfare shall ever
be my greatest care and contentment. And that I am a Servant, is most true;
that as I am a Head and Governor of all the People in my Dominions, who are my
Natural Vassals, and Subjects, considering them in numbers, and distinct ranks;
So if we will take the People as one Body and Mass, then as the Head is
ordained for the Body, and not the Body for the Head; so must a righteous King
know himself to be ordained for his People, and not his People for Him: For
although a King and his People be Relata, yet can he be no King if he want
People and Subjects. But there be many People in the World that lack a Head;
wherefore I will never be ashamed to confess it my Principal Honor, to be the
great Servant of the Commonwealth; and ever think the Prosperity thereof to be
my greatest felicity, as I have already said.

But as it was the whole Body of this Kingdom (with an uniform assent and
harmony) which did so far oblige me, so is my thankfulness due to the whole
State. For even as in Matter of faults, Quod a multis peccatur, impune
peccatur; even so in the Matter of virtuous and good deeds, which are done by
the willing Consent and Harmony of the whole Body, no particular Person can
justly claim thanks, as proper to him, for the same: And therefore I must here
make a little Apology for my self, in that I could not satisfy the particular
humors of every Person that looked for some Advancement or Reward at my hand,
since my entry into this Kingdom. Three kinds of things were craved of me,
Advancement to honor, Preferment to place of Credit about my Person, and
Reward in Matters of Land or Profit. If I had bestowed Honor upon all, no man
could have been advanced to Honor; for the Degrees of Honor do consist in
preferring some above their Fellows: If every man had the like access to my
Person, then no man could have it: and if I had bestowed Lands and Rewards upon
every man, the Fountain of my Liberality, would have been so exhausted, as I
should want Means to be liberal to any man. Yet was I not so sparing, but I may
without Vaunting affirm, that I have enlarged my favor in all the three
Degrees, toward as many and more, than ever King of England did, in so short a
space. No, I rather crave your pardon, that I have been so bountiful: For if
the means of the Crown be wasted, whither should I have recourse but to you my
Subjects, and be burdensome to you? which I should be lothest to do of any
King alive. Two special Causes moved me to be so open-handed, whereof the one
was reasonable and honorable, but the other (I will not be ashamed to confess
unto you) proceeded of my own infirmity. That which was Just and Honorable,
was, that being so far beholden to the Body of the whole State, I thought I
could not refuse to let some small Brooks run out of the Fountain of my
Thankfulness to the whole, for refreshing of particular Persons, that were
Members of that Multitude. The other which proceeded out of mine own Infirmity,
was, the Multitude and importunity of Suitors. But although Reason come by
infusion in a manner, yet Experience grows with time and labor: And
therefore do I not doubt, but Experience will teach the particular Subjects of
this Kingdom, not to be so importune and undiscreet in craving; and Me not to
be so easily and lightly moved, in granting that which may be harmful to my
Estate, and consequently to the whole Kingdom.

And thus at length having declared unto you my mind, My Conclusion shall only
now be, to excuse my Self, in case you have not found such Eloquence in my
Speech, as peradventure you might have looked for at my hands. I might alledg
the great weight of my Affairs, and my continual business, and distraction,
that I could never have leisure to think upon what I was to speak; And I might
also alledg, that my first sight of this so Famous and Honorable an Assembly,
might likewise breed some impediment: But leaving these excuses, I will
plainly, and freely, in my manner, tell you the true Cause of it; which is,
That it becomes a King, in my opinion, to use no other Eloquence than
plainness and sincerity. By plainness, I mean, that his Speeches should be so
clear, and void of all ambiguity, that they may not be thrown, nor rent in
sunder, in contrary senses, like the old Oracles of the Pagan gods: And by
Sincerity, I understand, that uprightness and honesty which ought to be in a
Kings whole Speeches, and Actions; that as far as a King is in Honor erected
above any of his Subjects, so far should he strive in Sincerity to be above
them all, and that his tongue should be ever the true Messenger of his heart.
And this sort of Eloquence you may ever assuredly look for at my hands.

Thus the Beams of Majesty had an influence upon every branch and leaf of the
Kingdom, by reflecting upon the Root, their Representative Body; every
particular expecting what fruit this Sunshine would produce; striving as much
to insinuate into him, as he did into the general, so that there was a
Reciprocal Harmony between the King and the People, because they courted one
another. But when the Kings Bounty contracted it self into private Favorites
(as it did afterward) bestowing the affection he promised the whole people,
upon one man; when the golden showers they gaped for, dropped into some few
channels, their passions flew higher than their hopes. The Kings aims were, to
unite the two Kingdoms, so that the one might corroborate the other, to make
good that part of his Speech (by this intermixtion) wherein he divides England
and Scotland into halves: But the English stumbled at that partition, thinking
it an unequal division, and fearing that the Scots (creeping into English
Lordships, and English Ladies Beds, in both which already they began to be
active) might quickly make their least half the predominant part.

But he was Proclaimed King of Great Britain; The King proclaimed King of great
Britain.
England must be no more a Name; the Scottish Coyns are made current, and our
Ships must have Saint Georges and Saint Andrews Crosses quartered together in
their Flags; all outward Ensigns of Amity. But those English that had sucked in
none of the sweets of this pleasant Stream of Bounty, repined to see the Scots
advanced from blew Bonnets to costly Beavers, wearing instead of Wadmeal,
Velvet and Satin, as diverse Pasquils written in that Age Satyrically taunted
at. Which is not set down here, to vilify the Scots (being most of them
Gentlemen that had deserved well of their Master) but to show, how cross to the
public Appetite the Honeycomb is, that another man eats. But the King (like a
wise Pilot) guided the Helm with so even an hand, that these small gusts were
not felt. It behoved him to play his Masterprize in the Beginning, which he did
to the life, for he had diverse opinions, humors and affections to grapple
with, as well as Nations, and it is a very calm Sea when no billow rises. The
Romanists bogled, that he said in his Speech, They were unsufferable in the
Kingdom, as long as they maintained the Pope to be their Spiritual Head, and He
to have power to dethrone Princes. The Separatists (as the King called them)
were offended at that Expression, wherein he professed willingly, if the
Papists would lay down King-killing, and some other gross errors, he would be
content to meet them half way. So that every one grounded his hopes, or his
fears, upon the shallows of his own fancy, not knowng yet what course the King
would steer. But these sores being tenderly dealt with, did not suddenly
fester, but were skinned over. The King desirous of the Title, Pacificus, did
not only close with his own Subjects, but healed up also that old wound that
had bled long in the sides of England and Spain, both being weary of the pain,
both willing to be cured. The King of Spain, sent the Constable of Castile with
a mighty Train of smooth-handed Spaniards to close up the wound on this side,
where (the old Enmity being well mortified) they were received with singular
Respect and Civility. The King of England sent his High Admiral, the Earl of
Notingham, with as splendid a Retinue of English, to close it on that: Who
being Personages of Quality, accoutred with all Ornaments suitable, were the
more admired by the Spaniards for beauty and excellency, by how much the
Jesuits had made impressions in the vulgar opinion, That since the English left
the Roman Religion, they were transformed into strange horrid shapes, with
Heads and Tails like Beasts and Monsters. So easy it is for those Iuglers,
when they have once bound up the Conscience, to tie up the Understanding also.

The King and Parliament in good accord.
But the Parliament highly admiring the Kings abilities, made a Recognition
thereof with many Elogies, as the prime Act of their humble submission to his
Government, wherein they yield their most humble thanks to the Divine Majesty
for his access to the Crown; and they desire from their Hearts, that as a
Memorial to all Posterity (among the Records of the High Court of Parliament,
for ever to endure) it may be published and declared, that they acknowledge his
Right of Succession to the Crown of England, and the Empire thereof; and
thereunto they faithfully submit, and oblige themselves, their Heirs, and
Posterities EARL OF NOTTINGHAM.
GEORGE CAREW, EARL OF TOTNES.
for ever, An. Reg. 2. An. Christi 1604.
until the last drop of their Bloods be spent. So high mounted was the
Affection of the People to the King! And happily might have continued so, if
some after Iealousies had not intervened, that like Clouds, hindered the
influence of their more intimate Correspondence.

And to satisfy the Kings desires about an Union betwixt England and Scotland,
Commiss. for an Union.
the Parliament made an Act to authorize certain Commissioners; viz. Thomas
Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England; Thomas Earl of Dorset, Lord
Treasurer of England; Charles Earl of Notingham, Lord High Admiral of England;
Henry Earl of Southampton, William Earl of Pembroke, Henry Earl of Northampton,
Richard Bishop of London, Tobie Bishop of Duresme, Anthony Bishop of Saint
David's; Robert Lord Cecil, Principal Secretary; Edward Lord Zouch, Lord
President of Wales; William Lord Mounteagle, Ralph Lord Eure; Edmund Lord
Sheffeild, Lord President of the Council in the North, Lords of the Higher
House of Parliament. And Thomas Lord Clinton, Robert Lord Buckhurst; Sir
Francis Hastings, Knight; Sir John Stanhope, Knight, Vice-Chamberlain to his
Majesty; Sir John Herbert, Knight, second Secretary to his Majesty; Sir George
Carew, Knight, Vice-Chamberlain to the Queen; Sir Thomas Strickland, Knight;
Sir Edward Stafford, Knight; Sir Henry Nevill of Berk-shire, Knight; Sir
Richard Bukley, Knight; Sir Henry Billingsley, Knight; Sir Daniel Dun, Knight,
Dean of the Arches; Sir Edward Hobby, Knight; Sir John Savile, Knight; Sir
Robert Wroth, Knight; Sir Thomas Chaloner, Knight; Sir Robert Maunsel, Knight;
Sir Thomas Ridgeway, Knight; Sir Thomas Holcroft, Knight; Sir Thomas Hesketh,
Knight, Attorney of the Court of Wards; Sir Francis Bacon, Knight; Sir Lawrence
Tanfield, Knight, Sergeant at Law; Sir Henry Hubberd, Knight, Sergeant at Law;
Sir John Bennet, Doctor of the Laws; Sir Henry Withrington, Sir Ralph Gray, and
Sir Thomas Lake, Knights, Robert Askwith, Thomas James, and Henry Chapman,
Merchants, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons; or any
eight of the said Lords, and twenty of the said Commons: Which Commissioners
shall have power to assemble, meet, treat, and consult with certain select
Commissioners to be nominated and authorized by Authority of the Parliament of
Scotland, concerning such Matters, Causes, and things, as they in their Wisdoms
shall think and deem convenient and necessary, for the honor of the King, and
common good of both Kingdoms. Yet the good intentions of this Union took no
effect, as will follow in the sequel of this History. But there were a great
many good Laws made, which are too voluminous for this place, having a proper
Sphere of their own to move in.

Thus the King sat triumphing as it were, upon a Throne of his Peoples
Affections; and his beginnings had some settlement: for being loath to be
troubled, he sought Peace everywhere. But our inbred distempers lay upon the
Lee, intermixed with other gross dregs, that the Princes lenity, and the Peoples
luxury produced. For the King minding his sports, many riotous demeanours crept
into the Kingdom, the Sunshine of Peace being apt for such a production, upon
the slime of the late War. The Sword and Buckler trade being now out of date,
one corruption producing another (the City of London being always a fit
Receptacle for such, whose prodigalities and wastes made them Instruments of
Debaucheries) diverse Sects of vicious Persons, going under the Title of Roaring
Boys, Roaring Boys.
Bravadoes, Roysters, etc. commit many insolences; the Streets swarm night and
day with bloody quarrels, private Duels fomented, especially betwixt the
English and Scots; many Discontents nourished in the Countries, betwixt the
Gentry and Commonalty, about Enclosure (the meanest gaping after new hopes)
growing in some places to a petty Rebellion. Daily discords (incident to peace
and plenty) betwixt private Families, Papist against Protestant, one Friend
against another; the Papists being a strong and dangerous Faction, missing
their hopes, strove to make the Scots more odious than they could make
themselves, though some of them went so high as to counterfeit the Kings
Privy Seal, and make Addresses thereby to Foreign Princes, for which one Thomas
Douglas, taken in the fact, was executed in Smithfield. Others were so
insolent, as to quip and jear the English Nobility; and other misdemeanors,
which caused secret heart-burnings, and jealousies betwixt the Nations. But
then comes a Proclamation, like a strong Pill, and carries away the grossest of
these humors.

The Gunpowder Treason.
Something yet stuck, especially in the Consciences of the Popish Party, that
could not be purged away without a Toleration, which they Petition for; but not
being granted, they contrived one of the most Horrid and Stupendous Mischiefs,
that ever entered into the Hearts of Men: For their heat of malice would not be
quenched with the Blood Royal, but the Nobility and Gentry, the Representative
Body of the whole Kingdom, United at Westminster, must be shattered in pieces,
and dis-membred, by the blast of six and thirty Barrels of Gunpowder, which
those dark Contrivers had hid in a Cellar under the Parliament House, being
discovered by a light from Heaven, and a Letter from one of the Conspirators,
when the fire was already in their hands, as well as rage in their hearts, to
put to the Train.

Principal Actors.
The principal of these Contrivers, was, Robert Catesbie, a Gentleman of a good
plentiful Estate, who first hatched and brooded the Plot, and promised to
himself the glory of an Eternal Name, by the Propagation of it; making choice
of Thomas GUY FAWKES.
Executed in the Year 1606. for the GUNPOWDER PLOT.

Percy, Robert Winter, Thomas Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, John
Wright, Francis Tresham, Sir Everard Digby, and others, Gentlemen of good
Estates (for the most part) and spirits as implacable and furious as his own;
who like combustible matter took fire at the first motion, their zeal to the
Roman cause burning within them, which nothing but the blood of Innocents can
quench. The design thus set afoot, they bind themselves to secrecy, by those
Sacraments which are the greatest ties upon the Soul, and Saint Garnet the
Jesuit was their Confessor. The foundation being laid, every man betakes
himself to his work, some to provide money, some materials. Percy was to hire
the Cellars under the Parliament House, to lay Wood and Coal in, for his
Winter-provision: Guido Faux, a desperate Ruffian (who was to give fire to the
Train) was appointed to be his man to bring in the Wood and Coal. The Gunpowder
provided in Flanders, is brought from Lambeth in the night, and covertly laid
under the Wood. Thus they prepare all things ready for a Burnt-offering,
against the day the Parliament should meet, 1604.
which was to be upon the seventh of February. But the King for some Reasons of
State (which at that time the dictates of Providence did much approve of)
prorogued the Parliament of the fifth of November following, which scattered
the Contrivers at present, and they were at their wits end; and some of them
went beyond Seas, because they would not beat too much about the Covert, their
materials being fitted; others that staid here persisted with Patience (made a
Vice by them) and met often to consult how they should manage their great
business, if it took effect. They looked upon the King and Prince, as already
sacrificed to their Cruelty: And Percy undertook to dispatch the Duke of York.
But because they must have one of the Blood Royal, that must serve as a center
to adhere to, to keep all from Confusion, they meant to preserve the Lady
Elizabeth, and make her Queen, that under her minority and innocence, they
might the better establish their bloody Principles of Piety and Policy. They
had designed the fatal day to be upon the fifth of November, when the King and
both Houses were to meet, and that day they appointed a great Hunting-match at
Dunsmore-beach in Warwickshire, to be nearer the Lord Harington's House, where
the Lady Elizabeth was. And they had by their horrid Art, and Experience, so
fitted their Matches, that were to convey the fire to the Powder, that they
could know a hundred Miles off, to a minute, when that Monstrous Fiery
Exhalation would break out.

Solacing themselves in this bloody expectation, and thinking their Conveyances
under ground were not seen above by the Divine Discoverer, they stood like
Vultures gaping for their Prey; when, behold! one tenderhearted Murderer among
the Pack, An. Reg. 3. An. Christi 1605.
willing to save the Lord Monteagle, writ this Letter to him.

MY Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of your
Preservation, therefore I would wish you (as you tender your Life) to forbear
your attendance at this Parliament; A Letter to my Lord Monteagle.
for God and Man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this Time. And
think not slightly of this advertisement; for though there be no appearance of
any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and
yet they shall not see who hurt them. This Counsel is not to be contemned,
because it may do you Good, and can do you no Harm: for the danger is past as
soon as you have burnt this Letter. I hope God will give you grace to make use
of it, to whose Holy Protection I commend you.


Here is the Protection of the Holy God desired, a strange expression in so
unholy an action, which is like their zeal, that made their children pass
through fire to Moloch; what horrid madness kindles such Sacrifices? The Lord
Monteagle astonished at the Letter (though he understood it not) thinking there
might be something in it of dangerous concernment, communicated the contents of
it to the Earl of Salisbury, and some others of the Kings Council. Salisbury
could not find out the Riddle, he concluded him either a fool or a madman that
wrote it, by this expression, The danger is past as soon as the Letter is
burnt: If the danger be past when the Letter is burnt, what needs any
warning? But he did not reach the meaning; for the Writers desire was to have
the Letter burned, and then the danger would be past both to the Writer and
Receiver, if he had grace to make use of the warning. The King was Hunting the
fearful Hare at Royston, while they laid this Snare for him at Westminster. As
soon as he came to Whitehall, the Earl of Salisbury being of his intimate
Councils, and principal Secretary, showed him the Letter. The King considering
it circumspectly (as Cicero said of the Sibyls works, Id majus est attenti
animi quam furentis) said, This is no Mad-mans writing. There is a great Blow
to be given, they shall not see it that feel it, which is some secret mischief.
Many times fear is a profitable and an active servant, if it do not domineer
and grow masterly. He was so sensible of a stroke, that he felt it (as it were)
coming: Therefore the day before the Parliament should begin, he commanded the
Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, to make a strict search about the Parliament
House, who accompanied with the Lord Monteagle, entered the Cellar under the
House, which he found stuffed with Billet, Faggot, and Coal, and asking
Whinyard of the Wardrobe (who was Housekeeper) what provisions they were, he
said, he had let the Cellar to Mr. Thomas Percy (who THOMAS PERSI NOBILIS
ANGLVS MAGNIBRITANNIAE REGIS STIPENDIARIVS ANNO 1605
Haec est vera and prima originalis editio Tho^ae Perci
Os vultumq vides Thomae cognomine Percy
Inter Britannos nobileis no^ssimi
Queis rebus (...) ambitione superstitioso
Animo nefandam machinatur dum necem
Regi Regina Ordinibus diprenditur: ipsum
Deo volente seclus in auctorem (...)
A Thomas Ichry^ Cap^^^runt
B Tho: Iehrus^ Regi adduxerit
C Tho: Persi in Arce fugit
D Thomas Persi sagittatus mortuus
Execution of the Conspirators In the Gunpowder Plot in the Year 1606.
was one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to the King) and close by in a corner of
the Cellar stood Faux, in a ghastly condition (being a raw-bon'd tall man) who
being questioned, said, he was Percies servant. The Lord Chamberlain, that
would make no noise, and bustle as that time, left both the Engine and Engineer
as he found them, taking no further notice, but apprehended Just Cause to have
the Cellars further searched; the Lord Mounteagle assuring himself, it was
Percie that writ the Letter to him, as soon as he heard him named, for there
were little intimacies betwixt them. The King with his Council advising what to
do, resolved of a further search that night, committing the Trust to Sir Thomas
Knevet, one of the Gentlemen of his Privy-Chamber, a Man of approved Fidelity;
who with a Retinue suitable to such an Enterprise, coming to the Cellar about
Midnight, he met the watchful Minister of Impiety, Faux, at the door, on whom
he presently seized; and making further search, pulled out the core of all that
horrid Contrivance. Faux, his underground Works being dug out, and seeing
all unkennel'd, confessed the intention, and was only sorry i^ came not to
perfection, saying, God would have concealed it, and the Devil only discovered
it. In his pockets they found a Watch (which were not common then) and a Tinder
box, the Engines to minute out his time to strike the stroke; so punctual was
he in his wickedness! This tough piece, upon examination by the Lords of the
Council, could have little drawn from him, only he said again, he was sorry it
was not done. But the Conspirators revealed themselves; for finding all
discovered, they pack to Dunsmore to the Hunting-meeting, breaking open some
Stables in London, and taking out diverse Horses of Noblemens, that were put
into Riders hands to manage, thinking to make a great Party: But the
High-Sheriffs of Warwickshire, and Worcestershire, hunted these Firebrand
Foxes so, that they were forced (most of them) to Earth themselves in
Littletons House at Halbach, and there Piercie and Catesby desperately sallying
out, were both slain, so were John Wright, and Christopher Wright: Thomas
Winter, Francis Tresham, and the rest, were taken; Tresham died of the
Strangury in the Tower; Traitors executed.
Thomas Winter, Guido Faux, Robert Keys, Thomas Bates, Robert Winter, late of
Hoodington in Worcestershire, Esquire; John Grant of Northbrook in the County
of Warwick, Esquire; Ambrose Rookwood, late of Staningfield in the County of
Suffolk, Esquire; and Sir Everard Digby of Gothurst in Bucking hamshire,
Knight, were executed according to their demerit.

This Prodigious Contrivance did not only stupifie the whole Kingdom with
amazement, but Foreign Princes made their Wonderment also; And though, for the
Propagation of the Catholic Cause, they might have Conscience enough to with
it had taken Effect; yet they had Policy enough to Congratulate the Discovery;
and some of them, to take off the asperity of the Suspect, sweetened their
Expressions with many rich Gifts, and Presents, to the King and Queen. But this
bloody Design, found in the hand of the Malefactors, grasping the Mischief, and
confirmed by their own Confessions (being such Spirits as were fit Boutefeus
for so desperate an Enterprise) was notwithstanding fathered upon the Puritans
(as Nero did the burning of Rome upon the Christians) by some impudent and
cunning Jesuits (whose practice is to deceive) if not quite to clear their
party, yet by stirring this muddy water, to make that which is in it to appear
the less perspicuous; and it is like the rest of their Figments, fit baits for
Ignorance to nibble on: Which some years after I had opportunity at Bruges in
Flanders, to make Weston, an old Jesuit, active in the Powder Plot, ingenuously
to confess.

The Parliament meet the 9. of November.
This preceded the second Sessions of the first Parliament, prorogued till the
fifth of November, and upon the ninth they met; where with Hearts full of Fears
and Jealousies, they ripped up the ground of the Machination, for discovery of
the Complotters; and laid such a Foundation of good Laws against Papists, as
might serve for a Bulwark in the time to come. The King was not unmindful of
the Lord Monteagle, the first Discoverer of this Treason, for he gave to him
and his Heirs for ever, two hundred pounds a year in Fee-farm Rents, and five
hundred pounds a year besides, during his life, as a reward for this good
service.

Rumors of the Kings death.
In the midst of the Parliaments Activity, a rumor was spread (by what strange
means unknown) that the King was stabbed at Okingham (twenty miles from London,
where he was Hunting) with a poisoned knife: The Court at Whitehall, the
Parliament, and City, took the Alarm, mustering up their Old Fears, every man
standing at gaze, as if some new Prodigy had seized them; such a Terror had
this late monstrous intended mischief imprinted in the spirits of the People,
that they took Fire from every little Train of Rumor, and were ready to
grapple with their own Destruction before it came. In the midst of this Agony,
there came assurance of the Kings safety, which he was enforced to divulge by
Proclamation, to re-establish the People. The Spanish Ambassador gave Sir Lewis
Lewknor, Master of the Ceremonies, a Chain of Gold of good Value, for bringing
him the news of the Kings safety, which presently resounded in the Court; and
it was thought, he was so bountiful, either out of Terror, being afraid of the
People in this Confusion, because it was rumor'd, that the King of Spain was a
Fomenter of the Plot; or out of a desire to vindicate his Masters Honor, and
take the Odium from him; for he had been solicited by diverse Jesuits, together
with Si quid patimini propter iustitiam, beati i petri^ Henricus Garnetus
anglus e societate IESV passus 3 May 1606
these Conspirators, An. Reg. 4. An. Christi 1606.
to invade England. The Principal of which Jesuits, called Henry Garnet (
Provincial of the Order in England) was arraigned at Guild Hall, the twentieth
of March 1605. and executed at the West end of St. Paul's soon after.

Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Stu^ton, not coming to the Parliament
according to their Writ of Summons, were suspected to have knowledge of the
Conspiracy, and so was the Earl of Northumberland from some presumptions, and
all three were committed to the Tower. The two Barons (after some imprisonment)
were redeemed by Fine in Star Chamber, but the Earl continued a Prisoner there
for many years after.

In July this year the King of Denmark (Brother to the Queen) came in Person as
a visitor, The King of Denmarks first coming.
where he found their Shakings somewhat settled, their Terrors abated, and met
with not only all those varieties that Riches, Power, and Plenty are capable to
produce for satisfaction, where will and affection are the dispensers, but he
beheld with admiration the stately Theater, whereon the Danes for many hundred
of years had acted their bloody parts: But how he resented their Exit, or the
last Act of that black Tragaedy, wherein his Country lost their interest, some
Divine Power, that searches the capacious hearts of Princes can only discover.
This short Month of his stay carried with it as pleasing a countenance on every
side, and of their Recreations and Pastimes, flew as high a flight, as Love
mounted upon the wings of art and fancy, the suitable nature of the season, or
Times swift foot could possibly arrive at. The Court, City and some parts of
the Country with Banquetings, Masks, Dancings, Tilting, Barriers, and other
Gallantry (besides the manly Sports of Wrestling, and the brutish Sports of
bayting Wild-beasts) swelled to such a greatness, as if there were an intention
in every particular man, this way to have blown up himself.

The seven and twentieth of May last, the Parliament was prorogued to the
eighteenth of November following; The fifth of November. made Holy Day.
but before they parted (having hearts full of affection for Gods great
deliverance of the whole Kingdom from ruin and destruction) they made an Act to
have the fifth of November for ever solemnized with public Thanksgiving:
Imputing the Discovery of the Treason to Gods inspiring the King with a Divine
Spirit to interpret some dark phrases of the Letter, above, and beyond all
ordinary construction. They attainted the blood of those Traitors that were
Executed, as also, those that were slain in the field, or dyed in Prison. They
made many good Laws, for the discovering and suppressing of Popish Recusants.
And gave the King three entire Subsidies and six Fifteens. Besides four
Subsidies of four shillings in the pound granted by the Clergy. But they put
off the Treaty of Union, by an Act that referred it to be done as well any
other Session of Parliament, so willing they were to keep close to the Kings
affections, and not to start from him. But the next Session (the King being
loath to be longer delayed) the business of the Union was much pressed again, by
some that knew the Kings mind, among whom, Sir Francis Bacon (now the Kings
Solicitor) was a principal Instrument, who came prepared for it, and first
moved the House of Commons, that the Scots might be Naturalized by Act of
Parliament; which was opposed by diverse strong and modest Arguments. Among
which they brought in the comparison of Abraham and Lot, Arguments about a
Union.
whose Families joining, they grew to difference, and to those words, Vade tu
ad dextram, and ego ad sinistram.

It was answered, That Speech brought the captivity of the one, they having
dis-joyned their strength.

The Party opposing said, If we admit them into our Liberties, we shall be
overrun with them, as Cattle (naturally) pent up by a slight Hedge, will over
it into a better soil, and a Tree taken from a barren place will thrive to
excessive, and exuberant Branches in a better, witness the multiplicities of
the Scots in Polonia,

To which it was answered, That if they had not means, place, custom, and
employment (not like Beasts but Men) they would starve in a plentiful soil,
though they came into it; and what springtide and confluence of that Nation
have housed and familied themselves among us, these four years of the Kings
reign? And they will never live so meanly here as they do in Polonia; for they
had rather discover their poverty abroad than at home. Besides, there is a
question whether England be fully peopled, witness the drowned Grounds, and
Common-wasts; the ruins and decays of ancient Towns in this Realm; Witness how
many serve in the Parliament for desolate Buroughs; Witness our Wastes by Sea,
as well as by Land, suffering the Flemings to carry away all our Fishing, the
sinews of our industry being slackned, we want active spirits to corroborate
them by their example: Besides the planting Ireland, fully abounding with
Rivers, Havens, Woods, Quarries, good Soil, and temperate Climate. No surcharge
of people has been prejudicial to Countries, the worst will be an honorable
War, to recover our ancient Rights, or revenge our Injuries, or to attain to
the honor of our Ancestors. We should not forget the consideration of
Amplitude and Greatness, and fall at variance about Profit, and Recknings,
fitter for private persons than Kingdoms.

The other side objected, That the Fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms are
diverse, and it is declared, they shall so continue, and therefore it would not
be reasonable to proceed to this Naturalization, whereby to indow them with our
Rights, except they should receive, and submit to our Laws.

EdwardusI DG Rex Ang: Dux Aqui: ete Dom: Hib:
sold by Robt: Peake.



It was answered, That in the Administration of the World under God, the great
Monarch, his Laws are diverse; one Law in Spirits, another in Bodies, one Law in
Regions Celestial, another in Elementary, and yet the Creatures are all one
mass, or lump. That in the state of the Church, among People of several
languages, and lineages, there is a Communion of Saints, and we are all
fellow-Citizens, and Naturalizants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and yet diverse
Ecclesiastical Laws, Policies, and Hierarchies; for the Laws are rather Figura
Republicae, than Forma; rather bonds of Perfection, than Intireness. That in
Ireland, Iersey, G^rnsey, and the Isle of Man, our Common Laws are not in
force, and yet they have the benefit of Naturalization.

To which it was replied, that these are only Flourishes of Rhetoric; for God
(who is the only Disposer of all his Creatures) keeps them in Order and
Obedience to Him, by a Law which they cannot deviate from, unless he withdraws
his preserving Hand from them: But betwixt Man and Man, or Realm and Realm,
there can be no such Tie, or Obligation, to hold an Unity, where they have
various Laws, and various Privileges. And for the immunities given to the
Irish (for some Ages past) they were English Colonies sent there to plant,
being a great part of them Natives with us, of the same blood and stock, with
whom we are ingrafted by Time, and made (as it were) one Body, the better to
secure their obedience, and hinder any League or Amity with a Foreign Nation.
But Scotland has an entire Union with the French, continued for some hundreds
of years, that is indissolvable, and therefore incompetent, yet to the freedoms
of England. When we have had as much experience of the Friendship of Scotland,
as of them, we shall incline to a more intimate Union. Besides there is an
inequality in the Portunes of the two Nations; and by this Commixture, there
may ensue advantage to them, and loss to us.

To the latter part was answered, Beatius est dare quam accipere: And Edward
the First, among other Commendations of War, and Policy, none was more
celebrated than his purpose and enterprise, for the Conquest of Scotland; as
not bending his Designs to glorious Acquests abroad, but solid strength at
home; which, if it had succeeded, could not but have brought in those
inconveniences, of the Commixture of a more opulent Kingdom with a less; for it
is not the yoke either of Laws or Arms, that can alter the nature of the
Climate, or the nature of the Soil; neither is it the manner of the Commixture,
that can alter the nature of the Commixture; and therefore if it were good for
us then, it is good for us now; and not to be prized the less, because we paid
not so dear for it.

They strive further to prove, That the benefit of Naturalization is by Law, to
as many as have been, or shall be born, since the Kings coming to the Crown;
for there is no more than to bring the Ante-nati unto the degree of Post-nati,
that Men grown may be in no worse case than Children, and elder Brothers in no
worse condition than younger Brothers. That if any object the Law is not so,
but that the Post-nati are Aliens as the rest, it is contrary to the Reason of
Law. The Wisdom of the Common Laws of England is admirable, in distribution of
the Benefit, and Perfection of the Law, according to the several conditions of
Persons, The Degrees are four, two of Aliens, and two of Subjects: The first
Degree is of an Alien born under a King or State, that is an Enemy; if such an
one come into the Kingdom without safe conduct, it is at his peril, the Law
gives him no protection, neither of Body, Lands, nor Goods; so as if he be
slain, there is no remedy by any appeal, at the Parties suit, though she were
an English Woman; though at the Kings suit the Case may be otherwise, in regard
of the offense to the Peace, and Crown, The second Degree is of an Alien that
is born under Faith and Allegiance of a King, or State, that is a Friend; unto
such a Person the Law does impart a greater benefit and protection concerning
things personal, transitory, and moveable, as Goods and Chattels, Contracts,
and the like, but not concerning Freehold, and Inheritance; and the Reason is,
because he may be an Enemy, though he be not; for the State where he was born,
may enter into Hostility; and therefore as the Law has but a Transitory
assurance of him, so it rewards him with Transitory benefits. The third Degree
is of a Subject, who having been an Alien, is made free by Charter, and
Denization: To such a one the Law does impart yet a more ample benefit, for it
gives him a power to purchase Freehold, and Inheritance to his own use, and
likewise inables his Children (born after his Denization) to inherit: But yet
he cannot make Title, or convey any Pedigree from any Ancestour Paramount; for
the Law thinks not good to make him in the same Degree with a Subject born,
because he was once an Alien, and so might have been an Enemy; and Affections
cannot be so settled by any benefit, as when from their Nativity they are
inbred, and inherent. The fourth Degree, and the perfect Degree, is of such a
Person, as neither is Enemy, nor can be Enemy in time to come, nor would have
been Enemy at any time past; and therefore the Law gives unto him the full
benefit of Naturalization. Now if these be the true steps and paces of the Law,
no man can deny, but whosoever is born under the Kings obedience, never could,
in aliquo puncto temporis, be an Enemy; and therefore in reason of Law is
Naturalized. So though the Scots seem to be in Reason, Naturales ipso jure, yet
it is not superfluous to have it done by Parliament; for it will show the World
our love to them, and good agreement with them.

Then they showed by authority of History, and Experience, the Inconveniences
that may grow, if this Union of Naturalization does not close, and bind up the
Veins, so as to make it one perfect Body; For else it may be apt to open, and
break out again upon all occasions, and relapse to the detriment of both:
Ripping up ancient Stories of the Romans and Latins, and the Wars they had,
merely for want of this Union, and never were at quiet till they enjoyed it.
Then between the Peloponnesians, and the Spartans the like. And from ancient
Stories to the Kingdom of Arragon and Castile, united in the Persons of
Ferdinando and Isabella, severed and divided from the rest of Spain in
Privileges, and directly in this point of Naturalization, or capacity of
Inheritance. But what came of this? A Rebellion grew among them, which a Royal
Army with difficulty suppressed, and (they being made one incorporated Body
with the rest of Spain) perpetuated Peace to Posterity.

The like example was betwixt Florence and Pisa. And whatsoever Kingdoms and
States have been United, and that Union corroborated by the Bonds of
Naturalization, you shall never observe them afterward, upon any occasion to
break or sever again: Whereof diverse Provinces in France, by time annexed to
that Crown, are further witnesses. So that except they proceed to this
Naturalization, these Realms will be in continual danger to divide and break
again.

Next they show the Benefits to be Security and Greatness. Surety, by stopping
up the Postern-gates of our Enemies, so that we shall not be so much a
temptation to the ambition of Foreigners, when their Approaches and Avenues are
taken away: For having so little success when they had these advantages, they
will have less comfort when they want them. And Greatness by this Union must
needs follow: For having so many Iron-handed men in these three Kingdoms, we
shall not only pluck Gold from the (once poor) Spaniards Indian-mines, but by
our Arms keep in awe the whole Christian World.

These Arguments pressed with gilded Oratory by the Solicitor and his partakers,
could not prevail, though urged with all the power Wit could invent, or Hope
aim at: For being new budded in Court, he was one of those that smoothed his
way to a full ripeness; by liqu^rish and pleasing passages, which he at last
attained to, being made Lord Chancellor of England. But such sweets, though
delightful at present, breed rottenness in the end: for he withered, and came
to nothing, as in due time shall be expressed.

But the King (like a great Sea) being troubled when such cross-winds are
boistrous, sent for both Houses of Parliament to White Hall hall the last of
March, An. Reg. 5. An. Christi 1607.
1607. to calm them; where betwixt a Sunshine of fair Words, and a Cloud of
Anger, he colors over some of the Arguments that had been used, and urges
others for his best advantage, with a plain natural bluntness fit for Kings. He
tells them, The Kings Speech to the Parliament about the Union.
the Union he desires, is of Laws and Persons, such a Naturalizing as may make
one Body of both Kingdoms; that as there is but Vnus Rex, so there may be but
Vnus Grex, and Vna Lex. His intention is not, as some idly alledg, to give
England the labor and sweat, and Scotland the fruit and sweet, vainly talking
of transplanting Trees out of barren ground into better, and lean Cattle out of
bad pasture into a more fertile soil. Can any man displant them unless they
will? Or is Scotland so strong, to pull them out of their houses? Whereas the
waste grounds in Scotland would rather be planted by Swarms of People that
cumber the Streets here.

First, He desires that all Hostile Laws should cease, being the King of
England cannot make War with the King of Scotland.

Secondly, That there should be Community of Commerce, he being no Stranger,
but descended of their ancient Kings: and how can he be Natural Liege-Lord to
both, and they Strangers to one another? And shall they that be under the same
Allegiance be no freer, nor have no better Respect than Frenchmen and Spaniards?

Thirdly, They all agree they are no Aliens, and yet will not allow them to be
Natural. That he was informed by their own Judges and Lawyers, at his first
access to the Crown, that there was a difference between the Ante and Post-nati
of each Kingdom; which caused him to publish a Proclamation, that the Post-nati
were Naturalized by his accession; but he confesses, Judges may err, so may the
Lawyer's on their side: Therefore he admonishes them to beware to disgrace,
either his Proclamations, or the Judges, for so they may disgrace both their
King and Laws; who have power, when the Parliament is ended, to try them both
for Lands and Lives.

And for some of them who with their flattering speeches would have the
Ante-nati preferred, alleging their merit in my service, such Discourses have
mel in ore, and fell in cord; carrying an outward appearance of love to the
Union, but a contrary resolution in their hearts. For the King would have them
know, it lies within the compass of his Prerogative to prefer whom he pleases
to any Dignity Civil or Ecclesiastical. But he is so far from prejudicing the
English, that he is willing to bind himself to reasonable Restrictions.
Besides, it is a special Point of the Kings Prerogative, to make Aliens,
Citizens; and in any case wherein the Law is thought not to be clear, Rex est
Iudex; for he is Lex loquens, supplying the Law where it wants. But this he
speaks as knowing what belongs to a King, not intending to press it further
than may agree with their loves, and stand with the convenience of both Nations.

The inconveniences supposed to arise from Scotland, are pretended to be, 1. An
evil affection in the Scots to the Union. 2. That the Union is incompetible. 3.
That the Gain is small, or none.


If this be so, Why is there talk of an Union? For the first, They alledg the
averseness of the Scots, from the Preface, and Body of their Act; where they
decare, they will remain an absolute and free Monarchy, and not alter the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. And yet in the beginning of this Session of
Parliament, the opinion was current, that Scotland was greedy of this Union,
and pursued it with so much violence, that they cared not for the strictness of
the Conditions, so they might attain the substance, and end. And yet they now
say, they are backwards, which is a Contradiction; for how can they both beg
and deny the same thing, at one and the same time? And by preserving their
Fundamental Laws, they mean, those Laws by which Confusion is avoided, and
their Kings Succession, and Monarchy maintained. To which he Declares, That he
is in descent three hundred years before Christ, not meaning (as they do) their
Common Law; for the Scots have no Law but that which is Ius Regis. And for
their desire of continuing a free Monarchy, he hopes they mean not he should
set Garrisons over them, as the Spaniards do over Sicily and Naples.

And then he tells them, That he governs Scotland with his Pen; he writes, and
does more by a Clerk of the Council, than others could do by the Sword. And
though he knows there are many seditious Persons in that Kingdom, that may talk
lewdly enough, yet none of them ever spoke dishonourably of England, as they
have done of Scotland: For if any man speaks any thing uncomely there, the
Chancellor by his Authority interrupts him; but here they have freedom to speak
what they list, and as long as they list, without contradiction. Then the King
shows what the Laws of Scotland are.

1. Those which concern Tenures, Wards, Liveries, Signiories, and Lands, are
drawn out of the Chancery of England, brought by James the First (who was bred
up here) and differ only in terms.

The second are Statute Laws, to which he hopes they will be no Strangers.

The third is the Civil Law, brought out of France by James the Fifth; and
serve only to supply in such Cases, where the Municipal Laws are defective: So
that he hopes it is no hard matter to unite the People together, who are in
effect already subject to the same Law. And whereas it is Objected, that the
King of Scotland has not a Negative Voice in Parliament, but must pass the
Laws agreed on by the Lords and Commons: He assures them, that the form of
Parliament there, is nothing inclined to Popularity: For about twenty days
before the Parliament begins, Proclamation is made throughout the Kingdom, that
all Bills to be exhibited that Session, be delivered to the Master of the Rolls
by a certain day: Then they are brought to the King, perused, and considered by
him; and only such as he allows, are put into the Chancellors hand, to be
propounded that Parliament, and no other. And if any man speak of any other
Matter than is in this Form first allowed by him, the Chancellor tells him,
that there is no such Bill allowed by the King: And when they are past for
Laws, he ratifies and confirms them, first racing out what he does not approve
of. And if this be to be called a Negative Voice in Parliament, then he has
one.

Union betwixt the French and the Scots, which makes this Union so
incompetible; he assures them, it was a League only made between the Kings, not
the People. For Scotland being solicited by England and France at one Time, for
a League Offensive and Defensive, against each others Enemies. There was a
great Disputation maintained in favor of England, that they being our
Neighbors joined in one Continent, a strong and Powerful Nation, it would be
more Security to the State of Scotland to join in Amity with England, than with
France, divided by the Sea, where they must abide the hazard of wind and
weather, and other Accidents that might hinder relief.

But on the contrary, it was alleged in the favor of France, That England
ever sought to conquer Scotland, and therefore there would never be kept any
sound Amity: Whereas France, lying more remote, claimed no interest, and
therefore would be found a more constant and faithful Friend; so it was
concluded on their Part. But by the Tenor it was ordered to be renewed, and
confirmed from King to King successively, by the mediation of their
Ambassadors, and therefore merely personal. And so it was renewed in the Queen
his Mothers time, but not by assent in Parliament; which it could not have
wanted, if it had been a League of the People: And in the Kings Time, when it
came to be ratified, because it appeared to be in Odium Tertii, it was by him
left un-renewed, in consideration of his Title to the Crown.

England by this Union; Who is so ignorant that does not know the gain will be
great? Do they not gain by the Union of Wales? And is not Scotland greater than
Wales? Shall not Lands, Seas, and Person be added to their Greatness? Two
Snow-balls put together MARIA IACOBI SCOTORVM REGIS FILIA SCOTORVMQVE NVNC
REGINA
HONORATISS: DNus THOMAS EGERTONUS BARO DE ELLESMER ANGLIAE CANCELLArius.
grow greater; two Houses joined make one the larger; and two Castle-walls made
into one, makes one as thick and strong as both. And he professes, he seeks
this Union only to advance the greatness of their Empire here in England, yet
with such caution as may stand with the weal of both States. What is now
desired, has often been sought, and not obtained, to refuse it then now were
double iniquity, And for their security in such reasonable points of
Restriction, which he shall agree to, they need not doubt his inclination: For
he will never say any thing he will not promise, nor promise any thing which he
will not swear, nor swear any thing which he will not perform.

This urged with asseveration might have wrought much with the Parliament, The
Parliament declined the Union.
but that they apprehended a great inconvenience in such an Union, where the
Laws and Government are of different natures. All were not Romans that were
born subjects to the Roman Empire, though St. Paul was born one, the Centurion
was a purchaser. For notwithstanding all the former Arguments by the King, and
his Ministers, the Parliament knew that it is true, That if Scotland had been
Conquered, the only way to tie them to obedience, were to let them taste the
sweets of English Liberties. But to let them sit Triumphing upon their own
privileges, and roam about among the English Freedoms, were to make them
straggle too much. The Scots would not lessen, nor in the least derogate from
the dignity of their long continued Monarchy, and the English thought they had
no reason to come to them to derogate from themselves. The Parliament only
feared the Kings Power would have such an influence upon the Judges of the
Kingdom; that the Scots would be naturalized too soon, they were resolved not
to be accessory to it: which indeed some two years after was confirmed in
Calvin's case of post-nati, reported by the Lord Chief Justice Cook, who was fit
metal for any stamp Royal, and adjudged by him, the Lord Chancellor Ellesmere,
and most of the Judges of the Kingdom in the Exchequer-Chamber, though many
strong and valid Arguments were brought against it ( such Power is in the
breath of Kings!) and such soft stuff are Judges made of, that they can vary
their Precedents, and model them into as many shapes as they please. And thus
this Case stood like a Statue clothed by the Lord Chief Justice in the vulgar
Language (when the rest of his Reports spoke an unknown Tongue) that the
Kingdom might take more particular notice, that the Scots were as free in
England as themselves, yet it fell not out to their wishes. But all that could
be gotten from the Parliament, was, That the Laws of hostility that were
anciently made betwixt England and Scotland were repealed, that the old grudges
which caused the Disunion (the War in the members) might be taken away. And in
the said Act they provided, An. Reg. 6. An. Christi 1608.
That if a natural born subject of England did commit any misdemeanour in
Scotland, and sly into England, he should be tried where he was taken, and not
carried into Scotland to receive his judgment there; Till such time (which are
the very words of the Act) as both Kingdoms shall be made one in Laws and
Government, which is the thing so much desired, as that wherein the full
perfection of the blessed Union (already begun in the Kings Royal person)
consists. And further they went not: For they found and feared the old enmity
would yet a while continue; for since the Kings coming into England, the loose
and uncomposed Borderers, that lived upon rapine and spoil (seeking new
benefits from new changes) had broke out and committed many insolences, who
though they were suppressed by the Forces of Barwick and Carlisle, and many of
them suffered in it, yet custom and habit had bred in them a natural Ferity,
which could only be restrained by giving freedom to the Laws, that within a
short time gave bound to that barbarous animosity. The Laws made in Scotland to
the prejudice of the English were likewise repealed there, so that all passages
were made smooth on both sides. This Session also produced diverse good Laws for
the benefit of the Commonwealth.

But this Session brought in no money, that is as the blood of the Subject,
which He (as a wise Physician) would not strain from them the ordinary way,
lest the sense of it should bring the more fears and faintings with it, but by
laying on little Burdens at first, he not only inured them to bear greater,
but made them sweat out some of that humor insensibly, though they felt it
afterward, when they found the weight laid upon their shoulders, only (as they
conceived) to daub other men's with bravery. For the Kings Bounty was seen by
the vulgar eye to overflow in many little Rivulets, who knew the golden streams
that out-faced the Sun came not from the Norths cold climate, but were drained
out of the fountains of their labor. They could not endure to see their fellow
Subjects grow fat, by what should be their nourishment. Collecting that the
King had received three hundred and fifty thousand pounds subsidies, due to the
late Queen, besides what the Parliament had given him. And fearing that
Proclamations (who were indeed very active Ministers) would now become Laws,
ushering in the Kings will with large strides upon the peoples Liberties, who
lay down while they stepped over them. The ingenious sort, sensible of this
incroaching Monarchy, brake out into private murmur, which by degrees (being of
a light nature) carried a Cloud with it, by which the wise Pilots of the State,
foreseeing a Storm gathering, strive to dissipate it the next Session of
Parliament, which was held the nineteenth of February, in the seventh year of
our Kings Reign.

Thomas Sackville Earl of Dorset


Not long after this, An. Reg. 7. An. Christi 1609.
the Earl of Dorset, Lord High Treasurer, died suddenly, as he sat at the
Council Table; which gave occasion to some persons disaffected to him (as what
eminent Officer that has the managing of Moneys can please all?) to speak many
things to his Dishonor. The death of the Earl of Dorset suddenly.
But they considered not, that besides the Black worm and the White (day and
night, as the Riddle is) that are gnawing constantly at the root of this tree
of Life, there are many insensible Diseases, as Apoplexies, whose Vapors
suddenly extinguish the Animal Spirits; and Apostems both in the upper, and
middle Region of Man, that often drown and suffocate both Animal and Vital; who
are like imbodyed Twins, the one cannot live without the other; if the Animal
Spirits fail, the Vital cannot subsist, if the Vitals perish, the Animal give
over their operations. And He that judges ill of such an Act of Providence, may
have the same hand, at the same time, writing within the Palace walls of his
own Body, the same Period to his Lives earthly Empire.

The Earl of Salisbury succeeded him, The Earl of Salisbury made Treasurer.
a man nourished with the milk of Policy, under his father the Lord Burley
(famous for Wisdom in his Generation) a Courtier from his infancy, Batteld by
Art, and Industry, under the late Queen, mother of her Country. Though Nature
was not propitious to his Outside (being Crooked backed) She supplied that want
with admirable indowments within. This man the King found Secretary, and Master
of the Wards; and to these he added the Treasurers staff, knowing him to be the
staff of his Treasury: For he had knowledge enough to pry into other Men's
Offices as well as his own, and knew the ways of disbursing the Kings moneys.
The Earl of Northhampton, he made Lord Privy Seal; and these were the two prime
wheels of his triumphant Chariot. The Earl of Suffolk was made Lord Chamberlain
before, but he came far behind in the management of the Kings affairs, being a
Spirit of a more Grosser Temper, fitter to part a fray, and Compose the
differences of a disordered Court, than a Kingdom. Upon the Shoulders of the
two first the King laid the Burden of his business: For though he had many
Lords his Creatures, some by Creation, and some by insinuation (for Kings will
never want supple-hand Courtiers) and the Bishops, being his Dependents, the
most of them tending by direct Lines toward him, as the Center of their
advancement; so that He (like the Supreme Power) moved this upper Region, for
the most part, and that had an influence upon the lower, in inferior Orbs; yet
these two noble Men were the two great Lights that were to discover the Kings
mind to the Parliament, and by whose Heat, and Vigor, the blessed fruits of
Peace, and Plenty, Salisbury and Northampton Sticklers for the King.
should be produced.

The Lord Treasurer (by a Command from the King) instructs both Houses in their
business, and what they shall do well to insist upon this Session. First, To
supply his Majesty's wants. Secondly, To ease the people of their Grievances.
They go commonly yoakt together; for the peoples Grievances are the Kings
Wants, and the Kings Wants are the peoples Grievances, How can they be
separated? If the King will always want, the people will always suffer: For
Kings when they do want, lay commonly lawless impositions on the people, which
they must take off again with a sum of money, and then they want again to a
continued vicissitude.

These two Propositions are sweetened by him with a third: Which is to make the
Parliament witnesses of those great favors, and honors, that his Majesty
intended his Royal Son, Prince Henry, in creating him Prince of Wales: Which
though the King might do without a Parliament, and that diverse Kings his
Predecessors had done so, (as by many precedents was manifested) yet being
desirous to have a happy Union betwixt him and his People, he would have
nothing resound ill in their ears, from so eminent an instrument to the
Kingdoms good as his Son. Then they excuse the Kings necessities, proceeding
from his great disbursements. For the three hundred and fifty thousand pounds
Subsidies, due in the late Queens time, he received with one hand, and paid her
Debts with another, redeeming the Crown Lands which she had morgaged to the
City. He kept an Army of nineteen thousand men in Ireland, for some time a
foot; wherein a great many of the Nobility were Commanders, and other deserving
Soldiers, that would have been exposed to want and penury, if not supplied: And
it was not safe for the King to trust the inveterate malice of a new reconciled
Enemy, without the Sword in his hand. The late Queens Funeral Charges were
reckoned up, which they hoped the Parliament would not repine at: Nor was it
fit the King should come in as a private Person, bringing in one Crown on his
head, and finding another here; or his Royal Consort, with our future Hopes
(like so many precious Ienels) exposed to Robbers, without a Guard and Retinue?
How fit was the Magnificence at the King of Denmarks being here? And how just
that Ambassadors from Foreign Princes (more than ever this Crown received)
should find those Entertainments and Gratuities, the want whereof would put a
dim luster abroad upon the most sparkling Jewels of the Crown; Besides the
necessary Charge of sending Ambassadors to others, being concurrent and mutual
Civilities among Princes.

That these are the causes of the Kings wants, and not his irregular Bounty,
though a magnificent mind is inseparable from the Majesty of a King. If he did
not give, his subjects and servants would live in a miserable Climate; And for
his Bounty to those that were not born among us, it must be remembered, he was
born among them; and not to have them taste of the blessing he has attained,
were to have him change his Virtue with his Fortune. Therefore they desire the
Kings wants may be supplied; a thing easy to be granted, and not to be valued
by Wisemen, nor spoken of without contempt. Philosophy says, that all Riches
are but food and raiment, the rest is nugatorium quiddam: And that it is but
purior pars terrae, and therefore but crassior pars aquae, a thing unworthy the
denial to such a King who is not only the wisest of Kings, but the very Image
of an Angel, that has brought good tidings, and settled us in the fruition of
all good things. He whose depth of Knowledge as well as Conscience, deserves
the Title of Fidei defensor; whose numerous Issue makes Foreign Princes study
to keep their own, not look abroad. He that has shut the backdoor of the
Kingdom, and placed two Lions, a red and a yellow to secure it, who would have
us live under our own Olive, that we may laetari and benefacere. That none will
wonder at the Want, or startle at the supply, but such as study to serve their
own turns, and believe nothing but what they find written in the stories of
their own ignorance. Among which those are to be reckoned, who (hearing of an
Order to bind up the printed Proclamations in a book, that the better notice
may be taken of the things contained in them) have raised a bruit, that it was
intended this Parliament to make Proclamations equal to the Laws, which never
entered into the Kings heart; who is so far from governing by will and power,
that he will yield to any motion from them, wherein they shall hold a just
Diameter, and proportion among themselves, and observe those Duties due to a
great and gracious King.

Thus these Lords did please themselves and the King, by striving to keep the
people in the milky way of Obedience, which they had long sucked in, and found
the sweet of it tending to nourishment, not yet meeting any Callous, or
Brawny-constitution (which must harden them by degrees) nor yet finding their
own Tempers grown Robust enough, by so harsh a diet as afterward they met
with. They therefore are willing to go on in the way pointed out to them, as
Pupils follow their Masters, minding rather the smoothness of the Tract they
saw, than the roughness of the end. Yet some of them, whose hopes were not so
high mounted, and their spirits more; spoke plainly, That the whole wealth of
England would not serve the Kings vast Bounty; therefore it was a vain thing to
give him, that would give it away again: That Gold and Silver in Edinburgh now
in our Solomon's time are like the stones in the streets, never so much
glittering there, like a perpetual springtime. Besides they look upon the
Kings encroachments upon the public liberty, by undermining the Laws, taking
notice of some expressions that fell from him publicly at his dinner, in
derogation of the Common Law, extolling highly the Civil Law before it; and
approving a Book lately written by Doctor Cowell, a Civilian, against it: Which
netled our great Lawyers, that had not some of them been raised so high, that
they could not with that Court-gag look downwards, it had bred a contest.

The High Commission a grievance.
The High Commission also began now to swell into a Grievance, which the
Parliament complained of. Seldom is Authority and Power exercised with
Moderation: Every man must conform to the Episcopal way, and quit his hold in
Opinion, or safety. That Court was the Touch stone to try whether men were
metal for their stamp; and if they were not soft enough to take such
impressions as were put upon them, they were made malleable there, or else they
could not pass current. This was the beginning of that mischief, which when it
came to a full ripeness, made such a bloody Tincture in both Kingdoms, as never
will be got out of the Bishops Lawn sleeves. And though these Apples of strife
thrown in the way did a little retard the course in hand, yet they carried not
the prize: For the King according to his old wont (like a cunning Hunter) when
they began to run counter, called them off, and at White Hall by one of his
Lectures he strives to bring them into the way again; By laying himself open as
in a Glass, wherein, if they could not see his heart, they might scent out his
meaning, and so follow the chase which was to be pursued.

The Kings Speech to both Houses.
He tells them, though the Kings heart be in the hands of the Lord, yet he will
set it before the eyes of the people: Assuring them that he never meant to
govern by any Law, but the Law of the Land; though it be disputed among them,
as if he had an intention to alter the Law, and govern by the absolute Power of
a King. He knew, said he, the Power of Kings, resembling it to the Power
Divine: For as God can create and destroy, make and unmake at his pleasure, so
Kings can give life and death, judge all, and be judged of none. They can exalt
low things, and abase high things, making the subjects like men at Chess, a
pawn to take a Bishop or a Knight. (But he left out the power of a Pawn to take
a Queen, or check a King). And when he had raised the Kings power to the
height, with Vos dii estis, he brings them down again, with, They shall die
like men: And that all Kings who are not Tyrants or perjured, will bound
themselves within the limits of their Laws, and they that persuade them the
contrary, are Vipers and Pests both against them and the Commonwealth. Yet as
it is Blasphemy to dispute what God may do, so it is Sedition in Subjects to
dispute what a King may do in the height of his power. And as he will not have
his subjects discourse of what he may do, so he will do nothing but what shall
be consonant to Law and Reason. Then he strives to mitigate the sharpness of
the words dropped from him at his Table to the disparagement of the Common Law,
and assures them, though he likes the Civil Law very well, as being Lex
Gentium, which maintains intercourse with foreign Nations, and sitted to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, Court of Admiralty, and Courts of Request, yet he is so
far from disavowing the Common Law, that he protests, if he were to choose a new
Law for this Kingdom, he would prefer it before any other National Law, yea,
the Law of Moses, nay, without blasphemy, the very Law of God. Then he recalls
himself, and tells them, That though for this Nation he had preferred the
Common Law to the Law of God, yet it is inferior to the Judicial Law: For no
Book, or Law is free from corruption, but the Book and Law of God.

And therefore he could wish that three things specially were purged out of
Common Law.

First, That it were written in the vulgar Tongue, and made plain to the
peoples understanding, that they might know what to obey, that the Lawyers in
the Law, like the Romish Priests in the Gospel, might not keep the people in
ignorance.

Secondly, That the Common Law might have a settled Text in all Cases, for being
grounded upon old Customs, Reports, and Cases of former Judges, called Responsa
prudentum, which are not binding (for diverse times Judges disclaim them, and
recede from the Judgment of their Predecessors) it were good upon mature
deliberation, that the Exposition of the Law were set down by Act of
Parliament, that the people might know what to depend upon.

Thirdly, There is in the Common Laws diverse contrary Reports and Precedents,
and diverse Statutes and Acts of Parliament, that do cross one another, being so
penned, that they may be taken in diverse senses, therefore he could wish, they
might be reviewed, and reconciled. And whereas he is thought an Enemy to
Prohibitions, he says he is not ignorant of the necessity of them, if every
stream might run in its own chanel, but the overflowing, and super-abundance of
them, in every Court, striving to bring most grist to their own Mill, was a
distemper fit to be cured, therefore he did not disallow the Use but the Abuse.

Then he closes with the House of Commons, and not only thanks them for the
Bonefire they made of certain Papers which were presented Grievances from some
discontented murmuring spirits, but he instructs them how to receive Grievances
hereafter: In which he would have them careful to avoid three things.

The first, That they meddle not with the main points of Government, that is
his craft, Tractent fabrilia fabri. To meddle with that were to lessen him, who
has been thirty years at the Trade in Scotland, and served an Apprentiship of
seven years here, therefore here needs no Phormios to teach Hannibal.

Secondly, He would not have such ancient Rights as he has received from his
Predecessors accounted Grievances, that were to judge him unworthy to enjoy what
they left him.

And lastly, That they should be careful not to present that for a Grievance,
which is established by a Law; for it is very undutiful in Subjects to press
their King wherein they are sure to be denied. Complaints may be made unto them
of the High-Commissioners, let the abuse appear then, and spare not, there may
be errors among them, but to take away the Commission is to derogate from him,
and it is now in his thoughts to rectify it in a good proportion.

Then he shows the emergent cause of his great expenses, since his coming to
the Crown, which makes him desire a supply from them, confirming what the Lords
formerly delivered; wherein he said, when they opened his necessities unto
them, his purse only labored, now his desires are taken notice of both at home
and abroad, his Reputation labors as well as his Purse; for the World will
think it want of love in them, or merit in him, that both lessened their
hearts, and tied up their hands toward him.

Thus the King expressed himself to the Parliament, desiring their assistance,
assuring them he had no intention to alter the Government, though he wished the
Laws might be rectified. But his King-craft (as he calls it) failed in striking
at the Common Law, and he was convinced in it, how dangerous it was to give too
much knowledge to the people; the two great Hammers of the State, the Churchman
and Lawyer, that work the people to obedience, upon the two Anvils of
Conscience and Policy, beat him to the understanding of it, so that ever after
he joined with them, and that threefold Cord was not easily dissolved. But the
times not being ripe yet to produce any thing but the fruits of obedience, they
after this Lesson settled themselves to make diverse good Laws, which they
purchased at the rate of a Subsidy and a Fifteen.

A Proclamation against new buildings.
About this time, the Suburbs betwixt London and Westminster, had many ruinous
Piles of Building, which Age had worn out, and Industry, and Riches (the two
great supporters of this momentary Eternity) did strive to renew. Among the
rest the Lord Treasurer erected out of the rubbish of the old stables of
Durham-house, a goodly Fabric, to be Rival to the Old Exchange, which the King
by his presence dignified with the name of Britains Burse. But he took notice
of the swelling Buildings upon DURHAM HOUSE SALISBURY HOUSE WORCESTER HOUSE.
ILLUSTRISS. PRINC. JOHAN. GUILIELMUS DUX IULIAE, CLIVIAE and BERG. COMES
MARCH. RAVENSBERG. and MEURS. DOMINUS IN RAVESTEYN.
IN DEO REFUGIUM MEUM.

Natus ao 1562, 28 May, obyt ao 1609, 25 Marty, aetatis suae anno 46. men's. 9.
die 25.

new foundations, which he looked upon as a Rickety constitution in the Head of
the Kingdom, being Inviters of a Flux of humors, and diseases, to be near the
Court; besides, he feared the Plague would come too near Whitehall, if that
Distemper increased. And therefore he carefully, with mature deliberation of
his Council, forbids all New Buildings to be set up for the future, within two
miles of the City; and by Proclamation strictly commands if any be, they shall
be pulled down, though not taken notice of till seven years after. Whereby many
men that did not so well heed the Proclamation) laid out their whole estates
upon little Hovels, and building fair houses upon new foundations (though it
were but two yards from the old) they became Trespassers, and must either
purchase their houses again at a dear rate, or pull them down, both ways
tending to their ruin; thus falling under the stroke of the times rough hand,
without a providential care of the danger that would follow: For what was so
strictly forbidden then, was permitted after; and those reasons that caused the
restraint then (the increase of the Plague) were found upon better experience
to be a remedy; for there was more room, and better air to prevent it, among
thin and single families, than full-crouded houses. And this severity had a
second consideration, which was, to prevent the greatness of the Body of the
Kingdom from swelling to be all Head, when the Head it self wanted so much
increase of Building, as to plump, and make those thin parts appear more round
and beautiful, which was then a disgrace, but is now an Ornament to both
Cities. So that what the wisdom of one time does decry, the experience of
another may advance: Such is the Worlds career! And they are only miserable,
whose imprudence, or ill luck, puts them in the way to be overrun by it.

This year 1609. The Siege of Iuliers.
begot a Truce betwixt the King of Spain, and the Low Countries; yet by the
death of the Duke of Cleve, the War was like to revive again: For while two
petty Princes, Brandenburgh and Newburgh, strove for the inheritance, Spain,
like the Vulture in the Fable, attempted to catch it from both, seizing upon
Iuliers, one of the chief Strengths of the Country; which the States of the
Netherlands, by the help of our King, and Henry the Fourth of France, besieged,
and recovered again. Sir Edward Cecil, Brother to the Earl of Salisburg,
commanded four thousand English at that Siege, whose Conduct gave Life to his
Soldiers Valor, and that advanced the Glory of his Conduct. But where such
fiery Spirits are congregated into a Body, there will be often violent and
thundering eruptions. Sir Hatton Cheek was next Commander to Sir Edward Cecil, a
Man of a gallant and daring courage in the difficultest enterprises; who
speaking to Sir Thomas Dutton (one of the Captains under his Command) somewhat
hastily, An. Reg. 8. An. Christi 1610.
Dutton disdaining to be snapt up (being a man of a crabbed temper returned as
hot an answer, which broke into a flame: But Dutton quenched it, by telling Sir
Hatton Cheek, He knew he was his Officer, which tied him in the Army to a
strict Obedience, but he would break that Bond, and vindicate himself in
another place: And instantly quitting his Command, he went for England.

A Duel betwixt Sir Hatton Cheek, and Sir Thomas Dutton.
Some small time after the taking of Iuliers, Cheek fell sick; and his
distemper was the greater, because he had heard Dutton strove to defame him,
both in Court and City: for being full with passion, he vented it with freedom
enough in every place. Cheek being recovered, and heart-whole, would not give
time to his decayed limbs to suck in their old vigor, but sends to Dutton that
threatened him, to give an account of the large expense of his tongue against
him; Dutton, that waited for such a reckoning, willingly accepted the Summons:
Cheek took Pigot, one of his Captains, to be his Second; Dutton took Captain
Gosnald, both Men of well-spread fame; and they four met on Calais Sands: On
which dreadful Stage, at first meeting, Dutton began to expostulate his
injuries, as if a Tongue-Combate might decide the Controversy; but Cheek would
dispute it otherwise. Then their Seconds searching, and stripping them to their
Shirts in a cold morning, they ran with that sury on each others Sword, as if
they did not mean to kill each other, but strive who should first die. Their
Weapons were Rapier and Dagger, a fit Banquet for Death. At the first course,
Cheek ran Dutton into the neck with his Rapier, and stabbed him in the neck
backward with his Dagger, miraculously missing his windpipe; And at the same
instant, like one motion, Dutton ran Cheek through the Body, and stabbed him
into the back with his left hand, locking themselves together thus with four
bloody keys, which the Seconds fairly opened, and would sain have closed up the
bleeding difference: but Cheeks wounds were deadly, which he finding, grew the
violenter against his Enemy; and Dutton seeing him begin to stagger, went back
from his fury, only defending himself, till the others rage weakened with loss
of blood, without any more hurt, fell at his feet. Dutton, with much difficulty
recovered his dangerous wounds, but Cheek by his Servants had a sad Funeral,
which is the bitter fruit of fiery passions.

Henry the 4. of France stabbed by Raviliac.
The next year was fatal to Henry the Great of France, who (in the height of
his Glory, when he had impt his Wings with a Mighty Army, and a Mass of
Treasure, and none knew which way his towering spirit would fly) was stopped by a
horrid hand, that with a poisoned knife cut out his passage to another World:
Such poor and penetrable things are Kings, as well as other Men! And when in
this Worlds Sea they have toyled their spirits, in a HENRY IIII ROY DE FRANCE
ET DE NAVARRE.
continued Tempest of fond Hopes, and built upon the Sand their vast desires,
either old Age does wash them quite away, or else some sudden storm makes them
cast Anchor upon the shores of death, and there is an end. But one Act of
Providence is very remarkable toward him, as a Forerunner of this ensuing
mischief. When he came first to the Crown (which he (as it were) snatched out
of the fire, the whole Kingdom being in a flame) he was a professed Protestant,
so born, and so bred up: but finding himself in a tottering condition among his
Popish Subjects, for his better security, he did something comply with them in
Ecclesiastical affairs, which gave great scandal to the Reformed, yet did not
much advance him in the good opinion of their Opposites. For the Jesuits
unconfident of him (inclining more to the hot zeal of Spain) one of their
Instruments stabbed him into the mouth with a knife, without much hurt. Which
done, an intimate of his, that came to visit him, told him plainly, that the
Hand of God was much seen in this Action; for he had now denied the Truths of
God, and the Religion he sucked in with his milk, but from the teeth outward,
and therefore this punishment came to him as a warning: But let him take heed
of denying it with his heart, for if he did, (it is to be feared) God would
strike him there also: Both which were too much manifested. So suitable often
are Gods Judgments to our Sins!

The venom of this blow reached presently into England: and came somewhat near
our Kings Heart; therefore he took the best way to prevent his Fears, by
striving to prevent his Dangers, having no other end but his own. For when he
considered the horridness of the Powder Plot, and by it the irreconcilable
malice of that Party, he thought it the safest policy, not to stir those Ashes,
where so much Fire was covered; which gave way to a flux of that Iesuitical
humor to infest the Body of the Kingdom.

But now being startled with this poisoned knife, A Proclamation against
Jesuits.
he ventures upon a Proclamation, strictly commanding all Jesuits and Priests
out of the Kingdom, and all Recusants to their own Houses, not to come within
ten miles of the Court; and secures all the rest of his Subjects to him, by an
universal taking of the Oath of Allegiance; which the Parliament, both Lords
and Commons, (then sitting) began, and the rest of the People followed, to the
Kings great contentment.

For the last Session the Parliament was prorogued till the sixteenth of
October this year; and meeting now, they were willing to secure their
Allegiance to the King out of Piety; yet they were so stout (even in those
youthful days, which he termed Obstinacy) that they would not obey him in his
encroachments upon the Public Liberty, which he began then to practice. For
being now seasoned with seven years knowledge in his profession here, he thought
he might set up for himself, and not be still journy-man to the lavish tongue
of men, that pryed too narrowly into the secrets of his Prerogative, which are
mysteries too high for them, being Arcana imperii, fitter to be admired than
questioned: But the Parliament were apprehensive enough, that those hidden
mysteries made many dark steps into the Peoples Liberties, and they were
willing by the light of Law and Reason, to discover what was the Kings, what
theirs; Which the King unwilling to have searched into (after five Sessions in
six years time) dissolved the Parliament by Proclamation.

Prince Henry created Prince of Wales.
Prince Henry, the prime branch of this Royal Cedar, now growing Manly (being
the sixteenth year of his Age) put forth himself in a more Heroic manner than
was usual with Princes of his Time, by Tiltings, Barriers, and other exercises
on horseback, the Martial Discipline of gentle Peace, which caught the peoples
eyes, and made their tongues the Messengers of their hearts, in daily extolling
his hopeful and gallant towardliness to admiration. And now the King thought
him full of ripeness for the Honor of Knighthood (which admitted of a willing
contribution from the people, and such old Customs as bring in money are never
out of date) and (to add the more splendour to his sparkling youth) created him
Prince of Wales, (as he formerly intimated to the Parliament) with all the pomp
and solemnity that a great King could express to a hopeful Son, his first born;
or the merit of a Prince (that floated in the peoples affections) could
possibly attain to. For as yet the King could discover nothing in him but that
harmless and wanton innocence that commonly accompanies youth, being of a light
nature, and soon blown away. But how far the Kings fears (like thick clouds)
might afterward blind the eye of his Reason, when he saw him (as he thought)
too high mounted in the peoples love, and of an alluring spirit, to decline his
paternal affection to him, and bring him to the low condition he fell in, may
be the subject of my fears, not of my pen. With this Ingrandizing Title the
King added a great Revenue, establishing also a full and splendent Retinue and
Family to attend his person at St. James, now appointed to be the Princes
Court, where this new Star placed in the third House, might be feared to
culminate, and become Lord of the Ascendant: His Palace being as gloriously
attended with young and sprightly Blossoms, as the Kings was with older, and
more sage Plants. And now the King deliberates for a Wife for him, and sends to
Sir Charles Cornwallis, his Lieger Ambassador in Spain, to treat with that King
for his eldest Daughter. But after some traverses, it was found there was more
time lost than ground gotten: For Princes HENRICUS Princeps Walliae etca.
Reverendissimus in Christo Pater D.D. RICHARDUS BANCROFT Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis.
in Treaties lie at the snap, and the most backward often gets the better of
it. But the King being not so hot then for this, as he was after for the other
Son, with another Sister (the eldest being matched into France) made a quicker,
and a more honorable Retreat.

About this time Richard Bancroft, Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbury dies.
Archbishop of Canterbury, died; a person severe enough, whose roughness
gained little upon those that deserted the Ceremonies. One work of his showed
his spirit better than the ruggedest Pen can depaint it: For it was he that
first brought the King to begin a new College by Chelsey, wherein the choice
and abiest Scholars of the Kingdom, and the most pregnant Wits in matters of
Controversies, were to be associated under a Provost, with a fair and ample
allowance, not exceeding three thousand pounds a year, whose design was to
answer all Popish Books, or others, that vented their malignant spirits against
the Protestant Religion, either the Heresies of the Papists, or the Errors of
those that struck at Hierarchy, so that they should be two-edged Fellows, that
would make old cutting and flashing; and this he forwarded with all industry
during his time; 7 Regis.
and there is yet a formal Act of Parliament in being for the establishment of
it. But after his death the King wisely considered, that nothing begets more
contention than opposition, and such Fuellers would be apt to inslame, rather
than quench the heat that would arise from those embors: For Controversies are
often (or for the most part) the exuberancies of Passion; and the Philosopher
says, men are drunk with disputes, and in that inordinateness take the next
thing that comes to hand to throw at one another faces; so that the design
fell to the ground with him; and there is only so much Building standing by the
Thames-side, as to show, that what he intended to Plant, he meant should be
well Watered, and yet it withered in the bud. I can lay nothing to the charge
of this great man, but from common fame; yet this I may truly say, That for his
Predecessor Whitgift, and his Successor Abbot, I never heard nor read any thing
tending to their disparagement: But on him, some unhappy Wit vented this
Pasquin, Here lies his Grace in cold Earth slad,
Who died with want of what he had.


The Queen was Mistress of Somerset House (as well as the Prince was Master of
St. James) and she would fain have given it the name of Denmark-house, which
name continued her time, among her people, but it was afterward left out of
the common Calender, like the dead Emperors new named Month. She was not
without some Grandees to attend her for outward glory: Masks in great esteem.
The Court being a continued Maskarado, where she and her Ladies, An. Reg. 9.
An. Christi 1611.
like so many Sea-Nymphs, or Nereides, appeared often in various dresses to the
ravishment of the beholders. The King himself being not a little delighted with
such fluent Elegancies, as made the nights more glorious than the days. But the
latitude that these high-flying fancies, and more speaking Actions, gave to the
lower World to judge and censure, even the greatest with reproaches, shall not
provoke me so much as to stain the innocent Paper. I shall only say in general,
That Princes, by how much they are greater than others, are looked upon with a
more severe eye; if their Virtues be not suitable to their Greatness, they lose
much of their value: For it is too great an allay to such resinedness to fall
under the common cognizance.

Pembroke a favorite. Mountgomery a favorite.
As she had her Favorites in one place, the King had his in another. She loved
the elder Brother, the Earl of Pembroke; he the younger, whom he made Earl of
Mountgomery, and Knight of the Garter: But either not finding him suitable to
his humor, or affections, or seeing another object more delightful, his fancy
ran with a violent stream upon a young Gentleman, who had neither Parts nor
Birth to entertain such a current. Car a favorite.
His name was Robert Car, born about Edinburgh in Scotland, descended from
Gentry of that name, a young man about twenty years of Age, a comely personage,
mixed with a handsome and Courtly garb, which he had been practicing in France,
and lately came over; Sir James Hayes, some say the Lord Dingwell, at a Tilting
(among the rest of the Pages and Gentlemen that in their richest ornaments
attended him for that days Triumph) made choice of Mr. Car (according to the
custom) to present his Shield, and Device to the King; and as he was
descending. the Horse full of fire and heat, prevented him, threw him down
before the King, and broke his leg. This accident gave the King occasion to
take notice of him, and hearing that his name was Car, remembered he had a Page
of that name when he came first into England, which this proved to be: For the
Pages the King brought first with him, according to the French way to wait upon
his Coach, were discharged, and Footmen according to the English way supplied
those places. The King mustering up his thoughts fixed them upon this object of
pity, giving special order to have him lodged in the Court, and to have his own
Physicians and Chyrurgions use their best endeavors for his recovery. The King
visited him often during his necessitated restraint, sometimes an hour or more
discoursing with him, to sound him, and know what he was; and though he found
no great depth of Literature or Experience, yet such a smooth and calm outside,
made him think there might be good Anchorage, and a fit Harbor for his most
retired thoughts. As soon as he recovered (which the King with some impatience
attended) Philip Earl of Pemb: and Mong: Lord Chamberlain to ye King. etc.
he made him Knight, and Gentleman of his Bedchamber, took the pains himself
to teach him the Latin Tongue, and laid a Foundation, by his daily discourses
with him, to improve him unto a capability of his more indeared affections.

Now all addresses are made to Sir Robert Car, he is the Favourit in Ordinary;
no suit, nor no reward, but comes by him; his hand distributes, and his hand
restrains; our Supreme Power works by second Causes; the Lords themselves can
scarce have a smile without him. And to give the greater luster to his power,
about this time the Earl of Dunbar, the Kings old trusty Servant (the Cabinet
of his secret Counsels) died; so that he solely now took the most intimate of
them into his charge, and the Officer of Lord high Treasurer of Scotland, which
staff the other left behind him; and though it could be no great Supporter, yet
the credit of it carried some reputation in his own Country, where it was his
happiness to be magnified, as well as in England; for he had Treasure enough
here, where the Fountain was. And to ingrandize all, the King created him Baron
of Brandspech, and Viscount Rochester, and soon after Knight of the Garter.
1612. Made Viscount.
Thus was he drawn up by the Beams of Majesty, to shine in the highest Glory,
grapling often with the Prince himself in his own Sphere, in diverse
Conteslations. For the Prince being a high born Spirit, and meeting a young
Competitor in his Fathers Affections, that was a Mushrom of yesterday, thought
the venom would grow too near him, and therefore he gave no countenance, but
opposition to it; which was aggravated by some little scintils of Love, as well
as Hatred (Rivals in passion) being both amorous, and in youthful blood, fixing
by accident upon one object, who was a third man's; in which the Viscount got
the Mastery, but to his ruin. The Prince showing his affection, by his
neglecting of her, to be grounded rather upon envy to the Man, than love to the
Woman.

But before this time, The Earl of Essex marries the Lady Frances Howard.
the Treasurer Salisbury, that great Engine of the State, by whom all Wheels
moved, held an intimate Correspondence with the House of Suffolk, which he had
strengthened with an Alliance; marrying his eldest Son, the Lord Cranborn, to
Katharine, the eldest Daughter of that Family. And being mindful of the
asperity and sharpness that was betwixt him, and the late Earl of Essex, he
thought it a good Act of Policy, and Piety, not to suffer Malice to become
Hereditary; and therefore he was a great means in marrying the young Earl of
Essex to the Lady Frances Howard, another of those Sisters, that the Fathers
Enmity might be closed up by the Sons Nuptial Fraternity. The Earl of Essex was
fourteen years of Age, and she thirteen, when they married; too young to
consider, but old enough to consent: Yet by the advice of Friends separated
after marriage, she under her Mothers wing, and he visiting France and Germany,
till Time should mature, and ripen a happy Co-union. The Court was her Nest,
her Father being Lord Chamberlain; and she was hatched up by her Mother, whom
the sour breath of that Age (how justly I know not) had already tainted; from
whom the young Lady might take such a Tincture, that Ease, Greatness, and Court
Glories, would more distain and impress on her, than any way wear out and
diminish. And growing to be a Beauty of the greatest Magnitude in that Horison,
was an Object fit for Admirers, and every Tongue grew an Orator at that Shrine.

The Prince of Wales now in his Puberty, sent many loving glances, as
Ambassadors of his good respects, and amorous expressions are fit subjects for
jealous reproaches to work on. Her Husband having been now three or four years
beyond the Seas, (sick with absence from her whom his desires longed after)
came over again, and found that Beauty, which he had left innocent, so farded
and sophisticated with some Court Drug which had wrought upon her, that he
became the greatest Stranger at home. His Patience made way for him a while,
and he bore up with a gentle gale against the stream of this Woman's affections,
which ran altogether (unknown to him) into another chanel. Nor was her
reputation yet become so rebust (being of a tender growth) to strike his ears
with reproaches, and therefore he imputed her sly entertainments to a Maiden
bashfulness; till surfeted with that dull Potion (upon better advice) he went
to the Earl of Suffolk (her Father) and demanded his Wife, thinking himself
capable to enjoy both her and her love. The Father, that thought there had been
an intimacy betwixt them, suitable to their Conjugal Knot, made use of his
Paternal power, to reduce his Daughter to the obedience of a Wife. But while
these things were struggling for, a most violent Disease of a poisonous Nature,
imputed to, but far transcending the small Pox, seized on the Earl of Essex;
and had not the strength of Youth, and that Almighty Power that orders all
things, wrought out the venom of it, the Earth (as probably wished by her) had
been his Marriage Bed.

The Countess of Essex in love with Rochester.
For this Lady being taken with the growing fortunes of the Viscount Rochester,
and grounding more hope upon him, than the uncertain and hopeless love of the
Prince, she cast her Anchor there; which the Prince soon discovered, and
slighted her accordingly. For dancing one time among the Ladies, and her Glove
falling down, it was taken up, and presented to him, by one that thought he did
him acceptable service; but the Prince refused to receive it, saying publicky,
He would not have it, it is stretched by another, meaning the Viscount: This was
an aggravation of hatred betwixt the Kings Son and the Kings Friend.



The Countess of Essex having her heart alienated from her Husband, and set
upon the Viscount, had a double task to undergo, for accomplishing her ends.
One was, to hinder her Husband from enjoying her; the other was, to make the
Viscount sure unto her: For dishonest Love is most full of jealousy. Her
Husband she looked upon as a private person, and to be carried by him into the
Country out of her element (being ambitious of glory, and a Beauty covetous of
applause) were to close (as she thought) with an insufferable Torment, though
he was a man that did not only every way merit her love, but he loved her with
an extraordinary affection, having a gentle, mild, and courteous disposition,
especially to women, such as might win upon the roughest natures. But this
fiery heat of his Wives mounted upon the wings of Lust, or Love, (call it what
you will) carried her after so much mischief, that those that saw her face,
might challenge Nature of too much Hypocrisy, for harboring so wicked a heart
under so sweet and bewitching a countenance.

To strengthen her designs she finds out one of her own stamp, She consults
with Mistress Turner.
Mrs. Turner, a Doctor of Physics Widow, a woman, whom Prodigality and
Looseness had brought low, yet her Pride would make her fly any pitch, rather
than fall into the jaws of Want. These two consult together how they might stop
the current of the Earls affection toward his Wife, and make a clear passage
for the Viscount in the place. And Forman about it.
To effect which, one Doctor Forman, a reputed Conjurer (living at Lambeth) is
found out: The women declare to him their Grievances, he promises sudden help,
and to amuse them, frames many little Pictures of Brass, and Wax, some like the
Viscount and Countess, whom he must unite and strengthen; others like the Earl
of Essex, whom he must debilitate and weaken; and then with Philtrous powders,
and such drugs, he works upon their persons. And to practice what effects his
Art would produce, Mrs. Turner, that loved Sir Arthur Manwaring, (a Gentleman
then attending the Prince) and willing to keep him to her, gave him some of the
powder, which wrought so violently with him, that through a storm of Rain and
Thunder, he rode fifteen miles one dark night to her House, scarce knowing
where he was till he was there. Such is the devilish and mad rage of Lust,
heightened with Art and Fancy.

These things matured and ripened by the cunning of this Jugler Forman, gave
them assurance of happy hopes. Her Courtly invitements, that drew the Viscount
to observe her, she imputed to the operation of those drugs he had tasted; and
that harshness, and stubborn comportment she expressed to her Husband, making
him (weary of such entertainments) to absent himself, she thought proceeded
from the effects of those unknown known potions and powders, that were
administered to him: So apt is the Imagination to take impression of those
things we are willing to believe.

The good Earl finding his Wife nousled in the Court, and seeing no possibility
to reduce her to reason, The Earl of Essex gets his Wife to Chartley.
till she were estranged from the relish, and taste of the delights she sucked
in there, made his condition again known to her Father. The old man being
troubled with his Daughters disobedience, embittered her being near him, with
wearisome and continual chidings, to wean her from the sweets she doted on; and
with much ado forced her into the Country. But how harsh was the parting, being
rent away from the place where she grew and flourished? Yet she left all her
Engines and Imps behind her; the old Doctor, and his Confederate Mrs. Turner,
must be her two supporters: She blazons all her miseries to them, at her
depart, and moystens the way with her tears. Chartley was an hundred miles from
her happiness and a little time thus lost is her eternity. When she came
thither (though in the pleasantest time of Summer) she shut herself up in her
Chamber, not suffering a beam of light to peep upon her dark thoughts* If she
stirred out of her Chamber, it was in the dead of Night, when sleep had taken
possession of all others, but those about her. In this implacable, sad,
discontented humor, she continued some months, always murmuring against, but
never giving the least civil respect to her Husband, which the good man
suffered patiently, being loath to be the divulger of his own misery: yet having
a manly courage, he would sometimes break into a little passion, to see himself
slighted and neglected by himself, but having never found better from her, it
was the easier to bear with her.

She writes to Forman.
While she was at Chartley she writ to her Confederates, That Her Husband found
little operation in their Drugs, complaining of his Lustiness, and her Misery:
For (she said) the Viscount would never love her, if her Husband did meddle
with her, which with difficulty she yet impeded, but how long she should resist
his Violence she knew not, therefore she implored their assistance, if they
would not see her the most despicable creature in the world: And for
satisfaction they should make their own price. With this kind of stuff she
filled her Letters, which were after found in Formans Closet. These
instigations made him active, and the man being skilful in natural Magic, did
use all the Artifice his subtilty could devise, really to imbecillitate the
Earl; for no Linen came near his body, that was not rinsed with their Camphire
Compositions, and other faint and wasting ingredients, and all Inward
applications were foisted on him by corrupted servants, to lessen and
debilitate the seminal operations. Which Veneficium is one great part of
Witchcraft, destructive to nature, and Robert Earl of Essex his Excellence
General of the Army etc:
horridly abominable to be practiced. And this in time wrought such effects
upon his person, that he found himself unable with her, though she permitted
him; yet when he had been from her some reasonable Time, to renovate his
spirits, by shaking off those artificial applications, then his abilities made
her unwilling, and refractory. Though some are of opinion, that he was not much
debilitated, but that she got (by her virtuous Agents) an Artifice too immodest
to be expressed, to hinder Penetration. And thus she to^ mented him, till he was
contented to let her steer her own course, which after run her on ground.

For coming to London next Winter with this full sail, She comes again to Court.
laden with lust, she found the Viscount much prepared for her; who being at
first fastened on the Object, absence, and all those little Artifices, that
mischievous Women, and cunning Impostures could devise, had advanced him as
much in his desires, as they had hindered the other. We could dispute the Nature
of these Operations, how far they are Contingent, and how the fancy works with
them, though ignorant of them, making their impulsions more active, being the
sparks that kindle this combustible matter; for we will never allow there was
any other Diabolical means used, Nature being strong enough for such a
production; but being not pertinent to the Story, will leave it, and follow
them that found the effects of it, and had affections suitable to it, which
they made use of with an unbridled appetite, yet meeting closely in corners (
Sin being at first shamefaced) but afterward they grew more bold; and every
hour that the Viscount could steal from his Royal Master, he dedicated it to
his Disloyal Mistress; being caught in this Net of Adulation, he becomes a
willing Prisoner; Lust only getting liberty to all looseness and
licentiousness: Places of frequent Meetings are daily renewed, Persons fitted
for such practices are employed; and when Nature was exhausted, Art, her subtle
Imitator, brought in her store, to contribute new Spirits, purchased at any
rate. All outward Adornment to present Beauty in her full Glory, were not
wanting on both sides, being Lusts fuel, which tended to the Consumption of all
Reason. And among the rest, yellow starch, the invention and foyl of Iaundice
Complexions, with great Cut-work Bands, and Piccadillies (a thing that has
since lost the name) crowded in, and flourished among us, Mrs. Turner, being
nominoted to be the first Contriver, happily in England, but the Original came
out of France; which fashion and color did set off their lean sallow
countenances. Thus did the Viscount get the Conquest of two, the King, and this
Lady, but could not subdue his own lustful Appetite.

The Wheel of Fortune running toward the Scots, The Lord Sanquir murdered a
Fencer.
turned by the Viscount Rochester, was unhappily diverted upon the Lord
Sanquir, a Baron of that Nation, and married to a good Family in England: who
some years before meeting with a sturdy Fencer, one John Turner, who was a
Master of the Weapon-Trade, in his own School, the young Lord strove to put
some affront upon him (making it no little Conquest to disgrace a Master in the
Art, as they termed it) and the man apprehensive of the Attempt, with a bold
rudeness pressed so hard upon him, that he thrust out one of the Barons eyes.
This business was much regretted by Turner, and the Baron being conscious to
himself that he meant his Adversary some ill, took the Accident with as much
patience, as men that lose one eye by their own default, use to do for the
preservation of the other. Some time after, being in the Court of the late
great Henry of France, and the King (courteous to Strangers) entertaining
discourse with him, asked him, how he lost his eye; he (clothing his answer in
a better shroud than a plain Fencers) told him, it was done with a Sword: The
King replies, Does the man live? And that question gave an end to the
Discourse, but was the beginner of a strange Confusion in his working Fancy,
which neither Time nor Distance could compose; carrying it in his breast some
years after, till he came into England, where he hired two of his Countrymen,
Gray and Carlisle (men of low and mercenary spirits) to murder him, which they
did with a Case of Pistols in his own House in White-Fryars; many years after
the loss of his bodily eye, thus the Baron lost the eye of his Reason. This
bold nefarious Act was very deeply resented at Court, and the Kings Commands
were so active for apprehension of the murderers, that they were all three
taken; one upon the Borders of Scotland, so far had his fears carried him;
another in a Ship bound for Hamburgh, who scaping in a Storm, the Seas
delivered up; and the Lord himself being obscured (in this Tempest of his Soul)
hearing a thousand pound was offered to bring his Head (so liberal was the King
for Justice) threw himself into the Arms of his Mercy, by the mediation of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom he presented himself an Object of pity: but
no intercession could prevail, Is hanged.
their lives satisfied the Law, the Baron not having the honor of a Noble
death.

Causes of the Kings severity.
The Cause of the Kings severity (if justice may be called severity) was
contrary to that of the Barons presumption; for he thought the Scots might do
any thing, and he suffered because they had done so much. For Ramsey, one of
the Kings Servants, not long before had switcht the Earl of Mountgomery, who
was the Kings first Favorite, happily because he took it so. Maxwell, another
of them, had bitten Hawley, a Gentleman of the Temple, by the Ear; which
enraged the Templers (in those times Riotous, and subject to Tumults) and
brought it almost to a National Quarrel, till the King stepped in, and took it up
himself. The Lord Bruise had summoned Sir Edward Sackvill, (who was Edward Earl
of Dorset. Lord Chamberlain to ye Queen. etc.
after Earl of Dorset) into France with a fatal complement to take death from
his hand, such killing civilities these times produced! And the much lamented
Sir James Stuart, one of the Kings blood, and Sir George Wharton, the prime
branch of that noble Family, for little worthless punctillioes of Honor (being
intimate friends) took the Field, and fell together by each others hand. These,
and many more private differences (though some of them of an ancient date) were
bleeding fresh in memory; so that the King, like a wise Physician, opened this
vein of blood, hoping by it to stop all other issues.

The Kings affections were not so monopolized, Salisbury not pleased with the
Viscounts greatness.
but that his crafty Servant the Earl of Salisbury, had a good hole as well in
his Councils, as Treasure. And being not well pleased to see himself bearded by
a Youth new started into the affairs of the World, and mounted by the wing of
love, not of merit; he cast out many mists before him, to hinder and damp his
passage so, that the Viscount could not rise to that pitch (during his life)
that he afterward arrived at. And one thing among the rest he obstructed was
five thousand pounds the King had given him to maintain his Riot: Which sum the
Treasurer thought too great a bulk to be carried lightly away, and therefore he
desired the King might see what he did. And having laid the money in Silver
upon Tables in his Gallery at Salisbury-house, he invited the King to dinner,
making this the passage to his entertainment. The King stricken suddenly with
such heaps, asked the Treasurer what this money was for; who told him, he had
received his Majesty's Commands to give so much to the Viscount Rochester. The
King that either carelessly thought five thousand pound to be no more than the
noise so much makes in Scotland (which does not amount to above five hundred
pounds) or, cunningly (if he knew the value, knew also the Treasurers meaning)
said it was too much for one man, and made him be contented with less than the
half.

And now the King casts his thoughts toward Peterborough, The Queen of Scots
translated to Westminster.
where his Mother lay, whom he caused to be translated to a Magnificent Tomb,
at Westminster. And (somewhat suitable to her mind when she was living) she had
a translucent passage in the night, through the City of London, by multitudes
of Torches: The Tapers placed by the Tomb and the Altar, in the Cathedral,
smoking with them like an Offertory, with all the Ceremonies, and Voices,
their Quires and Copes could express, attended by many Prelates and Nobles, who
paid this last Tribute to her memory. This was accounted a Piaculous action of
the Kings by many, though some have not stuck to say, That as Queen Elizabeth
was willing to be rid of the Queen of Scots, yet would not have it her action,
and being it could not be done without her command, when it was done she
renounced her own act. So though the King was angry when he heard his Mother
was taken away by a violent death, recalling his Ambassador, threatening War,
and making a great noise (which was after calmed and closed up with a large
Pension from the Queen) yet he might well enough be pleased that such a spirit
was laid, as might have conjured up three Kingdoms against him: For Patrick
Gray that the King sent to dissuade Queen Elizabeth from taking away his
Mothers life, was the greatest Instrument to persuade her to it; Distilling
always into her this Sentence, Mortua non mordet. When she is dead she cannot
bite; But the Love that tends to self-preservation, is an adjunct of Nature,
more powerful than Filial duty, and therefore there will be no great strife
where there are not adequate operations,

The Palatints arrival 16. October.
This time was also presented unto us in a various dress, and the event showed
(though some years after) there was more cause of Mourning than Rejoicing,
though the latter got the predominance: For the Prince Elector Palatine came
over into England to Marry the Kings only Daughter, and Death deprived us of
the Kings eldest Son. Prince Henry's death 6. Nov.
A Prince as eminent in Nobleness as in Blood, and having a spirit too full of
life and splendor to be long shrouded in a cloud of flesh. His gallant spirit.
If that which gave life to his life had been less, he might happily have lived
longer: Not that there was too much Oil, or that concurrent Natural Balsamum in
this fair and well-composed Lamp to extinguish it self, but the light that came
from it might cast so radiant a luster, as (by darkning others) it came to lose
the benefit of its own glory. Jealousy is like fire that burns all before it,
and that fire is hot enough to dissolve all Bonds, that tends to the diminution
of a Crown. The Prince of Spain (his contemporary) Son to Philip the second
(not long before this) like a young Phaeton, wished himself but one day in his
Fathers Throne, and he fell (not long after) into the hard hand of an immature
fate, before he could step into the Chariot. So dangerous are the paths of
Greatness, that the tongue (many times) rouling aside, makes men tread awry.
Strange Rumors are raised upon this sudden expiration of our Prince, the
disease being so violent, that the combat with Nature in the strength of youth
(being almost nineteen years of age) lasted not above five days. Some say he
was poisoned with a bunch of Grapes, others attribute it to the venomous scent
of a pair of Gloves, presented to him (the distemper lying for the most part in
the head.) They that knew neither of these, are stricken with fear and
amazement, as if they had tasted, or felt, the effects of those violences:
Private whisperings, and suspicions, of some new designs a foot, broaching
Prophetical terrors, That a black CARLO D'AVSTRIA PRINCIPE DI SPAGNA
Christmas would produce a bloody Lent. For the Spaniard, who opposed the
marriage of the Prince Palatine, and saw their ruin growing up in Prince
Henry's towardly Spirit, were reputed (vulgarly) the Mint-masters of some
horrid practices; and that a Ship of Pocket Pistols was come out of Spain, fit
Instruments for a Massacre. And these Trepidations were not only in the lower
Region, but wrought upwards, so high, that Proclamations were sent abroad, to
forbid the making or carrying of Pistols, under a foot long in the Barrel. And
all Papists are not only dis-armed (being ever esteemed Vassals to the
Catholic King) but their Actions with caution pried into. In such dark clouds
as these, the whole Kingdom was at a loss; all ordinary Transitions of Nature,
are imputed to prodigious Omens; the greater the fears are, the more blazing is
the Meteor that arises from them.

Some that knew the bickerings betwixt the Prince and the Viscount, muttered
out dark Sentences, that durst not look into the light; especially Sir James
Elphington, who (observing the Prince one day to be discontented with the
Viscount) offered to kill him: but the Prince reproved him with a gallant
Spirit, saying, If there were Cause he would do it himself. Now whether these
rumors begot a further scrutiny, or whether it be the Court-trick to daub and
slubber over things that may be perspicuous, I know not: But the Physicians
about the Prince gave it under their hands (which was spread abroad in several
copies) that he died of a strong malignant Fever (so are all violent
dissolutions, where Nature has power of resistance) that his Liver was pale,
and livid, lead-like; the Gall had no Gall, but was full of wind; the Spleen
was unnaturally black, and the Lungs in many places spotted with much
corruption; the Midriff, or Diaphragma, blackish; and the Head in some places
full of blood, and in some places full of clear water. Thus was he Anatomized
to amuze the World, and clear the suspicion of poison, as if no venoms could
produce these effects. He died the sixth of November, His Funeral.
and was carried on a Hearse ( Triumphing even in Death) to Westminster, the
seventh of December following; the pomp of the Funeral being fully completed,
with the People tears and Lamentations.

Mourning laid aside.
But the King (though he could not but be troubled to lose so near a part of
himself) looked over all these Mists and (like the Sun) dispelled all these
Clouds and Vapors; commanding, no man should appear in the Court in mourning;
he would have nothing in his Eye, to bring so sad a Message to his Heart. The
jollity, feasting, and magnificence of Christmas, must not be laid down. There
were Princes, and Nobles, that came out of Germany with the prince Elector,
that must see the Glory of the English Court; which was presented with so much
eminency in gorgeous Apparel, that the precedent mourning was but as a sable
foyl, the better to illustrute it.

The Prince Elector Palatine, and Maurice Prince of Orange, were made Knights
of the Garter, Lodowick Count of Orange being Maurice's Deputy; Knights of the
Garter made.
and Prince Maurice took it as a great honor to be admitted into the
fraternity of that Order, and wore it constantly: Till afterward, some
Villains at the Hague, that met the Reward of their Demerit (one of them a
French man, being Groom of the Princes Chamber) robbed a Ieweller of Amsterdam,
that brought Jewels to the Prince, this Groom tempting him into his Chamber to
see some Iewelr, and there with his Confederates they strangled the man with
one of the Princes blew Ribonds; which being after discovered, the Prince would
never suffer so fatal an Instrument to come about his Neck.

The Prince Palatine married to the Lady Elizabeth.
In February following, the Prince Palatine, and that lovely Princess, the Lady
Elizabeth, were married, on Bishop Valentines Day, in all the Pomp and Glory
that so much Grandeur could express. Her Vestments were white, the Emblem of
Innocence; her hair dishevil'd, hanging down her back at length, an Ornament of
Virginity; a Crown of pure Gold upon her head, the Cognizance of Majesty, being
all over beset with precious gems, shining like a Constellation; her Train
supported by twelve young Ladies in white Garments, so adorned with Jewels,
that her Passage looked like a milky way. She was led to Church by her Brother
Prince Charles, and the Earl of Northampton; the Young Bachelor on the right
hand, and the Old on the left. And while the Archbishop of Canterbury was
solemnizing the Marriage, some eruscations and lightnings of joy appeared in
her Countenance, that expressed more than an ordinary smile, being almost
elated to a laughter; which could not clear the Air of her Fate, but was rather
a forerunner of more sad and dire Events: Which shows how slippery Nature is,
to tole us along to those things that bring danger, yea sometimes destruction
with them.

She returned from the Chapel between the Duke of Lenox, and the Earl of
Notingham Lord High Admiral, two married Men. The Feastings, Maskings, and
other Royal Formalities, were as troublesome ('it is presumed) to the Lovers; as
the Relation of them here may be to the Readers: For such splendour and gayety
are fitter to appear in Princes Courts, than in Histories.

The City of London (that with high magnificence had feasted the Prince
Palatine, and his Noble Retinue) presented to the fair Bride a Chain of
Oriental Pearl, by the hand of the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen (in their Scarlet
and Gold Chain Accoutrements) of such a value, as was fit for them to give, and
GUILIELMUS LUDOVIC: COMES A NASSAU / CATZENELNB: VIANDEN ET DIE:
her to receive. A. Reg. 11. An. Christi 1613.
And the people of the Kingdom in general, being summoned to a contribution for
the Marriage of the Kings Daughter, did show their affections by their Bounty.
And though it be the custom of our Kings to pay their Daughters Portions with
their subjects purses, yet a hundred years being almost past since such a
precedent, it might have made them unwilling (if their obedience had not been
full ripe) to recall such obsolete things, as are only in practice now by the
meanest of the people.

But, The Prince Palatine returns home with the Princess.
tired with Feasting and Jollity, about the middle of April, when the beauties
of the Spring were enticing enough to beguile the tediousness of the way, the
Prince Elector willing to review, and the Princess to see what she was to
enjoy; After all the caresses, and sweet embraces, that could be between the
King, Queen, and Princes, that were to be separated so long, and at such a
distance; And after all the Shows, Pastimes, Fireworks, and other Artifices
that could be devised, and manifested, they parted at Rochester; The Lord
Admiral being ready with a Royal Navy in the Downs for their passage and
conduct. The season smiled on them, and they arrived the nine and twentieth of
the Month in Flushing. The Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Arundel, the Viscount
Lisle, and the Lord Harington, with diverse Ladies and persons of Quality,
attended them to Heydelburgh. Their entertainment was great and magnificent in
the Low Countries, not only suitable to the Persons, but the place from whence
they came, (The English having been ever a Bulwark to the Netherlands) and now
they were in full peace with Spain, which gave the better relish to their
Banquetings. And in every eminent Town in Germany as they passed, they found
that welcome which prolonged their time, but made their travel the less, so that
with much ado they reached Heydelburgh. And after some time spent there, to see
the beauties and delights of that Court, and Country (which were extended and
put forth to the uttermost) the Nobility and Ladies of England returned home,
only they left the Lord Harington behind them, who dyed by the way: A Gentleman
much lamented in his own person, but much more in his Sons (who not long after
survived him) with whom were buried, not only those excellent indowments that
make Noblemen great indeed, but the memory of a noble Posterity, which makes
them little, or indeed nothing at all.

The Viscount Rochester all this while (though plunged in Lust) was held up by
the chin in the glories of the Court; Rochester rules all.
and the Prince (that interposed betwixt him and the beams of Majesty) being
removed, the Earl of Salisbury (another obstacle) dying six months after the
Prince, in the way from the Bath: he now took full possession of the Kings
favors alone. He executes the place of Principal Secretary, receiving all
Pacquets, and dispatching Answers without the knowledge of the King or Council,
or if the King did know, his love had hoarded up such a confidence in him, as
he laid all out upon that stock. Rochester's greatest assistant was a private
Gentleman, one Sir Thomas Overbury, Assisted by Overbury.
by whose Compass he steered his course, who (being a man of parts and
abilities) had wrought upon the Viscount so, as not only to keep him in, and
close with the King, but to make him capable of managing the highest affairs,
if he had kept himself within the Circle drawn to his head This intimacy
betwixt them, spoke Overbury an actor in all his privacies. And when he
understood by the Viscount his intention of Marriage with the Countess of
Essex, he opposed it with all the powerful Arguments he could use: For though
he might be so active, in his initiation of favor with the Viscount, to be
assistant to his pleasures, and for carrying forward some of his dark
contrivances (those Secretaries being always the greatest favorites) yet
having now gotten good footing in his affection, and building his fortune
thereon, his reason might tell him, there could be nothing more destructive to
both their growing hopes, than to lay a foundation upon so much public
Injustice, as to marry another Man's Wife, her Husband living; therefore he
passionately persuaded him to cast his thoughts upon a more honorable object,
and not on one, whose disloyalty (in her present condition) was so much branded
with infamy, that the marks of it would be visible on his face. But the
Viscount bewitched with the inticements of his soul-ravishing Mistress,
(incapable of good counsel) does not only call home his affections from
Overbury, that had been long lieger with him (denouncing enmity) But incites
his Beloved against him also; who mustering up all her passions, with the
greatest acrimony that a feminine malice could devise, she never left, till she
had discharged all the vollies of her rage upon him. And the better to do it,
she consults with her Uncle the Earl of Northampton, aggravating Overburies
offense, as tending to the dishonor of their whole Family. That he (a petty
fellow) should dare to raise such scandals against her innocence. The Earl of
Northampton, that knew of the indearments betwixt the Viscount and his Niece
(so base and mercenary was his spirit) thought it good policy to stop all
passages, that it might not come into the public mouth: For being in a sphere
elated above others, it was a sin of a high presumption for any of a inferior
orb to move but in its own place, or meddle with what is above them. Rochester
and Northampton plot Overburies death.
He therefore closes with the Viscount (whom in his flattering acclamations by
Letters he makes a little Deity) and after some dispute of the manner how to be
revenged of Overbury, they conclude to dispatch him by poison, which could not
be done so well in a public HENRY HOWARD. End of Northampton. From an Original
Picture in the Collection of Mr. Harding
The lively Portraiture of the worthy Knight Sir William Wadd late Lieutenant
of the Tower etc.
way; and therefore they subtly contrive to exasperate the King against him,
that being a Prisoner, and shack'led by them to a place, he might be a more
settled mark for their envenomed Arrows.

About the same time, Rochester betrays Overbury.
the King thinking fit to send an Ambassador into Flanders, to the Archduke
(some say, into France) the Viscount recommended Sir Thomas Overbury to the
King for that Service (extolling his abilities, and fitness for the same,
publicly, that more notice might be taken of the affront) and the King made
choice of him for that Employment. Which done, the Viscount (under the shadow
of friendship) imparts to Overbury what intentions the King had toward him;
but he thought it would not be so convenient for him to accept of it, because
he should not only lose his converse, and company, by such an alienation (which
he highly valued) but many a fair opportunity of improving his respects to him,
in some better way of advancement. Overbury had not been so little a Courtier,
or a man of so mean Reason, but that he was sensible what displeasure he should
pull upon himself, by refusing the Kings Commands; And therefore he told the
Viscount, that betwixt the Kings favors, and his friendship, he had a great
conflict in his spirit, being willing to retain both; but how he should refuse
the Kings commands with safety, he knew not. But the Viscount, with fair
promises, prevailed with him to set up his rest at home, upon higher
expectations ( such a sweet bait is Ambition!) protesting to take off the
asperity of the Kings anger from him, and smooth his way so, as should be for
his better advantage. When he had wrought Overbury in this forge, he goes to
the King, and blows the fire, incensing him with all the aggravations he could;
so that the poor Gentleman, for his contempt, was forthwith committed to the
Tower. And to prepare all things for his reception there, Sir William Wade, the
late Lieutenant, was removed; and Sir Iervis Ellowis, a Person more ambitious,
than indigent (having made his way by money, the common merit) was admitted to
the place.

Now the Countess, The Countesses designs.
like another Alecto, drove furiously, her Chariot having two wheels, which ran
over all impediments: One was, to sue a Divorce betwixt her and her Husband,
that she might marry the Viscount: The other was, to take away Overbury, the
blemish in her Eye, and that laid such a stain upon her, that nothing but his
blood could expiate. For these she has several Engines; the one must be acted
Overtly; the other Covertly, in dark Corners; and she and her Agents find fit
Ministers for both.

The Earl of Northampton resenting his Nieces grievances, Northampton joins
with her.
makes the King acquainted with her Maiden bashfulness, how loath she is to
divulge her Husbands infirmities, and how long it is since her Marriage, and
yet she has not enjoyed the happiness of a Wife; that her Husbands inability
must needs be an unnatural conjunction, such as neither Law nor Reason can
admit of; and that there was a great affection betwixt the Viscount and her, so
as there seemed to be a more excellent sympathy, and sweet composition of Soul
in them, more suitable Reason and Nature, than in the state she was in. Which
was seconded by the Viscounts humble submissions to the Kings great wisdom, who
(he acknowledged) had not only raised him to what he is, but may yet make him
more happy, by uniting him to a Lady of so much honor and virtue.

The King, that took delight to complete the happiness of them he loved,
commanded the Bishops to sue out a Divorce between the Earl of Essex, and his
Lady, that the Viscount might marry her: For he had been practiced formerly in
Scotland, in his minority, with the like experiment. Elizabeth Daughter to the
Earl of Athol, Rob. Iohnstons Hist. of Scotland.
being married to the Earl of March, under pretense of impotency, but merely
for lust (as the Author reports) was Divorsed from her Husband, and married to
the Earl of Arran (the Kings Favorite) who had been before a Partner in her
Adulterous Sheets (so current is the Parallel, and so equally are lust and
ambition yoked together, that they both (with full violence) draw one and the
same way,)

The Bishops, and others, having a Commission under the great Seal of England
to convent the Earl of Essex, and his Countess, before them, sent out their
Summons, and they made their appearance accordingly. But before they proceeded,
they caused a Jury of twelve discreet Matrons to be impannelled, to search the
Countess, whether she were (as she pretended to be, and was reputed) a Maid
still; for if she were a Maid, they could fasten upon a Nullity, and so
separate them, for the more honor of her Virginity. The Countess being
ashamed, and bashful, to come to such a Trial, would not expose her face to the
light; but being to appear before the Matrons under a Veil, another young
Gentlewoman, that had less offended, was fobbed into the place; (...)
and she passed, in the opinion, both of Jury and Judges, to be a Virgin. Then
the Articles were drawn up, where she accused her Husband of impotency (and
that he was hindered with a perpetual and incurable impediment, whereby he is
unable to have carnal copulation with her, with frigiditas quoad h^nc, often
reiterated, etc.) The good Earl, willing to be rid of so horrid a mischief, did
acknowledge he had attempted to enjoy her many times, but he never did, nor
could carnally know her, and believed he never should. Upon these Grounds the
Judges proceed to a Divorce.

Declaring, That Robert Earl of Essex, and the Lady Frances Howard, contracted
by show of Marriage, did cohabit in one House, and lie together in one Bed,
Nudum cum Nuda, and Solus cum Sola; The Countess divorsed from her Husband.
and that the said Lady Frances did show her self prompt, and ready to be known
of him; and that the said Earl neither did, nor could have knowledge of her,
although he did think himself able to have knowledge of other Women. And that
the said Lady Frances, by inspection of her Body by Midwives, expert in matter
of Marriage, was proved to be apt for carnal copulation with Man, and yet a
Virgin. Therefore we the said Judges deputed in the Cause, first invocating the
Name of Christ, and setting God before our eye, do pronounce, decree, and
declare, That the Earl of Essex, for some secret, incurable, binding
impediment, did never carnally know, or was, or is able carnally to know, the
Lady Frances Howard: And therefore we do pronounce, have decreed, and do
declare, the pretended Marriage, so contracted, and solemnized, de facto,
between them, to have been, and to be utterly void, and to no effect; and that
they did want, and ought to want the strength of the Law. And that the Lady
Frances was, and is, and so ought to be free, and at liberty, from any Bond of
such pretended Marriage, de facto, contracted and solemnized. And we do
pronounce, that she ought to be Divorsed, and so we do free, and Divorce her;
leaving them, as touching other Marriages, to their Conscience in the Lord.
Which our Definitive Sentence, and Decree, we ratify and publish.

Thomas, Wint. Lancel. Elie. Rich. Coven. and Lichfield. John Roffe, Bishops.

Julius Caesar, Thomas Parry, Daniel Dun, Knights.

These Bishops, and the rest of the Judges, could not be ignorant what
scandalous reports of this Ladies actions flew up and down, from lip to lip;
which however sweetened by the Partakers, carried an ill savor with them in
every honest understanding, who were not blinded with wilfulness, or deafned
with prejudice, which made the Bishops of Canterbury, and London, decline the
business, though nominated in the Patent. But Kings will never want fit
Ministers in corrupted Times, both in Church and Commonwealth, as long as
there are Degrees, and Places of Ascent to clime to. And though these things
floated awhile upon the Stream of Greatness, yet there is One above that moves
the Waters, who did not only see what passed in the Bishops Palace, but in the
closest Prison, which he discovered to the shame and ruin of the Actors.

For while this Wheel was turning at Lambeth, the other Wheel had its motion in
the Tower. Mrs. Turner, the Mistress of the Work, had lost both her supporters:
Forman, her first prop, dropped away suddenly by death; and Gresham another
rotten Engine (that succeeded him) did not hold long: Mrs. Turner employed to
poison Overbury.
She must now bear up all her self. But she wrought in a Mine of inexhaustible
Treasure, therefore she may buy instruments at any rate. One Weston is thought
on for this Vnder-work, who was sometime Doctor Turners (her Husbands) man, and
has a little experience in the nature of poisonous Drugs. This venomous Plant
is sent for out of the Country to be transplanted here, and two hundred pounds
promised to disperse his Venom, so as it may be killing. Sir Thomas Monson is
made by the Countess to recommend him to Sir Iervis Ellowis, and he to Sir
Thomas Overbury to wait on him; where he goes under the character of a right
honest man, making it good with a sober and fair outside, the true vizard of
Hypocrisy, a fit Pipe for such corrupted Waters to run through; which must be
provided by one Franklin, a swarthy, sallow, crooked-backt fellow, who was to
be the Fountain whence these bitter waters came.

The Lieutenant of the Tower engaged in it.
But Overburies meat must be dressed in the Lieutenants kitchen, and therefore
it is necessary to make him acquainted with it; which the Earl of Northampton
undertook, smoothing him with such language, and promising him such rewards, as
he thought fittest to gain upon him; Assuring him that it would be an
acceptable service to the King to have him removed, being an insolent, and
pernicious fellow (as he called him) of a factious and dangerous spirit, and
therefore advised him to be cautious in admitting any to see him, lest his
passions should vent themselves and become public. The Lieutenant being a man
intelligent enough, could not but apprehend the dangerous path he trod in
pursuing this business: For if he should make the King acquainted with it, to
know more of his mind, before it were done, and he 'disclaim it, Northampton
was powerful enough to crush him on the one side; and if it should be
discovered after it were done, he might be sure the King would not own it, and
it would bring him a certain ruin on the other side: betwixt these two extremes
he knew no mean, and therefore he took that which tended (as he thought) to
most safety, hoping that the Earl of Northampton had some higher Authority for
the same. And now they begin to put their design in practice; Franklin
furnishes Weston with materials, compounded to consume Nature insensibly; but
this was not quick enough, Malice must be as active, as cunning! stronger
Ingredients are infused, which Weston having received from the Countess by his
Son, he meets the Lieutenant as he carried up Overburies meat, saying to him,
Sir, shall I give it him now? The Lieutenant asked him, What? THE Portracture of
Sir THOMAS OVERBURY Knight AETAT 32
Weston answered, Sir, you know what is to be done. The Lieutenant that would
not have it known that he knew any thing, gave him a check, and would not
understand his meaning, or at least would have him take notice that he
understood it; for he thought that this connivance would not bring him within
the compass of the fact (and for the guilt he could dispense with it well
enough) and therefore his part of Working was only not to seem to know what was
done. So subtily sometimes men strive to cosen themselves.

But these lingering operations do not suit with the Countesses implacable
humor, Their poisons set a work.
Weston is chid by Mrs. Turner for being so slow. But he that knew he might be
too active, kept on his old pace, as the only way to have it pass unsuspected,
aiming at his own preservation, as well as Overburies destruction. He gets
therefore (by the help of Franklin) several sorts of poisons, tempering them
with his broaths, and every bit of meat he eat, that he might diminish by
degrees; for his very Salt was mixed with white Mercury: And besides these, Sir
Thomas Monson sent Tarts and Jellies of the Countesses and Mrs. Turners
composition (by some of his servants) to Weston, for the better expedition.
Thus was the poor Gentleman tortured and rackt in a horrid distemper, who being
young, and of a strong constitution, was able to grapple a long time with these
corroding Tormentors: But his body being not always able to bear it, at length
he fell extreme sick, and having no friend that could, or durst visit him, none
to complain to but the causers of his misery (such strict guards were kept
about him) he languished both in body and mind. But some friend by accident
taking the advantage for a visit, and finding him very sick, procured him a
wholesome Glister, which Weston was willing enough to have administered, because
he would not be too quick, and that retarded the work, by carrying away some of
the poisonous matter. Which Northhampton hearing, the Lieutenant was checked for
being so careless, and commanded that none should come near him, being fearful
lest the desperateness of his condition should make him reveal some thing of
high concernment, that had been machinated among them. And Mrs. Turner rebuked
her Minister Weston, for looking no better to his charge, so that they dealt
with him now upon a new account.

The Countess got loose from her Husband grows wanton in her prosperity. Nature
is unbounded where neither Law nor Grace does limit. The good Earl of Essex
must repay the Portion, to do which he is forced to sell Benington in
Hartford-shire, a very gallant seat, and glad he is rid of a Torment at any
rate. She now mounted on her Car drives over all oppositions, her Beauties
shine in the Court (as she would have it) she is the Kings Favorite, as well
as her Husband; the glories of her Marriage must appear there, and she is a fit
gift for the King to bestow, he that took her away from one Husband, can give
her to another, who must be of equal rank to her, that she may not descend,
therefore he is Created Earl of Somerset; and all the splendid Equipage,
Rochester made Earl of Somerset, 4. Nov. married 5 Dec. following.
and magnificent Preparation, that can either fill a Court with delight, or
People with admiration, are not wanting for the Marriage. She thinking all the
World ignorant of her sly practices, has the impudence to appear in the habit
of a Virgin, with her hair pendant almost to her feet; which Ornament of her
Body (though a fair one) could not cover the deformities of her Soul: But
these, and her high Elations, are Clouds to her Conscience, that (though her
Bauds might for her) her indeed lovely Cheeks did not betray themselves to
blushes. These glorious Days are seconded with as glorious Nights, where Masks
and Dancings had a continued motion; the King naturally affecting such
high-slying Pastimes, and banquetings, as might wrap up his Spirit, and keep it
from descending toward Earthly things.

Feasted in London.
The City of London, and the Court at White Hall, like two great Stars in
Conjunction, had one and the same influence, and operation; they must do
something for the Man whom the King loves: Therefore a great Feast is prepared
by them in Merchant-Taylors Hall (and all the Grandees and Ladies are invited)
with so much magnificence, as if it had been Competitor, and vyed with
Whitehall for Glory. They all rod on horseback into the City in the Evening,
following their two Leaders; the Men attending the Bridegroom, and the Women
the Bride; so mounted, furnished, and adorned with Trappings, and so bespangled
with Jewels, that the Torches, and Flambeaux (which were numerous) were but
little light to the Beholders.

Overbury hears of the Marriage.
The noise of these Triumphs resounding in the closest Corners, brought the news
to Sir Thomas Overbury, which was an unfit and comfortless Companion to a Man
in misery, conscious to himself, that all his sufferings proceeded from his
opposition to that which was now in agitation; so that in his obscure Prison,
and darker thoughts, he could not see the least glimps of hope that looked
toward liberty, when he considered the implacable nature of the Woman. But yet
he was not so guilty to his own Reason, and that friendship (as he thought)
that was betwixt him and the Earl of Somerset, as utterly to despair, he having
so faithfully promised to procure his Release.

Writes to Somerset.
Therefore Overbury writes to him in the midst of his glory, to let him know the
sad condition wherein he was, and how much his health was impaired, which he
imputed to his reclusedness, and want of Air, humbly imploring his assistance,
that he might no longer languish under the burdens of his infirmities.
Somerset not willing to have him exclaim made answer, That the King was now
full of great business, but he would take the first opportunity to move him for
his Release (though he was highly incensed against him) and make his
indisposition a ground for the Kings mercy to work upon; Somerset sends poisons
in his Answers.
including in the Letter a white Powder, which he desired him to take, assuring
him, that though it made him a little sick at first, it would do him much good
in the end. The poor abused Gentleman took his Powder, which having a poisonous
Quality, added to his affliction: But there must be something more violent to
work the Feat.

The Lieutenant of the Tower (that was his frequent Visitor) opened his Breast
to his complaints, The Lieutenant betrays Overbury.
and with an outward pity received them, against those that were Authors of his
calamities, and discharged them again into their bosoms, against whom they were
spoken; so that he could say nothing that came not to their knowledge, his very
words being racked, as well as his body tormented. For the Lieutenant confessed
after, with repenting tears, as one of his great sins, that he was unfaithful
and treacherous to him, doing things to his disadvantage that he trusted him to
do, promising him secrecy, and betraying him to satisfy greatness. Thus he
continued in this dismal Den above four Months, whipped daily (as it were) with
Scorpions, whose venomous stings entered even into his Soul. So that his
Enemies, being more impatient for his enduring so long, than he was to endure
so much, forced Nature so, Overbury dies.
with an impoysoned Glyster, (compounded by Franklin) that within a short time
after he died.

And to kill him again after death, Northampton reviles him.
they brand him with the scandal of a lascivious life, giving out, that he died
of the Pox: Which Northampton expressed to Somerset in a Letter, telling him of
strange Sores, and Ulcers found upon his Body, ugly to behold, stinking
intolerably, the People forced to throw him in a loose Sheet into a Coffin, and
bury him privately on Tower Hill: Concluding, That God is gracious in cutting
off evil Instruments before their time. Which Sentence (while he was writing
it) reflected the judgment on himself; For Northampton having a great influence
in the Kingdom, being a prime Counselor to the King, and intimate with
Somerset, they two grasping all Power, and Northampton having the better head
to manage it, the miscarriages were, not without cause, imputed to him. For
being a Papist, he did not only work upon Somerset to pervert him (by letting
him see there was a greater latitude for the Conscience in that Religion) but
got him to procure many immunities for the Papists, as the Kings best affected
Subjects. And being Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, A. Reg. 12. An. Christi
1614.
he gave free access to Priests and Jesuits, that abundantly flockt again into
the Kingdom, the operation of the last Proclamation having now lost the virtue:
And a Letter being discovered which he had written to Cardinal Bellarmine,
wherein he expresses the condition of the Times, and the Kings importunity
compelled him to be a Protestant in show, yet nevertheless his heart stood firm
with the Papists, and if there were cause he would express it; with much more
to this purpose. These things first muttered, then urged against him, touched
him to the heart, so that he retired, disposed of his Estate, Northampton dies.
and dyed. He had a great mind tending toward eminent things, which he was the
better able to effect, by living a Bachelor to an old Age, being always
attended (and he loved it) with Gentlemen of Quality, to whom he was very
bountiful. His affections were also much raised to Charity, as by the Almshouse
he erected appears, and his Works show him to be a great getter. But leaving no
Issue to propagate his name, he built a fair House by Charing Cross to continue
it, which it lost soon after his death, being called Suffolk-house for a time,
and now is Northumberland-house. Such changes there are in the Worlds measures!
His Body was carried to be buried at Dover, because he was Warden of the
Cinque Ports, as was reported by some of his Followers, but it was vulgarly
rumored to be transported to Rome. But these actions of his about Overbury
lying dormant, made no great noise at this time against him; but when they
broke out, they laid upon his name as great a stench as Infamy or Oaium could
produce.

People go to New England 1614.
The Bishops that were only to move in their own spheres had an influence over
more than their own Seas: For some of them that were never unactive for
establishing their Temporal Greatness, were not contented to suppress many
Pious and Religious men, but, I know not for what Policy, restrained their
going beyond Sea: For there were diverse Families about this time shipped for
New England, and were not suffered to go, though afterward they were upon
better thoughts permitted. For in Reason (being there was an impossibility to
reduce them to their Wills) it had been the best course to have set open the
door, that the Enemy might have had a smooth passage. But this malicious
proceeding was no hindrance to the establishment of that Colony, nor is the
blame to be laid upon the Function (for some of the Bishops in these Times were
holy men, and great Lights to the Truths of God) but on such, whose ambition
made them endeavor more after Earthly things than Heavenly, and less to please
God than the King (as Cardinal Woolsey long since confessed of himself) and the
malice of evil men may protract, but it shall never destroy what God intends to
build up. A wonderful Light breaking forth in the West-part of the World, this
latter SUFFOLK HOUSE CHARING CROSS.
Age, discovering the nakedness of the Nations both in body and soul; which
carried a resemblance of the Creation of a new World, or at least the
imperfection of the old. A vast Territory and few people.

The Spaniards, the first discoverers, being more covetous to grasp, than well
able to plant, took possession of the most precious places, so that the
English, French, and Dutch, caught but what they left. Sir Walter Rawleigh and
others (after Sir Francis Drake) found out that Country now called Virginia,
which was long since planted with a Colony. And in that tract of Land more
Northerly, New England described.
within the degrees of 40 and 48 of latitude, lies New England, a Climate
temperate and healthful, but not so much as the Old. It is rather a low than a
high Land, full of Rocky-Capes or Promontories. The Inmost parts of the Country
are Mountainous, intermixed with fruitful Valleys, and large Lakes, which want
not store of good Fish. The Hills are no where Barren (though in some places
Stony) but fruitful in Trees and Grass. There are many Rivers, fresh Brooks and
Springs, that run into the Sea. The Rivers are good Harbors, and abound with
plenty of excellent Fish, yet are they full of Falls, which makes them not
Navigable far into the Land. The Seas bordering the Shores are studded with
Islands, about which great Shoals of Fishes (Cod, Haddock, and such like) do
wantonly sport themselves. The main Land does nourish abundance of Deers,
Bears, Wolves, and a beast called Moose, peculiar to those Regions; and the
Rivers and Ponds are stored with some Beavers, Otters, and Musquashes. There
are also diverse kinds of small Beasts, but the most offensive are Foxes; Fowls
there are store in their several seasons, as Turkies, Geese, and Ducks; and the
soil naturally produces wild Vines with very large Bunches of Grapes, but the
extremity of heat and cold hinder their just temper. There are many other
Fruits which are very good, with Plants, whose Rinds or Barks transcends our
Hemp or Flax; both Air and Earth concurring to bring forth most things that
Industry and Art can provide for the use of man.

The first that sent a Colony into this Country, Planted first 1606.
was the Lord Chief Justice Popham, in the year 1606. A man highly renowned in
his time, for persecuting such as transgressed the Laws among Christians,
living like Beasts of prey to the prejudice of Travelers. And in this he had a
special aim, and hope also, to establish Christian Laws among Infidels; and by
domestical, to chase away those ferous, and indomitable Creatures, that
infested the Land: Brave and gallant spirits having ever such public ends. But
Planters are like Alchymists, they have something in projection, that many
times fails in production. It is conceived the Romans were not well advised to
settle one of their first Colonies at Maldon in Essex, whose soil about, is
neither yet sound, nor Air salubrious. And the first opening of ground in a
Climate not Natural, has an extraordinary operation upon the Bodies of Men,
whose Senses must comply to give entertainment to a Stranger, that often spoils
the place where it finds Hospitality. For the first Planters of New England
having seated themselves low, few of them were left, to direct those that
succeeded, in a better way. Yet People, by dear experience, overcame it by
degrees, being yearly supplied by men, whose industry and affections taught
them, there was more hope to find safety in New England than in the Old.

Somersets devices to get Money.
Though these found some stop, yet our great Favorite, the Earl of Somerset,
and his business, runs smoothly, without rub, since Overburies death. But he
must alter his Bias, and go less, or find some new ways to bring in Moneys; the
Revenues of the Crown are not competent to maintain such vast Expenses,
accumulated by his Riot, though he had all the Earl of Westmorelands Lands at
his Marriage, and Creation, added to his Earldom. There must be therefore a new
Order of Baronets made, in number two hundred, that must be next Degree to
Barons, and these must pay a thousand pound a piece for their Honor, having it
by Patent under the great Seal, and continued to Posterity with the Title of
Knights. Some of these new Honorable men (whose Wives pride, and their own
Prodigalities had pumpt up to it) were so drained, that they had not moisture
to maintain the radical humor, but withered no nothing. This money thus
raised, is pretended for planting the North of Ireland, but it found many other
Channels, before it came to that Sea. And though at our Kings first access to
the Crown, there was a glut of Knights made, yet after some time he held his
hand, left the Kingdom should be cloyed with them: And the World thrived so
well with some, that the price was afterward brought up to three hundred
pounds a piece. But now again, the poor Courtiers were so indigent, that sixty
pounds would purchase a Knighthood, the King wanting other means to gratify
his Servants.

The Kings Bounty.
Yet he was of so free a Nature, and careless of Money, when he had it (though
solicitous to get it) that he batled in his own bounty. For being one day in
the Gallery at White Hall, and none with him but Sir Henry Rich (who was second
Son to the Earl of Warwick) afterward Earl of Holland, a Gentleman of
excellent Natural Parts, but youthfully expensive; and James Maxwel, one of his
Bed Chamber; some Porters past by them, with three thousand pounds, going to
the Privy Purse: Sir Henry Rich whispering Maxwel, the King turned upon them,
and asked Maxwel, what says he? what says he? Maxwel told him, he wished he had
so much money; Marry shall thou Harry, (says the King) and presently commanded
the Porters to carry it to his Lodging, with this Expression, You think now you
have a great Purchase; but I am more delighted to think how much I have
pleasured you in giving this money, than you can be in receiving it. This Story
intervenes, to show the Temper of his Mind.

About this time also Gold was raised to two shillings in the pound, Gold
raised.
occasioned from the high value set upon it abroad, which made the Merchant
transport it. But the first Inhancers can make their Markets, by engrossing
great Sums; especially the Payments of those times, and all this Kings Reign,
being for the most part in Gold so that it might be called the Golden Age; that
it is a wonder now, what gulf has swallowed those great sums, if their golden
wings be not flown to the Sunrising. But these little projects will bring in
but small store of money, to maintain the Work; many such Materials must go, to
make up a Royal Building, and little Streams will not easily fill a Cistern
that has many Issues. A Parliament can furnish all: but who dare venture on
such Refractory Spirits?

Yet there was a generation about the Court, A Parliament undertaken.
that to please and humor Greatness, undertook a Parliament; as men presuming
to have Friends in every County, and Borough, who (by their Power among the
People) would make Election of such Members for Knights and Burgesses, as
should comply solely to the Kings desires; and Somerset is the Head and Chief
of these Undertakers. But this was but an Embrion, and became an Abortive. The
English Freedom cannot be lost by a few base and tame spirits, that would
unmake themselves, and their Posterity, to ingrandize one Man. For the
Parliament meeting according to their Summons, such Faces appeared there, as
made the Court droop; who, instead of Contributing to the Kings wants, lay open
his wastes, especially upon the Scots, with whom they desire medietatem linguae,
a share of favor: The Bread (by our Saviors rule) properly belonging to the
Children of the Kingdom. And they beseech His Majesty to stop the Current of
future access of that Nation to make residence here, having enough to eat up
their own Crumbs. They enquire into the Causes of the unexpected increase of
Popish Recusants, since the Gunpowder Plot, the detestation whereof (they
thought) should have utterly extinguished them; and they find it to the
Admission of Popish Nobility into his Counsels; the silencing of many watchful,
and diligent Ministers; the diverse Treaties his Majesty has entertained, not
only for the Marriage of the deceased Prince Henry, but for Prince Charles that
now lives, with the Daughters of Popish Princes, which dis-heartneth the
Protestant, and encourages the Recusant; laying open with these, many other
miscarriages in Government, which the King willing to have concealed, stopped
them in their Course, dissolving the Parliament, and committing to the Tower
and other Princes (the beginning of incroachment upon the public liberties)
such as were most active for the Common good.

These fair Blossoms not producing the hoped-for fruit, they find out new
Projects to manure the People; different much in name and nature; A Benevolence
required.
a Benevolence, extorted; a Free-gift against their wills was urged upon them,
and they that did not give in their money, must give in their names, which
carried a kind of fright with it. But the most knowing men (like so many
Pillars to the Kingdoms liberties) supported their Neighbors tottering
Resolutions, with assuring them, that these kind of Benevolences were against
Law, Reason and Religion.

First against Law, being prohibited by diverse Acts of Parliament; and a Curse
pronounced against the infringers of them.

Secondly, against Reason, that a particular man should oppose his judgment and
discretion, to the wisdom and judgment of the King assembled in Parliament, who
have there denied any such aid.

Thirdly against Religion That a King violating his Oath (taken at his
Coronation for maintaining the Laws, Liberties, and Customs of the Realm)
should be assisted by the people in an Act of so much Injustice and Impiety.
These, and many other Arguments instilled into the people by some good
Patriots, were great impediments to the Benevolence: So that they got but
little money, and lost a great deal of love: For no Levies do so much decline,
and abase the love and spirits of the people, as unjust Levies. Subsidies get
more of their money, but Exactions enslave the mind; for they either raise them
above, or depress them beneath their sufferings, which are equally mischievous,
and to be avoided.

The King of Denmarks second coming.
This Summer the King of Denmark revisited his Sister the Queen of England,
with some forty Lords, Gentlemen, and others in his Train; landing at Yarmouth,
and passing directly to London, took up his Lodging in our Common Inns, and was
not known but for some Outlandish Nobleman, till he came to the Queens Palace
in the Strand, where she was surprised with the unexpected joy of a Brothers
company, distanced from her by the interest of his people, the great Bar that
hinders Princes the common civilities and happiness of their Inferiors. But the
joy continued not long; for after some fourteen days interview, they parted
again. But those days had such a plenitude of all those delights that contend
to satisfaction, as if a great deal of more time had been involved and
contracted in them.

The Queen opposes Somerset.
The Earl of Somerset new made Lord Chamberlain, succeeding his Father-in-law
the Earl of Suffolk, and the Lord Treasurer VERA EFFIGIES FRANCISCAE COMITISSAE
SOMERSETIAE / VICECOM: ROFFEN: ETc
The lively portraict of the Lady Francis Countess of Somerset

Successor to Salisbury, were not very acceptable to the Queen, having the same
spirit and animosity against Somerset that her Son had: But whether from an
apprehension that the Kings love and company was alienated from her, by this
Masculine conversation and intimacy, or whether the man's insolence, (thus high
mounted) had carried him too near the Beams of Majesty (his creature Overbury
being a little before his Commitment condemned for presumptuous walking with
his hat on in her Palace Garden, she being in the window) or whether from that
natural inclination that makes every one oppose Pride in others, though it be
more active in themselves, and see it not; or from that Rumor of Prince Henry's
death, covertly imputed to Somerset, I know not. But she became the head of a
great Faction against him.

Sir Ralph Winwood, who had been Lieger-Ambassador with the States in the
Netherlands, for his abilities and good service had merited so much from the
King, that he made him Secretary of State; The Queen closes with him, the
better to discover Somersets miscarriages, and he was ready enough to oblige
her; for Somerset made him but an Underling, grasping all Public employments
into his own hand, not caring whom he disobliged, or what Malice he pulled upon
himself; for like a Coloss he stood the brunt of all the Tempests of Envy,
making those that carried the greatest sail to strike and come under him. Nor
would he suffer any place in Court, or dignity in State, to be bestowed; which
was not sweetened with his smile that gave it, or their bounty that enjoyed it;
so that (it was thought) he engrossed a mass of Coin, as if his soul intended
to take her ease. This Pride and Covetousness added to his other miscarriages
such a number of Underminers, that he stood upon a tottering foundation, having
no support but the Kings favor, which, whether by Providence from above, or
purposes below (both ever concurring from the Will to the Means) was soon
removed.

For about this time the King cast his eye upon a young Gentleman, George
Villers a favorite.
so rarely molded, that he meant to make him a Masterpiece: His name was
George Villers, he was second Son to Sir George Villers, a Knight of
Leichestershire, by a second Venture: For the old man coming to Colehorton in
that County, to visit his Kinswoman the Lady Beaumont, found a young
Gentlewoman of that name, allied, and yet a servant to the Lady, who being of a
handsome presence, and countenance, took his affections, and he married her.
This was the soil where the glorious Cedar grew? who having only the breeding
and portion of a younger Brother, with the Mothers help and travel, got the
addition of a French garb, which brought him to the Court in no greater a
condition than fifty pounds a year is able to maintain. The King stricken with
this new object, A. Reg. 13. An. Christi 1615.
would not expose him to so much hazard as the malice of a jealous Competitor,
nor him self to so much censure, as to be thought changeable, and taken again
with a sudden affection* therefore he instructs some of his Confidents to bring
him in by degrees; who intimated the Kings pleasure to him, that he should wait
Cup bearer at large, being so, at too strait a distance of place, to have any
mark of favor for suspicion to level at. And if the King had not received a
new Impression thus, the old Character of Somerset that was imprinted in his
soul, could not so soon (as many men thought) have been blotted out. But Courts
that are the wisest, though not the most virtuous Schools, do teach their
Scholars to observe the Seasons, and by the Astronomy of the Princes eye, to
calculate what Fortune such Aspects, and such Conjunctions may happily produce:
And they found so much as gave them encouragement to hear, and boldness to
discover, that which pulled down the one, and set up the other.

Somersets decline 1615.
But Somerset that had the pulse of his Conscience always beating at Overburies
door, was as active to preserve himself, as his Enemies were to ruin him: and
finding himself shaking (though there was nothing yet laid to his Charge, but
the imbezelling some of the Crown Jewels) he throws himself at the Kings feet,
acknowledging the great Trust his Majesty had reposed in him, and the weight of
business lying on him, might make him encounter him with some miscarriages
through youth and ignorance (great employments often meeting with envy, that
jossels them in the way) he therefore humbly besought his Majesty to grant him
a general Pardon for what was past, that he might not be exposed to the malice
of those that would wrest all his Actions to the worst meaning. The King that
raised this fair Edifice, being loath to have it quite pulled down again, gave
order for the drawing up of a general Pardon, in so ample and full a manner,
that it might rather exceed, than take rise from any former precedent; This the
King signed and sent to the Great Seal; But the Queen having notice of it, and
using her Power with the Lord Chancellor, gave stop to the Seal till the Kings
coming to Town (who was on his Progress in the West) and then what was muttered
in corners before, rung openly in the Streets: For the Apothecaries boy that
gave Sir Thomas Overbury the Glister, falling sick at Flushing, revealed the
whole matter, which Sir Ralph Winwood by his Correspondents had a full Relation
of, and a small breach being made, his Enemies, like the noise of many Waters,
rise up against him, following the Stream.

The King deserts him.
The King hearing of the business, and what ill sound it carried with it (as it
was set out to him) that in the face of the Court, and so near his own bosom,
such poisonous practices should be perpetrated, and on one that was his
Prisoner, he VERA EFFIG: REVER^^^ DOMINI IOHAN^IS KING EPISCOPI LONDIN^
Lo here his shade whose substance is divine;
Like God, in all that may his Angel fit:
Whose light before men, like a lamp, does shine
The Oil of Grace and learning feeding it:
Yet, like a lamp, that others light does gieve,
Still wast's the Oil by which him self does lieve.
See thy true shadow Nature and suppose
How much thy Substance is beloved of Hearts
O Cunning, if thy Mirror could diclose
His heavenly Forms, of Zeal, Religion, Arts;
This picture might exactllie show in Him.
Each virtue done to Life for each dead Lym.
seemed to be much moved with the Relation; and sending for the Judges gave
them strict Charge to examine the Matter thoroughly, imprecating a Curse upon
them and their Posterity, if they did not endeavor to discover it; and if he
did spare any guilty Person, He wished Gods Curse mi^ht light on him, and his
Posterity; So violent the King appeared in prosecution of it! And away to
Royston he goes, and Somerset with him; thither these rumors came buzzing
about his ears, like a rising storm upon a well spread Oak; but he thought
himself too firmly rooted in the Kings favor to be removed, therefore he went
back to London, to still the murmurs vented against him. Some say, the Lord
Chief Justice Cook sent for him, upon which he went to the King with a
Complaint, as taking it to be a great presumption; but the King made answer,
Thou must go then, for if Cook sends for me I must go too. Others say, when he
came to take his leave of the King, he embraced and kissed him often, wished him
to make haste back, showed an extreme passion to be without him; and his back
was no sooner turned, but he said with a smile, I shall never see thy face
more. Whether either, or both of these were so, cannot be asserted, but to
London he went; his Countess was apprehended (and committed to Custody in
Black-Fryars) before he came thither; he was no sooner there, but he was seized
on, and commended to the Charge of Doctor Mountain, Dean of Westminster; and
then they went on roundly with the Business.

For a little before this, Weston and the rest tried.
Weston was taken, and examined, but like a stubborn piece (unmoulded for
impression) nothing could be drawn from him; but God (by the means and
persuasion of the Bishop of London, Doctor King, a man eminent for piety in his
time) so wrought upon his heart, that the eye of his soul being opened to the
foulness of his sin, he discovered all, so that the whole Confederacy were laid
hold on; Who falling into the hands of the Lord Chief Justice Cook (a Spirit of
a fiery exhalation, as subtle as active) he left no stone unturned, till he had
ripped up the very foundation.

But in the mean time, between Westons standing mute, and his Trial, one
Lumsden a Scotchman, took upon him to make a false and libellous Relation of
the business, and delivers it to Henry Gib of the Bedchamber, to be put into
the Kings hand; in which Writing he falsifies and perverts all that was done
the first day of Westons Arraignment, turning the edg of his imputations upon
the Lord Chief Justice Cook: which Bolt was boldly shot by him, but it was
thought not to come out of his own Quiver; and it lighted into an ill hand for
him, for the King discovered it, and left him an open Mark to that Justice, he
had traduced.

Weston was the first that suffered by the hand of the Law; which Sir John
Hollis (after Earl of Clare) out of friendship to Somerset; and Sir John
Wentworth, a Person debauched and riotous (hoping from the beams of of
Somersets favor to increase his wanting fortunes) strove to blast in the
spring; Weston executed.
for they rod to Tyburn, and urged him at his Execution to deny all, hoping
that way to prevent the Autumn that followed: but Westons Soul being prepared
for Death, resisted their temptations, sealing penitently the Truth of his
Confession with his last. And this attempt of Hollu, Wentworth, and Lumsden, to
pervert Justice being aggravated against them in the Star Chamber by the Kings
Attorney, Sir Francis Bacon, they were sentenced there, and found the reward of
their Presumption.

Mrs. Turner.
Mistress Turner followed next: A Pattern of Pride and Lust; who having always
given a loose Rein to her life, she ran this carreer at last into the jaws of
death.

Sir Ierv. Ellowis.
Sir Iervis Ellowis, Lieutenant of the Tower, was the third, who suffered on
Tower Hill; a Man much pitied, being drawn in by the allurements of Northampton
to be a Spectator rather than an Actor in this bloody Tragedy; but his
Connivence cost him his life. And being a man full of sorrow for his offense,
he left two Pillars behind him at his death, for Watch-Towers to all that pass
by, in this Bark of frail Mortality, to prevent Shipwreck. One was, Not to vow
any thing to God, but to perform it. The other was, Not to take a pride in any
Parts, though never so excellent. For the first, he said he was a great
Gamester, and loved it; and having lost one time much money, he seriously and
advisedly, between God and his own Soul, clapping his hand on his breast, spoke
thus (as it were to God) If ever I play again, then let me be hanged! and
breaking my Vow (said he) now God has paid my Imprecation home. The second
was, He took a great delight in his Pen, And that Pen (to use his own words)
which I was so proud of, has struck me dead, and, like Absolons hair, has
hanged me; for there dropped a word or two from my Pen, in a Letter to the Earl
of Northampton, which upon my salvation I am not able to answer: At my
Arraignment I pleaded hard for my life, and protested mine innocence; but when
my own Pen came against me, I was not able to speak for my self, but stood as
one amazed, or that had no tongue. Such damps does guiltiness cast upon the
Spirit!

The fourth that fell by the stroke of Justice, was Franklin, a Fellow as
sordid in his death, And Franklin.
as pernicious in his life, whose name deserves not so much as memory.

The fifth and sixth were Somerset and his Countess. At her Arraignment, all
the Letters that passed betwixt Forman and she, were read in open Court, and
the waxen and brazen Poppets were made visible, dancing up and down from hand
to hand, which discovered the folly of her Actions: But the Earl and JOHN
HOLLES 1st, EARL OF CLARE.
she, being condemned, found the King mercy, and were, after some time of
imprisonment in the Tower, set at liberty, holding their lives by a Lease of
the Kings Will, living in a private, and almost obscure condition. Showing in
it, That no content or happiness can be truly established, but on the
foundation of Justice. For that Love that made them break through all
Oppositions (either by her decling to some new Object (as was the common
rumor) or his inclining to reluctance for the Old) grew so weak* that it pined
away, and they lived long after (though in one House) as Strangers one to
another.

She died before him. The Countesses description in her death.
Her death was infamous, his without fame, the obscurity of the rest of his
life darkning the splendour of it. And though she died (as it were) in a corner
(in so private a condition) the loathsomeness of her death made it as
conspicuous as on the house top: For that part of her Body which had been the
receptacle of most of her sin, grown rotten (though she never had but one
Child) the ligaments failing, it fell down, and was cut away in flakes, with a
most nauseous and putrid savor; which to augment, she would roll her self in
her own ordure in her bed, took delight in it. Thus her affections varied; For
nothing could be found sweet enough to augment her Beauties at first, and
nothing stinking enough to decipher her loathsomeness at last: Pardon the
sharpness of these expressions, for they are for the Glory of God, who often
makes his punishments (in the balance of his Justice) of equal weight with our
sins.

For his Person, Somersets in his life.
He was rather well compacted than tall; his features and favor comely, and
handsome, rather than beautiful; the hair of his head flaxen, that of his face
tinctured with yellow, of the Sycambrian color: In his own nature, of a gentle
mind, and affable disposition, having public affections, till they were all
swallowed up in this gulf of beauty, which did precipitate him into these
dangerous Contrivances. For that which made his friendship false, diverted his
public affection to his private interest; and when he found himself guilty of
what he thought might ruin him, he grew covetous to heap that together, which
he thought might preserve him; So that at one breach that our Corruptions make,
many mischiefs follow in the crowd. And if he had not met with such a Woman, he
might have been a good man: but trials, and strong temptations, enhanceth the
Price of Virtue; the conflict is gallant, but to be overcome debaseth a man the
more, by how much his fall is the greater.

I was loath to separate these Delinquents in their Trials (being close woven)
by the length of Sir Francis Bacons Speech in the Star Chamber, against Hollis,
Wentworth, and Lumsden. But knowing what an Ornament his Oratory will give to
this Story, and how usual it was for ancient Historians to insert their
Harangues of State, A. Reg. 14. An. Christi 1616.
as well as Military Orations, I could not decline this, though it comes almost
in the Rere; the rather because it will serve as a Seal and Confirmation of
what is formerly written. And thus it was.

Sir Francis Bacons Speech in Star Chamber.
THE Offense wherewith I shall charge the three Offenders at the Bar, is a
misdemeanour of a high Nature, tending to the defacing and scandal of Justice,
in a great Cause Capital. The particular Charge is this:

the King among many of his Princely Virtues, is known to excel in that proper
Virtue of the Imperial Throne, which is Justice; it is a Master Virtue, unto
which the other three are ministrant, and do service: Wisdom serves to
discover, and discern of Innocencies, and Guiltiness; Fortitude is to
persecute, and execute; and Temperance so to carry Justice, as it be not
passionate in the pursuit, nor confused in valuing Persons, nor precipitate in
Time.

For this his Majesty's Virtue of Justice, God has of late raised an Occasion,
and erected (as it were) a Stage, or Theater, much for his Honor, to show, and
act it, in the pursuit of the violent untimely death of Sir Thomas Overbury,
and therein cleansing the Land from blood. For if blood does cry to Heaven in
Gods ears, this is a stench, I may say, in the Nostrils of God and Man.

This work of Justice, the greater and more excellent it is, you will soon
conclude, the greater is the offense of any that have sought to affront or
traduce it. And therefore, before I descend unto the particular Charge of these
Offenders, I will say somewhat of the Crime of Impoysonment; somewhat of the
particular Circumstances of this Fact upon Overbury; and thirdly, of the Kings
great and worthy care and carriage in this business.

The offense of Impoysonment is most truly figured in that Device and
Description which was made of the nature of Caius Caligula, That he was Lutum
sanguine maceratum, Mire cemented with blood: For as it is one of the highest
offenses in guiltiness, so it is the basest of all others in the minds of
Offenders. Treason, Magnum aliquid spectant, they aim at great things; but this
is vile and base. I have found in the Book of God, examples of all other
offenses, but not any one of an Impoysonment, or an Impoysoner. I find mention
of some fear of casual Impoysonments; when the Waters were corrupted and
bitter, they came complaining in a fearful manner, Master, Mors in olla: And I
find mention of Poisons of Beasts, and Serpents, The Poisons of Asps is under
their lips, says the Psalm, but I find no mention in a Human Creature, of a
malicious and murtherous Impoysonment. Let their table be made a snare, is
certainly most true of Impoysonment, but that I think was meant of the
Treachery of Friends, that were participant of the same Table.

This is an offense that has two spurs of offending, Spes perficiendi, and
spes celandi, it is easily committed and concealed. It is an offense, that is,
Tanquam sagitta nocte volans, it is the Arrow that flies by night, it discerns
not whom it hits: for many times the poison is laid for one, and another takes
it. As in Sanders case, where the poisoned Apple was laid for the Mother, and
the Child eat it. And so in that notorious Case, whereupon the Statute of 22
Hen. 8. cap. 9. was made, where the intent being but to poison one or two,
poison was put in a little Vessel of Barm that stood in the Kitchen at the
Bishop of Rochesters house, of which Barm, Pottage or Grewel was made,
wherewith seventeen of the Bishops Family were poisoned, nay, diverse of the
poor that came to the Bishops-gate, and had the Pottage in Alms, were likewise
poisoned. Here is great talk of Impoysonment, I hope I am safe, I have no
enemies, nor any thing men can long for; that is all one; for he may sit at the
Table by one, for whom poison is prepared, and have a drench of his Cup or of
his Pottage, and so (as the Poet says) Concidit infelix alieno vulnere, he may
die another man's death, and therefore it was most gravely, judiciously, and
properly provided by that Statute, that Impoysonment should be High Treason,
because whatsoever offense tends to the utter subversion and dissolution of
Human Society is in the nature of High Treason,

But it is an offense, that I may truly say of it, Non est nostri generis nec
sanguinis; It is, thanks be to God, rare in the Isle of Britain: It is neither
of our Country, nor of our Church; You may find it in Rome, and Italy, there is
a Religion for it, if it should come among us, it were better living in a
Wilderness than in a Court.

For the particular fact upon Overbury; I knew the Gentleman, it is true, his
mind was great, but it moved not in any great good order, yet certainly it did
commonly fly at good things; and the greatest fault that ever I heard by him,
was, That he made his Friend his Idol. But take him as he was, the Kings
Prisoner in the Tower, and then see how the Case stands. In that place the
State is (as it were) a Respondent to make good the Body of the Prisoner, and
if any thing happen to him there, it may (though not in this Case, yet in some
others) make an aspersion, and reflection upon the State it self: For the person
is utterly void of his own defense, his own care and providence can serve him
to nothing; He is in the custody and preservation of Law, and we have a Maxim
in our Law, that when a State is in preservation of Law, nothing can destroy
it, or hurt it, and God forbid but the like should be in Persons, and therefore
this was a circumstance of great aggravation.

Lastly, To have a man chased to death, in a manner, as it appears now by
matter of Record (for other privacy of Cause I know not) by poison after
poison: First Rosaker, then Arsnick, then Mercury sublimate, then sublimate
again, it is a thing would astonish man's nature to hear it. The Poets feign
that the Furies had Whips, and that they were corded with poisoned Snakes; and
a man would think that this subject were the very Case: To have a man tied to a
post, and to scourge him to death with Serpents, for so truly may diversity of
poisons be termed.

It pleased my Lord Chief Justice to let me know that which I heard with great
comfort, which was the charge that his Majesty gave to himself, and the rest of
the Commissioners in this Case, worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, That
the business should be carried without touch to any that was innocent, not only
without impeachment, but without aspersion, which was a most Noble and Princely
caution; for men's Reputations are tender things, and ought to be like Christ's
Coat without seam. And it was more to be respected in this Case, because it met
with two great Persons; A Nobleman that his Majesty had favored and advanced,
and his Lady, being of a great and Honorable House, though I think it be true
that the Writers say, that there is no Pomegranate so fair, or so sound, but
may have a perished Kernel. Nay, I see plainly in those excellent Papers of his
Majesty's own handwriting (as so many beams of Justice issuing from that Virtue
which so much does shine in him) the business so evenly carried without
prejudice, whether it were a true Accusation on the one part, or a practice or
false Accusation on the other, as showed plainly that his Majesty's judgment
was, Tanquam tabula rasa, as a clean pair of Tables, and his ears, Tanquam
janua aperta, as a gate not side open, but wide open to the Truth, as it should
be discovered. And I may truly affirm, that there was never in this Kingdom,
nor in any other, the blood of a private Gentleman vindicated, Cum tanto motu
Regni, or to say better, Cum tanto plausu Regni: If it had concerned the King
or Prince there could not have been greater, or better Commissioners. The term
has been almost turned into a Iustium, or Vacancy; the people being more
willing to be lookers on in this business, than proceeders in their own. There
has been no care of discovery omitted, no moment of time lost; and therefore I
will conclude, with the saying of Solomon, this part of my Speech, Gloria
Deicelare rem, and gloria Regis scrutari rem, It is the glory of God to conceal
a thing, and it is the glory of the King to find it out. And his Majesty's
honor is the greater; for that he showed to the World this business, as it has
relation to my Lord of Somerset (whose Case in no sort I do fore-judg, being
ignorant of the secrets of the cause, but take him as the Law takes him,
hitherto for a suspect) I say the King has to his great honor showed, That
were any man in such a case of blood, as the Signet of his right hand (as the
Scripture says) he would put him off.

Now will I come to the particular Charge of these Gentlemen And first I will
by way of Narrative relate the Fact, with the occasion of it.

This wretched man Weston, who was the Actor, or Mechanical party in this
Impoysonment, the first day being indicted by a very substantial Jury of
selected Citizens, to the number of nineteen, who found Billa vera, yet
nevertheless at the first stood mute. But after some days intermission, it
pleased God to cast out the Dumb Devil, and he put himself upon his Trial, and
was by a Jury of great value, upon his own Confessions, and other testimonies,
found guilty: So as thirty and one sufficient Jurors have past upon him, and he
had also his Judgment and Execution awarded. After this, being in preparation
for another World, he sent for Sir Thomas Overbury's Father, and falling down
upon his knees, with great remorse and compunction asked him forgiveness; and
afterward again of his own motion, desired to have his like prayer of
forgiveness recommended to his Mother, who was absent. And at both times out of
the abundance of his heart confessed that he was to die justly, and that he was
worthy of death. And after again at his Execution (which is a kind of sealing
time of Confessions) even at the point of death (though there were Tempers
about him he did again confirm publicly, that his Examinations were true, and
that he had been justly and honorably dealt with. So here is a period of this
man, which was the subject of this calumny or affront of Justice. Wherein Mr.
Lumsden plays his part first, who in the time between Westons standing mute and
his Trial, frames a most odious and libellous Relation, containing as many
untruths as lines, sets it down in writing with his own hand, and delivers it
to one of the Bedchamber to be put into the Kings hands, falsifying all that
was done the first day of Westons Arraignment, turning the pike and point of
his imputations upon the Lord Chief Justice of England, whose name thus
occurring, I cannot pass by, and yet I cannot skill of this same Flattery, or
vulgar Attribute; but this I will say of him, and I would say as much to Ages,
That never man's person and his place were better met in a business, than my
Lord Cook, and my Lord Chief Justice, in the Cause of Overbury.

Now for the person of Master Lumsden, I know he is a Scotch Gentleman, and
thereby more ignorant of our Laws: but I cannot tell whether this does
extenuate his fault, or increase it; for as it may extenuate it in respect of
ignorance, so it does aggravate it much in respect of presumption, to meddle in
that he understood not, unless some other man's cunning wrought upon this man's
boldness. The infusion of a slander into a Kings ear, is of all forms of
Libels, and Slanders, the worst. It is true, that Kings may keep secret their
information, and then no man can enquire after them, while they are shrined in
their Breast: but where a King is pleased that a man shall answer for his false
information, diverse precedents of slanderous Petitions have been as severly
punished, as slanderous Libels.

For the Offense of Sir John Wentworth, and Sir John Hollis, which was, to
scandalize the Justice already past, or to cut off the thread of something that
is to come, these two Gentlemen came mounted on Horseback, and in a ruffling
and facing manner, presumed to Examine Weston, whether he did poison Overbury,
or no; directly cross to that which had been tried, and judged. For what was
the Point tried? That Weston had poisoned Overbury: And Sir John Wentworth's
question was, whether he did poison him? A direct Contradictory. Whereupon
Weston answered, that he did him wrong; and turning to the Sheriff, said, You
promised me I should not be troubled at this time; and yet nevertheless
Wentworth pressed him to answer, that he might pray with him. l know not that Sir
John Wentworth is an Ecclesiastic, that he should cut any man from communion
of Prayer; and for all this vexing of the spirit of a poor man, now in the gate
of death, Weston stood constant, and said, I die not unworthily, my Lord Chief
Justice has my mind under his hand, and he is an honorable and just Judge. Sir
John Hollis was not so much a Questionist, but wrought upon the other
Questions, and like a Counselor, wished him to discharge his Conscience, and to
satisfy the World: What World I marvel! It was the World at Tyburn: For the
World at Guildhall, and the World at London, were satisfied before; Test the
Bells that rang every where. But men have got a fashion now adays, that two or
three busy bodies will take upon them the name of the World, and broach their
own conceit, as if it were a general opinion. Well, what more? When they could
not work upon Weston, Sir John Hollis in an indignation, turned about his
horse, as the other was turning to his death, and said he was sorry of such a
Conclusion. That was to have the State honored or justified.

Sir John Hollis offense has another Appendix, before this in time, which was
at the day of the Trial. He presumed to give his Verdict openly, That if he
were of the Jury he would not doubt what to do. Marry he says he cannot well
tell whether he spoke this before the Jury had given up their Verdict or after.
Wherein there is little gained; for whether he were a Praejuror, or a
Postjuror, the one was to prejudice the Jury, the other was to attaint them.

The offense of these Gentlemen is greater and more dangerous than is
conceived. We have no Spanish Inquisition, no Justice in a corner, no gagging
of men's mouths at their death, but they may speak freely to the last; but then
it must come from the free motion of the party, not by tempting of Questions.
The Questions that are asked ought to tend to further revealing of their own,
or others guiltiness: But to use a Question in the nature of a cross
interrogatory, to falsify that which is Res judicata, is intolerable. That
were to erect a Court, or Commission of review at Tyburn, against the Court of
Westminster: For if the Answer be according to the Judgment past, it adds
credit to Justice; if it be contrary, it derogateth nothing, yet it subjecteth
the Majesty of Justice to a popular vulgar talk and opinion. My Lords, these
are great and dangerous offenses; for if we do not maintain Justice, Justice
will not maintain us.

Then the Examinations being read, and further aggravated against these three
Gentlemen, there passed Judgment upon them of Fine and lmprisonment.

Sir Thomas Monson, Sir Thomas Monson arraigned.
another of the Countesses Agents in this poisoning contrivance, had past one
days Trial at Guildhall. But the Lord Chief Justice Cook in his Rhetorical
Flourishes at his Arraignment, vented some expressions (which he either deduced
from Northamptons assuring the Lieutenant of the Tower, that the making away of
Sir Thomas Overbury would be acceptable to the King, or from some other secret
hint received) as if he could discover more than the death of a private person,
intimating, though not plainly, that Overburies untimely remove had something
in it of retaliation, as if he had been guilty of the same Crime against Prince
Henry, blessing himself with admiration at the horror of such actions. In which
he flew so high a pitch, that he was taken down by a Court Lure, Sir Thomas
Monsons Trial laid aside, and he soon after set at liberty, and the Lord Chief
Justices wings were clipped for it ever after.

And it was rumor'd, that the King (heightened to so much passion by this
eruption of Sir Edward Cooks) went to the Council Table, and kneeling down
there, desired God to lay a Curse upon him and his posterity for ever, if he
were consenting to Overburies death. But this cannot be asserted, being above
our Sphere: yet as Mathematicians do propose to themselves imaginary Circles,
for the several motions in the Heavens, and though there be none discovered,
yet they find the effects of what they apprehend: So the sudden stopping of
Monsons Trial, put strange imaginations into men's heads, and those seconded by
Reports too high for private discovery, The Lord Chief Justice blamed.
their operation only falling under the common notion. But the Lord Chief
Justice was blamed for flying out of his way; that having enough to prosecute
the business, he would grasp after more till he lost all: For this Crime was
thought second to none but the Gunpowder-plot; that would have blown up all
indeed at a blow (a merciful cruelty) this would have done the same by degrees,
a lingering, but as sure a way; one by one might have been culled out, till all
opposers had been removed: Besides, the other Plot was scandalous to Rome,
making Popery odious, this was scandalous to the Gospel ever since the first
Nullity. The Devil could not have invented a more mischievous practice to
Church and State.

The Lady Arabella dies.
The Lady Arabella dying about this time in the Tower, set men's tongues and
fears a work, that she went the same way. Such mischief does one evil action
introduce, that it makes a great Rode for Jealousy to pursue after it. The
Lady was Daughter to Charles Stuart, younger Brother to our Kings Father, by
Elizabeth Cavendish, who was married some years past to Sir William Seymaur,
Son to the Lord Beauchamp, and Grandchild to Edward Earl of Hertford; both at
some distance allied to the Crown, therefore such a Conjunction would not be
admitted in the Royal Almanac, so dreadful is every apparition that comes near
Princes Titles. Sir William Seymaur for the Marriage was committed to the
Tower, and the Lady Arabella confined to her House at High-gate. But after some
imprisonment they conclude to escape beyond Sea together, appointing to meet at
a certain place upon the Thames: Sir William leaving his man in his bed to act
his part with his Keeper, got out of the Tower in a disguise, and came to the
place appointed. She dressed like a young Gallant in man's attire, followed him
from her house, but staying long above the limited time, made him suspicious of
her interception, so that he sent away, leaving notice if she came, that he was
gone away, before to Dunkirk. She, good Lady fraught with more fears, and
lagging in her flights was apprehended, brought back to the Tower, and there
finished her earthly pilgrimage. She being dead, Sir William Seymaur got leave
to return home, and married since to the Lady Frances, Daughter to the late
noble Earl of Essex, a Lady in whose breast dwells as much Honor as can be
derived from noble Progenitors, William Seymour, Marquis and Earl of Hartford,
and Baron Beauchamp.
GRAVE PONDUS ILLA MAXIMA NOBILITAS PREMIT. Anno 1619.

by whom he has a very hopeful Issue, and by the death of his Grandfather was
Earl, and now is Marquess of Hertford.

And now the Temples of Ianus being shut, Warlike Abilliaments grew rusty, and
Bellona put on Masking-attire; for Scotland bought her Peace at a good rate,
Peace every where.
and Ireland found the fruits of hers growing up to her hand. Those Irish that
had great Estates (though rude enough) the King suppled and tamed with Honors,
and they that had little were content calmly to suck in what they had, and
battel'd by it, so that they wanted nothing but moderation to make them happy.
These Halcion days shined round about us. The influence of our Kings peaceable
mind; had almost an universal operation Spains ambition was contented to be
bounded by the Pirene Hills, and the Atlantic Ocean, sucking in the fruits of
Italy and Sicily, and hoarding up the Treasures of the Indies, willingly
singing a Requiem to the Netherlands, France wanting Exercise surfeited with
diseases at home, which by fits broke out into Tumors among themselves. The
Germans swelled into a Dropsy of Voluptuousness, by Plenty, and the sweets of
Peace, Politic Bodies are like Natural; Full feeding contracts, gross humors,
which will have vent. Only such Exercise as may refine, and keep the spirits
active, and digest the grosser and fulginous matter, strengthens the Nerves of
a Kingdom, or Republic. Nothing now but bravery and feasting, the Parents of
Debauchery and Riot, flourished among us. There is no Theme for History when
men spill more drink than blood; when plots and contrivances for Lust, acted in
dark corners, are more practiced than Stratagems in War; and when the Stages
with silken Pageants and Poppets, that slacken the sinews, are more frequented
than those Theaters of Honor, where Industry brawns and hardens the Arms: Peace
is a great Blessing, if it bring not a Curse with it; but War is more happy in
its effects than it, especially if it takes away the distemper that grows by
long surfets, without destroying the Body. But since these buskind ornaments
are wanting, we must imbellish our Discourses with such passages as paced up
and down in the sock of Peace.

There had been in Prince Henry's time a Treaty of Marriage betwixt him and a
Daughter of Spain, The King think of a match for his Son Prince Charles.
which took no effect. Our King was real in his intentions, not willing to have
his Sons Beams to display themselves but in a Royal Horizon. The Spanish policy
clouded the business with delays, whether from the old grudg that was betwixt
Queen Katharine and Henry the eighth, or the difference between the Nations in
Religion? But the Spanish Courtesy being loath directly and point blank to tell
our King, he liked not the Conjunction, went with a slow-paced Gravity, such as
he thought befitted the Civility of Princes, and gave a little light to hope
that it might be accomplished. But Salisbury and others that managed those
great affairs then, did at this chink discover, that their formalities were but
Spanish Complements, which like the air that gave them being, soon vanished
away. After this our Kings thoughts cast about, how he might provide a fit
match for Prince Charles, who shined in the same sphere of Honor (that his
Brother left for a better) but not so much enlightened with the peoples love,
being less active and splendid, and (that I may not call it sullenness) more
reserved. The German Dames were discoursed on (where his Sister shined in her
Glory) as being of the same Religion, and more suitable in Christian Policy;
but they were (in a manner) Subjects to the Emperor, and that would give an
allay to the Super-elementary extraction of Kings, which should be of a higher
Origin, to amuse, and that they might be the more admired by their people, and
therefore not so fitting in State Policy. And seeing there were small hopes
expected from Spain, a Daughter to Henry the great, late King of France, was
aimed at, and Sir Thomas Edmonds, our Kings Lieger Ambassador, had (long before
this time) made his little addresses, superficially, and founded the Chanel,
but he met some Rocks and Remoras in the way, so that he could not discover
clearly their intentions; and the King was loath to express himself plainly,
lest he should receive an affront. And now sending (as he thought it civilly
necessary) an Extraordinary Ambassador to congratulate the King of France his
Marriage with Anna the Infanta of Spain, he thought it good policy to take this
occasion to make a stricter scrutiny whether there were any ground to rest upon
for matching his Son.

The Lord Hays sent into France.
And who is fitter for that employment, being only for Courtship and Bravery,
than the Lord Hayes, a Gentleman whose Composition of mind tended that way? He
was born in Scotland, where bravery was in no superfluity, bred up in France,
where he could not have it in extravagancy, but he found it in England, and
made it his vanity. The King had a large hand, and he had a large heart, and
though he were no great Favorite ever, yet he was never but in favor. He with
a great Train of young Noblemen, and other Courtiers of eminency, suited
themselves with all those ornaments that could give luster to so dazelling an
appearance as Love, and the Congratulation of it carried with it. All the study
was, who should be most glorious, and he had the happiest fancy, whose
invention could express something Novel, neat and unusual, that others might
admire. So that Huntingtons Prophecy was fulfilled here, 6 lib. H. Hunt.
when speaking of the time of the Scots Conquest of England, he said, Multimoda
variatione vestium and indumentorum designaretur. I remember I saw one of the
Lord Ambassadors Suits (and pardon me that I take notice of such petty things)
the Cloak and Hose were made of very fine white Beaver, imbroidered richly all
over with Gold and Silver; the Cloak, almost to the Cape, within and without,
having no lining but imbroidery, The Doublet was Cloth of Gold, The Lord Hayes
rides in state to the Court.
imbroidered so thick, that it could not be discerned, and a white Beaver-hat
suitable, Brimfull of imbroidery, both above and below. This is presented as an
Essay, for one of the meanest he wore, so that if this Relation should last
longer than his old clothes, the Reader might well think it a Romance,
favoring rather of Fancy than Reality.

But this kind of Vanity had been long active in England: For the last
Parliament it was moved by some well-affected to Reformation of the Abuses of
excess in Apparel, that there might be a Regulation of this kind of Gallantry,
to the distinguishing of men one from another; For (it was said) some of means
Fortunes wore Garments fitter for Princes than Subjects; and many Gentry of
ancient descent had wasted, and impoverished themselves and their Posterities
with this extravagancy, so that it was very requisite to give some stop to this
redundant humor. To which was answered, That if those of mean Fortunes went so
richly attired, and came not honestly by their ornaments, they would be quickly
found out, and there were good Laws enough for such Transgressors. But as there
is no perpetuity of Being on Earth, so there is a continual vicissitude and
revolution in all sublunary things, some are advanced, and some decline, God
pulls down one, and sets up another. If any Noble, or anciently descended
Family will be so mad and foolish to beggar themselves and their Posterities
with this, or any other excess, it is very probable that some man of more wisdom
and merit will enjoy that which the other has so idly and prodigally
misspent; for to set such limitations will damp the spirits of Industry. So the
motion was declined.

But to return to the Lord Hayes. Thus accoutred and accomplished, he went into
France, and a day for Audience being prefixed, all the argument and dispute
betwixt him and his gallant Train (which took up some time) was, how they
should go to the Court, Coaches, like Curtains, would eclipse their splendour;
riding on horsback in Boots, would make them look like Travelers, not
Courtiers; and not having all Foot-cloaths it would be an unsuitable mixture:
Those that brought rich trappings for their Horses, were willing to have them
seen, so it was concluded for the Foot-cloth, and those that have none (to
their bitter cost) must furnish themselves. This preparation begot expectation,
and that filled all the Windows, Balcones, and Streets of Paris as they passed
with a multitude of Spectators, Six Trumpeters, and two Marshals (in Tawny
Velvet Liveries, completely Suited, laced all over with Gold, richly, and
closely laid) led the way; the Ambassador followed with a great Train of Pages
and Footmen in the same rich Livery, incircling his Horse, and the rest of his
Retinue according to their Qualities and Degrees, in as much bravery as they
could devise, or procure, followed in couples, to the wonderment of the
beholders. And some said (how truly I cannot assert) the Ambassadors Horse was
shod with Silver-shooes, lightly tackt on; and when he came to a place where
Persons, or Beauties of eminency were, his very Horse prancing, and curveting,
in humble reverence flung his shoes away, which the greedy understanders
scrambled for, and he was content to be gazed on, and admired, till a Farrier,
or rather the Argentier in one of his rich Liveries, among his train of
Footmen, out of a Tawny Velvet bag took others, and tackt them on, which lasted
till he came to the next troop of Grandies: And thus with much ado he reached
the Louure.

All Complements and outward Ceremonies of State being performed, the Lord
Ambassador made his business known by more private addresses, which in
appearance was well resented, but indeed not intended, and came to no effect:
For the Duke of Savoy had anticipated the young Ladies affection for the Prince
of P^emont his Son. The Savoyan Agents bringing more Gold in their hands than
on their backs, had so smoothed the way, that not only those about the
Princess, but the great ones themselves were made workers for him. After the
Ambassador had been feasted magnificently, with all his gallant Train, in
several places, to show the Grandeur of France, he came over into England, and
practiced it here, making many times upon several occasions such stupendous
Feasts, and heaped Banquets, as if all the Creatures had contributed to his
excess. I know not what limits or bounds are set to the glories of Princes
Courts, or Nobles minds. We see the Sea it self, and all his tributary Rivers,
do ebb and flow, but if they swell so high, to overflow that Bank, that Reason
has prescribed to keep them in, what Inundations of sad mischief follow,
Experience shows.

A Breach betwixt the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice.
A little before this time there was a breach between the Lord Chief Justice
Cook, and the Lord Chancellor Ellesmer, which made a passage to both their
declines. Sir Edward Cook had heard and determined a Cause at the Common Law,
and some report there was juggling in the business. The Witness that knew, and
should have related the Truth, was wrought upon to be absent, if any man would
undertake to excuse his non appearance, A pragmatical fellow of the party
undertook it, went with the Witness to a Tavern, called for a Gallon pot full
of Sack, bid him drink, and so leaving him went into the Court. CHRISTINE DE
FRANCE DVCHESSE DE SAVOYE. Balt. Moncornet. ex.
CAROLVS, EMANVEL DVC DE SAVOYE ET PRINCE DE PIEDMONT.
This Witness is called for as the prop of the Cause, the Undertaker answers
upon Oath, He left him in such a condition, that if he continues in it but a
quarter of an hour, he is a dead man. This evidencing the man's incapability to
come, deaded the matter so, that it lost the Cause. The Plantiffs that had the
Injury bring the business about in Chancery: The Defendants (having had
Judgment at Common Law) refuse to obey the Orders of that Court, whereupon the
Lord Chancellor for contempt of the Court commits them to prison. They petition
against him in the Star Chamber, the Lord Chief Justice joins with them,
foments the difference, threatening the Lord Chancellor with a Praemunire. The
Chancellor makes the King acquainted with the business, who sent to Sir Francis
Bacon his Attorney General, Sir Henry Montague, and Sir Randolph Crew his
Sergeants at Law, and Sir Henry Yelverton his Solicitor, commanding them to
search what Presidents there have been of late years, wherein such as
complained in Chancery were relieved according to Equity and Conscience, after
judgment at Common Law. These being men well versed in their Profession (after
canvassing the matter thoroughly) returned answer to the King, That there has
been a strong current of Practice and proceeding in Chancery, after Judgment at
Common Law, and many times after Execution, continued since Henry the sevenths
time, to the Lord Chancellor that now is, both in the Reigns ( seriatim) of the
several Kings, and the times of the several Chancellors, whereof diverse were
great learned men in the Law; It being in Cases where there is no Remedy for
the Subject by the strict course of the Common Law unto which the Judges are
sworn. This satisfied the King, justified the Lord Chancellor, and the Chief
Justice received the foil: Which was a bitter potion to his spirit, but not
strong enough to work on him as his Enemies wished.

Therefore to humble him more, The Chief Justice is humbled.
he is brought on his knees at the Council Table, and three other Ingredients
added to the Dose, of a more active operation.

First, He is charged, That when he was the Kings Attorney, in the beginning of
his Reign, he concealed a Statute of twelve thousand pounds, due to the King
from the late Lord Chancellor Hatton, wherein he deceived the trust reposed in
him.

Secondly, That he uttered words of very high contempt as he sat in the seat
of Justice, saying the Common Law of England would be overthrown, and the light
of it obscured, reflecting upon the King. And thirdly, His uncivil and
indiscreet carriage before His Majesty (being assisted by his Privy Council and
Judges) in the Case of Commendams.

The last he contest, and humbly craved his Majesty's Pardon. The other two he
palliated with some colorable excuses, which were not so well set off, but
they left such a tincture behind that he was commanded to a private life. And
to expiate the Kings anger, he was enjoined in that leisurely retirement to
review his Books of Reports, which the King was informed had many extravagant
opinions, published for positive and good Law, which must be corrected, and
brought to his Majesty to be perused. But the Title of the Books wherein he
styles himself Lord Chief Justice of England, was to be expunged, being but
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. And at his departure from the Council
Table (where he humbly acknowledged his Majesty's mercy, and their Lordships
justice) the Lord Treasurer gave him a wipe, for suffering his Coachman to ride
bare before him in the streets; which fault he strove to cover, by telling his
Lordship, his Coachman did it for his own ease. But not long after the Lord
Treasurer came under his lash in the Star Chamber, and he requited him for it.

His Faults.
While he was under this Clond, all his faults were ripped up, either by his
Enemies, or his Well-wishers, who advise him to be humbled for this Visitation.
That Affliction only levels the mole-hils of pride in us, plows up the heart,
and makes it fit for Wisdom to sow her seed, and Grace to bring forth her
increase. That he delighted to speak much, which becomes a Pleader, and not a
Judge; for so his affections were entangled with a liking of his own arguments,
and an undervaluing of others; when having a large and fruitful mind, he should
not labor so much what to speak, as what to leave unspoken. Such lusty soyls
are often to be weeded! That he was wont to praise, and dispraise, upon slight
grounds, the same man, and that sometimes suddenly, so that his reproofs, or
commendations, are neglected and contemned; when as the censure of a Judge
(coming slowly, but surely) should be a brand to the guilty, and a crown to the
virtuous. That he will jest at any man in public, without respect of the
Persons dignity, or his own; which disgraceth his gravity, more than it can
advance the opinion of his wit. That he makes the Law to lean a little too much
to his own opinion, whereby he shows himself a legal Tyrant, striking with that
Weapon whom he pleases, being able to turn the edg any way. That having the
living of a thousand, he has no bowels of compassion to men in want; the hand
that has taken so much, can give little, but gets, gets still, as if he did
try how much he could gather to account for at the great and general Audit day.
That in the Case of Overbury, he used too many delays, till Delinquents hands
were loose, and his bound; in which slowness he was a Fabins, but the humor of
Marcellus would have done better; Vera Effigies Viri clariss EDOARDI COKE
Equitis aurati nuper Capitalis Iusticiarij ad Placita coram Rege tenenda
assignati R: White sculpsit
for he stopped the Confessions and Accusations of some, that would have spoken
enough to remove more stumbling blocks out of his way; and yet he did not this
in favor of any, but out of present unadvised humor, supposing enough behind
to discover all; which fell not out so: And therefore, though he were to be
commended for what he did, yet he is to be reprehended for many Circumstances
in the doing; and these are now briers in his sides, and thorns in his eyes.
Much more, to this purpose, was written to him, and vented against him.

Truly he was a Man of excellent parts, And short Character.
but not without his frailties: for as he was a Storehouse and Magazine of the
Common Law, for the present times; and laid such Foundation for the future,
that Posterity may for ever build on; So his passions and pride so were
predominant, that boiling over, he lost (by them) much of his own fullness,
which extinguished not only the valuation, but respect to his merit: So often
is that heat, that gives life to noble Parts, by a circular motion, the ruin of
them! Yet to cool his distemper, and to bring him to himself, he is within a
short time called to the Council Table, the King being loath to lose his
abilities.

The Lord Chancellor Ellesmer also about this time, The Lord Chancellor retires.
weary of his public employment, and weakened with age, desired the Kings leave
to retire, that he might make use of the short time left him, to cast up his
accounts for another World: The King gave the Seal, and the place of Lord
Chancellor, to Sir Francis Bacon, his Attorney Ceneral; and the old Lord
Ellesmer wore out the remnant of his life in quiet, dying in a good old age.
and full of virtuous fame, leaving a Noble Posterity, who enjoy a great Estate
with the Title of Earl of Bridgwater.

Time and Age had also worn out Sir Ralph Winwood, Sir Ralph Winwood dies.
the Kings able, faithful, and honest Servant, and Secretary; who dying, Sir
Robert Nanton, and Sir George Calvert, were made Secretaries; men of contrary
Religions, and Factions (as they were then styled) Calvert being an
Hispaniolized Papist: the King matching them together, like contrary Elements,
to find a medium betwixt them.

But the greatest remove was the Lord Treasurers staff, The Lord Treasurer
questioned in Star Chamber.
which was broken by Somersets fall, the way being now made plain, and laid
open, that discovered the Treasurers imperfections, and his Wives corruptions:
The Lady keeping the Shop, and Sir John Binglie, her Officer, crying, What do you
lack? as the new Lord Chancellor Bacon was pleased to express himself in the
Star Chamber; whither the business being brought, the sore was opened, and all
the bad humors flow to the ill-affected part. Bribery and Extortion is the
matter that appears, which is squeezed out, and aggravated by Sir Edward Cook,
(newly perkt up, such is the Worlds bucket!) who very learnedly cited many
Precedents of Treasurers in former Kings Reigns, that miscarried, and their
several punishments.

He begins with Randulphus de Britton, Treasurer to King Henry the third, who
had mis-imployed the Kings Treasure, deceived the King in his Office, for which
he was questioned, his Lands and Goods seized into the Kings hands, and sent
prisoner to the Tower, where he submitted himself to the King, confessed his
fault, gave up his place, and pro Gratia habenda (says the Record) obtained
Restitution of his Goods and Lands, paying only three thousand pounds Fine.
This was a piece of Wisdom (says he) as well as Humility; alluding to the
present Lord Treasurers stout heart that would not submit.

The second was Petrus de Rivallis, who was Treasurer of Ireland, and
Chamberlain of England in Edward the firsts time, who had taken Bribes in his
Office, Tam de Religiosis, quam de Laicis. Of which being convicted, he lost
his place, and was put to his Fine and Ransom.

And in the same Kings Reign, The Abbot of Westminster, and his virtuous Monks,
took out of the Kings Treasure at Westminster many thousand pounds, Ad
inastimabile damnum Regis and Regni. The Abbot being sent to the Tower, and the
Monks disposed to several prisons, and notwithstanding they pleaded Privilege
of Clergymen for their Trial, yet in the Case of imbezelling the Kings
Treasure, they had no Privilege, but the Temporalities of the Abbey were seized
for satisfaction.

Cov. and Lichf.
In King Edward the seconds time, Walter de Langton, a Bishop, was Treasurer to
the King; He did take of the Earl of Montealto to be a friend to him ( in
agendis negotiis versus dominum Regem) a hundred pounds (the said Earl being a
prisoner) to let him go free to do his business. And this was given, as the
Record speaks, De spontanea voluntate, for a Gratuity, and ex curialitate sua,
for his courtesy, yet this was adjudged Extortion and Bribery. Again, John de
Engam was indicted of Trespass by this Bishop for the Manor of Fisbie,
whereunto the King pretended Title, and was by the Bishop imprisoned for the
Trespass. But afterward another Manor was conveyed to this Bishop, ob
diversas curialitates, for courtesies that he had done, and so Engam was
discharged of his Indictment, and though that the Bishop pleaded, that Voluntas
Regis potius ad imprisonamentam quam ad sinem, because it was the Kings
pleasure rather to punish by Imprisonment than Fine, yet this was adjudged
Bribery. Again, the Bailiff of Oxford was committed for Arrerages of a hundred
pounds in his Account, and thereupon the Manor of Calcot was conveyed unto the
Bishop, and the Bishop of his pure devotion did discharge him of that
Imprisonment. But these were Pleas and Flourishes of guilty men, as the Record
says, but they were all three judged Extortion and Bribery; and for these the
Bishop was put from his place, fined, and committed to the Tower.

William Lord Latimer, in Edward the thirds time, being appointed to pay the
Kings debts, did buy in some of them at lower rates than was due, as eighty
pounds for a hundred, and thirty pounds for forty; By which course he made the
King a Bankrupt Compounder, and for this he was fined, and lost all his Offices.

In like case was the Lord Nevil, who was trusted to pay the Army, but he
bought the debt of them, and justified, that they gave him the remainder of
their free gift, but for this he was fined, and committed to the Tower.

These, and many other precedents and examples, armed with Authority and
Antiquity, were mustered up, and the Lord Treasurers miscarriages exasperated,
especially for embezelling those Moneys the King lately received of the State
of the Netherlands for the redemption of the cautionary Towns, Flushing, and
Brill, which the King was forced to relinquish again to the States, because he
had no money to pay the Soldiers there; and that money being designed for the
lrish Army (which was also in great Want) it was thought the more heinous, and
a double miscarriage, being it was so dearly bought, and so unduly spent. But
the Earl himself being a man of a noble disposition (though too indulgent to
his too active Wife) had retained the Kings favor, if he had taken Sir Edward
Cooks counsel, and submitted and not strove to justify his own integrity,
which he maintained with a great deal of confidence, till it was too late, for
then his submission did him little good. But his Wives faults being imputed to
him, he was fined thirty thousand pounds, and imprisonment in the Tower; Sir
John Bingly fined two thousand pounds, and imprisonment in the Fleet: For it
was thought the Lord and Lady could not have found the way into these obscure,
low, and dark contrivances, without the light of his help. Which Sentence was
pronounced by the Lord Chancellor Bacon, who though he were of transcendent
parts, yet was he tainted with the same infection, and not many years after
perished in his own corruption; which shows, That neither Example nor Precept
(he having seen so many, and been made capable of so much) can be a Pilot
sufficient to any Port of Happiness (though Reason be never so able to direct)
if Grace does not give the gate.

But the King, The King comes to the Star Chamber.
more to exalt Justice, and to show the people, his high abilities, came in
June this year to the Star Chamber, where in a long, and well-weighed
Discourse, he turns over the volume of his mind, that the World might read his
excellent parts in lively characters.

He told the Lords he came thither in imitation of Henry the seventh his great
Predecessor, and the reason he came no sooner was, that he resolved with
Pythagoras, for seven years to keep silence, and learn the Laws of the Kingdom,
before he would teach others, and the other seven years he was studying to find
an occasion to come, that might not be with prejudice: For in his own cause he
could not come; in a great cause betwixt man and man, it might be thought some
particular favor brought him thither; and in a small Cause it was not fit for
him to come; but now he had so much to say in relation to good Government, that
he could no longer forbear.

First, He charges himself. Secondly, The judges. Thirdly, The Auditory in
general.


In his own Charge he lays a foundation for raising a most excellent structure
in Government, wherein he was a Master-workman, and had a most admirable
Theory, and full abilities to put it in practice, and happily the bent of his
intentions tended that way, though it had for the most part a loose strong.

And to that which concerned the Judges, he not only reckons up their Duties in
their public Relation, but shows them the Jurisdiction and power of their
several Courts, how far every one did extend, to which he would have them
limited, that they might not clash and contest one against another, to shake
the Basis on which they were built, but that there might be a harmony and sweet
concordance among them, Expressing himself with such Elegance and Prudence,
that the most studious Lawyer (whose design had been to imbellish a Discourse
fitting for the ears of his Prince) could not have gone beyond what he expressed
to his People; so strong and retentive was his judgment, and memory, so
natural, and genuine that which came from them, that it did emanare, flow from
him to the admiration of the hearers.

To the people in general, and Underofficers, he gave an admonition to submit
to the Law, and Justice of the Land, and not to go upon new Puritan strains
(such was his expression) to make all things popular, but to keep themselves
within the ancient limits of Obedience: For he feared Innovation as a Monster
got loose, which should be always kept in such a Labyrinth, as none should come
at, but by the Clew of Reason.

Then he commands the Judges in their Circuits to take notice of those Justices
of the Peace, that were most active for the good of the Country, that they
might have encouragement from him. For (to use his own words) I value them that
serve me faithfully there, equally with those that attend my person. Therefore
let none be ashamed of this Office, or be discouraged in being a Justice of the
Peace, if he serve worthily in it.

The Chancellor under me makes Justices, and puts them out; but neither I, nor
he, can tell what they are: therefore we must be informed by you, Judges, who
can only tell, who do well, and who do ill, without which how can the good be
cherished, and the rest put out? the good Justices are careful to attend the
service of the King and Country; the bad are idle slow-bellies, that abide
always at home, given to a life of ease and delight, liker Ladies than Men; and
think it is enough to contemplate Justice, when as, Virtusin action consistet;
contemplative Justice is no Justice, and contemplative Justices are fit to be
put out.

Another sort of Justices, are Busybodies, and will have all men dance after
their Pipe, and follow their Greatness, or else will not be content: A sort of
men, Qui se primos omnium esse putant, nec sunt tamen: These proud spirits must
know that the Country is ordained to follow God, and the King, and not them.

Another sort are they that go seldom to the Kings service, but when it is to
help some of their Kindred or Alliance; so they come to help there Friends, or
hurt their Enemies, making Jugice serve for a shadow to Faction, and
tumultuating the Country.

Another sort are Gentlemen of great worth in their own conceit, and cannot be
content with the present form of Government, but must have a kind of liberty in
the people, and must be gracious Lords, and Redeemers of their Liberty; and in
every cause that concerns Prerogative give a snatch against Monarchy, through
their Puritanical itching after Popularity, some of them have showed themselves
too bold of late in the lower House of Parliament; And when all is done, if
there were not a King, they would be less cared for than other men. So wise the
Kings fears made him, and so wary to prevent the popular violence! And even in
these Infant-times, the contention does appear, which afterward got more
strength, when by his power he had gained in every County such as he made
subservient to his will: For as the King strove to loosen the Piles and Banks
of the peoples liberties, so the people strove to bound, and keep off the
Inundation of his Prerogative.

Then he takes notice of the swarms of Gentry, that through the instigation of
their Wives, or to new model and fashion their Daughters (who if they were
unmarried marred their Marriages, if married, lost their Reputations, and rob
their husbands purses) did neglect their Country Hospitality, and cumber the
City, a general Nuisance to the Kingdom, being as the spleen to the Body, which
as in measure it over-grows, the Body wastes; and seeing a Proclamation will not
keep them at home, he requires that the power of the Star Chamber may not only
regulate them, but the exorbitancy of the new buildings about the City (which
he still much repined at) being a shelter for them; A. Reg. 15. An. Christi
1617.
where they spent their Estates in Coaches, Lacquies, and fine Clothes, like
Frenchmen; living miserably in their houses, like Italians; becoming Apes to
other Nations: Whereas it was the honor of the English Nobility and Gentry
(above all Countries in the World) to be hospitable among their Tenants; Which
they may the better do, by the fertility and abundance of all things. Thus the
King pried into every miscarriage, being willing to reform these (then growing)
abuses.

Unstable spirits mutable.
But among all the heights of Reason that the spirit of man does actuate, and
give life to, the highest and most transcendent is that of Religion, which as
it partakes more or less of Faith, so it inclines more or less to Fancy:
Wavering and unstable minds are not only blown about with the wind of every
opinion, but pride and discontent (conjoined often, though of different
operations) are engines sufficient to shake the foundation, though never so
firmly settled. Some men turn over the leaf of Conscience, and change a good
Religion for a worse; some the leaf of Policy, leaving an evil Religion for a
better: but these kind of spirits will not be brought under by fasting and
prayer, unless it be by him that can discover the heart of hypocrisy, though
in as variable a capacity as the countenance.

The Archbishop of Spalato comes into England.
These times gave examples of both these humors, some that went from us to
Rome, and some that came from Rome to us. Among the rest, one of eminency,
Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, a man old and corpulent,
unfit for Travel, being almost at his journies end by Nature, came into England
with as little Grace. Here he preaches, rails, and writes against Rome,
(extolling the Protestant Religion) till he came to be Dean of Windsor, and
Master of the Savoy, which some few years he enjoyed; Then, whether he had
higher hopes homewards, or the humor and fancy altering, like a wandering Star,
he goes Retrograde, placing himself again in the Roman Calendar: but he is made
to reckon at Rome by the Gregorian account; And though he thought himself in a
full Conjunction with the Stars there of the greatest Magnitude (having
publicly recanted, and as bitterly reproached the Protestant Doctrine there,
as he had exalted it here) yet the Inquisition had so strong an influence upon
him, that it hindered the operation of it, for he died in Prison, Dies at Rome.
and they buried him both like a new Heretic, and an old Emperor, committing
his Body to the Flames. Such honor have all such Saints! For they hold it as a
Maxim, That that foundation is never again to be built upon, that was once of a
tottering temper.

France in combustion.
About this time, France raging with passion, played her bloody pranks. There is
in that Kingdom a mad Genius domineering, M. ANT. DE DOMINIS COM. PAL. ARCHIEP.
SPALAT. DALM. ET CROAT. PRIMAS
NICOLAS DE LHOSPITAL MARQVIS de Vitry et d'Arc, Comte de Chasteauuillain,
premier Marshall de France, Chler des Ordres du Roy. Gouuerneur de Meaux,
Lieuten^ gua^l eu Brie. Gou^ur. pourle Roy en se^ pais et arm^es de Prouence.
Fills de Louis de lhospital Seigr. de Vitry, et de Francoise de Brichanteau. Fut
longtemps Cap.ne des gardes du Corpse du feu Roy Louis 13, qui sen
seruitvtilenv. pour estoufer la naissance dime querre Civil, eu la p^rsoue du
M. dAncre: qui diuisoittous les Francois Arachantile^ma iiis decet ambitieux
fauory: les pretextes aux malcontens. Cet incomparable coup deiustice de graud
Priuce, marquera a iamais quil estoit diumem inspire pour le salut de son
Estat, et le repos de ses sujet^: sinous faisons reflection surnos miseres
presents. Mr de Vitry fut rescompensepar S.M. du bastou de M.al de France en
1617. et conduit pompeusem au Palais le iour de sa reception. Le Roy le fit
aussi en 1619 son Gna^l. d'Armee contre les Princes, retirez en Champagne. lan
1622 il fut laisse au blocus de la Rochelle auec le feu Conte de Soissons
Comandant l'armee du Roy, et donna les premiers aduis pour la construction de
limportant fort Louis. Il fit encore paroistre son courage et sa bonne
conduitte par la prise de forte place de Royan. Bref et dans la paix et dans la
guerre il sest tousiours monstre inesbranlable au service du Roy. Son Zele a
lavraye Religion^^ 'ay ant pas moins paru que sa ualeur dans les Combats. Il
fute estaby Gouuer.^ur de Provence en 1632, ou: l contibua de ses soms pour
lataque des Isles de S.t Honorat en suitte dequoy il ressenlit un reuers de la
Fortune parsa prison dans la Basti I Will, dou il ne sortit qu en 1642: apres la
mort du Card.al de Richelieu. Il mourut de Malady le 2^ Septembre 1644, ayant
laisse plusieurs enfans de Dame Lucresse Bouhyer sa fe^e, quilespousa en 1617;
alors Veufue du Marquis de Noirmoutier. son Corpse ^ist a Chastenuuillain.

FRANCOIS DE BOVRBON PRINCE DE CONTY.
which like Climaterical Diseases, take rest, and after some intermission break
out again. The very same Tragedy acted at this time, was newly revived there
three and thirty years after, as is now in the year 1650. perspicuous to every
eye of Reason; the Persons in power the same, running all in one parallel. The
Queen Mother and the Marquess D' Ancre then, the Queen Mother and the Cardinal
Mazarino now; both Aliens, both Favorites. The Prince of Conde (the Head, and
prime of the Nobility) imprisoned then, for opposing the swelling greatness of
that Favorite; The Prince of Conde, and the other Princes, Conti and
Longuevil, imprisoned now (though since set at liberty, having a powerful Army
afoot) for opposing this. The Nobility rise in Arms against the young King, and
his Mother, to assist the Princes; so they do now. The Complaints and
Grievances are the same; The Princes repined that such an Upstart should manage
all the great Affairs with so much licentiousness, and they sit still as
lookers on, and have nothing to do; All Offices, both Civil and Military,
bringing their Garlands, and strowing their choicest flowers at Marshal D'
Ancre's feet, which stunk in their Nostrils, and they infected the People, who
are there but what the great Ones will make them; so that the Kingdom groaned
under the insolences of an insulting Mushroom, bred from the excrescency of
Royal humors, as it does now. Lewis the 14. fights with his Subjects now upon
the same account that Lewis the 13. did then. But I can only give a Catastrophe
to one of these Tragedies; the last Act of this now a playing wants its Exit.

And to conclude the first, Lewis the 13. finding his Mothers power swell so
high, as to threaten a deluge of Noble Blood, for the preservation of a
Mechanic Florentine, and willing to be rid of a Governess, who eclipsed his
Glory, commanded Monsieur De Vitry, Captain of his Guard, to seize on the
Marquess at his first access to Court. The Marquess (being then in his
Government in Normandy, placing and displacing Officers, for his greater
security) hearing there were new Whisperers admitted to the King, came to the
Court in a full career, with a ruffling Retinue at his heels, thinking to
remove all Obstacles in his way; but there he met the great One, Death, waiting
for him, that his policy and high-flying thoughts never minded: For he had no
sooner entered the Gates of the Louure, but De Vitry arrested him; and seeing
him step back upon his arrest, as it were to lay hold on his Sword: he killed
him instantly with a Pistol; The noise whereof put the whole Court into an
uproar. The King approved the Fact, the Queen lamented it; but she must mourn
no longer in the Court, therefore removed thence with a small Train, to
practice her Italian Artifices, as she afterward did, to the disturbance of
most parts of Christendom The poor Marquess rested not in death; for though he
was privately buried that night, yet the rage and malice of the People lighted
them to his Grave the next day, and tearing him thence, and tying his naked
body to an Asses tail, drew him through the Streets of Paris, and hanged him by
the heels upon a Gibbet on the new Bridge; where they cut off flakes of his
Body, to send as Presents to their Friends. And when they had satiated
themselves thus, they took down the mangled Carcass, and made another Progress
through the City, till wearied with their Delight, they strove ^o burn the
Body, to be rid of it: but the fire being not so active as their malice, they
threw the tattered bones into the River; so that their Rage pulled him out of
the Earth, hung him in the Air, burnt him in the Fire, and left him in the
Water. And (as they thought) to leave no memory of him, pulled down his house
to the ground; which was afterward ratified by public justice, and his Wife
was condemned by the same, and burned for a Witch. And to make their names the
more odious, their very birthplaces were ripped up, and they were both found to
proceed from the dunghils of Florence. Thus ended this sad Tragedy; which
serves as Lights and Sea-marks of Mortality, to teach us how to steer our
brittle Bark in this Worlds Tempest, that we bear not too much sail, but keep a
moderate and even course, betwixt the rocks of pride, and shallows of contempt;
both which are equally dangerous.

The King goes into Scotland.
Our King dedicated this Summer to the Northern Climate; it is now fourteen
years Revolution, since the beams of Majesty appeared in Scotland. He begins
his Journey with the Spring, warming the Country as he went, with the Glories
of the Court: Taking such Recreations by the way, as might best beguile the
days, and cut them shorter; but lengthen the nights (contrary to the Seasons)
For what with Hawking, Hunting, and Horse-racing, the days quickly ran away;
and the nights with Feasting, Masking and Dancing, were the more extended. And
the King had fit Instruments for these Sports about his Person, as Sir George
Goring, Sir Edward Zouch, Sir John Finnit, and others, that could fit and
obtemperate the Kings Humor: For he loved such Representations, and Disguises
in their Maskaradoe^, as were witty, and sudden; the more ridiculous, the more
pleasant.

His new Favorite
And his new Favorite, being an excellent Dancer, brought that Pastime into
the greater Request. To speak of his Advancement by Degrees, were to lessen the
Kings Love; for Titles were heaped upon him, they came rather like showers than
drops. For as soon as Somerset declined he mounted. Such is the Court motion!
Knighthood, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber, were the first sprinklings: and
then the old Earl Edward Somerset Earl of Worcester.
of Worcester (who had been long Master of the Horse to the late Queen, and
continued it to this time) was made Lord Privy Seal, in exchange of his place,
and a good sum of money put into the Scale: And Sir George Villers (Baron of
Whaddon, Viscount Villers, Made Earl of Buckingham.
and Earl of Buckingham, also of the Privy Council) is made Master of the
Horse. In this glory he visits Scotland with the King, and is made a Privy
Counselor there. Favorites are not complete Figures, if the Princes Bounty be
not circular, as well in his Northerly motion as his Southerly. He now reigns
sole Monarch in the Kings affection, every thing he does is admired for the
doers sake. No man dances better, no man runs, or jumps better; and indeed he
jumpt higher than ever Englishman did in so short a time, from a private
Gentleman to a Dukedom. But the King is not well without him, his company is
his solace, and the Court Grandees cannot be well but by him, so that all
addresses are made to him, either for place, or office in Court or
Commonwealth. The Bishops Seas did also ebb and slow, from the Wane or Fullness
of his Influence upon them; and having a numerous kindred of the rank of
Gentry, which he planted about him, as a Nursery in the Court, to make them
virescere, and Spring up the better, the Dew of these Offices, and the fresh
Springs that came from those Seas must be contributed. It cannot with modesty
be expressed how greedily some of our Prelates would clear all the passages of
a bad Conscience, to bring in such Waters of comfort, lest it should bespatter
the more worthy, and brand them all with Simony, which dares not be done. But
where God has his Church, the Devil many times will have his Chapel: It was
ever his Ambition to be like unto him.

But among all the Dances that these Times were guilty of, The Book of Sports
obtruded.
none of the Maskaradoes presented so horrid a Vizard as the Churchmans: For
some of the Bishops, pretending Recreations, and liberty to servants and the
common people (of which they carved to themselves too much already) procured
the King to put out a Book to permit dancing about May-poles, Church-ales, and
such debauched Exercises upon the Sabbath day after Evening Prayer (being a
specious way to make the King, and them, acceptable to the Rout) which Book
came out with a command, injoyning all Ministers to read it to their
Parishioners, and to approve of it, and those that did not, were brought into
the High Commission, imprisoned, and suspended. This Book being only a trap to
catch some conscientious men, that they could not otherwise with all their
cunning ensnare: For they would preach the Gospel in a Fools-coat (as some of
them expressed) rather than be silenced for a Surplis. And their Conjuring of
them with the Cross in Baptism, and the Circle of the Ring in Marriage, could
not make a well-composed Reason, and a sound Conscience then start at it: But
when so frightful an Apparition as the dancing Book appeared, some of the
Ministers left all for fear, others by force, they were so terrified with it.
These, and such like Machinations of the Bishops, to maintain their Temporal
Greatness, Ease, and Plenty, made the stones in the Walls of their Palaces, and
the beam in the timber, afterward cry out, moulder away, and come to nothing:
Whereas if those in most Authority had not been so pragmatical, but holy,
prudent, and godly men (as some others of the Function were) their light might
have shined still upon the Mount, and not have gone out as it did, offensive to
the nostrils of the rubbish of the people.

The King in his return from Scotland made his Progress through the
Hunting-countries (his Hounds and Hunters meeting him) Sherwood-Forrest, Need
wood, and all the Parks and Forests in his way, were ransacked for his
Recreation. And every night begat a new day of delight, till he brought
Holyrood-day (not His House in Edenburg so called. Piety of the Lord Mayor of
London.
Holyrood-house) to White Hall.

This new incroachment upon the Sabbath gave both King and people more liberty
to profane the day with authority: For if the Court were to remove on Monday,
the Kings Carriages must go out the day before. All times were alike; and the
Court being to remove to Theobalds the next day, the Carriages went through the
City of London on the Sabbath, with a great deal of clatter and noise in the
time of Divine service. The Lord Mayor hearing of it, commanded them to be
stopped, and this carried the Officers of the Carriages with a great deal of
violence to the Court, and the business being presented to the King with as
much asperity as men in authority (crossed in their humors) could express it;
It put the King into a great Rage, Swearing, he thought there had been no more
Kings in England but himself; yet after he was a little cooled, he sent a
Warrant to the Lord Mayor, commanding him to let them pass, which he obeyed,
with this Answer, while it was in my power I did my duty, but that being taken
away by a higher power, it is my duty to obey. Which the King upon second
thoughts took well, and thanked him for it.

Juggling of the Jesuits.
As Profaneness crept in on one side, so did Idolatry and Superstition on the
other; for there was more enmity against Ministers of the Gospel than Popish
Priests; they swarmed over the Kingdom, working miraculous Projects in every
corner. One pack of them got into Staffordshire, among some of the Giffords in
that County, Gentlemen of good Estates, where they practiced their Artifices to
seduce the people. There must be a Groundwork, Estates to keep them (being
like the Gout, never troubling the poor) and then there must be materials,
Correspondents to act for them. Holiness and Piety must be confirmed by
Miracle, and these Miracles must be visible to the Peoples eyes, that they may
convey belief better to the heart. If the Priests be holy, and can subdue
Satan, the Religion they profess must be heavenly, that triumphs over
principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickedness, bringing all to
obedience. These are finesses and subtilties of Mastring Wits (calling them
Piae Frauds, godly deceits, Worms to bring Fish to the Net) and this kind of
frippery they are ever fraught with.

For about this time there was a Boy born at Bilson in that County, The Boy of
Bilson.
whose father, mother, neighbors, and many other people, with admiration, did
absolutely think possessed with a Devil; for he had strange, sudden, violent,
distorting fits, that appeared to all the beholders contrary to Nature, and
being not full fifteen years old, it could not be imagined that any thing of
Impostory could result from him, and therefore the same of it was the more
remarkable.

The Jesuits (that are the best Physicians in such Distempers) hearing of it,
visited the Boy, prayed by him, and used such other Charms and Exorcisms, as
are fit to make them to be admired; giving his Parents good hope of
dispossessing him of that foul spirit, by which might palpably be discerned,
how much Gods power was expressed in their weakness, and difference the truth,
and holiness, betwixt the Catholic Religion, and the Heresy professed among
Protestants. So that they that heard them (as many resorted to the place) must
needs take them for very holy men, by whom such Wonders were to be
accomplished. The Jesuits visited him often, sometimes in private. sometimes in
Company; but this kind of Spirit would not be commanded by them, so that they
grew almost desperate of the Cure.

The Boy in his fits would rave against an old woman dwelling near to his
Father, Accuses a Woman to be a Witch.
intimating by signs, and ghastly behavior, that she had sent a Spirit to
torment him; and in plain terms (when he was out of his fits) accused her to be
a Witch, and the Author of all his misery. This old woman is sent to the
Bishops Chancellor at Lichfield to be examined; the Boy is brought thither to
confront her, and having his back toward her, at her coming into the Room,
where the Chancellor was, before she yet entered or appeared, he falls into a
most bitter Agony, crying out, Now she comes, now my Tormentor comes! wreathing
and tearing himself in so horrid a manner, that it did not only breed
amazement, but pity in the Spectators, there being many with expectation
attending the issue: Which, with some other probabilities, were an inducement
to the Chancellor to send the woman to Stafford Goal.

At the next Assizes for that County, the Boy and his Parents appear as
Witnesses against the Witch; the Boy was placed in a conspicuous part of the
Court, with his face to the Bench, eying the Judge continually, in a very
peaceable and quiet posture; and as the woman was coming in (when the Court
thought it impossible the Boy should be sensible of her appearance) he fell
into a more raging fit than ever he was possessed with before: So stupendiously
unnatural, that it was deemed by all that saw it, that nothing but a Diabolical
Spirit could work such horrid effects. This, thus openly acted, and the
Relation of what was done at Lichfield, and other probabilities evidencing, the
old woman (that had no good Reputation among her Neighbors, being of a
tetrical and froward temper, incident to old age) found few Friends to plead
her Cause; so that being indicted for Witchcraft, She is condemned.
she was found guilty by the Jury, and Condemned to die.

Bishop Morton gets her Reprieve.
Doctor Morton Bishop of that Diocese, a great Father of the Anglicane Church
(and happily then on the Bench about Secular Affairs) hearing that some Romish
Priests had been tampering with their Exorcisms, to the undevilling of the Boy,
and finding little reason produced, why, or for what cause, the Witch should
use the Child so ill, was persuaded, this might be some juggling trick in them,
for effecting their miraculous ends. He therefore besought the Judge to reprieve
the woman till the next Assizes, and he would take the Boy home with him, have
him carefully and strictly looked to, and doubted not before than time to find
out the Bottom of some secret and hidden ^^^rivance. The Judge assented to the
Bishop's request, and so the Boy was carried to Eccleshal Castle, the Bishops
House, whither his fits followed him with a great deal of violence: For being
put out of his r^ad (having formerly all sorts of people come to admire him,
and now being more carefully looked to) he grew s^llen, and would not eat
sometimes in two or three days, so that his belly was almost clung, and grown
to his back, and he had a new swelling about his throat, which never appeared
before; lay in his Bed, sometimes as it were senseless, sometimes st^ring with
his eyes, and foaming at the mouth, sometimes striking those that stood near
him (his own careful mother being one, whom he made all black about the arms
and breasts) never spoke but in his fits, and then a strange gibbrish, at other
(...) he only muttered and made signs. The Bishop visited him often, striving
sometimes to soften him with gentleness, at other times he handled him roughly,
with objurgations, and threatenings; but his ill Spirit is capable of neither.
He spoke to him one time some of the Greek Testament, to see how that would
work, and it brought him into his fit. At another time, he uttered some Verses
out of the Greek Poets, which his Devil was not so learned as to distinguish,
for that put him into a fit again; so that the Bishop was confirmed, that he
was an Impostor of a most pernicious, and pernicious Spirit; but how to Conjure
it out of him was the difficulty. And finding words and menaces made no
impression in him, he fell to blows; for taking him out of his Bed, and having
one to hold him, the Bishop gave him six very smart lashes with a Rod, which
moved the Boy no more than if he had been an insensible stock. They also thrust
needles into his toes and fingers, betwixt the nails, clapped burning candles to
his eyelids, till they sing ed the hair off, to divert him when he was in his
fits; but with all their persecutions he neither winch'd nor stirred, so that
the Actors were more troubled to execute than he to suffer.

And in this condition growing almost desperate, he would make signs for knives
or any other instrument to do himself a mischief, therefore strict care was
taken, and many watchful eyes set over him to prevent any such danger. Thus he
continued almost a quarter of a year, at last his Urine grew so black, that the
Physicians thought Nature had left her usual operations, having never found in
any Human Body so much Adust matter, to give so deep and deadly a tincture.

This struck the good Bishop very near: The Bishop troubled for the Boy.
For he was certain the Priests had been Hammering about him, and now, if he
should miscarry under his hand, those Mini-masters of mischief would in their
dark shops coin such scandals against him, as might pass current in the Worlds
opinion; therefore he used all the means he could possible, as well to preserve
him, as to discover him: But finding the Boy endure so many Trials with
patience, so much tough hardship, and robustness, in tender years, he resolved
if his water continued black, to sit^ the matter no further. To find out which
he set a trusty servant to watch him through a hole that looked into the
Chamber upon the Bed, which the Boy knew not of. The Bishop going that morning
with his Family to a Lecture, all things were very still in the house, and the
Boy finding all quiet, no noise about him, he lifts himself up, stares, and
listens, and at length gets out of his Bed, and in the straw or mat under it,
takes out an Ink-horn, and makes water in the Chamber Pot through a piece of
the Cotton, in his hand, another little piece of the Cotton he puts into his
Prepuce, covering it with the skin, and that was for a Reserve, if he should be
forced to make water when company is by. Thus having cunningly put himself in
order, he hides the Ink-horn again, and returns to his Bed.

The man that was appointed to watch him seeing all this, The Impostor
discovered.
discovered it to the Bishop at his coming home, who came to him presently, and
asked him how he did? He according to his usual manner pointed to his water,
looked ghastly on it, and muttered out his old howling tone. The Bishop that
meant now to deal roundly with him, said, Sirrah, you have Ink in your
bed-straw, which you make use of to black your water, and your knavery is found
out; and calling in his man, he took out the Ink-horn where the Boy had hid it,
and the man justified, that he saw him make water through the Cotton. Which
(with the Bishops threatening to send him to the house of Correction) struck the
Boy with such a sudden terror, that he rose from his Bed, fell upon his knees,
and humbly besought the Bishop to pardon him, and he would discover to him the
whole Truth. And as he put on his clothes, the Bishop laid open the
grievousness of his sin, which wrought so upon his spirit, that he melted into
tears, crying to God for mercy. A very strange alteration! That, what he did
but counterfeit, the Devil had so hardened in him, that all the Torments and
Pains, inflicted by man could not produce a tear, till God that melted the
Rock, had first touched the heart.

His Confession.
Then he confessed a Peddler with a pack on his back met him when he was going to
School, and with many enticing words persuaded him to go to Mr. Giffords house,
assuring him of good entertainment, and by his allurements he went thither with
him. There he found four Romish Priests, who gave him money and many fair words,
promising him great matters, if he would be conformable to their instructions.
They were three days teaching him how to demean himself, and after he was well
tutored, and had practiced his tricks there privately, then they sent him home
to his father (who thought he had been lost, and was much troubled for him) to
exercise them in a more public way. He came home in a very distracted manner,
to the amazement of his parents, and in short time drew much company to visit
him, and his parents being poor got money from many charitable people, which
did encourage him to persist in that way. But when the fame of his being
possessed with an evil Spirit was sufficiently bruited abroad, the Priests came
to dispossess him, but he found so much sweetness in the ease, and profit of
that life, that he would not be dis-inchanted by them, though they charmed
never so cruelly; for they beat him, and pincht him, and used him bitterly ill,
to make him desist. Thus were the deceivers deceived! The Bishop asked him why
he accused the poor old woman of Witchcraft? He answered, the Priests told him
he must lay the cause of his being possessed upon some old woman, and she being
known to him, and of a scolding humor, he fixed it on her. Then the Bishop asked
him how he came to fall into his fits a little before the woman appeared in the
room, both at her Examination and Arraignment, his back being toward her? for
the first, at Lichfield, he said, he heard some about him mutter, She is here,
which made him cry out, she comes, she comes: And for the second, at Stafford,
he heard the people remove, and her chains gingle as she came, which gave him
the sign. Lastly, he was asked how he made his throat swell, and he showed, it
was by thrusting his tongue (being very long) down his throat, which trick he
found out himself; the rest were taught him by the Priests. Thus did the Bishop
preserve an innocent old woman condemned by the Law to die, discover the
abominable forgeries of the Priests, and convert a wicked Boy, whom afterward
he bound Apprentice, and proved a good man. This Story I heard from the
Bishop's own mouth, almost thirty years before it was inserted here. And the
Result of all is, That Falsehood with her painted countenance appears often as
beautiful as Truth it self, deceiving many, specially in this point of
Witchcraft, which is a structure established in the vulgar fancy, that has
many odd passages and ways opening to it, and is many Airy-stories high; but
being well examined, it will not prove (for the most part, I will not say
always) paper-proof, as there may be occasion to express in another place.

The King took delight by the line of his Reason to sound the depth of such
brutish Impostors, The King discovers many Impostors.
and he discovered many: For in the Beginning of his Reign, Richard Haydock of
New-Colledg in Oxford, practiced Physic in the day, and Preached in the night
in his Bed. His Practice came by his Profession, and his Preaching (as he
pretended) by Revelation: For he would take a Text in his sleep, and deliver a
good Sermon upon it, and though his Auditory were willing to silence him, by
pulling, haling, and pinching, yet would he pertinaciously persist to the end,
and sleep still. The fame of this sleeping Preacher flies abroad with a light
Wing, which coming to the Kings knowledge, he commanded him to the Court, where
he sat up one night to hear him: And when the time came that the Preacher
thought it was fit for him to be asleep, he began with a Prayer, then took a
Text of Scripture, which he significantly enough insisted on a while, but after
made an excursion against the Pope, the Cross in Baptism, and the last Canons
of the Church of England, and so concluded sleeping. The King would not trouble
him that night, letting him rest after his labors, but sent for him the next
morning, and in private handled him so like a cunning Surgeon, that he found
out the sore; making him confess not only his sin and error in the act, but the
cause that urged him to it, which was, That he apprehended himself as a buried
man in the University, being of a low condition, and if something eminent and
remarkable did not spring from him, to give life to his Reputation, he should
never appear any Body, which made him attempt this Novelty to be taken notice
of. The King finding him ingenuous in his Confession, pardoned him, and (after
his Recantation publicly) gave him preferment in the Church. Some others, both
men and women, inspired with such Enthusiasms, and fanatic fancies, he reduced
to their right senses, applying his Remedies suitable to the Distemper, wherein
he made himself often very merry (being happily practiced, to be taken notice
of by him) but some of their Stories being a little coarse, are not so fit to
be here related. And truly the looseness and carelessness of public Justice,
sets open a door to such slagitious and nefarious actions, as severer times
would never have perpetrated.

Sir Walter Rawleighs West-Indian Voyage.
About this time, that gallant Spirit, Sir Walter Rawleigh, (who in his
Recesses in the Tower, had presented in lively Characters, the true Image of
the Old World) made Accesses to the King, whereby he got leave to visit the
New-World in America. Captain Kemish (one of his old Seamen and Servants)
showing him a piece of Ore in the Tower, of a golden complexion, (a glittering
temptation to begin the work) assuring him, he could bring him to a Mine in
Guiana of the same metal: which (together with Freedom, the Crown of Life and
Being) gave rise to this enterprise.

The King looking on Rawleigh as a man whose abilities might better the Nation,
if improved the right way, gave him Liberty, and a Commission under the great
Seal, to equip and set forth Ships, and Men for that service. His Reputation,
and merit, brought many Gentlemen of Quality to venture their Estates, and
Persons, upon the Design; and being gallantly furnished with all things
necessary, either for Peace or War, they set out; and met no difficulties, till
they came to Cape Vert in Africa; and then they found the Winds averse to them,
(contrary to the usual nature of it) with many violent Storms, which much
impeded their Voyage: For they that usually navigate betwixt Cape Vert, and
America, run it in less than twenty days, but it took them double the time. And
being driven from the Isle of Bravo by a Tempest, their left their Cables,
Anchors, and Water-Cask behind them; so that by the length of the Time, heat of
the Climate, and their want of Water, great sickness fell among them, and swept
away many of their ablest men, both for Sea and Land.

But with much patience and hardship, getting sight of the Coast of Guiana,
they came to an Anchor in five Degrees, at the River Caliana, where they landed
their sick men, set up Barges, and Shallops, which were brought out of England
in Quarters, washed their Ships, and took in fresh Water, being fed and
assisted by the Indians, that Sir Walter Rawleigh had formerly known. Who (in
this general contagion, having grappled long with sickness, and not yet able to
move, otherwise than he was carried in a Chair) gave order to five small Ships
to sail into the River Orenoque (having Captain Kemish for their Conductor)
toward the Mine, the Star that directed them thither. And in these five Ships
were five Foot-Companies, under the Command of Captain Parker, and Captain
North, Brothers to the Lord Monteagle, and the Lord North; Captain Walter
Raleigh, the General's eldest Son; Captain Thornhurst, and Captain Chidley,
Gentlemen of great Valor, and infinite Patience, in suffering hunger, heat and
labor. Major Pigot died in the miserable Passage, and Sir Warham Santleger
(who was Lieutenant Colonel) lay sick, without hope of life; so that the
Command of the five Companies being conferred upon George Raleigh, the
General's Nephew (made Major, in Pigot's room) he was not so well obeyed, as
the Enterprise required. As they past up the River, the Spaniards began the
War, and shot at the Ships, both with their Ordnance, and Musket: but they
landed their Forces, without any great loss, near unto a Town upon the River,
called Saint Thome, and gallantly charged the Enemy to the very Ports; where
finding some little opposition, they at last forced a passage, and made
themselves Masters of the Town. In the Assault, Captain Walter Raleigh, the
General's Son (a Man of fire and courage, fitter to execute, than to order his
Valor) was slain, to the great grief of the Conquerours.

The other five Ships staid with the General at Trinidado, having no other Port
capable of them near Guiana. The first was commanded by the General himself;
the second by Captain John Pennington, Vice Admiral; the third by Sir Warham
Santleger; the fourth by Sir John Fern; the fifth by Captain Chidley of
Devonshire. The General had twelve Ships in all, set out with him; But Captain
Whitney and Captain Wolleston mutined against him, and run home again from the
Grenades. With these five Ships they daily attended the Armada of Spain, and
had they set upon them, their Force divided (one half being in Orinoque, a
hundred and fifty miles from them) they in Trinidado had not only been
endangered, but all those in the River had also perished. And though these five
Ships with the General were but of little Defense against so strong a power as
the King of Spain's Gallions, yet they would have given them their hands full,
for they were all resolved to have burned, and died by their sides. But the
Armada staid for them at Margarita, by which Island they expected them to pass
toward the Indies.

For the King, The Design discovered to Gondemar.
unwilling to displease his Brother of Spain, commanded Sir Walter Raleigh upon
his Allegiance, before he went out, to set down under his hand, the Country,
and the River, which he was to enter, the complete number of his Men, the
burden of his Ships, and what Ordnance every Ship carried; which being made
known to the Count Gondemar, the Spanish Ambassador here, and by him in Post to
the King of Spain, A Dispatch was made by that King to the Indies, and his
Letters sent from Madrid, before Sir Walter Raleigh with his Fleet departed out
of the River Thames. For the first Letter sent by a Bark of Advice, was dated
the 19th of March, 1617. at Madrid. The second Letter was sent by a Carvell to
Diego de Palomeque, at Trinidado. The third Letter by the Bishop of Puerto
Rico; and the fourth was sent by the Farmer and Secretary of the Customs, at
the same time. By that of the King's hand there was also a Commission, for the
speedy leavying of three thousand men, and ten pieces of Ordnance, to be sent
from Puerto Rico, for the defense of Guiana. These Provisions were made to
entertain the English, and had they met them, they would have found a harsh
Banquet.

But the Spaniards at Saint Thome (their Supplies being not come) were not so
numerous as to defend both the Town, and the Passages to the Mines; therefore
they quitted the Town, and fortified the way to the Mines near the Town. But
the Passages leading to the Mine that Kemish had in his Eye, were Aspera and
fragosa, as Sir Walter Raleigh expressed them; and Kemish found the River so low,
that he could not approach the banks, in most places near the Mine, by a mile;
and where he found an ascent, a Volley of Muskets came from the Woods, and at
one time slew two of the Rowers, hurt six others, and shot a valiant Gentleman,
Captain Thornhurst, in the head, of which he with great difficulty recovered.
Kemish seeing so much hazard in attempting to find the Mine, the Passage to it
being full of thick and impassable Woods, and thinking the English that were
left in the Town of Saint Thome, would not be able to defend it, especially if
the Enemy should be recruited, the Country being all in Alarm, he gave over
the Enterprise, and returned. For if he should have discovered the Mine, he had
no men (as he pretended) to work in it; and being a great way up into the Land,
men would have been got thither with much danger, and difficulty. And that was
true. The Spaniards themselves complain for want of Negroes to work in their
Mines; for the Indians cannot be constrained, by a Law of Charles the Fifth;
and the Spaniards will not, neither can they endure the labor. But this was
ill advised, to take so much pains, and run so much hazard, to get and possess
that, which when they had it, they could not make use of it; so that which
Kemish pleaded (when he returned) for an excuse, reflected upon him as a great
miscarriage. As soon as he came to Saint Thome, the English pillaged the Town,
carried away the best, and most portable things, and the Enemy not daring to
appear for the Redemption of it, they set it a-fire, leaving behind them an
infinite mass of Treasure, which either for want of knowledge, or power, they
could not attain to. For there were two Gold Mines near the Town, the one
possessed by Roderigo de Parama, the other by Herman Frontino, and a Silver
Mine by Francisco Fashardo: to preserve and fortify which, they employed all
their strength and industry; so that they needed not have gone so far up the
River to find a new Mine, when they had so many nearer them, that either
ignorance or want of strength made them neglect.

The General, Raleigh troubled.
with the news of the death of his Son, and Kemishe's return without effecting
his work, was perplexed to the very soul, telling Kemish he had undone him, and
wounded his credit with the King, past recovery; but he must think (he told
him) to bear the weight of the King's anger as well as himself; for he must a
vow that Kemish knew the Mine, and that with little loss he might have
possessed it. Kemish much troubled in his mind, Kemish kills himself.
retires to his Cabin, which he had in the General s Ship, and presently after
his being there, he shot himself with a Pistol; the General hearing the noise,
asked what Pistol it was? Answer was made, that Captain Kemish shot it off in
his Cabin to cleanse it; but Kemishe's man going into the Cabin, found his
Master lying in his own blood: the Pistol having a little bullet did only crack
the rib, which being too slow for his fury, he desperately thrust a knife in
after it up to the haft; and with him the Glory of the Voyage expired. For the
Design being thus broken, the Ships leaky, Victuals failing, and missing of
those golden showers they gaped after (that Radical moisture which fills the
veins of the affections, and gives life and vigor to all actions) some of the
men began to mutiny against the General, others were for him; some would have
him go home, others would have him stay; the major part forced him to swear not
to go home but by their allowance; and yet his Ships dwindled away one after
another (his strength was best discovered by his weakness) ten Ships being
reduced to four, and those would do what they list. Some would go for Italy,
some for France, few for England, fearing the Spanish Power there more than
they did in the Indies. Thus they were shattered in judgment, with a greater
Tempest than the Seas or Winds could produce. Miserable is that Government
where the Multitude is Master! At last he is brought to Kinsale in Ireland.

The news of taking and burning St. Thome coming to Gondemar, Gondemar incenses
the King against Raleigh. 1618.
he besieges, and (as it were) assaults the King with importunity for
Reparation: For he was a man not only of an insinuating and glosing spirit, but
of a violent and fiery temper, when any cross accident blew up the humor. The
matter is aggravated with the highest circumstances by those of the Spanish
Faction, as if this irruption of Raleigh's, not only tended to the breach of
the Treaty of Marriage betwixt Prince Charles, and the Infanta of Spain (that
was then in motion) but to the infringement of the Peace and Amity, established
betwixt the two Crowns. The King's fears being heightened to Anger, he disavows
the Action, and lest others of his Subjects should by this example take the
boldness to attempt the like Hostility against the King of Spain, he puts out a
Proclamation, wherein he shows his detestation of such proceedings, and
threatens severe punishment to the enterprisers, thereby to deter them. Which
gave Gondemar some satisfaction, whose design being only to get Sir Walter
Raleigh home (after this brush) vented little passion, but so cunningly skinned
over his malice, that when Raleigh was in Ireland, he found, nor heard of no
such great difficulties ( Dangers often flying upon the wings of rumor) but
that he might appear in England, and the men not willing to be banished their
own Country (though some of them had France in their eye) put in at Plymouth
Raleigh was no sooner ashore, but he had private intimation, which gave him
cause to suspect, the smoothness of this beginning would have a rough end;
therefore he attempted an escape from ^hence in a bark of Rochel: But being
apprehended by Sir Lewis Stukly (his Kinsman) who had private warrant and
instructions to that purpose (so unnatural and servile is the spirit, when it
has an allay of baseness, there being many others sitter for that employment)
he is brought to London, and recommitted to the Tower.

He is committed to the Tower.
He was no sooner in the Tower, but all his Transactions in this business are
put to the Rack, and tenter'd by his Adversaries. They say he knew of no Mine,
nor did Kemish know that the Mine he aimed at was Gold; but Kemish bringing him
a piece of Ore into the Tower, he fobb'd a piece of Gold into it in dissolving,
making the poor man believe the Ore was right, that by these golden degrees, he
might ascend to Liberty, promising the King to fetch it where never Spaniard
had been. But when Kemish found by better experience he was cozened by
Raleigh, he came back from the Mine: And Raleigh knowing that none but Kemish
could accuse him, made him away. This Vizard was put upon the face of the
Action, and all the weight of the Miscarriage was laid upon Raleigh's shoulders.

Gonaemar that looked upon him as a man that had not only high Abilities, but
Animosity enough to do his Master mischief (being one of those Scourges, which
that old Virago, (the late Queen) as he called her, used to afflict the
Spaniards with) having gotten him into this Trap, laid now his baits about the
King. There is a strange virtue in this spirit of Sol! the intenseness makes
men firm, the ductilness brings them to be active. French Crowns are not so
pure, not so piercing as Spanish Pistols. Auri sacra fames! quid non mortalia
pectora cogis? The King that loved his Peace, is incensed by them that loved
their Profit, and the poor Gentleman must lay down the price of his life upon
the old Reckoning.

In October this year he is brought to the King's Bench Bar at Westminster,
where the Records of his Arraignment at Winchester were opened, and he demanded
why Execution should not be done upon him, according to the Judgment therein
pronounced against him? To which in way of answer he began to justify himself
in the proceedings of the late Voyage; but the Lord Chief Justice wished him to
spare that trouble; for there was no other matter in question but the former
Judgment, which the King would have executed upon him, for some occasions best
known to himself, unless he could show good cause to the contrary.

Raleigh answered, That he was told by his Council, that Judgment was void, by
the Commission his Majesty was pleased to give him since under the Great Seal
for his last Employment, which did give him a new vigor and life to that
service. The Lord chief Justice replied that he was deceived, and that the
opinion of the Court was to the contrary. Then he desired that some reasonable
time might be allowed him to prepare for Death; but it was answered, That the
time appointed was the next morning, and it was not to be doubted, but he had
prepared himself for death long since. Raleigh having a courageous spirit
(finding the bent of the King's mind, and knowing Disputes to be in vain, where
Controversies are determined) acquiesc'd, was conveyed to the Gatehouse, and
the day following was brought to the Old Palace yard at Westminster, And
Beheaded.
and upon a Scaffold there erected, lost his head.

He had in the outward man a good presence, His character, and description.
in a handsome and well-compacted person, a strong natural wit, and a better
judgment, with a bold and plausible tongue, whereby he could set off his parts
to the best advantage. And to these he had the Adjuncts of general Learning,
which (by Diligence and Experience (those two great Tutors) being now
threescore years of age) was augmented to a great perfection, being an
indefatigable Reader, and having a very retentive memory. At his Arraignment at
Winchester, his carriage to his Judges was with great discretion; humble, yet
not prostrate; dutiful, yet not dejected: Toward the Jury affable, but not
fawning; not in despair, nor believing, but hoping in them; carefully
persuading them with Reasons, not distemperately importuning them with
Conjurations; rather showing love of life than fear of death. Toward the
King's Council patient, but not insensible neglecting, nor yielding to
Imputations laid against him in words (which Sir Edward Cook, then the King's
Attorney, belched out freely) and it was wondered a man of his high spirit could
be so humble in suffering, not being much overtaken in passion. And now at his
last, when Deeth was presented before him, he looked upon it without
affrightment, striving to vindicate his Actions, by taking off the veil that
false Reports had cast upon them (especially the Imputation of his glorying,
and rejoicing in the fall, and at the death of the la^e E. of Essex, which had
stuck so many years in his breast; and this new miscarriage of Kemish's of a
later date imputed to him) for having provided himself privately for heaven,
clearing his Accounts with God before he came to the Scaffold, He publicly at
last reckoned with man (being to quit all soores) and so made an end.

Disunion in the United Provinces.
Times of Peace are accounted the happiest times, and though they are great
Blessings, proceeding from the influence of supreme Mercy, and the showers of
Grace, yet the branches of the Tree of Knowledge (growing by this Sun shine)
for want of due pruning, do often become so exuberant, that their very fruits
are not only their burden, but sometimes their ruin. Prosperity is of an Airy
constitution, carried about with the breath of strange fancies, which mount
sometimes as high as Omnipotency; but there finding-resistance, they come down
amain, and beat the lower Region with a Tempest of Strife and Malice. When the
Romans wanted Enemies, they dug them out of their own bowels. Active Spirits
will be set on work.

Our Neighbors of the Netherlands (that had so long bounded the Spanish Power,
and humbled their Pride so far, as to acknowledge them a Free State, before they
would so much as listen to an Overture of Peace) had a fire kindled in their
own bosoms. It is now some time since the 12 years Truce betwixt Spain and
them began, being in the Wain, and last Quarter. While they had their hands
full of business, they had not their heads full of old Curiosities. Now like
Plethorique bodies, that want letting blood, they break out into distemper; A
Schism in the Church, and a Faction in the State.

The first Author of the Schism was Arminius; of the Faction, Barnevelt;
Persons of great parts and power (though of different natures.) The one had
been Divinity-Professor at Leyden the other the Manager of all the great
affairs of the State. Distempers in Kingdoms and States, are like madness in
bodies, which does not break out till some accident does stir the humor.
Arminius dyed just upon the beginning of the Treaty, which was in the year
1609. Leaving behind him the seeds of this Pelagian Heresy, which though it
were cherished much by some, in whose bosoms he had sown it, yet happily it
might never have taken root, had not Peace and Ease manured it, and made it
fruitful. The Mysteries of Predestination, and the ineffable Essence of God (
Quaetremenda and admiranda sunt, sed non scrutanda (to use our King's own
words) which are to be trembled at, and admired, not pried into) are the great
Theme. Such intuitions are too high for flesh and blood: Yet what will not
Pragmatical spirits do, when they proudly look into Divine things with the Eye
of Reason, not humbly with the Eye of Faith?

This Rupture in the Bowels of the Church grew so great, that it endangered the
Body of the State. The chief Rulers and Magistrates, Rombout Hogerbeets,
pensionaris der Stad Leyden
in the several Provinces, being tainted with this Error, strove to establish
it by Power; among whom Barnevelt was a Principal Agent, who by the assistance
of Hoogenberts of Leyden, Grotius of Roterdam, and Leidenburgh Secretary of
Utrecht, with others their adherents, drew on the Design, which was to suppress
the Protestant Reformed Religion, and establish the Tenants of Arminius, being
fomented by the Kings of France and Spain, as the immediate way to introduce
Popery. This went on so smoothly, that the Orthodox Ministers were expelled out
of their principal Towns, and none but Arminians admitted to preach to the
people, which in some places bred many combustions, that tended to nothing but
popular Confusion.

But long before this time, our King saw the Storm coming upon them: Our King
forewarns them of it An. 1611.
For in the year 1611 he forewarns the State, telling them, that by the unhappy
succession of two such Prodigies in one Sphere, as Arminius and Vorstius, some
dreadful mischief would succeed. For Arminius was no sooner dead, but those
that drew on the Design, had an eye on Vorstius his Disciple, to make him
Divinity-Professor in his place; which the King hearing of, and having read
some of Vorstius blasphemous Writings, sends to his then Ambassador Sir Ralph
Winwood, Resident there, to let the State know that Vorstius rather deserved
punishment than promotion; that the head of such a Viper should be trod upon,
and crushed, that was likely to eat his way through the bowels of the State.
And if they (nevertheless) would persist to prefer him, he would make known to
the World publicly in Print, how much he detested such abominable Heresies,
and all allowers and tolerators of them.

The Ambassador urging the King's desires, they returned a long Answer in
justification of Vorstius.

First, The States answer
That the Curators of the University of Leyden (according to their duty, and
the ancient custom ever since the foundation of that University) having
diligently made inquiry for some Doctor to be chosen in the place of
Divinity-Professor there, at that time void; after mature deliberation, they
made election of Conradus Vorstius to that place. Which Election and Calling,
was countermined presently after, by certain persons, to whose Office or
Disposal, the business did nothing at all belong; who charged the said Vorstius
with unsoundness of Doctrine; whereupon the Curators thought fit (with the good
liking of Vorstius himself) that both at Leyden, and at the Hague, he should
appear in his own justification, to answer all Accusers; which he did, and
there came none to charge him. But not long after, six Ministers undertook to
prove, That Vorstius had published false Doctrine, who being heard in a full
Assembly of the States of Holland and Westfrizeland, they could by their
Arguments find no reason, why the Execution of what was done by the Curators
lawfully, ought to be hindered or impeached. And they do assuredly believe, that
if his Majesty of Great Britain were well informed of the true Circumstances of
this business, he would, according to his high wisdom, and prudence, conceive
favorably of them, they proceeding in this business with all reverence, care
and respect, to his Majesty's serious admonition. Dated at the Hague 1 October.
1611.

The King seeing which way the States went, by the print of the footing that
Vorstius had set among them, Vorstius's Books burned by the King.
caused his Books publicly to be burned in Paul's Churchyard, and both the
Universities. And not giving it over, writes to them again, to be mindful of
the glory of God, and not suffer such scan dalous members to remain in the body
of the true Reformed Church, that maintain such execrable Blasphemies, as to
deny the Eternity and Omnipotency of God: Therefore he desires them so much to
mind the glory of God, and their own honor, and safety, as to extirpate such
Atheisms, and Heresies. But if they suffer such pestilent Heretics to nestle
among them (who dare take upon them the licentious liberty to fetch again from
Hell ancient Heresies long since condemned, and invent new ones of their own,
to the depravation of the true Catholic Church) he should be constrained
publicly to protest against them. Dated at Theobalds 6 October. 1611.

Sir Ralph Winwood represented this Letter to the States, and finding them cold
and backward in proceeding any further against Vorstius, according to the
King's Directions to him, he made this Remonstrance to them.

My Lords,
Sir Ralph Winwood's Remonstrance to the States.
IF ever the King of Great Britain, my Master, has merited, anything of this
State, (and how much he has merited, in respect of his great favors, and
Royal assistances, your Lordships acknowledging them with all gratitude, can
best judge and witness) he has surely merited at this present, having by his
Letters full of zeal and piety, which he has written unto you, endeavored to
procure the establishment of that Religion only within your Provinces, which
the Reformed Churches of Great Britain, France and Germany, by a mutual consent
have generally embraced. For what is it to his Majesty whether Doctor Vorstius
be admitted Professor in the University of Leyden, or not? or whether the
Doctrine of Arminius be preached in your Churches? saving that as a Christian
Prince, he desires the advancement of the Gospel, and as your best Friend and
Allie, the strengthening of your Commonwealth, whose first Foundations were
cemented with the blood of his Subjects; and which in his judgment JACOBUS
ARMINIUS S. S. TH. DOCT. ET PROFESS. NATUS OUDEWATRIAE MDLX. DENAT. LUGD.
BATAV. MDCIX. AETAT XLIX.
Qui nunc per altas aurei caeli domos Regnat beatus, et suo junctus Deo Humana
celsus spernit ac nescit simul, Sic. Hospes, ora magnus ARMINIUS tulit. Caelare
mores atque dotes ingeni. Doctumque pectus quod fuit (sed heu Fuit) Manus
nequivit artifax. et quid manus? Effere cum non lingua non stylus queant.

can no way subsist, if wittingly and willingly you suffer the Reformed
Religion to be (either by the practices of your Doctors sophisticated, or by
their malice) depraved. If therefore Religion be as it were the Palladium of
your Commonwealth, and that to preserve the one in her glory, and perfection,
be to maintain the other in her purity, let your selves then be Judges, in how
great a danger the State must needs be at this present, so long as you permit
the Schisms of Arminius to have such vogue (as now they have) in the principal
Towns of Holland; and if you suffer Vorstius to be received Divinity-Professor
in the University of Leyden (the Seminary of your Church) who in scorn of the
holy Word of God, has after his own fancy, devised a new S^ct, patched
together of several Pieces of all sorts of ancient and modern Heresies. The
Fool said in his heart, there is no God: But he that with an open mouth, of set
purpose, and prepensed malice, has let his Pen run at random, to disgorge so
many blasphemies against the sacred Majesty of God, this Fellow shall wear the
Garland of all that ever yet were heard of, since the Means of the Gospel, the
Light of Christian Religion, has shined unto the World. If any man doubt of
it, for a proof see here what his Majesty, with his own hand, has collected
out of his Writings. And then presenting them a Paper, he proceeded.

These are, in part, the opinions of that great Divine, who is chosen to
domineer in the Chair at Leyden: In opposition whereunto, I mean not to say any
thing, but that which the Roman Orator did once pronounce in the like Case,
Mala est, and impia consuetudo, contra Deum disputandi, sive serio id fit, sive
simulate; It is an evil and wicked Custom to dispute against God, whether it be
in earnest, or in jest.

Now my Lords, I address my self unto you, and according to the Charge which I
have received from the King my Master, I conjure you by the amity that is
betwixt his Kingdoms, and your Provinces, to awaken your Spirits, and to have a
careful eye at this Assembly of Holland (which is already begun) ne quid
Respublica detrimenti capiat, that the Commonwealth take no harm; which
undoubtedly at one time or other will be turned upside down, if you suffer such
a dangerous Contagion to harbor so near you, and not remove it as soon as
possibly you may. The Disciples of Socinus (with whose Doctrine Vorstius has
been suckled in his Childhood) do seek him for their Master, and are ready to
embrace him. Let him go, he is a Bird of their own feather, Et dignum sane
patella operculum, A fit Cover for such a Dish.

On the other side, the Students in Divinity at Leyden, to the number of six
and fifty, by a dutiful Remonstrance presented unto the States of Holland the
sixteenth of October, the last year, being 1610. did most humbly beseech the
said States, not to use their authority in compelling them to receive a
Professor, who both by the attestations of the Divinity-Colleges at Basil, and
Heydelberg, as also by manifest evidence out of his own Writings, is convinced
of a number of manifest Heresies.

These Reasons therefore, namely, the many enormous and horrible Heresies
maintained by him; the Instance of his Majesty, grounded upon the welfare and
honor of this Country; the Requests either of all, or of the most part of your
Provinces; the Petitions of all the Ministers (excepting those only which are
of Arminius's Sect) should methinks prevail so far with my Lords the States of
Holland, as they will at the last apply themselves to the performance of that,
which both the sincerity of Religion, and the service of their Country,
requires at their hands.

Furthermore, I have Commandment from his Majesty, to move you in his name, to
set down some certain Reglement in matters of Religion, throughout your
Provinces, that this licentious Freedom of Disputation may be restrained, which
breeds factions, and part-takings; and that you would absolutely take away the
Liberty of Prophesying, which Vorstius does so much recommend unto you in the
Dedicatory Epistle of his Anti-Bellarmine, the book whereof his Patrons do
boast so much.

And his Majesty does exhort you, seeing you have heretofore taken Arms for the
Liberty of your Consciences, and have endured a violent and bloody War the
space of forty years, for the Profession of the Gospel, that now having gotten
the upper hand of your miseries, you would not suffer the Followers of Arminius
to make your actions an example for them to proclaim throughout the World that
wicked Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints. The account which his Majesty
does make of your amity, appears sufficiently by the Treaties which he made
with your Lordships, by the succors which your Provinces have received from
his Crowns, by the deluge of blood, which his Subjects have spent in your Wars.
Religion is the only solder of this Amity. For his Majesty being by the grace
of God Defender of the Faith, does hold himself obliged to defend all those who
prosess the same Faith and Religion with him: But if once your zeal begins to
grow cold therein, his Majesty will then straightways imagine, that your
friendship toward him, and his Subjects, will likewise freeze by little and
little.


The Right Honorable Sr. RALPH WINWOOD Kn.t


This was the effect of Sir Ralph Winwood's Remonstrance, to which, after six
weeks delay, he received this cold and ambiguous Answer.

THat the States General had deliberated upon his Majesty's Proposition, The
States answer.
and Letter dated the 6 Oct. 1611. and do give him humble Thanks for the
continuance of his Royal affection toward the welfare of their Country, and
preservation of Religion. And that they had entered into Consultation concerning
the Articles charged against Vorstius; and the Curators of Leyden did thereupon
make an Order provisional, that Vorstius should not be admitted to the Exercise
of his Place, but remain in Leyden only as an Inhabitant, and Citizen. And in
case Vorstius should not be able to clear himself from those Accusations which
were laid to his Charge, at or before the next Assembly (which was to be holden
in Feb. following) that then they would decide the Matter with good contentment
to his Majesty.

But this Answer still savouring of delays, could not in effect be esteemed
less than an absolute refusal to yield to the King's desires; besides, the
specious Separation of Vortius as a Citizen, was only to satisfy the King at
present; for he (after) notwithstanding exercised his Place of Professor.
Whereupon Sir Ralph Winwood knowing the King's mind, made this Protestation in
their Public Assembly.

My Lords,
THere is not any one of you, Sir Ralph Winwood's Protestation.
I suppose, in this Assembly, that will not acknowledge the brotherly love
wherewith the King, my Master, has always affected the good of your Provinces,
and the fatherly care which he has ever had to procure the establishment of
your State. In which respect, his Majesty having understood, that Vorstius was
elected Divinity-Professor of Leyden, a Person attainted by many Witnesses,
Iuris and facti, of a number of Heresies, is therewith exceedingly offended.
And for the timely prevention of an infinite of evils, did give me in charge to
exhort you (which I did the 21 of September last) to wash your hands from that
Man, and not suffer him to come within your Country. To this Exhortation your
Answer was, That all due observance and regard should be had unto his Majesty:
But his Majesty has received so little respect herein, that instead of
debarring Vorstius from coming into the Country (which even by the Laws of
Friendship his Majesty might have required) the Proceedings have been clean
contrary; for he is permitted to come to Leyden, has been received there with
all honor, taken up his habitation, treated and lodged in the quality of a
public Professor. His Majesty perceiving his first motion had so little
prevailed, writ a Letter to you to the same purpose, full of zeal and
affection, persuading you by many Reasons, not to stain your own honor, and the
honor of the Reformed Churches, by calling unto you that wretched and wicked
Atheist. These Letters were presented to this Assembly, the fifth of November
last, at which time by his Majesty's command I used some speech my self to the
same effect. Some six weeks after I received an answer, but so confused,
ambiguous, and impertinent, that I have reason to conceive there is no meaning
at all to send Vortius away, who is at present in Leyden, received,
acknowledged, respected, and treated as public Professor, whether it be to
grace that University instead of the deceased Joseph Scaliger, or whether to
give him means to do more mischief in secret, which perhaps for shame he durst
not in public, I cannot tell. For these reasons, according to that charge
which I have received from the King my Master, I do in his name, and on his
behalf, protest in this Assembly, against the wrong, injury, and scandal, done
unto the Reformed Religion, by receiving, and retaining Conradus Vorstius in
the University of Leyden, and against the violence offered unto that Alliance
which is betwixt his Majesty and your Provinces; which being founded upon the
preservation, and maintenance of the Reformed Religion, you have not omitted to
violate, in the proceeding of this cause. Of which enormous indignities
committed against the Church of God, and against his Majesty's person, in
preferring the presence of Vorstius, before his amity and alliance, the King my
Master holds himself bound to be sensible, and if Reparation be not made, and
that speedily (which cannot be by any other means, than by sending Vorstius
away) his Majesty will make it appear unto the World by some Declaration (which
he will cause to be printed and published) how much he detests the Atheisms,
and Heresies of Vorstius, and all those that maintain, favor, and cherish them.




To this the States promised a better Answer at their next Assembly, but that
producing no good effect, the King writes a Declaration against Vorstius, which
is extant in his own Works, collected by Doctor James Montague, son to Sir
Edward Montague of Bowghton in the County of Northampton, Knight, then Bishop
of Winchester, and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel; in which Volume is depainted
the King's excellent spirit, and many Royal Graces tending to Religion and
Piety.

Thus the States let in a Deluge of Impiety, by being so pertinaciously
affected to Vorstius, and though he lived not long among JOSEPHUS, SCALIGER --
them, yet what he had planted grew up abundantly, and were the bitter Roots of
these present Divisions.

And after, in the year 1613. there were many Discords among them, which our
King hearing of, he incited the States by Letters again (so willing he was to
have Unity among them) that this War of the Tongue might be pacified rather by
public Authority than School Disputations, Our King writes to the States in
1613.
and by his Mediation, for a good time the Humor was abated, or rested, as in
the interpolate Fits of Agnes, but the Rancor broke out again more than ever.

For this year 1618. (as formerly expressed) the Distemper came to the State,
or height, and had ever after a decline. Our King hearing of the Disorders and
Tumults among them, looked upon them (now) as so many ill Omens, portending not
only the ruin of the Netherlands, but the Tempest growing greater might beat
too soon upon the British-shores. To stay therefore the swelling progress of
this Gangrene humor, And now in 1618.
he prohibits his Subjects by Proclamation to send their children to Leyden,
and solicits the States by Letters again, not only to forbid the preaching of
these Controversies (the Pulpits being made but the Bellows of Dissension) but
commands his Ambassador Sir Dudley Carleton to show them their Disease, and
then prescribes them the Cure. Their Disease was this, Schism in the Church,
which ushered in a Faction in the State, jealousy and disaffection among the
Magistrates, hatred, and heart-burning among the Common people, contempt of the
Orders and Decrees of the chiefest Courts of Justice, distraction among the
Soldiers, being tied to several forms of Oaths, insurrections and commotions
among the Companies new levied, not well disciplined (as likewise among the
common people) which have extended to blood, to the affrightment, fear, and
trouble of all the Provinces; at which the Enemy smiles (who happily have a
hand in the design) and their friends lament to see it so. To cure which
Malady, there is no other way than to call a National Council, where these
Waters of strife being kept in due bound, the asperous edge of Opinion might be
taken off, by grave and weighty Reason, to abate the Passion both in Church and
State.

The Remonstrants (which the Arminians called themselves) carrying on their
Resolutions with a full sail, Barnevelt opposes the Pr. of Orange.
would by no means alter their course, or consent to the calling of a Council;
either fearing their party in Council would prove the weakest, or knowing their
partakers in Action would be the strongest; for most of the States and
Governors of Provinces had tasted of this infected Cup. And Barnevelt (the
Head of them) being an active person, and having a nimble tongue, distilling
into them a Jealousy, that Maurice Prince of Orange (who had the command of
all their Garrisons, as General or their Army) affected to make himself (by his
power) sole Lord and Monarch over them; that the Freedom which they had
purchased with their bloods, was now ready to be trampled on; he that was their
Servant, aspiring to become their Master; having all power both by Sea and
Land, in his own hand; all Governments, and Offices at his dispose, so that he
wanted nothing but the Title to make him absolute. These sparks took fire with
many, and yet they could not well see by that light, because Barnevelt drew
these pretenses as a Curtain, to get as much power in the Militia, as he had in
their Councils, the better to bring his ends about. Whereupon to balance the
Prince of Orange's power, new Companies are levied in some of the Provinces
secretly, specially in Utrecht, meaning to make that the Stage to act their
bloody parts on: Which Town being much corrupted with the Leaven of bad
Doctrine, they soon closed with the corruption of as bad manners.

The Prince of Orange goes to Utrecht.
The Prince of Orange, and some others affected to him, did cut out their time
to the length of the others endeavors, proportioning their Prevention suitable
to the others Action, so the advance of the one party ran upon the same
Parallel with the other, being ready to tread on their heels for have. And now
the time being ripe, 25 July.
The Prince goes to Utrecht, accompanied with some of the States his intimates,
Count Ernest of Nassau, and some other Commanders of the Army, to seize upon,
or disband those new raised Forces; in which he was opposed by Leydenburgh and
other States of the Town, who incited the Governor, Sir John Ogle, our
Countryman, to deny the Prince entrance; but he was too much a friend to the
Honor of his Name and Nation, to falsify his trust. So that the Prince
encountered only with those, whose unwillingness had power enough if they had
had hearts to oppose him. But he finding it would be an ill Precedent to the
rest of the Towns to meet a Repulse here, had ordered five Hundred foot from
Arnham and the next Garrisons, to meet him there, who entered the Town that
evening peaceably, and the next morning about four a clock disbanded the new
levied Companies, before the Townsmen were well awake.

The Prince had no great reason to trust the Garrison of the City, considering
the Reformed Religion was totally kept under hatches, and the Arminian got upon
the deck. The Governor himself suspected, and complying to outward appearance,
and the common Soldiers running with the stream. But he knew (it seems) their
temper ascended to no higher notions than thirty Stivers a week was able to
purchase. Therefore he summoned them all over night into the Marketplace,
without beat of drum, who, with the other five Hundred, struck such a terror
into the new levied Companies, that at the first word of command JOHAN VAN
OLDENBARNEVELD Binnen s'Gravenhage Onthalst Den 13. May 1619.
they laid down their Arms and submitted. They were in that City in all nine
Hundred men, that knew they were raised to oppose the Princes power, picked up
of several Nations, that hoped to carve their fortunes out of bloody Tumults,
and backed by a numerous multitude of Citizens, yet they all shrunk in their
heads before the face of Authority.

This giving some stop to the carreir of the Remonstrants in Utrecht, the rest
of the Towns took up, though they had run long uncurbed. And now the Prince and
State thought of nothing more than of composing the Disorders of the Church, by
a National Council, which Barnevelt and his Faction opposing, they resolved to
take away those impediments that hindered the Peace and Tranquillity of the
Provinces. So that on the 19th of August, the prime Ringleaders of the
Sedition, Barnevelt, Hogenberts, and Grotius, were seized on at the Hague, as
they were entering the Senate, and committed to several Prisons. This cast a
general damp upon the spirits of the Remonstrants, as if they had been crushed
in the head. And some few days after Leydenburgh was sent from Utrecht with a
strong Guard. These being the four chief Pillars whereupon this confused
Building stood, they being taken away, it fell to the ground. Leydenburgh to
prevent their mercy stabbed himself in Prison with a knife, that opened a
passage to let out his life. Hogenberts, and Grotius, found something of mercy
by waiting for it, but they were condemned to perpetual Imprisonment in the
Castle of Lovestien. And the latter of them (Grotius) after some time of
Imprisonment made an escape in a Trunk, which his Wife pretended to the
Soldiers of the Castle, to be full of Arminian Books, which she would send
away, because they should not trouble her Husband's head. But the Capital
Offender, Barnevelt, was Beheaded at the Hague the fourteenth of May following,
being 1619.

His Sentence of death was this, Barnevelt's Sentence and death.
That for so much he had endeavored to disturb the Peace of the Land, and had
opposed himself against the wholesome advice of diverse Princes, Lords, and
excellent Persons, as well without as within the Land, and that he had injured
some of their mightiest Allies by his secret practices (namely, by calumniating
the King of Great Britain, as though he had been the Author of these troubles
in the Low Countries.) For that he had kindled the fire of Dissension in the
Provinces; had raised Soldiers in the Diocese of Utrecht; had disreputed his
Excellency as much as lay in his power; had revealed the secrets of the
Council; and had received Presents and Gifts from Foreign Princes: Finally, for
that by his Machinations and Plots, new States have been erected in the State,
new Governments against the Government, and new Unions and Alliances against
the ancient Union, to the general perturbation as well of Policy, as of
Religion, to the exhausting of the Treasures of the Land, to the jealousy and
dislike, not only of the Confederates, but of the Natives of the Country, who
by this means were brought into danger, that they were like to fall into final
ruin.

He was born in Amersford, His Employments.
descended from the Ancient Family of Olden Bernevelt; in his Fortune a private
Gentleman, but by his Industry, Travels, and Studies at home and abroad, he
made himself capable of managing the highest affairs, which he did almost for
forty years together. He was five times Extraordinary Ambassador into England
and France; had been in the Field with the Princes of Orange, and the Army, as
one of the States, thirty two several Leaguers; nothing was acted without his
Advice: Indeed he was the Tongue and Genius of the State. But whether Ambition
(now in his old Age) mounted him to grapple with the Prince for power, or
whether that wild and frantic fancy, that men often brand their spirits with,
and call it Conscience (but is nothing but pertinacy in opinion) impt the wings
of his Affections, we cannot discover, being only the secret Companions of his
own Breast, and let them dye with him. But thus he ended, in the seventy first
year of his Age.

He lived to see (that which he had so much opposed) a National Synod held at
Dort, A Synod at Dort.
whither our King sent Doctor George Carlton, Bishop of Landaff, Doctor Joseph
Hall, Dean of Worcester; Doctor John Davenant, Professor Regius in Cambridge,
and Master of Queens College; and Doctor Samuel Ward, Regent of Sidney College
in Cambridge; Divines of great Reputation, sound Learning, and well-grounded
Faith. Where they met with diverse Divines from Switzerland and Germany, besides
the Natives of the Netherlands; who altogether in a full Synod, quashed, as
much as in them lay, the Arminian Opinions; and though they could not utterly
extirpate the roots of the Heresy, yet they laid them so low, that they never
broke out there since into exuberant branches; though some of the Fibrae, the
small veins left behind, much tainted our Nation, as shall be expressed
hereafter.

A blazing Star.
And now the Heavens declare the Glory of God; A mighty blazing Comet appears in
Libra, whose bearded Beams covered the Virgin Sign; it began on Wednesday
morning, the 18th of November this year, and vanished away on Wednesday the
16th of December following, making, in 28 days motion, its Circumgiration over
most Parts of the known World, extending its radiant locks (by the observation
of Astronomers) sometimes 45 Degrees in length. And as our Doctor Bambridge
observed toward the Declination of it, about the 11th of December, it past
over London in the morning, and so hasted more Northwards, even as far as the
Orcades.

VERA EFFIGIES R.DI IN CHRISTO PATRIS GEORGII CARLETON EPISC.PI CICESTRIENSIS
GEORGIUS CARLETONVS (...) Age, tu solus regai cor. Orbis cor Sol est regai cor
tu Pateriut Sol Orb ^at reg sui seripta meant: (...) Si cor principum (...)
Anglie reite Per (...)


Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus Ether,

they make not their Course in Vain! These Apparitions do always portend some
horrid Events here below, and are Messengers of mischief to poor Mortals: The
Divine Wisdom pointing to us what we should do, to prevent these threatened
dangers, that we may have our lives for a prey. It appears first in Libra, the
Emblem of Justice, and streams over the Virgin Astrea, which (as the Poet
says) was last of all the Virtues left the Earth, Ultima Coelestum terras
Astrea reliquit.

We must by this Admonition from Heaven, learn to do justly; and it is for
injustice that these sad Omens threaten us. What miserable Effects of War,
Ruin, and Devastation, in most parts of the known World, followed at the heels
of this stupendous Harbinger, is obvious to all; and so far as relates to us,
may be declared (God willing) in the Progress of this History: but I hope the
operation and power of it is almost at an end, for it began in Germany, took
France and Spain in the way, and past over England to the Orcades, and so
vanished, as Bainbridge relates in the Description of it, Fol. 7.

Fulgura non semper, nec semper praelia durant. -- let us count it almost past,
For War, like lightning, does not always last.
The first remarkable Accident that happened in England after this Prodigious
Forerunner, The death of Queen Anne.
was the death of Queen Anne, who died of a Dropsy at Hampton Court, and
thence brought to her Palace in the Strand, for the more triumphant glory of
her Obsequies. The Common People, who naturally admire their Princes, placing
them in a Region above ordinary Mortals, thought this great Light in Heaven was
sent as a Flambeau to her Funeral; their dark minds not discovering, while this
Blaze was burning the fire of War that broke out in Bohemia, wherein many
thousands perished.

She was in her great Condition a good Woman, not tempted from that height she
stood on, A short Character of the Queen.
to embroyl her spirit much with things below her (as some busy-bodies do) only
giving her self content in her own House, with such Recreations as might not
make Time tedious to her: And though great Persons Actions are often pried
into, and made Envies mark, yet nothing could be fixed upon her, that left any
great impression, but that she may have engraven upon her Monument a Character
of Virtue.

An. Reg. 17.
About this time Henry Earl of Northumberland, who had been a Prisoner in the
Tower ever since the Powder plot (a long Recluse) was set at liberty. An.
Christi. 1619.
The Cause of his Confinement was upon a Sentence in Star Chamber, for
nourishing in his House Thomas Piercy his Kinsman, Northumberland set at
Liberty.
who was one of the Complotters of the Treason. And though nothing could be
proved against the Earl, to endanger his life, yet upon the presump^^on of his
knowledge of it, he was fined in thirty thousand pounds, and imprisoned in the
Tower. He was married to Dorothy, eldest Daughter to Walter Earl of Essex, by
whom h^ had a N^ble (yet surviving) Issue, two S^ns, and t^o Daughters;
Algernon now Earl of Northumberland, and Henry, both in these Times young.
Dorothy, the eldest Daug^te^, married Robert Viscount Lisle, after the death of
his Father E^^l of Leicester, by whom he had a numerous Issue, like Clive
branches a^out his Table. The younger Daughter, Lucy, a Lady of ^^^omp^rable
Beauty, (solemnized in the Po^^s o^ ^he most exqui^^e Wits ^f her time) married
the Lord Hayes (now made Vi^count Doncaster) against her Father's will (^ho
aimed at higher ^xtracti^^^) during his Imprisonment; which the old Ear^'s
stubborn spirit not brooking* would never give her any thing; And Doncaster,
whose affection was ab^ve money (^etting only a valuation upon his
much-admired, Bride) strove to make himself meritorious, and prevailed so with
the King for his F^ther-in (...), that he got his Release. But the old Earl
would h^rdly be drawn to take a Release from his hand, so that when he had
liberty he restrained himself; and with much importunity was wrought upon, by
(such as knew the distempers of his body, might best qualify those of his
mind) pe^^uading him, ^o^ ^ome indisposition, to make a journey to the Bath,
which was one special motive to accept of his Son-in-la^'s respects.

The variousness of times.
The stout old Earl, when he was got loose, hearing that the great Favorite,
Buckingham, was d^awn about with a Coach and six H^rs^s (which was wondr^d a^
then as a novelty, and imputed to him as a mastring pride) tho^ght if
Buckingham had six, he might very, well have eight in his Coach, with which he
rode through the City of London to the Bath, to the vulgar talk and admiration;
and recovering his health there, ^e lived long after at Petworth in Sussex,
b^ting this over-topping humor, which showed it rather an a^f^cted fit, than a
distemper. Nor did this addition of two H^rses by Buckingham grow higher than a
little murmur. For in the late Q^eens time, there were no Coaches, and the
first had but two Hor^es; the rest crept in by Degrees, as men at first venture
to Sea. And every new thing the People dis-affect, they stumble at, sometimes
at the action for the person, which rises like a little cloud, but soon
vanishes. So after, when Buckingham came to be carried in a HONORATISS^^^^ Dus
HENRICUS PERCEY COM^^^^ NORTHVMBERIAN^
If Art could show the Spirit in the Face
And in dead Sines express a Living Grace,
You might (though wanting an Inscription) swear
That this the shadow of a PERCY were
For when the Noblest Roman worthies Liud,
(Though greater Fame their Fortunes have atcheiud
No brauer Spiritts did in ROME command
Then were the PERCYS of NORTHVMBERIAND
Chair upon Men's shoulders, the clamor and noise of it was so extravagant,
that the People would rail on him in the Streets, loathing that Men should be
brought to as servile a condition as Hor^es. So irksom is every little new
impression, that breaks an old Custom, and rubs and grates against, the public
humor! But when Time had made those Chairs common, every loose Pimp, or
Minion, used them; so that, that which gave at first so much scandal, was the
means to convey those privately to such places, where they might give much
more. Just like long hair, at one time decried as abominable, at another time
approved of as beautiful. So various are the fancies of the times! And that
strong Reason is only able to manage this Beast, that can best curb its own
Appetite.

But now War breaks in upon us, Stirs in Germany.
following that blazing Forerunner; the House of Austria (like Pyrrhus and
Lysander, extending their Dominions no further than the Sword could reach)
having long seat hered their Nests with the Eagles plumes, grew formidable to
the Princes and States of Germany. And because they found the Popes had
shrewdly plumed some of their Predecessors, till they had wrested most parts of
Italy from the Empire, they were content to maintain their Grandeur by the
Popes power, and to ingratiate themselves the more, became great Persecutors of
the Reformed Religion.

A little before this time Ferdinand (Uncles Son to Matthias the Emperor) was
Crowned King of Bohemia, Anno 1617.
with this Reservation, that he should not exercise the Power of a King, as
long as the old Emperor lived. This kind of Crowning of Kings (one in the life
of another) was the great Chain, that (link by link) held the Empire, and the
two Kingdoms of Hungaria and Bohemia together in the Austrian Family; so that
the State of either Kingdom could not, or durst not, put forth their Strength
to shake them asunder. The Emperor kept his Court at Vienna, King Ferdinand at
Gretz in Stiria; so that the Government of Bohemia rested in such Counselors
as the Emperor Matthias left there for the management of Public Affairs. These
Counselors, and Ministers, with the Archbishop of Prague broke out about this
time, not only to demolish the Protestant Churches, but by the help of the
Jesuits (their bitter Enemies) strove to undermine the Religion it self.

The Protestant States, and Nobles of the Country, summoning an Assembly, to
redress their Grievances, were opposed by some of them Emperor's Ministers of
State, the very day of their meeting; which exasperated them to such a height
of Passion, (being backed by some Forces they brought with them for their
Security) that they threw Slabata the Emperor's chief Justice, Smesansius, one
of the Council of State, and Fabricius, a pragmatical, Secretary, from a high
Window in the Castle, down into the Court, though some of them took little
hurt, and lived (as reports go) to this time. This rash Action the Bohemians
strive to palliate by Apologies to the Emperor, but withal strengthened
themselves, making Leavies both of Horse, and Foot, the better to secure their
own Peace, and banishing those Firebrands the Jesuits out of Prague, whose
malicious and distempered Zeal first kindled the Flame. The Emperor hearing of
these mischiefs, raises an Army under the command of Count Bucquoy, and the
Protestant States finding the Emperor exasperated, raise two Armies, one
commanded by Count Thurne, the other by Count Mansfeldt: some bickrings past
betwixt the Imperial Army and the Bohemians, some Towns taken on both sides;
and in the heat of this stir the old Emperor dies.

Ferdinand King of Hungary, and Bohemia, and adopted heir of old Matthias,
meeting (after summons) at Frankford, with the three Electors of Mentz, Collen,
and Trevers, and only with the Representatives of the other three Electors; The
Church carried it for him, 18 Aug.
and he was chosen King of the Romans. The States of Bohemia disclaimed the
election, as invalid, because he could not be an Elector himself as King of
Bohemia; for that he had never been actually in possession of the Crown. And
though their dissent could not lessen Ferdinand's Election to the Empire, yet
they protested by oath never to acknowledge him for their King. These eruptions
made a noise all over Christendom, and most knowing men looked on this heavenly
Torch, the late Comet, as fit fuel to give fire to such a train.

Our King fearing the clap would fall heavy upon the Protestant party,
Doncaster Ambassador.
sent the Viscount Doncaster, extraordinary Ambassador, to mediate a
Reconciliation betwixt the Emperor, and the Bohemians. But the asperity and
bitterness was too great to find an allay by his sweet and candid Complements,
being sitter for the bosoms of Lovers, than the armed breasts of Uprores and
Tumults.

Ferdinand insinuated with the Princes of Germany, especially the Duke of
Bavaria, to corroborate his party; the Bohemians, made election of our King's
Son-in-law, the Prince Elector Palatine, to be their King, hoping his great
Alliance would strengthen theirs. Some little pauses were in the acceptance
(though a liquorish bait) the Elector Palatine being fearful to engage himself
to snatch a Crown out of the fire: But the Bohemian States wrought the Prince
of Anhalt, the Earl of Holoch, and the Baron Done, the Palatines intimates, in
their forge (of great promises and preferments) to such a temper, that by their
assistance (slighting the danger) he reached at the Crown, before either he, or
his friends were well advised of it. His Election was upon the 26 of August,
1619.
his entrance into Prague the last of October, and his Coronation the fourth of
November following. But as soon LOTHARIVS PAR LA GRACE DE DIEV ARCHEVESQVE DE
TREVES B. Moucorne^ excudit
as he had accepted, and swallowed the Royal bait, he sent the Baron Done to
our King, to excuse the suddenness of the acceptance, before his Counsels were
well concocted, but the emergency of the Cause (as he pretends) would admit of
no deliberation. As some hasty Physicians, or choleric Patients, to prevent a
Fever, bring the body to a Hectic.

Our King that looked upon his own condition through the Optique of the peoples
mutable and unstable affection, would by no means countenance such a Precedent
as should give them power to dispose of an established Royal dignity, at their
pleasure, and upon every change of humor; for so he might shake his own
foundation, which made the Barons addresses crude and nauseous to his Appetite,
till time had a little digested them. And then he dispatched two Ambassadors
into Bohemia. Weston and Conwey sent Amb. into Bohemia.
One was Sir Richard Weston, who was afterward Lord high Treasurer of England,
and left to his posterity the Earldom of Portland, a man of a haughty spirit,
yet knew how by suppling it, to make his way to the height he arrived at: For
his Religion gave place to his Policy, and mounted him till he became one of
the great grievances of the Kingdom. The other was Sir Edward Conwey, a man of
a grosser temper; bred a Soldier, being Governor of Bril when England gave over
her interest in the cautionary Towns, who was after made a Viscount, and
Secretary of State, a rough impollished piece for such an employment. But the
King that wanted not his Abilities would often make himself merry with his
imperfect scrouls in writing, and hacking expressions in reading, so that he
would break into laughter, and say in a facetious way, Had ever man such a
Secretary, that can neither Write nor Read? These two were suited for the
employment, happily upon design; Weston being a kind of Papist, and Conwey a
Protestant, the better to close up the breach between the Emperor, and the King
of Bohemia,

But Ferdinand being startled with the flaring Glory of this new King, 1620.
to cast a damp upon it, and to terrify him, and his Adherents, he caused this
Proscription to be published against them.

WE Ferdinand, etc. To all Electors, The Palatine proscribed.
Princes, etc. but especially to the Subjects of Frederick Count Palatine of
the Rhine, Elector, etc. send greeting. Because it is not known unto you, how
that Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine, etc. has made himself head of that
persidious and rebellious crew of our Kingdom of Bohemia: Wherefore we proclaim
the said Frederick Count Palatine, etc. Guilty of High Treason, and iterate
Proscription, and of all the Penalties which by Law and Custom are depending
thereon. We conclude him out of Our, and the Imperial Peace, and are firmly
resolved solved to execute the said Penalties against the said Frederick, An.
Reg. 17.
which calls himself Count Palatine of the Rhine, as against one publicly
proscribed, An. Christi. 1619.
an Enemy and Adversary to us, and to the Empire, and as one which has
suffered himself to be made a Head of our disobedient and perfidious Rebels;
who is a Contemner and Oppugner of our Imperial Authority, and Majesty; who is
an Infringer of Public Peace, and Tranquillity, and of other Ordinances and
Laws of the Empire. Commanding you, under pain of Life, that in no way you give
any aid, succor, assistance, neither in Money, Provision, Munition, nor any
way else, neither openly, nor covertly, under what color or pretext soever, to
the said Frederick, who calls himself Count Palatine of the Rhine. And if one
or more of you should serve, or be in pay of the said Frederick, his Accomplices,
or Helpers, We command him, or them, to forsake the Service of the said
proscribed Frederick, and of his Helpers. And we command you the Estates,
Dependents, Alliances, Subjects and Vassals of the said proscribed Frederick,
that henceforth you yield unto him no obedience, help, nor aid, in assisting
him any further; nor partake of his Rebellion, Disobedience, and Crime, but
utterly to forsake him in it, and to assist us with true and faithful aid and
succor, to reduce the disobedient, disloyal, rebellious, proscribed Frederick,
and his Helpers, to due Obedience, any Treaty, Confederacy, Amity and Alliance
notwithstanding. And we absolve you that are Vassals of the said proscribed
Frederick, or which are in his Protection, or which are his Natural Subjects,
or Strangers, from all your Oaths, and Duties; promising to all those which
shall be obedient unto this our Mandate, all Imperial favor, grace, and
security. We will likewise, that none shall protect, defend or secure the said
banished Frederick, and his Helpers, and Assistants, in nothing that may be
profitable to them. For we exclude the said banished Frederick, together with
his Adherents, from all favor, liberties, promises, security, public peace,
confederacies, alliances, laws, privileges, immunities and customs heretofore
given unto him, and them, by our Ancestors the Roman Emperors. But he that
shall be disobedient unto this our Will and Command, and shall assist, take
part, or aid in any sort, either privately or publicly, under what color
soever, the said Frederick, who calls himself Count Palatine of the Rhine,
and Duke of Bavaria, We declare by these Presents guilty of high Troason, and
iterate Proscription, no less than himself. And this let every one take notice
of, to keep themselves from danger. Given in our City of Vienna, etc.

CHRISTIANVS II. DVX SAXONIAE, ETC. SEPTEMVIRATVS CAES. CREAN. HAERES ANNO MDCIX
VIRTVTE CHRISTI ANA

The Duke of Saxony took the Field with an Army of twenty thousand men, An.
Reg. 18. An. Christi. 1620.
to execute this Imperial Ban, and reduced most part of Lusatia. But before
this, the Earls of Thurn, and Mansfeldt, with a great Army stood the shock of
the Imperial power in diverse Assaults: Saxony executes the Imperial Ban.
but when the King was established in Bohemia, and his Counsels managed by the
Prince of Anhalt, and the Earl of Holoch, then Thurn and Mansfeldt were
eclipsed by the brightness of their power; for Anhalt must be General, and
Holoch Lieutenant General. This taking impression in the region of gallant
minds, drew up some ill vapors of discontent, which tended to a fiery
exhalation, that like ill Omens did presage an unhappy event.

While they were thus grappling in Bohemia, Preparations for War.
the Marquess Spinola was forming an Army in Flanders, and the Protestant
Princes of Germany, Consederates to the Palatine (calling themselves the
Princes of the Union) raised Forces for the defense of the Palatinate, and
their own Interest, under the Command of the Marquess of Ansbach. But our King
made no Preparations, yet he sent to his Ambassador at Bruxels, commanding him
to enquire for what purpose Spinola's Army was called together, the Truce
continuing betwixt Spain and the Low Countries; but the Ambassador could
receive little satisfaction, the Spanish subtilty having sealed up Spinola's
Commission, which he was not to open till the Army were ready to march. But men
of ordinary understanding might apprehend, that an Army of six and twenty
thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, with all Military Provisions, were not
to lie still; and though our King had diverse Arguments presented to him, that
did assure him that Army was intended for the Palatinate, yet would not his
Spirit be set on work to preserve his Childrens Patrimony; So odious was the
name of War to him! But at length, with much ado, one Regiment of Foot (to join
with the Princes of the Union, and make a little noise and bustle) was extorted
from him by importunities. This Regiment was the gallantest for the Persons,
and outward presence of men, that in many Ages (I think) has appeared either
at home or abroad: It consisted of two and twenty hundred complete; the chief
Commander Sir Horatio Vere (who was after Baron of Tilbery) a Person bred up in
the School of War, and a known Master in the Art of Victory. He was accompanied
with the Earls of Oxford and Essex, young and daring Spirits, whose honor not
only descended from a long Series of Noble Progenitors, but they made it their
own. And out of respect to them, as well as love to the Service, this Regiment
was almost furnished with Gentlemen, who went to make themselves capable of
better employment; the English for many years having been truants in that Art.
The two Earls had two hundred and fifty men apiece piece in each Company; and
so many flocked to Essex out of love (and he loath to put them off) that he
carried 300 men into the Palatinate, An. Christi. 1620.
paying fifty of them with his own Money. The King being drawn to consent, that
two Regiments more should follow for these two Noblemen, which gave the more
encouragement to this petty Enterprise.

The march of the English into the Palatinate.
The English followed Spinola, but at a distance; for he being nearer to the
Palatinate, got much the start of them, though they went out of England before
he presented the Archdukes with the civilities of his Departure, which was
upon the eighth of August. And upon the last of the same month, by the
Assistance of Maurice Prince of Orange, and the benefit of a Bridge of boats a
little below Weasel, they past the Rhine under the Conduct of Prince Henry of
Nassau, who with two thousand Horse, and four hundred Musketeers, taken out of
Gulick and the adjacent Garrisons, cleared the Country before them, marching
through Gulickland, and the barren Mountains of Collenland, till they came near
to Coblentz, which Town stands upon the Center of two Rivers, the Rhine, and
Mosell. Giving out in the march, as if the Army intended to pass the Mosell;
but the Prince (to divert the Enemies intelligence) upon the sixteenth of
September drew two miles back from Coblentz, and past the Rhine in Punts, a
kind of Liter, advancing forward on the other side of the River three English
miles that night, to a Village called Hembach, where the Foot stayed till the
Horse past the River. And this sudden change of resolution was one of Prince
Henry's Masterpieces; for he knew from Collen, Spinola would have intelligence
by Curriers, which way the bent of their march tended; and they had the Mosell
in their eye all the way, but the Rhine in intention. In the Halt before
Coblentz, one bullet among others from the Town, past between General Vere, and
the Earl of Essex standing together, and hit a Gentleman, called Flood, on the
elbow: The cause of shooting from thence (as was conceived) proceeded from a
Skirmish the night before, that happened betwixt some English, and the Country
People of an adjoining Village on the Mosell; for Captain Fairfax being sent
with a Squadron to them, in a peaceable manner, to desire the accommodation of
bread and wine for Money, the Bores shot at him, and hurt some of his men, but
he stoutly advancing to them, they took their Boats, and hasted down to
Coblentz. Some of the Bores were reported to be slain, for which Fairfax, upon
the Prince's complaint, was committed, to give the Country satisfaction, but
the next day released.

Before the Army past the Rhine, General Vere sent Captain Row, and Captain
Dexter (with ninety four sick men, some Tents, Trunks, and other Luggage, that
were cumbersome) by MAURITS PRINS VAN ORANJE
Benssheim.
water to Bacrash, which Town within few days after was summoned by Spinola,
and yielded to him, after the example of Openheim, and the other Towns he had
taken in the Palatinate; so spiritless were the people in every place, that he
met no resistance in any thing that he attempted. The English taken in Bacrach
were used with civility, and with the payment of small Ransoms, had liberty to
return home. After the Army, both Horse and Foot, had passed the Rhine, they
had hard marches through the pleasant Country of Nassau (whose Amocnity and
fruitfulness may rival the beauties of France) shaping their course toward
Frankford.

Spinola finding himself deluded on one side of the Rhine, Spinola attempts to
intercept the English.
past the River Main with all his Horse, and four thousand Foot, intending to
snap them on the other; but the stream being too high, his Wagons with
Munition took wet, and some Fieldpeices miscarried, which could not be
recovered with the loss of some of his men; which disasters happening, they
admonished him to a retreat, otherwise in all probability he had cut off those
Forces before they could have joined with the Princes of the Union. The 24 of
September Prince Henry with his Horse, and General Vere with the Foot, past the
River Main, at a Ford not far from Frankford, the Foot for the most part
marching up to the middle through the stream, and that night they stood in
Arms, having two Alarums of Spinola's approach, not hearing yet he was retired.
The next day they had a long march to recover Darmstat, one half of which Town
belongs to the King of Bohemia, the other part to the Landsgrave of Hessen.
There Prince Henry and the Dutch Companies left the English, and returned into
the Netherlands again, and fifteen hundred German Horse, commanded by Colonel
Megan, met them, by order from the Princes of the Union. The 27 of September
they came to Beinsheim, being the first entire Town in the Palatinate they
arrived at; and upon the first of October past over the Rhine by Worms, upon a
Bridge of Boats, and that day were met by the Marquess of Ansbach, and some
others of the Princes of the Union, who stayed to see them march by, wondering
at the gallantry of such Foot, who were with them the meanest of the people.

After two days rest, The English join with the Princes.
the Princes with part of their Army, being 4000 Horse, and 6000 Foot, joined
with the English, and together marched toward Altzi (a Town in the Palatinate
that the Enemy had taken in) which they intended to surprise. But hearing by
their Scouts that the Enemy had quitted the Town as not tenable, and that
Spinola with his whole Army was marching toward them, they faced about to make
his way the shorter, and within three hours their Scouts and the Enemies were
in Skirmish, but the German Princes, not having their whole Army, were not
forward to engage. Spinola seeing them march toward him (being as weary as
they) took the advantage of a Hill, and forced their Horse with his Cannon to
retreat; but the Princes drew their Cannon up another Hill on the right hand of
the Enemy, there being a large bottom, and a hill of Vineyards betwixt the two
Armies, which were not visible but from thence, for the one Hill drowned the
other to them in the bottom. As soon as they saw how the Enemy strove to secure
himself, and that he was loath to come on, they judged their strength not to be
great, and therefore took a resolution to set upon them. The Dutch in courtesy
yielded the Vanguard to the English, which before they stood upon, as a
Punctilio of honor. The English General drew out of every Division fourscore
Musketeers to give the Onset, who were encouraged by that Reverend Divine
Doctor Burges (of whom mention is formerly made) who accompanied the General
from England, and was an instrument of much good to that Regiment; though they
needed no encouragement at that time, being spirits willingly prepared for such
enterprises.

And prepare for a Charge.
Standing thus ready, expecting the command of the Marquess of Ansbach to begin
the charge, and the evening hastening with a sable foil to excuse his flowness:
General Vere tired with his delays, rod up to the Hill, accompanied with the
Earls of Oxford and Essex; and there they saw the Enemy began to march away,
their Wagons marching in two ranks, and the Foot on the further side of them,
the Wagons serving as a Bulwark for them; their Horse brought up the Rear, and
the march was without Drum or Trumpet, till the last Division moved, and then
they made the Air shake with the noise of their shouts, which was apprehended
to be for joy of their escape: For the Princes afterward had intimation, that
they were not above six thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, and that they
had marched all night, hoping to have found them in some security at Altzi,
that they might have beaten up their Quarters before they had been settled. But
the Spaniard, like a cunning Miner, finding them in a posture to entertain him,
was loath to engage, fearing their strength, and seeking advantages. And if
their German heads had countermined with him, and interposed betwixt him and
Openheim (his head Quarter, whither he was marching) being nearer to it than
he, they might have either forced him to fight, or forced the Town from him.
The Earl of Essex being informed of this by some that knew the Country, pressed
the Marquess of Ansbach to it, desiring him not to let slip an opportunity so
happily put into his hand. He, not well pleased to be urged to a thing so
contrary to his humor, replied angerly, There is a Fort betwixt us and the
Town, and we must pass thither under the mercy of their Cannon. Sir AMBROSIVS.
SPINOLA. DVX. S. SEVERINO. PRINC. SARLVAL. MARCH. BENAFRO
Horatio Vere hearing the Marquesse's reason, said, When shall we then fight,
if we shun the Cannon? But no persuasion can be prevalent, where Power and
Disaffection join their Force. The Dutch Horse skirmished with the Rear of the
Spanish, and took five or six Horse, and some straggling Foot, that was all the
hurt done them.

The next day they marched to Quarters again, Spinola and the Princes hunt one
another.
where the Soldiers found the Country Roots, Fruits, and Wine in the Must, no
good preservatives: But after they had stayed by it seven or eight days,
Spinola led them a dance for digestion, pretending for Keisars Luther, a Town
in the borders of the Palatinate, which made the Princes advance their whole
body to attend him, but as they drew near he retreated, so that they sported
with one another, as children at Seek and Find, though neither of their Armies
could be much pleased with the sharp frosty nights, those desolate and naked
Hills exposed them to; upon the top of one of them, the English Commanders one
night burnt a great many of their Wagons to warm them, the Frost was so
violent, and the Soldiers lay in heaps upon the ground close together like
sheep covered as it were with a sheet of snow. Yet they spent the time thus
till their Stoves summoned them to warmer lodging. And the English Regiment was
disposed into three principal Garrisons: General Vere commanded in Manheim, Sir
Gerard Herbert in Heidelburgh, and Serjeant-Major Burrows in Frankindale,
imprisoning themselves in Walls, while the Enemy romed round about them, and
they had only power to preserve themselves; For the Princes of the Unions
Forces were garrisoned in their several Countries. I have the more particularly
described this Expedition, because I was an eyewitness of what passed; and if
we had not had an allay of Dutch dullness, the Spaniard could not have carved to
himself so great a share in that Country, and their opposers had not mouldred
away their Forces as they did afterward, which makes this Relation harsh and
unpleasing.

But there was a Divine Fate attended not only this Country, A sad Fate upon
Germany.
but all Germany; For the Almighty Wisdom that is the Author of all Revolutions
in the World, has his set times for changes, which often tends to the
imbettering of it. For all the Northern Conquests of the Goths, Huns, Vandals,
Scyths, and other ba^barous Nations, were to corroborate the Southern bodies
wasted with Ease and Luxury. And now in Germany a flood of Books, that almost
tended to an inundation, overspread the World, and was her great disease:
Besides the drunken Dropsy, witness their monstrous swelling tuns, and vessel.
In lieu of books, War brings in barbarism* which is the firstborn before
Plague, or Famine. These do not always kill, but rectify. Full bodies are apt
to fall sick, and then they must be drawn very low oftentimes, before they
come to perfect health. These Judgments have fallen heavy upon England, we drink
the dregs of the Cup; one sin is not to be pointed at, but all; and though it
has been bitter to the taste, yet He that knows the nature of the Ingredients
may make it wholesome unto those that love him.

A sad story of Mr. Duncomb.
One thing both pitiful and remarkable, that happened in the Palatinate, was
almost omitted. There was a Gentleman whose name was Duncomb, that was a
Soldier in the Earl of Oxford's company. This young man left a Gentlewoman
behind him in England, to whom he had vowed his heart, and promise of marriage;
but her fortune being not fit for his Father's humor, he threatened to
dis-inherit him, if he married her: and the better to alienate him from her, he
sent him so long a journey, hoping time and absence might wear out those
impressions, that the present fancy had fixed upon him, charging him at his
departure, never to think of her more, lest with the thoughts of her he lost
him for ever. The young man being now long absent from her, and having his
heart full with the remembrance of her, could not contain himself, but let her
know, that no threats or anger of Parents, should ever blot her memory out of
his thoughts, which was illustrated with many expressions of love and
affection. But the careless man writing at the same time to his Father,
superscribed his Father's Letter to his Mistress, wherein he renounces her; and
his Mistresses Letter to his Father, wherein he admires her. The Father swollen
with rage and anger against the Son, sent him a bitter Letter back again full
of menaces; and whether that, or shame for the mistake, that she should see he
renounced her whom he professed to love, did overcome his Reason, is not known;
but he killed himself, to the great grief of all the English there. And by this
example Parents that are too rigid to their children, may see what Murderers
they are: For it was not the young man's hand, but the old man's hard heart
that killed him.

Good success in Bohemia.
The Prince of Anhalt General to the King of Bohemia, in the beginning of the
War (like a red morning, that is the forerunner of a foul evening) met Victory
smiling in his face: For hearing that Bucquoy the Imperial General with his
Army was drawing near Prague, he interposed to stop his Progress, having not
above twelve thousand men, a far less number than the Imperialists. Bucquoy had
a wooden Stratagem, and it thrived accordingly; He mounted Trees upon
Carriages, like Ordnance, to fright his Enemy; but they as wise as birds would
not leave their prey for a whisp of straw dressed like a man, but charged upon
the mouths of such Cannon. Anhalt used a more real Stratagem, that took effect;
He brought his Ordnance up behind his men, invisibly, laden with
Musquet-bullet; and when they should have charged the Enemy, made them wheel
off, that those CAROLVS ALBERTVS DE LONGVEVAL COMES DE BVQVOY ET DE GRATZEN,
BARO DE VAVX ET DE ROSEN BERGHE COMMIT. HANNONLAE GVBERNATOR and B. Moucornet
CXCII
bloody Engines might break their ranks, which they performed to purpose, and
forced them to retire into a Wood, where persuing their advantage, they scatter
their main Body.

This was a fair Springtime (the Battle being fought upon the tenth of March)
and might have inhanced the hopes of a good Autumn: Bad success in Bohemia.
But in November following (when the Princes of the Union, and Spinola, were
hunting one another among the frosty Hills in the Palatinate) the Duke of
Bavaria coming with a great Army toward Prague, and joining Bucquoy and
Tillie, with all their Forces together, like cruel Hunters, meant either to
catch a Prey, or be a Prey. Anhalt then had not so closed with Count Mansfeldt,
as to bring him up to him (being pufft up with his last Victory) and some of
his Soldiers being discontented for want of Pay, it abated the edge of their
Courage; yet he got with his Army betwixt the Imperialists, and Prague, and
stood upon the advantage of Ground; but all would not do; a Hand went out that
gave a Period to that Royalty: for the Enemy breaking through them, forced his
way, and put the Bohemians into such confusion, that happy was he that could
escape with his life. The Prince of Anhalt, and his Lieutenant General Holloc,
were the first that fled, and brought the news of the defeat to the King at
Prague, who (with his Queen astonished with the danger) being in a City not
very defensible, among a wavering People, and a Conquering Enemy in the Field,
took time by the fore-top, and in this hurly burly, the next morning, being the
9 of Nov. left Prague, taking with them their most portable things, having load
enough within them: But the Queen, the more Gallant and Royal Spirit, carried
it with most undauntedness; the King suffered doubly as he went, The King
censu^ed.
being blamed for keeping his Soldiers without pay, having such a mass of
money by him, which he was forced to leave behind to his Enemies, and the
imputation stuck upon him; but flying upon the Wings of common Fame, I shall
not lure it into this Relation as a known Truth.

But by a sad Accident that some years after happened to this unfortunate King,
The loss of his Son.
it was obvious that he left not all behind him; for going to visit the Bankers
of Amsterdam, where his Treasure lay brooding, and passing in the night over
Harlem mere, the winds and darkness in a conspiracy, made a cross Hoigh to run
against the King's, and bulged it in the Sea: but before it sunk, the King and
others got to the Mastring Vessel, and saved themselves; But the Prince his Son
(being of a pregnant, hopeful puberty) with too severe a fate, was left to the
broken Boat, which they durst not approach again, though they heard his cries,
so that he was abandoned to be tormented to death, which was more grievous than
death it self, for the Waters being shallow, and the Hoigh sinking not far, the
next day they found him frozen to the Mast, embracing it as his last Refuge,
his Body half above, half under the water. This Story, melting with Pity, is
here inserted, because the glory of this King expires.

The King's Character.
And since there will be occasion to mention him no more, because his Actions
afterward never mounted up one Story high; Take this brief Character of him.
He was a comely Personage for body, of a good stature, his complexion of a
duskish melancholy; the constitution of his mind rather fitted for those little
besoignes of Accounts, and Reckonings, than any vigorous, or masculine heat, to
solder up the cracked Title of a Crown: He was a handsome, well built, but slight
Edifice, set on an ill Foundation, that could not stand long. The King of great
Britain (that the Bohemians built upon) was not of so firm a temper, as to
support a Fortress (weakly made) that must endure the Rigorous Shock of War;
which made it at the first or second Assault thus totter and fall.

Weston and Conwey return home.
The two English Ambassadors, Weston and Conwey, which our King sent to mediate
for the Bohemians, could make little use of their Oratory, being scattered with
the rest in the Cloud of this Confusion: But they brought the King and Queen to
Limburgh, the first days journey, and after they were gone toward the
Netherlands, the Ambassadors procured a safe Conduct from the Duke of Bavaria
to return to Prague; But there they could find no words so prevalent and
penetrable, as the steel of a Conquering Enemy; and so they returned home, re
infecta, no wiser than they went out.

The Princes of the Union submit to Ferdinand.
This Defeat coming to the Ears of the Princes of the Union, quailed their
courage, made them look back into their own condition; and having not so much
faith as to depend upon our King for assistance, before the Spring they
submitted themselves to the Emperor, leaving the almost-ruined Palatinate as a
Prey to an insulting Enemy; the English only giving Spirits to the Vital parts
of it, conveyed by the Conduct of those Instruments, Vere, Herbert, and
Burrowes; Men fitter to command Armies, than to be confined within the Walls of
Towns.

So does Anhalt.
As soon as Anhalt had done the King his Master this disservice, he retires,
applies himself by mediation to the Emperor, is received with favor, and
admitted to be one of his Generals. No wonder that the War thrived no better,
when it was only made for worldly interests! It was not the badness of the
Cause altogether, but the Men, that struck the deadly blow. The Protestant rage
at Prague was not justifiable in the Star Chamber of Heaven, though the Popish
insolence might too much exasperate. The Counsels must be well weighed in all
the Courts of Justice, when War is put into the Scale; for he that holds it,
sits above, can turn it which way he pleases, and picks out men to manage
Benssheim.
Grundtriss vnd Entwurff etlicher ohrt der ChurPfaltz vnd wie die Spanier nach
etliche treffe^ endtlich gar dar auss geschale^ word

it, suitable to his own ends. If the Protestant Party had been Conquerors, it
should not have been by the means of a General that could fight for it, and
presently after take Arms against it: Such lukewarm tempers are not of a
Heavenly Constitution! Therefore in all great Actions, respect the Men, as well
as the Cause: for God seldom does any great thing for his People by wicked
Instruments.

Mansfeldt only, Mansfeldt vexes the Emperor still.
that was rejected and slighted by Anhalt makes good his fidelity, by bearing
up against the power of the Emperor; not that he was able to grapple with his
whole Force, but being an active spritely man, and having a nimble moving Army
of fourteen or fifteen thousand men, he did harasse the Countries, force
Contribution from the Cities, and when any greater power came against him, he
got from them into another Country, and harrowed that, to their perpetual
vexation: So that he was as goads in their sides, and thorns in their eyes. And
thus he continued in despite of the Emperor, and the Duke of Bavaria, for
almost two years after, till they were constrained to purchase their peace of
him at a dear rate; to which Mansfeldt was also enforced, not finding
assistance nor Supplies to support him.

As soon as the Princes in the Palatinate were retired to their Quarters, Essex
solicits our King for more Forces.
before the great loss at Prague came to their knowledge, the Earl of Essex
with a Convoy of Horse to Swibruken, passed into Lorain, and through France
posted for England, to solicit the King to send those Regiments promised, and
other Supplies (if possible) that the English there, and the whole Country,
might not be exposed to ruin. But when he came into England, he found the
Court Air of another temper, and not as he left it, for it was much more
inclined to the Spanish Meridian. And though Gondemar, the King of Spain's
Ambassador, at the departure of one of his Agents into Spain, facetiously bad
him commend him to the Sun, for he had seen none here a long while, yet we had
the Spanish influence hot among us, the King himself warmed with it; then what
will not the Court be?

The King and his Ministers of State had several ends, Obstructed by Gondemar.
and drive different designs. His was, for the matching of his Son with some
great Princess, aiming at no other glory, though he debased himself to purchase
it. For presently after he received a Denial in France, he sent to Sir John
Digby, his Leidger Ambassador in Spain, to treat of a Marriage betwixt the
Prince of Wales, and the Infanta Maria, Sister to that King, which was in 1617.
No blood but blood Royal can be a propitiatory Offering for his Son; yet the
best Sacrifice is an humble spirit. No matter what Religion, what Piety; that
is not the Question. When Kings have earthly aims, without consideration of
God, God looks to his own Glory, without respect of man. The little foundation
of hope they built upon at that time, was now raised to a formal building, by
the cunning practices of Gondemar, who assured the King, it was his Master's
real intention the Prince should marry the Infanta. And he wished the King his
Master had all the Palatinate in his power, to present it as a donative to the
Prince with his fair Mistress.

The King (that now heard all was lost in Bohemia, saw little possibility of
enjoying the Palatinate quietly, but by the Treaty of a Marriage) was lulled
asleep with Gondemar's windy promises, which Sir John Digby seconded, being
lately made Vice-Chamberlain to the King, Baron of Sherborn, and a great
manager of the affairs at Court. Sir Walter Aston being sent Leidger Ambassador
into Spain, for the general correspondence. And the King anchoring his hopes
upon these shallow promises, made himself unable to prevent the Tempest of War
that fell on the Palatinate, tying up his own hands, and suffering none to
quench the Fire that devoured his Childrens Patrimony.

On the other side, Spanish Pensioners.
the great Courtiers that were our King's intimates, and had his ears, either
through easiness, willing to please his humor, and not daring to oppose it; or
else being Papists and Pensioners to Spain, striving to promote the Catholic
Cause, out of love to it, or being suppled by that insinuating Minister
Gondemar (who had his Master's purse at command, and purchased such as he
thought to be most useful to his ends) were content to let the King go which
way the stream of his affection carried him, and some of them put hand to the
Oar. Those that were looked on under the name of Spanish, were Arundel,
Worcester, Digby, Calvert, Weston, and some others Popishly affected; then
Buckingham, and all the Train he swept along with him (except that party which
his Mother managed) advanced the Spanish Match out of love to their Master. The
Duke of Lenox, the Marquess Hamilton, both Scotchmen, and old servants, of
great credit with him, and interest in his Counsels, were not so active; no
more was William Earl of Pembroke, who after Somerset's fall (by the late
Queen's mediation) was made Lord Chamberlain to the King, a man that merited
the highest employment: For these finding the King's Genius tending to the
Spanish Match, and he a known Master of his own Reason, did not oppose him with
a contesting spirit, but gave him some little hints, that he might know they
were not of his mind. And he being able to steer his own course, looked after
no other Pilot but Gondemar, and those that knew the Chanel. Making Buckingham
his instrument and only bosom-Counsellor in those affairs, which afterward
brought the hatred of the people with the more violence upon him: For they look
not upon the King in WILLIAM HERBERT Earl of PEMBROKE etc
any miscarriage with an eye of Anger (such was the English modesty, if Kings
had been sensible of it) but upon such intimate Ministers, as he makes active
in those things which are contrary to their affection. And though there were
general murmurs in the breasts of the people, which found vent enough in
corners, yet the Council Table, and Star Chamber are such terrifiers, that (as
one said) none durst run riot, but keep at the stirrup, at excellent command,
and come in at the least rebuke or check.

It was thought the Papists did much contribute to Gondemar's liberali^y;
Papists flourish.
for they began to flourish in the Kingdom, he having procured many Immunities
for them, and they used all their industry to further the Match, hoping that if
the Prince did not adhere to Rome, yet his Offspring might; and at present
looked for little less than a Toleration.

No stubborn piece of either Sex stood in Gondemar's way, Gondemar's power.
but he had an Engine to remove them, or screw them up to him. None that
complied with him but found the effects of his friendship; many Jesuits fared
the better for his intercession, he releasing numbers, among the rest one
Bauldwin, an Archpriest, accused to have had a hand in the Gunpowder-Treason,
and had been seven years in the Tower, a man of a dangerous and mischievous
spirit, who was (after his release) made Rector of the Jesuits College at St.
Omers. By his Artifices and Negotiations (having been time enough Ambassador in
England to gain credit with the King) he got Sir Robert Mansel (the
Vice Admiral) to go into the Mediterranean sea, with a Fleet of Ships to fight
against the Turks at Algier, who were grown too strong and formidable for the
Spaniard (most of the King of Spain's Gallions attending the Indian Trade, as
Convoys for his Treasures, which he wanted to supply his Armies) and he
transported Ordnance, and other Warlike Provisions to furnish the Spanish
Arsenals, even while the Armies of Spain were battering the English in the
Palatinate; so open were the King's ears to him, so deaf to others: For Sir
Robert Nanton, one of his Secretaries (a Gentleman of known honesty and
integrity) showed but a little dislike of those proceedings, and he was
commanded from Court, and Conwey was put in his place. And Gondemar had as free
access to the King as any Courtier of them all ( Buckingham excepted) and the
King took delight to talk with him; for he was full of Conceits, and would
speak false Latin a purpose in his merry fits to please the King; telling the
King plainly, He spoke Latin like a Pedant; but I speak it like a Gentleman:
And he wrought himself so by subtilty into the King's good affections, that he
did not only work his own will, but the King's into a belief that the Treaties
in agitation, were (though slow) real and effectual. So easily may wise men be
drawn to those things their desires with violence tend to.

And he cast out his Baits not only for men; but if he found an Atalanta, whose
tongue went nimbler than her feet, he would throw out his golden Balls to catch
them also. And in these times there were some Ladies, pretending to be Wits (as
they called them) or had fair Neices, Prevails with both Sexes.
or Daughters, which drew great Resort to their houses; and where company meet,
the discourse is commonly of the times (for every man will vent his passion)
these Ladies he sweetened with Presents, that they might allay such as were two
sower in their expression, to stop them in the course, if they ran on too fast,
and bring them to a gentler pace. He lived at Ely-House in Holborn, his passage
to the Court was ordinarily through Drury Lane (the Covent Garden being then an
enclosed field) and that Lane and the Strand were the places where most of the
Gentry lived, and the Ladies as he went, knowing his times, would not be
wanting to appear in their Balconies, or Windows, to present him their
Civilities, and he would watch for it; and as he was carried in his Litter or
bottomless Chair (the easiest seat for his Fistula) he would strain himself as
much as an old man could to the humblest posture of Respect. One day passing by
the Lady Jacob's house in Drurylane, she exposing her self for a Salutation, he
was not wanting to her, but she moved nothing but her mouth, gaping wide open
upon him. He wondered at the Lady's incivility, but thought that it might be
happily a yawning fit took her at that time; for trial whereof, the next day he
finds her in the same place, and his Courtesies were again accosted with no
better expressions than an extended mouth. Whereupon he sent a Gentleman to
her, to let her know, that the Ladies of England were more gracious to him,
than to encounter his Respects with such Affronts. She answered, it was true
that he had purchased some of their favors at a dear rate, And she had a mouth
to be stopped as well as others. Gondemar finding the cause of the emotion of her
mouth, sent her a Present, as an Antidote, which cured her of that distemper.

These kind of Spirits were let loose to be suitable to the times they lived
in, Vanity of this Age.
and they wrought strange effects; for this being a Widow, and of no good
Fame, with her subtilties intrapt in her nets, and married a famous Lawyer, a
man of great Reputation, and a pregnant wit; and many other young Gentlewomen
(whom their Parents debaucheries drive to necessities) made their Beauties
their fortunes, coming to London to put them to sale, and some of them had so
good Markets, that they obtained great Pensions during their lives, and
afterward were married to men of eminent parts, and fortunes, accounted wise,
gallant, and Heroical spirits. Such silly Fate often intermingles with those
parts though never so excellent, when the sensitive faculties get predominance
over the Reason! And such men as ELY HOUSE. Engraved from an original Drawing.
were affected to wantonness, would vulgarly brag of it; nay, many times to the
traducing of a Ladies fame, and their own (I cannot say) innocence: For some
would say, and vent it as an Apothegm, I would rather be thought to enjoy such
a Lady, though I never did it, than really to enjoy her, and no body know it.
Such pride was taken in sin, and so brazen-faced and impudent such crimes were
then! And though men thought them small, and trivial, yet they were of such
weight, that they pressed those down that practiced them (though great in the
Worlds Eye) to be now in little better esteem than the meanest of the People.
But as Tacitus modestly covered the faults of some that followed Nero in his
folly, and madness; Ne nominatim tradam majoribus eorum tribuendum puto, for
the honor (he says) of their Ancestors; so though I name the vices, I shall
spare the Persons, out of respect to their Posterity.

The Earl of Buckingham, Buckingham rules all.
as great in Title as in Favor, was now grown a Marquess; and lying all this
while in the King's bosom, every man paid tribute to his smiles. As the King
bought off Worcester, to make him Master of the Horse; so he bought off
Nottingham, to make him Admiral. What may not he have, that is not only Master
of his Horse, and Ships, but his Heart also? His Mother is created a Countess
by Patent, and her second Husband, Sir Thomas Compton, had no other Title but
an unworthy one, which the People (either out of their anger, or her
misdemeanour) imposed upon him. Her eldest Son, first made Sir John Villiers,
after Viscount Purbeck, married to the Daughter and Heir of the Lady Elizabeth
Hatton by Sir Edward Cook; a Lady of transcending beauty, but accused for
wantonness. Purbeck not well able to look down from these great heights, got a
giddiness in his head, which confined him to a dark room. Her other Son, first
made Sir Christopher Villiers, was after created Earl of Anglesey, whose honor
mixed with a weak brain, could not buoy him up from sinking into that distemper
that drowns the best Wits. Her Daughter presently after also shined in the same
Sphere with her, her Husband being from a private Gentleman made Earl of
Denbigh. Happy is he can get a Kinswoman, it is the next way to a thriving
Office, or some new swelling Title. The King, that never much cared for Women,
had his Court swarming with the Marquesses kindred so, that little ones would
dance up and down the privy Lodgings like Pharies; and it was no small sap
would maintain all those suckers.

And now we have named Sir Thomas Compton, A Duel betwixt Compton, and Bird.
there will follow a Story of his youthful Actions, which though done long
since, will not be uncomly to crowd in here. He had the remark of a
slow-spirited man when he was young, and truly his Wife made him retain it to
the last. But such as found him so in those vigorous days of Duelling, would
trample on his easiness; and there could not a worse Character be imprinted on
any man, than to be termed a Coward. Among the rest, one Bird, a roaring
Captain, was the more bold and in^olent against him because he found him slow,
and backward (which is a baseness of an over-daring nature) and his
provocations were so great, that some of Compton's Friends taking notice of it,
told him, It were better to die nobly ^nce, than to live infamously ever; and
wrought so upon his cold temper, that the next alfront that this bold Bird put
upon him, he was heartned into the Courage to send him a Challenge. Bird, a
massy great Fellow, confident of his own strength (disdaining Compton, being
le^s both in Stature and Courage) told the Second that brought the Challenge,
in a vapouring manner, That he would not stir a foot to encounter Compton,
unless he would meet him in a Sawpit, where he might be sure Compton could not
run away from him: The Second, that looked upon this as a Rodomontado fancy,
told him, That if he would appoint the Place, Compton should not fail to meet
him. Bird making choice b^th of the Place, and Weapon (which in the vain
formality of Fighters, was in the election of the Challenged) he chose a
Saw-pit, and a single Sword, where, according to the time appointed, they met.
Being both together in the Pit, with swords drawn, and stripped ready for the
encounter, Now Compton (said Bird) thou shall not escape from me; aand hovering
his sword over his head, in a disdainful manner, said, Come Compton, let us see
what you can do now: Compton attending his business with a watchful eye, seeing
Bird's Sword hovering over him, ran under it, in upon him, and in a moment run
him through the body, so that his pride fell to the ground, and there did
spraul out its last vanity. Which should teach us, that strong presumption is
the greatest weakness, and it is far from wisdom in the most arrogant Strength,
to slight and disdain the meanest Adversary. There is yet in bleeding memory
(even in these Times of just severity against this impious Duelling) one of the
same Family of the Compton's, in some part guilty of Bird's Crime; for the
Provoker to such horrid Encounters seldom escapes, the Divine Justice
permitting such violent madness to tend to its own destruction. But to return
to our Story.

Two Lord Treasurers in one year.
Sir Henry Mountague, Lord Chief Justice (as the Reports of those Times lively
voted) laid down twenty thousand pounds for the Office of Lord Treasurer; and
before the year expired, it was conferred upon Sir Lionel Cranfield, who had
been a Citizen of London, bred up in the Custom-house, and knowing the secret
contrivances of those Officers, was thought fittest to manage the King's
Revenue: For in expensive and wanting Courts, those great Officers are most
acceptable, that by their finenesses and projects, can bring in that, which
with riot and prodigality Prenobilis Henrici Comi Manchester Dnu^ Custodio
Privati Sigil: An^^ete
goes out. But the great step to his Office, was Cranfield's marrying one of
the Marquesse's kindred, which mounted him presently after to be Earl of
Middlesex. The Lord chief Justice for his Money was made a Precedent, as some
jested; the King finding him a man intelligent in all the great Affairs of
State, made him Lord President of the Council, Viscount Mandevill, and Earl of
Manchester, and after the death of Worcester, was Lord Privy Seal.

But though the Marquess of Buckingham in appearance acted all these Removes,
The Countess of Buck. rules her Son.
and Advancements, yet his Mother, the Countess, wrought them in effect, for
her hand was in all Transactions, both in Church and State; and she must needs
know the disposition of all things, when she had a feeling of every man's
pulse; for most Addresses were made to her first, and by her conveyed to her
Son (for he looked after his pleasure more than his profit) which made Gondemar
(who was well skilled in Court Holy Water) among other his witty pranks, write
merrily in his Dispatches into Spain, That there was never more hope of
England's Conversion to Rome, than now; for there are more prayers and
oblations offered here to the Mother, than to the Son.

For the Marquess himself, Buckingham a lover of Ladies.
as he was a man of excellent symmetry, and proportion of parts, so he affected
beauty, where he found it; but yet he looks upon the whole race of Women, as
inferior things, and uses them as if the Sex were one, best pleased with all:
And if his eye culled out a wanton beauty, he had his Setters that could spread
his Nets, and point a meeting at some Ladies House, where he should come (as by
accident) and find Accesses, while all his Train attended at the door, as if it
were an honorable visit. The Earl of Rutland, of a Noble Family, had but one
Daughter to be the Mistress of his great Fortune, and he tempts her, carries her
to his Lodgings in Whitehall, keeps her there for some time, and then returns
her back again to her Father. The stout old Earl sent him this threatening
Message, That he had too much of a Gentleman to suffer such an indignity, and
if he did not marry his Daughter to repair her honor, no greatness should
protect him from his justice. Buckingham, that perhaps made it his design to
get the Father's good will this way (being the greatest match in the Kingdom)
had no reason to mislike the Union, therefore he quickly salved up the wound,
before it grew to a quarrel: And if this Marriage stopped the Current of his
sins, he had the less to answer for. This young Lady was bred a Papist by her
Mother, but after her Marriage to the Marquess, she was converted by Doctor
White (as was pretended) and grew a zealous Protestant, but like a morning dew,
it quickly vanished: For the old Countess of Buckingham never left working by
her sweet Instruments the Jesuits, till she had placed her on the first
foundation. So that the Marquess, betwixt a Mother and a Wife, began to be
indifferent, no Papist, yet no Protestant; but the Arminian Tenets taking root,
were nourished up by him, and those that did not hold the same opinions, were
counted Puritans. These new indifferences now grew so hot in England, that the
Protestant Cause grew very cold in Germany. Which made the spirits of most men
rise against the Spanish Faction at home, and Spain's incroaching Monarchy
abroad.

And though the King sped ill the last Parliament of Somerset's undertaking,
The King calls a Parliament.
and thought to lay them by for ever (as he often expressed) looking upon them
as incroachers into his Prerogative, and diminishers of his Majesty, and Glory,
making Kings less, and Subjects more than they are; Yet now, finding the
peoples desires high-mounted for regaining the Palatinate, he thought they
would look only up toward that, and liberally open their Purses, which he
might make use of; and this Unanimity and good agreement, betwixt him and his
people, would induce his Brother of Spain to be more active in the Treaty in
hand, and so he should have supply from the one, and dispatch from the other.
But Parliaments that are like Physicians to the bodies of Commonwealths, when
the humors are once stirred, they find cause enough many times to administer
sharp Medicines, where there was little appearance of Diseases. For in this
Recess and Ease, Time-servers, and Flatterers, had cried up the Prerogative;
And the King wanting Money for his vast expenses, had furnished himself by
unusual courses. For Kings excessive in gifts, will find followers excessive in
demands; and they that weaken themselves in giving, lose more in gathering,
than they gain in the gift: For Prodigality in a Sovereign, ends in the Rapine
and Spoil of the Subject. Sir Rob. Cotton Hen. 3.
To help himself therefore and those that drained from him, he had granted
several Patents to undertakers, and Monopolizers, whereby they preyed upon the
people by suits and exactions, milkt the Kingdom, and kept it poor, the King
taking his ease, and giving way to Informers; the Gentry grown debauched, and
Fashion-mongers, and the Commons, sopt, and besotted with quiet and restiness,
drunk in so much disability, that it might well be said by Gondemar, England
had a great many people, but few men. And he would smile at their Musters; for
through disuse they were grown careless of Military Discipline, ill provided of
Arms, effeminate; Officers neglecting their charges and duties, conniving for
gain at their Neighbors miscarriages. Some of the Officers in the Militia, and
Justices of the Peace not a few, being Church-Papists, floating upon the smooth
stream of the times, overwhelming all others that opposed them, stigmatizing
them with the name of Puritans, and that was mark enough to hinder the current
of any proceeding or preferment aimed at, or hoped for, either in Church or
State.

And the Jesuits ranging up and down (like spirits let loose) did not now, as
formerly, creep into corners, using close and cunning Artifices, Jesuits swarm.
but practiced them openly, having admission to our Counselors of State; for
when Secretaries, and such as manage the intimate Counsels of Kings are
Iesuitical, and Clients to the Pope, there can be no tendency of Affection to a
contrary Religion or Policy. Those were only most active in the Court of
England, that courted the King of Spain most, and could carry the face of a
Protestant, and the heart of a Papist, the rest were contented to go along with
the cry: For they hunted but a cold scent, and could pick out, and make nothing
of it, that drew off, or crossed, or hunted counter. Which raised the spirits of
the people so high against them, that were the chief Hunters in these times,
that they brought the King himself within the compass of their Libels and
Pasquils, charging him to love his hounds better than his people. And if this
bad blood had been heated to an itch of Innovation, it would have broke out to
a very fore and incurable Malady; every man seeing the danger, few men daring
to prevent it. The Pulpits were the most bold Opposers, but if they touched any
thing upon the Spanish policy, or the intended Treaties (for the Restitution of
the Palatinate was included in the Marriage before it was the Spaniards to
give) their mouths must be stopped by Gondemar, without the Lady Jacob's Receipt,
and (it may be) confined, or imprisoned for it: So that there were noplain
downright blows to be given, but if they cunningly, and subtily, could glance
at the misdemeanors of the Times, and smooth it over metaphorically, it would
pass current, though before the King himself.

For about this time one of his own Chaplains, A Satirical Sermon.
preaching before him at Greenwich, took this Text, 4 Mat. 8. And the Devil
took Jesus to the top of a Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the
World, saying, All these will I give, etc. He showed what power the Devil had
in the World at that time, when he spoke these words, and from thence he came
down to the power of the Devil now. And dividing the World into four parts, he
could not make the least of the four to be Christian, and of those how few went
God's way? So that he concluded the Devil to be a great Monarch, having so many
Kingdoms under his command, and no doubt he had his Vice Roys, Council of
State, Treasurers, Secretaries, and many other Officers to manage, and order
his affairs; for there was order in hell it self; which after he had mustered
together, he gives a character of every particular Officer, who were fit to be
the Devil's servants, running through the body of the Court, discovering the
correspondencies with Jesuits, secret Pensions from Foreign Princes, betraying
their Masters Counsels to deserve their Rewards, working and combining to the
prejudice of God's people. And when he came to describe the Devil's Treasurers
exactions and gripings, to get money, he fixed his eye upon Cranfield, then Lord
Treasurer (whose marriage into the house of Fortune, and Title of Earl, could
not keep him from being odious to the people) and pointing at him with his
hand, said with an Emphasis, That man (reiterating it) That man, that makes
himself rich, and his Master poor, he is a fit Treasurer for the Devil. This
the Author heard, and saw, whilst Cranfield sat with his hat pulled down over
his eyes, ashamed to look up, lest he should find all men's eyes fixed upon him;
the King, who sat just over him, smiling at the quaint Satyr so handsomely
colored over. It seems Neile, the Bishop of Lincoln was not by him then; for
when any man preached that had the Renown of Piety (unwilling the King should
hear him) he would in the Sermon time, entertain the King with a merry Tale
(that I may give it no worse title) which the King would after laugh at, and
tell those near him, he could not hear the Preacher for the old B. Bishop. We
must confess, this Relation smells too rank, but it was too true, and hope the
modest Reader will excuse it (We having had diverse hammerings and conflicts
within us to leave it out) seeing it proceeds not from any rancour of spirit
against the Prelacy, but to vindicate God's Justice to Posterity, (who never
punishes without a Cause) and such like practices as these were doubtless put
upon the score, which after gave a period to that Hierarchy. This man's hand
helped to close up the Countess of Essex's Virginity, when he was Coventry and
Litchfield; his heart had this kind of vanity when he was Lincoln; and when he
was Archbishop of York his head was so filled with Arminian impiety, that in
the next King's Reign he was looked upon by the Parliament to be one of the
great Grievances of the Kingdom, as will follow in the Tract of this Story.

But England was not only manned with Jesuits (all power failing to oppose them)
but the women also began to practice the trade, Jesuitrices.
calling themselves Iesuitrices. This Order was first set a foot in Flanders,
by Mistress Ward, and Mistress Twittie, two English Gentlewomen, who clothed
themselves in Ignatian habit, and were countenanced and supported by Father
Gerard, Rector of the English College at Liege, with Father Flack, and Father
More. But Father Singleton, Father Benefield, and others opposed them, and
would not bless them with an Ite, praedicate; for their design was to preach
the Gospel to their sex in England. And in short time this Mistress Ward (by the
Pope's indulgence) became the Mother-general of no less than two hundred
English damsels of good birth and quality, whom she sent abroad to preach, and
they were to give account to her of their Apostolic labors. This Spawn out of
the mouth of the Beast, and many other fine Lionell Craufield Earl of
Middlesex, Baron Cranfield of Cranfield.
Iesuitical exploits, are more particularly related by Wadsworth in his Spanish
Pilgrim (who was son to that Wadsworth, that went over Chaplain into Spain,
with our King's first Leidger Ambassador, Sir Charles Cornwallis, and there
perverted by the Jesuits) which young man being bred up at Saint Omers, in the
Nursery of Iesuitism, discovered all their machinations. Such a brood of Vipers
being then nourished in the bowels of this Kingdom.

The King, The Parliament meet the 20 Ian.
that either thought these instruments were not so active, or that they would
not be discovered, was resolved upon a Parliament, for the former Reasons,
which began the twentieth of January this year; yet not being ignorant of some
miscarriages that passed by his allowance, he strives to palliate them, and
gives the Parliament some little touches of them by the way, that when they
should find them, they might (by his Anticipation) appear the less. And being
loath to have the breach between him and his people made wider, he thus strives
to stop the gap.

MY Lords, The King's Speech to the Parliament.
Spiritual and Temporal, and you the Commons, cui multiloquio non deest
peccatum. In the last Parliament ^ made long Discourses; especially to them of
the Lower House, I did open the true thought of my heart. But I may say with
our Savior, I have piped to you, and you have not danced, I have mourned, and
you have not lamented. Yet as no man's Actions can be free, so in me, God found
some spices of Vanity, and so all my sayings turned to me again, without any
success. And now to tell the Reasons of your Calling, and this Meeting, apply
it to your selves, and spend not the time in long Speeches. Consider, That the
Parliament is a thing composed of a Head and a Body; the Monarch, and the two
Estates: It was first a Monarchy, then after a Parliament; there are no
Parliaments but in Monarchical Governments; for in Venice, the Netherlands, and
other Free-Governments, there are none. The Head is to call the Body together,
and for the Clergy the Bishops are chief, for Shires their Knights, and for
Towns and Cities their Burgesses and Citizens. These are to treat of difficult
matters, and to counsel their King with their best advice, to make Laws for the
Commonweal; and the Lower House is also to petition the King, and acquaint him
with their grievances, and not to meddle with their King's Prerogative. They
are to offer supply for his necessity, and he to distribute in recompense
thereof Justice and Mercy. As in all Parliaments, it is the King's office to
make good Laws (whose Fundamental Cause is the peoples ill manners) so at this
time. That we may meet with the new Abuses, and the incroaching craft of the
times, particulars shall be read hereafter.

As touching Religion. Laws enough are made already; it stands in two points,
Persuasion and Compulsion. Men may persuade, but God must give the blessing.
Jesuits, Priests, Puritans, and Sectaries, erring both on the right hand and
left hand, are forward to persuade unto their own ends; and so ought you the
Bishops, in your example and preaching; but compulsion to obey, is to bind the
Conscience.

There is talk of the Match with Spain: But if it shall not prove a furtherance
to Religion, I am not worthy to be your King: I will never proceed, but to the
Glory of God, and content of my Subjects.

For a supply to my necessities. I have reigned eighteen years, in which time
you have had Peace, and I have received far less supply than has been given to
any King since the Conquest. The last Queen of famous memory, had one year with
another above a hundred thousand pounds per annum in Subsidies. And in all my
time I had but four Subsidies, and six Fifteens. It is ten years since I had a
Subsidy, in all which time I have been sparing to trouble you. I have turned my
self as nearly to save expense as I may. I have abated much in my
Houshold-expences, in my Navies, in the charge of my Munition: I made not
choice of an old beaten Soldier for my Admiral, but rather chose a young man,
whose honesty and integrity I knew; whose care has been to appoint under him
sufficient men to lessen my charges, which he has done.

Touching the miserable dissentions in Christendom. I was not the cause
thereof; for the appeasing whereof, I sent my Lord of Doncaster, whose journey
cost me three thousand five hundred pounds. My Son-in-law sent to me for
advice, but within three days after accepted of the Crown; which I did never
approve of for three Reasons.

First, for Religion sake, as not holding with the Jesuits disposing of
Kingdoms, rather learning of our Savior to uphold, not to overthrow them.

Secondly, I was no Judge between them, neither acquainted with the Laws of
Bohemia. Quis me judicem fecit?

Thirdly, I have treated a Peace, and therefore will not be a party. Yet I left
not to preserve my Childrens patrimony; for I had a Contribution of my Lords
and Subjects, which amounted to a great Sum. I borrowed of my Brother of
Denmark seven thousand, five hundred pounds, to help him, and sent as much to
him, as made it up ten thousand: And thirty thousand I sent to the Princes of
the Union to hearten them. I have lost no time, had the Princes of the Union
done their part, that handful of men I sent had done theirs. I intend to send
by way of persuasion, which in this Age will little avail, unless a strong hand
assist. Wherefore I purpose to provide an ROTTERDAM
View of Rotterdam Army the next Summer, and desire you to consider of my
necessities, as you have done to my Predecessors, Qui cito dat, bis dat. I will
engage my Crown, my Blood, and my Soul in that Recovery.

You may be informed of me in things in course of justice; but I never sent to
any of my Judges to give Sentence contrary to the Law. Consider the Trade, for
the making thereof better; and show me the Reason why my Mint, for these eight
or nine years, has not gone. I confess, I have been liberal in my Grants, but
if I be informed, I will amend all hurtful grievances: But who shall hasten
after grievances, and desire to make himself popular, he has the Spirit of
Satan. If I may know my errors, I will reform them. I was in my first
Parliament a Novice; and in my last there was a kind of Beasts, called
Undertakers, a dozen of whom undertook to govern the last Parliament, and they
led me. I shall thank you for your good Office, and desire that the World may
say well of our Agreement.

Physicians have an Aphorism, The Parliament comply with the King.
Si caput infirmum, caetera mem brum dolent. This Head is not a weak one, but
subtle enough for the Body. The Parliament knew well whom they had to deal
with, and managed their business in the beginning, that they were the readier
to grapple with him in the end. They would not stir a Stone of that foundation
his Prerogative rested on, but those men that had wrought themselves in, to
supplant and undermine the Common Liberties, they fell sore upon them.

The King was modest, Doncaster's Ambassy expensive.
and almost ashamed to tell the Parliament, how much Money the Viscount
Doncaster's J^urney cost, therefore he minces it into a small proportion. But
this we know, when he landed at Roterdam, the first night and morning, before
he went to the Hague, his Expenses those two meals, in the Inn where he lay,
came to above a Thousand Gilders, which is a Hundred pounds Sterling. And the
Innkeeper at the Peacock at Dort (hoping he would make that his way into
Germany) made great Provisions for him, upon, no other Order, but a bare Fancy;
and the Ambassador taking his way by Utricht, the Innkeeper of Dort followed
him, complaining that he was much prejudiced by his baulking that Town: For
hearing of a great Ambassador's coming, and what he had expended at Ro^erdam, I
made (says he) Preparations suitable, and now they will lie on my hands: Which
coming to Doncaster's ear, he commanded his Steward to give him Thirty pounds
sterling, and never tasted of his Cup. And we have been assured by some of his
Train, that his very Carriages could not cost so little as Threescore pounds a
day, for he had with him a great many Noblemens Sons, and other Personages of
quality, that the Germans might admire the glory of the English, as well as the
French did in his last Embassage. And he was out so long following the Emperor,
in his Progresses from City to Camp, and from Camp to City, a poor humble
Solicitor, if not Petitioner, that his Expense could not amount to less than
fifty, or threescore thousand pounds.

When he was at the Hague, He is feasted by the Pr. of Orange.
had made his visits, and filled the Town with the admiration of his bravery
and feasts. Some intimates to Maurice Prince of Orange, advised him to feast
the great English Ambassador. Yes, yes, (says the Prince) bid him come. When
the Prince's Steward had notice of the invitation (from other hand, for the
Prince gave no order in it) he comes to the Prince and tells him, there will be
great preparations expected; for the Ambassador's ordinary meals were Feasts;
and he had an numerous and splendid Train of Nobles and Gentry, that did
accompany him. Well (said the Prince) fit me a dinner, such as I use to have,
and let me see the bill of fare. When the Steward brought the Bill, the Prince
liked it well; but the Steward said, Sir, This is but your ordinary diet; now
you should have some thing extraordinary, because this is an extraordinary
Ambassador. The Prince thinking some reason in the Steward's Arguments, and
finding but one Pig nominated in the Bill, commanded him to put down another
Pig, and that was all the additions he would make. Which Dish as it is not very
pleasing and acceptable to the Scots Nation for the most part, so we know not
whether it were by accident, or on purpose to displease him. But this is well
known, there could be nothing more contemptible to the morose and severe temper
of the Princes spirit, than this comportment of Doncaster's, which most men
interpreted to be pride and prodigality. But truly (set those vanities of
Grandeur aside, for the honor, His short character.
though not profit of his Master) He was a Gentleman every way complete. His
Bounty was adorned with Courtesy, his Courtesy not affected, but resulting
from a natural Civility in him. His Humbleness set him below the Envy of most,
and his Bounty brought him into esteem with many. A true Courtier for
complying, and one that had Language enough to be real as well as formal; for
he could personate both to the height of expression. So that he was very fit
for his employment, though it were purchased at a dear rate.

Digby goes into Germ.
But to leave this digression. Some small time after the Parliament began, the
King, according to his intentions and expressions in his Speech to them,
dispatched away the Lord Digby Ambassador to the Emperor, where he was to press
for a punctual Answer, whether the Palatinate might be recovered by Peace, or
War.

The King's wants.
And now expecting his return, and the Emperor's answer, the Sir Robert Cotton.
From an Original by P. Van Somer. His Autograph from the Original in the
Possession of John Thane.
Parliament go on with their Work, An. Reg. 19. An. Christi. 1621.
receiving diverse Petitions from several persons imprisoned and ruined, by the
violent extortions of such Ministers, and Informers, as were active to promote
the illegal exactions, that the King's necessities, and ill-advised Counsels
drive him to. For he was grown very low, not having had the assistance of his
people in ten years (as he himself notes) so that he was forced to lessen his
Household, and bring his Expenses down, not being willing to call a Parliament
to supply him. Like Henry the third of England, whose Life and Reign, Sir
Robert Cotton (that able understander and lover of Antiquities) wrote about
this time, wherein he presents that King so fearful of calling Parliaments,
that he would rather pawn his Crown Jewels, give over his House, and cum
Abbatibus, and Prioribus prandere, dine and eat with the Monks, rather than be
beholden to his people. And some thought this Piece of Sir Robert Cotton's a
Parallel for these times. But our King was not so much necessitated, though his
wants were the greater, because they confined the greatness of his mind.

The main things which the Parliament insisted on (though many others came by
the by) were the three great Patents; The peoples grievances.
for Inns, Alehouses, and Gold and Silver thread. Upon every Inn, and
Alehouse, there was a great Fine and Annual Revenue set, throughout the
Kingdom, and they that would not pay so much as the Patentees assest them at,
their goods and persons were seized on till they gave them satisfaction
according to their voraginous humors. And they found out a new Alchimistical
way to make Gold and Silver Lace, with Copper, and other sophisticate
materials, to cousen and deceive the people; and no man must make, or vent any
but such Factors as they employed, so that they engrossed all the whole trade
of that Ages vanity (which was enough) and gave them counterfeit ware for their
money: And if any man were found to make any other Lace than what was allowed
by them, they were made to know (to their dear experience) the power of these
Ingrossers: And so poisonous were the Drugs that made up this deceitful
Composition, that they rotted the hands and arms, and brought lameness upon
those that wrought it; some losing their eyes, and many their lives by the
venom of the vapors that came from it.

The chief Actors in this Pestilent business, Mompesson and Michel actors in
them.
were Sir Giles Mompesson, and Sir Francis Michel: These two moved all the
underwheels. Mompesson had fortune enough in the Country to make him happy, if
that sphere could have contained him, but the vulgar and universal error of
satiety with present enjoyments, made him too big for a rustical condition, and
when he came at Court, he was too little for that: So that some Novelty must be
taken up, to set him (if he knew his own mind) in Aequilibrio to the place he
was in; no matter what it was, let it be never so pestilent and mischievous to
others, he cared not, so he found benefit by it. To him Michel is made
Compartner, a poor sneaking Justice, that lived among the Brothels near
Clerken-well, whose Clark and he picked a livelihood out of those corners,
giving Warrants for what they did, besides anniversary ^^ipends (the frequent
Revenue of some Justices of those times) for connivency. I know how necessary
and how splendent it is for men of public minds to flourish in the execution
of Justice, for weeding out, and extirpating vicious habits, radicated in every
corner; but this thing was a poisonous Plant in its own nature, and the fitter
to be an Ingredient to such a Composition: Therefore he is brought to Court,
Knighted, and corroborated by these Letters Patents, whereby he took liberty to
be more ravenous upon poor people, to the grating of the bones, and sucking out
the very marrow of their substance.

These oppressions were thoroughly ripped up, The Parliaments goodness.
and laid open by the House of Commons. But together with these proceedings
they took notice of the King's wants, and thought fit something to sweeten his
temper, that they might not take from him the little profit he had by those
Patents, but they would m^ke it up some other way, therefore they gave him two
entire Subsidles, which were very acceptable unto him: For those Contributions
that flow from the peoples love, come freely like a Springtide; But illegal
Taxes racked from their bowels (coming through so many Promoters and Catchpoles
hands) run very low, and the King has the least share.

The King hearing these Patents were anatomized in the House of Commons, and
willing to comply with his people, whom he found so bountiful unto him, he
comes to the House of Lords to close gently with them, and excuse the granting
of those Patents, showing some reasons why he did them, and the instructions he
gave for the execution of them, by which he hoped to take off that sharp
reflection that might light upon him. But the modesty of Parliaments seldom
impute any of these miscarriages to the Prince, but the Actors under him must
bear the burden of it. And the time drawing near that the Lords assigned for
judging the Malefactors, the King comes again to the House upon the 26 of
March, and thus passed his sentence upon the Patents, before the Lords should
pass theirs upon the executioners of them.

My Lords,

THe last time I came hither, The Kings Speech to the Lords.
my errand was to inform you (as well as my memory could serve me of things so
long passed) of the verity of my proceedings, and the caution used by me in
passing those Letters Patents, which are now in question Thomas Earl of
Arundell and Surrey Earl Marshall, and Lord high Steward of Englaud. etc.
before you, to the effect that they might not be abused in the execution: And
this I did by way of Declaration. But now I am come (understanding the time of
your censure at hand) to express my readiness to put in execution (which is the
life of the Law) those things which ye are to sentence (for even the Law it
self is a dead Letter without execution) for which office God has appointed me
in these Kingdoms. And though I assure my self that my former behavior, in all
the course of my life, has made me well known for a just King; yet in this
special case, I thought fit to express my own intentions, out of my own mouth,
for punishment of things complained of. The first proof whereof I have given,
by the diligent search I caused to be made after the person of Sir Giles
Mompesson, who though he were fled, yet my Proclamation persued him instantly:
And as I was earnest in that, so will I be to see your sentence against him put
in execution.

Two reasons move me to be earnest in the execution of what ye are to sentence
at this time.

First, That duty I owe to God, who has made me a King, and tied me to the
care of Government, by that politic Marriage betwixt me and my people: For I
do assure you in the Heart of an honest man, and by the Faith of a Christian
King (which both ye, and all the World know me to be) had these things been
complained of to me before the Parliament, I would have done the office of a
just King, and out of Parliament have punished them, as severely, and
peradventure more than ye now intend to do. But now that they are discovered to
me in Parliament, I shall be as ready in this way, as I should have been in the
other. For I confess, I am ashamed (these things proving so as they are
generally reported to be) that it was not my good fortune to be the only Author
of the Reformation, and punishment of them, by some ordinary Courts of Justice.
Nevertheless, since these things are now discovered by Parliament, which before
I knew not of, nor could so well have discovered otherwise, in regard of that
Representative Body of the Kingdom, which comes from all parts of the Country;
I will be never a-whit the slower to do my part for the execution. For (as many
of you that are here, have heard me often say, and so I will still say) So
precious unto me is the public good, that no private person whatsoever (were
he never so dear unto me) shall be respected by me by many degrees as the
public good, not only of the whole Commonwealth, but even of a particular
Corporation, that is a Member of it. And I hope that ye my Lords will do me
that right, to publish to my people this my heart and purpose.

The second Reason is, That I intend not to derogate or infringe, any of the
Liberties, or Privileges of this House, but rather to fortify and strengthen
them: For never any King has done so much for the Nobility of England as I
have done, and will ever be ready to do. And whatsoever I shall say, and
deliver unto you as my thought, yet when I have said what I think, I will
afterward freely leave the Judgment wholly to your House. I know you will do
nothing but what the like has been done before, and I pray you be not jealous
that I will abridge you of any thing that has been used: For whatsoever the
Precedents (in times of good Government) can warrant, I will allow. For I
acknowledge this to be the supreme Court of Justice, wherein I am ever present
by Representation. And in this ye may be the better satisfied by my own
presence, coming diverse times among you: Neither can I give you any greater
assurance, or better pledge of this my purpose, than that I have done you the
honor to set my only Son among you, and hope that ye with him, shall have the
means to make this the happiest Parliament that ever was in England.

This I profess, and take comfort in, that the House of Commons at this time
have showed greater love, and used me with more respect in all their
proceedings, than ever any House of Commons have heretofore done to me, or I
think to any of my Predecessors. As for this House of yours, I have always
found it respective to me, and accordingly do I, and ever did favor you, as
you well deserved. And I hope it will be accounted a happiness for you, that my
Son does now sit among you; who, when it shall please God to set him in my
place, will then remember that he was once a Member of your House, and so be
bound to maintain all your Lawful Privileges, and like the better of you all
the days of his life. But because the World at this time talks so much of
Bribes, I have just cause to fear the whole Body of this House has bribed him
to be a good Instrument for you upon all occasions: He does so good Offices in
all his Reports to me, both for the House in general, and every one of you in
particular. And the like I may say of one that sits there, Buckingham; He has
been so ready upon all occasions to do good Offices, both for the House in
general, and every Member in particular. One proof thereof, I hope, my Lord of
Arundel has already witnessed unto you, in his report made unto you of my
answer touching the Privileges of the Nobility, how earnestly he spoke unto me
of that matter.

Now, my Lords, the time draws near of your Recess; whether Formality will
leave you time for proceeding now to Sentence against all, or any of the
persons now in question, I know not. But for my part, since both Houses have
dealt so lovingly, and freely with me, in giving me, as a free Gift, two
Subsidies, in a more loving manner than has been given to any King before, and
so accepted by me. And since I cannot yet retribute by a General Pardon, which
has by Form usually been reserved to the end of a Parliament: The least I can
do (which I can forbear no longer) is to do something in present, for the ease
and good of my People. Three Patents at this time have been complained of, and
thought great Grievances. "1. That of the Inns, and Hosteries. "2. That of
Alehouses. "3. That of Gold and Silver Thread.
My purpose is, to strike them all dead, and that Time may not be lost, I will
have it done presently. That concerning Alehouses, I would have to be left to
the managing of Justices of the Peace, as before. That of Gold and Silver
Thread was most vilely executed, both for wrong done to men's persons, as also
for abuse in the Stuff, for it was a kind of false Coin. I have already freed
the Persons that were in Prison, I will now also damn the Patent, and this may
seem instead of a Pardon. All these three I will have recalled by Proclamation,
and wish you to advise of the fittest Form to that purpose.

I hear also there is another Bill among you against Informers; I desire you,
my Lords, that as you tender my Honor, and the good of my People, ye will put
that Bill to an end as soon as you can, and at your next meeting to make it one
of your first works: For I have already showed my dislike of that kind of
people openly in Star Chamber, and it will be the greatest ease to me, and all
those that are near about me at Court, that may be. For I remember, that since
the beginning of this Parliament, Buckingham has told me, he never found such
quiet and rest, as in this time of Parliament, from Projecters and Informers,
who at other times miserably vexed him at all hours.

And now I confess, that when I looked before upon the face of the Government,
I thought (as every man would have done) that the People were never so happy as
in my time. For even as at diverse times, I have looked upon many of my
Coppices, riding about them, and they appeared on the outside very thick, and
well-grown unto me, but when I turned into the midst of them, I found them all
bitten with in, and full of Plains, and bare Spots, like an Apple or Pear fair
and smooth without, but when ye cleave it asunder, you find it rotten at the
heart: Even so this Kingdom, the external Government being as good as ever it
was, and I am sure, as learned Judges as ever it had, and I hope as honest,
administering Justice within it; and for Peace both at home, and abroad, I may
truly say more settled, and longer lasting, than ever any before, together with
as great Plenty as ever; so as it was to be thought, that every Man might sit
in safety under his own Vine, and Figtree: Yet I am ashamed (and it makes my
hair stand upright) to consider, how in this time my People have been vexed,
and polled, by the vile execution of Projects, Patents, Bills of Conformity,
and such like, which besides the trouble of my People, have more exhausted
their purses than Subsidies would have done.

Now my Lords, before I go hence, since God has made me the great Judge of
this Land under him, and that I must answer for the justice of the same, I will
therefore, according to my Place remember you of some things, though I would
not teach you; for no man's knowledge can be so good, but their memories will
be the better to be refreshed. And now, because you are coming to give Judgment
(all which moves from the the King) that you may the better proceed, take into
your Care two things.

"1. To do Bonum. "2. To do it Been.
I call Bonum, when all is well proved, whereupon ye judge, for then ye build
upon a sure Foundation. And by Been I understand, that ye proceed with all
formality and legality; wherein you have fit occasion to advise with the
Judges, who are to assist you with their Opinions, in Cases of that Nature, and
woe be to them if they advise you not well* So the ground being good, and the
form orderly, it will prove a Course sitting this High Court of Parliament.

In Sentence ye are to observe two parts: First, to recollect that which is
worthy of Judging, and Censuring; And Secondly, to proceed against these, as
against such like Crimes properly. We doubt there will be many Matters before
you, some complained of out of passion, and some out of just Cause of
grievance: Weigh both, but be not carried away with the impertinent Discourses
of them, that name as well innocent men as guilty. Proceed judicially, and
spare none, where ye find just Cause to punish: But let your Proceedings be
according to Law, and remember that Laws have not their eyes in their necks,
but in their foreheads. For the Moral Reason for the punishment of Vices in all
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, is, because of the breach of Laws standing in
force; for none can be punished for breach of Laws by Predestination, before
they be made.

There is yet one particular that I am to remember you of; I hear that Sir
Henry Yelverton (who is now in the Tower upon a Sentence given in the
Star Chamber against him for deceiving my Trust) is touched concerning a
Warrant Dormant, which he made while he was my Attorney: I protest I never
heard of this Warrant dormant before, and I hold it as odious a matter as any
is before you. And if for respect to me ye have forborne to meddle with him, in
examination, because he is my prisoner, I do here freely remit him unto you,
and put him into your hands.

And this is all I have to say unto you at this time, wishing you to proceed
justly and nobly, according to the Orders of your House: And I pray God to
bless you, and you may assure your selves of my assistance; Wishing, that what
I have said this day among you, may be entered into the Records of this House.

Thus the King strove to mitigate the asperity and sharpness of the humors
contracted in the Body of the Kingdom, The King's Speech discanted on.
that they might not break out to disgrace the Physician: For he looked upon
himself as an able Director, and yet he found he might be deceived; And
therefore he brings the Lords into a Wood, comparatively to tell them, that
they appeared to him well grown, and fair, but searching into them he found
them otherwise. But he that pretended to the knowledge of all things, (as give
him his due he was well known in most) could not be ignorant that the Patents
he granted were against the Liberties of the people, but whether the execution
of them to that extremity came within his Cognizance cannot be determined; his
damning of them shows his dislike at present, condemning that which he knew
would be done to his hand, if he had not done it; and this must not be known
only at Westminster, and left upon Record to Posterity there, but he commanded
his Speech to be printed, that all his people might know, how willing and
forward he was to abolish any Act of his that tended to a grievance. And though
he did not accuse the Marquess of Buckingham for giving way to Informers, yet
he was much troubled with them till the Parliament began; and in that numerous
crowd those that brought profit were doubtless admitted with the first:
Buckingham Master of the Work.
These considerations upon the King's Speech buzzed up and down, and many of
the Parliament men looked upon the Marquess as the first mover of this great
Machine; but the Wisdom of the House did not rise so high as to strike at the
uppermost branches, but they pruned those roundly they could reach. Buckingham,
though he were well grown, had not yet sap enough to make himself swell into
exuberancy, as he did afterward, nor was the peoples malice now against him so
fertile, as to make every little weed, a dangerous and poisonous plant, being
subtle enough (yet) to crop off any, that might appear venomous in relation to
himself, that the mischievous operations might work upon others: For all the
world knew Mompesson was his creature, and that notwithstanding the King's
Proclamation for his interception, he got out of the Kingdom by his Key: For
Buckingham ruled as a Lord Paramount, and those that complied with him found as
much refuge as his power could secure unto them; those that opposed him, as
much mischief as malice could pour upon them. Sir Henry Yelverton the King's
Attorney had found the effects of his Anger, by not closing with his desires in
such Patents as he required; so that all his Actions being anatomized, some
miscarriages are made criminal, he is committed to the Tower, and another put
in his place that should be more observant. The King now lays upon him a
Warrant Dormant, which did not much startle him; for he was not long after
released and made a Judge, carrying with him this character of honesty, That he
was willing to lay down his preferment at the King's feet, and be trod upon by
the growing power of Buckingham, rather than prosecute his Patron Somerset,
that had advanced him, as his Predecessor Bacon had spitefully done his. But
whether that Dialogue betwixt Buckingham and Yelverton in the Tower, mentioned
in our King's Court, have any thing of Truth, cannot be asserted here,
Buckingham being not arrived yet to the Meridian height of his Greatness,
though the King afterward had cause enough to be jealous of his Actions.

But now comes the old Justice, Michel censured.
Sir Francis Michell, to his Censure, and the crime he had committed arguing a
base spirit, he is fitted with as suitable a punishment. First he is degraded,
with all the ceremonies of debasement; but that being most proper to his
nature, he was but eased of a burden, his mind suffered not; but then his
kecksie carcass was made to ride Renvers with his face to the horse tail (with
a p^per on his breast and back, that pointed at the foulness of the cause)
through the whole City, suffering under the scorn, and contempt of Boys, and
rabble of the people, besides the squeezing of him by fine and confinement to
prison, that he might never be more capable of mischief. The same sentence had
Sir Giles Mompesson, but he was so provident as not to be found to pay it in
his person, though he paid it in his purse. Some others also, their
Instruments, though not so sharply dealt with, had great mulcts laid upon them
according to their demerit, and so this Gangrene was healed up.

Not long after comes the great Lord Chancellor Bacon to a Censure, The Lord
Chancellor Bacon questioned.
for the most simple, and ridiculous follies, that ever entered into the heart
of a Wise man. He was the true Emblem of humane frailty, being more than a man
in some things, and less than a woman in others. His crime was Bribery, and
Extortion (which the King hinted at in his Speech, when he facetiously said, He
thought the Lords had bribed the Prince to speak well of them) and these he had
often condemned others for as a Judge, which now he comes to suffer for as a
Delinquent: And they were proved, and aggravated against him with so many
circumstances, that they fell very foully on him, both in relation to his
Reception of them, (...) QVI POSTQVAM OMNIA NATVRALIS SAPIENTIAE ET CIVILIS
ARCANA EVOLVISSET NATVRAE DECRETVM EXPLEVIT COMPOSITA SOLVANTVR AN DNI, M.D C.
XXVI. AETAT: LXVI. TANTI VIRI MEM: THOMAS MEAVTYS SVPERSTITIS CVLTOR DEFVNCTI
ADMIRATOR H. P.
and his expending of them: For that which he raked in, and scrued for one way,
he scattered and threw abroad another; for his Servants, being young, prodigal
and expensive Youths, which he kept about him, his Treasure was their common
Store, which they took without stint, having free access to his most retired
Privacies; and his indulgence to them, and familiarity with them, opened a gap
to infamous Reports, which left an unsavory Tincture on him; for where such
Leeches are, there must be putrid blood to fill their craving Appetites. His
gettings were like a Prince, with a strong hand; his expenses like a Prodigal,
with a weak head; and it is a wonder a man of his Noble, and Gallant Parts, that
could fly so high above Reason, should fall so far below it; unless that Spirit
that acted the first, were too proud to stoop, to see the deformities of the
last. And as he affected his men, so his Wife affected hers: Seldom does the
Husband deviate one way, but the Wife goes another. These things came into the
public mouth, and the Genius of the Times (where malice is not corrival) is
the great Dictator of all Actions: For innocence it self is a crime, when
calumny sets her mark upon it. How prudent therefore ought men to be, that not
so much as their garments be defiled with the sour breath of the Times!

This poor Gentleman, mounted above pity, fell down below it, His Tongue, that
was the glory of his time for Eloquence, (that tuned so many sweet Harrangues)
was like a forsaken Harp, hung upon the Willows, whilst the waters of
affliction overflowed the banks. And now his high-flying Orations are humbled
to Supplications, and thus he throws himself, and Cause, at the feet of his
Judges, before he was condemned.

To the Right Honorable the Lords of the Parliament, in the Upper House
assembled, The humble Submission and Supplication of the Lord Chancellor.
May it please your Lordships
I Shall humbly crave at your hands a benign interpretation of that which I
shall now write: His Supplication.
for words that come from wasted spirits, and oppressed minds, are more safe,
in being deposited to a noble construction, than being circled with any
reserved caution.

This being moved (and as I hope, obtained of your Lordships) as a protection
to all that I shall say, I shall go on; but with a very strange Entrance, as
may seem to your Lordships at first: for in the midst of a State, of as great
affliction, as I think a mortal man can endure ( Honor being above Life) I
shall begin with the professing of gladness in somethings.

The first is, That hereafter the greatness of a Judge, or Magistrate, shall be
no sanctuary, or protection to him against guiltiness, which is the beginning
of a golden work.

The next. That after this Example, it is like that Judges will fly from any
thing in the likeness of Corruption (though it were at a great distance) as
from a Serpent: Which tends to the purging of the Courts of Justice, and
reducing them to their true honor, and splendour. And in these two Points ( God
is my witness) though it be my fortune to be the Anvil upon which these two
effects are broken and wrought, I take no small comfort. But to pass from the
motions of my heart, ( whereof of God is my Judge) to the merits of my cause,
whereof your Lordships are Judges, under God and his Lieutenant; I do
understand, there has been heretofore expected from me some justification; and
therefore I have chosen one only justification, instead of all others, out of
the justification of Job. For after the clear submission and confession which I
shall now make unto your Lordships, I hope I may say and justify with Job, in
these words, I have not hid my sin, as did Adam, nor concealed my faults in my
bosom. This is the only justification which I will use.

It rests therefore, that without Fig Leaves, I do ingenuously confess, and
acknowledge, that having understood the Particulars of the Charge, not formally
from the House, but enough to inform my conscience and memory, I find matter
sufficient, and full, both to move me to desert my defense, and to move your
Lordships to condemn and censure me. Neither will I trouble your Lordships, by
singling those Particulars, which I think might fall off. Quid te exempla
juvant spinis de pluribus Uva? Neither will I prompt your Lordships to observe
upon the proofs, where they come not home, or the scruple touching the credits
of the Witnesses. Neither will I represent to your Lordships, how far a defense
might in diverse things extenuate the offense, in respect of the time, and
manner of the guilt, or the like circumstances: But only leave these things to
spring out of your more noble thoughts, and observations of the Evidence, and
examinations themselves; and charitably to wind about the Particulars of the
Charge, here and there, as God shall put into your minds, and so submit my self
wholly to your piety and grace.

And now I have spoken to your Lordships as Judges, I shall say a few words
unto you as Peers and Prelates, humbly commending my Cause to your noble minds,
and magnanimous affections.

Your Lordships are not simply Judges, but Parliamentary Judges; you have a
further extent of Arbitrary Power than other Courts; and if you be not tied by
ordinary course of Courts, or Precedents in Points of strictn^ss and severity,
much less in Points of mercy and mitigation. And yet if any thing which I shall
move, might be contrary to your honorable and worthy end (the introducing a
Reformation) I should not seek it; but herein I beseech your Lordships to give
me leave to tell you a Story.

Titus Manlius took his Son's life, for giving Battle against the prohibition
of his General. Not many years after, the l^ke severity was pursued by Papirius
Cursor the Dictator, against Quintus Maximus; who being upon the point to be
sentenced was by the intercession of some particular persons of the Senate,
spared. Whereupon Livy makes this grave and gracious observation, Neque minus
firmata est Disciplina Militaris, periculo Quinti Maximi, quam miserabili
supplicio Titi Manlii; The Discipline of War was no less established by the
questioning of Quintus Maximus, than by the punishment of Titus Manlius. And
the same reason is in the Reformation of Justice: For the questioning of men in
eminent Places, has the same terror, though not the same rigor with the
punishment. But my Cause stays not there: for my humble desire is, that his
Majesty would take the Seal into his hands, which is a great downfall, and may
serve I hope in it self for an expiation of my faults. Therefore if mercy and
mitigation be in your Lordships power, and no way cross your Ends, why should I
not hope of your favor and commiseration? Your Lordships will be pleased to
behold your chief pattern, the King our Sovereign, a King of incomparable
clemency, and whose heart is inscrutable for wisdom and goodness. And your
Lordships will remember, there sat not these hundred years before a Prince in
your House, and never such a Prince, whose presence deserves to be made
memorable by Records and Acts, mixed of mercy and justice. Your selves are
either Nobles (and Compassion ever beats in the veins of noble blood) or
Reverend Prelates, who are the Servants of him that would not bre^k the bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. You all sit upon a high Stage, and therefore
cannot but be sensible of the changes of humane conditions, and of the fall of
any from high place.

Neither will your Lordships forget, Extortion and Bribery the Vices of the
Times.
that there are Vitia Temporis, as well as Vitia Hominis; and the beginning of
Reformation has the contrary power to the pool of Bethesda; for that had
strength to cure him only that was first cast in, and this has strength to
hurt him only that is first cast in: And for my part, I wish it may stay there,
and go no further.

Lastly, I assure my self your Lordships have a noble feeling of me, as a
Member of your own Body, and one that in this very Session, had some taste of
your loving Affections, which I hope was not a lightning before the death of
them, but rather a spark of that Grace, which now in the Conclusion will more
appear. And therefore my humble suit to your Lordships is, That my penitent
submission may be my sentence, the loss of my Seal my punishment, and that your
Lordships would recommend me to his Majesty's Grace and Pardon for all that is
past. God's holy Spirit be among you.

Your Lordships humble servant, and suppliant, Fran. St. Albans Can.
April 22. 1621.



Thus was his great spirit brought low, His censure.
and this humiliation might have raised him up again, if his offenses had not
been so weighty as to keep him down. He lost his Peerage and Seal, and the
Scale was wavering whether he should carry the Title of Viscount St. Albans to
his grave, and that was all he did; having only left a poor empty being, which
lasted not long with him, his honor dying before him. And to heighten his
misery the more, many others were crushed to pieces by his fall; for he had a
vast debt lay upon him, which they were forced to pay; and though he had a
Pension allowed him by the King, he wanted to his last, living obscurely in his
Lodgings at Gray's Inn, where his loneness and desolate condition, wrought upon
his ingenious, and therefore then more melancholy temper, that he pined away.
And had this unhappiness after all his height of plenitude, to be denied Beer
to quench his thirst: For having a sickly taste, he did not like the Beer of
the house, but sent to Sir Fulk Grevil, Lord Brook, in neighborhood (now and
then) for a bottle of his Beer, and after some grumbling, the Butler had order
to deny him. So sordid was the one, that advanced himself to be called Sir
Philip Sidnie's friend, and so friendless was the other, after he had dejected
himself from what he was.

He was of a midling stature, His description and character.
his countenance had indented with Age before he was old; his Presence grave
and comely; of a high-flying and lively Wit, striving in some things to be
rather admired than understood, yet so quick and easy where he would express
himself, and his Memory so strong and active, that he appeared the Master of a
large and plenteous storehouse of Knowledge, being (as it were) Nature's
Midwife, stripping her Callow-brood, and clothing them in new Attire. His Wit
was quick to the last; for Gondemar meeting him the Lent before his Censure,
and hearing of his Miscarriages, thought to pay him with his Spanish Sarcasms
and Scoffs, saying, My Lord, I wish you a good Easter; And you my Lord, replied
the Chancellor, a good Passover: For he could neither close with his English
Buffoonry, nor his Spanish Treaty (which Gondemar knew) though he was so wise
as publicly to oppose neither. In fine, he was a fit Jewel to have beautified,
and adorned a flourishing Kingdom, if his flaws had not disgraced the luster
that should have set him off.

William Viscount Sayand Sealem: of the Court of Wards etc: Are to be sold by
John Hind


In this very time of Parliament, when the King carried all things with a full
sail, the Pilots of the Commonwealth had an eye to the dangers that lay in the
way; for in both Houses the King had a strong Party, especially in the House of
Lords: All the Courtiers, and most of the Bishops steered by his Compass, and
the Princes presence (who was a constant Member) did cast an awe among many of
them, Parties in Parliament.
yet there were some gallant Spirits that aimed at the public Liberty more
then their own interest. If any thing were spoken in the House that did in the
least reflect upon the Government, or touch (as the Courtiers thought) that
Noli me tangere, the Prerogative, those that moved in it were snapt up by them,
though many times they met with stout encounters at their own Weapon; among
which the Principal were, Henry Earl of Oxford, Henry Earl of Southampton,
Robert Earl of Essex, Robert Earl of Warwick, the Lord Say, the Lord Spencer,
and diverse others, that supported the Old English Honor, and would not let it
fall to the ground.

Oxford was of no reputation in his youth, being very debauched and riotous,
and having no means, maintained it by fordid and unworthy ways; for his Father
hopeless of Heirs, in discontent with his Wife, squandred away a Princely
Estate, but when she and his great Fortune were both gone, he married a young
Lady of the ancient family of the Trenthams, by whom he had this young Lord,
and two Daughters; she having a fortune of her own, and industry with it, after
her Husband's death married her Daughters into two noble Families; the Earl of
Mountgomery married the one, and the Lord Norris, after Earl of Berk-shire
married the other: And finding her Son hopeless, let him run his swing till he
grew weary of it; and thinking he could not be worse in other Countries than he
had been in his own, she sent him to travel, to try if change of Air would
change his Humor. He was not abroad in France and Italy above three years, and
the freedoms and extravagancies there (that are able to betray and ensnare the
greatest modesties) put such a Bridle upon his inordinateness, that look how
much before he was decried for a mean and poor spirit, so much had his noble
and gallant comportment there gained, that he came over refined in every
esteem; and such a Valuation was set upon his parts and merit, that he married
the Lady Diana Cecil, Daughter to the Earl of Exeter, one of the most eminent
Beauties and Fortunes of the time.

Southampton, though he were one of the King's Privy Council, yet was he no
great Courtier; Salisbury kept him at a bay, and pinched him so by reason of
his relation to old Essex, that he never flourished much in his time, nor was
his spirit (after him) so smooth shod, as to go always the Court pace; but that
now and then he would make a Carrier that was not very acceptable to them: for
he carried his business closely and slily, and was rather an Adviser than an
Actor.

Essex had ever an honest Heart, and though Nature had not given him Eloquence,
he had a strong reason that did express him better; his Countenance to those
that knew him not appeared somewhat stern, and solemn, to intimates affable and
gentle, to the Females obligingly courteous, and though unfortunate in some,
yet highly respected of most, happily to vindicate the Virtue of the Sex. The
King never affected him, whether from the bent of his Natural inclination to
effeminate faces, or whether from that instinct or secret Prediction that
Divine fate often imprints in the apprehension, whereby he did foresee in him
(as it were) a hand raised up against his Posterity, may be a Notation, not a
determination: But the King never liked him, nor could he close with the Court.

Warwick, though he had all those excellent indowments of Body and fortune,
that gives splendour to a glorious Court, yet he used it but as his Recreation;
for his Spirit aimed at more public adventures, planting Colonies in the
Western World, rather than himself in the King's favor: his Brother Sir Henry
Rich (about this time made Ba^on of Kensington) and he had been in their youths
two emulous Corrivals in the public affections, the one's browness being
accounted a lovely sweetness transcending most men, the other's features and
pleasant aspect equalled the most beautiful Women; the younger having all the
Dimensions of a Courtier, laid all the Stock of his Fortune upon that Soil,
which after some years Patience came up with increase; but the Elder could not
so stoop to observances, and thereby became his own Supporter.

Say and Seal was a seriously subtle Piece, and always averse to the Court
ways, something out of pertinaciousness; his Temper and Constitution ballancing
him altogether on that Side, which was contrary to the Wind; so that he seldom
tackt about or went upright, though he kept his Course steady in his own way a
long time: yet it appeared afterward, when the harshness of the humor was a
little allayed by the sweet Refreshments of Court favors, that those stern
Comportments supposed natural, might be mitigated, and that indomitable Spirits
by gentle usage may be tamed and brought to obedience.

Spencer (like the old Roman chosen Dictator from his Farm) made the Country a
virtuous Court, where his Fields and Flocks brought him more calm and happy
contentment, than the various and mutable dispensations of a Court can
contribute: and when he was called to the Senate, was more vigilant to keep the
Peoples Liberties from being a prey to Robert. Earl of Warwick, and Lord Rich
of Leeze. etc.


Henry, Earl of Holland. Baron of Kensington. etc. ^^ul^ by Ru^^^^ P^ake.


the Incroaching power of Monarchy, than his harmless and tender Lambs from
Foxes and ravenous Creatures.

There were many other noble Patriots concentrique with these, which like
Jewels should be preserved and kept in the Cabinet of every man's memory, being
Ornaments for Posterity to put on; but their Characters would make the line too
long, and the Bracelet too big to adorn this Story.

About this time Spencer was speaking something in the House that their great
Ancestors did, Spencer and Arundel quarrel.
which displeased Arundel, and he cuts him off short, saying, My Lord, when
these things you speak of were doing, your Ancestors were keeping sheep,
(twitting him with his Flocks which he took delight in:) Spencer instantly
replied, When my Ancestors (as you say) were keeping sheep, your Ancestors were
plotting Treason.

This hit Arundel home, and it grew to some heat in the House, whereupon they
were separated, and commanded both out of the House, and the Lords began to
consider of the offense. There was much bandying by the Court- Party, to excuse
the Earl of Arundel, but the heat and rash part of it beginning with him,
laying such a brand upon a Peer that was nobly descended, he could not be
justified, but was enjoined by the House to give the Lord Spencer such
satisfaction as they prescribed; Arundel committed.
which his Greatness refusing to obey, he was by the Lords sent Prisoner to the
Tower, and Spencer readmitted into the House again.

When Arundle was well cooled in the Tower, and found that no Power would give
him Liberty, but that which had restrained him, (rather blaming his rashness,
than excusing his stubborness) his great Heart humbled it self to the Lords,
betwixt a Letter and a Petition in these words.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the Higher House
of Parliament assembled.
May it please your Lordships,
WHere as I stand committed here by your Lordships Order, His Submission.
for having stood upon performing some part of that which was injoined me by
your Lordships; which I did rather in respect the time was short for advice,
than out of any intent to disobey the House, for which I have suffered in this
place till now: I do therefore humbly beseech your Lordships to construe of
what is past, according to this my profession, and for the time to come to
believe that I both understand so well your Lordships power to command, and
your nobleness and tenderness to consider what is fit, as I do, and will wholly
put myself upon your Honors, and perform what is, or shall be enjoined me. So
beseeching your Lordships to construe these lines, as proceeding from a heart
ready to obey you in what you command, I rest

Your Lordships most humble Servant Thomas Arundle
Tower 2 June 1621.



Upon this submission the Lords commanded him to be sent for, and presenting
himself at the Bar of the House, with the accustomed Humility that Offenders
do, he thus expressed himself, Because I have committed a fault against this
House, in not obeying all the Order that your Lordships commanded me, I do here
acknowledge this my fault, and ask your Lordships pardon for the same, and am
ready to obey all your Lordships commands.

Thus this great Lord (though he fluttered in the Air of the Court, and mounted
by that means upon the Wings of Passion) was glad to stoop when consideration
lured him to it, lest by the heat that he himself made (melting the Waxen
Plumes that he thought would have supported him) his suffering might have been
a greater mischief to him than his submission: so sour and severe a
Schoolmaster is Passion, to be both Author and Punisher of our Errors: yea,
making the best Natures (often) correct themselves most.

The fourth of June this year the Parliament had a Recess, The Parliament
adjourned.
the King being to go his Progress, wherein some Lords, and others of the
Parliament were to attend him: For it seems his business was not yet ripe for
the Parliament, and he was loath they should have too much leisure, therefore
they were not to meet again till the eighth of February following; which being
a long time of Vacancy, the House of Commons before they parted took the
Miseries of the Palatinate into serious debate; and though they felt the King's
pulse, and knew the beat of his thought, when he spoke of providing an Army
this Summer for the recovery of it, and would engage his Crown, Blood, and Soul
for it (finding him apt to say what he had no will to do) yet they were so wise
as not to slacken or draw back in so good a work; that if there were a failing,
it should not be on their side, knowing how much Religion was concerned in it
(for to the appearance of Reason, the triumphing Emperor, and Universal King,
would quickly tread all under foot) therefore with one voice (none daring to
oppose) they made this Declaration.

THe Commons assembled in Parliament, The Commons Declaration.
taking into most serious consideration the present state of the King's
Children abroad, and generally afflicted estate of the true Professors of the
same Christian Religion, professed by the Church of England in Foreign Parts,
and being touched with a true sense and fellow-feeling of their distresses, as
Members of the same Body, do with unanimous consent, in the name of themselves
and the whole Body of the Kingdom (whom they represent) declare unto his most
excellent Majesty, and to the whole World, their hearty grief and sorrow for
the same; and do not only join with them in their humble and Devout Prayers
unto Almighty God, to protect his true Church, and to avert the Dangers now
threatened, but also with one heart, and voice do solemnly protest; That if his
Majesty *s pious endeavors by Treaty, to procure their Peace and Safety,
shall not take that good effect which is desired in Treaty, (wherefore they
humbly beseech his Majesty not to suffer any longer delay) that then upon
signification of his Majestie*s pleasure in Parliament, they shall be ready to
the utmost of their Powers, both with their lives and fortunes, to assist him
so, as that by the Divine Help of Almighty God ( which is never wanting unto
those who in his fear, shall undertake the defense of his own Cause) he may be
able to do that with his Sword, which by a peaceable Course shall not be
effected.

The King took this Declaration of the Commons in very good Part, The King
pleased with it.
and meant when occasion served to make good use of it: For as he found them
forward enough to begin a War, so he knew his own constitution backward enough
(the Sword being in his Hand) and did foresee an advantage arising from a
Medium betwixt the Parliament and him, if he could bring his Ends about, which
he after put in practice; but it broke all to pieces and now away he goes on
his Progress.

Toward Winter the Lord Digby returns from his soliciting journey in Germany;
His first addresses he made to the Emperor, his second to the Duke of Bavaria,
and his last to the Infanta at Bruxels, and all to as little purpose as if he
had stayed at home; that threefold Cord, twisted by the power of Spain, was
not easily to be broken. Some little twilight and scintil of Hope, was given
him by the Emperor for restitution of the Palatinate, yet not so much as would
discover the error of our easy belief: But the Bavarian had already swallowed
the Electurate, and his Voraginous appetite gaped after the possession of the
Country, though the English there were bones in his way.

Digby being arrived at Court, Dighie's return.
and bringing him with doubtful answers from the Emperor, and sullen ones from
the Duke of Bavaria, the King thought it good Policy to shorten the long Recess
till February, and to re-assemble the Parliament the 20 th of November, that
meeting before their Time, it might more amaze them, and intimate some
extraordinary Cause, which happily might produce some extraordinary effect if
well managed. And as incident thereunto, he gave order to Digby as soon as the
Parliament assembled, to make relation to the Houses of his proceedings there,
which he did in these words.

IT pleased his Majesty to command me to give you an account of my last Foreign
Negotiation with the Emperor; His Relation to the Parliament
who (you know) being much exasperated with the invasion of Bohemia ( to which
the King never gave encouragement in the attempt, nor countenance in the
Prosecution) has upon the advantage of his fortunate success there, invaded
into the inheritance of his Son the Palatine: Whereupon I was directed by his
Majesty's Commission to treat if Peace might be compassed with fair
endeavors, to which the Emperor seemed very inclinable. Albeit, slow in
giving Audience, by reason that the Diet in Germany was deferred, and he
depended upon some answer from the Princes. But in conclusion, I received such
satisfaction, as promised Restitution of the Palatinate, which only was granted
by Commission to the Duke of Bavaria, until it was settled by absolute Peace, or
further War. And being addressed by the Emperor with Letters to the Duke of
Bavaria, wherein he wished his tractable condescent to all good Terms of Peace;
Upon which occasion I urged, that I had Authority from the Count Palatin^e, to
cause the Count Mansfield to desist from War, and likewise from the King to his
Body of War under the Government of Sir Horatio Vere. The Duke of Bavaria
replied, That he had becalmed Mansfield with great sums of money, and when he
is quiet, my Peace is made. To which scornful and slight reply something I
answered, and departed to the Infanta to Bruxels, who seemed to understand by
the Emperor's Letters, that he did rather prepare for War then Peace, and
would give no direct answer till she heard from the King of Spain, who I must
ingenuously confess, has stood clear a Neutral, according to his promise: Yet
is he now so strong prepared for War ( having at this instant five great Armies
in motion) that it will not mis-become the wisdom of the State to fear the
worst: And to conclude, such has been the care of the King for his own Honor,
and Son's Right, that he presumes you will cheerfully apply your selves to the
necessity of the Times, and this occasion; and not only afford him aid for his
present support, but such further supply as may help to re-invest his Son into
his inheritance.

Which Relation of Digbie's being seconded by some of the King's great Minister
of State, Seconded.
(who had instructions suitable to their Errand) they let the Parliament know,
how justly and necessary it was, and how forward the King would be to
accomplish that by War, which he could not recover by Peace; and they set it
off with all the slippery Oratory they could to draw in money; for that being
the main ingredient, if that were provided, the rest of the simples would
easily be purchased, to make up the Composition.

Thus the Kings suits and entreaties were slighted, and disregarded abroad; and
his intentions suspected, and feared at home. Princes that do grasp Possessions
with iron hands, will not be smoothed out of them by fair words; the Sword, as
it is the best determiner, so it is the most honorable Treater: And though the
King incited the Parliament by these his Ministers to contribute toward a War,
The King prevails not abroad nor at home.
yet they found his inclination bent toward Peace, both in respect of
Gondemar's power with him (upon whose sandy promises he built a good Foundation
of Hope) and in regard of some Letters which the King had lately written to the
King of Spain, wherein great indulgencies were promised to the Papists, whereby
they saw he was too much transported with a desire to the Match: And the King,
finding Digbie's endeavors fruitless in Germany, intended to send him into
Spain, extraordinary Ambassador to that King whom he looked upon as the great
Wheel that moved the others which way he pleased. For he was resolved to close
some way with the House of Austria, either by Marriage or entreaty, to piece
and make up the Breach the War had made. But the King had to do with cunning
Gamesters that smiled to see how earnest he was at it, for they had the sign
given out of his hand, and saw all the Game he played, so faithless was the
Council about him!

The English in general, The People and Parliament against the Match.
except Papists, were averse to this Match, as boding some evil event, because
the Papists did prune themselves, flutter up and down, and spread their Trains
so publicly: This almost universal aversation of the people had a natural
influence upon the Representative, the Parliament; who considering that the
King (by Digby and others) did inform them how formidable the King of Spain
was, and did require them to apply themselves to the necessity of the Times,
and further him with help to re-invest his Son in his Inheritance, thought
there was no better means to be used than to try effectually the King's Spirit,
and stir him up to a war; for so they should know which way their Money went,
at leastwise his mind, before they tamely parted with it. And therefore (like
wise Physicians that never prescribe letting blood, but when it tends to the
health of the Body) first they show the Causes of the Distempers and Evils that
were to be feared. Secondly, what effects they were likely to produce. And
lastly, the Remedies to prevent them, in this Petition and Remonstrance.

Most Gracious and dread Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, A Remonstrance of the
House of Commons.
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, now assembled in Parliament, who
represent the Commons of your Realm, full of hearty sorrow to be deprived of
the Comfort of your Royal Presence, the rather for that it proceeds from the
want of your health, wherein We all unfainedly do suffer. In all humble manner
calling to mind your gracious answer to our former Petition concerning
Religion, which notwithstanding your Majesty's pious and princely intentions,
has not produced that good effect, which the danger of these Times does seem
to us to require. And finding how ill your Majesty's goodness has been
requited by Princes of different Religion, who even in time of Treaty, have
taken opportunity to advance their own Ends, tending to the Subversion of
Religion, and disadvantage of your affairs, and the Estate of your Children. By
reason whereof your ill-affected Subjects at home, the Popish Recusants, have
taken too much encouragement, and are dangerously increased in their Number,
and in their insolences. We cannot but be sensible thereof; And thereof humbly
represent what we conceive to be the Causes of so great and growing Mischiefs,
and what be the Remedies.

1. The Vigilance and Ambition of the Pope of Rome, and his dearest Son, the
one aiming at as large a Temporal Monarchy, as the other at a Spiritual
Supremacy.

2. The Devilish Positions, and Doctrines, whereon Popery is built, and
taught, with authority to their Followers, for advancement of their Temporal
Ends.

3. The distressed, and miserable Estate of the Professors of true Religion in
Foreign parts.

4. The disastrous Accidents to your Majesty's Children abroad, expressed with
rejoicing, and even with contempt of their Persons.

5. The strange Confederacy of the Princes of the Popish Religion, aiming
mainly at the advancement of theirs, and subverting Ours, and taking the
advantages conducing to that End, upon all Occasions.

6. The great and many Armies raised and maintained at the charge of the King
of Spain, the chief of that League.

7. The expectation of the Popish Recusants of the Match with Spain, and
feeding themselves with great hopes of the consequences thereof.

8. The interposing of Foreign Princes, and their Agents in the behalf of
Popish Recusants, for connivence and favor unto them.

9. Their open and usual Resort to the Houses, and which is worse, to the
Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors.

10. Their more than usual concourse to the City, and their frequent
Conventicles, and Conferences there.

11. The education of their Children, in many several Seminaries, and Houses of
their Religion, in Foreign parts, appropriated only to the English Fugitives.

12. The Grants of their just forfeitures intended by your Majesty as a reward
of service to the Grantees, but beyond your Majesty's intention, transferred or
compounded for, at such mean rates as will amount to little less than a
Toleration.

13. The licentious printing and dispersing of Popish and seditious Books, even
in the time of Parliament.

14. The Swarms of Priests and Jesuits, the common Incendiaries of all
Christendom, dispersed in all parts of your Kingdom.

And from these Causes as bitter Roots, we humbly offer to your Majesty, that
we foresee, and fear there will necessarily follow very dangerous effects both
to Church and State. For,

1. The Popish Religion is incompatible with Ours in respect of their Positions.

2. It draws with it an unavoidable Dependency on foreign Princes.

3. It opens too wide a Gap for Popularity, to any who shall draw too great a
Party.

4. It has a restless Spirit, and will strive by these Gradations; if it once
get but a Connivence, it will press for a Toleration; if that should be
obtained, they must have an equality; from thence they will aspire to
Superiority: And will never rest till they get a Subversion of the true
Religion.

The Remedies against these growing Evils, which in all humbleness we offer to
your most excellent Majesty, are these,

1. That seeing this inevitable Necessity is fallen upon your Majesty, which no
wisdom or providence of a peaceable and pious King, can avoid, your Majesty
would not omit this just occasion, speedily and effectually to take your Sword
into your hand.

2. That once undertaken upon so Honorable and just grounds, your Majesty
would resolve to pursue, and more publicly avow the aiding of those of our
Religion in foreign parts, which doubtless would reunite the Princes and States
of the Union, by these disasters disheartened and disbanded.

3. That your Majesty would propose to your self to manage this War with the
best advantage, by a Diversion or otherwise, as in your deep judgment shall be
found fittest, and not to rest upon a War in these parts only, which will
consume your Treasure, and discourage your people.

4. That the bent of this War, and point of your Sword may be against that
Prince (whatsoever Opinion of Potency he has) whose Armies and Treasures, have
first diverted, and since maintained the War in the Palatinate.

5. That for securing of our peace at home, your Majesty will be pleased to
review the parts of our Petition formerly delivered unto your Majesty, and
hereunto annexed, and to put it in execution; by the care of choice
Commissioners, to be there unto especially appointed, the Laws already, and
hereafter, to be made for preventing of Dangers by Popish Recusants, and their
wonted evasions.

6. That to frustrate their hopes for a future Age, our most Noble Prince may
be timely and happily married to one of our own Religion.

7. That the Children of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, and of others
ill affected, and suspected in their Religion, now beyond the Seas, may be
forthwith called home by your means, and at the charge of their Parents or
Governors.

8. That the Children of Popish Recusants, or such whose wives are Popish
Recusants, be brought up during their minority with Protestant Schoolmasters,
and Teachers, who may sow in their tender years the seeds of true Religion.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased speedily to revoke all former Licenses,
for such Children and youth to travel beyond the Seas, and not grant any such
license hereafter.

10. That your Majesty's learned Council may receive commandment from your
Highness, carefully to look into former Grants of Recusants lands, and to avoid
them if by Law they can; and that your Majesty will stay your hand from passing
any such Grants hereafter.

This is the sum and effect of our Humble Declaration, which we (no ways
intending to press upon your Majesty's undoubted and Regal Prerogative) do with
the fullness of our Duty, and Obedience, humbly submit to your most Princely
consideration, the Glory of God, whose Cause it is, the Zeal of our true
Religion, in which we have been born, and wherein (by God's grace) we are
resolved to die, the safety of your Majesty's person, who is the very life of
your people, the happiness of your Children and Posterity, the Honor and good
of the Church and State dearer unto us then our own lives, having kindled these
Affections, truly devoted to your Majesty.

And seeing out of our Duty to your Majesty, we have already resolved to give
at the end of this Session one entire Subsidy, for the present relief of the
Palatinate only, to be paid in the end of February next, which cannot well be
effected but by passing a Bill in a Parliamentary course before Christmas; We
most humbly beseech your Majesty (as our assured hope is) that you will then
also vouchsafe to give life by your Royal assent, to such Bills as before that
time shall be prepared for your Majesty's Honor, and the general good of your
People. And that such Bills may be also accompanied (as has been accustomed)
with your Majesty's gracious Pardon, which proceeding from your own mere
Grace, may by your Highness direction be drawn to that latitude, and extent, as
may best sort. with your Majesty's Bounty and Goodness. And that not only
Fellons, and criminal offenders may take benefit thereof, but that your good
Subjects may receive ease thereby. And if it shall so stand with your good
pleasure, that it may extend to the relief of the old Debts and Duties to the
Crown, before the first year of your Majesty's reign, to the discharge of
Alienations without license, and misusing of Liveries and Oustre le main before
the first summons of this Parliament; and of concealed Wardships, and not suing
of Liveries and Oustre le mains, before the twelfth year of your Majesty's
Reign. Which gracious favor would much comfort your good Subjects, and ease
them from Vexation, with little loss or prejudice to your own profit.

And we by our daily and devout prayers to the Almighty, the great King of
Kings, shall contend for a blessing upon our endeavors, and for your Majesty's
long and happy Reign over Us, And for your Childrens children after you for
many and many Generations.




The King hearing that the House of Commons were hammering upon this
Remonstrance, The King vexed at it.
went to Newmarket, a cold and bleak Air, in as cold and bleak a season,
pretending his Health, but indeed to be further from the sound of that noise
(which perpetually possessed his Ears) of the discontent of the Commons for the
intended Match with Spain. And as the Business grew up, he had intimation of it
from his creatures in the House; for it vexed his Popish Secretary, Sir George
Calvert, Weston, and others to find the House so bitter against their
Profession, (though they were cunning Underminers, and put on a smooth face
there) yet they aggravated the matter to the King with all the Acrimony they
could, so far as to reflect upon particular persons, that were the most Active
instruments in it.

And what is there in this Remonstrance (at such a time when the Protestant
Religion was in danger of being extirpated) that put on so horrid a Vizard as
to affright or exasperate the King? The Protestant Religion in danger.
The Emperor had prevailed in Germany, the Protestant Princes either subdued,
or acquiesced, and laid down their necks to the Yoke. The Protestants were
persecuted in France, besieged and ruined by the youthful fury of Lewis the 13.
And notwithstanding Our King's solicitations by Sir Edward Herbert, since Baron
of Cherbery, his Resident Ambassador there, who (after his conflict with Luynes
the youthful Constable of France, and Favorite to that King) being sent for
home, the Viscount Doncaster was sent again into France, upon one of his
mediating employments, who also followed that King from Camp to City, and from
City to Camp, with as little success, this being no journey of Bravery, for it
almost cost him his life there by a tedious sickness.

Rochel and Montaban were besieged at one time this very year, Rochel by the
Count of Soissons, and the Duke of Guise, and Montaban by the King, a great
distance one from another; but Doncaster could prevail for neither, yet the
French King did not do his work. When man has vented all his malice, he can go
no further than the line God has set him. One sad story intervenes which had a
various Countenance, mixed with Bravery and Baseness, Hicks and Fairfax.
so that it was doubtful which was most prevalent. One Hicks an Englishman
undertook to carry a Letter from Rochel to Montaban, through both Armies, to
let them know the good State and Condition of the Rochellers were in (maugre
the fury and violence of their Enemies) that those of Montaban might be
encouraged to hold out against the King's assaults. Hicks makes a clear passage
through the Army before Rochell, and came to Thoulouse, where the Viscount
Doncaster was, there he consorted with the English, insinuating with a young
Gentlemen, one Fairfax, of that noble Family in Yorkshire, who was for that
journey one of the Lord Ambassador's Train, and Hicks finding him willing
(being a young and gallant Spirit) to see the Kings Leagure at Montaban, they
rode thither together, and under the notion of being of the Ambassador's
retinue, they had free admittance to view all the Works, and Avenues. Hicks
whose eye was fixed upon his opportunity to fly into the Town, made use of
Fairfax to take his advantage with the least Suspicion, and in the instant of
time, puts Spurs to his Horse, and got into the Town through a Shower of
Bullets, leaving Fairfax (astonished at the attempt) to be wrackt and tormented
to death (as he was by the French fury) to confess what he never knew; so that
Hicks his Brave^y deserves a Brand of Infamy, and Fairfax his Innocence a
memorial of pity. A noble Spirit must not dare to do a gallant action an
unworthy way.

But our King's intentions aiming at Peace, Our King a King of Peace.
he took as he thought the best way to it, which was, to entreat for it: But
that would not prevail, for the voice of entreaty cannot be heard for the
Trumpet. In War, one noise must expel another. The Parliament saw the danger
the Protestant Religion was in ( For in many Counselors there is wisdom) and
thought it their duties to let the King see how inclinable they were to support
the falling Condition of it with their lives and fortunes; But the King would
be called Rex Pacificus to the last; His Heart was not advanced to glorious
Achievements, God will not (many times) make use of some men to do great
things by them. The Parliament did not desire to make this a War for Religion
only, though they saw it suppressed; for so all Popish Princes (which, was the
King's fear) might have combined against him: But though the true end was
Religion, the outward aim was to hinder the Progress of the victorious Spanish
Power, which was likeliest to do most mischief. Many times UIUA EFFIGIES
GENEROS Is siMI GULIELMI FAIRFAX PREFECTI
To Frankenthal when seige Cordoua loyde
So ^as our Britishe King - craft ouerknau'd
By Gondome^ as in it Martix - made
This honorable Cadet 3 and so stau'd
Of all re^reuts, that Buroughs there comander
Our glorious Burroug^s was compelled to render.
THOVLOVSE
the Divine Goodness puts an opportunity, as a price into Men's hands, which if
they fail to make use of, redounds to their Prejudice. If the King's spirit had
been raised up to a War, when the voice of God (the voice of the people) called
him to it, happily it might have hindered the great Effusion of Blood amongst
our Selves, that happened after in his Son's time: But he was not the Man, the
Work was reserved for Gustavus, not Iacobus; and these Conflicts of our Kings
formerly, and at this time with his people (alienating their affections) did
not only leave sad impressions upon their Spirits, of rancour, and malice
against Monarchy, but taught his Successor the Pattern of breaking Parliaments,
and contesting with his Subjects, till ruin succeeded to him and his Posterity.

But when this Remonstrance was brought to perfection, the King had a Copy of
it before the House had time to send their Messengers with it; in which,
something so highly displeased him, that he instantly dispatched a Letter to
the Speaker of the House of Commons to forbid the sending of it.

To Our Trusty and Wellbeloved, Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, Speaker of the
House of Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
WE have heard by diverse Reports, The King's Letter to the Speaker.
to our great grief, that Our distance from the Houses of Parliament (caused by
Our indisposition of health,) has imboldned some fiery and Popular Spirits of
some of the House of Commons, to argue and debate publicly of Matters far
above their reach and capacity, tending to Our high dishonor, and breach of
Prerogative Royal. These are therefore to command you to make known in Our Name
unto the House, that none therein shall presume henceforth to meddle with any
thing concerning Our Government, or deep Matters of State, and namely not to
deal with our dearest Son's Match with the Daughter of Spain, nor to touch the
Honor of that King, or any other our Friends or Confederates. And also not to
meddle with any man's particulars, which have their due motion in our ordinary
Courts of Justice. And whereas we hear they have sent a Message to Sir Edwin
Sandis, to know the Reasons of his late restraint* you shall in Our Name
resolve them, that it was not for any misdemeanor of his in Parliament; But to
put them out of doubt of any question of that Nature, that may arise among them
hereafter, you shall resolve them in Our Name, That We think Our self very free
and able to punish any man's misdemeanors in Parliament, as well during their
sitting as after: which we mean not to spare hereafter upon any occasion of any
man's insolent Behavior there, that shall be ministered unto Us. And if they
have already touched any of these points, which We have here forbidden in any
Petition of theirs, which is to be sent unto Us, it is our pleasure that you
shall tell them, that except they reform it before it come to our hands, We
will not deign the hearing nor answering of it.

This was the effect of the Letter. Dated at Newmarket, December. 3. 1621.



When the House had duly and weightily considered the just Reasons they had to
draw up this Remonstrance, in discharge of their Consciences and duties to God,
and the King, and found how fruitless their labors were. Having (as it were)
cast out one Anchor in a tempestuous season which would take no hold, they were
forced to cast out another, that both together might better fasten on the
King's good affections: Therefore they framed this following Petition, and sent
the Remonstrance with it, hoping yet to save the beaten Bark of the
Commonwealth from ruin in so great a time of danger. And thus they address
themselves to their great Pilot.

Most dread and gracious Sovereign,
The Parliaments Petition.
WE your most humble and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
assembled in the Commons House of Parliament, full of grief and unspeakable
sorrow, through the true sense of your Majesty's displeasure expressed by your
Letter lately sent to Our Speaker, and by him related and read unto Us; Yet
comforted again with the assurance of your Grace and Goodness, and of the
sincerity of our own intentions and proceedings, whereon with confidence we can
rely, in all humbleness beseech your most excellent Majesty, that the Loyalty
and Dutifulness of as faithful and loving Subjects as ever served or lived
under a gracious Sovereign, may not undeservedly suffer, by the misinformation
of partial and uncertain Reports, which are ever unfaithful Intelligencers: but
that your Majesty would in the clearness of your own Judgment, first vouchsase
to understand from Our selves, and not from others, what our humble Declaration
and Petition (resolved upon by the Universal Voice of the House, and proposed
with your Gracious favor to be presented unto your Sacred Majesty) does
contain. Upon what Occasion we entered into Consideration of those things which
are therein contained, with what dutiful respect to your Majesty, and your
Service, we did consider thereof, and what was our true intention thereby. And
that when your Majesty shall thereby truly discern our dutiful Affections, you
will in your Royal judgment free us from those heavy Charges wherewith some of
our Members are burdened, and wherein the whole House is involved.

And we humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will not hereafter give Credit to
private Reports against all, or any of the Members of our House, whom the whole
have not censured, until your Majesty have been truly informed thereof from our
selves, and that in the mean time, and ever, we may stand upright in your
Majesty's Grace and good Opinion, than which no worldly consideration is, or
can be dearer unto us.

When your Majesty had reassembled us in Parliament, by your Royal Commandment,
sooner than we expected, and did vouchsafe by the mouths of three honorable
Lords, to impart unto us the weighty occasions moving your Majesty thereunto;
And from them we did understand these particulars.

That notwithstanding your Princely and Pious endeavors to procure Peace, the
time is now come that Janus Temple must be opened.

That the Voice of Bellona must be heard, and not the Voice of the Turtle.

That there was no hope of Peace, nor any Truce to be obtained, no, not for a
few days.

That your Majesty must either abandon your own Children, or engage your self
in a war, wherein Consideration is to be had, what foot, what horse, what money
would be sufficient.

That the Lower Palatinate was seized upon by the Army of the King of Spain, as
Executor of the Ban there, in quality of Duke of Burgundy, as the Upper
Palatinate was by the Duke of Bavaria.

That the King of Spain at his own Charge had now at least five several Armies
on foot.

That the Princes of the Union were disbanded, but the Catholic league
remained firm, whereby those Princes so dissevered, were in danger one by one
to be ruined.

That the Estate of those of the Religion in Foreign parts was miserable. And,

That out of these Considerations we were called to a war, and forthwith to
advise for a Supply, for keeping the forces in the Palatinate from disbanding,
and to foresee the means for raising and maintaining the body of an Army for
the war against the Spring. We therefore out of our Zeal to your Majesty and
your Posterity, with more alacrity, and colerity, than ever was precedented in
Parliament; did address our selves to the Service commended unto Us. And
although we cannot conceive, that the honor and safety of your Majesty, and
your posterity, the patrimony of your Children, invaded and possessed by their
Enemies, the welfare of Religion, and State of your Kingdom, are matters at any
time unfit for our deepest consideration in time of Parliament. And though
before this time we were in some of these points silent, yet being now invited
thereunto, and led on by so just an occasion, we thought it Our Duties to
provide for the present supply thereof, and not only to turn our eyes on a war
abroad; but to take care for the securing of our peace at home, which the
dangerous increase, and insolency of Popish Recusants, apparently, visibly, and
sensibly did lead us unto. The consideration whereof did necessarily draw us
truly to represent unto your Majesty what we conceive to be the Causes, what we
feared would be the effects, and what we hoped might be the remedies of these
growing Evils. Among which, as incident and unavoidable, we fell upon some
things which seem to touch upon the King of Spain, as they have relation to
Popish Recusants at home, to the Wars by him maintained in the Palatinate
against your Majesty's Children, and to his several Armies now on foot; yet as
we conceived without touch of dishonor to that King, or any other Prince your
Majesty's Consederate.

In the discourse whereof we did not assume to our selves any power to determine
of any part thereof, An humble Parliament.
nor intend to incroach or intrude upon the Sacred bounds of your Royal
Authority, to whom, and to whom only, we acknowledge it does belong to resolve
of Peace and War, and of the Marriage of the most noble Prince your Son. But as
your most Loyal and humble Subjects, and Servants, representing the whole
Commons of your Kingdom (who have a large interest in the happy and prosperous
estate of your Majesty, and your Royal Posterity, and of the flourishing Estate
of our Church and Commonwealth) did resolve out of our Cares and Fears, truly
and plainly to demonstrate these things to your Majesty, which we were not
assured could otherwise come so fully and clearly to your knowledge, and that
being done, to lay the same down at your Majesty's feet, without expectation of
any other answer of your Majesty touching these higher points, than what at
your good pleasure, and in your own time should be held fit.

This being the effect of that we had formerly resolved upon, and these the
occasions and reasons inducing the same, our humble suit to your Majesty, and
confidence is, that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to receive at the
hands of these our Messengers our former humble Declaration, and Petition, and
to vouchsafe to read, and favorably to interpret the same. And that to so much
thereof, as contains our humble Petition concerning Jesuits, Priests and
Popish Recusants, the passage of Bills, and granting your Royal Pardon, you
will vouchsafe an answer unto us.

And whereas your Majesty by the general words of your Letter seems to
restrain us from intermedling with matters of Government, or particulars which
have their motion in the Courts of Justice; the generality of which words in
the largeness of the extent thereof, (as we hope beyond your Majesty's
intention) might involve those things, which are the proper Subjects of
Parliamentary occasions and discourse.

And where as your Majesty does seem to abridge us of the ancient liberty of
Parliament for freedom of Speech, Jurisdiction, and just Censure of the House,
and other proceedings there (wherein we trust in God we shall never transgress
the bounds of loyal and dutiful Subjects) a liberty which we assure our selves
so wise and so just a King will not infringe, the same being our ancient and
undoubted right, and an inheritance received from our Ancestors, without which
we cannot freely debate, nor clearly discern of things in Question before us,
nor truly inform your Majesty; in which we have been confirmed by your
Majesty's most gracious former Speeches and Messages: We are therefore now
again enforced in all humbleness to pray your Majesty to allow the same, and
thereby to take away the doubts and scruples your Majesty's late Letter to your
Speaker has brought upon us.

So shall we your Loyal and loving Subjects ever acknowledge your Majesty's
justice, And a Pious.
grace and goodness, and be ready to perform that service to your Majesty,
which in the true affection of our hearts we prosess, and power out our daily
and devout prayers to the Almighty for your Majesty's long life, happy and
religious Reign, and prosperous Estate, and for your Royal posterity after you
for ever.




The Parliament thought it strange that the King in a Recess should call them
together before the appointed time of meeting, The King wanted money, not
advice.
pretending Emergent occasions, and (by his Ministers of State) persuade and
incite to a War, and when (in obedience to this command) they shall proceed in
their advice, only to prevent the dangers abroad, and establish security at
home, they shall be accounted presumptuous and insolent. But by this they
discover, (and which the King plainly expresses in his Answer) that he required
none of their advice, he wanted only their money, if they had furnished him
with that instead of Counsel, it would have been a golden Remonstrance. They
are to be his Bank, his Merchants, he needs no other directions; let them find
money, he knows how to dispose of it. This was the great fault, which this
Petition strives to mitigate, accompanied with the Remonstrance it self, and
the Petition against Recusancy, for both which it was an intercessor, but it
could not with all its Humility procure acceptance for its Companions, though
sent by twelve select Members of the House, and the leading man Sir Richard
Weston (who was really the King's) chosen by the Commons to make their
Petitions the more acceptable. And the House finding it a great discouragement
to them to proceed in any business, when there was so great a distance betwixt
the King and them, (the King thinking their actions an intrenchment upon his
Prerogative, and they thinking the King's expressions an infringement of their
Liberties) they resolved to give over all business, till they had an Answer of
their Petitions; for they thought they had as good do nothing, as have that
they do undone again. Which the King hearing of was vexed at the heart, and
entertained their Messengers very roughly; and some say he called for twelve
Chaire's for them, saying, Here are twelve Kings come to me. But after he had
considered their desires in their last Petition (rejecting the others) he
returns them this answer to all. An. Christi. 1621.


WE must here begin in the same fashion that we would have done, if your first
Petition had come to our Hands* before we had made a stay thereof, The King's
Answer.
which is to repeat the first words of the late Queen of famous memory, used by
her in answer to an insolent Proposition, made by a Polonian Embassadon^ unto
her, that is Legatum expectabamus, Heraldum accipimus. For we had great reason
to expect that the first Message from your House should have been a Message of
thanksgiving for Our continued gracious behavior toward our People since your
last Recess. Not only by our Proclamation of Grace, wherein were contained six
or seven and thirty Articles, all of several points of Grace to the people; but
also by the labor we took for the satisfaction of both Houses in those three
Articles recommended unto Us in both their names by the right Reverend Father
in God the Archbishop of Canterbury, and likewise for the good Government of
Ireland we are now in hand with at your request. But not only have We heard no
news of all this, but contrary, great complains of the Danger of Religion
within this Kingdom, tacitly implying Our ill Government in this point. And we
leave you to judge, whether it be your Duties, that are the Representative Body
of Our People, so to distate them with Our Government, whereas by the contrary,
it is your Duty with all your endeavors to kindle more and more a dutiful and
thankful Love in the peoples hearts toward us for our just and gracious
Government.

Now whereas in the very beginning of this your Apology, you tax Us in fair
terms of trusting uncertain Reports, and partial informations concerning your
Proceedings; We wish you to remember that we are an old and experienced King,
needing no such lessons, being in our conscience, freest of any King alive from
hearing or trusting idle Reports, which so many of your House as are nearest
Us, can bear witness unto you, if you would give as good ear to them, as you do
to some Tribunitial Orators among you. And for proof in this particular: We
have made your own Messengers confer your other Petitions sent by you with the
Copy thereof, which was sent Us before, between which there is no difference at
all, but that since our receiving the first Copy, you added a Conclusion unto
it, which could not come to our hands, till it was done by you, and your
Messengers sent, which was all at one time. And if we had had no Copy of it
before hand, we must have received your first Petition to our great dishonor,
before we had known what it contained, which would have enforced us to have
returned you a far worse answer than now we do. For then your Messengers had
returned with nothing, but that We have judged your Petition unlawful and
unworthy of an answer: For as to your Conclusion thereof, it is nothing but
Protestatio contraria facto, for in the body of your Petition you usurp upon
Our Prerogative Royal, and meddle with things far above your reach, and then in
the Conclusion you protest the contrary; as if a Robber would take a man's
purse, and then protest he meant not to rob him. For first you presume to give
Us your advice concerning the Match of Our dearest Son with some Protestant, we
cannot say Princess, for we know none of these fit for him, and dissuade us
from his Match with Spain, urging us to a present War with that King, and yet
in the conclusion, forsooth, ye protest ye intend not to press upon our most
undoubted and Regal Prerogative; as if the petitioning of Us in matters that
your selves confess ye ought not to meddle with, were not a meddling with them.

And whereas ye pretend that ye were invited to this course by the Speeches of
three honorable Lords, ye thy so much as your selves repeat of the Speeches,
nothing can be concluded, but that We were resolved by War to regain the
Palatinate, if otherwise We could not attain unto it. And you were invited to
advise forthwith upon a Supply for keeping the Forces in the Palatinate from
disbanding, and to foresee the means for the raising and maintaining of the
Body of an Army for that War against the Spring. Now what inference can be made
upon this? That therefore we must presently denounce War against the King of
Spain, break our dearest Son's Match, and Match him to one of Our Religion, Let
the world judge! The difference is no greater, than if we would tell a Merchant
that We had great need to borrow money from him for raising an Army, that
thereupon it should follow, that We were bound to follow his advice in the
Directions of the War, and all things depending thereupon But yet not
contenting your Selves with this excuse of yours, which indeed cannot hold
water, ye come after to a direct contradiction to the conclusion of your former
Petition, saying, that the Honor and Safety of Us and Our posterity, and the
patrimony of our Children invaded, and possessed by their Enemies, the welfare
of Religion, and State of Our Kingdom, are matters at any time not unfit for
your deepest considerations in Parliament. To this generality, We answer with
the Logicians, That where all things are contained, nothing is omitted. So as
this plenipotency of yours invests you in all power upon Earth, lacking nothing
but the Popes to have the Keys also both of Heaven ahd Purgatory. And to this
vast generality of yours, we can give no other Answer; for it will trouble all
the best Lawyers in the House, to make a good Commentary upon it. For so did
the Puritan Ministers in Scotland, bring all kind of Causes within the compass
of their Jurisdiction, saying, That it was the Churches Office to judge of
Slander, and there could no kind of crime or fault be committed, but there was
a slander in it, either against God, the King, or their Neighbor, and by this
means they hooked into themselves the (...) too fair a ground, and opened them
too Wide a Gate, for Curbing and oppressing of many thousands of our Religion
in diverse parts of Christendom.

And whereas you excuse your touching upon the King of Spain, upon occasion of
the incidents by you repeated in that place, and yet affirm that it is without
any touch to his Honor, We cannot wonder enough that ye are so forgetful, both
of your Words and Writs: For in your former Petition ye plainly affirm, that he
affects the Temporal Monarchy of the whole Earth, then which there can be no
more malice uttered against any great King, to make all other Princes and
Potentates both envy and hate him. But if ye list, it may be easily tried,
whether that Speech touched him in Honor or not: if we shall ask him the
Question, whether he means to assume to himself that Title or no? For every
King can best judge of his own Honor. We omit the particular ejaculations of
some foul mouthed Orators in your House, against the Honor of his Crown and
State.

And touching your excuse of not determining any thing concerning the Match of
our dearest Son, but only to tell your opinions, and lay it down at Our feet:
First, We desire to know how you could have presumed to determine in that point
without Committing of high Treason. And next you cannot deny, but your talking
of his Match after that manner, was a direct breach of Our commandment, and
Declaration out of Our own mouth, at the first sitting down of this Parliament;
where we plainly professed, that we were in treaty of his Match with Spain, and
wished you to have that Confidence in our Religion, and Wisdom, that We would
so manage it as Our Religion should receive no prejudice by it. And the same We
now repeat unto you, professing that We are so far engaged in that March, as we
cannot in Honor go back, except the King of Spain perform not such things as
we expect at his hands: And therefore We are sorry that ye should show to have
so great Distrust in Us, or to conceive that We should be cold in our Religion:
otherwise We cannot imagine how Our former public Declaration should not have
stopped your mouths in this point.

And as to your Request, That We would now receive your former Petition, We
wonder what could make you presume, that We would not receive it; whereas in
our former Letter, We plainly declared the Contrary unto you, and therefore we
have justly rejected that suit of yours. For what have you left un-attempted in
the Highest points of Sovereignty in that Petition of yours, except the
striking of Coin? For it contains the violation of Leagues, the particular way
how to govern a War, and the Marriage of our dearest Son, both Negative with
Spain, nay with any other Popish Princess. And also Affirmatively, as to the
Matching with one of Our Religion; which We confess is a strain beyond any
Providence or Wisdom God has given Us, as things now stand.

These are unfit things to be handled in Parliament, except your King should
require it of you, For who can have Wisdom to judge of things of that Nature?
but such as are daily acquainted with the particulars of Treaties, and of the
Variable or fixed Connection of Affairs of State, together with the knowledge of
the secret ways, ends, and intentions of Princes, in their several
Negotiations: otherwise a small mistaking in matters of this Nature may produce
more effects than can be imagined. And therefore Nesutor ultra crepidam. And
besides the intermedling in Parliament with matters of Peace, or War, and
Marriage of Our dearest Son, would be such a diminution to Us, and to Our Crown
in foreign Countries, as would make any Prince neglect to treat with Us,
either in matters of Peace or Marriage, except they might be assured by the
assent of Parliament. False play justly rewarded.
And so it proved long ago with a King of France, who upon a trick procuring
his States to dissent from some Treaty, which before he had made; was after
refused treating with any other Princes, to his great reproach, unless he would
first procure the Assent of his Estates to their Proposition. And will you cast
your eyes upon the late Times, you shall find that the late Queen of Famous
memory, was humbly petitioned by a Parliament to be pleased to marry: But her
Answer was, that she liked their petition well, because it was simple, not
limiting her to place or person, as not besitting her liking to their Fancies;
and if they had done otherwise, she would have thought it a high presumption in
them. Judge then what We may do in such a Case? having made our public
Declaration already (as we said before) directly contrary to that which you
have now petitioned.

Now to the points in your Petition, whereof you desire an answer as properly
belonging to the Parliament. The first and the greatest point is that of
Religion, concerning which at this time We can give you no other answer than in
the General; which is, that you may rest secure, that We will never be weary to
do all we can for the propagation of Our Religion, and repressing of Popery.
But the manner and form you must remit to Our care and providence, who can best
consider of Times and Seasons; not by undertaking a public War of Religion
through all the World at once; which, how hard and dangerous a task it may
prove, you may judge. But this puts Us in mind how all the World complained the
last year of plenty of Corn, and God has sent Us a cooling Card this year for
that heat. And so We pray God that this desire among you of Kindling Wars (
showing your weariness of Peace and Plenty) may not make God permit Us to fall
into the miseries of both. Wars good to prevent wars.
But as we already said, Our care of Religion must be such, as on the one part
We must not by the hot persecution of Our Recusants at home, irritate foreign
Princes of contrary Religion, and teach them the way to plague the Protestants
in their Dominions, whom with We daily intercede, and at this time principally
for ease to them of Our profession, that live under them. Yet upon the other
part, We never mean to spare from due and severe punishment any Papist that
will grow insolent, for living under Our so mild Government. And you may also
be assured, We will leave no Care untaken, as well for the good Education of
the youth at home, especially the Children of Papists, as also for preserving
at all times hereafter the youth that are or shall be abroad, from being bred
in dangerous places, and so poisoned in Popish Seminaries. And as in this
point, namely, concerning the good Education of Popish youth at Home, We have
already given some good proofs both in this Kingdom, and in Ireland, so will We
be well pleased to pass any good Laws that shall be made, either now, or any
time hereafter to this purpose.

And as to your request of making this a Session, and granting a general
pardon, it shall be in your Defaults, if We make not this a Session before
Christmas.

But for the Pardon, ye crave such particulars in it, as We must be well
advised upon, lest otherwise we give you back the double or treble of that we
are to receive by your entire Subsidy, without Fifteens. But the ordinary
course We hold fittest to be used still in this Case, is, that We should of our
free grace send you down a Pardon from the higher House, containing such points
as We shall think fittest, wherein we hope ye shall receive good satisfaction.

But We cannot omit to show you how strange we think it, that ye should make so
bad and unjust a Commentary upon some words of our former Letter, as if we
meant to restrain you thereby of your ancient privileges and liberties in
Parliament. Truly a Scholar would be ashamed so to misplace, and mis-judge any
Sentences in another Man's book. For whereas in the end of our former Letter We
discharge you to meddle with matters of Government and Mysteries of State,
namely, Matters of War or Peace, or our dearest Sons Match with Spain; by which
particular denominations, We interpret, and restrain Our former words: And then
after We forbid you to meddle with such things as have their Ordinary course in
Courts of Justice: yet couple together those two distinct Sentences, and
plainly leave out these words, Of Mysteries of State; so as ye err ^abene
divisis ad male conjecta. For of the former part concerning Mysteries of State,
We plainly restrained our meaning to the particulars that were after mentioned.
And in the latter we confess we meant it by Sir Edward Cook's foolish business.
And therefore it had well become him, especially being Our Servant, and One of
Our Consel to have complained unto Us, which he never did, though he was
ordinarily at Court since, and never had access refused unto him.

And although We cannot allow of the style, calling it, Your Ancient and
undoubted right and inheritance, but could rather have wished that ye had said,
That your Privileges were derived from the Grace, and permission of our
Ancestors and Us (for most of them grow from Precedents, which shows rather a
toleration than inheritance) yet we are pleased to give you Our Royal
assurance, that as long as you shall contain your selves within the limits of
your Duty, we will be as careful to maintain, and preserve your lawful
Liberties and Privileges, as ever any of Our Predecessors were; nay, as to
preserve Our own Royal Prerogative. So as your House shall only have need to
beware to trench upon the Prerogative of the Crown; which would enforce Us, or
any just King to retrench them of their Privileges that would pare his
Prerogative and Flowers of the Crown. But of this We hope there shall be never
cause given. This was the effect of the King's Answer, which was dated at
New Market the 11. of December 1621.

Thus the King acted his part, and though his answer might be the Result of his
thoughts, The King and People Competitors.
yet it was some transcendent Cause that put it into Words, for his Nature was
apt enough to fear the Sound of its own impressions. But now his Spirit was
mounted, either the Breach of the Treaty with Spain, or the Breach (as he
thought) upon his Prerogative gave wing, to raise his Anger higher than his
fear. Princes that never knew how to obey, ride their Passions with a loose
rein, and are easiest carried by that impulsion. The Prince and the People are
here Competitors, both jealous of encroachments, both striving to prevent them.
Liberty is a power that gives a well being, and life to the People. Power is a
liberty that Princes take to be the very life of their Being. Kings are like
the Sea, and the people like the land, the industry of the one striving with
the Piles, and Banks of good laws, and Precedents, to bound the
often-springtides, and overflowing of the other. In Scotland the Land was
high, Rocky, and inaccessible for his Waves though never so boisterous; Here he
finds a smooth Shore, and the people as tame in their obedience, as they were
in their sufferings, which makes him the bolder with them.

But the Parliament (weighing the King's answer by the Balance of Reason, not
Passion) found that there was little for them to do. Discourses upon the Kings
Answer.
For how is this a mixed Government, when Kings do what they please? They Call
their People to a Parliament, where the three Estates are said to be the mixed
Government, but what is their great Errand? to get Money. If they touch upon
miscarriage in Government, it disparages him to his people, (for now the inside
of his Copses are well grown again.) If upon Religion, he knows well enough how
to order that, if the Treaty with Spain goes on. And for the affairs of State,
he seems to imply as if there were some hidden and secret Art in those
Mysteries of King-craft, that the Parliaments apprehension cannot reach. For,
who can have wisdom (says he) to judge of things CAESAR BORGIA VALENtiorum Dux.
Cum pater ad summos Romae esset vectus honores
Borgaei, toto Praesulvt orb foret.
Purpuraei donat gnato huic insigne galeri,
Quod tamen hoc tantum respuit ille decus,
Cum ferabella sequi mallet Venerem^ nefandam,
Et sratr^m e ^edi^ tolleret suum.
of that Nature, but those that are traded in them? Every man in his
Profession! So the Priests by their old Oracles did strive to keep the World in
ignorance, as the Romish Factors do now. Whereas the true way of Treaties is
with Christian, not Machiavelian policy. This we require, this answer we
expect, you shall have this Retribution from Us. If you go about to cozen and
cheat Us by delays, and spin out time for ends, such Sirens must not be
listened after. Every State must stand upon the foundation of its own Reason
and Power, and not build Castles of paper. Hopes upon deceitful promises,
unless there be such redundant Causes of dependency upon them, as it is
impossible to subsist without them. It was observed by Comines, that in all
Treaties betwixt the English and the French, the English ever had the worst;
but in all Wars and Conflicts, the English had the better: intimating that
Subtil^y may deceive, but plain downright Honesty is best, and will prevail.
Falsness is fit for such spirits as Pope Alexander, or his Nephew, Caesar
Borgia, Scipio, though a Heathen in his pactions with Spain and Carthage,
scorned it; and the old Roman Senate were so Gallant, as to rebuke Lucius
Marcius, their Ambassador and General, because in the managing of his Wars and
Treaties, with Perseus King of Macedon, he went about by subtilties to
circumvent him. And now an Ambassador (as one says) lies abroad, Reipublicae
causa, for the good of his Country, which tends rather to the hurt of it.

But now they find that the King would only make Merchandise of the
Commonwealth, The Parliament the Kings Merchants.
yet Merchants look for their Money again with advantage, and therefore their
Counsel in disposing it may be well spared. But the Parliament it they raise
Money from the People (which is never to be repayed) there is good reason they
should know not only to what purpose it is levied, but how prudently and sitly
laid out: otherwise as the King tells them in the comparison of the Robber
(though in relation to his Prerogative) if they should be summoned to levy
Money of the people without consideration of what it is for, or how it shall be
disposed for the good of the Kingdom, they may very well say and protest, That
they meant not to take it from them so; that is, not to rob them of it. But the
King's necessities must come under the Common Emergencies, which he would not
have known; and what will one Subsidy without fifteens do? The Protestants want
in the Palatinate, so does he in England: But he had lately a great assistance
from his People, never King of England found greater love, (as he says of
himself) yet he wants still, and would have supply for it under the notion of a
War. They must consider what Money is fit, what Foot, what Horse necessary, but
they must not know for what. All that they can imagine, is, that the King wants
Money for his Favorite Buckingham, and his kindred, to furnish them against
Christmas, for feasting, gaming, and bravery, the three main pillars of the
Times licentiousness, raised up to a stupendous and excessive height, or to
send out his Ambassadors, or help his indigent and expensive Courtiers, and
then the Wars are ended; for Want is a great War. But if the good of the
Kingdom, the establishment of Religion, the happiness of the King and his
Posterity be not fit Themes for them to discourse of, why are they called?

The late Queen (whose memory will be for ever famous) by the King's own
relation liked the Parliaments Petition well, when they humbly besought her to
marry, because they did not prescribe her place and person, but left that to
her Election, if they had done otherwise, She would have thought it presumption
in them. The King thinks it presumption in the Parliament, humbly to beseech
him (for the good of Religion) to permit his Son to marry with a Protestant
Princess, if they had fixed upon place or person, he would have thought it High
Treason. So many degrees high was the King's spirit mounted above a Woman's to
humble Subjects, and so many degrees lower then Hers was his Spirit to daring
Enemies.

Some of these things were publicly discoursed of among them in the House, and
other-some muttered and talked of in private ( for full breasts will find vent)
but the main business that the Commons insisted on, was the King's incroachment
upon their Liberties, debarring them freedom of speech in Parliament, which was
a Natural, Reasonable, and uncontrolled immunity, as long as they kept
themselves within the limits of their duty, which the House was to be the sole
judge of. And who can tax any particular Member with miscarriages that way,
that the house has not Censured hitherto? for now the heat is but new broke in
among them, and this liberty of speech stuck most with them; for if any man
should speak any thing to displease the King (though it tended never so much to
the good of the Kingdom) it might be termed insolent behavior, and be liable
to punishment after Parliament (if not then) as the King threatens in his
Letter; which carried such a Terror and over-awing with it, that they resolved
to give over all business, left they should offend. Which the King hearing of,
writes again to his Secretary, Calvert, and the Speaker, to take off the edge
of those sharp expressions he used in his Letters, thinking to cool the heat
among them.

But before this heat was in the House of Commons, The higher House offended.
the Lords began to consider how cheap they were made by the multitude of
Irish, and Scotch Earls and Viscounts, the King had accumulated, not the
Natives of those Kingdoms, but private English Gentlemen, who had procured, and
assumed those Titles, to perch above the English Baronry, to their great regret
and dishonor. And after some debate, and canvassing in it, they resolved, That
though they could not debar the King from making such swarms of Nobles with
Outlandish Titles, yet they would let him know what prejudice it was to them,
and if it produced no other good effect, the King might at least see they took
offense, and were not well pleased with it, which made them present him with
this Petition, thus Subsigned.

The Humble Petition of the Nobility of England.
THat whereas your Majesty at the importunity of some natural Subjects of this
Realm of England, They Petition.
has been pleased to confer upon them, Honors, Titles, and Dignities,
peculiar to other your Majesty's Dominions, by which all the Nobility of this
Realm, either in themselves, their Children or both, find they are prejudiced.
Our humble desire is, that with your gracious allowance, we may challenge, and
preserve our Birthrights, And that we may take no more notice of these
Titulars to our Prejudice, than the Law of this Land does, but that we may be
excused, if in civil courtesy, we give them not the respect or place, as to
Noblemen strangers, seeing that these being our Country Men, born and
inheritanced under our Laws, their families and abode among us, have yet
procured their Translation into foreign names, only to our injury.

But in this address to your Sacred Majesty, it is far from Us to meddle with,
much less to limit, or interpret the Power of your Sovereignty, knowing that
your Majesty (being the Root whence all Honor receives Sap, under what Title
soever) may collate what you please, upon whom, when, and how you please;
Wherefore in all humbleness We present this to your gracious view, confident of
your Majesty's equal favor herein.

1. Oxford. 2. Huntington. 3. Essex. 4. Lincoln. 5. Dorset. 6. Salisbury. 7.
Warwick. 8. Abergavenie. 9. Dacres. 10. Darcie. 11. Stafford. 12. Willoughbie.
13. Sheffeild. 14. Windsor. 15. Gray. 16. Wentworth. 17. Mordant. 18. Scroop.
19. Cromwell. 20. Sturton. 21. Howard. 22. St. John. 23. Paget. 24. Russell.
25. Gerrard. 26. Dudley. 27. Hunsdon. 28. Denny. 29. Spencer. 30. Haughton. 31.
Stanhope. 32. Say. 33. Noell.





Thus we see the Errors of Princes, The King angry.
are sometimes put into the Scale, and they bring with them so much trouble and
vexation that they often weigh down their Glory and Happiness; for no man can
feel the load and burden of it, but he that wears a Crown. The King was
conscious to himself that he had done these Noblemen injury, especially the
Barons, to advance their inferiors above them, for a little profit either to
himself or his Courtiers. And if he had not heard of this Petition before, such
a Troop of attendance together might have startled him, but being prepared for
it, he mustered up his Spirits, thinking it too great an abasement for Majesty
to stoop at their Summons, being so public an Action; or to lesson or recall
what he had done. Yet he was troubled, not knowing what quarrels the strife for
place and precedence might produce; or what ill blood the discontent of so many
of the Nobility at one time might engender: Therefore he sent for them all, or
the most eminent and leading men of them, some days after, and expostulated the
business with them, one by one, in private, knowing he could deal best with
them so, beginning with some of them roughly, yet still he closed with them at
last, his anger being (as it were) raised to make them humble, and reconcile
themselves to him, that he might the better reconcile himself to them. And to
the Earl of Essex he vented this Expression, I fear thee not Essex, if thou
were as well beloved as thy father, and had forty thousand men at thy heels.
Which words he uttered as if he had chid himself that they made an escape from
him. And though this Petition did not derogate from the Dignity of those
creations past, yet the King willingly restrained himself for the time to come.

But the House of Commons found the King's Letters to entangle the way rather
than make a free passage to their Liberties, The Commons discontent.
for that which was their birthright would now come to be derived from his
Ancestors. And for all the King's finenesses they thought Religion very un
secure: for as long as the bent of his Affections tended to the Spanish match,
there must needs be a wide Gap open as an inlet to Popery; and if it may be
made Treason for his Parliament to advise him from it, they saw but a very
small door left open to liberty. But whatsoever befell them, they resolved to
leave to posterity some prints and footsteps of their Parliamentary Rights and
Privileges, left them by their great Ancestors, that though they could not
preserve them entire, those that succeed them might at least find some
Relics, and ruins of what they had; Which made them make this Protestation
recorded in their Iournal Book, 19. Dec. 1621.

THe Commons now Assembled in Parliament, Their Protestation.
being justly occasioned thereunto, concerning sundry Liberties, Franchises,
and Privileges of Parliament, among others here mentioned, do make this
Protestation following. That the Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, and
Jurisdictions of Parliament, are the ancient and undoubted Birthright, and
inheritance of the Subjects of England, And that the arduous and urgent affairs
concerning the King, State, and defense of the Realm, and of the Church of
England, and the Maintenance, and making of Laws, and redress of Mischiefs and
grievances, which daily happen within this Realm, are proper Subjects, and
matter of Counsel, and debate in Parliament. And that in the handling and
proceeding of those businesses, every Member of Parliament has, and of right
ought to have freedom of Speech, to propound, treat, reason, and bring to
Conclusion the same. And that the Commons in Parliament have likewise liberty,
and freedom to treat of these Matters, in such order as in their judgments
shall seem fittest. And that every Member of the said House has like Freedom,
from all impeachment, imprisonment, and Molestation, (other then by censure of
the house it self) for, or concerning any speaking, reasoning, or declaring of
any matter or matters, touching the Parliament, or Parliament business. And
that if any of the said Members be complained of, and questioned for any thing
done, or said in Parliament, the same is to be showed to the King, by the
advice and assent of all the Commons assembled in Parliament, before the King
give credence to any private information.

The King was again Alarmed by this Protestation, The King's trouble increases.
and he that naturally loved Peace, both at home and abroad, found a loud War
in his own Breast, which indeed was in effect raised by himself, for no wisdom
could resolve the Intricacies of his Resolutions but his own; for he would have
a War with the Emperor in Contemplation, and a Treaty with the King of Spain in
Action, both at one time, who were (as it were) one person; and because the
Parliament, like wise Mathematicians, would use the Practical part as well as
the Theory, he was enraged against them, and his Prerogative stepped in as a
stickler, and broke out like an Exhalation, in thundering, and terror, to the
Astonishment, and fear of his people, which made them shroud themselves from
those storms, by creeping under the Shelter of their Native liberties. And now
the King flies from his hot and intemperate Region, to soom cool
Considerations. If he should yield by Silence, or Connivence to this
Protestation, it would remain as an impregnable Bulwark for the people to
Posterity. And what is this terrible thing? their just Liberties. If he should
oppose it with Rigor, it might produce such an intestine Division at home, as
with all industry he strove to prevent abroad. Break the Treaty with Spain he
would not, his Heart was too much set upon it, for he could find no Protestant
Princess good enough, the high and elated Extraction of Kings, will raise the
people up to a kind of Adoration (as the old Heathens did the Race of their
Gods and Heroes.) Whereas true Honesty and piety, finds out such matches as may
as well bring Glory to God as to man, not worldly Blessings only, but heavenly
also. Lose the love of the people he was loath, for he thought his peaceable
Reign gained upon them, and that no King had ever deserved better of a People
than he. But Peace is a kind of Soft Raiment, or Masking-dress, not always to
be worn; Standing lakes beget Corruption. The Pool of Bethesda had no Virtue
till it was stirred. War is necessary as Physic for unsound Bodies. Iustum id
bellum quibus necessarium.

When the King had weighed every particular scruple, The Parliament is
dissolved.
by the Balance of his own Reason, and Council about him, he took a Resolution
to dissolve the Parliament; which he did, by Proclamation the sixth of January,
being fifteen days after the Protestation was made, so much time he measured
out by the Scale of consideration, before he would pull down such a Structure
of Love as never was built by the people for any of his Predecessors, which he
implies in his Proclamation* laying there all the blame upon the House of
Commons, and not on them in general, but on some ill-tempered Spirits (as he
called them) that sowed Tares among the Corn, and frustrated the Hopes of a
plentiful Harvest. Striving by these imputations to take away the Odium, that
such a Dissolution might produce.

The Parliament (and consequently the Union between the King and People) being
thus dissolved, A Proclamation against talking.
every man's tongue is let loose to run Riot. And though the King loved Hunting
above all other exercises, and had many good Hunters about him, yet all those,
and the Strength of a Proclamation (put out to forbid talking of State Affairs)
could not restrain them from mouthing out: That Great Britain was become less
than little England; that they had lost strength by changing Sexes, and that he
was no King but a Fidler's Son, otherwise he would not suffer such disorders at
home, and so much dishonor abroad. So dangerous it is for Princes by a
stegmatick remisseness, to slacken the ligaments of the peoples tongues, for
such an overflux of bad Humor may bring their obedience to a Paralytick! And
the Story of David Ricius written by the King's own Tutor, Buchanan, had died
in every English Opinion, if it had not had a new Impression by these
miscarriages.

And they say further, Set peoples tongues awork.
why should he assume to himself the Title of Defender of the Faith, that
suffers the Protestants of Germany and France, to be extirpated. That he might
almost have purchased such a Country as the Palatinate, with the Money spent on
Ambassages; And that his promising the French Protestants assistance (by their
Agents that interceeded for them) made them the more resolute, and confident to
their Ruin: So that they might well call England, the Land of Promise. And all
that he got by his lip-labor assistance from the French King, Edward Herbert
Lord Herbert of Castle ^Land and Lord H^rbert of C^^erbery in England
was, that his Ambassador Sir Edward Herbert was snapt up by Luynes the young
Constable and favorite there; With what has your Master to do with us and our
business? Whereas the English Fleets the glory of the World (if employed) would
have taught the French pride to know that a looker on sees more than the
Gamester, and he that strikes with passion will many times thank them that take
him off by friendly admonition; such discourses as these flew up and down from
lip to lip, that it was almost Treason to hear, much more to speak.

The Earl of Oxford was betrayed, Oxford and Southampton committed.
and accused by one White a Papist, (who was vulgarly called after in derision,
by the Name of Oxford-White) to have spoken some words to the Dishonor of the
King, and disparagement of his Government, and was committed to the Tower. The
Earl of Southampton was also committed to the Dean of Westminster. Oxford lay
by it a great while, and being an Active man, the King sent him at last to Sea,
to be one of Buckingham's Vice-Admirals for the English Coast, while Sir Robert
Mansell guarded the Coasts of Spain from being infested with the Turks of
Algier, Sir Ed. Cook in disgrace.
and Sally. Sir Edward Cook that was looked upon as one of the great
incendiaries in the House of Commons is put from the Council Table with
disgrace. The King saying, he was the fittest instrument for a Tyrant that ever
was in England. And yet in the House he called the King's Prerogative, a great
Overgrown Monster. And how can these agree. Unless because the King would not
take his counsel, he hanged himself on the other side. But whether the King had
cause to say the one I know not, but he (it seems) found cause enough to say
the other.

Sir Thomas Crew, Some punished, some preferred.
Sir Dudly Digges, Sir Nathaniel Rich, and Sir James Perrot, men of great
Repute, and knowledge, active in the House, were sent into Ireland, and joined
with others in commission, to inquire into Misdemeanors committed there, but
(it was thought) as a punishment for what they had committed here, for they
were long detained from their own occasions, under the color of an honorable
employment; And Sir Peter Hammon of Kent and others, were sent into the
Palatinate. This kind of punishment beginning now to be in fashion, and not
long after this, Sir John Savile, the Knight of Yorkshire, that carried all
the Country at a Beck, and a powerful Man in the House, is taken off by the
King, made Comptroler of his Household, a Privy Councellor, and not long after
a Baron, so the King found out two ways of silencing those that were able to do
him mischief. Active Spirits that come too near him, must either come nearer to
him, or be sent further from him, which he doubts not will take off the edge,
and bate the sharpness of the Humor another time. And these preferments and
punishments were also practiced by his successor with this Experiment in both,
that the most popular men, as soon as they wore the Court Livery, lost the love
of the people; but those that suffered for them, were the more beloved and
admired by them. The Commons of England having more than an ordinary Genius to
support and strengthen the pillars of their Liberties.

And as these Troubles bred disturbance at home, The King dishonored abroad.
so they begot discredit abroad, for now (by this Breach) they undervalued the
King's power as much as they did before his Spirit: yea, even in the King of
Spain's own Towns (whilst this beloved Treaty was in heat) they in their
Comedies presented Messengers bringing News in haste, That the Palatinate was
like to have a very formidable Army shortly on foot: For the King of Denmark
would furnish him with a hundred thousand picked Herrings, the Hollanders with
a hundred thousand Butterboxes, and England with a hundred thousand
Ambassadors. And they picture the King in one place with a Scabberd without a
Sword. In another place with a Sword that no body could draw out, though diverse
stand pulling at it. At Bruxels they painted him with his pockets hanging out,
and never a penny in them, nor in his purse, turned upside down. In Antwer^
they pictured the Queen of Bohemia like a poor Irish Mantler, with her hair
hanging about her ears, and her child at her back, with the King her father
carrying the Cradle after her; and every one of these Pictures had several
Motto's expressing their Malice. Such Scorns and Contempts were put upon the
King, and in him on the Whole Nation.

And now the Treaty goes on amain. The Lord Digby is sent into Spain
extraordinary Ambassador. To relate the manner of whose entertainment after his
arrival there, it may not be impertinent: for by it may be discovered the
Course-grain of Spanish civility, and how much our Ambassador went against the
hair then, though happily the way may be smother now.

He landed at St. Andero in Biscay, a poor Maritime Town, where the people for
the most part go all barefoot: and there his Lordship had the patience to stay
a Fortnight expecting the Court civilities, which were then upon remove from
Madrid to Lerma (being part of the way to St. Andero) without any intention to
meet his Lordship. When his expectations were tired with attending their
Formalities, he sent his Secretary, Simon Digby, to Madrid, to be a Solicitor
to the Duke of Lerma (who then bore the sway) that he might have his first
Audience at Lerma. And after some waiting time (though he had Our King's Agent,
Mr. Cottington, for his Assistant) he was returned with a Spanish shrug, That
the King would by no means admit of his desire, because he knew the Ambassador
came about business, and he went to Lerma only for pleasure. This was a Rub in
his Lordship's way, and being impatient till it were removed, he sent again to
Court a second Petition, which was to be presented with all the power
Cottington could make, and his importunity got the upper hand of the Spanish
Resolution (though much against their minds) that he might come to Lerma; for
which his Lordship was so elevated in his spirits, that he pleased himself in
an endeavoring way to express, That the King of Spain would not have done this
favor to any Ambassador, but the King of England's; nor to any that our King
should have sent, but himself. And it may be partly true, for none (it is
hoped) would have begged it so shamefully as he did; for there was no business
to be expected; that must be turned into feasting and jollity; and if he had
not hunted after the King of Spain for the favor, they would have let Don
Iuvan, (as they called him) dance attendance at Madrid till all their Sports at
Lerma had been finished. For all his Train (many of them Knights, and
Gentlemen, of good quality), murmured to see him so slighted by the Spaniard;
that being known to be a whole month in the Country, he had not the least
message or civility from the Court; which extraordinary miscarriage, would have
put any but an Extraordinary Ambassador out of countenance. But his Lordship
made Bonne mine, and pleased himself with the great favors he should receive
at Lerma, and so came forward to Burgos, which is within twenty English miles
of Lerma: And though the Court had been a Fortnight at Lerma, yet there was no
more news of his Reception at Burgos, than if he had been still at St. Andero.

And now his Lordship fearing they would wholly neglect him, thought it his
best course to send Cottington (who met him at Burgos) to Lerma, to learn what
their pleasure was to do with him; who returning brought word, that the next
day he should have advice what Order would be taken. And accordingly one of the
Duke of Lerma's Secretaries sent a poor fellow with a Letter, that the next day
(being Sunday) there should be two Coaches sent, to bring his Lordship on
Tuesday following to Villa Manza (a Village a mile short of Lerma) where his
Lodgings should be ready, and the King's Harbingers attending to prepare all
things with Diligence. This gave new life to his Lordship's spirits; the
Coaches came according to the time, and to Villa Manza they went, every man
furnished in his best accoutrements, hoping to see the Count that night: But
they only found a pitiful, poor, ragged Village; where enquiring for the Lord
Ambassador's house, the honest Country people told them, surely they were
mistaken, they knew of no house, nor Harbinger, nor what they meant; being as
much amazed at the strange questions of the English, as they had cause to be at
their strange Entertainment.

The English romed up and down the Town, and could discover no house fit for
the Ambassador to go into, so that he was forced to sit in the Coach, and sent
Walsingham Greisley in all haste to Lerma, to know how he should be disposed
of: Greisley returned, and told the Ambassador, They were all so busy in
seeing a Play, that he could not come to speak with any man that understood any
thing relating to his Lordship. Which so distracted him, that he began to doubt
whether Villa Manza were the place, and it begot a new Scrutiny, but the
Scruple was quickly removed, by finding Villa Manza in the Letter, in very
legible characters. And now he could no longer dissemble like an Ambassador,
but supplying with impatience what he wanted in Authority, commanded the
Coachmen in a very hasty manner to drive back to Burgos, which they very
punctually refused; whereupon his Lordship leapt out of the Coach, and in a
great Choler mounted on Horseback, crying to his Company, Away. The Coachmen
seeing him resolute, and fearing to lose their Reward, told his Lordship, They
would venture a Chiding to do him service, which dismounted him again, and he
entered the Coach; but before the wheels turned about, his mind changed, and by
some little whispering advice of Cottington's he now determined to tarry there
all night: So that after sitting still four hours in a Coach, he made a worse
choice, entering into a poor Cottage, where bare walls, and want of such sitting
furniture as helps Nature's weariness, might tell his Lordship that the Commons
of England stand on a better foundation than wooden shoes. Yet the Owner of
this house welcomed his Lordship with as much gravity as if it had been a well
provided Castle; so that there was little pleasure to be taken to hear one so
over-furnished with words, that had such empty rooms.

But now news was brought that a Harbinger was come, who said there was a
house, and all things provided, so that his Lordship composed his countenance
as well as he could upon such a sudden warning, and commanded the Harbinger to
be brought to him; who excusing himself for not coming time enough to attend
his Lordship, said, He was glad to see his Lordship had lighted upon the right
House. My Lord something dashed with the ill accommodation, asked him, How he
knew it to be the right house? he answered, That himself and one of his fellows
had been there the day before to be speak it. The Master of the House being
questioned about it (having formerly denied it) made good his first assertion,
denying there was any body at his House: Which put his Lordship into such a fit
of Anger, that he threatened to throw the Harbinger out at the window for lying.
The man affrighted, Francis Cottington Lord Cottington of Hannorth Mr of the
Court of Wards Chancellor of the Exchequer
quickly got down the stairs, leaving his Lordship to his shifts, and he and
his train that night were but slenderly provided for.

The next morning Cottington went to Court betimes, where he spoke with the
Duke of Lerma, representing to him the disorder that had been at Villa manza,
whereat the Duke seemed highly offended with the Officers; and as he was in his
heat, in comes the Harbinger, who being questioned for this miscarriage, told
the Duke (before Cottington's face) that the Ambassador expected two or three
Grandees should be sent to receive him, which failing in, he grew so choleric,
that when he came to do his service, he threatened to throw him out at the
Window. The Duke perhaps glad of the occasion, gave (by way of Diversion) good
ear to the fellow's words, and putting on the severest Countenance, told
Cottington, He did not think that so great a Councellor as Don Iuan, would have
so miscarried with passion, as to menace, and affront the King's Officer in
that manner. So that Cottington's business was quite perverted: for whereas he
came to complain of the wrongs his Lordship had received, he was now driven to
excuse the Error he had committed. So that the Duke of Lerma left him in his
old House a day or two, to consider well of it, and then the Conde de Salazar,
one of the King's Major Domos, was sent to accompany him to the Court. These
were the Glories of the Spanish entertainments, the Honor they gave the
English, and the ground work of that Union betwixt the Nations; whereon they
built up some great formalities, which (like Royal shadows) vanished in the end
and came to nothing.

As the Lord Digby is sent into Spain, to smooth the way over the Pyrene, so
Gage is sent to Rome to make the Alps accessible; for the Dispensation must be
had from thence for the Marriage. That Man of sin is the Primum mobile, he
turns about all inferior Orbs at his pleasure, usurping a Terrene Deity, and
holds it by the chains of conscience, even now, when the light of Learning and
Knowledge, with a marvelous influence shines over the Christian World. At home
the Prisons are set open, Priests and Jesuits walk about at noon day to
deceive. And Gondemar vaunts of four thousand Recusants that his intercession
had released: either to make his service the more acceptable to his Master, or
to let him see how willing Our King is to do any thing to advance that Match
that they never intend. Who is not so nice, but that he can stay for a
Dispensation from Rome, to expedite which, he writes to some of the activest
Cardinals there, and receives answers from them, Car. Bandino. Car. Lod^visio.
by Gage his Agent, full of alluring Hopes. And that he might give some more
public Testimony of his indulgence, He commands Dr. Williams Bishop of
Lincoln, then Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, An. Reg. 20.
to pass Writs under the great Seal, to require the Judges of every Circuit, to
enlarge all such Papists as were imprisoned for Recusancy. An. Christi. 1622.
Whereupon the Lord Keeper issued out these Writs, and to let the Judges see
how well he was pleased with this command, he Corroborates their Authority with
this Letter, signed with his own hand.

AFter my hearty commendations to you: Lord Keeper's Letter to the Judges.
His Majesty having resolved (out of deep reasons of State, and in expectations
of like Correspondence from foreign Princes, to the Professors of our Religion)
to grant some Grace, and Connivence, to the imprisoned Papists of this Kingdom,
has commanded me to pass some Writs under the broad Seal to that purpose:
Requiring the Judges of every Circuit to enlarge the said Prisoners according
to the tenor and effect of the same. I am to give you to understand (from his
Majesty) how his Majesty's Royal pleasure is, that upon Receipt of these
Writs, you shall make no niceness, or difficulty to extend that his Princely
favor to all such Papists as you shall find prisoners in the Goals of your
Circuits, for any Church Recusancy whatsoever, or refusing the Oath of
Supremacy, or dispersing Popish Books, or hearing, saying of Mass, or any other
point of Recusancy, which does touch or concern Religion only, and not Matters
of State.

And so I bid you farewell.Your loving friend, JO. LINCOLN.
Westminster Coll. 2 Aug. 1622.



This Bishop succeeded the Lord Verulam, His Preferment, Character, and part of
his Story.
not as Chancellor, but Keeper of the great Seal, he having been by
Buckingham's means made Dean of Westminster, and Bishop of Lincoln, upon Neils
remove to Durham, and for a long time had very gracious acceptance with the
Countess of Buckingham, who was a great means to smooth his passage to all
these places, and the Marquess her Son was the rather induced to it, because he
was his creature, and could mould him (as he thought) to serve his own turn;
though when he had sifted and tried him, he found some Pharisaical leaven in
him, and afterward in the next King's Reign threw him by. For though he were
composed of many grains of good Learning, yet the Height of his Spirit (I will
not say Pride) made him odious even to those that raised him; happily because
they could not attain to those Ends by him, that they required of him: For
great and good Officers ought to be just to their own principles, and not
deviate from them for any wordly Respects.

But being of a comely and stately Presence, and that animated with a great
Mind, made him appear very proud to the Vulgar Eye, but that very temper raised
him to aim at great William Arch-B: of Canterbury Primate of all England etc.
things, which he effected, for the old ruinous Body of the Abbey Church at
Westminster was new clothed by him; The fair and beautiful Library of St.
John's in Cambridge, was a Pile of his Erection; and a very complete Chapel
built by him at Lincoln-College in Oxford, merely for the name of Lincoln,
having no interest in, nor relation to that University. These were Arguments of
a great Mind, how far from Ostentation in this frail Body of Flesh, cannot be
determined, because the Benefit of public Actions, smooths every stone that
makes up the building.

But that which heightened him most in the Opinion of those that knew him best,
was his bountiful Mind to Men in Want, being a great Patron to support, where
there was Merit that wanted supply. Among the rest Monsieur de Molin, a very
famous Minister of France, (in the persecution there) driven into England for
Refuge. The Bishop hearing of him, spoke to Doctor Hacket his Chaplain to make
him a Visit from him. And because (says he) I think the Man may be in Want, in
a strange Country, carry him some Money, not naming the Sum, because he would
sound the depths of his Chaplain's mind. Doctor Hacket finding the Bishop
nominate no proportion, told him he could not give him less than twenty pound.
I did demur upon the Sum (said the Bishop) to try you. Is twenty pound a fit
gift for me to give a man of his parts and deserts? Take a hundred pounds, and
present it from me, and tell him he shall not want, and I will come shortly and
visit him my self. Which he after performed, and made good his Promise in
supplying him during his abode in England.

But these great Actions were not publicly visible; those were more apparent
that were looked on with an Envious, rather than an Emulous Eye. For the close
and intimate Correspondence, that was betwixt this Bishop and the old Countess,
set many scurrilous tongues, and Pens a work, though he was (as I have been
assured) Eunuchus ad Utero, which shows that nothing can prevent Malice, but
such an innocence as it cannot lay hold on. For it has ever been accounted a
crime, not to endeavor to prevent the voice of Calumny.

His breach with Land, Archbishop of Canterbury, and the disgraces put upon
him by the Court, will not fall in here, nor his closing again, and Struggling
when he saw the Axe laid to the Root of Episcopacy. But by this man's Actions
(as in a Mirror) may be seen that a great Estate, which ( besides his bounty)
his places procured him, is a liquorish Temptation, to make a man Proteus-like
vary from one shape to another, and to shape no direct course, but to go still
as the wind blows.

Not long before this, that Reverend Prelate, George Archbishop of Canterbury,
a man of a holy and unblamable life (meddling with edged Tools that he used not
to handle in his Study) by a sad accident killed a keeper with a forked arrow
as he was shooting at a Dear. This was a great perplexity to the good man, and
a heavy Knell to his Aged Spirit, which he petitioned the King might ring a
Requiem to his retired thoughts, Archbishop Abbat kills a Keeper.
at Guildford, his place of Birth, where he had built a very Munificent
Almshouse, for poor people, and where he went to bring his Spirit under, to
make it more blessed than the Glories of the World can contribute to it. There
were very many willing to have him retire to his rest, that gaped after his
Dignity more than desert, and though Doctor Laud was but newly initiated into
his Bishopric of St. David's (by other hands, because those of the Archbishop
were tinctured with blood, as he says himself) yet his enmity was not small
against him, for being a means to let the King know; he was reputed a Papist in
Oxford, and a dangerous turbulent Spirit. But the King granted out a Commission
to enquire whether casual Homicide did make the Archbishop irregular? And in
the Disquisition of it, he found many friends that restored him from his
Almshouse to his Palace. But this he did, and would have done in either
condition. The widow of the man that fell by him was raised by him, and she and
her children (as may be said) built a commodious being upon his grave.

Arminianisin flourished.
The King's mercy and indulgence extending toward the Papists, taught many men
to come as near Popery as they could stretch, finding it the next way to
preferment, so that Arminius's Tenets flew up and down from Pulpit to Pulpit,
that indeed preaching was nothing but declamation, little tending to
Edification (such Orthodox Ministers, as strove to refute these erroneous
Opinions being looked on as Puritans, and Antimonarchical) which continual
rubbing one against another, begot so much heat, as might have turned into a
flame not easy to be quenched. And the King had daily information how the
Pulpits rung against the Spanish match. So that to settle these extravagancies,
he directs his Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury in this manner for
Regulating of the Ministry.

The King's Letter for regulating the Ministry.
MOst Reverend Father in God, right trusty and entirely beloved Councellor, we
greet you well.
For as much as the abuses and extravagancies of preachers in the Pulpit have
been in all Times expressed in this Realm, by some Act of Council, or State,
with the advice and Resolution, of grave and learned Prelates: Insomuch, that
the very licensing of Preachers, had beginning by an Order of Star Chamber, the
eighth day of July, in the nineteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the
eighth, our Noble Predecessor; And whereas at this present, diverse young
Students, by reading of late Writers, and ungrounded Divines, do broach Dr.
GEORGE ABBOT, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.
many times unprofitable, unsound, seditious, and dangerous Doctrines to the
scandal of the Church, and disquiet of the State, and present Government. We
upon humble representations unto us of these inconveniences by your self, and
sundry other grave and reverend Prelates of this Church; as also, of Our
Princely care and Zeal for the extirpation of Schism, and dissension, growing
from these seeds, and for the settling of a Religious, and Peaceable Government,
both in Church, and Commonwealth, do by these Our special letters, straightly
charge and command you, to use all possible Care, and Diligence, that these
Limitations, and Cautions, herewith sent unto you concerning Preachers, be
duly, and strictly, from henceforth put in practice and observed, by the
several Bishops within your Jurisdiction. And to this end Our Pleasure is, that
you send them forthwith Copies of these Directions, to be by them speedily
sent, and Communicated, unto every Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, and
Minister in every Cathedral, or Parish Church, within their several Diocese.
And that you earnestly require them to employ their utmost endeavors, in the
performance of this so important a business, letting them know that We have a
special Eye unto their Proceedings, and expect a strict account thereof, both
from you, and every of them: And these Our Letters shall be your sufficient
Warrant, and discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor the 4. of August, in the
twentieth year of Our Reign. Directions concerning Preachers sent with the
Letter.
1. THat no Preacher, under the Degree and calling of a Bishop, or Dean of a
Cathedral, or Collegiate Church (and they upon the King's days, and set
Festivals) do take Occasion (by the expounding of any Text of Scripture
whatsoever,) to fall into any set discourse, or Commonplace, otherwise than by
opening the Coherence, and Division of the Text, which shall not be
comprehended, and warranted, in Essence, Substance, Effect, or natural
inference, within some one of the Articles of Religion, set forth 1562. Or in
some of the Homilies set forth by Authority of the Church of England. Not only
for a help for the Non-preaching, but withal for a Pattern and Boundary (as it
were) for the preaching Ministers. And for their further instructions for the
performance hereof, that they forthwith, read over and peruse diligently the
said Book of Articles, and the two books of Homilies.

2. That no Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, shall preach any Sermon or
Collation hereafter upon Sundays, and Holydays in the afternoon, in any
Cathedral, or parish Church, throughout the Kingdom, but upon some part of the
Catechism, or some Text taken out of the Creed, ten Commandments, or the Lords
Prayer ( Funeral Sermons only excepted) and that those Preachers be most
encouraged, and approved of, who spend the afternoons exercise, in the
examination of children in their Catechism, which is the most ancient, and
Laudable custom of teaching in the Church of England.

3. That no Preacher of what Title soever under the Degree of a Bishop, or
Dean, at the least, do from Henceforth presume to preach in any Popular
Auditory the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the
universality, efficacy, resistibility, or irresistibility of God's Grace, but
leave those Themes rather to be handled by the learned Men, and that moderately
and Modestly, by way of use and application, rather than by way of Positive,
Doctrines, being fitter for the Schools then for simple Auditories.

4. That no Preacher of what Title or Denomination soever, from henceforth
shall presume in any Auditory within this Kingdom to declare, limit, or bound
out, by way of Positive Doctrine in any Lecture, or Sermon, the Power,
Prerogative, and Jurisdiction, Authority, or Duty of Sovereign Princes, or
otherwise meddle with Matters of State, and the differences between Princes,
and the People, then as they are instructed, and Precedented in the Homilies of
Obedience, and the rest of the Homilies, and Articles of Religion, set forth
(as before is mentioned) by public Authority, but rather confine themselves
wholly, to those two heads of Faith, and Good life, which are all the subject
of the ancient Sermons, and Homilies.

5. That no Preacher of what Title or Denomination soever, shall presume
causelessly; or (without invitation from the Text) fall int bitter invectives,
and undecent railing speeches against the Persons of either Papists, or
Puritans, but modestly, and gravely, when they are occasioned thereunto, by the
Text of Scripture, free both the Doctrine, and the Discipline of the Church of
England, from the aspersions of either adversary; especially where the Auditory
is Suspected to be tainted with the One, or the other infection.

6. Lastly, that the Archbishops, and Bishops of the Kingdom (whom his Majesty
has good cause to blame for this former remissness) be more wary, and choice
in their licensing of Preachers, and revoke all Grants made to any Chancellor,
Official, or Commissary, to pass Licenses in this kind. And that all the
Lecturers throughout the Kingdom of England (a new Body severed from the
ancient Clergy, as being neither Parsons, Vicars, nor Curates) be licensed
henceforward in the Court of Faculties, but only, from a Recommendation of the
Party, from the Bishop of the Diocese under his hand and seal, with a Fiat from
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, a Confirmation under the great Seal of
England. And that such as do transgress any one of these Directions, be
suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in his default by the Archbishop of
the Province, ab officio and beneficio, for a Year and a Day, until his Majesty
by the advice of the next Convocation, shall prescribe some further punishment.




The Directions the Archbishop recommended to his several Diocesans, that they
might be put in execution with caution. And then may be observed that the
King's affections tended to the peaceable comportment of his people, that both
Papist and Puritan might have a quiet being; Observations upon the Directions.
which preponderation of His puts them in Aequi-librio, nay, the Papist was in
the prime Scale. But this new thing called a Lecturer, he could by no means
endure, unless he past through all the Briers of his several Courts to the
Broad Seal, which was a kind of pungent Ordeal Trial, to which he must put his
Test me ipso, and then it was Orthodox; so that though Lecturers were not
absolutely forbidden, yet the charge and trouble to come to it, made the way
inaccessible. Preachers by an Order of Star Chamber in Heaven were first
licensed, with an Ite, praedicate, before Henry the Eighth's time; and
certainly they have a great Seal from thence for what they do: Therefore it
behooves them to take heed what they say, left that Spirit they receive
Directions from bind them not up.

But this Animosity of the King's against Puritans, Papists the fomenters.
was thought to be fomented by the Papists, whose Agent Bishop Laud was
suspected to be, though in Religion he had a Motley form by himself, and would
never (as a Priest told me plainly in Flanders) bring his neck under the
obedience of the Roman Yoke, though he might stickle for the grandeur of the
Clergy. And now he began to be Buckingham's Confessor (as he expresses in his
own Notes) and wore the Court Livery, though the King had a sufficient
character of him, and was pleased with Asseveration to protest his incentive
Spirit should be kept under, that the flame should not break out by any
Preferment from him. But that was now forgotten, and he crept so into favor,
that he was thought to be the Bellows that blew these Fires. For the Papists
used all the Artifices they could to make a breach between the King and his
People, that they might enter at the same for their own Ends: which to
accomplish, they slily close with the chief ministers of State, to put the King
upon all his Projects and Monopolies, displeasing to the people, that they
might the more Alienate their Affections from him: Sowing their seeds of
Division also betwixt Puritan and Protestant; so that (like the second
Commandment) they quite exclude the Protestant; For all those were Puritans
with this high-grown-Arminian-popish party, that held in judgment the Doctrine
of the Reformed Churches, or in practice live according to the Doctrine
publicly taught in the Church of England. And they attribute the name of
Protestant,

1. To such Papists as either out of policy, or by popish indulgence, hold
outward Communion with the Church of England.

2. To such Protestants, as were either tainted with, or inclinable to their
opinions.

3. To indifferent Men, who embrace always that Religion that shall be
commanded by Authority. Or,

4. To such Neutrals as care for no Religion, but such as stands with their own
liking: so that they allow the Church of England the Refuse both of their
Religion, and Ours.

Then they strive to make a Division of Regians and Republicans; Regians and
Republicans.
The Regians are the great Dependents upon the Crown, both in Church and State,
who swell up the Prerogative, preaching and distilling into the King, the
Almightiness of his power. That all that the People has is the King's, and
that it is by his mercy they have a bare empty Being. And this hoisting up of
the King they knew would stir up the Republicans to oppose him in his Designs,
by which they pinch (as the King thinks) his Prerogative; feeding a strife,
betwixt Law and Prerogative, whereby they escape the Dint of both, and hope the
fire they kindle will break out at last to consume their Adversaries. That
these things were acted and fomented by Papists, was very probable, for they
were great Sticklers about the Court and Council Table. But it was too apparent
that some of the Clergy (to make their way the smoother to their wished end)
began so to adore the King, that he could not be named but more reverence was
done to it than to the Name of God* And the Judges in their itinerant Circuits
(the more to enslave the people to Obedience) being to speak of the King, would
give him such Sacred and Oraculous Titles, as if their advancement to higher
places, must necessarily be laid upon the foundation of the peoples debasement.

On the other side: The well affected to Religion (that knew no other
inclination than the Dictates of their own Reason, experiences of former times,
and the constant practices of the Romanists for propagating their own designs)
did by their writings and discourses, strive to warm the King's cold temper,
and put fresh spirits into his chilled veins; showing the Tyranny of the
incroaching Monarchy of the House of Austria (who was Rome's great Factor) and
how just and secure the opposing of such a growing power will be; That no Sword
is so sharp, nor Arm's so strong, as those that are cemented with true
Religion. The security of Conscience, grounded upon the Word of Truth, being
not only a Bulwark to defend, but the best Engine to oppose Idolatry and
Ambition. Thus stood the Kingdom divided in it self.

But as the King strove (after this Rupture betwixt him and the Parliament) to
settle things at home, The King active in the Treaty.
and keep his people in obedience, so he was as active abroad to keep up his
own Reputation: For he made a full account to salve up all these miscarriages,
by the intended Match with Spain, that his people might see he could discern
further into the intrinsical matters of State than they, and so make the Error
theirs. Therefore he plied it by his Ambassadors and Agents, and all
indulgences to Recusants were admitted to sweeten their Addresses. The Lord
Vaux, a Papist, had freedom to transport four thousand English, to reinforce
the King of Spain's Armies, both against our King's Confederates of Holland
(under whose protection his banished Children had refuge) and against their
Country it self the Palatinate, which the King so much endeavored to preserve.

The Articles of Marriage had taken up much time in debate, The Articles of
marriage long a settling.
between the Commissioners of the two Kings, before they could be brought to
any form, and the principal Articles (that concerned Religion) had many various
shapes put upon them, till they were dressed to their minds: And when they were
fitted and fashioned by them, the Pope stripped them naked, and put upon them
what Garment they pleased; He has his Index expurgatorius in every thing. And
to dead our King's hopes, the Pope urges, Quod Ecclesiastici nullis legibus
subjaceant, nisi sourum superiorum Ecclesiasticorum, That the Ecclesiastics
should be subject to no Laws, but what they brought along with them, which gave
liberty to do what they pleased, and to be punished for their ill doing how
they pleased. Quo semel est imbuta Recens servabit odorem Testa diu: --
That the children of the Infanta might be brought up in the Popish Religion,
Usque ad Annos nubiles, till it be well rooted in them. And that she might have
a public Church in the City for all comers, besides her Chapel in the Court,
which extended to little less than an open Toleration. Some other Rubs the Pope
threw in the way, which the King stumbled at, not being in the Articles treated
on betwixt him and the King of Spain, which He insists on to that King,
disclaims any Treaty with the Pope, though his Agent Gage made daily addresses
to him, by Cardinal Bandino with whom Our King held correspondence. And He
requires the Lord Digby in Spain to press that King to a final Resolution, that
he might provide some other Match for his Son, if this should not succeed: For
(says He) We have in a manner already done that which is desired, as all the
Roman Catholics have found; which if the Pope had known, it is to be presumed,
he would not so much have insisted upon these points. And the sending, and
resending, betwixt Spain and Rome, and Rome and Spain spends time, and may
serve for a color to draw the Treaty in infinitum. But yet willing he was to
have some Anchor-hold for his hopes; for in the same Letter, he says,
Nevertheless if you find it a thing impossible for them to resolve without a
reply to Rome, Our King's Resolution.
and that they do earnestly desire it; We are contented that you shall yield
them two months time, after your Audience, and longer we cannot expect.

These Resolutions were sent Post into Spain, enclosed in this following
Letter, which is very necessary to be inserted here, though taken from Mr.
Prin's Collection, who had this and others among the Lord Cottington's Papers
(a great Agent afterward in the Spanish Affairs) and are the bitter Kernel,
preserved by Cottington, when the Shell of the Treaty was broken.

RIght Trusty,
Sent to Digby in Spain.
etc. Your dispatch of the ninth of August gave Us so much Contentment, and so
great Hopes of Satisfaction, in all those Business, which you have there to
Treat with that King, as we could not expect any further Difficulties;
Notwithstanding by that which has come to Our hands immediately after, as well
by George Gage from Rome, as by our Ambassador, Sir Richard Weston at Bruxels,
and Our Ministers in the Palatinate; We find that neither the Dispensation is
granted for the Match, nor the Treaty of Cessation so near a conclusion, as We
conceived it would have been, now that the Auxiliaries and all other Obstacles
are removed. But on the contrary side, that new delays and excuses are
invented, Our Garrisons in the Palatinate in the mean time blocked up,
Heidelburg it self Actually besieged. Which proceeding, though Our Ambassador
has expostulated with the Infanta and the Commissioners, as injurious to Us,
and ill beseeming their Professions hitherto, yet is there not that readiness
showed to give Us such contentment therein as We might justly expect, but
Answers still protracted, and put off, for advantage; whilst Our Forces there
remain in great Distress, and the Town and Castle of Heidelburg likely in a few
Days to be lost, for it cannot hold out long, as We are informed. This dealing
seems the more strange unto Us, for that the late Dispatch of the King of Spain
was (before the news of the Siege, and that Our Ambassador had propounded any
thing concerning it) come unto the Infanta. Spanish juggling.
But because you shall be particularly informed of the whole carriage of the
business. We have given order that copies shall be sent you of all the
Dispatch, and then you shall see how these proceedings agree with the Hopes and
Promises which are given Us from thence.

Hereupon therefore Our pleasure is, That you shall immediately and with as
much speed as you may, crave Audience of that King, and represent unto him the
merit which We may justly challenge unto Our self, for Our sincere proceedings
with the Emperor, and Him, in all the course of this business, notwithstanding
the many invitations and temptations, which We have had, to engage Our self on
Our Son-in-law's part. That We have had both from the Emperor and him hopes
given Us from time to time, of extraordinary Respect, howsoever Our Son-in-law
had deserved* which We have attended, and expected even to the very last with
much Patience, and in despite (as it were) of all the opposition that has All
flesh is grass, the best men vanity;
This but a shadow, here before thine eye,
Of him, whose wondrous changes clearly show,
That GOD, not men, swayes all things here below.
been made to shake our Resolution in that behalf. If now when all impediments
are removed, and that the way is so prepared, as that the Emperor may give an
end unto the War, and make some present demonstration of his Respects toward
us, in leaving Us the Honor of holding those poor places, which yet remain
quietly, and peaceably, until the general accommodation, the same shall
nevertheless be violently taken from Us, what can We look for when the whole
shall be in his hands and possession? who amusing Us with a Treaty of
Cessation, and protracting it industriously (as We have reason to believe) does
in the mean time seize himself of the whole Country; which being done, Our
Ambassador shall return with Scorn, and We remain with Dishonor.

I shall not need to furnish you with Arguments for the unfolding and laying
open this unfriendly Dealing more plainly unto them; your own Reason and
observation will find enough out of the Dispatches, whereof Copies are sent
unto you; as namely, the withdrawing of the Spanish forces, and leaving the
business wholly in the hands of the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria; The Style
of the Infanta in answering Our Ambassador with Recriminations, Austrian
juggling.
which was not her manner heretofore; The slight and frivolous answer given by
the Marquess of Bedmar unto Our Ambassador, when he acquainted him with the
Siege of Heidelburg: The quarrellous occasion taken by the Emperor for calling
the Diet at Ratisbone, contrary to his own promise, which in his dispatch to Us
he confesses to have broken, as you will see by the Copy. All which, and many
more, which your own judgment (in the perusal of the Dispatches) will suggest
unto you do minister unto Us cause sufficient of jealousy on the Emperor's
part, as you shall plainly tell that King, although We will not do him that
wrong as to mistrust, that He gives the least consent to it. In this
confidence, with much earnestness, We shall still solicit him, that for the
affection he bears us, and the desire which We suppose he has, that there may
continue for ever a perfect Amity betwixt Us, and the whole House of Austria,
he will not cease to do all good Offices herein; letting him know directly,
that in these terms We cannot stand with the Emperor, but that if Heidelburg be
won, or the Siege continue, or the Cessation be long unnecessarily delayed, We
must recall Our Ambassador from Bruxels, and treat no more, as We have already
given order, hoping that whatsoever unkindness We shall conceive against the
Emperor upon these occasions, it shall not be interpreted to reflect in any
sort upon the entire affection that is at this present, and as We hope shall
always continue betwixt Us and the Crown of Spain. And therefore as we have
heretofore sundry times promised, in testimony of the sincerity of Our
proceedings, and of Our great Desire to preserve the Amity inviolable, between
Us, and the whole House of Austria; That in case Our Son-in-law would not be
governed by Us, that then we would not only forsake him, but take part, and
join Our forces with the Emperor against him so you may fairly represent unto
that King, An. Reg. 20.
that in like manner, we have Reason to expect the same Measure from him, that
(upon the Emperor's averseness to a Cessation, An. Christi. 1622.
and Accommodation) he will likewise Actually assist Us, for the Recovery of
the Palatinate, and Electoral Dignity, unto Our Son-in-law, as it has been
often times intimated from Spain.

To conclude, We shall not need to say any more unto you, touching this Point;
but to let you see, that Our meaning is to carry all things fair with that
King* and not to give him any cause of Distrust, or jealousy; if you perceive
that they intend to go really and roundly on with the Match. Wherein
nevertheless we must tell you that we have no great Cause to be well pleased
with the Diligences used on that part, when we observe that after so long an
expectance of the Dispensation, upon which the whole business (as they will
have it) depends, there is nothing yet returned but Queries and O^jections, Yet
because we will not give over Our Patience, a while longer, until we understand
more certainly what the effect thereof is like to be; wherein we require you to
be very Wary, and watchful, considering how Our Honor is therein engaged; we
have thought fit to let you know, how far we are pleased to enlarge Our self*
concerning those points demanded by the Pope, and set down by way of Postil
unto the Articles agreed upon, betwixt Spain and Us as you shall see by the
Power, which Gage brought Us from Rome, whereof we have sent you a Copy, and
our Resolutions thereupon Signed with our own hand, for your warrant, and
Instruction. And further then that since we cannot go, without much prejudice,
inconvenience, and dishonor to our self, and our Son, we hope and expect the
King of Spain will bring it instantly to an issue, without further delay, which
you are to press with all Diligence, and earnestness; that you may presently
know their final Resolution, and what we may expect thereupon. But if any
Respit of time be earnestly demanded, and that you perceive it not possible for
them to resolve until an answer come from Rome, we then think it fit that you
give them two Months time after your Audience, that we may understand that
King's final Resolution, before Christmas next at the furthest.

Wansted. 9. Sept. 1622.



This Letter does not only discover the shuffling, The King abused.
and Foxlike contrivances of the House of Austria to Work, and Earth themselves
in the Palatinate, but also the scorns, and reproaches put upon Our King, and
(if I may so call them) his Terriers, who (with little Bayings only) let them
work, till they had got into their Fastnesses, and strong holds, and then they
may Bay at leisure, and blame their lazy Belief. But notwithstanding our King
threatens in his Letter, if Heidelberg be lost, and the Cessation delayed, he
will Treat no more, yet the Desire of the Match was so radicated in his Heart,
that neither the loss of Heidleberg, or Manheim that succeeded it, nor the
blocking up of Frankendale (the last strong hold of his Son-in-laws
Inheritance) could Mortify his Hopes. But as the Emperor besieged these Towns
with his Armies, so he beset the King of Spain with his Treaties. And the Lord
Digby though quickened by this Letter, Digby faulty.
did not lay open the cunning carriage of these contrivers (which tended to
root out the reformed Religion in Germany) nor press home these particulars as
he was injoined but only let the King of Spain know, That his late Father, by
the advice of his Ecclesiastics in Spain, had consented to the Articles of
Marriage, in matters of Religion, five months since, yet there were demurs upon
those points, notwithstanding that the King of Great Britain complied in all
things, then demanded particularly, what he would do in favor of the
Catholics; But now after two years time, the Pope of his own Accord (without
any intimation to Spain) had sent directly for England, propounding to the King
his Master, not only many alterations in the Capitulations (before a
Dispensation could be granted) but intruded something new, which the King would
by no means yield unto: wherefore to expedite the Business (the King having
neglected all other Treaties of marriage for his Son these six years past, only
in respect of this Treaty) he is commanded to declare plainly to the King of
Spain, how far the King his Master may condescend in matters of Religion, and
if that will give content, to proceed to a conclusion of the Marriage, without
more Delays, (seeing he has yielded to much more than was capitulated in the
late King of Spain's time) if this will not satisfy, that then without loss of
more time, the King his Master may dispose of his Son, and the King of Spain of
the Infanta as they please.

These things were ruminated on by the slow paced Spanish gravity, and fair,
and plausible answers presented, that like fruits of Dissimulation gave but
small Nourishment to hope, yet it kept it alive, (though in a drooping
condition) and it was only sustained till they could bring their ends about.
Which our King now suspecting (as he had good cause) from the constant
intelligences given him, of the diminution of his own Forces in the Palatinate,
and the Growing strength of the Enemy, He dispatches this second Letter to the
Baron Digby to let the King of Spain know how sensible he was of being abused,
and how loath he was to see it.

RIght Trusty,
2. Letter to Digby.
etc. There is none better knows than your self, how we have labored, ever
since the beginning of these unfortunate Troubles of the Empire
(notwithstanding all opposition to the contrary) to merit well of our good
Brother, the King of Spain, and the whole House of Austria, by a long and
lingering Patience, grounded still upon his friendship, and promises, that Care
should be had of our Honor, and of our Childrens Patrimony, and Inheritance:
We have acquainted you also from time to time, since the beginning of the
Treaty at Bruxels, how crossly all things have there proceeded, notwithstanding
all the fair Professions made unto us, both by the King of Spain, and the
Infanta, and all his Ministers, and the letters written by him unto the
Emperor, and them Effectually, at least (as they endeavored to make us
believe,) but what fruits have we of all these? Whilst we are Treating, the
Town and Castle of Heidelberg are taken by force, our Garrison put to the Sword,
Manheim besieged, and all the Hostility used that is in the power of an Enemy,
as you may see by the Relation, which we have commanded our Secretary to send
you. Our pleasure therefore is, that you immediately, as soon you can get
Audience, let that King understand, how sensible we are of these Proceedings of
the Emperor toward us, and withal, are not a little troubled to see, that the
Infanta (having an absolute Commission to conclude a Cessation, and suspension
of Arms) should now at last when all Objections were answered, and the former
(solely) pretended Obstacles removed, not only delay the conclusion of the
Treaty, but refuse to lay her Command upon the Emperor's Generals to abstain
from the Siege of our Garrisons during the Treaty, upon a Pretext of want of
Authority: so as for avoiding of further Dishonor, we have been forced to
recall both our Ambassadors, as well the Chancellor of our Exchequer (who is
already returned to our Presence, as also the Lord Chichester, whom we intended
to have sent unto the Emperor, to the Diet at Ratisbone.) Seeing therefore that
merely out of Our extraordinary Respect to the King of Spain, and the firm
Confidence We ever put in the Hopes and promises, which He did give Us
(desiring nothing more then for his Cause principally to avoid all occasions
that might put Us in ill understanding with any of the House of Austria) We
have hitherto proceeded with a steadfast patience, trusting to the Treaties, and
neglecting all other means, which probably might have secured the Remainder of
Our Childrens inheritance (these Garrisons which We maintained in the
Palatinate, being rather for Honor sake, to keep a footing until the general
accommodation, then that we did rely so much upon their strength, as upon his
friendship) and by this Confidence and Security of Ours, are now exposed to
Dishonor and Reproach. You shall tell that King, Gondemar 's Masterpiece.
that seeing all those endeavors and good offices, which he has used toward
the Emperor in this business, on the behalf of Our Son-in-law (upon confidence
whereof that security of Ours depended, which he continually by his Letters and
Ministers here labored to beget and confirm in Us) have not sorted to any
other issue, than to a plain abuse, both of his trust, and Ours, whereby We are
both of Us highly injured in Our Honor, though in a different Degree; We hope,
and desire, that out of a true sense of this Wrong offered unto Us, he will as
Our dear and loving Brother, faithfully promise, and undertake upon his Honor,
(confirming the same also under his Hand and Seal) either that the Town and
Castle of Heidelberg, shall within Threescore and ten days after your
Audience, and Demand made, be rendered into Our hands, with all things therein
belonging to Our Son in law, or Our Daughter (as near as may be in the State
they were, when they were taken) and the like for Manheim, and Frankendale, if
both or either of them shall be taken by the Enemy, while these things are in
Treaty: As also that there shall be within the said Term of seventy days a
Cessation and Suspension of Arms in the Palatinate for the future, upon the
several Articles and Conditions last propounded by Our Ambassador Sir Richard
Weston, and that the general Treaty shall be set afoot again, upon such
Honorable Terms and Conditions, as We propounded unto the Emperor in a Letter
written unto him in November last, and with which the King of Spain then (as We
understood) seemed satisfied. Or else in case all these Particulars be not
yielded unto, and performed by the Emperor, as is here propounded, but be
refused or delayed, beyond the time aforementioned: That then the King of Spain
do join his Forces with Ours for the Recovery of Our Childrens Honors and
Patrimony, which upon this Trust has been thus lost: Or if so be his Forces at
this present be otherwise so employed as that they cannot give Us that
assistance which We here desire, and (as We think) have deserved, yet that at
the least He will permit Us a free and friendly passage through his
Territories, and Dominions, for such Forces as We shall send and employ in
Germany for his Service. Of all which distinctively, if you receive not from
the King of Spain (within ten days at the furthest after your Audience) a
direct Assurance under his Hand and Seal, without Delay, or putting Us off to
further Treaties and Conferences: That is to say, of such Restitution,
Cessation of Arms, and proceeding to a General Treaty, as is before mentioned;
or else of assistance, and joining his Forces with Ours, against the Emperor;
or at the least, permission of passage for Our Forces through his, the said
King's Dominions; that then you take your leave, and return to Our Presence,
without further stay; Otherwise to proceed in the Negotiation for the Marriage
of Our Son, according to the Instructions We have given you.




This Letter was dated the Third of October. And presently after it was sent
away, the King recollected himself, and thought it good Policy to make some
advantage of this Breach with Spain (if there were One) by letting his People
see, he would no longer wait the Spanish Delays; (which they were impatient
enough of) therefore his Ambassadors (to hinder the knowledge of it at home)
must conceal the Breach abroad, stay still in the Spanish Court, as if the
Business were in full Motion, and ripe for projection; And he must break it to
pieces here himself, to make it the more acceptable; either to get the more
love or money from the people, or for what other intention is unknown. But the
very next day he sends this further Direction by Endimion Porter.

RIght Trusty,
3. Letter to Digby.
etc. We have given you certain Instructions, signed with Our hand, to direct
you how to express unto the King of Spain the feeling We have of the Dishonor
put upon Us by the Emperor, through Our Trust and Confidence in that King's
Promises, wherein you have Order to come away without further delay, in case
you receive not Satisfaction to your Demands, in such sort as We have Commanded
you to propound them. Nevertheless, We are to put you in remembrance of that
which We have heretofore told you, in case a Rupture happen between the King of
Spain and Us, that We would be glad to manage it at Our best advantage. And
therefore however you do not find the Satisfaction, which We in those
Instructions crave from the King of Spain, and have Reason to expect, yet would
We not have your instantly come away upon it, but advertise Us first, letting
Us know privately (if you find such cause) that there is no good to be done,
nor no Satisfaction as you judge intended Us, ( though Publicly, and Outwardly
you give out the contrary) that We may make use thereof with Our People in
Parliament, as We shall hold best for Our Service. And this se^ you do,
notwithstanding any thing in your other Instructions to the contrary.

Dated 4. October. 1622.



The King in the first of these two Letters gives Thirty days more to the King
of Spain, Our King's patience.
to repent of his bad dealing with him, then was given to the great City, and
yet he repented not. And this Positive Command (limiting but ten days after
Audience for a Resolution in these Points,) one would have thought should have
produced an absolute Breach, or a perfect Conclusion. But the Spaniard
continues in his old pace still, and would not be spurred up, and Digby (now
made Earl of Bristol for his good Service) whistles after him his Old Note
still, assuring Our King, That the King of Spain (though slow) was real in his
Intentions. And if Our King had not had a great good stomach to the Match, he
would never have digested this dealing from a Brother and a Servant, the Pope
also at the same time giving him a Bit to chew on, interpreting the Articles
where the Children of Marriage were to be brought up, usque ad annos nubiles,
to be fourteen years old, which Our King would not consent to, in respect of
the Scandal it might produce. For he knew impressions in Youth settled by
Custom, are not easy to remove, especially where they make Dints upon the
Conscience; therefore he pressed the King of Spain, that the children The right
Honorable John Digby Earl of Bristol Baron of Shirborne, Vice Chamberlain to
his Mar. and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel;
and Ambassador extraordinary to the high and Mighty Philip the fourth king of
Spain. Are to be Souto by William Peake.
IOANNES THERCLAES Comes de Tilli.
might not suck in their Mothers instructions so long time, being less for his
Honor: and they with much importunity, brought it down from fourteen to ten,
and there they stuck. Our King expressed himself willing to have them brought
up sub regimine matris, for seven years, and that time should be limited in the
public Capitulations, but if more time were insisted on by the Pope, He would
oblige himself privately by a Letter to the King of Spain, Dated New Market 24.
Novem. 1622.
that they shall be under their Mother's Regiment for two years longer. And
seeing there is but one year more that is betwixt them, the King in another
Letter to the Earl of Bristol tells him, That if they would not be contented
with nine, he would not stick to give them another year.

While they were thus Wire-drawing, time spun out, The Palate. lost.
Manheim the chief Strength and Fortress in the Palatinate was taken by Tilly
the Emperor's General, whereof Sir Horatio Vere was Commander, surrendered upon
honorable Conditions, having neither strength of Men, or means to resist an
Enemy. Heidelberg before it (as the King expressed) was taken by Assault, Sir
Gerard Herbert the Commander of the Castle slain, after he had repulsed the
Enemy from the Assault, breaking six Pikes upon them with his own hand. And now
Tilly (Winter comeing on) greedy to finish his work, sits down before
Frankendale, whereof Major Barrowes had the Command, a man of as much valor
and experience, as Time the Director, and Spirit the Actor could make a man
capable of. But all this, and the Strength of the Town to boot could not have
protected them, (their Wants being stronger than their Enemy) if Tilly had not
been drowned up in his Trenches, which forced his remove.

And though Our King said in his last Answer to the Parliament's Petition, The
Palatinate a strong Country.
That the Enemy would have swallowed up his Forces in the Palatinate in eight
days, if my Lord Digby had not succored it; yet the weakest of the three
Places, which is Heidelberg, was not taken in a moment; for Tilly in June last
set down before it, and was constrained to raise his Siege, being not strong
enough; and coming again with a greater Power in the end of July following, he
was there above two months before he took so much as any of their Outworks.
And Manheim, and Frankendale are two such strong Holds, that if they had been
well furnished with Men and Provisions, they might have stood out against
Tilly; nay the great Turk, as well, if not better than Vienna the Imperial City.

As soon as the King had notice of the taking of Manheim, Our King satisfied of
Spaines^ good intentions.
he gives Bristol intimation of it, and was very well satisfied of the King of
Spain's good intentions for the Relief of it, though Order sent to the Infanta
arrived not there till the Town was surrendered. Which was the old Spanish plot
of Philip the Second to get Portugal into his hand, wherein he cheated the Pope
himself, delaying his solicitations, by his Legate, Cardinal Riario (for Don
Antonio Bastard of Portugal) with specious and pleasing entertainments, till he
had gotten the Castle of St. Iulians, the greatest strength of the Kingdom
(then besieged by him) into his power. And yet our King looked upon this
Apparition as Real, and thanked the King of Spain for the good he never
intended.

Articles of Marriage
And now the Articles of Marriage that had been long hatching, flew up and down
from hand to hand: The French Historians mention them: so does Mr. Pryn in his
hidden Works of darkness, as they were found among the Lord Cottington's
Papers. These came to me from the Nest, and I have kept them till this time,
and comparing them with other Copies, there is scarce a feather amiss. Nor
should they have pestered this paper, but to show what great pains was taken to
little purpose, what Huge pretenses shouldred in to make way for the Spanish
Designs, which at last dwindled to nothing.

The Articles are these.
1. THat the Marriage be made by Dispensation of the Pope, but that to be
procured by the endeavor of the King of Spain. 2. That the Marriage be once
celebrated in Spain, and Ratified in England, in form following. In the
morning, after the most gracious Infanta has ended her Devotions in the
Chapel, She and the most excellent Prince Charles, shall meet in the King's
Chapel, or in some other Room of the Palace, where it shall seem most
expedient: and there shall be read all the Procurations, by Virtue whereof the
Marriage was celebrated in Spain. And as well the most excellent Prince, as the
most excellent Infanta shall ratify the said Marriage celebrated in Spain,
with all Solemnity necessary to such an Act, so as no Ceremony, or other thing
intervene, which shall be contrary to the Roman-Catholik-Apostolik-Religion. 3.
That the Gracious Infanta shall take with Her such Servants, and Family, as are
convenient for her service; which Family, and all Persons to her belonging,
shall be chosen and nominated by the Catholic King, so as he nominate no
Servant which is Vassail to the King of Great Britain, without his will and
consent. 4. That as well the most gracious Lady Infanta, as all her Servants
and Family, shall have free use and public exercise of the Roman Catholic
Religion, in manner and form, as is beneath Capitulated. 5. That she shall have
an Oratory and decent Chapel in her Palace, The Pope extended this Article,
Habeat exiam Ecclesiam publicam Londini, etc.
where, at the pleasure of the most Gracious Infanta, Masses may be celebrated,
which Oratory or Chapel shall be adorned with such decency, as shall seem
convenient for the most gracious Infanta; with a public Church in London, etc.
6. That the Menservants and Maidservants of the most Gracious Infanta, and
their Servants, Children, and Descendents, and all their Families, of what sort
soever, serving her Highness, may be freely Catholics. 7. That the most
gracious Infanta, her Servants and Family, may be freely Catholics, in form
following. 8. That the most gracious Infanta may have in her Palace her
Oratory, and Chapel so spacious, that her said Servants and Family may enter
and stay therein. In which there shall be an ordinary and public door for
them, and another inward door, by which the Infanta may have a passage into the
said Chapel, where she, and others, as above said, may be present at Divine
Offices. 9. That the Chapel, Church, and Oratory, may be beautified with
decent Ornaments, of Altar, and other things necessary for Divine Service,
which is to be celebrated in them, according to the custom of the Ho. To.
Church; and that it shall be lawful for the said Servants, Holy Roman Chapter
and others to go to the said Chapel and Church at all hours as to them shall
seem expedient. 10. That the care and custody of the said Chapel and Church,
shall be committed to such as the Lady Infanta shall appoint, to whom it shall
be lawful to appoint Keepers, that no body may enter into them to do any
undecent thing. 11. That to the administration of the Sacraments, and to serve
in Chapel and Church aforesaid, there shall be so many Priests, and
Assistants, as to the Infanta shall seem fit, and the election of them shall
belong to the Lady Infanta, and the Catholic King her Brother. Provided, that
they be none of the Vassals of the King of Great Britain, and if they be, his
will and consent is to be first obtained. 12. That there be one Superior
Minister or Bishop, with necessary Authority upon all occasions which shall
happen, belonging to Religion; and for want of a Bishop, that his Vicar may
have his Authority and jurisdiction. 13. That this Bishop or Superior Minister
may correct, amend, or chastize all Roman Catholics who shall offend, and shall
exercise upon them all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; and moreover also, the Lady
Infanta shall have power to put them out of her service, when soever it shall
seem expedient to her. 13. That it may be lawful for the Lady Infanta and her
Servants, to procure from Rome Dispensations, Indulgences, Jubilees, and all
Graces, as shall seem fit to their Religion and Consciences, and to get and
make use of any Catholic Books whatsoever. 15. That the Servants of the Family
of the Lady Infanta, who shall come into England, shall take the Oath of
Allegiance to the King of Great Britain, provided that there be no clause
therein, which shall be contrary to their Consciences, and the Roman Catholic
Religion; and if they happen to be Vassals to the King of Great Britain, they
shall take the same Oath that the Spaniard does. 16. That the Laws which are or
shall be in England against Religion, shall not take hold of the said Servants.
And only the foresaid Superior Ecclesiastical Catholic may proceed against
Ecclesiastical persons, as has been accustomed by Catholics. And if any
Secular Judge shall apprehend any Ecclesiastical Person for any offense, he
shall forthwith cause him to be delivered to the aforesaid Superior
Ecclesiastic, who shall proceed against him according to the Canon Law. 17.
That the Laws made against Catholics in England, or in any other Kingdom of
the King of Great Britain, shall not extend to the Children of this Marriage;
and though they be Catholics, they shall not lose the Right of Succession to
the Kingdom and Dominions of Great Britain. 18. That the Nurses which shall
give suck to the Children of the Lady Infanta (whether they be of the Kingdom
of Great Britain, or of any other Nation whatsoever) shall be chosen by the
Lady Infanta, as she pleases, and shall be accounted of her Family, and enjoy
the privileges thereof. 19. That the Bishop, Ecclesiastical Persons, and
Religious, of the Family of the Lady Infanta, shall wear the Vestment and Habit
of his dignity profession and Religion, after the custom of Rome. 20. For
security that the said Matrimony be not dissolved for any cause whatsoever; The
King of Great Britain and Prince Charles are equally to pass the Word and
Honor of a King: and moreover that they will perform whatsoever shall be
propounded by the Catholic King for further confirmation, if it may be done
decently and fitly. 21. That the Sons and Daughters which shall be born of this
Marriage, shall be brought up in the company of the most Excellent Infanta, at
least until the Age of Ten years, and shall freely enjoy the Right of
Succession to the Kingdoms as aforesaid. 22. That whenever any place of
either Manservant, or Maidservant, which the Lady Infanta shall bring with
her (nominated by the Catholic King her Brother) shall happen to be void,
whether by death, or by other Cause or accident, all the said Servants of her
Family are to be supplied by the Catholic King as aforesaid. 23. For security
that whatsoever is Capitulated may be fulfilled, The King of Great Britain and
Prince Charles, are to be bound by Oath, and all the King's Council shall
Confirm the said Treaty under their hands. Moreover the said King and Prince
are to give their Faiths in the Word of a King, to endeavor, if possible, that
whatsoever is Capitulated, may be established by Parliament. 24. That
conformable to this Treaty, all these things proposed are to be allowed and
approved of by the Pope, that he may give an Apostolical Benediction, and a
Dispensation necessary to effect the Marriage.
But though our King, and Prince, subscribed these Articles (as they were sent
to them by the Earl of Bristol) in this manner; Hos supra memoratos Articulos
omnes ac singulos approbamus, et quicquid in iis ex nostra part, seu nostro
nomine conventum est, ratum atque gratum habemus, Spanish delusion.
approving and expressing them to be very acceptable unto them. And after they
had wrought the King to sign these large immunities to the Papists, viz. Quod
Regnorum suorum Romano Catholici persecutionem nullam patientur, molestiave
officientur, Religionis suae causa, vel ob exercitium illorum ejusdem
sacramentorum, modo iis utantur absque scandalo (quod intelligi debet inter
privatos parietes) nec juramentis, aut sub alio praetextu qualicunque ordinem
Religionis spectante vexabuntur: That the Roman Catholics should not be
interrupted in the exercise of their Religion, doing it privately without
Scandal, nor be vexed with any oaths in order to the same. What rested but a
closing of both Parties? Yet all would not do, for the Spaniard never intended
the Match at all, as is evident by a Letter of the King of Spain's written to
his Favorite, the Conde of Olivares, dated the Fifth of November, 1622. found
among the Lord Cottington's Papers.

THe King my Father declared at his Death, That his intent never was to marry
my Sister, The King of Spain's letter to Olivares.
the Infanta Donna Maria, with the Prince of Wales, which your Uncle Don
Baltazer understood, and so treated this Match, ever with intention to delay
it, notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that (considering all the
aversness of the Infanta to it) it is time to seek some means to divert the
Treaty, which I would have you find out, and I will make it good whatsoever it
be. But in all other things, procure the satisfaction of the King of Great
Britain (who has deserved much) and it shall content me, so it be not in the
Match.




Thus was our King's plain heartedness deluded, his Honor blemished, his Love
among his Subjects diminished, the time for a positive answer for the
Dispensation from Rome long expired, and prolonged; his Childrens Patrimony
destroyed, and he left so unsatisfied, that the Prince himself, and the
Marquess of Buckingham, must go into Spain to unfold this Riddle, where they
found it as full of Aenigma's as at first. He that went to tie a knot there,
found it so entangled, that he took some time there to clear it; and when it
was clear, he thought it best, Scindere nodum, to cut that at last, which he
could not unloose at first.

Bergen besieged by Spinola.
The Marquess Spinola having long since left the Palatinate to the Imperials
Generals, with a great Army, consisting of above Thirty thousand men, the last
Summer sits down before Berghen ap Zome, a Town of very great Strength and
Importance, upon the Borders of Brabant, and incloses himself with two strong
Lines of Circumvallation, notwithstanding all the Power the Town could oppose
from within, or Prince Maurice, General of the States Army without. And though
he were well entrenched for his own Security, yet the Works of the Town were so
impregnable, that he could find no way to gain it, but by starving them, and
that could not be done but by commanding the River; and those Batteries that he
planted to hinder the access of Shipping with Relief into the Town, were within
reach of their Cannon, so that he found there was little good to be done,
tending to the reducing of it. This struck the Marquess to the Heart, that he
should bury his Honor, as he had done a great part of his Army, in those
bloody Trenches, and therefore he gave scope to his Resolution, to make use of
his time, for he converted his intentions of Starving, to Assaulting, and his
assaults were the more furious, because he found they would not last long; and
Old Morgan, that gallant Colonel, with his English Brigade, gave them their
hands full; the Scots did Gallant Service in the Town, and their Colonel
Hinderson was slain; but many of the Enemy fell on every side; for it is a
great disadvantage for living Bodies to fight against dead Walls, being so
high, and unassaultable. A General that goes to besiege a City, should have his
access to it (in his apprehension) as plain as a Mathematician has a
Demonstration (except it be upon some emergent cause) otherwise there is an
Error in his account, and there cannot be two, for the Honor dies in the
first, which touched the Marquess near, being his great trouble, and made him,
and his enterprise both droop.

Mansfeldt comes into Brabant.
But while he lay there digging graves, Count Mansfeldts ranging Army, that he
brought out of Bohemia, and those forces that remained of Christian Duke of
Brundswicks, after he was beaten by Tilly and Cordova, meeting in the
Palatinate, and finding themselves able to do little good there (the Country
being ruined, and wanting provisions to supply them) resolved to bring their
Army into the Low Countries being invited thereunto by the Prince of Orange,
and the States, to counterpoise the formidable Armies, that the King of Spain
had then in Motion; for though Spinola's hands were tied to the Trenches, yet
Conduba with one Army, on one side; and Count Henry van de Berg with another
army, on the other side, were dreadful to the Netherlands. The Mansfeldters
were not above twelve thousand strong, horse and foot, the Horse were only
armed with Pistols, the foot with Muskets, scarce a Pike, or Corslet among them
(for Brundswicks men upon their defeat for the most part had thrown away their
Arms) Money, and Provisions, they had very little (their store being now
spent) but what they could get by the Sword, or purchase from the Towns, and
Cities (by terror) as they passed; order there was little among them, for want
makes men Brutish, and Ravenous; and there ERNESTUS D: G: COMES MANSFELDIAE,
MARCHIO CASTELINO VI, ET BUTIGLIERAE, NOB: DNS IN HELD: SUP: DUX BELLIC, ET
HEROES FORT MART votens decus et dubijs si^sucia rebus, ERNESTUS CAMPI VIR
generosus nic est. Qui genus illustri ducens a stirpe Parentum Auget honoratum
per sua facta genus. E. (...) D.M.C.B.
was no way for them but to cut themselves out a passage into a plentiful
Country. On their way diverse of Mansfieldt's Horse mutined for Money, and came
swarming about his house where he was quartered, threatening violence, and were
ready to break open his doors. Mansfieldt having a Spirit full of Magnanimity
(and finding courage best able to quail such Attempts) would not stay so long
as to have his doors broken, but opened them himself (attended only by those of
his family) with a Case of Pistols in his hands, and presented himself before
them, and his very presence daunted them, for he did with sweet and affable
language let them know his own wants were as great as theirs; and thus when
they wanted other provisions he fed them with Hopes. But many of these Brunts
he had born formerly, Soldiers are like Gamesters, they get a great deal of
Money at one time, and have none at all another; and when want pinches it
rages; his House has been often beset by Mutiners, that threatened to tare him
in pieces; and he has opened his doors, thrown himself (as it were) among
them, and demanded stoutly, What they would have? and having a Case of Pistols
always by him, those near him that called for Money were sure to have those
Pistols discharged in their guts: And then he would ask them again, who would
have Money? and they would all slink away, and not a Man dare to open his
Mouth; so high and overpowring a Spirit he had! and that only kept him from the
Rage of Mutiny, for he knew his own integrity, that when he had Money he
di^ributed it freely, and the more ingenuous part of them knew what Money he
had, which was brought in great Sums, from such Towns and Cities, as redeemed
themselves from the Plunder of his Soldiers; so that it was not his Hoarding
and Covetousness, but real want made them suffer, and that imboldned his
Spirit; For a General that would be safe; when his Soldiers are in want,
should not take refreshment so much as with the tip of his Rod, unless they may
be partakers in it.

But with many Necessities, The Battle of Fleury.
in their March through Lorrain, and Lutzenburgh, they came to Fleury within
eight miles of Namurs, where Corduba with a Spanish Army strove to hinder their
passage; The Conflict was great betwixt them, and many slain on both sides, and
both triumphed in the Victory. For Corduba kept the Field, and Mansfieldt kept
his way. But Mansfieldt's Victory was the compleatest, because he attained to
his End, which was, to break through Corduba; But Corduba did not attain to his
End, which was, to hinder Mansfieldt. Yet the Spanish Bravery was highly
exalted with Bonfires, and rejoycings both at Madrid, Brunswick's Arm shot off.
and Bruxels. The Duke of Brunswicke lost his Bridle Arm in that service, and
many Gentlemen both English and Scots, out of Love to the Queen of Bohemia
behaved themselves gallantly, and let the Spaniard know; it was more than an
ordinary shock they encountered with. Among whom Sir Charles Rich, brother to
the E. of Warwick was a Principal person, whose Voluntary Spirit, not
necessity, made danger his Companion, where Honor attended it. Sir James
Heyes, Knevet, Humes, Heiborn, and other Commanders striving for Corrivalship
in Bravery.

Spinola raises his Siege.
Spinola hearing that Mansfieldt was broken through Corduba's Army, and come
into Brabant, made the Court Splendour of Corduba's Conquest appear but Ignes
fatui, which also something extinguished the glory of his own fame. For he
thought it good policy (seeing he should be necessitated to leave the Siege of
Berghen) to do it at that time, when there might be cause to think it
occasioned by that Accident, more than his default. And therefore as soon as
the Prince of Orange and Mansfieldt had joined forces, though Corduba came to
him and reinforced his Army, yet Winter drawing on, and his Army almost wasted,
he trussed up his Baggage in haste, set his Camp a-fire, and departed, leaving
to his Hungry Enemies good store of Wine, and other Provisions, in his burning
Quarters. And thus stood the Balance this year betwixt the King of Spain and
the Netherlands.

Buckingham's Medicine to cure the King's melancholy.
But our King receiving so many delays, and dissatisfactions from Spain, and
Rome, they begot him so much trouble, and Vexation, that crowding into his
thoughts, pressed upon his Natural Temper, some fits of Melancholy, which those
about him with facetious Mirth, would strive to Mitigate; And having exhausted
their inventions, or not making use of such as were more pregnant, the Marquess
and his Mother (instead of Mirth) fell upon Profaneness, thinking with that to
please him, and perhaps they were only mistaken in the unseasonableness of the
time, being not then suitable to the Humor. For they caused Mistress Aspernham,
a young Gentlewoman of the Kindred, to dress a Pigg like a Child, and the Old
Countess like a Midwife brought it in to the King in a rich Mantle. Turpin that
married one of the Kindred (whose name was renowned for a Bishop in the
Romances of the Emperor Charlemain) was dressed like a Bishop, in his Satin
Gown, Lawn sleeves, and other Pontifical Ornaments, who (with the Common Prayer
book) began the words of Baptism, one attending with a silver Basin of Water
for the Service, the King hearing the Ceremonies of Baptism read, and the
squeeking noise of that Brute he most abhorred, turned himself to see what
Pageant it was, and finding Turpin's face, which he well knew, dressed like a
Bishop; and the Marquess, whose face he most of all loved, stand as a
Godfather, he cried out, away for shame, what Blasphemy is this? and turning
aside with a frown, he gave them cause to think that such ungodly Mirth would
rather increase than cure his Melancholy.

Another time at Theobalds the King wanted some papers that had Relation to the
Spanish Treaty, so hot in Motion, which raised him highly into the Passion of
Anger, that he should not know what he had done with them, The King's Choler.
being things so material, and of such conoernment, And calling his Memory to a
strict account, at last he discharged it upon John Gib, a Scotchman, who was of
his Bedchamber, and had been an old Servant to him. Gib is called for in haste,
and the King asks him for the Papers he gave him; Gib collecting himself;
answered the King, he received no papers from him. The King broke into extreme
Rage (as he would often when the Humor of Choler began to boil in him)
protesting he had them, and reviling him exceedingly for denying them. Gib
threw himself at the King's feet protesting his innocence, that he never
received any, and desired his life might make satisfaction for his fault if he
were guilty. This could not calm the King's Spirit tossed in this tempest of
Passion; and overcharged with it, as he passed by Gib (kneeling) threw some of
it upon him; giving him a kick with his foot. Which kick infected Gib, and
turned his humility into Anger; for rising instantly he said: Sir, I have
served you from my youth, and you never found me unfaithful, I have not
deserved this from you, nor can I live longer with you with this disgrace; Fare
ye well Sir, I will never see your face more: and away he goes from the King's
presence, took Horse, and rode toward London. Those about the King put on a
sad countenance to see him displeased, and every man was inquisitive to know
the cause, some said the King and Gib were fallen out; but about what? some
papers of the Spanish Treaty, the King had given him, cannot be found. Endimion
Porter hearing it, said, The King gave me those Papers, went presently, and
brought them to the King, who being becalmed, and finding his Error, called
instantly for Gib; Answer was made he was gone to London: The King hearing it,
commanded with all expedition to send post after him, to bring him back,
protesting never to Eat, His sanguine.
Drink, or Sleep till he saw Gib's face. The Messenger overtook him before he
got to London, and Gib hearing the Papers were found, and that the King sent
for him with much earnestness, returned to the Court. And as he came into the
King's Chamber, the King kneeled down upon his Knees before Gib, entreating his
pardon, with a sober and grave aspect, protesting he would never rise till Gib
had forgiven him, and though Gibs modestly declined it with some humble
excuses, yet it would not satisfy the King, till he heard the words of
absolution pronounced. So ingenious was he in this piece of Passion! Which had
its sudden variation from a stern and furious anger, to a soft and melting
affection, which made Gib no loser by the bargain.

Thus the King's Melancholy, Choleric, and Sanguine constitution appeared. But
of all the Humors, Phlegm was now the most predominant, which made him so tamely
swallow those raw fruits of Spain, that all his Exercise could not well digest.

His Phlegmatic Humor. A Diet at Ratisbone. 7 Ian.
In January this year, the Diet which the Emperor had summoned (contrary to his
promise, as our King intimates) met at Ratisbone, where the Electors and diverse
other Princes of Germany assembled, either in their own persons, or by their
Deputies. The Imperial design was to take off the edge of the Princes
dissatisfaction, for his harsh proceedings against the Prince Palatine; wherein
he makes him the ground work, and cause of all the Wars, and miseries, that
have happened in the Empire. And thinking no man (as he said) would take the
boldness to mediate the Restitution of the proscribed Palatine into the
Electoral College, he could do no less than dispose of the Electorate, now (
plenojure) devolved unto him, as Emperor, which he had bestowed on the Duke of
Bavaria for spending his Treasure, and hazarding his Blood in his service,
against his own Nephew, the expulsed Palatine, Wherefore he requests the
illustrious presence of Electors and Princes, to give their opinions, how the
peace of the Empire may be established, to prevent all commotions for the
future.

The opinion of the Protestant Princes.
The Princes took this Proposition of the Emperor into debate, and the
Protestant Princes desired Caesar to consider the importance of the Business.

That though his Imperial Majesty in his own judgment may have had Cause enough
to publish the Ban against the Prince Palatine, yet they are of Opinion, that
in his particular Cause, which so nearly concerned the disposing of an
Electorate of the Empire, and so principal a Person of the Electoral College
(the sudden doing whereof might occasion, long, and tedious Wars, dangerous to
the Roman Empire) that Caesar should not of himself have proceeded so
rigorously, nor without the advice, and consent, of all the rest of the
Electors, according as it was agreed upon in the Capitulation Royal, which is
holden for a fundamental Law of the Empire. Which course of Caesar's, even for
the manner of proceeding in it, was distasted by Diverse, because the Prince
Palatinate had never been legally summoned, but uncited, and unheard, without
all knowledge of his Cause, and contrary to all ordinary Course, had been
condemned, and against all Equity, oppressed by the Publication of that
Imperial Ban. We purpose not to call the Power Imperial into question, yet we
cannot but remember your Majesty of that Promise made in your Capitulation unto
the Electors; and humbly We admonish Caesar, to stand unto his own word, and
not to intermit the performance of it. And as for the disposing of the
Electorate, we desire nothing more than that We could gratify Caesar with Our
Suffrages; But perceiving so many, and so great Difficulties in it, We cannot
but admonish your Majesty of the danger of it. This being the Opinion of Our
Electors, that seeing your Majesty has graciously called the Diet for
restoring Peace in the Empire, that it were altogether necessary first to
remove the Obstacles of Peace. And seeing that all the stirs began in Bohemia,
Caesar should do well to labor first for the quieting of that Kingdom, and
command a stay to be made of the severe Reformation, and frequent Executions
there; That so the Hearts of your Subjects being overcome with Grace and Mercy,
might be sweetly joined to you, and all fear, and distrust, utterly taken away;
without which, we see no hope, either how your Majesty can sit sure upon your
Imperial Throne, or how the Electors and Princes can be freed of their fears;
being evident, that the Bohemians, and others, made desperate by the Extremity
of their sufferings, will take any occasion to begin new troubles, and to
involve the Empire with new Dangers. All the Lutheran States of the Empire,
likewise, which follow the Augustan Confession, have their Eyes upon this
Bohemian Reformation, which though it were given out to be for private Justice,
yet it is so linkt with the public cause, that unless it be speedily ended,
and the two Churches at Prague (granted by Rodolphus the second) not in favor
of some private men alone, but of Christian Elector of Saxony, and which had
continued free until of late) were again opened, and the free exercise of
Religion generally permitted, We see no sure Peace likely to be in the Empire,
but utter ruin rather, and final desolation, may every day be feared. Seeing
it was apparently known, that it was not those that professed the Reformed
Religion, who begun these troubles; but the Noblemen and great Officers, whose
designs the other were compelled to obey.

And for the Prince Palatine, seeing he is already sufficiently punished, it
were far more commendable in your Majesty, that now at last upon his
submission, you would be pleased to restore him to his Lands and Dignities,
otherwise there is no likelihood of Restoring Peace to the Empire. And in the
transferring of the Electorate, this main thing were fit to be considered;
Whether the Prince Palatine, excluded in his own person, does debar his
Children, who (by the providence of their Ancestors) had before this Act of
their Father, jus adquisitum, an Hereditary Right unto the Electorate; or the
brother of the Prince Palatine, who has no way offended your Majesty; nor, by
reason of his Minority, could not; Or others of the Kindred of the Prince
Palatine, should be, or ought to be in this Case neglected? If they be, it will
be hardly taken of other Electors and Princes, and occasion various Distrusts,
betwixt the Head and the Members. For the Princes allied unto the Prince
Palatine, who have been quiet hitherto, (upon Considence of Caesar's Clemency)
now perceiving all hope of that Dignity unto their Family taken away, must
needs have Recourse unto Arms, and endeavor the Recovery of it by force. And
if Caesar should die, this controversy being not compounded, it may well be
feared, many inconveniences will fall out, contrary to Caesar's desire. For
though upon the advantage of his Victories, he has had the Law in his own
hand, if the Wheel should turn, that side which is lowest will get up again.

Therefore We hold it more Wisdom to advise Caesar, not to proceed too
suddenly, but rather to accept the intercession of other Electors and Princes,
as in such Cases has hitherto been done. Considering the Prince Palatine was
then but young, abused by ill Council, and no ways the Author of those stirs in
Bohemia, they being in an uproar before his coming among them. And if his
Majesty would pardon the Prince Palatine, he should ever oblige the whole
Electoral College, and all the Kings and Princes allied unto him; and the
Prince himself, and all his posterity, would be advised (when they remember
their Exile) how they embroil themselves in such Business. Whereas if he saw
the door of Mercy quite shut, and nothing left him but his life, it would make
both him, and his, desperate to attempt, so as there would be no end of the
Troubles in the Roman Empire. Caesar therefore should do far righter, if for
his own Honor, and the public good, he would prefer mercy before severity,
and not pursue these Extremities.

To these things the Catholic Princes said, That Caesar had shown Causes
enough which he had to deprive the Palatine, The opinion of the Popish Princes.
and the Palatinate being devolved to him, he might dispose of it, without
having regard to the Palatine line, according to his own pleasure. That his
Majesty could not well hold any terms of Amity with him, though he were
restored; and this impunity would give occasion unto others to offend. As for
the matter of Punishment, there would be little difference between the Emperor,
and the Palatine, seeing that his Majesty's Lands and Dominions, are no less
wasted than the others, and yet there is great difference in the cause; for
this fell out to Caesar without his Demerit, and the Palatine did the other,
having no necessity to it. That he had refused mercy, in not acknowledging his
fault, nor seeking for favor. And it is an unequal Request for Caesar to
accept of any Reconciliation, whilst his General Mansfield is yet in the field,
and prosecutes his cause by force of Arms. The safety of the Empire consisting
in the filling up of the Electoral College Caesar has done very well in a
speedy resolving on it, and other Emperors in the like causes have done the
same before.

The Reply of the Protestant Princes.
To which the other party answered: That for the security of the Imperial
Dignity, and safety of the Empire, there is no question, but that it consisted
in the Concord of the Electoral College, with the Emperor. And the Prince
Palatine has (as you say) done amiss, yet if Caesar shall still use Rigor, the
Princes of the lower Saxony are of Opinion, there can be no Peace established
in the Empire, the good of which being most worthy to be preferred, Caesar
should do wisely to suffer himself to be entreated, and change Rigor into
Clemency, making the Empire by that means glad with a desired Peace, otherwise
new flames were likely to break out, in those places which yet are preserved
from burning. That Caesar had now by the aid of the Electors, and Princes,
recovered his lost Provinces, and wanting nothing but quiet possession of them
which, this desired Reconciliation was the best means to effect. The hand of
War may be lifted up, but who knows where the stroke will fall? and Victory is
so long uncertain, as the adverse party has power to reinforce his Arms. And
for the renewing of the War, there is yet a fair pretense left, for that in
bestowing the Electorate, the Prince Palatine's sons, and brother have been
neglected, and with these Principles are the minds of many of the Princes of
the Empire already possessed. The King of Great Britain besides could not but
take it ill, that he should now see all his endeavors take no good effect, but
his only daughter and her Children, left in exile. And as for the manner of
this Reconciliation, there might be a particular Treaty, and Consultation,
wherein Caesar's Prerogative imperial being reserved, all parties might receive
Satisfaction, and the Empire once again flourish in Peace. If these Remedies be
not applied it will produce ill blood, yea Heart-burnings, and distrusts, in
the Electoral College it self.

The Emperor's Reply. The Elector of Saxony.
These several answers delivered to the Emperor, the twentieth of January, he
replied unto, thanking them for their consultations. And though some (says he)
have wisely heretofore resolved us, that our proceedings in proscribing the
Palatine was both legal and necessary, yet now we perceive some of you are of
opinion that according to our Capitulation Royal, we ought not to have
proceeded so far, without the Knowledge, and consent of the Electors. But as we
have no ways gone begond this our Capitulation, but even before we set out the
Ban, punctually considered all that was necessary to be taken notice of; so did
we also desire nothing more then that a Diet might be convoked, for the due
treating and advising upon this Business: which meeting being impeded by the
prosecution of the War by the Palatine, we could do no less, to take down his
courage, than publish the Ban against him: which course of ours, seeing it was
never intended to be prosecuted to the prejudice of the Electoral College, or
against our own Capitulation, we hope that the Electors will not take it
otherwise; being that we promise withal, so to moderate it, that no detriment,
or prejudice shall result thereby unto the Dignity Electoral.

As for the Translation of the Electorate, and your advice for Restoring of the
Palatinate, there is (I perceive) some difference in your Opinions. One part
wisely, and in favor of us, affirming the great Reason we have to do it. But
for the other party, which advises his Restoring, we purpose not so far to
consent unto it, as to the restoring of him to the Electoral Dignity, seeing
that in the disposing of it other where, we are resolved that we shall do no
more than we have just reason to do: nor will we defer the filling up of the
Electoral College, because the dispatching of it does so much concern the
Common good. But for the Restitution of the Person of the Palatine, you shall
see how much our Mind is inclined toward clemency* and how far we will declare
Our self to gratify the King of Great Britain, the King of Denmark, the
Elector of Saxony, and other Electors, and Princes, interceding for him.

And as concerning our forbidding the Exercise of the Lutheran Religion in the
City of Prague; we do not see how it any way concerns this Diet to inquire of;
our Letter have signified the causes that moved us to begin it unto the Elector
of Saxony, nor can we think that what we have done there, any of the Neighbor
States or Territories, need be suspicious of seeing that we have sworn oftener
than once in the Word of an Emperor, that we will most Religiously observe the
Peace, both of Religion, and civil Government, throughout the Empire. And thus
much we could not but advertise this Illustrious Presence of Electors, and
Princes, and you the Ambassadors of those that are absent.

The Protestants answer.
The Protestant Electors, and Princes, still persisted in their Resolution, that
the Emperor could not translate the Electorate legally, the words of the
Capitulation, being clearly these. In all difficult businesses, no process
ought to be made, without the knowledge and consent of the Electors; and that
without ordinary process, no proscription should go out against any one of the
States of the Empire, before the cause were heard. This is the fundamental Law
of the Empire, which required no more, but to be constantly observed, nor is it
to be drawn into further dispute, or deliberation. And it stood the Electors
upon, to be open eyed, to see to the observation of it, being it concerned the
three Secular Electors especially, whose Dignity, did by an Hereditary Right
descend unto their Posterity, to keep it safe, and entire, which they hoped
that Caesar would not contradict.

Result of all.
But the Emperor would not be persuaded from his own Resolution, yet in
conclusion, to gratify the Princes, he was contented to confer the Electorate,
with a Proviso, that the investiture of the Duke of Bavaria, should not be
prejudicial to the children of the Palatine; and so the Diet ended.

23. Feb.
The Duke of Saxony was one of the first that executed the Imperial Bann against
the Prince Palatine, assisting the Emperor with a great Army, to level the
Power of his fellow Elector, when he mounted to be a King, and came so near him
as Prague, but when he was brought thus low, he would willingly have raised him
up again, and then, the Hand that had done him so much mischief was not
permitted to do him any good. But by the carriage of the Business (though the
Emperor gave fair words) it did after appear, the Austrian Policy aimed at the
Extirpation of Religion, as well as at the exclusion of the Palatine and his
Children; for he never meant them Title, nor Territory, unless he could settle
both upon a Popish Foundation; Austrian policy.
and to that end there was a private Treaty broached in England, and carried on
by some of Our King's Ministers of State; That the Young Prince Palatine,
should be bred up in the Emperor's Court, under pretense of marrying his
Daughter, but in effect to be trained up in the Popish Religion: And our Prince
Charles at the same time must fetch his Wife in Spain; where they hoped the
influence of that Air, their Visible Piety, and their invisible Plots would
sweetly insinuate their Popish Principles into him. So impiously cunning they
are to make others as miserable as themselves.

The ending of the Diet in Germany, The Prince's journey into Spain.
and our Prince's Journey into Spain, were much about a time. He went with the
Marquess of Buckingham privately from Court the 17. of February to New-Hall in
Essex, the Marquess's House (purchased of that unthrift, Robert Earl of Sussex)
and from thence the next day by Graves-End the straight way to Dover, attended
only by Sir Richard Graham, Master of the Marquess's Horse, where they were to
meet Sir Francis Cottington, who was thought fit to be the Prince's Secretary,
and Endimion Porter, who was then taken from the Marquess's Bedchamber to wait
upon the Prince. Cottington was at first, Clerk to Sir Charles Cornwallis his
Secretary, when Cornwallis was Ambassador in Spain; and being left there an
Agent, in the Intervals of Ambassadors, was by that means trained up in the
Spanish affairs: Porter was bred up in Spain when he was a Boy, and had the
Language, but found no other Fortune there, then brought him over to be Mr.
Edward Villers his man, in Fleetstreet, which was before either the Marquess or
his Master were acceptable at White Hall. And Graham at first was an underling
of low degree in the Marquess's Stable. It is not hereby intended to vilify
the persons, being men (in this World's lottery) as capable of advancement as
others; but to show in how poor a Bark, the King ventured the rich freight his
Son, having only the Marquess to steer his Course.

The Prince and Buckingham had false Beards for disguizes, By Dover.
to cover their smooth Faces, and the names of Jack Smith, and Tom Smith, which
they past with, leaving behind them impressions in every place (with their
bounty, and presence) that they were not the Persons they presented; but they
were not so rudely dealt with as to be questioned till they came to Dover, and
there the Mayor in a Supercilious Officiousness (which may deserve the title of
a careful Magistrate) examined them so far, (being jealous they were Gentlemen
going over to fight) that the Marquess (though Admiral) was glad to Vail his
Beard to him in private, and tell him he was going to visit the Fleet, so they
had liberty to take Ship, and landed at Bulloign the same day, making swist
Motion by Posthorses (which celerity leaves the least impression) till they
came to Paris; Paris.
There the Prince spent one day to view the City and Court, shadowing himself
the most he could under a Bushy Peruque, which none in former times but bald
people used, but now generally intruded into a fashion; and the Prince's was so
big, that it was hair enough for his whole face. The Marquesses fair Face was
shadowed with the same Pencil, and they both together saw the Queen Mother at
Dinner, the King in the Gallery after Dinner, and toward the Evening they had
a full view of the Queen Infanta, and the Princess Henrietta Maria, with most
of the Beauties of the Court, at the practice of a Masking Dance, being
admitted by the Duke of Montbason, the Queens Lord Chamberlain in Humanity to
Strangers, when many of the French were put by. There the Prince saw those Eyes
that after inflamed his Heart, which increased so much, that it was thought to
be the cause of setting Three Kingdoms afire: but whether any spark of it did
then appear, is uncertain; if it did, it was closely raked up, till the Spanish
fire went out; the heat whereof made him neglect ^no time till he came to
Madrid.

Bordeaux.
At Bordeaux, the Duke D'Espernon, Governor there, out of a noble freedom to
Strangers, offered them the Civilities of his House, which they declined with
all bashful respects, and Sr Francis Cottington who always looked like a
Merchant, and had the least Miene of a Gentleman (fittest for such an
employment) let him know, they were Gentlemen that desired to improve
themselves, and had not Breeding suitable to his Grandeur; which took off the
edge of his invitation, whose subtle Eye by Converse might have pryed through
those fictitious outsides, to discover more then did appear.

Bayone.
They past with some difficulties also at Bayone, where the Count de Gramant was
Governor, (being the utmost part of France, and the Key, that opens the Way
into Spain) he being a pregnant man read more than ordinary in them; but where
Peace is the Schoolmaster, Jealousy the Pragmatical Usher has little to do;
therefore out of Common Civility he let them pass. And within a small time
after they had taken Post (before they had well passed the Bounds of France) he
had notice by a Courier, (that brought Advice thereof to the King of Spain,)
from Don Carlos de Coloma, Extraordinary Ambassador in England, ( Gondemar for
his good Service being sent for home, and advanced) that the Prince of England
was among them. This Hazard the Prince ran, upon Posthorses, that if he had
been discovered, it would not only have questioned his Judgment, in the
managing of so great an MARY DE MEDICIS.
but he must have remained at the French mercy, which would have given an
Eclipse to the glory he shined in, in the Court of Spain, for they looked upon
this spritely journey, as a high remarque of a Gallant and Noble spirit; And
happily some Spanish Fancy may now be framing, how many Giant Difficulties he
conquered in the way, and what Enchantments he passed among the Beauties of
France: for such Romances are frequent among those barren Rosemary Mountains,
the fume whereof is pleasant and helpful to the Brain.

Upon Saturday the sixth of March, At Madrid.
they arrived at Madrid. The Prince and Marquess came thither one day before
Cottington, and the others, to make the less noise in appearances. They lighted
at the Earl of Bristol's House, in the evening, and the Marquess brought in the
Portmantua, but his Master staid without with the Guide, till he had prepared a
way for Privacy. The Earl of Bristol was astonished at the sight, but after he
had collected himself, his Diligence attended his Duty, and the Prince wanted
nothing but Counsel how to order himself, which they took time (till the next
day toward the Evening) to deliberate on. All that morning the Town was filled
with Rumors of the arrival of some great Prince, and though the King of Spain
had intimation by his Letters, yet he kept all private till the Prince expressed
himself, which was done that Evening. For Buckingham and Bristol went to the
Court, and had private Audience of the King, who sent his Grand favorite
Olivares back with them to congratulate the Princes coming, who let the Prince
know how Happy the King his Master was in the Enjoyment of him there, and what
addition of Grandeur his presence would contribute to the Court of Spain, and
that the obligation was so great, that he deserved to have the Infanta thrown
into his Arms. All this while kneeling, kissing his Hands, and embracing his
Thigh! the Huge and swelling expressions of Spanish Humility. And from him he
went to the Marquess of Buckingham, telling him, That now the Prince of England
was in Spain, his Master and he would divide the World betwixt them, with other
Rodomontado fancies. And after he was gone, about ten of the Clock that night,
the King of Spain came in a close Coach to Visit the Prince, who having
intimation of his coming (such secret Hints among Princes being suitable
invitements) he met him in the way, and there they spent some time in those
sweet, yet formal Caresses and Embraces, that are incidents to the Interviews
of great Princes, though their Hearts and Tongues do seldom accord. Gondemar in
consort was not without his Strain of Complement, for he told the Prince upon a
Visit next day; that he had strange news to tell him; which was, That an
Englishman was sworn a privy- Counselor to the King of Spain; meaning
himself, who he said was an Englishman in Heart, and had lately received that
Honor.

The next day the King and Prince had some Interviews in their Coaches passing
to the Parada to take the Air, where also he had a glimpse of his fair
Mistress, but the Formality of the Princes Entertainment was deferred till his
lodgings were made ready in the Court, Rides in State to the Court.
which was the Sunday following, being that day invited to Dinner to St.
Hierome's Monastery, where the King commanded diverse of his great Officers to
attend upon the Prince, which they did bare-headed, and they say it was
according to the old Custom of Castile; but King Philip when he was in England
found that Respect, and retained it ever after in Spain. The Prince would have
prevented their Ceremony to him, but they are stubborn, and pertinacious in
their very Humility. After dinner the King came in Person, with his Favorite
Olivares and diverse others of the Nobility in Coaches, with intention on
horseback (for the more State) to conduct the Prince through the Town to the
Court, having Horses and all accoutremens fit for such a Royal Train. And thus
mounted they rode in great Glory, through the streets (being adorned with rich
Tapistry and rare Pictures) as their Kings do to their Coronation. The Spanish
civility placed the Prince on the Right hand of the King, under a rich cloth of
Estate, supported by many Persons of Quality; Olivares and Buckingham went next
the Canopy, and after them the rest of their Grandees in their several Degrees,
most glorious every where to behold, the choice Beauties of the Town and Court,
presenting themselves to see and to be seen. At the Court gate they dismounted,
and then a new friendly strife began who should enter First, and because that
should breed no difference they went both together. The Queen and the Infanta
from a Window in the Court, saw them come riding in triumphant Equipage, and
when they alighted the Infanta retired, and the Queen went to her Chamber,
expecting a Visit; and when the King and Prince entered her Chamber, she rose to
meet them making an Obeisance to the Prince, suitable to her Greatness and His;
and he bowing to the Ground almost in Obedience to Her, were both as great
Patterns of Civility, and courtesy to the rest of their Train. And after some
Compliments they sat down in three Royal Seats prepared for them, the Queen in
the Middle, the Prince on her right hand, and the King on her left. And in this
Stately posture they discoursed away some half an hours time, and then they
parted. The Queen brought the Prince to the utmost extent of her Chamber, and
the King to a Chamber prepared for him (with many Rooms of State, Sumptuously
adorned,) where he left him to his own Attendance, and some great Spanish
Condes, as Principal Officers of his Household, Gondemar ever being one about
him. Two days after, the Prince was invited to run at the Ring, where his fair
Mistress was a Spectator, and to the Glory of his fortune, and the great
Contentment CRUX FIDEI COTI^ CULA
both of himself, and the Lookers on, he took the Ring the very first Course.
So seasonable are these little empty joys, when they are suitable to our Minds
and Wishes.

All that the Spanish Court could do was heightened into Gallantry and
Civilities to the Prince, His Royal entertainment.
yet he saw not his fair Mistress but at an undiscerning distance, and in
transitu, as she came from Church. But after all these Splendid, and glorious
outside Ceremonies of Entertainment, were grown a little old, the Prince began
to mind the Business he came about, and desired a more intimate access to his
Beloved Infanta, which Olivares promised from day to day to accomplish, but
still delayed; and at length, when unperformed promises were heightened into
Shame, he plainly confessed, That it was agreed by the King and his Council,
that he might not see her as a Lover, till the Dispensation came; for it would
give scandal to admit him before, yet not to starve him quite in his Desires
(but to keep him short that he should not surfeit) he had now and then Access
to her as a Prince, in a public way, the King of Spain being always present,
and the Earl of Bristol Interpreter, so that nothing could be spoken, but those
little superficial Compliments, that served as Baits rather to nibble on, than
satisfy. But these small Repasts kept up the Appetite.

The English Nobility flock into Spain.
And now the Glories of the English Court left the Northern Sun declining to the
West, and came to see the Sun rising in Spain. The Marquess of Buckingham's new
Title of Duke came to him also, (that he might be in the highest Rank among the
Spanish Grandees) to beard the proudest of them; which afterward he did. And
the Viscount Doncaster (lately made Earl of Carlisle) came in all his Glories;
of which two, it was observed by knowing Men, That Buckingham came into Spain
of the Spanish Faction, and returned into England of the French Faction:
Carlisle came into Spain of the French Faction, and returned into England of the
Spanish: thus varying the Scene by fits, and acting their parts as the present
fancy moved them. The Lord Kensington Captain of the Guard to our King, came
also to see the Prince, so did the Earl of Denbigh, Edward, Son and Heir to the
now Earl of Manchester; The Viscount Mandevill, the Viscount Rochford, and
diverse others of the Nobility; And the Prince was so circled with a Splendid
Retinue of his own people, that it might be said, There was an English Court in
the King of Spain's Palace.

The Spanish strive to pervert the Prince.
But together with these specious Entertainments there were underworking Hopes
to have the Prince turn Papist, for (in intervenient Discourses) Olivares, and
others, would press him (with all the Arguments the Court had instructed them
in) to a conversion; intimating how smooth a path it would make to the
Infanta's affections; for when he, that was to be Lord of her Heart and the
best friend she had, would be an Enemy to her Religion, it could be but a great
Obstacle to her Love. And when the Danger of it was proposed to them, as likely
to bring a Rebellion in the Nation, if their Prince should be perverted; they
promised to assist him with an Army against such rebellious people. But if he
would not admit of a present, and sudden alteration publicly, yet that he
would be so indulgent when the Infanta came into England, as to listen to her
in Matters of Religion, which the Prince promised to do. Nay, his own familiar
friend Bristol (as it was Articled against him afterward by Buckingham) did
strive with a gentle hand to allure him that way, as bringing with it an
addition to the Grandeur of the King's of England, that none of them could ever
do great things, that were not of that Religion.

Thus was the Prince beset, and Time ran away in Discourses: The Dispensation
being purposely delayed; for some at that time in the Spanish Court, said it
was come, and sent back again to Rome, (being too forward, and active) that it
might have more weight put upon it, and then it would not make so much haste,
for now it came too soon to dispatch their work. For the subtily considered,
that Time and continual dropping, might leave those impressions upon the
Prince's spirit, that Dispatches cannot effect. Therefore they made new
Queries, and clapped new Remora's upon the Articles, that being tangled in
Disputations betwixt England and Spain; and in controversies of Religion
betwixt the Prince, and some of their cunning Sophisters, (which they set a
work) that before the way could be well cleared on both sides, their Design
(which was the Prince's Perversion) might mature and ripen. For the Earl of
Bristol confessed afterward, That it was a general received Opinion in the
Spanish Court, that the Prince came thither with intention to be a Roman
Catholic; And Gondemar pressed Bristol not to hinder so pious a work, assuring
him, they had the Duke of Buckingham's assistance therein.

So does the Pope.
And it was evident enough their hopes were great, by the Pope's letter to the
Bishop of Conchen, Inquisitor general in Spain: Wherein, he excites him, not to
slip the Opportunity, providence had put into his hand, of extending his Piety
to the outtermost Nations. The Prince of England being now in the Court of
Spain, that glorious Temple (as it were) that has been a Bulwark to the
Pontifical Authority, and an Academy for propogation of Religion, he desires he
may not stay there in vain, but that some of the impressions of the Piety, of
so many Catholic Kings, as have lived there, may be imprinted on him; that he
may be won with all sweetness, as many of his noble Ancestors have been, who
have submitted their Crowned heads, and Imperial power to the Roman Obedience.
And to his glorious Victory, and Eternal GREGORIVS XV alexander Luaouisuis,
Bononien. creat die 9. Februar^ an 1621. Sedit an. 2. me ^s. S. Ob^t die 8.
Iulij an. 1623 Vac.
Triumph of Celestial Beatitudes, the Treasures of Kings, and Legions of
Soldiers cannot contribute, but the Weapons of Light that must come from
Heaven, whose Splendour inlightning the Prince's Eyes, shall dazle^ his Errors,
and establish his mind in meekness. And he charges the Bishop, and all his
Fraternity, to use the best strength, and industry, they can to this purpose.
So that the Prince was continually laid at, by the insinuating Orations of
cunning Jesuits; the fained, and cousening Miracles of reclused Holiness; the
Splendid and Specious Solemnities of their Formal Processions; the rare, and
admirable Pictures of their reputed Saints; besides many other painted devices,
and subtle Artifices, brooded among them.

And the Pope used all the Rhetoric of his Cabalistical Consistory, and Holy
Chair, to charm him to his Obedience, as may be seen by this Letter which he
writ to him himself.

MOst Noble Prince, By his Letters.
Health and Light of Divine Grace. For as much as Great Britain has always been
fruitful in Virtues, and Men of Merit, having filled the one and the other
World with the Glory of Her Renown: She does also very often attract the
thoughts of the Holy Apostolical Chair, to the consideration of her praises.
And indeed the Church was but then in her Infancy, when the King of Kings did
choose her for his Inheritance, and so affectionately, that it is thought the
Roman Eagles prevailed not so much as the Banner of the Cross. Besides that
many of her Kings instructed in the Knowledge of the true Salvation, have
preferred the Cross before the Royal Scepter, and the Discipline of Religion
before Covetousness, leaving Examples of Piety to other Nations, and to the
Ages yet to come; so, as having Merited the principal and chief Places of
Blessedness in Heaven, they have obtained on Earth the Triumphant Ornaments of
true Holiness. And although now the State of the English Church be altered, yet
we see the Court of Great Britain adorned and furnished with Moral Virtues,
which might serve to support the Charity that We bear unto Her, and be an
Ornament to the name of Christianity; if withal She could have for her defense
and Protection, the Orthodox and Catholic Truth. Wherefore by how much the
Glory of your most Noble Father, and the apprehension of your Royal
Disposition, delights Us, with so much more Zeal, We desire that the Gates of
the Heavenly Kingdom, might be opened unto you, and that you might purchase to
your self the Love of the Universal Church. Moreover, it being Certain that
Gregory the Great of most blessed Memory, has introduced to the English
people, and taught their Kings, the law of the Gospel, and the respect to
Apostolical Authority; We as inferior to him in Holiness and Virtue. but equal
in Name and Degree of Dignity, it is very reasonable that We following his
blessed Steps, should endeavor the Salvation of those Provinces, especially at
this time, when your Happy Design (most Noble Prince) elevates Us to the Hope
of an extraordinary advantage. And as you have taken a Journey into Spain to
the Catholic King, with desire to allye your Self to the House of Austria, so
We do commend your Design, and indeed do testify openly in this present
Business, That you are he that takes principal Care of our Prelacy. For seeing
that you desire to take in Marriage the Daughter of Spain, We may easily from
thence conjecture, That the ancient seeds of Christian Piety which have so
happily flourished in the Hearts of the Kings of Great Britain; May ( God
prospering them) revive again in your Soul. And indeed it is not to be
believed, that he that loves such an alliance should hate the Catholic
Religion, and delight to oppress the Holy Chair. To that purpose We have
commanded to make continually most humble Prayers to the Father of Lights, That
he would be pleased to put you as a fair Flower of Christendom, and the only
Hope of Great Britain, in possession of that most noble Heritage, that your
Ancestors have purchased for you, to defend the Authority of the Sovereign High
Priest, and to sight against the Monsters of Heresy. Remember the days of
old, enquire of your Fathers, and they will tell you the Way that leads to
Heaven, and what way Temporal Princes have taken to gain an Eternal Kingdom.
Behold the Gates of Heaven opened, the most holy Kings of England (who came
from England to Rome accompanied with Angels) did come to Honor, and do Homage
to the Lord of Lords and to the Prince of the Apostles, in the Apostolical
Chair: their Actions, and Examples, being as so many Voices of God, speaking
and exhorting you to follow the course of the Lives of those, to whose Empire
you shall one day attain.

Is it possible that you can suffer Heretics should hold them for impious, and
condemn those whom the Faith of the Church testifies to reign in Heaven with
Jesus Christ, and have command, and authority over all Principalities, and
Empires of the Earth? Behold how they tender you the hand of this truly happy
inheritance, to Conduct you Safe and Sound to the Court of the Catholic King;
And now desire to bring you back again into the bosom of the Roman Church:
beseeching with unspeakable sighs and groans the God of all Mercy for your
Salvation, and do stretch out to you the Arms of the Apostolical Charity, to
embrace you with all Christian affection; even you, that are her desired Son,
in showing you the happy Hope of the Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed you cannot
give a greater Consolation to all the people of the Christian World, then to
put the Prince of the Apostles, in possession of your most noble Island, whose
Authority has been held so long in the Kingdom of Britain for the defense of
Kingdoms, and for a Divine Oracle, the which will easily arrive, and without
Difficulty, if you open your Heart to the Lord that knocks, upon which depends
all the happiness of that Kingdom. It is from this our great Charity that we
cherish the Praises of the Royal Name; and that which Great Britain is thy
Birth: right but the Earth Li^e then, and conquer, till victorious war
stoopes to the Virtues, which exceed thy Birth Make thy Rule endless, as thy
Virtues are.
makes us desire that you and your Royal Father might be styled with the name
of Deliverers, An. Reg. 21. An. Christi. 1623.
and Restorers of the ancient, and Paternal Religion of Great Britain. This is
it we hope for, trusting in the Goodness of God, in whose hands are the Hearts
of Kings, and who causes the People of the Earth to receive Healing; to whom
we will always labor with all our Power to render you gracious and
favorable. In the interim take notice by these Letters, the care of our
Charity, which is none other then to procure your Happiness; and it will never
grieve us to have written them, if the reading of them stir but the least spark
of Catholic Faith in the heart of so great a Prince, whom we wish to be filled
with long continuance of Joy, and flourishing in the Glory of all Virtues.
Given at Rome in the Palace of St. Peter, the 20. of April. 1623. in the third
year of our Popedom.

This Letter of the Pope's expresses not only the sleek, The Pope's cunning.
and smooth ways, that Soul-merchant takes to purchase his Proselytes, but the
end he proposes to himself; which is, to bring them under the Roman Obedience,
otherwise whatsoever they do or profess is Heresy. And to build up the Towers
of this great Babel, the name of the most High God is brought down among them,
and used as a Master Builder. Every Profession lays that name as a Foundation,
though the Superstructure be but straw and stubble of Hypocrisy, which a
whirlwind shall scatter, and the time is coming that her Lovers shall be
destroyed, and fierycloven tongues shall confound their Language. The Prince
was not slack in answering this Letter, which happily he might think would
quicken the Pope to dispatch the Dispensation, when he should find so little
cause for Delays, by his closing so nearly with him. Which whether out of
Policy or Real intention cannot be asserted, but the Letter was thus.

MOst Holy Father,
The Prince's answer.
I received the Dispatch from your Holiness with great content, and with that
Respect which the Piety, and care wherewith your Holiness writes, does require.
It was an unspeakable pleasure to me to read the Generous Exploits of the
King's my Predecessors, to whose Memory Posterity has not given those praises,
and Elogies of Honor that were due to them. I do believe that your Holiness
has set their Example before my Eyes, to the end that I might imitate them in
all my Actions, for in truth they have often exposed their Estates, and Li^es
for the Exaltation of the Holy Chair, And the ^ou^^ge with which they have
assaulted the Enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ has not been less then the
Care and thought which I have to the end that the Peace and Intelligence, which
has hitherto been wanting in Christendom, might be bound with a bond of true
concord: for like as the common Enemy of Peace, watches always to put Hatred
and Dissension between Christian Princes, so I believe that the Glory of God
requires that we should endeavor to unite them. And I do not esteem it a
greater Honor to be descended from so great Princes. then to imitate them in
the Zeal of their Piety. In which it helps me very much to have known the Mind
and Will of our Thrice Honored Lord and Father, and the Holy Intentions of his
Catholic Majesty to give a happy Concurrence to so laudable a Design: For it
grieves him extremely, to see the great Evil that grows from the Division of
Christian Princes, which the Wisdom of your Holiness foresaw, when it judged
the Marriage, which you pleased to design, between the Infanta of Spain and my
self, to be necessary to procure so great a good; For it is very certain, that I
shall never be so extremely affectionate to any thing in the World, as to
endeavor alliance with a Prince that has the same apprehension of the true
Religion with my self. Therefore I entreat your Holiness to believe that I have
been always far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan of any faction
against the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion. But on the contrary, I have
sought all occassions to take away the suspicion that might rest upon me; and
that I will employ my self for the Time to come, to have but one Religion, and
one Faith, seeing that we all believe in One Jesus Christ. Having resolved in
my self to spare nothing that I may have in the World, and to suffer all manner
of Discommodities, even to the hazarding of my estate and life, for a thing so
pleasing unto God. It rests only that I thank your Holiness for the permission
which you have been pleased to afford me, and that I may pray God to give you a
blessed Health here, and his Glory, after so much travel, which your Holiness
takes within his Church.

Signed, CHARLES STUART.




A fatal Letter.
It may well be a Quere, Whether this profession of the Prince, in suffering all
discommodities, even to the Hazarding of Estate and Life, did not rest upon him
at his, Death? as may be said hereafter; But there is a long Race for him to
run, before he come to that End. It seems he had either a good Will to write
this Letter, or a bad Council to indite it, or both conjoined, that were as
careful to please the Pope as they were hopeful it would never come to see the
light, till the flame of it would be too visible. For if the Prince intended
Really (when he had power) to introduce Popery into England; this Letter in a
bloody color too apparently would have been discovered; and if his intentions
were formal, and only to close with the Pope for his present accommodation, how
black would every Character of this letter look to the Roman Rubric, and what
a Tincture of Scandal would it leave upon the true Religion? for Fallere
fallentem, may be a fit Motto for a bad man, not a good Christian; so that
whatsoever his Intentions were, the Act was evil: And I could suspect it is a
forged Letter, but that it has been asserted by so many Authors both at home
and abroad.

The Pope finding by this letter, and some other private intimations, the
Princes good affections to the Roman See, thought it high time to dally no
longer, The Dispensation comes to Madrid.
but to draw him altogether with the Cords of Love; therefore he dispatches the
Dispensation to his Nuntio at Madrid, six months after the Prince's arrival
there, with a little Bob at the Tail of it, yet to amuse them: Which was, That
the King of Great Britain, and the Prince, should give Caution to perform what
was stipulated between them and the King of Spain, especially in those Articles
which were in favor of the Roman Catholics in England, and other his
Majesty's Dominions; Requiring at least, some Sovereign Catholic Prince
should engage for them by oath. This made some little demur; for being sent
into England, the King answered, That he could give no other Caution but his
own, and the Princes Royal Words and Oaths, Confirmed by his Council of State,
and Exemplified under the great Seal of England. But this would not satisfy.
Therefore the King of Spain undertook it, and it was thought a Spanish Device,
That by undertaking such an engagement, he might not only the more endear
himself to the King of Great Britain, and to the Prince his Brother, but have a
more colorable pretext to make War against England, if the Roman Catholics
there had not full satisfaction and freedom according to the Articles; and the
King of Spain knowing or assureing himself that no Catholic Prince would take
such an Oath, offered himself to satisfy the Pope. And a Committee of
Ecclesiastics in Spain were appointed to debate the Case in Relation to the
King's conscience, whether he might take such an Oath for them? and they (being
doubtless resolved on it before) concluded Affirmatively. And that if the King
of Great Britain, and Prince should fail in the performance of these
Capitulations, the King of Spain might save his Oath, by vindicating the Breach
thereof upon them with his Sword. And now this Monster-difficulty being
overcome by the Spanish Bravery, the very same time Articles that our King and
Prince had signed (as are before related) were sent into England for our King
and his privy Council to swear to, and there was not a Rub left for either
party to stumble at.

But whilst these things were in motion in Spain, they were much regretted, and
badly resented in England. The Spirit almost of the whole Nation being averse
to this Union; which made many vent their Passion by their Pens, as well as
their tongues. Amongst the rest the Archbishop of Canterbury, knowing that a
Toleration was to be admitted (though he stood tottering in the King's Favor,
and had the Badg of a Puritan clapped upon him) thought it better to discharge
his Conscience, though he hazarded all, rather than be silent in such a Cause,
where the Glory of God, and the Good of the Kingdom were so higly concerned.
Therefore he writes this letter to the King:

May it please your Majesty,
The Archbishops letter to the King against a Toleration.
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid by my Silence I have neglected the
Duty of the Place it has pleased God to call me unto, and your Majesty to
place me in. And now I humbly crave leave I may discharge my Conscience toward
God and my Duty to your Majesty: And therefore I beseech your Majesty give me
leave freely to deliver my self, and then let your Majesty do with me what you
please. Your Majesty has propounded a Toleration of Religion: I beseech you,
Sir, take into your consideration, what the Act is, next what the consequence
may be. By your Act you labor to set up that most Damnable and Heretical
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Whore of Babylon. How Hateful will it be to
God, and grievous unto your good Subjects, the true Professors of the Gospel;
that your Majesty, who has often disputed, and learnedly written against those
wicked Heresies, should now show your self a Patron of those Doctrines, which
your Pen has told the World, and your Conscience tells your Self, are
Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Detestable? Add hereunto what you have done in
sending the Prince into Spain, without the consent of your Council, the Privity
and Approbation of your People. And though, Sir, you have a large Interest in
the Prince, as the Son of your Flesh, yet has the people a greater, as the Son
of the Kingdom, upon whom (next after your Majesty) their Eyes are fixed, and
Welfare depends. And so tenderly is his going apprehended, as believe it, Sir,
however his return may be safe, yet the drawers of him to that Action so
dangerous to himself, to desperate to the Kingdom, will not pass away
unquestioned, and unpunished. Besides this Toleration which you endeavor to
set up by Proclamation, cannot be done without a Parliament, unless your
Majesty would let your Subjects see, That you will take unto your self a
liberty to throw down the Laws of the Land at your Pleasure. What dreadful
Consequence these things may draw after them, I beseech your Majesty to
consider. And above all, lest by this Toleration, and discontinuance of the
true profession of the Gospel, whereby God has blessed us, and under which
this Kingdom has for many years flourished, your Majesty do not draw upon the
Kingdom in general, and your Self in particular, God's heavy Wrath and
Indignation. Thus in discharge of my Duty toward God, to your Majesty, and the
place of my Calling, I have taken humble Boldness to deliver my Conscience. And
now, Sir, do with me what you please.




Thus did our Solomon in his latter time (though he had fought with the Beasts
at Ephesus, as one says of him) incline a little too much to the Beast. Yet he
made his tale so good to the Archbishop of Canterbury (what reservations soever
he had) that he wrought upon the good old man (afterward) in the Conclusion of
the work, to set his Hand as a Witness to the Articles. And his desires were so
heightened to the Heats of Spain, Arguments for and against a Toleration.
(which boiled him to such a Distemper) that he would listen to nothing, and
almost yield to any thing, rather than not to enjoy his own Humor. Diverse of
his intimate Council affecting Popery, were not slack to urge him to a
Toleration, and many Arguments were used inciting to it: As that Catholics
were the King's best and most peaceable Subjects, the Puritans being the only
Sticklers and the greatest Disturbers of the Royal peace, trenching too boldly
upon the Prerogative, and striving to lessen the Kingly power; But if the King
had occasion to make use of the Catholics, he should find them more faithful
to him, than those that are ever contesting with him, And why should not
Catholics with as much safety be permitted in England as the Protestants are
in France? That their Religion was full of Love and Charity (where they could
enjoy it with freedom) and where Charity lays the Foundation, the upper
Building must needs be spiritual, But these Arguments were answered, and many
reasons alleged against them, proving the Nature of the Protestant Religion to
be Compatible with the Nature of the Politic Laws of any State, of what
Religion soever; Because it teaches that the Government of any State, whether
Monarchial or Aristocratical, is Supreme within it self, and not subordinate to
any power without; so that the Knot of Allegiance thereunto is so firmly tied,
that no Humane power can unloose or dissolve it. Whereas on the contrary, the
Roman Religion, acknowledging a Supremacy in another, above that power which
swayeth the State, whereof they are Members, must consequently hold, that one
stroke of that Supreme power is able to unsinew, and cut in sunder all the
Bonds which ty them to the Subordinate and Dependent Authority. And therefore
can ill accord with the Allegiance, which Subjects owe to a Prince of their own
Religion, which makes Papists intolerable in a Protestant Commonwealth. For
what Faith can a Prince or People expect from them, whose Tenet is, That no
Faith is to be held with Heretics? That the Protestants in France had merited
better there, than the Papists had done in England: the one by their Loyalties
to their lawful King, having ransomed that Kingdom with their Bloods, in the
Pangs of her desperate Agonies, from the Yoke of an Usurper within, and the
Tyranny of a Forain Scepter without; The other seeking to write their
Disloyalties in the Heart-Blood of the Princes and best Subjects of this
Kingdom. That the Number and Quality of the Professors of these different
Religions in either Kingdom is to be observed. An. Reg. 21. An. Christ. 1623.
For in France the Number of the Protestants were so great, that a Toleration
did not make them, but found them a Considerable Party; so strong, as they
could not have been suppressed without endangering the Kingdom; But a
Toleration in England would not find, but form the Papists to be a considerable
party, (witness their increase by this late Connivency) a thing which ought
mainly to be avoided. For the distraction of a State into several powerful
parties, is always weakening, and often proves the utter ruin thereof.

The Match concluded in England.
These thing were laid open to the King, but all were waved by the King of
Spain's Offering. His engagement to the Pope by oath, That he and the Prince
his son should observe and keep the Articles stipulated betwixt them, did
exceedingly affect him. And the Articles now coming to close up all, they were
engrossed, The Preamble to the Articles.
with a long preamble. Declaring to all the World the much desired Union
betwixt him and the King of Spain, by the marriage of his son to the Infanta
Maria, sister to the King. To which end he had sent his Son into Spain to treat
and conclude the match; together with George Duke of Buckingham, John Earl of
Bristol, Sir Walter Astone, and Sir Francis Cottington, Baronets, Commissioners
on his part for the said Treaty. And on the behalf of the King of Spain, John
de Mendoza and Luna, Marquess of Monstes Claros, Didacus Sarmiento de Acuna
Earl of Gondemar, and John de Cirica, Secretary to the Secret Council. Which
Commissioners for both parts qualified by a Dispensation from his Holiness,
after long and deliberate Dispute in so serious a matter, Communi consensu
atque judicio in aliqout Capitulationes and conditiones, ad rem terminandam and
absolvendam accommodata, quae sic se habent, convenerunt; by one consent and
judgment, had determined and concluded the same.

Then followed the before recited Articles, after which this long Postscript
attesting them.

The Postscript to the Articles.
THe Treaty aforesaid, and all and singular the Capitulations in the same
contained and specified, are acceptable to Us, and from Our certain Knowledge,
for as much as does concern Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do approve,
allow, confirm, and ratify, all and every of them; and We do promise by these
presents, bonafide, in the Word of a King ( laying aside all Exception and
Contradiction) inviolably, firmly, well and faithfully, to keep, observe, and
fulfill the same; and to cause them with Effect to be kept, observed, and
fulfilled. And laying Our hand upon the Holy Evangelists, We do confirm the
same by Oath. In the presence of the Illustrious and Noblemen, John de Mendoza,
and Carrolus a Colonna, Ambassadors Effigies eximy viri Dn^i Didaci Salmienti
de Acuna, Comitis de Gondomaere EQuitis nobli ordinis Calatravae
of his Majesty the Catholic King, Resident in Our Court: Notwithstanding all
Opinions, Sentences, and Laws to the contrary. In Faith, and Witness that these
Articles, and all and singular the premises were subscribed with Our own hand,
We have caused our great Seal to be put to them, in the presence of, The most
Reverend father in Christ, George Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of all
England, The most reverend Father in Christ; John Bishop of Lincoln, Keeper of
the great Seal of England. And our beloved Cousins, Lionel Earl of Middlesex,
Lord High Treasurer of England. Henry Viscount Mandevil, President of Our
Council. Edward Earl of Worcester, Keeper of Our privy Seal. Lodowick Duke of
Richmond and Lenox, High Steward of Our Household. James Marquess Hamilton,
James Earl of Carlisle, Thomas Earl of Kelley, Oliver Viscount Grandison; And
the Reverend father in Christ, Lancelot Bishop of Winchester, Dean of Our Royal
Chapel. And Our beloved and faithful, George Baron Carew of Clopton, Master of
Our great Ordnance of England. Arthur Baron Chichester, of Belfast, high
Treasurer of Our Kingdom of Ireland. Thomas Edmonds Knight, Treasurer of Our
Royal Household. John Sucklin Knight, Comptroller of our Household. George
Calvert Knight, one of Our principal Secretaries. Edward Conwey Knight, another
of Our principal Secretaries. Richard Weston Knight, Chancellor and
sub-Treasurer of Our Exchequer. And Julius Caesar Knight, Master of our Rolls.
All of them of Our Privy Council. Dated at Our Palace at Westminster, the
twentieth day of July, in the one and twentieth year of Our Reign.

This Train of Witnesses are set down to show who, were then of Our King's
Council, though some of them set their hands to it much against their wills;
and swore with as little zeal to observe and keep (as much as in them lay) all
the aforesaid Articles. Such Power have Kings over men's Reasons and Consciences.

There was some little Contest betwixt our King and the King of Spains
Ambassadors about some particular Ceremonies observed in swearing of these
Articles. For our King having written, and spoken against the Popes Holiness,
would not admit him to be so styled in his Oath; But the Ambassadors refused
to proceed further unless that Title were consented unto; so that Our King
(affecting ever to be accounted a Peacemaker) though he where Defender of the
Faith, was forced to lay by his Shield, (admitting him to be holy, who was most
unholy) and so the strife ended. Some other little things were stood upon by
the Ambassadors, but the King's Patience surmounted all their Demands. And in
the Close of the Business, he invited the Ambassadors to a Royal Feast at
Whitehal; where after dinner, retiring into the Council Chamger, The King took
another private Oath, to observe certain Articles in favor of Roman
Catholics, for a free exercise of their Religion in all his Dominions; Wherein
he protested to do what in him lay, that the Parliament should confirm the
same. And thus was the great Business accomplished, Private Articles sworn to.
which gave Our King so much content, that (being transported with an assurance
of the Match) he was heard to say, Now all the Devils in Hell cannot hinder it;
So secure was he of it in his own Opinion! But one that heard him, said to
others standing by, That there was never a Devil now left in Hell, for they
were now all gone into Spain to make up the Match.

This forwardness of the Union with Spain, Jesuits swarm.
and indulgence to Papists, made Jesuits and Priests swarm in every corner,
setting up their subtle Traps to catch wavering Spirits. And they could not
hear of a man of estate that was sick (for persons of Quality were only aimed
at) but they would tamper with his weak conscience, and persuade him to the
Charity of their Religion, whereby his Soul (that was tainted with earthly
corruptions, and must needs be purged by Fire, before it can come to God)
should escape the pains of Purgatory; or if it went thither, their Prayers
could redeem them thence; with such stuff as this deceiving many poor Souls.
But their most specious juggling Argument (which did catch many ignorant
persons) was the Visibility of their Church in all Ages (as they pretended) and
their great Question, Where the Protestant Church was before Luther? Among the
rest, one Edward Buggs Esquire, living in London, aged seventy years, and an
old professed Protestant, was seduced by them in his Sickness, and after his
recovery, being troubled in mind, at his request and desire there was a public
conference and dispute appointed at Sir Humphrey Lind's House, Lind being a
friend to Buggs, Dispute publicly.
and a Gentleman of great knowledge, and integrity, who was able to grapple
with the Jesuits himself, yet he modestly desired Doctor White, and Doctor
Featly, Protestants, to encounter with Father Fisher and Father Sweet, Jesuits.
Where Featly laid their juggling tricks at their Doors, protesting to
acknowledge himself overcome by them, if they could prove out of any good Author
(let them brag what they would of the Visibility of their Church in all ages)
that in City, Parish, or Hamlet, within five Hundred years next after Christ,
there was any visible assembly of Christians to to be named, maintaining, or
defending, either the Council of Trent in general, or these Points of Popery in
special.

1. That there is a Treasury of Saints Merits, and super abundant
Satisfactions, at the Pope's disposing.

2. That the Laity are not commanded by Christ's Institution to receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both kinds.

3. That the Public Service of God in the Church, An. Reg. 20. An. chisti.
1623.
ought, or may be celebrated in an unknown tongue.

4. That Private Masses (wherein the Priest says, Edite and bibite ex hoc
omnes, and yet eats and drinks himself only) are according to Christ's
Institution.

5. That the Pope's Pardons are requisite or useful, to release Souls out of
Purgatory.

6. That the effect of the Sacrament depends upon the Intention of the
Minister.

Here Mr. Sweet interrupted him, saying, These were Scholastical Points, not
Fundamental.

To which Doctor White replied, Those things which are defined in your Council
of Trent, are to you matters Fundamental. And whatsoever Article denied, makes
a Man an Heretic, is Fundamental.

But the denial of any of these, make a Man an Heretic.

Ergo, Every one of these Articles is Fundamental.

To which Argument, nothing being answered, Doctor Featly proceeded.

7. That extreme Unction is a Sacrament properly so called.

8. That we may worship God by an Image.

9. That the Sacred Host ought to be elevated, or carried in solemn Procession.

10. That Infidels, and impious persons, yea Rats and Mice, may eat the Body of
Christ.

11. That all Ecclesiastical Power depends on the Pope.

12. That he cannot err in matters of Faith.

13. That he has Power to Canonize Saints, to dispose of Kings and Kingdoms
at his pleasure, etc.

But the Jesuits not being able to prove that any of these things were in
practice in the Primitive Times of Christianity (but that they wene fobb'd in
by several Popes and Councils, in latter times, to serve their own turns) waved
the Argument, and insisted upon other particulars, not material to the Point;
striving to confound one thing with another (as their manner is) that they
might complicate, and wrap up in obscurity, all that was spoken: Which Mr.
Buggs perceiving, rested fully satisfied and confirmed in the Truth.

But thus the Jesuits ranged up and down seeking whom they might devour; A
great judgment, or an unfortunate mishap.
and their Insolency being greater, and more notorious at this time, than at
others, the mischief that fell to them in this Height of their pride and
greatness, is very remarkable: For at at a Sermon in Blackfriars, where Father
Drurie, a Jesuit, vented his pestilent Doctrine to an Auditory of near three
Hundred people, the Floor of the Chamber (being an upper room) fell down, and
killed the Preacher, and almost (if not) a full Hundred of his Auditory
outright, maiming and bruising most of the rest, many of them lying a long time
under the Rubbish, crying for Help, and with much difficulty recovered their
broken Limbs. Thus many times we might immediately see the hand of God (who is
the Lord of Life and Death) though through wilful stupidity (because we must
judge modestly) we look upon these accidents by mediate and second causes,
thinking an old house can destroy so many lives, without the permission of that
supreme Authority that orders all things both in Heaven, and in Earth.

The Duke of Brunswick this Spring (being healed of his wounds received in the
last Battle with Mansfeldt, Brunswick raises an Army.
and having gotten an artificial Arm to manage his Horse, which he could do
with a great deal of dexterity) what by his own interest and power, and the
assistance of his friends (being but a younger Brother, and having nothing but
the Bishopric of Haverstat for his portion) he raised a great Army in the
lower parts of Germany, about Brunswick and Munster, consisting of about
sixteen thousand foot, and five thousand horse, every way completely armed, and
accomplished with a gallant Train of Artillery: The Horses, Wagons, and
Carriages, in such trim and suitable Equipage, as showed by their suitableness
in furniture, they had not been patched up, nor hastily hurried together. His
Design (being invited thereto) was to join with the Prince of Orange, to be
revenged of the Spaniard for the loss of his Arm the last year: But the chief
motive (as he always pretended) was his respects to the Queen of Bohemia, who
in those days (whether out of pity for her suffering so much, or out of fear
that Religion would yet suffer much more) carried a great stream of affection
toward her.

The Commanders in chief of this Army under the Duke of Brunswick, His Chief
Officers.
were Duke William of Wimar, Marshall General of the Field; Count Stirum,
General of the Horse; Count Isenburg, General of the Ordnance; and Kniphuisen,
Sergeant Major General; men acquainted with War, and Danger. But whether the
Divine Fate had laid a mouldring Hand upon this gallant Army, or whether the
Enemy with a full Hand had charmed some of these great Officers (as by the
carriage of the Business may be suspected) to be of his party, was not
discovered; but the ruin of it was as strange for the manner, as unknown for
the means: For after Brunswick had taken a resolution at Kettington in
Brunswick-land, to join with the Prince of Orange, he declined all occasions of
encountering with Tillie the Imperial General; who was with an Army at a good
distance, attending Brunswick's motion, not knowing (as may be conjectured)
whether he would bend his course into the Palatinate, or into the
Low Countries; so that upon Brunswick's march he left him in his Rear. And left
Tillie should follow him too close, and interrupt ILLVSTRISSIMVS PRINCEPS
CHRISTIANVS DVX BRVNSVICENSIS ADMINISTRATOR HALBERSTADENSIS
Tali Brunonis claro de stemmate Princeps
Vultu Barbaricos acer consurgit in hortes;
Nec Patriae tristes fert men's generosa ruinas.
him in his March, he divided his Army into three Brigades: The Vanguard was
commanded by Duke William, in which was three Regiments, his own, Colonel
Mayers, and Colonel Frenkes. Kniphuisen the Sergeant Major General had the
ordering of the Batail, the Colonels under him were Guertsken, and Spar. And
the Count de la Tour brought up the Rear, with Duke Bernard of Wimar's
Regiment, the Rhinegrass, and Colonel Spees: with Direction that these three
Bodies should keep equal distance, and observe this Order.

That having in their March the Enemy at their Backs, if the Rear-guard made a
Halt, Their Order in Marching.
the Battle should do the same* and consequently the Vanguard (according to
the best Discipline) attending with firm foot, the cause of the Halt, that they
may be ready to put themselves in order for service, if occasion were
presented: The Army thus coming to pass any Passage, while the Vanguard did
advance: the Battle and Rear-guard should make a stand, with the front toward
the Enemy. The Vanguard being past, should face the Passage, and stay for the
Battle, which being past also should do the same for the Rear-guard, that they
might be ready upon the approach of an Enemy to assist one another. With this
Order and Direction, they began to march into Westfalia; Brunswick trusting to
Stirem, Kniphuisen, and Frenck; who being Natives of the Country, gave him
assurance of the safe Conduct of his Army, by ways short and commodious. And
he commanded, especially the General of the Horse, to send out parties of Horse
every way, that he might have intelligence of the Enemie's Motions; who gave
him assurance that the Enemies Army was not within thirty English Miles, when
by other hand at the same time, he had certain notice, that the Enemy was
within three English Miles with his whole Power. This miscarriage made
Brunswick have away to Newburgh, the next Town, where resting a little he took
a Resolution to march all night, to recover time, and ground again; that
Stirum's negligence had made him lazily lose. And to that end he commanded
Kniphuisen, and Count Isenburg, to make the Baggage march at eleven a clock at
Night, the Cannon, at Midnight, and the Army two hours after; But Brunswick
getting up at three a clock in the Morning, hoping to find his Commands obeyed,
and the Army in a good forwardness of advance, found nothing done, and these
great Officers in their Beds. This disobedience of his Officers troubled
Brunswick much, but he was constrained to Diligence, as well as Patience; And
hastening them away, they pretended forwardness, but made it eight of the Clock
in the morning, before the Rear-guard stirred out of their Quarters.

The General of the Horse falters.
From Newburgh to Statloo Bridge (a place of Security) was but fourteen English
Miles, and there were in that way seven passages or Straits, where a few men
might oppose an Army. The Baggage, Cannon, and Munition, (except six pieces
with Munition, that marched with the Rere-guard) had past them all, and the
Foot three of them without disturbance, but Count Stirum with the Horse
loitered still behind at Newburgh, which caused Brunswick to make the whole
Army face about and stay for the Horse; sending a strict Command to Stirum with
all speed to come up and join with the Foot, and not to skirmish with the Enemy
at any rate. But he stayed so long that the Enemy began to charge him in the
Rere, before he advanced to the third Passage, So that he sent to Brunswick for
five hundred Musketeers to amuse the Enemy till he had passed the third
Passage with his Horse. The Duke sent these Musketeers according to Sirum's
desire, and advancing his Army forward, he passed the fourth Passage, and there
made the Rere of his foot face about, the better to favor and receive his
Horse. Which having done, he speeds back toward Stirum to see how the Business
went with him, and incountring Kniphuisen, he asked him what the Enemy had
done? Who answered, Nothing, all is well. But Brunswick going forward, found
the contrary, for the Enemy had made a great slaughter, laying almost a
thousand Horse upon the Ground.

This perplexed Brunswick exceedingly, so that with some Passion, he sent a
Command to Stirum to advance his Horse toward the Body of the Army, who had
stayed three hours for them at the fourth Passage, whither the Duke returned to
secure the same, planting two Pieces of Demi-cannon at the Mouth of the
Passage, and leaving two thousand Musketeers to guard it, for the assistance
of the Horse, if the Enemy should come to charge them at the Entrance; and so
he marched forward with the rest of the Army. But Stirum drew the Horse into a
Body under the side of a Wood, which was in the middle of a spacious plain,
betwixt the two Passages, and that brought the Enemy to a stand: for they
suspected the whole Army stood in Battalia behind that Wood, and therefore did
not advance, which showed, they watched only for advantages. And Stirum seeing
the Enemy at a stand, drew his Horse toward the fourth Passage, which the
Enemy observing made all the haste after that could be, to pelt them in the
Rere, but the Horse passed the fourth Passage before the Enemy came up.

So does the Sergeant Major General.
Then Brunswick drew off his Cannon, and marched away to the fifth Passage,
leaving Kniphuisen (who undertook it voluntarily) with two thousand
Musketeers, to make good that Passsage, which was of that advantage, that half
the men might have done it, and two Regiments of Horse were left to give
assistance to the Foot, to bring them off when they should retire, and join
with the Army. But the Vanguard of Brunswick's Army had scarce entered the
fifth Passage, but he discovered some Musketeers running toward a Wood, that
was on this side, and not far from the fourth Passage, and riding back to see
whether all stood firm, he met Kniphuisen, and asked him if the Passage was made
good? Who answered, Take you no care, trust me. But presently discovering some
of the Officers that had command of the Musketeers running toward the Army,
he took a more lively apprehension that the Passage was lost, and meeting
Kniphuisen, with some heat, told him he had betrayed him; But Kniphuisen
excused himself that he could not keep it against an Army, and complained that
the Horse had abandoned him. But said he, the next Passage is of as great
importance as the last, and I will undertake to keep that upon forfeiture of my
Head, to redeem my Credit again, and to that end he desired an entire Regiment
of Foot, which the Duke granted him, but assured him he should answer it if any
ill succeeded by his default.

Whilst the Army was passing the fifth Passage, the Duke sent to know whether
the Horse placed according to his Direction in the Rere, made good their
Station, and he had intimation, that the Horse were retired close to a Wood,
and by that means discovered the Foot to the Enemy. And the Army was no sooner
passed the fifth Passage, but Kniphuisen quitted it to the Enemy, without so
much as a Musket shot from them. And the more to weaken his force (before he
quitted the Passage) he comes to the Duke, and tells him (but it was not true)
that the Enemy with thirty Cornets of Horse struck toward the left hand, to
cut away to the Baggage, to possess that; And Brunswick looking about,
perceived within a little Wood not far off a Body of Horse, which proved to be
the Prince of Ouldenburgh, who was Colonel of a Regiment of a thousand Horse,
whom he sent to resist the Enemy, if they should attempt upon the Baggage. And
advancing his Army to the sixth Passage, he passed that also before the Enemy
came to it; but here was Brunswick's Error in trusting Kniphuisen the third
time, which was only as he said to redeem his former faults; for he gave the
keeping of this sixth Passage to him also, which he delivered to the Enemy, at
their first approach as he did the others; And drawing the Rere-guard out of
the way on the right hand, (contrary to Brunswick's commands) and the General
of the Ordnance striking out on the left hand, with his Body and Cannon; and
Stirum sheltring himself in the Woods with his Horse; The Enemy advanced
freely, (seeing them thus scattered) and charged on all sides with his whole
Power. But little resistance being made (the General Officers leaving the
Field) every one shifted for himself: Brunswick's Army defeated.
Some escaped over Statloo Bridge, many were drowned in the River, the
slaughter, and ruin was great, so was the Confusion and fear. Sir Charles Rich
being with Brunswick in this disorderly business, escaped a great danger, for
in their flight, his Horse fell into a Bogg, where Brunswick and the rest left
him sticking; But being a Spritely Horse, (that his Brother the Earl of Warwick
had given him) with much labor he plunged himself out, and saved both himself,
and his Rider.

The Relics of this broken Army that escaped, the Author saw at Eltem on the
Hill, in Cleveland, and this Relation was made by the Duke of Brunswick to
Maurice Prince of Orange for his own Vindication. And from a French Copy that
the Duke gave to the Earl of Essex, he translated it then into English that
some of our Nation there might partake of the true knowledge of his
Misfortunes. And the Duke cited his chief Officers to appear before Prince
Maurice, where he laid this Accusation to their charge; but either the Duke had
no power over them (being in a strange Country) or no proof against them for
this strange Miscarriage (being accounted among them La Fortane de la Guerre,
but Chance of War) for they all escaped without Punishment.

And some years after Kniphuisen was thought fit in the Duke of Buckingham's
Voyage to the Isle of Ree, to be a field-Officer in the English Army, which
almost (if not altogether) thrived as ill; So uncertain is the true State of
intricate Transactions! for that which is obvious and visible may be believed
an Error; but secret mischiefs are left to his Discovery, who only knows the
heart.

The condition of France.
France about this time had her wounds bound up, and stancht the bloody Issue,
by the Pacification of Montpelier; but it broke out again at Rochel, where some
English ships did the King of France service, pressed thereto by the Duke of
Guise, Admiral of France, and though it carried a bad savor then, that they
should fight against the Protestants, being forced thereto, yet it was not so
enormous, and dangerous to them, as when the Duke of Buckingham afterward, did
force the Vanguard, a prime Ship of Our King's, and six other gallant Ships,
out of the English hands, and put them into French fingring, that they might do
the mischief with them. Which Act was laid upon the Duke's Account, among other
heinous Crimes by him committed, and he had dearly paid for it, if the Prince
his Fellow-Traveller (in the first year of whose Reign it was done) had not
acquitted him.

But in their intimate and secret Counsels in France it was debated, whether it
were not better to pull such a Goad of Heretics (as they called the
Protestants) out of the side of the Kingdom, that stuck there, to their
continual Vexation and trouble, rather than have their pain perpetually
renewed, being impossible to heal the Sore, but by such an extirpation; so much
rancour, and inveterate Malice sprung up in the Popish Party against them of
the Religion, that the Animosity of it extended to little less than another
Massacre. And though Our King (who may be said to love them) gave them no
countenance (whatsoever his Promises were) otherwise than by entreating for
them (being a tickle and tender point (as he thought) to partake with Subjects
against their Prince) yet God (...) them Deliverance (such are the
Dispensations of his Providence) by one that hated their Religion, as much, if
not more, than the French.

For the King of Spain (doubling his Ambition) possessed himself about this time
of some parts of the Valtolin, thinking to bound France toward Italy (the
Alps being not so high as his thoughts) as the Pyrenes had bounded it toward
Spain; And the French Activity being loath to be cooped up, thought it better
to endure a little inconvenience at home, than so much prejudice abroad, and
therefore to oppose Him, they closed with the Protestants. And what was it
brought them in Obedience? The re-edifying of their ruined Temples, the
restoring and maintaining their banished Ministers, and Security in their
Religion and Consciences. So that it was not their Rebellion that was cause of
the War, but the War made against their Religion, caused it to be called a
Rebellion. Thus when all other means failed, their worst enemies (though much
against their wills) proved to be their best Friends.

The Match concluded in Spain.
But to return to the Spanish Treaty all this while in Agitation. As soon as the
Articles Our King had sealed, and sworn to observe, were come into Spain, and
the Prince had ratified, and comfirmed them, and had sworn to another Article
there, wherein he ties up his own hands, and gave leave to Satan, and all his
accomplices to buffet him (which was, To permit at all times, that any should
freely propose to him, the Arguments of the Catholic Religion, without giving
any impediment; and that he would never directly, nor indirectly permit any to
speak to the Infanta against the same) the two Kingdoms of England and Spain
(as it were) shook hands to the Agreement: Preparations were made in England to
entertain the Infanta, a new Church built up at Saint James the Prince's house;
the Foundation stone (with much Ceremony) laid by Don Carlos a Coloma the
Spanish Ambassador, for the public exercise of her Religion; Her very Shadows
are courted in every Corner, Painters being set a work to take the Height and
Dimensions of this new Star that was to rise in the North, before it appeared.
Such as hoped to flourish by her influence, grew up to exuberancy; what would
they do then when they found the effects of it? Why? be drowned in their own
redundancy: For the Moderate Spirit did foresee what bad Omens this Apparition
did threaten. On the other side, in Spain the Substance is as much courted as
the Shadow is here, with the Title of Princess of England, her Maiden
Restraints are taken off, and she may come abroad to public Meetings, where
now their Eyes may prattle loving Stories; though the great Courtier Olivares,
gave it no better Title, than, The Prince watches the Infanta as a Cat does a
Mouse; too gross (...) Expression for a Master of those Ceremonies. And in fine
there was such an Union betwixt the two Crowns, that it might well be said
Philip and Jacob made one Holy Day.

But this closing betwixt England and Spain, made the breach the wider in the
House of the Palatine; The Palatine affairs waved.
the Restitution of the Palatinate, and the Electorate, to the Queen of
Bohemia, and her Children, being waved in the Treaty; and a great sum of Money
proposed as a Dowry, which was also lessened after the first Proposition, and
some part of it promised to be sent with Her in Jewels (which as one said might
be Counterfeit as the rest of their Actions) yet Our King accepted of all, so
eager was He and greedy of the Match, that no Obstacle could stand in his way,
which he did not remove. But there was some underhand promise; that the
Infanta among the Courte-Complements, should work that feat, in presenting the
Restorative of that Dignity, and Country, for a breakfast, to ingratiate her
Self with the Prince her Husband, and as a pawn of her good Will and Affection
to the English Nation: And these Promises with the Spanish stamp, were taken in
England for current Payment, so that all things tended to a Conclusion.

New Resolutions on both sides.
But time in Spain came too swift upon them, they were willing the Infanta
should winter there, but knew not well how to delay the Prince longer. And as
they were in this plunge, ruminating upon, and striving to find out some new
Remora; to help them, Pope Gregory the fifteenth (that had granted the
Dispensation) dies; and then their Subtilties flew upon that accident to
make-the Dispensation invalid; yet with a Reserve to keep up our Prince's
Spirit that it should be no hinderance to the Match; for the new Pope would
instantly do it; if not, it should be dispatched by the Dean of the Cardinals;
and the King of Spain assured the Prince, That if he would stay till Christmas
the Marriage should be really celebrated then. These delays coming one on the
neck of another, and the Duke of Buckingham having taken some disgust (...)
Spain, presented all things to our King in the worst habit he could put upon
them; For there had been some jarrs betwixt him, and Olivares. Two great
Favorites though of different Kingdoms, could not well squat in one form.
Olivares hunted Buckingham so close that he had almost caught him in his own
Burrow, but instead of his Game he incountered some Vermin (which darkness
could not distinguish) who bit him shreudly; and whether it were by this Common
Hunt I know not, but I am sure it was by the Common-Cry, that he was so
displeased with the Spanish for it, that he afterward much inclined to the
French. I acknowledge the Gravity, and Dignity of History, should not appear in
such Metaphorical Habiliments, but that we now live in an Age where Truth is
forced to shroud her self in such Attire, lest she should have imprinted on her
face a Mark of Malice against Greatness; which if it be not balanced with
Goodness and Piety, is but an empty and frothy Title.

Buckingham angry.
But it was said this Tetrical Humor made Buckingham dislike all the Spanish
proceedings, and just in the nick when it was on him, the Queen of Bohemia, by
a private message, gave him some intimation, that She and her Children were to
be thought on, inviting him to be a Witness to the Christning of one of them,
which came fit to his acceptance, not so much out of affection to the one
Party, as in opposition to the other. And what disrelished with him, gave an
ill Savor to Our King, who having cause enough to dislike the Spanish delates,
and finding the Hearts of the People bent against the Match, and some near him,
as the Duke of Lenox, made Duke of Richmond when Buckingham had his Title, that
the Scots might still precede the English; and the Marquess Hamilton made Earl
of Cambridge to entitle him a Peer the last Parliament, a man of a gallant, and
stately presence; one whom the King much listened to, and others having as
little affection to it; The hopes of a Daughter of France left to give life yet
to a Royal Race, did bate something of Our King's keen edge; so that he wrote
to Buckingham, That he could not expect after so long a stay in Spain, and so
little done, that they had any cordial intention to perfect the Treaty, and
therefore conjured him to bring his Son back with all speed: but if his Sons
youthful follies should tie him to a long expectation, he charge him by his
allegiance to come away and leave him there. This letter the Duke showed to the
Prince, and it wrought so upon him, that he took a sudden resolution to go
home.

The Grandees of Spain having notice thereof, The Duke and Olivares quartel.
were much troubled, for their Design was to detain the Prince there all
Winter, not only hoping thereby to turn him to their Religion, but to marry him
to the Infanta, that there might have been a Co-union between them, that she
being with Child before the Spring, they might keep her there till she were
delivered, that so, the Child might be bred up and naturalized a Spaniard, both
in affection and Religion, which this sudden Resolution hindering, it somewhat
startled them. Olivares told Buckingham, that he had promised the Prince should
admit of Communion with some Jesuits of theirs in Matters of Religion.

And the Duke answered, there had been some already with him, but the Prince
(he said) was so well settled in Religion, that he was not to be further
altered. Olivares replied, You gave me some assurance and hope of the Prince's
turning Catholic. The Duke told him, it was false. The Conde in a great rage
broke from him, with so much impatience, that he was scarce able to contain
himself, went to the Prince, and told him how unworthily- Buckingham had served
him; And after his complaints to him he found out the Baron Kensington, whom he
looked on with an eye of good respect, his Civilities and Carriage obliging
every where, venting his passion to him; telling him that Buckingham had given
him the Ly, and that there was nothing a man of Honor could be more sensible
of. That it bred a great distraction in him, betwixt his affection to his
Master's Honor, and his own: For if any evil did redound to Buckingham by his
hand, (being a Person so near the Prince who had honored the Court of Spain
with his presence, and run through great and dangerous hazards, out of
affection to his Master's Sister, upon whose actions now all the Christian
World are gazing) it would reflect upon the Honor of his Master, and when his
own Honor comes in competition with his Master's, the least must give way to
the greatest; therefore he desired the Lord of Kensington to tell the Duke,
That he had so much of a Gentleman, as to be sensible of the injury, and so
much Power and Courage as to revenge himself, but rather than his Master's
Honor should suffer, he would be the sufferer. The Duke sent the Conde word
again by the said Lord, That he laid a thing to his charge that would not admit
of a less sharp answer; for when his Honor comes in competition with the
Conde's he had rather that should suffer than his own. His Passion was quick
but not durable, hot but not revengful; And he held so high an esteem of the
Conde, that he was more willing to venture upon his Sword than his Malice.

This business being waved by the Conde's discretion, and they seeing the
Prince's intention bent homeward, Buckingham goes to the Ships.
made preparation of Carriages to the Seaside. The Duke of Buckingham's
departure was sudden, giving them no time to prepare for him, pretending a
great Charge to look after the Port of St. Andero in Biscaie, where the Royal
Navy of England, under the Command of his Father-in-Law the Earl of Rutland,
attended his Directions, that all things might be accommodated for his young
Master: not caring a Fig for the Ceremony of a Spanish farewell, which happily
he might fear, and therefore strive to avoid, and which their gravities, as
they do all other things, draw out at full length. But becase they should not
think he ran away, he gave them a short signal of his Departure, and left the
Prince to manage his own Business. And that the Prince's NOVILISSus. Dus.
FRANCISCUS MANNORES COMES RVTLANDIAE BARO ROSS ET cetera
The right Honorabell FRAVNCIS MANNERS Earl of Rutl and Baron Ross of Ham:
lake Beluoire and Trusbutt, and Knight of the Honorable order of the Garter.

change of Soil, and Air, the great Volatile of Fancy, might produce no change
in his Affection, the King of Spain and He, both took solemn Oaths to
accomplish the Marriage, and to make the Espousals ten days, after the
Dispensation from the new Pope should arrive. And a Procuration was sealed by
the Prince, to the King of Spain, and Don Carlos his Brother, and left in the
Earl of Bristol's hand to perfect the Work.

Gifts and presents on both sides.
Among the Specious Ceremonies indented betwixt these two great Princes, the
richness of the Gifts, and Presents, that past among them, were highly
remarkable. The King of Spain presented the Prince, and all his Noble Train,
and the Prince filled the Court of Spain, as it were, with Jewels; no Person of
Quality or Merit, but his name was recorded in the Inventory of the Princes
Bounty, as if England had disfurnished, and made bare her own Neck, to adorn
the Breasts of Spain. The Pirnce presenting his Mistress with such a Neck-lace
of Pearl, that all Spain could not Parallel: Pearls that had been long plucked
from their Watery Beds, and had left few fellows there. For the Eastern and
Western Diverse throughout the Catholic Empire, could never yet find the like.
But these upon the Breach were returned again, though it be now indifferent
whether the French or the Spanish have them. The Duke of Buckingham was not
close handed in distributing his Jewels to the Beauties of Spain, though his
farewell was private, his Bounty was public, More suitable to his Masters Honor,
than his Own; which the Lord Treasurer Middlesex found, and repined at.

The Prince took leave of the Queen of Spain and the Infanta, The Prince leaves
Madrid.
prepared for it, in their greatest Magnificence, attended with all their train
of Grandees and Ladies. The Queen spoke her own Adieu in French, which the
Prince returned in the same Language. But the Earl of Bristol was the Medium
betwixt the Prince and his Mistress, who if he may be believed, set her Heart to
make Her self Grateful, and therefore this parting could not be acceptable to
her; one of her Arguments being, If the Prince loved me, he would stay for me;
but now the Time of parting approaching, those Arguments were laid aside, and
the Superficial Ornaments of public Interview, like a Cloud, interposed it self
betwixt them, so that what was darkly lodged in their thoughts, could only find
light by the Eyes. Their Tongues (the Common Orator) could tell what was fit to
say, when there were so many by to hear, and if the Eyes had learned the
Language of the Heart, they quickly forgot it, because they never met again to
practice it.

Comes to the Escurial.
The King of Spain brought our Prince to the Escurial (which was part of his way
to the Sea side) a House of that Superbous, and elegant Structure, that I
cannot pass by it without vailing to it, and spending some time in the survey
of it. The Spaniard proudly boast it to be the eighth Wonder of the World; It
was built by Philip the second upon a Spiritual Foundation, which heightened
into Superstition, produces the most stupendous effects. Philip at the Siege
of Saint Quintin; was persuaded by his Officers, experimented in War, that if
ever he would take the Town, he must batter down a Monastery of Friars
(dedicated to Saint Lawrence) that stood in his way; which he was with much
difficulty wrought to, but that Act (though it effected the Work) dinted such
an impression upon his Conscience that he vowed to make the Martyr a full and
ample Reparation. Some say it was for the Battle he gained against the French
near St. Quintin; when they came to relieve it, upon that Saints day; but
whether either or both (for they were both accomplished) he built this Mighty
Fabric, in form of a Gridiron (the Emblem and Instrument of his Martyrdom) the
Handle whereof, is the Kings Palace, of a vast Capacity, and the Square of the
Gridiron, is divided into twelve spacious Quadrangles in which are arched
Cloisters, one above, the other below; all dedicated to Religious Orders,
endowed with a Revenue enough to make the best Piety Proud, every Friar in the
Monastery having his Man, and his Mule, so that they live there more like
Princes than Priests. And in the middle of the Square, stands a Magnificent
Cathedral Church, The Description of it.
under the high Altar whereof there is a Vault. or rather Stately Chapel, of
most excellent Polished Marble, built round like an Old Roman Pantheon (which
because it resembled Heaven, the Romans placed there the images of their Gods)
and this the Founder made the Burial-place for the Kings of Spain; establishing
this Order (which is precisely observed) that no Queen shall be buried there
that is not Mother to a Prince; nor none of the King's Children but the first
born Son. And round about this Round, in the Marble Wall, placed in Stately
Order, are many excellently contrived Arches, of wrought and Burnished Marble,
and in every Arch a beautiful and curious Coffin (either of black Marble or
Iet,) of whole stone, covered with the same, which are to put the embalmed
Bodies in. So that lying there, they seem as if they were inthroned, the Beauty
of the Place is so resplendent about them; the Richness of the Silver lamps,
and Candle-sticks blasing with Tapers, adds to the shining Brightness of the
Marble, and gives a glorious Luster. To speak of the Riches of their golden
Crosses, and Chalices; the Wonders of their Giant-like Statues, and the
pleasure of there Grottoes, Gardens, Walks, Fountains, and Aqueducts, would take
up more time, than is fit to allow them here. In fine, it is so transcendently
full of admiration, that it is to be feared they that enjoy the pleasures
thereof (saving their Merits) will look for no PHILIPPUS II. HISPANIAE REX,
XLIII. BRABANTIAE
FRANCOIS de Moncada Marquis d Aytone General de L'armee du Roy dcspaigne B.
moncornet exc^^
other Heaven: For certainly Purgatory (though it be the Pope's Kitchen Garden)
has no such Walks in it, no more had old Elysium, and therefore this cannot be
the way to Heaven unless it be through Mahomet's Paradise.

Here the Prince being feasted sealed the Proxy, and swore to perform the
Marriage as aforesaid; And the day of Departure being come, there was a Stagg
lodged in the way, whose Chase gave the King, The Prince feasted there.
and Prince some Recreation. The Prince was attended by the Lord Kensington,
and the Earl of Bristol, who was the Prince's Interpreter; the King of Spain,
(by intention) only with Olivares, and the Marquess D'avila; Olivares was grand
Master of the Horse to the King of Spain, and nearest Attendant to his Person,
but to show the Spanish Civility, he always waited on the Prince, and the
Marquess D'avila his brother-in-Law attended on the King of Spain. After the
Ceremonies of the Staggs death were performed, the King and Prince with their
Train declining into a little Wood adjoining found a Table spread with Variety
of Meats, and excellent Wines, provided for them, which entertained them, as
well with wonder how it came there, as with Refreshment, after the Serenity of
the Air, and their exercise, had quickened their appetites: concluding Merrily,
as if the Stagg had been in the Plot, and had yielded himself to Death
purposely there, because the Prince's necessary accommodations were so near.
After the Repast the parting Minute approaching, to perfect all, they gave
leave to the exercise of Complements. The King expressing extraordinary
Respects to the Prince, setting a high valuation upon his Merit, telling him,
Nothing in the World could more oblige him, than the confidence he had of him,
to put himself into his hands, being unusual with Princes: But he that valued
his Honor above all earthly things, was the more indeared to him, in that he
gave him, by this access, an opportunity to express it: and protested, The
King's and Prince's compliments parting.
That he earnestly desired a nearer conjunction of Brotherly affection with
him, for the more entire Unity betwixt them. The Prince repaying his Noble
expressions with the like Civilities, lets him know, how Sensible he was of
those high Favors he had found during his abode in his Court and presence;
which had set such an estimation upon his worth, that he knew not how to value
it, but he would leave a Mediatrix, that should make good his defects, if he
would do him the honor, and make him so happy, as to preserve him in the good
opinion of her, his most fair, his most dear Mistress. And so embracing each
other they parted.

This kind Farewell was upon the twelvth of September, the King leaving the
Prince to be attended to the Seaside, by a numerous train of Spanish
Courtiers, whereof the Principal were Cardinal Zapata, the Marquess Aytone, the
Earl of Gondemar, the Earl of Monterie, the Earl of Baraias, who was Steward of
the King's household, but now the Manager of the Prince's Domestical Affairs.
These Grandees, and others, had at Saint Andero a fair opportunity to see some
of the Navy Royal of England, and were feasted aboard the Prince's Ship: But at
their return toward the shore, The Prince in danger by a Tempest.
the Prince being with them in the Barge, a Tempest overtook them with that
Fury, that they could neither fetch the Land, nor make to the Ships again, and
night and darkness joining with the Storm, the Rowers fainting with labor,
because they thought themselves at the end of their Work, their horror and
fear, almost heightened to Despair; In this Calamity yiedling themselves to the
Mercy of the Seas, they spied a light from a Ship, near which the wind had
driven them, that gave new life to Hope, and plucking up their Spirits to fetch
that Ship, with the danger of being broken to pieces by the Ships side, at last
they got aboard. This cooled the heat of their Ceremonies so much, so that when
the Tempest was over, they parted. And the Prince arrived safely at Portsmouth,
upon the fifth of October following, and the next day at London, where the
Peoples joy, elevated above Bonfire-expressions, might teach misguided Princes,
that LOVE is the firmest foundation of security, and Happiness.

A demur upon the espousals.
When the Prince, and Buckingham, met at Saint Andero, the Spanish
entertainments did not take them off from minding their Business: The Duke had
time in his Recess to mature his Conceptions; And whether his adverseness to
the Spanish in affection wrought upon the Prince, or whether the Prince's
affection, that was wrought upon in the Spanish Court, lost the Vigor, and
Virtue, by losing the Object, or whether the united Operations of both, cannot
be determined: But one Clark a Creature of the Dukes, was posted back to Madrid
to the Earl of Bristol, to command him not to deliver the Procuration for the
Espousals (which the Prince had sealed, and sworn to perform) till he had
further Order from England; pretending the Infanta might after the Espousals
betake her self to a Cloister, and defraud him of a Wife. Bristol was much
troubled at this Restriction, That a public Act of such Eminency, betwixt two
such great Princes, highly obliging, should be smothered up by a private
Command from one of the Parties, that had not power to do it, having, in true
Justice, tied up his own hands, and when the Dishonor of it would so much
reflect upon the other Party; and therefore he resolved (notwithstanding the
Prince's command) if the Dispensation came, to make the Espousals within ten
days according to the agreement: And he would bear himself up, from the
authority he had under the great Seal of England to perfect this Work, if he
had not within the limited time a Command from Our King to the contrary.

CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD PRINce of Wales, Duke of Cornwell, etc.


The Duke being jealous of Bristol, from some particular Discontents, and ill
Resentments betwixt them, and the Prince, fearing he would be too forward in
the Espousals, as soon as they landed in England posted toward the King (who
was then at Roiston) where they gave him a fair and plausible Narration of
their Proceedings, The Prince comes to Court cold in his Spanish affections.
laying the load upon the Spanish Delays, and Bristol's miscarriages. Which
the King as a Father to his Son, and as a friend to his Favorite, indulged to,
taking their Account without examination as good and just payment. And his good
Brother of Spain must now be dallied with by Talion Law; not falling off in a
direct line, but obliquely, that the King might thereby measure out to himself
a way to his Ends. And these two great Opposites to Spain, the Prince and Duke,
must prepare it, by closing with those of the Council about the King, and
others of the Nobility, whose judgment, not prejudice, made them averse to the
Spanish Superciliousness, cementing their Power with that strength that a
Parliament must be called, and the People consulted with; That they discovering
to the King the fraudulent proceedings of the Spaniard, the King's Integrity
and Justice in breaking the Treaty might the more appear to the People, and by
that means they should be mounted upon the Wings of the Peoples affections, as
Enemies to that which was so contrary to them. The News of a Parliament to
break the Spanish match was quickly carried about, and according to their
thoughts, it took much with the People, and gained them much respect and
Honor. But the first thing they did was to procure an absolute Command from
the King to the Earl of Bristol, to suspend the delivery of the Proxy till
Christmas, though the Dispensation came, which they effected, and sent away
with all speed. In which Letter, Bristol had instructions to demand the
Restitution of the Pala^inate and Electoral Dignity, which were both waved and
neglected in the Conclusion of the Treaty; but now are set a foot again, to let
the King of Spain see the Edge of their Eargerness was taken off. For (says
the Letter) It would be a great disproportion for me to receive one Daughter
with joy, and contentment, and leave another in tears and sighs.

But Bristol's power of deferring the Espousals till Christmas, was to be
reserved to himself, Preparation in Spain for the Marriage.
and not made public, till the Dispensation should come to discover it. And
there was a Clause in the Procuration left by the Prince, that the Power of
that should be in force but till Christmas, and then to expire; so that the
Execution of it was to be respited till it were altogether invalid. And the
Spaniard for his greater affront must make all Provision ready, for
accomplishing so glorious a work, that all the Eyes of the Christian World
looked upon either with dislike or affection. The King of Spain (to be his own
free Trumpet) sending into England with the Prince, Don Mendosa de Alcorcana,
to our King to congratulate the Princes happy Voyage into Spain, and his safe
return into England; And from thence he had instructions to go into Flanders,
Germany, and Italy, to make known to all Princes, and Potentates, Allies to the
King of Spain, how near the Treaty of Marriage (betwixt the Prince of England,
and the Infanta of Spain) was to be consummated. And the Polonian Ambassador
at Madrid, that solicited to have the Infanta for the Prince of Poland, when he
saw such preparations for the Match with England, fainted in his Hopes, and
returned home. For as soon as the Dispensation came from the new Pope (which
was in the Beginning of December) Bonefires were made throughout all Spain, for
joy, and the great Ordnance every where thundered out the noise of it. The ninth
of the month was prefixed for the Marriage day, a Tarras being erected betwixt
the Court, and the next Church, almost a quarter of a mile in length, covered
with Tapestry, for the more magnificence, and all things appointed in the
highest State for so great a Solemnity. Presents were providing in the Court of
Spain for Our King and Prince; the Infantas family (to take into England) was
settled, and established; She had used her best skill among the Sweets of Spain,
as one of the Principal of them, to cloth her Lord and Husband with some suits
of perfumed Amber leather, some imbroidered with Pearl, and some with gold; she
had practiced long the English tongue to make it natural, by the help of her
two Jesuit Tutors, Wadsworth and Boniface, and began to draw the letters which
she intended to have written, the day of her Espousals, to the Prince her
Husband, and the King her Father-in-law; Her journeyinto England being resolved
on about the Beginning of March.

In this State and perfection were the affairs of Spain, Spanish delays
retaliated.
when Our King's commands like a Cloud overshadowed the Brightness of them. For
Bristol had now Order to declare positively to the King of Spain, that without
the Restitution of the Palatinate and the Electoral Dignity, the Treaty should
proceed no further. Four Messengers, viz. Mr. Killigrew, Gresly, Wood, and
Davies, followed each other at the heels, which raised such a dust of
Coffeehouse among the people at Madrid, that as some report, they wished
they had broken their necks by the way; so highly were the Commonalty of Spain
affected with the Match! And if they felt the Influence of this cloudy Message,
what did the Lady Infanta, and the King do? The one to lose her Lover, the
other to lose his Honor. She whose Heart was affected. and He who found
himself affronted. But his answer to Bristol, was, The Palatinate was none of
his to give, and the Electorate was in the Power of another; but if the
Emperor, and the Duke of Bavaria, would not yield to reason, he would Arm
himself on our King's part against them. But this would not satisfy, fair
Promises having now lost their Virtue; and the King of Spain discerning a
Breach toward, by this Various Motion, sent to the Earl of Bristol to demand
no more Audience of him, to deliver no more Letters to the Infanta, and gave
command that none should call her hereafter Princess of England. This was the
end of seven years Treaty. Wherein the King of England, a King of Peace, in
spite of all the Spanish Armadoes, got the Victory, and Spain for many years
did not receive so great an overthrow. Yet they were paid in their own Coin:
For at the first, and in the highest Progress of the Treaty, when Our King was
so eager for the Match, in all likelihood they never intended it; But the
Prince's Presence gaining much with both Sexes, his Journey into Spain being
esteemed among them so glorious an action, and the hopes they had now by this
Marriage to propagate the Catholic Cause; finding the Prince, as they thought,
something inclined that way, better digested their first intentions, and
brought it to the state from whence it declined.

The Duke of Buckingham, Thoughts of a Match with France.
by the insinuation of a long converse, having brought the Prince up to his own
Humor, taught him to look back to the Beauty he had seen in France, which was
nearer to him, that he might remember the Spanish no more, now esloigned from
him. But the Treaty with Spain must be first dissolved, to give a tincture of
Honor to a proceeding with the other, and nothing but a Parliament shall do
that, which they had fore-determined. For a Parliament taking away the cause,
which was a Treaty of Peace, A Parliament Summoned.
were best able to make good the effect, which would be a War that must follow
it. Therefore a Parliament was summoned to meet the 12 th of February, but a
sad accident intervened which made it to be deferred for some few days.

That morning the Parliament was to begin, The Duke of Richmond dies suddenly.
the King missed the Duke of Richmond's attendance, who being a constant
observer of him at all times, the King, as it were, wanted one of his Limbs to
support the Grandeur of Majesty, at the first solemn meeting of a Parliament,
and calling for him with earnestness, a Messenger was dispatched to his
Lodgings in Have, where the King's Commands, and the Messenger Importunity,
made the Duchess his wife, somewhat unwillingly, go to the Duke's Bedside to
awake him, who drawing the Curtain found him dead in his Bed. The suddenness of
the affright struck her with so much Consternation, that she was scarce
sensible of the Horror of it, and it was carried with that violence to the
King, that he would not adorn himself that day to ride in his Glories to the
Parliament, but put it off to the nineteenth of February following, dedicating
some part of that time to the Memory of his dead Servant, who might serve as a
forerunner to the King, and an Emblem to all his People, That in the dark
caverns of Man's Body, Death often lurkes, which no Humane Prudence, or
Providence, is able to discover: For the Duchess to some of her intimates
confessed afterward, that She found the effects of his full Veins that night
that he was found dead the next Morning.

The Duchess of Richmonds Legend.
This Lady was one of the greatest both for Birth, and Beauty, in her time; but
at first she went a step backwards, as it were to fetch a Carreer, to make her
mount the Higher. She was Daughter to Thomas Viscount Bindon, second Son to
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and her Mother was eldest Daughter to Edward Duke of
Buckingham, both which Dukes striving to become Kings, lost their Heads. Her
Extraction was high, fit for her great Mind, yet ( he descended so low as to
marry one Prannel a Vintner's Son in London, having a good estate, who dying,
lest her Childless, a young and beautiful Widow; upon whom Sir George Rodney a
Gentleman in the West (suitable to her for person and fortune) fixing his love,
had good hopes from her to reap the fruits of it; But Edward Earl of Hertford
being entangled with her fair Eyes, and she having a tang of her Grandfathers
Ambition, left Rodney, and married the Earl; Rodney having drunk in too much
affection, and not being able with his Reason to digest it, summoned up his
scattered Spirits to a most desperate attempt; and coming to Amesbury in
Wiltshire (where the Earl and his Lady were then Resident) to act it, he
retired to an Inn in the Town, shut himself up in a Chamber, and wrote a large
paper of well-composed Verses, to the Countess in his own blood (strange kind
of Composedness) wherein he bewailes and laments his own unhappiness; and when
he had sent them to her, as a sad Catastrophe to all his Miseries, he ran
himself upon his Sword, and so ended that life which he thought death to enjoy;
leaving the Countess to a strict remembrance of her inconstancy, and himself a
desperate and sad Spectacle of Frailty. But she easily past this over, and so
wrought upon the good Nature of the Earl her Husband, that he settled above
five thousand pounds a year jointure upon her for life. In his time She was
often courted by the Duke of Lenox, who presented many a fair offering to her,
as an humble Suppliant; sometimes in a blew Coat with a Basket-hilt sword,
making his addresses in such odd disguises; yet she carried a fair fame during
the Earl's time. After his decease, Lenox and Richmond, with the great Title of
Duchess gave period to her Honor, which could not arrive at her Mind, she
having the most glorious and transcendent heights in Speculation: for finding
the King a Widower, She The portraiture of the illustreous Princess Frances
Duchess of Richmond and Lenox daughter of Thomas LD. Howard of Bindon son of
Thomas Duke of Norfok. whose mother was Elisabeth daughter of Edward Duke of
Buckingham Anno 1623.
vowed after so great a Prince as Richmond, never to be blown with the Kisses,
nor eat at the Table of a Subject, and this Vow must be spread abroad, that the
King may take notice of the Bravery of her spirit: But this Bait would not
catch the Old King, so that she missed her aim, and to make good her
Resolution, She speciously observed her Vow to the last.

When She was Countess of Hertford, and found admirers about her, She would
often discourse of her two Grandfathers, the Dukes of Norfolk and Buckingham;
recounting the time since one of her Grandfathers did this, the other did
that: But if the Earl her Husband came in presence, she would quickly desist;
for when he found her in those Exaltations, to take her down, he would say,
Frank, Frank, How long is it since thou were Married to Prannel? which would
damp the Wings of her Spirit, and make her look after her feet, as well as
gaudy Plumes.

One Little Vanity of this great Duchess (with your Patience) may yet crowd in
this Story; She was a Woman greedy of Fame, and loved to keep great State with
little Cost: For being much visited by all the Great ones, Of her Visitants.
she had her formality of Officers, and Gentlemen, that gave attendance, and
this advantage that none ever eat with her; Yet all the Tables in the Hall were
spread, as if there had been Meat, and men to furnish them; but before eating
time (the house being voided) the Linen returned into their folds again, and
all her people grased on some few dishes. Yet whether her Actions came into
Fames fingring, her Gifts were suitable to the greatness of her Mind. For the
Queen of Bohemia (to the Christning of whose Child she was a Witness) had some
taste of them. And being blowing up by Admiration for this Bounty, either by
her own design to magnify her Merit, or by others in Mockery to magnify her
Vanity, huge Inventories of Massy Plate went up and down, from hand to hand,
that she had given that Queen, and most believed it; yet they were but Paper
presents, those Inventories had an non est inventus at the Hague, they saw the
Shell, the Inventory, but never found the Kernel, the Plate. Such difference
there is betwixt solid worth, and Airy-paper-Greatness. And it is hoped these
slight intermixtures, will be no great transgression, because long serious
things do dull the Fancy.

The King having digested his sudain loss of the Duke of Richmond, and fitted
himself to make his mind known to his people, in Parliament; he went to the
House the nineteenth, as is said, and opened himself to them to this effect.

The King's Speech to the Parliament.
To testify to the World how far my mind has been from esohewing to assemble a
Parliament, and how willing I have been upon all Occasions to have the advice
of my people. I have at this present called you, to approve unto you the
earnest desire I have ever had, and still have, to deserve the love of my
people, by improving your trust, and communicating unto you a Matter of as
great Consequence as ever King imparted to his people, to have their advice and
Counsel in.

I shall say unto you as Christ said to the Church, I am your Husband, and you
are my Spouse. And as it is the Part of a good Husband to procure, and maintain
the love of his wife; which he usually does by often visiting her, and upon
extraordinary Occasions communicating the secrets of his affairs unto her, and
by all gentle and affable ways to gain her Love: So in the administration of
Government, I desire to carry my self toward my People. There are two ways by
which a King may show his love to his People. One is, by a constant
administration of Justice, according to the Laws established; the other is, by
communicating himself to his People, in their Representative, the Parliament.
For the first, I know there is no particular Man of you that has not enjoyed
the Blessing and Benefit of it; which I will say nothing of, because you have
been all Witness of it; for who has not found the fruits of it? If he
considers the Peace which my Kingdoms enjoy, in the midst of the Miseries our
Neighbors are afflicted with. And though I cannot say my Government has been
without Error, yet this I can truly say, and will avouch it before God, and his
Angels, That never King governed with a more pure sincerity, and incorrupt
Heart, than I have done, far from all intention, and meaning of the least
Error, or imperfection in my Reign.

I have assembled you at this time to perform the other part, which is duly to
impart unto you, a Secret, and a Matter of as great importance as can to be to
my Estate, and the Estate, of my Children; I crave your best, and safest
advice, and Counsel, as the Writ whereby you are assembled imports, That the
King would advise with you in matters concerning his Estate and Dignity; And as
I have ever endeavored by this, and the like ways, to procure, and cherish
the love of my People toward me, So do I hope, and fully believe, that never
any King was more beloved of his People (whom you my Lords and Gentlemen do
here represent) so I would have you truly represent their loves also to me,
that in you as in a true glass I may perfectly behold it, and not as a false
glass presents it, not at all, or otherwise than it is indeed. Give me your
free and faithful Counsel in this Matter, which is that of which you have often
heard, the Match of my Son. Wherein as you may know I have spent much time,
with great Cost, in long Treaty, desiring always therein (and not without
reason, hoping to have effected my desires) the advancement of my Estate, and
Children, and the general Peace of all Christendom. Wherein I have always
constantly labored, depending too much upon fair Hopes and Promises. But at
the earnest instance of my Son, I was contented (although it was of an
extraordinary Nature) to send him to prosecute his Desires in Spain; and for
his more safety I sent Buckingham (in whom I ever reposed the most trust of my
Person) with him with this command, to be continually present with him, and
never leave him, till he returned safe again unto me; which he performed,
though not with such effect as I expected, yet not altogether without Profit;
for it taught me this Point of Wisdom, that, Qui versatur in Universalibus,
etc. is easily deceived, and it generally brings nothing to good issue; for
before any Matter can be fully finished, it must be brought to particulars. I
thought before their going, the affairs had been produced to a narrow Point
(relying upon their general Propositions) but when they came to the matter, it
proved so Raw, as if it had been never treated of, the Generals giving them
easy way to evade, and affording them means to avoid the effecting of any
thing.

The Particulars that passed in the Treaty, I mean not now to discover unto
you, the time being too short, I refer that to Charles and Buckingham, and
the Secretaries, who shall relate unto you all the Particulars. And after that,
Super totam materiam, I desire your best assistance and advice; what is best
and fittest for me to do, for the good of the Commonwealth, the advancement of
Religion, and the good of my Son, and my Children of the Palatine. And of Our
Estate I know you cannot but be sensible, considering your Welfare consists in
Ours, for you shall be sure to have your share in what misery shall befall us,
therefore I need to urge no further Arguments unto you for your choicest and
surest Counsel. And I assure you in the faith of a Christian King, that it is
Res integra, presented unto you, and that I stand not bound, nor any ways
engaged, but remain free to follow what shall be best advised.

To plant is not sufficient, unless like good Gardiners you pluck up the weeds
that will choke your labors; and the greatest weeds among you are jealousies,
root them out: for my Actions, I dare avow them before God, but jealousies are
of a strange depth. I am the husband, and you the wife, and it is subject to
the wife to be jealous of her husband. Let this be far from you! It has been
talked of my remisness in maintenance of Religion, and suspicion of a
toleration, but as God shall judge me, I never thought, nor meant, or ever in
word expressed any thing that savored of it. It is true, that at times best
known to my self, I did not so fully put those laws in execution, but did
wink, and Connive at some things which might have hindered more weighty
Affairs: But I never in all my Treaties agreed to any thing, to the overthrow,
or disagreeing of those Laws; But in all I had a chief regard to the
preservation of that Truth, which I have ever professed. And in that respect as
I have a Charitable conceit of you, I would have you have the like of me also,
in which I did not transgress. For it is a good Horseman's part not always to
use the Spur, nor keep straight the Reign, but sometimes to use the Spur, and
sometimes to suffer the Reign more remiss; So it is the part of a Wise King
(and my Age and experience have informed me) sometimes to quicken the Laws,
with strict Execution, and at other times upon just Occasion to be more remiss.

And I would also remove from your thoughts all jealousies, that I might, or
ever did question or infringe any of your lawful liberties, or privileges; But
I protest before God I ever intended you should enjoy the fullness of all those,
that from ancient times give good Warrant and Testimony; of which, if need be,
I will enlarge, and amplify. Therefore I would have you (as I have in this
place heretofore told you, as Saint Paul did Timothy) avoid Genealogies, and
curious questions, and quirks and jerks of Law, and idle innovations, and if
you minister me no just Occasion, I never yet was, nor ever will be curious or
captious to quarrel with you. But I desire you to avoid all doubts, and
hindrances, and to compose your selves speedily, and quietly, to this weighty
affair. Carry your selves modestly, and my Prayers shall be to God for you, and
my love shall be always with you, that a happy Conclusion may attend this
Parliament. God is my Judge, I speak it as a Christian King, never any way
faring Man, in the burning, dry, and sandy Deserts, more thirsted for water to
quench his thirst, than I thirst and long for the happy success of this
Parliament, that the good issue of this, may expiate, and a^quit the fruitless
issue of the former. And I pray God your Counsels may advance Religion, the
public weal, and the good of me, and my Children.

The Bishop of Lincolns short Harangue.
When the King had thus ended, the Lord Keeper Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, and
Speaker to the House of Peers (who uses always to make the King's mind further
known if there because) told the Parliament, That after the Eloquent speech of
his Majesty, he would not say anything; for as one of the Spartan Kings being
asked whether he would not willingly hear a man that counterfeited the voice of
the Nightingale to the life, made answer, He had heard the Nightingale. So for
him to repeat, or rehearse what the King had said, was (according to the Latin
Proverb) to enamel a Golden Ring with studs of iron. He doubted not but that
the King's Speech had like Aeschines Orations left in their minds a sting; And
as an Historian said of Nerva, that having adopted Trajan, he was immediately
taken away, Nepost divinum et immortale factum, aliquid mortale faceret: So he
would not dare after his Majesty's Divinum et immortale dictum, mortale aliquid
addere.

This is not inserted to show the pregnancy, and Genius of the Man, but the
temper of the Times; wherein, Men made themselves less than Men, by making
Kings little less than Gods. In this the Spanish Bravery is to be admired,
HONORATISS et REUERENDISS Dus IOHANES WILIAMES. EPISC. LINC. et MAG: SIGILL:
ANG: (...)
The right Honorable and right-reverend father in god John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln Lord keeper of the great Seal of England and one of his Ma.ties most
hon.ble princes Counsel.

and the French do not much come short of them, who do not idolize their Kings
with Sacred Sovereign, immortal, and Oraculous expressions, but in their
humblest Petitions, give him the Title Sir, tell him their Business, and demand
Justice of him. But where these Adulations are admitted, though it does not
strike suddenly with some incurable Disease, yet the same hand can make them
consume; and in the end wast away to nothing.

But the Parliament, though they knew there was an intention of a Toleration of
Popery upon the close of the Spanish match, sealed up (as it were) their lips,
and would not see the light that discovered it self through this cloud that the
King cast before it (though some of the Commons had much ado to hold, which he
takes notice of at the next Interview, and thanks them for) but they went on
directly to his Business, making it their own, forgetting all former
miscarriages. And upon the 24. of this month, the Duke of Buckingham, Feb. 24.
Buckinghams Relation to the Parliament.
accompanied with the Prince as his Remembrancer, made a long Relation of all
the transactions in Spain, to both Houses, with all the advantage he could, to
make good his own Actions, some of the Particulars whereof are already related.
And he took the first Discovery of the intention of the King of Spain not to
deal fairly with Our King (touching the Restitution of the Palatinate) from the
Arch-dutchess juggling in the Treaty at Bruxels, which was managed by Sir
Richard Weston, our King's Ambassador there, who urged for a Cessation of
Arms in the Palatinate (the Arch-Dutchess pretending Power to draw off the
Spanish Forces, if Our King would first draw off his) it came to an Agreement;
but in the close (after some Delays) she confessed she had no Power to admit
of a Cessation, till she had more particular warrant for it out of Spain.

That these shufflings made Our King send Porter into Spain for a more resolute
answer, in relation to the Match, and the Palatinate, and assigned him but ten
days to stay there; In which time, Bristol fed him with Hopes, which he found
very Empty ones: whereupon Porter went boldly to Olivares, who (in an
open-hearted way) told him plainly that Spain meant neither the Match, nor
Restitution of the Palatinate.

Bristol seeing Porter would return with this answer, persuaded him to speak
with Olivares again, who coming to Olivares, found him much incensed, for
relating the private intimation he gave him, to Bristol the Public minister,
and denied to speak with Porter anymore.

Bristol still puffs up Our King with an assurance both of the Match, and
restitution of the Palatinate, but they proceeding slowly, the Prince desired
that he might go himself into Spain, which Buckingham first broke to the King,
who with Reasons laid down for it, was drawn to it.

When the Prince came there, the Match at first was absolutely denied, unless
he would be converted, which Bristol persuaded the Prince unto, at least in
show, to expedite his Business.

Then the Spanish Ministers urged for a Toleration of Religion in England,
which they hoped (as some of them expressed) would cause a Rebellion, and they
offered the Prince an Army to Assist him for the Suppression of the same.

But the Prince finding the Spanish did but dally with him, left a Proxy with
Bristol to conclude the Match, when the Dispensation came, which the Prince
forbad him to deliver; Bristol nevertheless proceeds, and if Gresley had not
brought a Revocation of the Proxy from the King over night, Bristol had made
the Espousalls the next day. And always at the end of every point, he would
look upon the Prince for his approbation, and allowance, who still as the Duke
went on, confirmed the same. And so Buckingham concluded, that if the drawing
of us out of Darkness into Light, did deserve thanks, we all owed it to the
Prince, who by the Hazard of his Person, and by his great care and industry had
done this for Us.

The Duke highly esteemed.
The Parliament that looked upon the Duke with a Sour Eye for tempting the
Prince to so dangerous a journey, when they found what excellent effects it had
produced, forgot the Old Murmurs buzzed against him, and with elevated Voices
could scarce be contained from acknowledging him The Preserver of the Nation.
This his discovery is Cried up every where, and who but the Duke is become the
Darling of the Multitude? So dear then was the Prince unto the People, that
they tendered his safety as their own! and so easily might he have retained his
Love, if by grasping after Shadows, he had not lost the Substance. For those
people are the soonest deceived that love most to admire.

Little deserved.
The Parliament were but men, and could at present see no more than the Duke was
pleased to show them, through the flattering glass of this Relation. But when
Bristol came over, and (as afterward he did) discover, that the Duke carried
the Prince purposely into Spain to be the better instructed in Popery: That he
gave hope to the Spanish Ministers of State of the Prince's Conversion, which
made them propound far worse Conditions for Religion than had been formerly
agreed on: That he professed himself a Papist there; going to Mass, kneeling
to, and adoring their Sacraments, which the Pope being informed of, sent the
Duke a Bull, to persuade, and encourage him to pervert the King and Prince, An.
Reg. 21.
with other pernicious Crimes laid to his Charge in the next King's reign (as
may appear in due time) None can blame the People for Mutable affections: An.
Christi. 1624.
for when false-hood is so impudent as to hoodwink such an Assembly, with the
vail that Truth her self is wont to put on, who can at an instant discover it?

But it was a hard Condition for the banished Palatine to have such Mediators
as Buckingham, Bristol, and Weston, to make intercession for him, the Temper of
whose Spirits was well known, and which way their affections tended. But now
the load is all laid upon Bristol; though he were at the distance of not being
sensible of it, yet it was so heavy, that most Men thought he would never come
to have it taken off.

The Parliament advise the King to break the Treaties with Spain.
But all things were passed over by the Parliament that reflected upon
particulars, having in their eye the general good of the Kingdom, which they
strove to manage with advantage. And the Treaty of the Marriage with Spain
being put into their hands, they crushed the brood in the nest, advising the
King to break the Treaty, and proclaim open War with that King. Which they did
not do suddenly, as if they had been eager upon a War, but with good advice,
and deliberate consideration, as the most immediate means for the establishment
of Religion, and settled Peace; protesting to assist the King, for the regaining
of the Palatinate with their lives, and fortunes. Upon which Declaration and
Resolution, the King determined to send instantly post into Spain, to his
Ambassadors, to signify to that King that the Parliament advised him to break
off the Treaties, and to recover the Palatinate by War, and the Post had his
Dispatch to that purpose; when the King repented him of what he had done, and
(like the Husband how jealous of his Wife) writes to Secretary Conway this
Letter, to impede and delay the Business.

The King's Letter to Secretary Conway.
I doubt not but you have heard what a stinging Petition against the Papists,
the Lower House have sent to the Higher House this day, that they might jointly
present it to me; you know my firm Resolution not to make this a War of
Religion. And seeing I would be loath to be Conny-catcht by my People, I pray
you stay the Post that is going into Spain, till I meet with my Son, who will
be here to morrow morning. Do it upon pretext of some more Letters ye are to
send by him, and if he should be gone, hasten after him to stay him, upon some
such pretext, and let none living know of this as ye love me: and before two in
the afternoon to morrow you shall without fail hear from me.

Farewell. Apr. 3, 1624.

By this Letter it appears, Conjectures on the King's Letter.
that the King thought the Petition against Recusants of such high consequence,
that if he should not give the Parliament a good answer, it might make a
Rupture with them, and therefore he will see further in the Nature of this
Petition, before he will break with the King of Spain; and know more of the
Prince, his Son's mind, happily whether he would yet accept of his Old Mistress,
or expect a new one. Or whether the King feared that the Parliament would not
make good their Promises, to stand with their lives and fortunes in the Gap,
when this great Breach was made, and so cosen him, may be Mystical Conjectures
from Mystical Expressions, grounded upon the Words of a King: Or whether any or
all of these (like the King's Heart inscrutable) are meant in the Letter, is
not here determined. But the King hastens to the House, and finding no such
terrible things in the Petition (the Lords being not so quick in the Resolution
of it, as the King was in the apprehension of it) he stirs not those Waters,
but sounds the depth of the Parliaments Intentions, by propounding his Doubts,
and requiring a solution to them, in order to a War, with prudence and caution.

My Lords and Gentlemen all. I have cause first to thank God with my heart, The
King's 2. speech to both Houses.
and all the faculties of my mind, that my speech which I delivered in
Parliament has taken so good effect among you, as that with an Unamine
consent, you have freely, and speedily, given me your advice in this great
Business, for which I also thank you all as heartily as I can. I also give my
particular thanks to the Gentlemen of the lower House, for that I hear, when
some among them would have cast jealousies, and doubts, between me and my
people, you presently quelled those Motions, which might have hindered the happy
agreement I hope to find in this Parliament. You give me your advice to break
off both the Treaties as well concerning the Match, as the Palatinate. And now
give me leave as an old King to propound my Doubts, and hereafter give me your
answer.

First it is true that I who have been all the days of my life a peaceable
King, and have had the Honor in my Titles, and impress to be styled Rex
pacificus, should without necessity, imbroil my self in a War. Which is so far
from my Nature and from the Honor I have had both at home and abroad, in
endeavoring to avoid the effusion of Christian blood (of which too much has
been shed) and so much against my Heart, that unless it be upon such a
necessity, that I may call it (as some merrily say it of Women) Malum
Necessarium, I shall be loath to enter into it. And I must likewise acquaint you
that I have had no small hopes given me of Obtaining better Conditions, for
Restitution of the Palatinate, and that even since the setting down of this
Parliament. But be not jealous, nor think me such a King, that would under
pretext of asking your advice put a scorn upon you, by disdaining or rejecting
it. For you remember, that in my first Speech unto you, for proof of my Love to
my People, I craved your advice in this great and weighty affair. But in a
matter of this Weight. I must consider how this Course may agree with my
Conscience and Honor, and next, according to the Parable uttered by our
Savior, (after I was resolved of the Necessity, and justness of the Cause) to
consider how I shall be enabled to raise Forces for this purpose.

As concerning the Case of my Children. I am now old, and would be glad, as
Moses saw the Land of Promise from a high Mountain (though he had not leave to
set his foot in it) so would it be a great Comfort to me, that God would so
long prolong my days, as, if I might not see the Restitution, yet at least to
be assured that it would be. That then I might with old Simeon say, Nunc
dimittis servum tuum Domine! Otherwise it would be a great grief unto me, and I
should die with a heavy, and discomforted Heart. I have often said, and
particularly in the last Parliament, (and I shall be ever of the Mind) that as
I am not ambitious of other Men's Goods or Lands, so I desire not to enjoy a
surrow of Land in England, Scotland, and Ireland, without Restitution of the
Palatinate; and in this Mind I will live and die.

But let me acquaint you a little with the difficulties of this Case; He is an
unhappy man who shall advise a King to War, and it is an unchristian thing to
seek that by blood, which may be had by Peace. Besides, I think your Intentions
are not to engage me in a War, but withal you will consider how many things
there are requisite thereunto. I omit to speak of my Own Necessities, they are
too well known; Sure I am, I have had the least help in Parliament of any King
that reigned over you these many years; I have let you know that my
disabilities are increased, by the Charge of my Son's Journey into Spain (which
I was at for his Honor, and the Honor of the Nation) by sending Ambassadors,
by Maintenance of my Children, and by assisting of the Palatinate. I have
incurred a great Debt to the King of Denmark, which I am not able to pay. The
Low Countries (who in regard of their nearness are fittest to help for the
Recovery of the Palatinate) are at so low an ebb, that if I assist them not,
they will be scarce able to subsist. The Princes of Germany that should do me
any good, are all poor, and weak, and disheartened, and do expect assistance
from hence. For Ireland, I leave it to you, if that be not a backdoor fit to
be secured. For the Navy, I thank God it is now in a better Case than ever it
was, yet more must be done, and before it can be prepared as it ought to be, it
will require a new Charge, as well for the own Strength, as for securing of the
Coasts. My Children (I vow to God) eat no bread but by my means, An. Reg. 22.
I must maintain them, and not see them want. My Customs are the best part of
my Revenues, An. Christi. 1624.
and in effect the Substance of all I have to live on; All which are Farmed out
upon Condition, That if there be War, those Bargains are to be anulled.
Subsidies ask a great time to bring in; and if you assist me that Way, I must
take them up beforehand upon Credit, which will eat up a great part of them.

This being my Case, to enter into a War without sufficient means to support
it, were to show my Teeth and do no more. In the mean time, I heartily thank
you for your Advice, and will seriously think upon it; As I pray you to
consider of these other Points. My Treasurer, to whose Office it appertains,
shall more at large inform you of those things that concern my Estate.

Thus freely do I open my Heart to you, and having your Hearts, I cannot want
your Helps; for it is the Heart that opens the Purse, not the Purse the Heart.
I will deal frankly with you, show me the means how I may do what you would
have me, and if I take a Resolution upon your Advice to enter into a War, then
your own Deputies shall have the disposing of the Money, I will not meddle with
it, but you shall appoint your own Treasurers.

I say not this with purpose to invite you to open your Purses, and then to
slight you so much as not to follow your Counsel, nor engage you before I be
engaged my self. Give me what you will for my own means, for I protest none of
the Money which you shall give for these Uses, shall be issued but for those
ends. If upon your Offer I shall find the means to make a War honorable, and
sat, (and that I resolve to embrace your Advice) then I promise you on the
Word of a King, That although War and Peace be the peculiar Prerogative of
Kings, yet as I have advised with you in the Treaties, on which War may ensue,
so I will not Treat nor accept of Peace, without first acquainting you with it,
and hearing your Advice, and therein go the proper way of Parliament, in
conferring and consulting with you: And happily, Conditions of Peace will be
the better, when we are prepared for War, according to the Proverb, That
Weapons breed Peace.

Your kind Carriage gives me much Contentment, and that comforts me which my
Lord of Canterbury said, That there was not a contrary Voice among you all,
like the Seventy Interpreters, who were led by the breath of God.

I am so desirous to forget all rents in former Parliaments, that it shall not
be my default, if I be not in love with Parliaments, and call them often, and
desire to end my life in that intercourse between Me and my People, for making
of good Laws, reforming abuses, and maintaining the good Government of the
Commonwealth. Therefore go on cheerfully, and advise of these points, and my
Resolution shall be then, declared.

None can blame the King for being too cautelous, The Parliament close with the
King.
or wary in such an Eruption as this, so contrary to his Nature (as he says
himself) a War was a new World to him, fearing to lay out by it more than he
should receive. And in this, he was like the Man, that when his Master gave
great Charge to go and gather up his Rents in the Country, and to take a pair
of Pistols with him, to bring home his Money with the more security: After the
Master had appointed him to pay so much in one place, and so much in another,
that the Man saw he should not receive so much as he should disburse, Bid his
Master take his Pistols again, he should not use them. So the King fearing that
when the War was begun, there would not be where withal to maintain it, Thanked
the Parliament for their Advice, and he would consider better of it. And they
seeling the King's Pulse by his expressions, resolved now not to let him flag,
but to keep up the temper of his Spirit, that a little thing would make decline
again. And therefore they seriously settled to their Business, and answered his
Expectation fully, which they presented unto him shortly after, in these words,
to his great Satisfaction.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects, Their Declaration.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do first render to
your Sacred Majesty, Our most Dutiful Thanks, for that to Our unspeakable
Comfort, you have vouchsafed to express your Self so well satisfied with Our
late Declaration made unto your Majesty, of Our general Resolution in pursuit
of Our Humble Advice to assist your Majesty in a Parliamentary way, with Our
Persons and Abilities. And whereas your Majesty in your Great Wisdom and
Judgment, foreseeing that it will make a deeper impression, both in the Enemies
of that Cause, and in your Friends and Allies, if they shall not only hear of
the Cheerful Offers, but also see the Real performance of your Subjects toward
so great a Work. Your Majesty was pleased to descend to a particular
Proposition for the advancing of this great Business. We therefore in all
humbleness most ready and willing to give your Majesty and the whole World an
ample Testimony of Our Sincere and Dutiful Intentions herein, upon Mature
Advice and Deliberation, as well of the Weight and Importance, of this great
Affair, as of the present Estate of this your Kingdom. (the Weal and Safety
whereof, is in Our Judgments apparently threatened, if your Majesty's Resolution
for the Dissolving of the Treaties, now in question, be longer deferred, and
that Provision for defense of your Realm, and aid of your Friends, and Allies,
be not seasonably made) have with a Cheerful Consent of all the Commons (no one
dissenting) and with a Full, and Cheerful Consent of the Lords, Resolved, That
upon your Majesty's public Declaration, for the Dissolution, and utter
Discharge of both the said Treaties of the Marriage, and the Palatinate, in
pursuit of Our Advice therein, and toward the Support of that War, which is
likely to ensue; And more particularly for those four Points proposed by your
Majesty. Namely, for the Defense of this your Realm; the Securing of Ireland;
the assistance of your Neighbors, the States of the United Provinces; and
other your Majesty's Friends, and Allies; and for the setting forth of your
Royal Navy; We will grant for the present, the greatest Aid which ever was
given in Parliament. That is to say, Three entire Subsidies, and three
Fifteens, to be all paid within the compass of one whole Year, after your
Majesty shall be pleased to make the said Declaration; The Money to be paid
into the Hands, and expended by the Direction of such Committees, or
Commissioners, as hereafter shall be agreed upon at this present Session of
Parliament. And We most humbly beseech your Majesty, to accept of these First
Fruits of Our Hearty Oblation, dedicated to that Work, which We infinitely
desire may prosper, and be advanced. And for the Future to rest confidently
assured, That We your Loyal and Loving Subjects, will never fail in a
Parliamentary way, to assist your Majesty in so Royal a Design; wherein your
Own Honor, and the Honor of your most Noble Son the Prince, the Ancient
Renown of this Nation, the Welfare and very Subsistence of your Noble, and
Only Daughter, and her Consort, and their Posterity, the Safety of your Own
Kingdom, and People, and the Prosperity of your Neighbors, and Allies, are so
deeply engaged.




The Treaties with Spain dissolved.
The Parliament by this Declaration came up so close to the King, that he could
make no evasion, but rested contented now in his Latter time (when the Almonds
(as it were) begun to Blossom upon his head) to plunge himself into a War:
which brought him again to the Parliament, to thank them for their Readiness to
assist him; telling them, That he is willing to follow their advice in the
Anulling and Breach of these two Treaties. They having given enough to begin a
War, but when the end will be (he said) God knows. Yet he will engage for
himself and his Son, his Successor, That no means shall be left unused for
recovery of the Palatinate. And for all his Old Age (if it might do any good)
he would go in person to further the Business. But as he is contented to have
the Parliament Committees to dispose of the Moneys by their Directions, so the
Design must not be acted by public Councels; For whether he shall send Two
thousand, or Ten thousand; whether by Sea or Land, East, or West, by Diversion
or Invasion, upon the Bavarian, or the Emperor, that must be left to the King.
And this he did, that there might be no jealousies, but to smooth every Rub
betwixt them.

And to put it in execution, a Council of War is chosen out of the old, and
long discontinued Militia of Ireland, and some others of the Nobility; and upon
result of their Counsels (after some debate) it was concluded, to send fix
thousand men for the present into the Low Countries, to join with the States
Forces, against the King of Spain's mighty Armies, under the command of
Marquess Spinola, that threatened the next Summer to overrun the Netherlands,
that weakening the Spaniard in Flanders, they might have the more free access
into Germany.

The Dissolution of the Treaties with Spain, The Spanish Ambassador accuses
Buckingham of Treason.
and the preparation for War resounding in every Ear, gave such an Allarm to
the Spanish Ambassador, the Marquess of Inoiosa, that whether out of Truth,
and Knowledge (as he pretended) or Malice only, cannot be determined: But he
sent to the King, to let him know, that the Duke of Buckingham had some
dangerous Machination a foot, that tended to his Destruction, and the best he
could expect, would be a confinement to a Countrey-house, in some Park during
his life; the Prince being now in full abilities and ripe in Government. This
Concussion was strong enough to shake an old Building, that was of a fearful,
and tottering Temper (especially if he considered how his Mother was put by her
Government, to say nothing of Prince Henry) but the violence of it did not
work, because the Operation was somewhat mitigated by the Duke's Protestation
of his Innocence. For the King at the next Interview saying to him, Ah Stenny,
Stenny, (which was the Familiar name he always used to him) Will thou kill me?
The Duke struck into an Astonishment with the Expression, after some little
Pause, collected himself, and with many asseverations strove to justify his
Integrity; which the good King was willing enough to Believe; and Buckingham
finding by some discourse, that Padre Macestria the Spanish Jesuit, had been
with the King, he had then a large Theme for his Vindication, turning all upon
the Spanish Iesuitical Malice, which proceeded from the ruins of their quashed
Hopes. And the King knowing Inoiosa and all that Party, very bitter against
Buckingham; and though he did not directly accuse the Prince to be in the
Conspiracy, with Buckingham, yet he reflected upon him; for such an attempt
could never have been effected without his Privity; therefore out of the Bowels
of good Nature he did unbelieve it; and after Examinations of some Persons the
Duke's Intimates, and their constant denial upon oath (which they had no good
Cause to confess) the King was content (being loath to think such an Enterprise
could be fostred so near his own Bosom) to have the Brat strangled in the Womb.
And he presently sent into Spain to desire Justice of that King, against the
Ambassadors false Accusation, which he said wounded his Son's Honor through
Buckingham's side, which Sir Walter Aston represented to the King of Spain (for
Bristol was coming over to justify his Actions to the Parliament.) But the
Duke of Buckinghams reputation there procured no other Satisfaction, than some
little check of formality; for when Inoiosa was recalled home, he was not
lessened in esteem. Thus was this Information waved, though there might be some
cause to suspect, that the great intimacy, and Dearness, betwixt the Prince and
Duke (like the conjunction of two dreadful planets) could not but portend the
production of some very dangerous effect to the old King.

But the Duke's Reputation, though it failed in Spain, held firm footing in
England; Bristol sent to^ the Tower.
for Bristol no sooner appeared, but he is clapped up in the Tower. Their juggling
practices (whereof they were Both guilty enough) must not yet come to light, to
disturb the Proceedings in Parliament. Bristol had too much of the King's
Commission for what he did (though he might overshoot himself in what he said)
which was not now to be discovered. Yet the Rigor of that imprisonment would
have sounded too loud, if he had not had a sudden Release; who finding the
Duke high mounted yet in power, and himself in no Degree to grapple with him,
was content with Submission to gain his liberty, and retire himself to a
Country privacy.

The Lords being now at leisure began to consider of that stinging petition (as
the King called it) against Papists, how necessary it was to join with the
Commons, to supplicate the King to take down the pride of their high-flying
Hopes, that had been long upon the Wing, watching for their prey, and now they
are made to stoop without it. And after some Conferences betwixt both Houses
about it, the Petition was reduced to these two Propositions, and presented to
the King as two Petitions.

The Parliaments Petition against Recusants.
We your Majesty 's most humble and loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, do in all humbleness offer unto your Sacred Majesty
these two Petitions following.

1. That for the more safety of your Realms, and better keeping your Subjects
in Obedience, and other important Reasons of State, your Majesty would be
pleased (by some such course as you shall think fit) to give present Order,
that all the Laws be put in due execution, which have been made, and do stand
in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and others, having taken Orders by
authority derived from the Sea of Rome, and generally against all Popish
Recusants. And as for disarming, that it may be according to the Laws, and
according to former Acts, and Directions of State, in that Case. And yet that
it may appear to all the World, the Favor and Clemency your Majesty uses
toward all your Subjects of what Condition soever; And to the intent the
Jesuits, and Priests, now in the Realm, may not pretend to be surprised, that a
speedy and certain may be prefixed, by your Majesty's Proclamation, before
which day they shall depart out of this Kingdom, and all other your Highness
Dominions; and neither they nor any other to return or come hither again, upon
peril of the severest Penalties of the Laws now in force against them. And that
all your Majesty's Subjects may thereby also be admonished, not to receive,
entertain, or conceal, any of them, upon the Penalties, and Forfeitures, which
by the Laws may be imposed on them.

2. Seeing We are thus happily delivered from that danger which those Treaties
now dissolved, and that use which your ill-affected Subjects made thereof would
certainly have drawn upon us, and yet cannot but foresee, and fear lest the
like may hereafter happen, which would inevitably bring much peril upon your
Majesty's Kingdoms; We are most humble Suitors unto your Gracious Majesty, to
secure the Hearts of your good Subjects, by the engagement of your Royal Word
unto them, that upon no occasion of Marriage or Treaty, (or other request in
that behalf from any foreign Prince or State whatsoever) you will take away or
slacken the Execution of your Laws against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish
Recusants.

To which Our humble Petitions (proceeding from Our most Loyal and Dutiful
affections toward your Majesty, Our Care of Our Countries good, and our own
confident persuasion, that these will much advance the Glory of Almighty God,
the everlasting Honor of your Majesty, the Safety of your Kingdoms, and the
encouragement of all your good Subjects) We do most humbly beseech your Majesty
to vouchsafe a gracious Answer.

The King was prepared for the Petition, The King prepared for it.
having given his own Resolution the Check at present; that whatsoever he might
do hereafter, yet now he would comply; and therefore he sends for both Houses
to Whitehall, to sweeten them with a gentle answer to this Petition, that might
take off those sour aspersions that this miscarriage in Government might
happily cast upon him. And we will not say but his intentions might rove
toward the End, though he gave too much liberty (through a Natural easiness in
himself) to those that He trusted with Management of the great affairs, by evil
means to pervert that end; which made him guilty of their Actions: For where
true Piety is not the Director, Carelessness as often as Wilfulness carries men
out of the way. But he had this Principle, and made often use of it, (like ill
Tenants when they let things run to ruin) to daub all up again, when forced to
it, and find no other Remedy. This was the effect of what he said in his own
excuse.

My Lords and Gentlemen of both Houses, I cannot but commend your Zeal, in
offering this Petition to me; yet on the other side, I cannot but hold my Self
unfortunate, that I should be thought to need a Spur to do that which my
Conscience, and Duty, binds me unto. What Religion I am of, The Kings answers
to the Parliaments Petitions, 23. Apt.
my Books do declare, my Profession, and Behavior does show, and I hope in God
I shall never live to be thought otherwise; surely I shall never deserve it:
And for my part I wish it may be written in Marble, and remain to Posterity as
a mark upon me, when I shall swerve from my Religion: For he that does
dissemble with God, is not to be trusted with Men.

My Lords, for my part, I protest before God, That my Heart has bled when I
have heard of the increase of Popery. God is my judge, it has been such a
great grief to me, that it has been as Thorns in my Eyes, and Pricks in my
Sides, and so for ever I have been and shall be from turning another way. And
my Lords and Gentlemen, you shall be my Confessors, that one way or other it
has been my Desire to hinder the growth of Popery, and I could not be an
honest Man, if I should have done otherwise; And this I may say further, That
if I be not a Martyr, I am sure I am a Confessor, and in some sense I may be
called a Martyr, as in the Scripture, Isaac was Persecuted by Ismael, by
mocking Words, for never King suffered more ill Tongues than I have done, and I
am sure for no cause; yet I have been far from Persecution, for I have ever
thought, that no way increased any Religion more than Persecution, according to
that Saying, Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae.

Now my Lords and Gentlemen, for your Petition; I will not only grant the
Substance of what you craved, but add somewhat more of my own. For the Two
Treaties being already anulled (as I have declared them to be) it necessarily
follows of it self, that which you desire, and therefore it needs no more, but
that I do declare by Proclamation, (which I am ready to do) That all Jesuits,
and Priests, do depart by a Day; but it cannot be as you desire, by Our
Proclamation to be out of all my Dominions; for a Proclamation here, extends
but to this Kingdom.

This I will do, and more, I will Command all my Judges, when they go their
Circuits, to keep the same Courses, for putting all the Laws in Execution
against Recusants, as they were wont to do, before these Treaties: for the Laws
are still in force, and were never dispensed with by me. God is my judge, they
were never so intended by me. But as I told you in the beginning of the
Parliament, you must give me leave as a good Horseman sometimes to use the
Reins, and not always to use the Spurs. So now there needs nothing but my
Declaration for the disarming of them, that is already done by the Laws, and
shall be done as you desired. And more, I will take order for the shameful
disorder of the Resorting of my Subjects to all foreign Ambassadors; of this I
will advise with my Council how it may be best reformed. It is true, that the
Houses of Ambassadors are privileged places, and though they cannot take them
out of their Houses, yet the Lord Mayor, and Mr. Recorder of London, may take
some of them as they come from thence, and make them Examples. Another Point I
will add, concerning the Education of their Children, of which I have had a
principal care, as the Lord of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Winchester, and
other Lords of my Council can bear me witness, with whom I have advised about
this Business: For in good faith it is a shame their Children should be bred
here, as if they were at Rome. So I do grant not only your Desire, but more: I
am sorry I was not the first mover of it to you; But had you not done it, I
should have done it my self.

Now for the second part of your Petition; You have there given me the best
advice in the World; For it is against the Rule of Wisdom, that a King should
suffer any of his Subjects to transgress the Laws, by the intercession of other
Princes; and therefore assure your selves, that (by the Grace of God) I will be
careful that no such Conditions be foisted in upon any other Treaty whatsoever:
For it is fit my Subjects should stand or fall to their own Laws.

If the King had seriously and really considered the Minute of this Petition,
The King promises much, performs little.
the very last Clause, wherein the Glory of God, and the Safety of his Kingdoms,
so much consisted, as the Parliament wisely express, and foresee, and which the
King says is the best Advice in the World, and which he promised so faithfully
to observe in the next Treaty of Marriage for his Son, it might perhaps have
kept the Crown upon the Head of his Posterity. But when Princes break with the
People, in those Promises that concern the Honor of God, God will let their
people break with them to their Ruin and Dishonor. And this Maxim holds in all
Powers, whether Kingdoms or Common Wealths; As they are established by Justice,
so the Justice of Religion which tends most to the Glory of God, is principally
to be observed.

The King grants them more than they desire, but not so much as they hope for:
they have many good words thick sown, but they produce little good fruit. Yet
the Parliament followed the Chase close, and bolted out diverse of the Nobility
and Gentry of Eminency, Popishly affected, that had Eathed themselves in
Places of high Trust and Power in the Kingdom, as if they meant to under-mine
the Nation. Viz.

Francis Earl of Rutland, the Duke of Buckingham's Wives Father. Sir Thomas
Compton, that was married to the Duke's Mother; And the Countess her self, who
was the Cynosure they all steered by. The Earl of Castle-Haven. The Lord
Herbert, after Earl of Worcester. a swarm of Popery.
The Lord Viscount Colchester, after Earl of Rivers. The Lord Peter. The Lord
Morley. The Lord Windsor. The Lord Eure. The Lord Wotton. The Lord Teinham, The
Lord Scroop, who was Lord President of the North (and which they omitted, the
Earl of Northampton, Lord President of Wales, who married his Children to
Papists, and permitted them to be bred up in Popery.) Sir William Courtney, Sir
Thomas Brudnell, Sir Thomas Somerset, Sir Gilbert Ireland, Sir Francis
Stonners, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Francis Howard, Sir William Powell, Sir
Francis Lacon, Sir Lewis Lewkner, Sir William Awberie, Sir John Gage, Sir John
Shelly, Sir Henry Carvel, Sir Thomas Wiseman, Sir Thomas Gerrard, Sir John
Filpot, Sir Thomas Russell, Sir Henry Bedingfield, Sir William Wrey, Sir John
Conwey, Sir Charles Jones, Sir Ralph Connyers, Sir Thomas Lamplough, Sir Thomas
Savage, Sir William Moseley, Sir Hugh Beston, Sir Thomas Riddall, Sir Marmaduke
Wivel, Sir John Townesend, Sir William Norris, Sir Philip Knevit, Sir John
Tasborough, Sir William Selbie; Sir Richard Titchborn, Sir John Hall, Sir
George Perkins, Sir Thomas Penrodduck, Sir Nicholas Sanders, Knights; Besides
diverse Esquires Popishly addicted, either in their own Persons, or by means of
their Wives, too tedious to be expressed here. And these were dispersed and
seated in every County, who were not only in Office and Commission, but had
Countenance from Court, by which they grew up and flourished, so that their
exuberancie hindered the growth of any Goodness, or Piety, their Malice pleased
to drop upon.

These men being now touched, began to shrink in their Branches, Herba mimosa.
like the newfound Indian Plants, but they quickly put out again: for though
this Disturbance, or Movement, came upon them, by the Dissolution of one
Treaty, yet they presently got heart, and spread again, by the other which was
in Agitation.

For our King after the Breach with Spain, loath to be refused in France, A
Treaty of Marriage with France.
(where the Younger Daughter to Henry the Great, was reserved to be the Fatal
Mother of a Disherited Royal Issue) durst not venture upon an Overt Treaty, but
sends over the Lord Kensington, newly made Earl of Holland, who was to sound
the King, and Grandees of France, whether the Match were feasible, before he
would begin to Treat ubliquely. He remained a Month in France, and moved not a
word, though they apprehended his address was to that end. While the Prince was
in Spain, they Carolus D. G. Rex Ang: Sco: Fran: et Hib:


Henreta Maria D. G. Reg: Ang: Sco: Fran: et Hib:


looked upon the Count Soison, as a fit Match for the Princess Henrietta Maria,
but our Prince's Gallantry (as they esteemed it there) and his Spritely
carriage in so dangerous, and hazardous a Journey, both by Sea, and Land, took
such impressions in the frisk of the French Humor, and raised him to such a
height of Bravery among them, that they were impetuously Violent in desiring
the Match; Insomuch as upon the very first Overture, the King of France told
the Earl of Holland, That he had rather have the Prince of England to his
Brother, than any man in the World. And when the Treaty was begun, the Spanish
Factors began to play their parts with the Pope, so that he sent to the King of
France to get some Immunities, in the Articles now in Treaty, for the
Catholics in England, and that there might be public exercise of the Popish
Religion for the Princess. This the Earl of Holland opposing, the King of
France told him, That if he would go on with the Treaty, he would be tied no
further to the Pope's Rules than did consist with Reason; For he did acknowledge
the next Diocesan Bishop to him, in his Dominions, to have as much power as he.
So that the Treaty went on with a petty admittance of the Catholic Religion,
and Romish Ministers about the Princess, to a private, and almost obscure
Condition; so eager was the King of France for the Match.

But the Iesuitical Party, both here, and there, were incessantly laborious for
a greater Liberty, and the King's chief Agent in the Treaty, Monsieur de
Vieuxvill, having pulled on him the Odium of the people (through some
miscarriages) being committed Prisoner by the King, to protect him from their
Rage, the Cardinal Richelieu entering then into his Infancy of Favor, being
preferred by the Queen Mother to be a manager of the Treaty, whose Intimate he
was, and more Stubborn for promoting the Catholic Cause, yet all this could
give no stop to the Career, but that the Match would be made up upon very easy
Terms.

But when the King of France understood by his Ministers, and Agents in
England, how eager our King was for the Match, (for he desired it above all
Earthly Blessings, as one near him said of him) for besides the Reproach he
thought would fall upon him by another Breach, he should lose the Glory of a
Conjunction with Kings (which he highly wound up his Opinion to) to Sublime,
and, as it were, Deifie his Posterity in the esteem of the people, so that he
would almost submit to any thing, rather than the Match should not go forward;
which the King of France finding, he bated his Humor of earnestness for it,
and descended by the same Steps and Degrees that he found his Brother King
advanced to it; and got several great Immunities for the Papists by it:
notwithstanding all Our King's fair Promises to the Parliament, as may be seen
by those Articles, sealed and sworn to by Our King, some few Months before his
Death.

But a little before this, (when the Hopes of the Match with France began to
bud) the Earl of Carlisle was sent over to mature, and Ripen the proceedings
with the Earl of Holland, to bring the Treaty to some perfection, yet with
private instructions, That if they could find by their Spanish Correspondencies
(as the Earl of Carlisle was a little Hispanioliz'd) that the Match there had
any Probability of taking effect with the new Propositions; that then they
should proceed no further in the French Treaty: so earnest was the King for the
one, so Violent for the other; The Sophisticate Drugs of the Spanish
Restitution of the Palatinate, having not yet lost their Operation. Thus the
Ambition of Princes (that devolve all their Happiness upon glorious
Extractions) does choke and smother those Considerations, that Religion (like a
clear light) discovers to be but gross, and cloudy Policy, which vanishes
often, and comes to nothing.

The Duke of Buckingham swollen with Grandeur (having two great Props to support
him) doubted not to Crush any thing that stood in his way, The Lord Treasurer
questioned in Parliament.
so that he fell very heavily upon his Cosen the Earl of Middlesex, Lord
Treasurer; for he remembered how he repined at the Moneys that were spent in
Spain, and his Comportment to him since his coming over ( Middlesex being
naturally of a Sullen and proud Humor) was not such as (he thought) did become
his Creature: Therefore he Resolved to bring him down from that Height he had
placed him in, and quickly sound the means to do it. For great Officers that
dig deep in Worldly Treasures, have many Underminers under them; and those that
are not just to themselves or others, must make use of such as will not be so
just to them, so that a flaw may easily be found, whereby a great Breach may be
made. And as Middlesex had not Innocence to Justify himself, so he wanted
Humility whereby others might Justify him, which made him fall unpitied. The
Prince (that was Buckingham's right hand) took part against him in the House of
Lords, where he was Questioned; which the King hearing of, writes to the Prince
from New Market, (whither he often retired to be free, and at ease from comber,
and noise of Business) That he should not take part with any Faction in
Parliament against the Earl of Middlesex, but to reserve himself, so that both
sides might seek him; for if he bandied to take away his Servants, the time
would come that others would do as much for him. This wise Advice speaks
Buckingham a little declining from the Meridian of the King's Favor, or the
King from his; For if the King did know that Buckingham was his chief
Persecutor, it could not but relish ill with the Duke to have the King plead
for him; if the King did not (...) know, there was not then that intimacy
betwixt them that used to be. But the Treasurer's Actions being thoroughly
canvased (though he had not had such great Enemies) he was found guilty of such
misdemeanors, as were not fit for a Man of Honor to commit, so that the
Parliament thought to Degrade him; but that they looked on as an ill Precedent.
But though they took not away his Titles of Honor in Relation to his Posterity
(who had not offended) yet they made him utterly incapable of sitting in the
House of Lords as a Peer. And for his fine, it was so great, that the Duke (by
Report) got Chelsie House out of him for his part of it.

There was an odd accident happened in Northamptonshire while this Treasurer was
in his Greatness. Harman's story
One Harman a rich man (that knew not well how to make use of his Riches) having
some bad Tenants, and being informed that one of them which Owed him money, had
furnished himself to go to a Fair, to buy some Provisions for his
accommodation: Harman walks (as by accident) to meet him in the way to the
Market; when he saw his Tenant, he asked him for his Rent; the man (that was
willing otherwise to dispose of his money) denied he had any; Yes I know thou
have money, said Harman, (calling him by his Name) I prithee let me have my
Rent; and with much importunity the man pulled out his money, and gave all, or
the most part of it to his Landlord. This coming to some Pragmatical knowledge,
the poor Man was advised to indict his Landlord for Robbing him, and taking his
Money from him, in the Highway; which he did, and Harman for his Sordid and
base carriage, being ill beloved in the Country, was found guilty, but
reprieved by the Judges; And Harman hearing the Lord Treasurer had a Secretary
of his Name, he applied himself to him, promising to give him all his Estate
(having no Children) if his Lord would bring him out of the Danger he was in;
which the Lord Treasurer by his power with the King did effect, and Harman his
Man within a short time after (by the other's death) enjoyed an ample estate.

The King being a good Master, The Lady Finch Viscountess of Maidstone.
did by his Bounty much indear his Servants unto him, and seldom denied any man
a Reasonable Suit; This Treasurer by his Greatness also procured the King, by
Patent (after the example of the Countess of Buckingham) to create Elizabeth,
the Widow of Sir Moyle Fynch of Kent, Viscountess of Maidstone, A Lady of a
great Fortune, and having a Mind suitable to it, she laid the Foundation of a
Noble Family, intailing not only this Title, but in the next King's Reign, the
Earldom of Winchelsey, upon her now flourishing Posterity. But it is thought
this Treasurer got well by laying the groundwork to this great Structure; For
Copt-Hall (a Noble Seat in Essex) came to his hand from this Lady at a small
value; which is the principal House he left to his Family.

This Spring gave Birth to Four brave Regiments of Foot, (a new apparition in
the English Horizon) Fifteen hundred in a Regiment, Four Regiments sent into
Holland.
which were raised, and transported into Holland, under Four gallant Colonels;
The Earl of Oxford, the Earl of Southampton, the Earl of Essex, and the Lord
Willoughby, since Earl of Lindsey. These four Regiments being well armed and
exercised in Holland, were ready to march into the Field with Maurice Prince of
Orange, General of the States Army; who having an opposite, the Marquess
Spinola, as subtle, and more daring than himself, they both lay at the Catch,
and their wariness prevented many a Mischief. Maurice finding Spinola with the
Spanish Army hankering about Breda, either thinking himself not ready enough to
encounter him, or not strong enough to Grapple with him, permitted him to work
himself within two strong lines of Circumvallation, fortified with several
Forts, and Redoubts, notwithstanding that Breda was his Darling Town, and the
Honor of his Excellency; Spinola beseiges Breda.
And while Spinola was thus working, he diverted his Army into Cleveland, to
take in Cleve Castle, a poor, and inconsiderable Place, which was surrendered to
him as soon as he presented his Cannon before it; and when he had done that,
and Spinola had finished his Works, he brought his Army to a little Village
called Mede, which was close by Spinola's Quarters, and there entrenched
himself by his side; But the Enemy attended their Work, and would not busy
themselves to look after him, being strongly fortified, and the way open for
their Convoyes to bring Provisions out of Flanders, which went always very
strong; and Prince Maurice would not go so far out of his way from his
Victual-Ships to interrupt them, lest he should want Provisions for his own
Army. But his great Design of lodging so near the Enemy was to amuse them, that
they should bend their Eyes and Thoughts upon him there, and neglect that the
more which he aimed at; For he had the Surprising of the strong Castle at
Antwerp in his Fancy, which (he was informed) at that time had but small Force
in it; and he was so assured to prevail, that he would have none but the Dutch
to have the Honor of it. But they attempted the Business so blunderingly, that
they were discovered, and lost their labor. And so with some few little
Bickerings of small Parties of Horse, betwixt the two entrenched Armies, the
whole Summer was shuffled away; And Winter approaching, the Prince seeing
little good to be done there, drew his Army to Rosendale, and Sprang, Villages
adjacent, where they attended Opportunities of doing the Enemy mischief. But
the Glory of Prince Maurice began to decay, the loss of this Town (which
MAURITS. Prins van Oranje.
he now gave as gone) came so near his Heart, that he went sick from the Army
to the Hague, and never returned to it again,

While these things were in Motion, Truth that comes often with a leaden-foot,
Cruelty at Amboina.
brought News out of the East Indies, that the year 1622. gave Birth to a
Mischief of so horrid a countenance (for a private one) that no Time or Age
could Parallel. The Dutch (while the English, their great Supporters, were
fighting for them at their own doors) grasping at all the Treasures, and Spices
of the Eastern World, had not only wormed out the Spaniards, and Portugals,
from many Islands, and Colonies there, but (unbounded with Covetousnes and
Ambition) strove to hinder their Neighbors, and best friends the English, from
that free Commerce with the Natives they ever enjoyed, so that many Bickerings
happened among them; till the Controversy was taken up by public Treaty, and
Stipulation, agreed on betwixt Our King, and the States of the Netherlands, in
the year one thousand six hundred and nineteen. And according to this
agreement, the English, being as they thought secure, planted their Factories
among them, where, after they had reaped the fruit of their great danger, and
hazard, for some two years with much grumbling, and repining, the Dutch began
to practice their utter Extirpation: Not by a Massacre, for that had been a
merciful Mischief, but by torture (to make their Cruelty Justice) in so horrid
and savage a manner, as if they had sucked their Rage from Indian Tigers.

Amboina was the bloody Stage where they acted this black Tragedy; The English
accused of Treason.
and Fire, and Water, were their Engines; which are ever cruel Masters when they
get Power. For pretending the chief Agent Captain Gabriel Towerson, and the
rest of the English Factory, had an intention by the assistance of some few
poor Iaponeses, to possess themselves of the Castle, and expel the Dutch out of
the Island, they seized upon them, and set their bloody Engines a work, having
no other Accusers but them. The racks extending their Sinews, drew them out at
length, and the waters which they subtly forced into their Mouths, by their
own respiration, and breathing, swelled all their Bodies to a huge Proportion,
making their very eyes ready to bolt out of their Heads; and such whose sturdy
innocence would not be compelled to accuse themselves, they burned the soles of
their feet with candles, till the moisture which dropped from them extinguished
the flame, and with those burning instruments made such holes in their sides,
that they might see their entrails, yet would not see their innocence. So
exquisite were they in their Devilish Cruelty, as will be ghastly to express,
what was it then to suffer! Thus having tired the poor Men with Tortures, and
they being willing to the quickly, confessed whatsoever their cruel Tormentors
would have them say. The Dutch having in this furnace wrought them to accuse
themselves, with their pestilent formality, got their Confessions under their
hands, and so concluded their Barbarism, with cutting off some of their heads.

The improbability of the Attempt by the English.
There were not twenty Englishmen, nor above thirty Iaponeses in the whole
Island, with whom they were said to machinate this Conspiracy, and the Castle
had in it two hundred Dutch Soldiers, and eight Ships riding before it well
manned, whereof two of them were above twelve hundred tuns a piece; Besides,
the Dutch had two other Castles in the same Island; and what Probability could
there be (if the Plot were as plain as their Malicious tongues could make it)
that so weak a force should attempt upon so many, having Men enough in the
Ships and Castles, to have devoured the Attempters? And if they had effected
their work, what would the end have been, but ruin to their Estates, and
everlasting Infamy to their Memories? knowing the Dutch were by the last
agreements to have that Castle, 1619
confirmed by the King, who hated Treason in any Man, with his very Soul.
Whereas the Men were of well-known, upright conversation, loathing such
baseness, and every man of them with Christian impressions, sealed the last
Gasp of his life with a Protestation of his Innocence.

Ten of the English lost their lives, whereof Captain Towerson was one; the
rest with racked, burnt, and Macerated Bodies were sent out of the Island to
other English Plantations, and so the whole Factory was destroyed: The Dutch
seizing into their hands greedily (which they only gaped after) the whole
Trade, which they have eversince enjoyed. And to put a fairer Gloss upon this
mad mischief, nine Iaponeses, and one Portugal, that they would needs have to
be Complotters with the English, were racked (poor men) to the same Confession,
and then executed; there being more Horror in the examination of the fault,
than in the Punishment of it.

This Cruelty had made an incurable wound betwixt the two Nations (the noise of
it giving Animosity enough) but that it was new skinned over, the bloody Garment
taken off by Dutch Apologies, and presented at the Court with a face of
Justice. For nothing must come thither but in such attire, as the great Ones
about the King will please to put upon it; who might be wrought to any temper
by that Forge that could frame such flagitious Actions: for they that had
Babarism enough to perpetrate the one, had Baseness enough to practice the
other. But leaving their Consciences besmeared with this Gore, which they
cannot wipe off, but may stick to them yet, Proceed to the Story.

All this while count Mansfeldt wanted employment, and having prepared his way
both in France and England, for gathering an Army, he shipped himself in Zealand,
in the Speedwel (a ship of Our King's, commanded by Sir John Chidley) that was
sent expressly for his transport, which in going out, run upon the Sands, and
was with the violence of foul weather, split in pieces: Mansfeldt, and some of
his followers, with difficulty escaping in her long Boat, Mansfeldt goes into
England.
got aboard a Pink that brought him into England; the Captain and the rest of
the company attending the Ships fate, were swallowed up in the Sea.

While Mansfeldt remained in England, after some few nights he was lodged at
Saint James's the Prince's house, served and attended in great State, by some
of the King's Officers, and feasted by diverse of the Nobility with much
magnificence; In which time a Press went through the Kingdom, for raising
twelve thousand foot, which with some Cavalry that Mansfeldt expected in
Germany, and France, would make up the Body of a considerable Army. Mansfeldt's
design was to go into Germany, through France, and he had fair Promises from
thence, not only of admission to pass through the Country, but assistance from
it. These 12000 were digested into Six Regiments. The Colonels were the Earl
of Lincoln, Forces raised for him.
The Lord Doncaster eldest Son to the Earl of Carlisle, The Lord Cromwell, Sir
Charles Rich, Sir John Burrows late Governor of Frankendale, and Colonel Gray
a Scotchman, that had been an old German Commander, one that affected Buff in
the time of Peace, and wore it in the face of the Court; which the King seeing
him in, and a case of Pistols at his girdle (which he never well liked of) he
told him merrily, He was now so fortified, that if he were but well victualled,
he would be impregnable. Two Troops of Horse were also raised for this service,
the Earl of Lincoln had the command of the one, and one Gunter, an ordinary
Horse-Rider, was thought the fittest man to command the other; as if none could
command Horse, but such as could make them curvet in a Riding-House. And the
Ignorance of these times shows, that unpractical Reason cannot put forth itself
to the height, being bound up for want of Exercise; for we set a Valuation and
esteem upon German and French Horse, when (like them) we knew not our own
strength, for there are not in the World a more gallant Cavalry, both for the
Activity of the Riders, and Ability of the Horses, than may be formed in
England, as experience has lately demonstrated.

These being already in Kent for Transport about the beginning of February, The
design ruined.
and Shipping provided, the French began to falter in their Promises,
(notwithstanding Our intimate Correspondence by the Treaty of Marriage agreed
on) pleading many inconveniences, in the passing of an Army through the
Country, and the more, because Our Men were so unruly in Kent (where some of
them were tried by Marshal-Law) what would they be then in a strange Country?
These being but demurs, not denials, the whole Army is Shipped, and put over to
Callais, to wait the French leisure; but the charge of Shipping (being above a
hundred Sail that attended that service) required more speed, than their faint
and sickly Promises did expedite: for the French dallying with them, and
delaying them, happily upon Design (the Queen of France being then more
affected to the Spanish, and a less enemy to her blood and kindred, than they
have found her since) after a long stay, Mansfeldt was forced to leave the
hopes of his French Horse, and sail with his Army into Zealand. There the
Soldiers lay at the Ramkins a long time in their Ships, not suffered to land:
for the States not dreaming of such a Body of men, could not determine suddenly
what to do with them; besides, the Inland waters being frozen, Provisions would
grow short for their own Army, much more for them. After some stay in Zealand,
they sailed up to Guertenberg in Brabant, which Town being not well provided
with Victuals, they were not suffered to land, but continuing on Shipboard, the
Ships stuffed and pestred with men, wanting Meat, and all manner of
Necessaries, such a Stench and Pestilence grew among them, that they were
thrown into the Sea by multitudes, so that many hundreds (if I may not say
thousands) beaten upon Shores, had their bowels eaten out with Dogs and Swine,
to the Horror of the Beholders. Those bodies that drive up near those Towns
where the English were, had great pits made for them, wherein (being thrown by
heaps) they were covered with earth, but upon those shores where they were
neglected, (as they were in many parts of Holland) a great Contagion followed.
And of Mansfeldt's twelve thousand men, scarce the moity landed.

This Winter Quarter at Rosendale, was also fatal to the Earl of Southampton,
The death of the Earl of Southampton and his son.
and the Lord Wriothsley his Son. Being both sick there together, of burning
Fevers, the violence of which distemper wrought most vigorously upon the heat
of youth, overcoming the Son first, and the drooping Father having overcome the
fever, departed from Rosendale with an intention to bring his Son's body into
England, but at Berghen ap Zome he dyed of a Lethargy in the view and presence
of the Relator, and were both in one small bark brought to Southampton.

And now Our King found by dear experience, that the favors he had done the
King of Spain (in protecting his Subjects and Seas from being infested and
ruined by Turkish Pirates, furnishing his Arsenals, and giving way to the Lord
Vaux, and Sir PRAENOBIL: Dus. HENRIC VRIOTHESLEY, COMI SOUTHAMPTON: BAR
TITCHFEILDIAE, ETC.
Right Honorable and most noble HENRY Wriothsley Earl of Southampton Baron of
Titchfeild, Knight of the most nob: Ord: of ye Garter.

panoramic view Edward Parham, to transport so many English into Flanders)
tended much to his prejudice. For his Subjects in a strange Country by this
means fought one against another, which was a kind of an Un-civil War; nor was
it their voluntary Intention, for the English that were shipped for Flanders,
were tempted over by Popish Allurements, not knowing but that they were to go
into Holland, which made them run away as they got opportunity. But Our King
did not live to see how his Forces in the Low Countries dwindled to nothing.
And the Result of all is, that though he were a wise Prince, yet Blessings did
neither attend his Counsels nor Actions: So that it is not humane Wisdom, but
Divine Directions, that orders and disposes all things to a good end.

The Marquess Hamilton died before Our King; The death of the Marquess Hamilton.
suspected to be poisoned; the Symptoms being very presumptuous, his head and
body swelling to an excessive greatness, the body being all over full of great
blisters, with variety of Colors; the hair of his Head, Eyebrows, and Beard,
came off being touched, and brought the Skin with them; and there was a great
Clamor of it about the Court, so that Doctors were sent to view the Body, but
the matter was hudled up, and little spoken of it, only Doctor Eglisham a
Scotch-man, was something bitter against the Duke, as if he had been the Author
of it. The Marquesses Son had a little before married the Earl of Denbigh's
Daughter, who was the Duke of Buckingham's Niece, and yet this Tie could not
oblige a friendship betwixt them, because thee Marquess was averse to the
Marriage. This Distance, and other Discontents, occasioned some tumorous
Discourses, which reflected much upon the Duke, but they never broke out in
this King's time, being bound up close (as it was thought) more by the Duke's
Power than his Innocence.

And not long after him, whether our King's care for his Grandchildren, or the
hazard and danger of his own Person at home (being ever full of fears) or his
engagement in a War abroad, The death of the King.
(being contrary to his very Nature) or whether his full feeding and continual
use of sweet Wines, (which he abundantly affected) set the gross Humors a work,
or what other Accident caused his Distemper is uncertain; but he fell sick of a
Tertian Ague, which is not dangerous in the Spring (if we believe the Proverb)
and had some few fits of it. After which he fell into a Fever, which was too
violent for him. A little before his Death, he called for the Prince his Son,
who rising out of his bed, something before day, and presenting himself before
him, the King rowsed up his Spirits, and raised himself up as if he meant to
speak to him, but Nature being exhausted he had not Strength to express his
Intentions, but soon after expired, Being upon Sunday morning, the 27. of March
1625. at Theobalds, in the nine and fiftieth year of his Age, and the two and
twentieth year complete of his Reign. And was buried at Westminster, An.
Christi. 1625.
with great Solemnity the 7. of May following.

Not long after our King's Death (as if the Time, and Season, as well as the
Disease, The Death of Maurice Prince of Orange 23. Apr. 1625.
were Epidemical to Princes) old Maurice the Prince of Orange died; And his
Brother Prince Henry (being made General of the States Army) put his Fortune
into an unhappy Balance, which lost much of the Weight. For either valuing his
Soldiers lives less than his Brother, or the loss of so brave a Town as Breda
more, or thinking to spring up with more Glory ( Phoenix-like) from the ashes
of his Brothers funerals (being recruited with the Relics of Mansfeldt's Army)
he set upon one of Spinola's strong Works, at Terheiden, either to relieve the
Town, or beat the Enemy out of his Trenches; but he failed in both, and lost
many gallant Men (especially English) in the Enterprise. The Earl of Oxford
having the leading of the Van (being a man Corpulent, and heavy) got such a
sweltring heat in the service, that though he came off without hurt from the
enemy, The death of the Earl of Oxford.
yet he brought Death along with him; for he fell sick presently after, went to
the Hague and there dyed. The other two gallant Colonels, Essex, and
Willoughby, survived to command two English Armies in a Civil-War; Essex being
General for the Paliament, and Willoughby for the King, in Kinton-field in
Warwickshire; where Essex remained Victor, the King being there in Person, and
leaving him the Honor of the Field, his General Willoughby, then Earl of
Lindsey, being slain in the Battle. But there will be a long Tract of Time, and
Discourse, before these Armies encounter, being the first Cloud of that fiery
exhalation, which broke out in the next King's Reign, and could not be quenched
without the blood of many thousands of the Nation.

The different Carriage of two Princes of Orange.
But the different Carriage of these two Sons of Mars, the two Brothers,
Maurice, and Henry, is very observable; Which shall be left to the judgment of
the great Masters in the Art of War, whether Error were the greater (so apt is
the under World to spy out great Men's Errors Maurice, that had a Powerful Army
of the States, and was reinforced with six thousand English, gallant, and
resolute men, that would have hugged a daring Enterprise, yet durst not
encounter Spinola, when he lay open to his assault, but let him work himself
into his Fastness, and rather bear the burden in his own breast than disturb
him. Or Henry, when Spinola's Works were in full strength, confirmed by time
and settled Order, the opposite to the confused end he aimed at, to throw so
brave part of his Army upon eminent destruction? Or is there not a time and
Period prefixed to earthly things, and the all-disposing Power to that End, does
either infatuate or establish Counsels? This Town depiction of sickbed and old
Prince Maurice, as may be said, were lost together.

But Our King that was very much impatient in his Health, was patient in his
Sickness, and Death. Whether he had receibed any thing that extorted his Aguish
Fits into a Fever, which might the sooner stupifie the Spirits, The King
patient in sickness.
and hasten his end, cannot be asserted; but the Countess of Buckingham (who
trafficked much with Mountebanks, and whose Fame had no great savor) had been
tampering with him, in the absence of the Docto^s, and had given him a Medicine
to drink, and laid a Plaster to his side, which the King much complained of,
and they did rather exasperate his Distemper than allay it: and these things
were admitted by the insinuating persuasions of the Duke her Son, who told the
King they were appoved Medicines, and would do him much good. And though the
Duke after strove to purge himself for this Application, as having received
both Medicine and Plaster, from Doctor Remington, at Dunmow in Essex, who had
often cured Agues, and such Distempers with the same; yet they were Arguments
of a complicated kind, not easy to unfold; considering that whatsoever he
received from the Doctor in the Country he might apply to the King what he
pleased in the Court; besides the Act it self (though it had been the best
Medicine in the World) was a Daring not justisiable; and some of the King's
Physicians muttered against it, others made a great noise, and were forced to
fly for it; and though the still voice was quickly silenced by the Duke's
power, yet the Clamorous made so deep impressions that his Innocence could
never wear them out. And one of Buckingham's great provocations was thought to
be his fear, that the King being how weary of his too much greatness, and
power, would set up Bristol his deadly enemy against him, to pull him down. And
this Medicine was one of those 13 Articles that after were laid to his Charge
in Parliament, who may be misinformed, but seldom accuse any upon false Rumor,
or bare Suggestion; and therefore it will be a hard task for any man to excuse
the King his Successor, for dissolving that Parliament, to preserve one thar
was accused by them for poisoning his Father.

For Doctor Lamb, Lamb a Witch.
a man of an infamous conversation (having been arraigned for a Witch, and
found guilty of it at Worcester; and arraigned for a Rape, and found guilty of
it at the Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminster, yet escaped the stroke of Justice for
both, by his favor in Court) was much employed by the Mother; and the Son,
which generally the people took notice of, and were so incensed against Lamb,
that finding him in the Streets in London in the year 1628. they ro^e against
him, and with stones and slaves knocked out his Brains, as may be more
particularly ^elated in its due time.

And besides Lamb, Butler a Mountebank.
there was one Butler an Irishman (which vaunted himself to be of the house of
Ormond) who was a kind of Montebank, which the Duke and his Mother much
consided in. This Butler was first an Apprentice to a Cutler in London, and
before his time expired quitted his Master, having a running head, and went to
the Barmudoes, where he lived some time, as a Servant in the Island, and
walking by the Seaside with another of his Companions, they found a great Mass
of Ambergreece, that the Seas bounty had cast up to them, which they willingly
concealed, meaning to make their best Markets of it. Butler being a subtle
Snap, wrought so with his Companion, with promises of a share, that he got the
possession of it, and in the next Dutch ship that arrived at the Barmudoes, he
shipped himself and his Commodities for Amsterdam, where having sold his Bargain
at a good Rate, and made his credit with his fellow Venturer cheap enough,
engrossing all to himself, he came into England, lived in a gallant, and noble
Equipage, kept a great and free Table, at his lodgings in the Strand, which
were furnished suitable to his Mind, and had his Coach with six Horses, and
many footmen attending on him, with as much State, and Grandeur, as if his
Greatness had been real: But though his means lasted not to support this long,
yet it brought him into great acquaintance, and being Pragmatical in tongue,
and having an active pate, he fell to some Distillations, and other odd
extracting practices, which kept him a float, and some men thought he had
gotten the (long-dreamed-after) Philosopher's Stone; but the best Recipe which
he had, to maintain his Greatness after his Amber money fumed and vapoured
away, was suspected to come from his friends at White Hall; And the Story of
his Death (if it be true) is one great Evidence of some secret Machination,
betwixt the Duke and him, that the Duke was willing to be rid of him, For
Mischief, being an ingrosser, is Unsecure, and Unsatisfyed, When their Wares
are to be vented in many Shops. Therefore he was recommended upon some
plausible occasion by the Duke's means (as same delivered it) to some Jesuits
beyond the Seas; where he was entertained with a great deal of specious
Ceremony, and Respect, in one of their Colleges, or Cloisters; and at Night
they attending him to his Chamber with much Civility, the Chamber being hanged
with Tapestry, and Tapers burning in stretcht-out Arms upon the Walls, and when
they gave him the Goodnight, they told him they would send one should direct
him to his lodging, and they were no sooner out of this Room of Death, But the
floar that hung upon great hinges on one side, was let fall by Artificial
Engines, and the poor Vermin Butler, dropped into a Precipice, where he was never
more heard of. That there are such secret Inquisition-Conveyances, of a horrid
Nature, is obvious, and such close contrivances may fly up and down upon the
Wings of Rumor, but it is impossible to find out the bottom of such black
Pitfals, but with as much danger as those that find the bitter effects of them.
And this was reported to be the end of Butler.

But to conclude with Our King, The Description of King James.
whom this do concern. He was born a King, and from that height, the less
fitted to look into inferior things; yet few escaped his Knowledge, being, as
it were a Magazine to retain them. His Stature was of the Middle Size; rather
tall than low, well set and somewhat plump, of a ruddy Complexion, his hair of
a light brown, in his full perfection, had at last a Tincture of white. If he
had any predominant Humor to balance his Choler, it was sanguine, which made
his Mirth Witty. His Beard was scattering on his Chin, and very thin; and
though his Clothes were seldom fashioned to the Vulgar garb, yet in the whole
man he was not uncomely. He was a King in understanding, and was content to
have his Subjects ignorant in many things. As in curing the King's Evil, which
he knew a Device, to aggrandize the Virtue of Kings, when Miracles were in
fashion; but he let the World believe it, though he smiled at it, in his own
Reason, finding the strength of the Imagination a more powerful Agent in the
Cure, than the Plasters his Chirurgions prescribed for the Sore. It was a hard
Question, whether his Wisdom, and knowledge, exceeded his Choler, and Fear;
certainly the last couple drew him with most violence, because they were not
acquisititious, but Natural; If he had not had that Allay, his high touring,
and mastering Reason, had been of a Rare, and sublimed Excellency; but these
earthy Dregs kept it down, making his Passions extend him as far as Profaneness,
that I may not say Blasphemy, and Policy superintendent of all his Actions;
which will not last long (like the violence of that Humor) for it often makes
those that know well, to do ill, and not be able to prevent it.

He had pure Notions in Conception, but could bring few of them into Action,
though they tended to his own Preservation: For this was one of his Apothegms,
which he made no timely use of. Let that Prince, that would beware of
Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such, whom his extraordinary favors have
advanced, than of those whom his displeasure has discontented. These want
means to execute their Pleasures, but they have means at pleasure to execute
their desires, Ambition to rule is more vehement than Malice to revenge. Though
the last part of this Aphorism, he was thought to practice too soon, where
there was no cause for prevention, and neglect too late, when time was full
ripe to produce the effect.

Some Paralleled him to Tiberius for Dissimulation, yet Peace was maintained by
him as in the Time of Augustus; And Peace begot got Plenty, and Plenty begot
Ease and Wantonness, and Ease and Wantonness begot Poetry, and Poetry swelled
to that bulk in his time, that it begot strange Monstrous Satyrs, against the
King's own person, that haunted both Court, and Country, which expressed, would
be too bitter to leave a sweet perfume behind him. And though bitter
ingredients are good to imbalm and preserve dead Bodies, yet these were such as
might endanger to kill a living name, If Malice be not brought in with an
Antidote. And the tongues of those times more fluent than my Pen, made every
little miscarriage (being not able to discover their true Operations, like
small seeds hid in earthy Darkness) grow up, and spread into such exuberant
branches, that evil Report did often perch upon them. So dangerous it is for
Princes, by a Remiss Comportment, to give growth to the least Error; for it
often proves as fruitful as Malice can make it.

But alas good King! here was an end of his earthly Empire, and little did he
imagine that the last Period to great Britain's Monarchy should not much exceed
the time of his own Reign, and in the true extent come short of it.

Soli Deo Gloria.
THE CONCLUSION To the discreet Reader.
HAving now finished (I will not say perfected) my little Work of this great
King, without prejudice to his Person, or Envy to his Dignity, not having (for
filthy lucre sake) any Man in Admiration, and willing to be less than the least
in the Times flatuous opinion: I hope to free my self from that Rigid,
censorious Humor, that foams in the mouths of such whom the Venom of Passion
has corrupted, that I may clear the way the better over the Precipices, and
prodigious Passages, that will be found in the next King's reign, which to
attempt is a Daring inexpressible. For History seldom follows Truth so near the
Heels, where a various, and mixed multitude, may either pretend to, or really
know more, than one man can well Relate; and where affection or dislike, to
particular men, would willingly cover, or sordidly lay open, those Blemishes,
which may be smear, if not quite deface the living Character yet imprinted in
their memories. For though they that write near the Times, are said to write
partially, either for Fear, or Friendship; yet they that write Truth, must
either do it from private Knowledge or public Report; and who can know better
than they that live near the Times? according to the French Proverb; Ce qu'on
voit, est plus certain, que ce qu'on oit; and as Horat. says, Oculis potius
credendum quam auribus. The waters are the purest at the Fountain; they mingle,
and gather dross, by running through diverse troubled Channels. And as everything
in a clear Spring will be perspicuous, so the soil of Falsehood or Mistake (if
any be cast into it) will be the more visible. But some may retort the
Argument, and say, In troubled fountains the Waters are not so pure as they
will be when they are further from the Spring, that time may settle them, and
then men will take up that which runs clearest. But nimium altercando Veritas
amittitur, Truth may be lost in a crowd. And as all things are not to be
spoken, so some things are not to be concealed; for it derogates from the glory
of God to have his Justice obscured, his remarkable Dispensations smothered, as
if We were angry with what the Divne Power has done, who can debase the
Spirits of Princes, and is mighty among the Kings of the earth. And though the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, yet (as the Prophet says) he can make them
contemptible and base before all the people. And therefore why should we grudge
and repine at God's Actions? for his thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor his
ways as our ways. His Judgments should teach us Wisdom, and his glorious
proceedings should learn us Righteousness, that his. Anger may be turned away
from us. And let them that stand take heed lest they fall. For though God
rewarded Jehu with the Kingdom, for the good service he did him, yet because he
walked not with him, God visited the house of Jehu, and laid the blood of
Jezreel, which he was commanded to shed, upon the head of his Posterity. But
all the Arguments of Men and Angels, will neither penetrate, nor make
impression, in some ill-composed Tempers, till they are softened with the fire
of Love; and that holy Flame is best kindled with Patience, by willingly
submitting to the al-disposing Providence that orders every thing. Before whose
Altar (waiting for the Season of Grace) I will ever bring the best fruits of my
Labors. But if that which I intend should not come to Perfection (the day of
man's life being but as a Dawning, and his time as a Span) I will never be
displeased with my Master (in long and dangerous Labors) for calling me away
to rest, before my work is done.

FINIS.
The Table. An Index exactly pointing to the most material Passages in this
HISTORY.
A
CRuelty at Amboyna 281 Queen Ann an Enemy to Somerset, 78, 80. Her Death, 129.
and Character, ibid.
Anhalt, the Prince thereof intimate with the Count Palatine, persuades him to
accept of the Crown of Bohemia, 132. Is made General of the Bohemian Forces,
135. His good Success at first in routing of Bucquoy's Army, 140. Is overthrown
afterward by the Duke of Bavaria, 141. Fli^s, so does Helloc, his Lieutenant
General, ibid. and afterward submits to the Emperor, 142
Ansbach, the Marquess thereof Commander in Chief of the Forces raised by the
Protestant Princes of Germany in defense of the Palatinate, 135. for slowes a
fair advantage over Spinola, 138. His Answer to the Earl of Essex, ib. with Sir
Horatio Vere's Reply thereunto, 139
Lady Arabella dies 90 Archbishop Whitgift's Saying concerning King James at
Hampton Court Conference, 8. his Character, Dies when, ibid.
Archbishop Bancroft succeeds Whitgift in the Sea of Canterbury, 8. Dies, his
Character 53
Archbishop Abbot accidentally kills a K^eper, 198. his Letter to the King
against a Toleration in Religion, 236. yet sets his hand as a Witness to the
Articles of Marriage with the Infanta 237
Arch-b^shop of Spalato comes into England, his Preferment here, relapses to
the Roman Church, dies at Rome, His manner of Burial, 102 Arguments about the
Union of England and Scotland, 34. for and against a Toleration 237
Articles agreed on concerning the Marriage of the Infanta, 212. Preamble and
Postscript to the Articles, 238. Private Article sworn to by the King 240
Arundel and Lord Spencer quarrel, 163. Arundel thereupon committed to the
Tower, his Submission, ibid.
August the fifth made Holy Day 12.
B
Bacon's Speech in Star Chamber, against Hollis, Wentworth, and Lumsden, 84 He
is made Lord Chancellor, 97. is questioned, 158. His humble Submission and
Supplication, 159. His Censure, 160. The Misery he was brought to, his
Description and his Character, ibid.
Bancroft succeeds Whitgift in the Archbishopric of Canterbury, 8. dies,
Character 53
Barnevelt opposes the Prince of Orange, 125. Is seized on together with his
Accomplices, 127. his Sentence and Death, ib. His employments 128
Baronets, a new order made 76 Battle of Fleury 217 Benevolence required, but
opposed, 78 Bishops in Scotland to enjoy their temporal Estates 8 Blackfriars,
the downful there 241 Blazing-Star 128 Bounty of King James 76 Boy of Bilson,
his Impostures, discovery very, and confession, 107, etc. Bristol, forbid to
deliver the Procuration for Espousals, 254. Has Instructions to demand the
Palatinate and Electoral dignity, 155. without the restitution of which the
Treaty for the Match should proceed no further, 256. Bristol sent to the Tower,
but gains his liberty by submission 272
Brunswick loses his Arm, 217. raises a gallant Army, 142. and is defeated 145
Buckingham made Marquess, Master o the Horse, and High Admiral, 147. Rules
all, ibid. His Kindred advanced, ib. A lover of Ladies, 149. Marries the Earl
of Rutland's Daughter, ib. overruled by his Mother, ibid. Gondemar writes
merrily concerning her into Spain, ib. Buckingham's Medicine to cure the King's
Melancholy, 218. made Duke, 229. He and Olivarez quarrel, 249. Goes to the
Fleet sent from England to attend the Prince home, 250. His Relation to the
Parliament of the transactions in Spain, 263. He is highly commended by the
People, 264. accused of Treason by the Spanish Ambassador 272
New Buildings within two mile of the City of London forbid by Proclamation 48
Bergben ap Zome besieged, 216. The Siege raised 218 Breda besieged 28 Butler a
Mountebank, his story, 287
C
Car. a Favorite, and the occasion thereof, 54. made Viscount Rochester, and
soon after Knight of the Garter, 55. opposed by Prince Henry, ib. rules all
after the death of Prince Henry, and Salisbury, 65. Is assisted by Overbury,
66. with Northampton plots Overbury's death, and why, ib. created Earl of
Somerset, and married to the Divorced Countess of Essex, 72. both Feasted at
Merchant-Tailors Hall, ib. Vid. Somerset
Cecil holds correspondence with the King of Scotland, 2. His put-off to the
Queen, his secret conveyances being like to be discovered, ib. proclaims the
late Queens Will, ibid. made Earl of Salisbury, 7. vid. Salisbury.
Ceremony, Sermon against them, 11 Chelsey College 53 Commissioners for an
Union betwixt England and Scotland 27 High Commission, a Grievance, 46 House of
Commons, their Declaration, 164. Their Remonstrance, 167. House of Commons
discontent, 188 their Protestation, ibid.
Conference at Hampton Court, 7. where the King puts an end to the business 8
Conwey and Weston sent Ambassadors into Bohemia, 133. Their Characters, ib.
Their Return, 142
Cook Lord Chief Justice blamed, 89, 90. a breach betwixt him and the Lord
Chancellor, why, 74. brought on his Knees at the Council Table, 95. his
Censure, 96. his faults, ib. his Character, 97. Is again in disgrace, 191

D
Denmark's King comes into England, his Entertainment, 33. His second coming 76
Diet at Ratisbone, where an agitation concerning the Electoral Dignity, 220.
The result thereof 224
Digby sent Leidger Ambassador into Spain to Treat of a Marriage between the
Prince of Wales and the Infanta of Spain, 143. made Baron of Sherborn, 144.
Sent to the Emperor for a punctual answer concerning the Palatinate, 154. His
Return, and Relation to the Parliament, 165, 166. Sent Extraordinary Ambassador
into Spain, 192. where slighted and coursly entertained, ibid. Made Earl of
Bristol, 210. vid. Bristol.
Disputation at Sir Humphrey Linds house 240 Doncaster sent Extraordinary
Ambassador into Germany, 132. his expensive Ambassy, 154. Feasted by the Prince
of Orange, 154. sent again into France, 171. his short Character, ib.
Dorset Lord Treasurer dies suddenly, 43 Duel between Sir Halton Cheek and Sir
Thomas Dutton, 50. Lord Bruise and Sir Edward Sackvil, 60. Sir James Stuart, Sir
George Wharton, 61. Sir Thomas Compton and Bird, 147
Duncome, a sad story of him 140
E
Queen Elizabeth breaks into passion, mention being made of her Successor, 2.
yet bequeaths one in her last Will, as a Legacy to this Nation, 1
The Lady Elizabeth married, 64. presented with a chain of Pearl by the Mayor
and Aldermen of London, ib.
Ellowis made Lieutenant of the Tower 67. consenting to the poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury, 70. Executed on Tower Hill, 82
Earl of Essex his Character 2 Young Earl of Essex restored to the right of
Blood and Inheritance, 6. marries the Lady Frances Howard, 55. Travels into
France and Germany, 56. demands his Wife, is suspected to be poisoned, ib.
Attended with a number of Gallant Gentlemen accompanies Sir Horatio Vere into
the Palatinate, 136. His Character 162
March of the English into the Palatinate, 136. Spinola endeavors to intercept
them, 137. they join with the Princes of the Union, ibid. and prepare for a
Charge 138
Countess of Essex in love with the Viscount Rochester, 56. She is slighted by
Prince Henry, ibid. consults with Mr. Turner and Foreman, 57. whom she writes
to, 58. seeks by the aid of Northampton to be divorced from the Earl of Essex,
67. searched by a Jury of Matrons and found a Virgin, 68. divorced, 69. married
to Rochester now made Earl of Somerset, 72. and both Feasted at
Merchant-Tailers Hall, ib. vid. Somerset.

F
Fairfax racked and tormented to death in France, the occasion, 172 Lady Finch
Viscountess of Maidstone, 279 France in combustion, 102. their troubles now,
and those thirty three years ago running all in one parallel 103

G
Gage sent to Rome 195 Garnet Provincial of the Jesuits in England, arraigned
and executed, 33 Gib a Scotchman; a passage 'twixt him and King James 219 Gold
raised 77 Gondemar by Letters into Spain makes known Sir Walter Raleigh's
design, 113. incenses our King against him, 115. lulls the King asleep with his
windy promises, 144. His power, 145. and several effects thereof, ib. prevails
with both Sexes, 146. a Passage 'twixt him and the Lady Jacob, ib. He writes
merrily into Spain concerning the Countess of Buckingham 149
Germany, stirs there, and the causes thereof 131
H
Hamilton dies 285 Harman's Story 279 Lord Hays sent into France, 92. rides in
state to Court. 93. made Viscount Doncaster, and married to the Lady Lucy,
younger Daughter to Henry Earl of Northumberland, 130. sent into Germany to
mediate a reconciliation betwixt the Emperor and the Bohemians, 132. Vid.
Doncaster.
Henry 4th of France stabbed by Raviliac 50 Prince Henry installed Knight of the
Garter, 6. created Prince of Wales 52 Hicks and Fairfax their story 172 August
the fifth made Holy Day 12 November the fifth made Holy Day 33 Thomas and Henry
Lord Howards made Earls of Suffolk and Northampton, their characters 3
I
James the sixth of Scotland proclaimed King of England, 1, 2. Thirty six years
of age when he comes to the Crown, 1. Posts are sent in have (after the death
of Queen Elizabeth) into Scotland, 2. coming through the North toward London,
great was the applause and concourse of people, which he politickly inhabites,
3. at Theo^alds he is met by diverse of the Nobility, ib. went at his first
entrance, a smooth way betwixt the Bishops and Non-conformists, not leaving out
the Papists, whom he seems to close withal, ib. conspired against by Cobham,
Gray, Rawleigh, etc. 4. A Censure on the Conspiracy, ib. Crowned at
Westminster, 5. Gives way to a Conference a: Hampton Court, 7. and determines
the matters in controversy, 8. Rides with the Queen and Prince thorough the
City, 12. His first Speech he made to the Parliament Anno 1603. 13. Proclaimed
King of Great Britain, 25. Rumor of his Death, how taken, 32. His Speech to the
Parliament concerning an Union of Scotland and England, 38. His wants laid open
to the House of Parliament 44. his Speech to both Houses an. 1609. 46. His
bounty, 76. comes to the Star Chamber, 99. his Speech there, 100. Goes into
Scotland, 104. Several Messages of his to the States concerning Vorstius, 119.
whose Books he caused to be burnt, 120. writes against him, 124. Prohibits his
Subjects to send their Children to Leyden, 125. dislikes the Palatin's
acceptance of the Crown of Bohemia, 133. yet at last sends a Gallant Regiment
to join with the United Princes in Germany, 135. and assents to the raising of
two Regiments more, 136. Intends to match the Prince of Wales with the Infanta
of Spain, 143. Encouraged therein by Gondemar and Digby, 144. Calls a
Parliament An. 1620. 150. His Speech to both Houses, 153. to the Lords, 155. is
not pleased with the House of Commons Remonstrance, 171. writes to the Speaker
of the House of Commons, 173. The Parliament Petition him, 174. His Answer
thereunto, 178. The Nobility Petition him, 187. He is angry thereat, ib. His
expression to Essex, 188. dissolves the Parliament, 190. Punishes some, and
prefers others that were active in the House, 191. is dishonored abroad, 192.
persues the Match with Spain, ibid. Sends Digby thither as Extraordinary
Ambassador, ib. and Gage to Rome, 195. Commands Lincoln to write to the Judges,
that all Recusants be released out of Prison, 196. His Letter to the
Archbishop, with directions concerning Preachers, 199. Active in the Treaty of
Marriage with Spain, 202. Disclaims any Treaty with the Pope, 203. his Letter
to Digby, 204. his second Letter to Digby, 207. A third Letter to Digby, 210.
writes to Buckingham to bring home the Prince speedily, or to come away and
leave him there, 249 Demands restitution of the Palatinate, or else the Treaty
of marriage to proceed no further, 256. Summons a Parliament An. 1623. 257. His
Speech to the Parliament, 259. writes to Secretary Conwey, 265. A second
Speech, 266. his Answer to the Parliaments Petition against Recusants, 274. His
Death, 285. more of him, 287. his description 289
Jesuits commanded to avoid the Realm 51 Jesuits swarm, 151. Iesuitrices, 152.
K
King of France stabbed by Raviliac, 50 Knighted many. 5 Prince Henry installed
Knight of the Garter 6
L
Lamb a Witch 287 Laud gets into Favor 201 Lieutenant of the Tower consenting
to the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, 70. Executed 82
Lincoln made Keeper of the Great Seal, 196. his Letter to the Judges for
setting Recusants at liberty, ib. His preferment, Character, and part of his
story, ib. his short Harangue, 262

M
Lord Mayor his Piety 106 Mansfieldt with an Army opposes the Emperor, 135.
Vexes him after Anhalt's defeat for the space of 2 years, 143. and constrains
him and the Duke of Bavaria to purchase their peace at a dear rate, ib. comes
into Brabant, 216. his Soldiers mutiny by the way, 217. comes into England,
283. Forces raised for him, ib. his design ruined, ib.
Masks in great este^m 53 King of Spain intends not to conclude the Match
betwixt the Prince of Wales, and the Infanta of Spain, 116 Match between the
Prince of Wales, and the Infanta of Spain treated of, 143. who of the Nobility
favorers thereof, and who not. 144
Match with Spain concluded in England, 238. as likewise in Spain, 247.
Marriage Preparations in Spain for it, 255. yet the Treaty dissolved.
Match with France thought of 257 A Treaty of Marriage with France 276 Michael
and Mompesson questioned, 155. their offense, ibid. Mompesson flies, Michael
censured 158
Monjoy created Earl of Devonshire, 6 Monson arraigned, but his Trial laid
aside 89 Lord Monteagle the Discoverer of the Powder Treason rewarded 32
Montague Lord Treasurer, 148. made Lord Treasurer, Viscount Mandevile and Earl
of Manchester, afterward Lord Privy Seal. 149

N
New England described, 75. when first planted, and by whom, ib. Noblemen
created 6, 7 Nobility Petition the King 187 Northampton made Lord Privy Seal,
43 He and Rochester plot Overburie's death, why, 66. assists the Countess of
Essex in suing out a Divorce, 67. engages the Lieutenant of the Tower in
poisoning Overbury, 70. reviles Overbury after his death, 73. touched at heart,
and dies 74
Northumberland with others committed to the Tower, 33. why, 130. his marriage
and Issue, ib. is released out of Prison by intercession of his Son-in-law
Viscount Doncaster, ib. hardly drawn to take a Release from his hand, ib. Rides
through London in a Coach drawn by Eight horses, ib.

O
Oath of Allegiance 51 Prince of Orange made Knight of the Garter, 64. Death of
Maurice Prince of Orange, 286. Different carriage of two Princes of Orange, ib.
Overbury a great assistant of Viscount Rochester, 66. opposes his marriage
with the Countess of Essex, ibid. Rochester and Northampton plot his death,
ibid. is betrayed by Rochester, how, 67. committed to the Tower, ibid. Mistress
Turner employed to poison him, 70. Weston and Franklin employed by her therein,
ib. the Lieutenant of the Tower like engaged therein, ibid. The poison set a
work, but the operation retarded, and by what means, 71. Overbury writes to
Somerset, 72. is betrayed by the Lieutenant of the Tower, 73. dies, and is
scandalized after death by Northampton, ibid.
Oxford gallantly accompanied, goes to the Palatinate, 136. his character, 161.
is committed to the Tower, 191. his death, 286.

P
Parliament declines the Union with Scotland 41 Parliament undertaken by
Somerset, 77. dissolved, ibid.
Parliament called An. 1620. 150. complies with the King 153
Parties in Parliament, 161. Parliament adjourned, 164. re-assembled, 165.
their Petition to the King, 174. dissolved by Proclamation, 190.
Parliament summoned An. 1623. 257. advises the King to break off the Trea^y
with Spain, 265. their Declaration, 269. Petition against Recusants, 272. a
Catalogue of them taken notice of by it 276
Prince Elector Palatine comes into England, 62. is made Knight of the Gart^r,
64. married to the Lady Elizabeth, ib. with whom he returns home, 65. is
Elected and Crowned King of Bohemia, 132. s^nds to our King to excuse the
suddenness of the acceptance of that Kingdom, ib. is proscribed, ib. is
overcome in his General the Prince of Anbalt, 141. Flies with his Queen, ib. is
censured, ib. loss of his Son, ib. His Character 142
March of the English into the Palatinate, 136. Restitution of the Palatinate
demanded by the Lord Digby 154
Piety of the Lord Mayor 106 Prince Henry installed Knight of the Garter, 6.
created Prince of Wales, 52. slights the Countess of Essex, 56 his death, 62.
and funeral 63
Prince of Spain his disaster 62 Prince Charles his Journey into Spain, 225.
His Attendants, ib. He and Buckingham disguise themselves and change their
names, 225. questioned by the Mayor of Dover, 225. pass through France, where
they have a view of the Princess Henrietta Mari^, 226. Arrive at Madrid, 227.
The Prince rides in State to Court, 228. His Royal Entertainment, 129 Many of
the English Nobility flock thither unto him, 229. The Spaniards strive to
pervert the Prince, 229. So does the Pope by his Letter, 231. The Prince's
Answer, 233. A Dispensation thereupon dispatched to Madrid, 235. Articles sworn
to by the Prince, the Match is concluded in Spain, 247. New delays sought out
by the Spaniards, 248. The Prince takes a resolution to return home, 249. but
takes a solemn Oath to solemnize the Marriage 251. After Gifts and Preseots on
both sides, leaves Madrid, and comes to the Esourial, ibid. The Description of
it, 252. The Prince is Feasted there, 253. The King and Prince's Complements at
parting, 253. The Prince in danger by a Tempest, 254
Proclamation against Jesuits, 51. for uniformity in Religion, 11. against New
Buildings, 48. Proclamation against talking, sets peoples tongues a work 190
Protestant Religion in danger. 171 Protestants in France providentially
relieved by one that hated their Religion. 247
Q
Queen of Scots translated to Westminster 71 Queen Ann opposes Somerset, why,
78. Her Death, her Character. 129

R
Rawleigh his Treason, 4. his West-Indian Voyage, 112. his Design discovered to
Gondemar, 113. The King by Gondemar incensed against him, 115. He is committed
to the Tower 116. beheaded, 117. His Character and description, ibid.
Recusants confined to their houses 51 Reformation in the Church fought after 7
Four Regiments sent into Holland, 280 Duke of Richmond dies suddenly, 257
Duchess of Richmond her legend, 258 Rochester rules all after the death of
Prince Henry, and Salisbury, 65. with Northampton plots Overburie's death 66

S
Earl of Salisbury made Lord Treasurer, 43. not pleased with Rochester's
greatness. 91. Obstructs Five thousand pound given him by the King ibid.
Lord Sanquir murders Turner a Fencer, 59. for which he is hanged, 60
Duke of Saxony executes the Imperial Ban 135 Satirical Sermon 152 Say and Seal
his Character 161 Sermon against Ceremonies 11 Somerset devises to get Money,
76. undertakes a Parliament, 80. opposed by the Queen, 78, 80. begins to
decline, 80. The King deserts him, ib. He and his Countess seized, 81. and
Arraigned 82
Somerset's description in his life, The Countess in her death 83 Southampton
released out of the Tower, 4. Restored to the right of Blood and Inheritance,
6. His Character, 161. Committed, 191. He and his Son dies 284
King's Speech to the Parliament Anno 1603. 13. In the Star Chamber, 100. To
the Parliament An. 1620. 153. Second Speech to the Lords, 155. To the
Parliament An. 1623. 259. Bacon's Speech in Star Chamber 84
Spencer his Character, 162. He and Arundel quarrel 163
Spinola forms an Army in Flanders, 135. Strives to intercept the English in
their March toward the Palatinate, 137. Besieges Berghen ap Zome, 216. Raises
his Siege, 218. Besieges Breda 280
Book of Sports obtruded 105 3 Subsidies, and 6 Fifteens granted, 33. Subsidy
and Fifteen granted Anno 1609. 84. Two Subsidies granted Anno 1620. 155.
Synod at Dort 128
T
Tirone comes over, is pardoned, and civilly entreated 6 Gunpowder-Treason, 38.
Discovered by a Letter to the Lord Monteagle, 30. The principal actors, 28. The
Traitors Executed, 31. The Lord Monteagle the Discoverer of the Treason
rewarded 3
Earl of Dorset Lord Treasurer dies suddenly, 43. Earl of Salisbury made Lord
Treasurer 43
Lord Treasurer questioned in Star. Chamber, 97. and fined 99 Two Lord
Treasurers in one year, 148 Lord Treasurer Cra^fi^ld questioned in Parliament,
278. His punishment, 279
Turner murdered by the Lord Sanquir, 59 Mrs. Turner intimate with the Countess
of Essex, 57. In Love with Sir Arthur Manwaring, ibid. Executed, 82

U
Sir Horatio Vere Commander of a Regiment sent to join with the United Princes
in Germany, 135. His Answer to the Marquess of Ansbach, 139
Villers a Favorite, 79. highly advanced, 104. Rules all, made Marquess of
Buckingham, Admiral and Master of the Horse, 147. His Kindred advanced, ibid.
Commissioners for an Union betwixt England and Scotland appointed, 27
Arguments pro and con about the Union. Disunion in the United Provinces by
reason of Schism and Faction, 118. the Authors thereof, ib. forewarned of it by
our King 119
Vorstius his Books burnt by the King, 120
W
Warwick his Character 162 Weston employed in the poisoning of Sir Thomas
Overbury 70 Tried and Executed 81 Weston and Conwey sent Ambassadors into
Bohemia, 133. Their Characters, ib. Their Return, 142
Archbishop Whitgift's Saying concerning King James at Hampton Court
Conference, 8. His Character, Dies, when, ibid.
Sir Ralph Winwood's Remonstrance, 120. and Protestation.
The End.

