IERICHOES DOVVN-FALL, As it was Presented in a Sermon preached in St.
Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS At the late
Solemn Fast, September. 28. 1642.

By THOMAS WILSON Preacher of the word at Otham in Kent.

Published by Order from that HOUSE.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup, near to
S. Austins Gate, 1643.

Die Mercurii 28. Sept. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that M. Hollis, and
Sr Robert Harley are appointed to return thanks, from this House, to M.
Hodges, and M. Wilson, for the great pains they have taken in the Sermons they
preached this day at St. Margarets Westminster, at the entreaty of this House.
And that they desire them to print their Sermons; And that no man presume to
print them but such as they shall appoint, until the House shall take farther
Order.

H. ELSYNG Cler. Parl. D. Com.
To the HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE Great God, the Lord your God, God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, in pity to
his people, and mercy to this Land, has raised up (in our great distress)
Micah 5. 5.
seven shepherds and eight principal men, out of the several divisions of
the Kingdom; when the enemy would come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord
has lift up a S^andard against him. God has called you for such a thing as
this, at such a time as this, to this Great Court, your call is high, your work
is hard, you know why you are borne, for the benefit of many, as Bucers
Physicians said to him, non sibi se, sed multorum utilitati esse natum; You are
our deliverers from heavy burdens, our reformers of great corruptions, You find
Church and State bruised and diseased. You are our healers, (...). Sept.
ligator vulneram. Chirurgus and Reip. medi^us. (...) ab (...), medela Corn^l. a
Lap. in Isai. 3.7.
What though Israel fret? shall Moses faint? when men of renown murmr at the
instruments of good, the Lord will show who are Gods; no man suffers so much
injury as God does contumely, as Melanchthon said, nullum hominem tantum
sustinere malorum, quantum contumeliarum Deus. It is not strange that some
prefer Egyptians Onion^ to Canaan, and its dainties; yet their Caleb (a noble
spirit) fully followed the Lord. Bucer and Melanchthon framed a form of
reformation, with approbation of the Peers and States, but the Clergy in the
College of Colen (wherein were some stood right affected, but more were
contrary) (...) in alta omnia iverunt. Melchior Adam. vita Buceri. p. 217.
rejected with slander, and affirmed they had rather live in Turkey, then under
such a reformation, sub imperio Turcico malle se vivere, quam sub Magistrat^
qui reformationem illam sequatur. Nehemiah, when he was in the Lords work, was
scorned, resisted^ accused, threatened, and by Nobles in Judah, (sworn unto
Tobiah) deserted, yet he builds and prospers, desists not his work, defieth
his adversaries factions, dreads not words, nor letters: Men's Furere ist^ic and
^^emere reges, principes, populos, adversus Christum Domini: foelix Omen puto,
ac melius, quam si blandiren^ur, etc. Id. vita Lutheri. p. 158.
fury against Christ (is a good Omen) is better then their flattery, they laugh
at him, (weep not for it) God laugheth at them. Gods infinite providence (the
seven eyes upon ^ne stone, Zechar. 3.9.) is upon the Churches foundation, all
things below are wheeled about, as the r^ngs full of eyes, infinita Dei
providentia, Iun. in Ezekiel. 1. 18. Build you, God will prosper your work, make
up the hedge, (God has sought you for it) stand in the gap before the Lord,
that he may not destroy the Land, who now visits our ingratitude, as Luther to
Melanchton, valde cupio ut sint adversus Satanae furores inaestimabiles aliquor
reliqui, qui se pro do mo Israel muros opponant, in hoc die furoris Domini
visitantis nostram, sicut dignum est, ingratitudinem. Id. vita Melan. p. 358.
You love our Nation, your acts are national, execute judgment and seek the
truth, (thus love our Land) and the Lord will pardon, Ier. 5. 1. Do men hate
him that rebukes in the Gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly? it is
known by it, it is an evil time, you contend for peace and truth, be
constant, and confident, your war is peace, as Zwinglius de bello Helvetico,
writing to his friends, Id. vita Zwing. p. 36.
Bellum cui nos instamus, pax est, nonbellu^, they strove to preserv verity and
liberty of the Gospel. Men may (may be not) hurt the body, but they cannot
reach, not touch the soul that spiritual sparkle, as Zwinglius his heart was
whole (cor illaesum) when his body was turned into ashes. Luther warmed
Melanchthons spirit by a letter about the common cause then molested by
Pontifical rage and Caesar's fury, I ( says he) about the public cause have a
quiet mind, assured it is just, true, and unappalled, I fear not the fierce
and cruel Papists, Id. vita Luth: p. 138.
if we be overthrown, Christ shall be overthrown with us, and come what can,
malo ego cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare, I had rather fall with
Christ, then stand with Caesar. You fast, you pray, you consult with the God of
heaven, who will answer in due time with good and comfortable words, Zechary
1.13 Pray (as Tanta reverentia aliquid petit ut cum D^o, tanta spe and fide, ut
^um patre and amico se loqui s^ntiat. p. 142.
Luther was wont to do) with rever^nce as to a God, and with confidence as to
a friend and father.

The day of fasting allows no ornaments in lesser things then Sermons, it was
only my purpose to speak something pertinent to the day; fasting must have
prayer, prayer faith, and faith activity; What can be more necessary in the
ca^se of faith, then faith? Luther^ animosa ep. de negotio Evang^lii ad
Spalatin.
in tantu^ est opus fidei, ne causa fidei sit sine fide; your difficulties
many, faith (which has a kind of omnipotency) will carry you through all,
tantum possumus, quantum credimus. In this service my study was that the word
of truth propounded, your hearts (lift up in the way of the Lord to the work of
the Lord) might continue in their height and heat by the spirit of burning,
till all our filth and blood be purged, and washed away, till fasting be turned
into feasting, till men may use this speech in England, concerning the State,
The Lord bless thee o habitation of justice; and concerning the Church, The
Lord bless thee o mountain of holiness; till there be one Lord, and his Name
one. That this Parliament (the repairer of the breaches, the restorer of the
Paths to dwell in) by loyalty to our Sovereign, fidelity to the Kingdom, and
zeal to Religion may be the joy of many Generations; which is the prayer of

Your devoted servant, and daily Petitioner to the God hearing Prayer, THOMAS
WILSON.

JERICHO'S DOWNFALL. A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS,
at a solemn Fast, November. 28. 1642.
HEB. 11. 30. By Faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they were
compassed about seven days.


THE authority of this Epistle depends not on the Writer, but on the Author:
The Epistl^ to the Hebrews.

1. Its author. 2. Its matter.

not on Man, but on God; whose Spirit of truth held and ruled the pen of the
Writer.

It evidently sets forth, 1. Christ's 1. Person, God and man; and 2. Offices,
King. Priest. Prophet.
2. The Christians duty, in faith and holiness. This Chapter ( a little book
of Martyrs^) contains the encomium of faith, commended by its heroical acts
and mavelous effects; by (no^ the worlds, but) the Lords Worthies, in every
age of the Ancient Church, whose neck is like the tower of David builded for an
armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers; all shields of mighty men.
Can. 4.4.


These mighty men of God are renowned and recorded, powerfully to persuade men
with courage and comfort to continue in the faith, sustained with the precious
promises of the blessed God.

Fidei documentum in toto populo edi^um. Iun. and Par. in Hebr.
The words read, rehearse the famous fact of Isreal's faith, under the prosperous
conduct of Joshua ( the Hebrews General) the conqueror of Canaan.

This text, 1. Interpreted 2. Divided.



1. The interpretation.

By faith.] By faith, both in Joshua and Israel, his and their faith; not by
arms, and engines; not by common sense, nor ca^nall reason; not by faith
historicall^ yet they knew the word; not by faith miraculous, albeit this
oracle tells us of a miracle: but by faith (called by Divines) justifying and
saving principally, not only as it justifies, but as it looks toward God,
and apprehends any promises, works, and benefits of God, past, present, or
future, revealed in his word.

Nixi Dei Praecepio, Promissione: Par.
Faiths prop was 1. A word of precept, to compass the city; ye shall go round
about the city. Josh. 6. 1. 2. A word of promise annexed, the walls should
fall; the wall of the city shall fall down fl^t. verse. 5.


Jericho.] It was a strong walled tower in their way, and first entrance into
Canaan, after they had so safely passed over I^rdan.

The walls of it fell down.] The great walls, this townes-mens strength
tumbled down without man's hand, warlike engine, or violence.

After they were compassed about. (...)
] They pitched not the ^^^ld against it, nor did they undermine or scale the
walls; but go abo^t them.

A mean, to man's reason, 1^ Very childish; seven Priests, sounded seven rams
horns; would not Jericho laugh at it? Josh. 6. 4. 2. Very perilous; had there
been such Guns as be in these dangerous days. M. Perk.
Yet after they had circuited the walls, 1. In obedience to Gods command, 2. In
dependence on Gods promise,


The walls fell down. Obedience to God, in the event meets with good: first,
they mind duty; after it, they find mercy. First, they go about Jericho; and
then, they go into Jericho.

Seven days.] The walls fell not on any of the six days, nor until the
seventh time the seventh day. Till then the walls never shake, and then
(nothing seen before) they fall^ it was Gods appointed time, in which every
thing is beautiful: one of these days was the Sabbath, the observation
whereof yields (for man's good) to this special command of God the great
Lawgiver.

2. The parts^ Iericho's downfall the walls fell down.

1. The mean of it, faith in Gods word. 2. The m^^^er of it, in compassing it
seven days.
1. The downfall of the walls, the strength of this city, the h^lp whereby it
was fortified as invincible, falls, this wall is cast down and demolished;
the city is taken, and a straight way opened to the Israel of God. Joshua 6. 20.

Observe. 1. Church-enemies helps will fail them.
The greatest helps of Church-enemies will fail them, their walls which hinder
Gods Church in the way to happiness, will fall down, and their defense departs
from them. Numb. 14. 9.

Herodot. and Xenoph. Decima persurbis est tota bod^erna Romae Pontificia.

M. Mede.


As it is with this cursed city Jericho: So with old Babylon, the wall of
Babylon shall fall, Ier. 51.44.

The broad walls (fifty cubits thick, and two hundred cubits high, say
Historians) of Babylon shall be utterly broken, ^er. 51. 58.

Thus with Mystical Babylon it is thrown down as a great millstone cast into
the Sea; thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down and
shall be found no more at all, Rev. 18.21.

The tenth part of the city, (the whole Kingdom of Popery, Br.) fell, was
diminished by the revolt of the Germans; the Earthquake ordinarily signifying
a great change of the estate of matters, Rev. 11. 13.

The enemies vvalls.

1. Principality. 2. Prelacy.
Satan's Vicar the Antichrist of Rome, instigated Charles the most puissant
Emperor, to attempt war, that by violence the doctrine of the Gospel, and the
liberty of Germany may be oppressed; And the united Princes compelled to the
service and observance of his wicked and devilish religion. Sleid. Comment. li.
17.


1. The enemies walls to stop the Churches way, which will fail and not be a
shadow to them, be 1. Principality and imperial power, Princes and their
people, Emperors and their vassals, were a wall to the enemy; the ten horns
shall give their power and strength to the beast, Revel. 17. 13.

CHARLES the Great, and K. Pipin arose with stout and fierce contention in the
Beasts quarrel, advanced and honored the Popedom.

These shall make war with the Lamb, verse. 14. in rebellion against Christ;
yet the Lamb (Christ) shall overcome them. In Gods appointed time, the Emperor
CHARLES the fifth, persecuted the Princes of Germany with a lamentable war,
because they required a liberty to worship the Lamb; but the victorious Lamb
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, got the victory (a free confession of truth)
which the Lamb wrung from the Emperor against his will. And this by Christian
soldiers, and armies of Protestants; Called, chosen, and faithful, verse. 14.
Yet by the good pleasure of God Christian Princes shall rise and make
themselves ready against Rome, to bring the whore to an horrible destruction,
contrary to her expectation, and their former profession for her.

1. These shall hate her, curse her, which bewitched Kings of the earth.

2. Make her desolate, they converting to Christ, revolting from her and
ministering no aid to her.

3. Naked, by their confessions, by their writings which discover her
filthiness and lewdness.

4. Shall eat her flesh, not physically, Exossatio non Physice se^ mystice.
but mystically, cutting away her toll-money, wealth gotten by her chaffering
in their dominions.

5. Burn with fire, who will not otherwise be purged; she shall be burnt as
an whore not washen with nitre.

Many Princes have failed Popedom, Revel. 17. 16.

2. Prelacy, purple Prelates, and their corrupt Clergy, hinder the passage of
Gods redeemed ones into Canaan, heaven, and shall down: As the troop of Trent
Bishops fortified themselves; and made a wall about Popery, that erroneous
doctrine and corrupt worship might be continued; notwithstanding this, the man
of sin, hi^ jurisdiction and his generation must down and be destroyed, that
wicked one the Lord shall consume with the spirit of ^is mouth, 2. These. 2. 8.


Prelacy ro^^ and branch shall be taken away^ every plant which God has not
planted shall be plucked up by the root; all false callings, false doctrine,
false worship, God threatens, Mat. 15. 13. as a tree that cumbers the ground,
must be cut down; the Church and pure religion cannot thrive by it, under it,
near it. Prelacy is not only not fruitful, but hurtful, and if the
vinedresser find no fruit, his word is, Cut it down, Luke 13. 7. There is no
ju^ divi^um to plead for it, it will come to naught as Gamaliels word was Act.
5. verse. 38. The Prelates were daubing a wall with untempered mortar, made of
Canons, oaths, Constitu^ions, and Superstitions, yet all falls that one may
say, where is the wall and they that daubed it? God will effect it, Contusi^
Antistitum fals^m religionem ^^entium, Bran:
that the pride of their glory shall be strained^ he shall tread upon Princes
as mortar, and as the Potter treads the clay, Isay. 41.25.

The defense of the enemies walls.

1. Policy. 1. Detected. 2. defeated.
2. Patrimony. 3. Power of. 1. One man. 2. Many men.


^. The defense of the ene^ies wall^ departs from th^^.

1 Policy, that fails, when they work by subtilty, yet nothing in man, no
wisdom, understanding, nor counsel, by all plots and hellish practices can
prevail against the Lord his will and work. Pr. 30. 1. (...) detected albeit
most secre^, as the Syri^ns plot against Isr^^l, 2. King. 6.9. yet God told the
P^ophet of it, and the man of God told the King, v^^s. 10. the King of Syria
suspected some to by im^^^sty, verse. 11. but his servan^s ^^ll him Elisha
revealed to the King of Israel, the words which he spoke in his bedchamber, v.
12.

^od knows, and can point at the man, or men that gives evil counsel, Ezekiel.
11.2. He knows all that comes into their minds, v. 5.

The folly (not wit) of them who resist the truth shall be (near their fall)
manifest to all men: How many plots of mentlesse men, have been discovered
before the eyes of all men? have they not proclaimed to every one by their way,
this their folly? 2 Timothy 3.9.

2. It is defeated, their counsel comes to nothing, but to the hurt of the
authors: as Ahitophel a deep Politician, gives counsel against a good man, but
the good God disappointed it; for the Lord had appointed to defeat the good
counsel of Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 14. Men advanced for their wisdom, are often
times made a prey, and Judges who should keep a Commonwealth from civil
dissentions, and ruins, do themselves (when God pleases) become fools, He
makes the Judges fools, Job. 12.17.
2. Patrimony and possessions will fail them, the tenth part of the city fell;
Hanc urbis decimam casuram; agro sibi pro patrimonio a^tributo spoliatam,
Ponti^ice vi jude pulso, praerogativam and dominium in urtes and populos
amissuram M. Mede.
(...) nomen tributi; the revenues, profits, first fruits, tributes,
comme^dams, lands, taken away, Rev. 11.13. In that fall many men were slain,
not in their bodies, but in their estates, spoiled of Monasteries, Nunneries,
Abbeys, whereby many filled their paunehes, as Lordly Prelates, all-belly
Abbots, evil beasts, slow bellies: it was a death indeed to be brought to true
poverty, from their former luxu^y, v. 13. the vine was gathered, many
cloisters, and clusters pulled, and cut down, in the days of that great
Prince, Henry 8. who not only did shake off the Antichristian yoke, but did
confiscate the lands of many Frieries, Priories, etc. whereby the stals of the
fatlings were destroyed, and havoc made of Papists goods, that the horses of
them set over the business, seemed to swim in their spoils, as it were in a
river of pressed grapes; to the great good of many who had no small good, by
the fall of this oak, Rev. 14.19,20.

Euphrates ^^gnificat praecipua Babylonis Antichrist: praesidia, quibus ad
tantam excrevit potentiam: Et in vigore stetit hactenus. Vrbs slumine q^am
muri^ ^rat munitior. Par.
The water of Euphrates was dried up: as Cyrus when he took Babylon, the way of
Romish traffic decayed. Euphrates notes the chief safeguard of Antichristian
Babylon, which was stronger by this river, then their wall. 16.12.

3. Power: mountains be made a plain: however they swell, and seemed
invincible, immovable, unpassable, inaccessible; yet God contemnes the enemies
mightiness, and will remove all impediments of the restoration of the Church,
and make it as easy to march over, as a plain and eaven Champaine. Zechar.
4.7. 1. In the might of one man is no safety for sinners against Sion, as Haman
a great favorite, highly promoted and advanced, no man had either priority, or
parity, Esther 5.11. yet he abode not in honor, he began to fall before
Mordecai, 6. 13. he is detected and accused as the adversary, and enemy of the
Jews. 7.6. he is cast off by the King, v. 7. he is cut off, for they hanged
Haman on the gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai, he made a net for his
own neck, his pride falls, and power fails, 7.10. 2. In the multitude of many
men is no strength to uphold the evil doers. Captain Sisera had in his company
nine hundred Charets of iron, and much people, Iud. 4. 13. yet the Lord
discomfited them, ver. 15. there was not a man left, ver. 16. The Midianites
were numberless, Iud. 6. 5. as the grasshoppers for multitude, 7.12. yet before
Gedeon and his three hundred, ver. 16. all the Host ran, cried, and fled, v. 21.

Many nations, of diverse abominations, wickedly consulted, and unanimously
consented in a cursed co^federacy, and cruel combination, against the Lord of
glory, (Who hate his Church hate him) Ps. 83. 5, 6, 7, 8. which by some is
supposed to be in the days of Iehoshaphat, whom Moab, Ammon, and Edom beset
and assaulted, 2 Chronicles. 20.1. a great multitude there was, v. 2. yet they were
smitten, v. 22. one helped to destroy another, v. 23. that Judah looking on the
multitude, and behold, they were dead bodies, fallen to the earth, and none
escaped, v. 24. The Ethiopians came against Asa, with a huge host of a thousand
thousand, and three hundred Charets, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. yet they fled, v. 12. Thus
it is clear that no policy of man, no patrimony in the world, nor power of
united forces, can be a sure wall to secure the sons of wickedness. Reasons why
the enemies walls will fall.

1. The enemies

1. Impiety, being 1. prayerlesse 2. full of cursing. 3. Idolatrou^



Reasons why the Enemies walls will fall.

1. In regard of Church-enemies

1. Their impiety: they are a cursed generation; iniquity will cast them down,
as the inhabitants of Jericho, whose wall fell, were Canaanites, a seed of
evil doers, to be utterly destroyed, both man and woman. Ios. 6.21.

1. They are prayerlesse, they cannot, they will not, they do not pray, they
twit prayer in the spirit, they (by predominancy of Atheism) call not upon
God: hence is that prediction of wrath, to fall on them who call not on Gods
name, Psalm. 79.6. 2. They are full of cursing, and it shall come unto them;
cursing men be cursed men: What is in their mouths, but fearful,
self-damning imprecations, and innominate soule-damning oaths? the mercy they
desire God to show them, is to damn them; such words be heard, as those who
wished they might die in the wilderness, God took them at the word, As ye have
spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you, Numb. 14. 28. 3. They are
idolatrous; who withstand the Church, in the way to reformation, they desert
God and his pure worship; and cannot prosper by that means, but must fall,
they and all their confidences, as is manifest, in those vain men, children of
Belial, who gathered to Jeroboam, 1 Chronicles. 13. 7. who had golden calves for
gods, the gods of the land of bondage, v. 8. who cast out the Priests of the
Lord, v. 9. who kept not Gods charge but forsook him, v. 11. who (albeit
Israelites in name) opposing God, (a graceless act) cannot prosper, v. 12. God
smote Jeroboam, and all Israel, v. 15. that Israel fled, v. 16. fell down, v.
17. and were brought under at that time, v. 18.
The vanity of their helps.

1. Horses. 2. Men. 1. Faint. 2. Fearful.
1. Kings. 2. Merchants. 3. Mariners.


2. The vanity of their helps; their walls high and broad, are earth, dust, built
on the sand.

1. Their horses (how many soever troops they have) be but vain for safety,
the strength of horses cannot be the deliverance of man, in danger, Psalm. 33.
^7. it is not well with them, but woe to them who stay upon horses, because
they are many and strong, Esaias 51. 1. 2 Their men, 1 are faint, frail, feeble;
men, and not God; when the Lord stretches out his hand, both he that helps
shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they all shall fail
together, Esaias 31.3. 2. Are fearful, afraid to help: as when the great city
falls, her lovers take up a lamentation, but do not, dare not help her.
1. The Kings of the earth, the spiritual sons of the Roman See, Romanae sedis
filii spirituales qui cum Papa perseverabunt. Par.
the whores slaves: as the King of Spain and others, who have committed
fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for
her, Rev. 18.9. Standing afar off, when they see the smoke of her burning, they
have not to help, but are in a bodily fear, by beholding the whores misery,
they fear their own safety, and will not venture themselves for an old
withered harlot, v. 10. 2. The Merchants of the earth, which chaffer with
spiritual matters, Nundinatores spirituales, Camerae Pontificiae Quaestores.
Par.
rather then corporal, who by making countries serviceable to Rome, by their
confederacy, prove brave and gallant fellows, and gained well by this
merchandise, getting Bishoprics, Cardinalships, as C. Woolsey, a notable
ambitious, tumultuous, flourishing Romish Merchant, who durst brave, and beard,
yea outface, and out-brag King Hen. 8. a mighty Prince, Rev. 18. 11. thus all
stand afar off, having short horns and no hearts to repel this imminent
danger, v. 15. only they cry, Alas, expressing the truth and terriblenesse of
their grief for this change, v. 16. 3. The Mariners, Shipmasters, Saylors, they
cannot not keep Romes ship from sinking, nor S. Peter's fishboat from the sands,
or rushing on the rocks, although many a lusty lubber has labored hard to
promote Romes lustful laws, as Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops,
Deanes, Arch-Deanes, Abbots, Jesuits, Priests, Priors, Friars, Monks, the
Canonical Clergy, and all inferior officers; yet the more they would cover,
the more they discover, the whores and the Popes filthy wickedness; and more
at length, when the whores wages for their acts of wickednsse be detained,
denied, consumed, Rev. 18.17,18. Many greater and lower Churchmen are of the
mind of Demetrius, and the craftsmen, concerning this happy Reformation,
intended, and entered upon, whereby their gain cease, they live by a craft,
By this craft we have our gain, Acts 19.25. their rotten props removed, and
corrupt courts abolished, this one craft is in danger to be set at naught, v.
27. Their Diana despised, and her magnificence destroyed, v. 27. this trade of
theirs is decayed, their wares not merchantable, for no man buyeth their
merchandise any more, Rev. 18.11.
God his 1. Contrari^ty. 2. Commination. 3. Promise.



2. In regard of God

1. His contrariety to the enemies and their helps: God faith, he will arise
against the house of evill-doers, and against the help of them that work
iniquity; if God arise, they must fall, Esaias 31.2. God is contrary to them,
that he will make a city a heap, a defensed city, a ruin, a palace of
strangers to be no city, it shall never be built, 25.2 God in his power,
over-powreth the enemies, that he brings down them that dwell on high, the
lofty city he lays it low, he lays it low e^^n to the ground, he brings
it even to the dust, 26.5. 2. His commination: God has threatened this fall of
the enemy, and his word will take hold on men, they cannot evade his vindictive
hand. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Revel. 14.8. 3^ His Promise: God in truth has
assured his Church to remove all impediments. He is a God of his word, who
says to the Deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers; fulfilled by Cyrus,
who (the Citizens of Babylon not dreaming of it) dried up their Euphrates, and
brought Babylon under his hand, Isay 44. 27. God means not to leave a Canaanite
in the house of the Lord, and will perform the good thing which he has
promised: There shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord,
Zechar. 14.21.
1 To wicked men: yet misled. Exhort.

1. Wicked men be not 1 Vain con^ident. 2 Impenitent.





1 Be not confident in any means to wall about you: What? can Princes protect
you? can Prelates support you? will policy, patrimony and power fail you? how
can you be confident? Babels brickmakers would build a city, to prevent
scattering, Genesis 11.3,4. but God disappointed them, for he scattered them
abroad, and they left off to build the city, v. 8. God is against you, who is
unresistible, for all your association; Associate you selves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: take counsel together, and it shall
come to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us,
Esaias 8.9,10. 2 Be not impenitent, nor hardened in the sins of the enemies: H^^
will a hard heart endure when God casts down its defense and confidence? o
repent before the fall; el^e ye are in danger to perish in the fall; o walk not
in a way contrary to God; o receive not the beasts mark in the forehead, which
is to profess openly their homage and submission unto the holy Apostolic
Catholic See of Rome, the Popes vassals, they called Catholics; receive not
his mark in the hand, to advance and prefer with your best power, the Romish
prerogative; this, Emperors, Kings, and great men of the earth received, by
being obliged to the Pope by solemn o^th, T.W. in his Did.
promising and binding themselves to be defenders and protectors of the chief
Bishop, and the holy Church of Rome: All, small and great repent and worship
God, or else they must drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and they shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.9,10. Be not at rest now in fin; they have no
rest, day nor night who worship the beast; v. 11.
Godly men 1. Come out from the enemies. 2. Be not afraid of the enemies.



2 To the godly.

1 Come out from the enemies: Come out of Babylon, is counsel to Gods people;
have no share in Romes sins, and ye shall have no part in her plagues, Rev.
18.4. it is our lesson when we hear such news of its fall, v. 2.

Do as Rahab, when she perceived their city to be in danger, she provided how
to get out of it, Ios. 2. 12. to be saved alive. v. 13. So she perished not
with them, who believed not, when all who remained in Jericho were destroyed,
Heb. 11.31.

O get out of the way of evil men, and save your selves from an untoward
generation, which you hear will come to desolation, Acts 2.40.

2 Be not afraid of enemies, whose walls will fall; God has threatened it. Caleb
and Ioshuah said to Israel, Their defense (but a shadow) is departed from them,
fear them not, Numb. 14.9. be strong and courageous, be not afraid of them,
nor dismayed for them, they have but the arm of flesh, all their help is
vanity; Why do men tremble when the enemies walls shake? 2 Chronicles. 32.78.
It is a comfort, Consolat.

Comfort when the enemies be 1. In power. 2. In policy. 3. In prosperity.



that the helps which uphold the enemies, will fail; Rejoice, be glad, and
^hout for joy at this fall, when Babylon with violence is thrown down, Rev.
18. 21. then abundant joy comes to all the godly; rejoice over her, thou
heaven, (the universal multitude of the Saints on earth) and ye holy Apostles
and Prophets, the Godly and learned teachers of the Church, in the days of
reformation; these more deadly hated by the whore by whom they endured much
tribulation, are now called to rejoice most, v. 20. Shout against Babylon,
round about, her walls are thrown down, as sure of victory; as if all were
already effected, Ier. 50.15.

It is firm ground of strong consolation, 1 When the enemies, be 1. In power,
and pride; as Haman had such a principality, who but he? he could write what he
pleased, he could accuse, and none could gainsay him, yet he, when he was well
(in his conceit) walled, and ^xpected to rise to more honor, ( ambition is
never satisfied) would be higher, yet in his pride he fell, as did T.E.St. in
great jollity, he was laid in the dust, his neck brought under foot; pride has
a certain fall, Esth. 6.13. 2 In policy, full of plots and projects against
Christ and Christians, then all is in vain, they fail, they take counsel
together against the Lord, Psalm. 2.2. to reject his commands, which they judge
too strict, v. 3. The Lord laughs at them, v. 4. and dasheth them in pieces.
Christ will be too hard for them who plot against him, v. 9. The late Canoneers
cast Canons to defend their walls, but they recoiled upon themselves, they
traveled with iniquity, conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood, Psalm.
7. 14. Wicked men make pits, and dig them, but fall into the ditch which they
made, ver. 15. their mischief return upon their own head, and their violent
dealing comes down upon their own pate, v. 16. 3 In prosperity, they fall into
misery: David's observation may be presented to us, I have seen the wicked in
great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree; yet he passed away,
and lo^ he was not, yea I sought him, but he could not be found; Psalm.
37.35,36. How manifest is this, in the Arch-B. W. L. and the re^t of the
Prelates, come down when they were in their Pontificalibus? When wicked men
flourish, it is an evidence they shall perish; when the wicked spring as the
grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.7.


2 When the Church is 1. In the impotency of men, When the Church is 1. In
impotency of men. 2. In the insufficiency of means.



the enemies helps fail when friends be few and feeble, The foot shall tread it
(the lofty city) down, even the feet of the poor^, and the steps of the needy,
Isay. 26. 6. 2. In the insufficiency of means, rams horns in appearance a
childish thing to cast down such walls, as ^erichoes were, Josh. 6. 20.



But God can cause the enemies fall; 1. By a weak hand, God can cause enemies
fall. 1. By a wea^ hand. 2. By their own hand. 3. Without hand.



the least of the flock shall draw them out, Ier. 50 45. 2. By their own hand,
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands, 9. 16. 3 Without hand, the
mighty shall be taken away without hand, Job 34. 20.


1. The Mean of this fall is faith, by faith they fall, the walls of Jericho
could not stand before the faith of Joshua and Israel.

Faith in God is mighty to remove the greatest impediments of good. Observe. 2.
Faith is potent to remove impediment^.
Faith gets victory over the mightiest enemy. Faith overcomes any difficulty.
Faith is stronger then all the world, This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our Faith. 1. John 5. 4.

David feared not the Philistine, nor would have any man's heart fail because
of him, 1 Samuel 17.32.

David's faith in God prevailed over Goliath, yet there was no sword in the hand
of David, verse 50.

Israel by faith could go dry, where the Egyptians were drowned, the Sea gives
way to faith, Heb. 11. 29.

Caleb through faith, stilled the muttering and murmuring people: assuring them
(albeit the Canaanites were strong, their cities walled and great; and the
children of Anak there) they were well able to overcome all. Numb. 13. 30.

The ground of this. Faith is omnipotent through Christ. I can do all things
through Christ which strengthened me, Phil. 4. 13.

God in whom we believe, is never put to a nonplus, he meets no impossibility;
for with God shall nothing be impossible. Luke 1. 37. and thus all things are
possible to him that believes, Ground of the Power of faith.

1. It builds on Gods word.

1. His precept. 2. His promise, minding in it, 1. His mercy. 2. His grace. 3.
His truth.


Mark. 9. 23.

1. Faith builds on G^ds word as most firm: as David; In God will I praise his
word, in God will I put my trust, Psalm. 56. 4. there is a strength in the
Scripture, lean on it, it cannot be broken, Io. 10 35.

1. Gods word of precept is faiths warrant, God bids, it is enough for faith to
build on: as in this compassing by Jericho, God commanded them, of Iosh^a 6. 4
Abraham also at Gods word walked through many difficulties obediently, Heb
11.8. He went and followed God to his foot, whose command carried him through
that great trial of offering up Isaac, verse 17. Gods special command
overcame reason, affection, and all hindrances: God said to him, Take thy son,
thine only son Isaac whom thou love; and offer him for a burnt offering,
Gen 22. 2. 2. Gods word of promise is a proppe to faith, God promised the walls
should fall, Joshua 6 20. God has spoken the word, faith is strong upon it.
Believe in the Lord so shall ye be^ established, believe his Prophets, so shall
ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

Faith for its confirm^tion minds in the pro^ises, 1. Gods mercy to make a
promise, in pity to men, by it to send in relief to man's heart. God did
perform his mercy to Abraham Mic 7. 20. 2. Gods grace in his promise, all is
of grace to us unworthy, it is free without our desire or desert. Cry grace,
grace to it, Zechar. 4. 7. 3. Gods truth, he is faithful, he fails not in his
word, what he promised in mercy and grace he will keep in truth; he keeps his
truth for ever, Psalm. 146. 6.



2. Faith rests on Gods providence, Faith rests on Gods providence, sustained
1. By his goodnes^ 2. By his wisdom. 3. By his power.



who is by it a wall of fire about his Church, Zechar^ 2^ 5. Faith in Gods
providence is sustained by beholding, 1. His goodness, who is good to do his
good in a time of need, which is a great strength to them. The Lord is good and
a strong hold in the day of trouble, Nahum 1^ 7 2. His wisdom, he has
millions of ways to help his which they know not of, The Lord is great in
counsel; who has an art in working for his ^his ways are not known, but the
wyles of his enemies be open to him, Ier. 32^ 19^ 3. His power, nothing is too
hand for him, Ier. 32 17. Faith looks not at the deadness of men, or
^naptnesse of means, but relies on God, persuaded that what he had promised he
is able to perform, Romans 4. 19. 20


1. Faith in God being so mighty, know it, In form.

1. The valor of believers.


Believers be most valiant victors, the chiefest conquerours, godly men relying
on the word, be stronger then all the world, their spirits be hero^^ call,
their arms made strong by the mighty God of Jacob; Kingdoms cannot stand
before them. Through faith they subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11 33. Waxed valiant in
fight, verse 34. David believing in the Lord, prevailed against the great and
formidable Philistine: by faith Barak over-powred Sisera and vanquished Iabin:
by faith Gedeon mastered the Midianites: by faith Asa chased the Ethiopians: by
it the Jews brought down Haman in his glory: by it the Canaanitish Kings fell
before Joshua: by it the Kingdom of Saints are a Peerlesse people. It is the
honor of all the Saints to triumph over all contrary Royalty and Nobility, to
bind Kings in chains, and Nobles with fetters of iron, Psalm. 149. 8, 9.

The vanity to expect victory by what is not of faith, as 1. Formality. 2.
Policy. 3. Power.



2. It Is a vanity in any difficulty to expect victory by what is not of faith,
which is so potent an instrument; without faith there is no settling of any
heart in hope or state in happiness; If ye will not believe, surely ye shall
not be established, ^say 7. 9.

1. Formality in Religion: Ceremonies in Gods worship, be heartlesse, empty,
powerless; faith is the power of godliness, it is a deceit to rest in going to
Church (as men speak) as once it was confidence in a lie to say, The temple of
the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these, Ier^ ^. 4.
These are lying words, they trusted to that could not profit, verse. 8. Yet God
ruined all where was no faith, both the temple, verse. 14. and Shiloh of old,
verse. 12. When Israel trusted to the Ark to save them from the enemy, 1 Samuel 4.
3. ^etch the Arc -- let it save us; Could it save^ did it save them? nay, many
Israelites were ^mitten, verse. 10. and an impure pair of Priests slain, verse
11. 2. Policy is too impotent to remove all impediments, worldly wisdom
weakens men, carnal reasonings be faiths enemies, and Satan's strong holds.
Lean not to thine own understanding, Pro. 3.5. carnal reason is called a
bitter enemy of God.

Luthers oracle published, Melch. Adam. vita Lutheri. pa. 157.
what would be the pest and perdition of Christian Religion: 1. Oblivion of
Evangelicall blessings. 2. Security generally reigning. 3. Wordly wisdom which
would reduce all in order, and heal the land with ungodly counsels.


Iehu subtly cut off Ahabs Baals, and in wiliness, yea wickedness, kept
Ieroboams calves, 2 Kin. 10. 28, 29. yet could not he continue the Kingdom;
for then began the Lord to cut Israel short, verse 32.

3. Power of many men is too weak a prop to lean on. Many provisions, several
stratagems, manifold machinations, be without faith means of no value; God
promised Zerubbabel, whom as special Magistrate it concerned to see the temple
reedified, not by might of many men, or power of one man, but by my spirit,
power, providence, and gracious favor, (when all helps which be subordinate
fail) will I build the Temple, Zechary 4. 6.
1. Prove ye your selves, Exhort.

A trial of faith.

1. It casts down walls 1. In men's hearts. 2. In men's houses.



whether you be fitted to conquer all comers, to remove all impediments,
obstacles, or obstructions in your way and work; Have ye faith? deal kindly
and truly with your selves, be not by sloth, and presumption deceived.

1. It is a faith will cast down walls.

1. In men's hearts, it casts down strong holds in us, 2 Cor. 10. 4. it lays
low our lofty imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, it silenceth our reasonings, verse 5. it removes the
perverseness of heart, it causes frowardness of heart to depart, Psalm. 101.
it cannot endure vainglory, as in Hezekiah, his heart was lif^ up after a
mercy, 2 Chr. 32. 25. yet he humbled himself for the pride of his heart, verse
26. Faith di^allowes worldliness, ^. in lusts after honor, greatness,
reputation; as Moses by faith he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, verse 24. 2. In lusts after pleasure; faith preferres the afflictions
of Gods people before the pleasures of sin, verse 25. 3. Lusts after profit
and pleasure; the treasures of Egypt cannot lie in faiths way to bribe it,
verse 26.

Faith wastes, ruins, and undermines all inward evil, it regards no iniquity
in heart, it purifieth the heart, it cleanses the conscience, abhorres
hypocrisy, security, inward vanity, Acts 15. 9.

2. In men's hou^es, it is upright in the family, as David, I will walk within
my house with a perfect heart, Psalm. 101. 2. he reformes servants, He that
works deceit shall not dwell in my house, he that tells lies shill not
tarry in my sight, ver. 7. The father of the faithful, Abraham commanded his
children and household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. Jacob purged
his house from all strange Gods and vanities, 35. 2. and had no enemy to hurt
him, for the terror of God was upon the cities round about him, verse 5.
Cornelius a Centurion, a pious soldier, a devout man, one that feared God with
all his house, Acts 10. 3. Gedeon, a noted man for goodness, and famous for
faith, began his reformation at his fathers household, and cut down his grove,
and threw down the Altar of Baal, Iud. 6. 25. 27. Have ye faith to cast down
evils, Idols, and to remove scandals in Gods houses, to reform our Churches,
Ministers and members? and is it not most serious and sincere to begin with
your own hearts and houses? how unseemly, yea and unsound is it to talk of
reformation Ecclesiastical, and to neglect the heart, as disordered, and the
family as deformed and unreformed?
2. This faith in God is effectual, Faith is effectual.

2. It relyeth on the Lord. 2. It gloryeth in the word. 3. It works by love,
to Christ. To his Church. 4. It walks by rule. 1. In religion. 2. In
reformation.


where it is in man.

1. It relyeth on the Lord, his presence, his assistance, his arm, his name;
as Judah did in 2 Chronicles. 13. 18. Faith will set God his word, his promise,
against all. Faith has a God to trust to, the Lord is its hope, not men, or
means, Ier. 17. 7. 2. It gloryeth in the word of God, with praise to God, when
it sees nothing but present trouble, in days of fear it fears not man, his
cruelty, policy, power. When King Saul misled by evil counselors, pursued
David (a loyal subject, a faithful servant) to swallow him up, Psalm. 56. in
the title, and verse 1. his faith cures his fear, verse 3. his soul made its
boast of the promise of God, verse 4. 3. It works by love, 1. to the Lord
Jesus, Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a
man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned, it cleaves to Christ in contrary temptations, Cant. 8. 7. 2. To the
Church, it loves the household of faith, the Saints; others it pitieth, in them
it delights, Gal. 6. 10. this is the faith the Gospel praises, Gal. 5. 6.
4. It walks and works by rule, a divine Canon, 6. 16. 1. In Religion and
worship of God, it minds and credits the word of God, Non ex arbitrio, sed ex
imperio Deo serviendum.
it is fully for the Scripture, all that is in the Scripture, it is for: as Paul
confessed, I worship God, believing all things which are written in the law; it
dislikes unwritten traditions, it disallowes no divine institutions, it is well
pleased to be ruled by Gods will, it will not accept man's lust for a law, nor
except against any law of Christ, Acts 24. 14. 2. In reformation, it minds the
word as a pattern most perfect, as Moses had his pattern, not a pin was left
to his discretion in that great work of the tabernacle, yet he was prudent, he
was pious, but he is charged to attend to directions of God; See that thou make
all things according to the pattern showed to thee, Heb. 8. 5. the word is our
pattern, in the day of grace, the man of God is to hold fast the form of sound
words, as 2 Timothy 1. 13. measure all by this pattern in this our new building,
Ezekiel. 43. 10.

Learn all the forms, all the ordinances, and all the laws of this house,
and do them, verse 11.

A faithful man is to mind that too, Ezra 7. 18.

Do after the will of your God; command, or commend nothing but by divine
warrant; whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently
done for the house of the God of heaven, verse 23. Gods words is a perfect
rule, fear him; do nothing without, beside, or against the word of God; Gods
commands contain a man's whole duty, Eccl. 12. 13. Faith is to believe no more
then may be preached, but the preachers may and must preach; not what men
invent, but whatsoever Christ commands, Mat. ^8. 20.

Gods word will furnish a man with all that is profitable, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and
will perfect a man in all things doctrinall, and in all things practical; more
then is in that perfect word, needs neither be known, taught, nor done in the
Church of God, verse 17.

2. Procure that which is the speedy way to remove all obstacles in your work,
your good work; Procure faith.

1. Governors. 2. Governed.
Non docet ^ic Christus montes transfe^re, sed certitudinem fidei ^radit, and
quanta sit fidei virtu^. B.


even this wonder-working faith, Mark. 11. 22. Have faith in God, this will
remove mountains, great and seemingly settled impediments: believe what God
does say, and you may have what you shall say; verse 23. Christ does ascertaine
us of it, neither is it spoken of miraculous faith, which removes these
mountains, it is an useful instruction unto believers now, Mat. 21. 21. 22.

1. Governors, (ye most noble Senators) trust in the Lord, this will make
you incomparable, succesfull, freemen, as Hezekiah, a godly King trusted in
the Lord, so that none was like him, 2 Kings 18. 5. and he prospered whither
soever he went, verse 7. it is a glory to be a believer and a counselor, a
believer, and a Parliament man. Be wise now and kiss the son of God, with
faith; it is your wisdom, the believer is the wise man, it will be your
happiness to trust in Christ, the believer is a blessed man, Psalm. 2. 11,12.
2. The Governed people who desire to do any good at this day, when
difficulties be many, this work sticks: o it is want of faith! believe in the
Lord, believe down these walls, these high walls, when others put to their
hands, have ye faith in your hearts, Believe in the Lord and prosper, 2 Chronicles.
20. 20.
Now ye ( Right Honorable, who love our nation, and whose hearts are to build
us synagogues) who meeet with many oppositions, and discern many obstructions,
and such dangerous distractions in this crazy State and diseased Church; A way
to have faith among us, by 1. Promoting preaching. 2. Provoking unto prayer. 3.
Providing for the pure administration of the seals.



1. Promote preaching of the word of faith, which is so powerful to remove
impediments: men must hear if they would believe, and how shall they hear
without preachers? Romans 10. 14.

It Is preaching is a notable alarm against God-forsakers, although (as
Church-Papists may do) they keep their Church, and will not be called
Church-forsakers. 2 Chronicles. 13. 12.

Preachers be the strength of a Land, the Charets of Israel and horsemen
thereof, 2. Kings 13. 14. It is more needful to set up Preachers, then
garrisons in towns; let them have maintenance, countenance, continuance. Exalt
ye Christ's Kingdom, it will down with all contrary Kingdoms; Satan's, and
Antichrists power fails, and is broken, where Christ is known as King, Dan.
2.44. Christ is that stone, breaks some and grinds others to powder, Mat. 21.44.

Let Christ (the object of faith) be the head, albeit the builders ( in place,
name; not in 1 act, 2 nature) refused him, Psalm 118.22. What is to be expected
in Counties, where little or no word of faith is? there the enemies swarm and
triumph: What good can you find in men, either toward righteousness, or
religion, where me^ are as the mountains of Gilboa, no rain nor dew of the
doctrine of faith falls on them? Let your hearts be lift up in the way of the
Lord, to do according to that your pious resolution, of establishing a
Preaching Minister through out all the whole ^ingdome; for faith comes by the
word preached, Romans 10. 17.

2 Provoke unto prayer: Prayer is a way to have an addition to faith, Luke
17.5. Lord increase our faith: restrain not prayer by any decree, for any
time, as they wickedly did, Dan. 6. 12. Let them that can pray, pray; men are
to be excited, to cover earnestly the best gifts, and not to rest in a dull
devotion, but to pray in the holy Ghost; a perfect help to prayer, a blessed
mean of more faith, Iud. v. 20. 3 Provide that the seals of the Covenant of
God may be purely administered, as helps of faith, this excellent grace, Romans
4.11. Let your wisdom search the book of God, and study the will of God, that
according to the counsel of the Lord, Ministers and members in all our
assemblies may be sanctified sufficiently for this, 2 Chronicles. 30. 2. Till men be
sufficiently sanctified, they cannot come to the Lords supper no more then keep
the passover, v^ 3. Remove in this all obstacles, all superstitions,
profanations, v. 14. O that all might be according to the Word of the Lord in
Pastors and people! 35.6. God is the God of order, in his own ordinances.
Worship him we must after the due order, lest in stead of a blessing we meet
with a blow; as David discovered and reformed, 1 Chronicles. 15. 2.13.


Motives to faith; then 1. Preaching profits. 2. Prayer prevayles. 3. The
Soldier triumphs. 4. Good done by God. 1. He will effect all. 2^ He will
bring through difficulties. 3. He will show his glory. 4^ He can do a world of
good in a week.




Motives to this faith in God; 1. Preaching by it profits men; How good is a
word, a sermon, a promise believed! it works effectually in them that believe,
1 These. 2.13. whereas the Gospel full of glad tidings profits not, being not
mixed with faith in them that hear it, Heb. 4. 2. 2. Prayer then prevails when
it is the prayer of faith; What is fasting without prayer, (prayer being a
special duty more to be mending on a fast day) or prayer without faith? this
day ye fast, this day ye pray, this day ye believe and speed; Asa cried to
God, relied on God, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and the Ethiopians fled, verse 12. 3. The
soldiers by this triumph, and the enemies fall; faith is good in the field,
faith is the warriors Target, the soldiers shield. Trust in God will raise
us, and ruin his enemies, Psalm. 20. 7.8. 4. God will do much good for those
who trust in him.


1. God will effect what they commit to him, trust to this Commissioner, and he
will bring all to pass; works shall succeed and be prosperous, when men rest
on the Lord: without faith, things will be at a st^nd, and not be effected:
you would have all ended comfortably that is happily begun, rest on the Lord,
and he will do it to your hand; Faith puts the business in, and will not take
it out of Gods hand, as Psalm. 37. 5. 2. God will carry believers through mids of
manifold troubles, and difficulties, with great ease, comfort, and safety; the
red Sea was for believers made dry land: Ye whose unparalleld pains have met
with unheard of difficulties in your proceedings, cast the eye of your faith
upon the Lord, to make your way plain and passable, that the Lords flock may
go (albeit through the wilderness,) Canaan-ward, Heb. 11. 29. 3. God will
show believers his glory, his glory of power to help, of mercy to pity, of
truth to keep promise, of wisdom to counsel them: men without faith, miss and
meet not with God: but bow the ear to that of Christ our Savior, Said I not
unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God,
John 11.40. 4. God can do a world of good for men in a week, Ratio quidem non
ass^quitur, quomodo ex nihilo sint omnia; in^o, ratio contradicit ex ni^ilo
nihil fieri; quod vero ratio non capit, fides intelligit. Par. in Heb. 11. 3.

In coelo plantat^ and terra renovata -- Ecclesia intelligitur. Sanct. in lo^.


he made a world in six days, that may cause us to rest on him; What great
things can God do in a day in your great council, for this sinful Kingdom,
and corrupted Church! mind what a day may bring forth, or a week bring about;
and rest on the Lord, who can work all our works for us: were a matter as hard
as to make a world, yet God can by his own hand (he needs no in^truments, who
are all unactive without him) plant the heavens, and lay the foundation of the
earth, Isay 51.16.
2. The manner of this fact, they are diligent every day, early compassing this
city Jericho seven days, having no rest till the work be done, the walls be
down, as the Lord had told them.

Faith in God is active for God, till it have done the will of God, Observe. 3.
the work of God, as Joshua and Israel did as God bad them without ceasing; so
Caleb a man of a generous spirit, having a regenerate heart, when others would
turn back, he would on to Canaan in the act of faith, he fully followed the
Lord, who promised them the land, Numb. 14. 24.

Faiths activenesse is A^^^ beat co^omoda and removete quaecunque sunt
incommoda ad promovendam ecclesiam. I^n. The good Kings of Judah, 1. abolished
idolatry, and superstition, and 2. planted true religion D. Will. on. Dan.
1. In removing stumbling blocks as walls out of the way, that Gods people may
hold on in Gods way and not decline: it is a command, Prepare the way, take up
the stumbling block out of the way of my people, Isay 57. 14. 2. In restoring
the worship of God, that all divine institutions may be enjoyed in a right
manner and due order: thus David was solicitous and reckoned himself
afflicted, till the Ark of God was set in its proper place, Psalm. 132. 1.
David's afflictions, his religious care to bring the Ark home before that breach
upon Vzzah. ^un: he vowed, and laid a solemn tie upon his soul; an oath, a
forcible obligation, verse 2. he would not give sleep to his eyes, or slumber
to his eyelids, ver. 4. in his new house which he had builded in the city of
David, verse 3. till he found out a place for the Lord, represented by the Ark,
verse 5.


In that faith is so active it may inform us, Inform.
1. It Is no wonder, that many (unwilling to be good, or wise to do evil) so
hinder and oppose faith in the means of it; the enemies have reason (as they
would be true to a cursed cause) to resist it, which will not rest till it have
razed their walls, ruined their building, crossed their cause, overthrown
their helps, and dashed their hopes.

1. The devil hinders faith, that it be not preached to men: Paul would have
come to the Thessalonians, for the furtherance of faith; but Satan (an
adversary) hindered, 1 These. 2. 18. the devil in his instruments turns away
men (desirous to hear the word of God) from the faith, as Elymas ( the child
of the devil) dealt with the Deputy Sergius Paulus, a prudent man, Acts 13.
7,8,10. 2. The world allows and likes no believers, they are all under the
observation of an envious eye, as ^ahab was in Jericho, Ios. 22. the men of
this world, not men of God, forbid preaching, the word of faith, and salvation,
1 These. 2. 16. they are stiff opposers: as Apostaticall Alexander greatly
withstood (who had once stood for) Paul's preaching, 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15.
They put away, shoulder, (...).
and thrust out the word of God, Acts 13.46

2. Many persons be wicke^ men, men of no faith, as is evident by their
non-activity for God, for whom faith is active; and of this sort are they, 1.
Who be pleaders for Baal, and his wall that it should not down; when it was
down, that men if they do not stigmatize, yet they particularize reformers,
eminent men, as Gedeon, ( a man, well known in those corrupt times, by his work
of faith) appointed to dye. Baals Altar was cast down, Iud. 6.28. they said
Gedeon had done it, verse 29. they willed his father Ioash, to bring him forth
that he may dye, verse 30. a fitter censure for those who will plead for Baal;
he that will plead for him, let him be put to death, verse 31. 2. Who be
neuters, as lu^e-warme, most loathed persons, who will not meddle, nor have a
hand in any good, as cursed Meroz, a people who came not to the help of the
Lord, Iud. 5. 23. men bitterly cursed of God, as the Reubenites, mere
worldlings, minding their folds and flocks, verse 16. lazy Gilead tarried at
home, verse 17. Dan tarried, minded his trade, his ships and traffic, ibid.
Asher on the Sea coast abode in his breaches to fortify himself as weak, verse
17. and secure Iabesh Gilead yielded, sent in none to punish delinquents, men
of great folly and villainy in Israel, Iud. 21. 9. albeit it was by an ordinance
of their Parliament in a general Assembly, 20. verse 2. 9, 10. that the
children of Belial might receive condign punishment, verse 13.


3. Who be active against the Church, for the enemy, with the enemies of Church
and State, as Edom, Moah, Ammon, join with Philistines, Tyrians, Assyrians,
degenerate professors, fit companions, (in service against the Church, albeit
they pretend the Church Service) of lewdest persons, Papists, Atheists, and men
of flagitious lives, Psalm. 83. 5, 6, 7.

This did Amelek, feared not God, but smote the Church in its way for liberty,
Deuteronomy. 25. 17,18. These as Balaam (hired to curse the Church of God) can pray,
read a prayer, yea preach against the children of God, under the notion of
heresy, hypocrisy, schism, rebellion, treason, Numb. 22. 17. 23. 8.

4. Who be builders of Ierichoes walls, as the men who set up superstitions,
Altars, images, innovations; they be known men, God (if they belong to him)
grant them repentance, lest that curse be clapped upon them, Cursed be the man
before the Lord, that rises up and builds this city Jericho, Joshua 6. 26.




Faith in God, being so Active for God, Exhort.
as men persuaded of this, be active, quit your selves like men, as did
General Ioab to his brother Abishai in that fight against Ammon and the
Syrians, Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for
the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good, 2 Samuel 10,
11, 12. receive that counsel, put your selves in Array against Babylon round
about; all ye that bend the bow shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has
sinned against the Lord, Ier. 50. 14.

1. Rulers, ye Worthies of our Israel, called out of Noble families in the
several coasts of the Kingdom, as they in Israel out of Ephraim, Benjamin,
Machir, Issachar, Zebulon, and Naphtali, be^ ye of raised and stirring spirits
in the work of the Lord, Iud. 5. 14, 15, 18.

1. In the civil State. Most sage Senate, touch the mountains of proud
incendiaries, they will become a plain before you, Zechar. 4. 7. Scatter the
everlasting mountains of firm settled Canaanites, make the perpetual hills
bow, Hab. 3. 6. Remove the wicked from before (they will rush into the presence
of the, as special servants, and Chaplains in Ordinary to) the King, that his
throne may be established in righteousness, take away the dross from the
silver, impious persons be very pernicious to Princes, as Darius counselors,
Herod's flatterers, Pharaohs sorcerers, Rehob^ams young companions, with many
Hamans to Ahasu^^^^, D^^g^ to Saul, who blemish the repu^ation of Princes,
Spiritus dicuntur, quia professione erant spirituales Patres; tres, multi
su^ficientes negotio suo peragendo; impuri, ortu, ingenio ac moribus; ^imiles
ranis, sordibus, impudentia, loquacitate, clamositate, aures regum obtundunt;
ranarum quadrata capita geometricis Pileis referunt, Par. i^ lo^.
as Sh^bna did Heze^iahs, Prove. 25. 45. Leave no frogs, that creep into Kings
chambers, provoking them by their croaking to make war; they are known by
the g^^ter whence they come, out of the mouth of the Dragon, out of ^he mouth
of the beast and the false Prophet; they are spirits of devils, which go forth
unto the Kings of the earth, to gather them to battle; Prince against his
Principality, King against Parliament, Kingdom against Kingdom, nation
against nation, England against Scotland; by Men like frogs impudent in
croaking, the frogs head like their caps; quadrata ranarum capita; frogs are an
Egyptian plague, Rev. 16. 13,14. Here is work for the power of a Parliament,
that the King may have no croakers in his Chamber or Court, to be offensive to
his Royal ^ares, ^ha^ ^he Kingdom distracted and bleeding may have justice
and peace^ this (God commanding you so) do according to your wisdom, given
you of God.

1. (...), A n^w decree made, ^ by Nebuchadn^zzar, to punish blasphemers, Dan.
3. 29.
binding (...) any vanity^ or burdens which lie heavy on the Church: the Kings
word was changed, Dan. 3. 28. the decree ^ullified, verse 10. as did Darius,
Dan. 6. 26. and Haman^ letters of Mart reversed by Ahas^^r^s to Esther and
Mordecai, Esther 8. 5. 8.

By Darius for true Religion, 6. 26. A great change in Kings and Laws.
2. Contend with great one^, Nobles, Judges, Just^ces, that be profan^
themselves, or counten^nce ^^iquity in the Kingdom; as did renowned Ne^emi^^,
with those men who profaned the Sabbath, N^h^m. 13. 17, 18.

3. Destroy the accursed, d^aw the wheel over the wicked, take away the
accursed things, Vnius faci^us pesti^ multorum Salvian. de guber. Deo. l. 7.
else God will have a controversy with England, and deny us his presence in all
our proceedings; away with Achans, Josh. 7.11. 12.

2. In the Church.

1. Cast out block^, stumbling blocks: as Asa took courage and put aw^y
abominations out of the land, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7, 8. and Iehosophat took away the
high places and groves out of Judah, and did not leave them to please the
people, 17. 6. Show you your integrity, as that pious Prince, 20. 32. let it
be the peoples blemish, to affect and keep ^p high places, verse 33. Remember
the Prelates, as that proud Primate Diotrephes, with malicious words, (...).
prating against and casting out good Church Members, 3 Ioh. 10. Bear not, but
be imp^tient with men who pretend to be Apostolical, and are Apostaticall
liars, Rev. 2. 2. Forget not the odious sin of non-re^idency, idle, dumb, and
scandalous ministers, which make the people loath the offerings of the Lord,
drive them out of Gods house for the wickedness of their doings, Hos. 9. 15.
Regard the godly discipline of zealous Josiah, he put down idolatrous Prie^^s,
2 Kin. 23. 5. that they should not come up to the Altar of the Lord in
Jerusalem, verse 9. It is recorded what Nehemiah did in his zeal and
reformation, he cleansed the Chambers (of intruders) in the Courts of the house
of our God, Nehe^. 13. 7, 8,9. and chaced away Sa^ballats sons in law from him,
ve^. 28. These (as the Ierich^n^i^es ^hut their gates, Josh. 6. 1.) hinder the
passage of the people of God into the land of Canaan. Mat. 23. 13. ^ee ^inder;
people be too slow, but it is laid on the Priests as the impediment, ye would
not, verse 37. It is considerable what was done to the leprous house: Levit.
14. 40.
1. Take away the stones in which the plague is. ^. Take other stones and put in
the place of them, Lev 14. v. 42. If after the house be scraped and plaistered,
the plague come again and break out in the house, v. 43. then break down the
house, the stones of it, and timber thereof, and all the mortar of the house;
it is a fretting leprosy, verse 45.


A leprosy was discovered in Queen Mary her days, after that zealous Prince
King Edward the sixth, but all was new plaistered in the Reign of that Englands
Deborah, Queen Elizabeth: but the plague is broken out again, wherefore down
must the house, leave not one stone upon another unthrowne down. For
profaneness from the Priests is gone out through all the land, profaneness,
superstitions, are spread; down with their walls, their builders, their
repairers, their defenders, as Ioash judged, Iud. 6. 31.

2. Erect ^ wall about the Church in building it up, as Exodus 15. 2. prepare
God an habitation, with a stirring spirit do the Lords work, Hag. 1. 14. and
then prosper in your work, From this day will I bless you; consider what
success has followed since the voting down the Prelacy, what blessing God
gives you, Hag. 2. 18, 19.

2. Preachers be active to cast down Antichrist, Popery in doctrine, and
wor^hip; the Churches be called Reformed, not only in doctrine true, but in
discipline pure.

1. In preaching the word of truth; Preachers must do their work as well as
Princes, to cast down the man of sin; God casts him down with the spirit of
his mouth, 2 Th^s. 2. 8. preach the Gospel, Christ conquers by it, riding on
the white horse, Revel. 6. 2. Dagon will fall before the Ark, 1 Samuel 5. 3.

2. In praying, coveting the best gifts, to lift up a prayer, not in their
hand, but in their heart for Zions happy deliverance; not in a formal
customary bedulling manner, but watching thereunto according to all occasions
and seasons; we having the same spirit of prayer as Isaiah had, let us lift a
prayer as Isaiah was bid, 2 King. 19.4.

3. In our examples, as patterns; be patterns of believers in spirit, 1 Timothy
4. 12. be as the Hee-Goates before the flocks, Ier. 50. 8. The Priests
circuited Jericho, go into the gap, stand in the hedge for the house of Israel
to stand in the battle in this day of the Lords controversy with England,
Ezekiel. 13. 5.

3. People be active for God.

1. By their portions. Quis Domino mente credit and facultate noncredit? quis
Deo animam suam ma^cipat and pecunia^ negat? Salvian. ad Eccl. Cath. lib. 2.
Honor the Lord with your substance, now when his enemies would rob us of
Religion, let your Merchandise be holiness to the Lord, Isay 23. 18. Prove. 3.
9. 2. By their persons, power, and lives; it is a glory in ^ebulon and
Naphtali, they jeoparded their lives, Iud. 5. 18. 3. By prayer: earnest prayer
was made by the Church in a troublous time, Acts 12. 5. that God would remember
Church-enemies Edomites, Psalm. 137. 7.
1. The manner of this Activenesse.

1. Obedientially, do all according to Gods will, rule and call, else a man
may smart for it, as Iehu did, Hos^ 1, 4. Iehu reformed after his own and not
Gods heart, and God would be revenged on the house of Iehu. Do all according
to the law of God, and then let all obey^ as Artaxerxes to Ezra, Ezra 7 25,26.
Gods laws are not new but old ways, his law is not novelty, but the best
antiquity; Ask for the old way, Ier. 6. 16.

Away cast up of God to go in, Isay 57. 14.

Thus peace shall be to you in doing as God commands you, Exodus 18. 23.

2. Diligently; the Israelites go about Jericho seven days, and seven times
the seventh day, most of all on the Sabbath: enemies receive greatest blows,
and the Church greatest help, blessing, victories on that day; Be not weary of
your work albeit it cost you many days, work not slothfully, He is cursed who
does the work of the Lord negligently, Ier. 48. 10. 3. Unanimously they all
compassed it; unity is happy in the people, in the Preachers, in the
Parliament, all as one man, all one way, Ne^em. ^. 1. no divisions^ Are ye not
Members in this High Court, both Houses one Parliament, all vote for the truth,
for holiness, for justice against iniquity, sc^ndall, Popery? it is the good
hand of God to our joy to give you one heart, 2 Chronicles. 30. 12. with your
magnanimity, to grace you with unanimity. You call to mind this day, we have
one Covenant and Protestation to maintain truth, to withstand evil; be
enlarged in covenanting, as of Iehoiada it is writ, He made a covenant between
the Lord and the King and the people, that they should be the Lords people; (
when this was) then all the people of the land brak^ down thoroughly Baal his
house, altars, and images to pieces; unanimity works effectually to cast down
iniquity, 2 Kin. 11. 17, 18. 4. Patiently, 1. in tarrtance for a fit time, the
Lords time; we see nothing done (we call great things nothing, who the other
year would have been glad of some of those many things be now effected) at
many days work, as they in compassing Jericho many times, 12 times saw never a
stone fallen, yet it will succeed well in the end, and all will down. Though
the vision tarry, wait for it; at the end it shall speak, and not lie; it will
surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3.

2. In silence, mutter not; in this compassing of Jericho, not one spoke a word
till the last day; and then ye shall shout, Joshuah 6. 10.

Stand still, fear not, hold your peace, Exodus 14. 13. 14.

Wait ye for the salvation of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 17.

5. Confidently by faith, an active grace, valia^tly be strong in the Lord, who
will not deceive, Heb. 11. 34. Stagger not at the promise, Romans 4. 20. call to
mind ye mighty men, the Magistrates must have Lyon-like courage in every
p^ssage of their work, all the steps of Solomon's throne were s^pp^rted with
Lions, 1 Kings 10. 19. 20. 6. Constantly till the wall be down, the work be
done, and way be made for the Lords people to pass on toward their
inheritance; wait on God till mercy come, Psalm. 123. 1, 2. till the Lord l^ok
down upon us, Lam. 3. 49, 50. as Israelites w^astling till we have a blessing,
Genesis 32. 26. nev^r h^ld your peace day nor night, keep not silence, give the
Lord no rest till he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isay
62. 6, 7.
2. The motives to this Activenesse.

1. In regard of the enemies. 1. They are active, a busy world it is, they lay
their heads together to plot mischief, and as Sampsons foxes turned tail to
tail to burn up all, they are set on fire, Iud. 15. 4. they take crafty
counsel, they consult: shall they stir against good for evil, and we sit
still and not move against evil for good? Psalm. 83. 3. Philistines could
animate one another, Be strong, quit your selves like men, against the Israel
of God, 1 Samuel 4. 9. they encourage themselves in an evil matter, Psalm. 64. 5,
6. 2. They would ruin all, Jerusalem must (so they have their will) down to
the ground, Raze it, raze it even to the foundation, Psalm. 137. 7. they would
have the name of Israel no more in remembrance, 83.4. They would cut off
Ireland, that none might remember the Lord any more. May not this provoke men's
zeal (to see the wicked devour the men more righteous then themselves) to
help Ireland with all forwardness? alas for it, the day is great, cruel men
have shed blood, the blood of Saints, the blood of Prophets, and in justice
they must have blood to drink: for they are worthy, Rev. 16.5,6. Reward Babylon
as she has rewarded you, double to her double, in the cup she has filled,
fill to her double, 18. 6. 3. They be spiritlesse, faint and fearful, they
fly away, follow on; the Canaanites hearts melted before the armies of Israel,
Josh. 5. 1. and no courage left in Jericho, 2. 11. near a ruin, they are dead,
6.21. A hornet of fear is before their fall; fear not them who are half dead
men, Exodus 23. 27, 28. 4. They are fallen, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; it is
repeated, it is certain, Revel. 18.8. fallen 1. in dominion, Kings and people
fall from them. 2. In doctrine, her folly is manifested. 3. In credit for
religion and holiness, which made them feared and honored. 4. In rich
revenues taken away by the power of the Gospel, the whore is a withered, that
once was a well favored harlot, the beasts Kingdom is full of darkness, (...)

Rev^ 16.10.11.


a Scottish mist is fallen on Episcopacy, the vial is on them, and yet they
repent not. Go on and prosper in your work, and the Lord hasten Babylons full
and final fall. Rev. 18. 2.
2. In regard of the work. 1. It is high, an Angelical work; who but Angels
power out the vialls. May not men work? Rev. 15. 1, 6. 2. It is holy, a divine
work, you work as Gods; you have a divine title, in office, Gods, Psalm. 82. 6.
You work for the King and the Kingdom, for your countries, and our
consciences; your and our Eternity. You work for Christ and his Kingdom, you
work for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 3. It is a happy, it is a blessed work;
happy you in rewarding Babylon as she has served us; you may by just censure
do to her, what she in her agents has done to us in unjust sentence, Psalm.
137. 8. You work here, but you and yours have many a prayer, every day prayer,
often in the day prayer, Christ's servants in the Ministry pray for you, Christ's
people his beloved ones pray for you, all that can pray, pray for you^ the
blessing of the poor, the prisoner, the exiled, the persecuted, the oppressed,
the just, is upon you, that you may be as the Sun when it goes in his
strength, over all mountains, and sublunary impediments. Much honored, you
may well work, you are under many a prayer, with many a tear powered out to God
the hearer of prayers, that you and your work may prosper: it will wither any
most flourishing bay tree, to have the Church pray against it; it will put
vigor and spirit into any gracious heart, to have Gods children pray for it.
Iud. 5. 31. 4. It is Honorable, a work full of credit: Ioshuah is by this made
famous in the world, upon this fall his fame was noised throughout all the
country, Josh. 6. 27. Great is, and greater will be the glory of this Englands
Parliament, albeit you meet with ill requital, by an unworthy and unthankful
people, yet your work will redound to ages, to posterity that will know your
name; you continue Isreal's name, yea Christ's name among us; you shall be
called the friends of nations, the healers of the Kingdom, deliverers raised
up, Saviors come up on mount Sion, the repairers of the breach, the restorers
of the path to dwell in, Isay 58. 12. Work the Lords work, study his name and
glory, he will mind your memory, and honor, your name shall be blessed, Prove.
10. 7.
3. In regard of good to many. 1. The King shall reign in honor, and happiness,
(all impediments removed) a loving King over a li^g^ people^ his throne will be
established i^ righ^^ousnesse, Prove. 25. 5. the evil (the King sitting on the
throne of judgment) will be scattered away with his eyes, 20. 8. His Crown
will be in safety, and His Person in dignity, verse 21.

His Subjects many to His Honor, 14. 28.

His Countenance as life to them, 16. 15. and His Favor as the cloud of the
latter rain, yea as dew upon the grass, 19. 22. to the joy of his people by
justice, 29. 2.

2 The way to Canaan, heaven opened, Doc^tur po^^ l^ngam ign^rantiam facienda^
esse hominibus copiam cognoscendae veritatis. Locupletissimum veritatis
incrementum, doctrine pluribus capitibus illustrata, enucl^atius cognita,
distinctius tradita. Bri^ in loc.
and by the preaching of the Gospel made plain, which by impediments was shut
up; the Temple of God was open, Revel. 11. 19. After much ignorance, truth
shall be known more clearly; the little book will be open, the veil will be
taken away, Revel. 10. 2. which was marvellously overspread, Isay 25. 7. down
with these walls, and then many may go on more comfortably, hopefully,
speedily, to the promised land. 3 Liberty for Gods chosen, to come out of the
fellowship of Canaanites, to hold communion with true Israelites: as Rahab was
freed from Jericho when the walls fell, and it was taken; She was saved alive
and dwelt in Israel: many now greatly afflicted with the company of the evil
doers, when the work of reformation comes to an end, shall be able to live in
communion of Saints; Joshua 6. 25. 4 An addition to the Church of God of many
distressed, who by humane vanities, and inhumane persons could not dwell in the
land; who will come home, and fall in to us abundantly by a reformation: many
went away, but went not from us; but were scattered, they love the assembly of
Saints, without separation from them; when offenses be taken away, they being
driven away will be gathered; we shall lose none but gain many, Ecclesia D^i
est q^asi oculus: n^m u^ in oculum etiamsi parva sordes in^idit, t^tum l^men
ob^aeca^; sic in Ecclesiastico corpore, etiamsi pa^ci sordida faciant, prope
^otum Ecclesiastici splendoris lumen obscurant. Sal^ian. de Gubern. Dei lib. 7.
^
whereas men's former ways have scattered Saints and increased Papists, and
superstitions have overspread the face of Religion in many places: our study
to continue the Church in peace by vain ceremonies, has increased
distractions in it; and the will and wit of man to content and convert Papists
with May-poles and Morris-dances, is both vicious and ridiculous. King Asa his
serious reformation, in putting down Idols, and in setting up Gods worship,
brought in men; 2 Chronicles. 15 8. And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the
strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasses, and out of Simeon: (for they
fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was
with him) verse 9.
4 In regard of God, 1 His word, 1 Calling you his choice ones to do his work,
as to Solomon, God has chosen thee to build him a Sanctuary; take heed, Gods
providence was in your choice, people set their hearts on you, gave voice and
hand for you, to do this work; you see your call, mind your duty, authority,
opportunity, and do as God has called you, 1 Chronicles. 28. 10. 2 Commanding you
to do his work, be strong, and of good courage, do it; v. 20.
2. His reward to you, your work shall be rewarded, so did Obed assure Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7. you shall not lose your labor in Gods service, Ierem. 31. 16.
God will not be a man as Nebuchadnezzar, lack his wages for his Army, Ezekiel. 29.
19. but the Lord said, I have given him the land of Egypt for his labor,
wherewith he served against it, (Tire) because they wrought for me, says the
Lord, verse 20.

Then he will give his voluntary servants a plenary reward, 2 John 8.

1 Internal peace, joy, hope, the fruit of well-doing in your pure
consciences, inward friends, very fast and faithful to you without falsehood or
flattery, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 2 External in your houses, God will bless you, and
build your families; take care of Gods house, his worship, Religion, children,
let God alone with your households; you are from them for to wait on God, God
will be with them to wait to do you good; mind Gods house now at this day^
this time, God will care for yours for time to come; as to David, the Lord will
build thee an house, 1 Chr. 17. 10. David said in thankfulness to his God,
thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come, verse 17. 3
Eternal, the reward of faith, (...); mercedem fidei: Bez. Praemium: Tr. inter.
the salvation of the soul, 1 Peter 1. 9. God will never give less then a
Kingdom, o be faithful in this Kingdom, you shall have a call to inherit a
prepared Kingdom; Ye blessed, inherit ye it. Mat. 25 34.
3 His presence, behold him, Moses saw him, hence is your ability, sufficiency,
safety, success, think on it every day to meet with God in your Honorable
assembly, God is among you gods, God judges among the Gods, Hebrews 11. 27.
with Psalm. 82.1.

1 To work before you: God wrought on the Ierichuntines ere Joshua came to
them, Rahab told the spies, The Lord has given you the land, your terror is
fallen on them, they faint because of you, Joshua 2.9. God has wrought before
you in Scotland, an honored nation, our dearest brethren, a loyal people,
most faithful subjects. You have had your feet on the neck of the enemy,
follow on in justice and holiness; so shall God do to all your and his
enemies. God will clear your righteousness as the light, and your judgment as
the noon day, Psalm. 37. 6. 2 To work for you: God will work all your works for
you, to your hand, when they may be too hard for you, Isay 26. 12. Christ that
man with a drawn sword comes in for his, as a captain of the Lords host, to
fight for them when Joshua could not tell which way to assault Jericho, Joshua
5. 13, 14. 3 To work with you: as with Gedeon; The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of valor, Iud. 6. 12. the sword of the Lord and Gedeon will make
the enemies run, cry, and fly away, 7. 20, 21. Exibitis victores, alacres, quia
Deus ^rit dux vester, vosque proteget and diriget. Cornel. a Lap. in loc. Ruina
Babylonis praebitura sanctis laetandi and celebra^di Dei jucundissimum
argumentum. Par.
4 To be rereward to you, to gather you up, the Lord will regard the faint and
weary, he will help his on, he will shield his from fear of the enemies and
hurt of evil: The Lord shall go before you, and the God of Israel shall be
your rereward, Isai 52. 12.
4 His praise and glory (your ultimate end, your chief desire) when the walls
be down the people shout, Joshua 6. 20. the Church will praise God when Babylon
falls, much people in heaven (the Church reformed and redeemed from the earth)
were saying Allelujah, Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the
Lord our God, Revel. 19. 1. for he has judged the great whore, and has
avenged the blood of his servants at her hand, verse 2. again Allelujah verse
3. all the company of Saints say again Allelujah, verse 4. a voice charging
me^ to praise God, verse. 5. Allelujah, for the Lord God omnip^tent reigns,
verse 6.


Let the fear of the Almighty fall upon all your hearts who come this day to
lay your selves low before him, go from this duty with renewed purposes and
confirmed resolutions to be for the Lord and his work with all activenes. Think
on the enemies of the Church: Be they active? and not you! Would they ruin
all? and not you study to preserve all? Be they spiritlesse, may not you have
heartinesse? Be they fallen? will you fear them? Consider what may carry you
on in your work, it is high, and holy, happy, and honorable: be of good
courage and do it; ponder in your hearts the good you may do in your work,
the Kings Honor, the Subjects peace, the way to heaven more opened, the
liberty of the Church procured, and an addition to the Church of many
scattered, all call upon you, and under God depend on you. With deepest
thoughts regard Gods word calling and commanding you; Gods reward internal,
external, and eternal for you; Gods pre^en^e to work before you, for you,
with you: and to be rereward to you; Gods praise the greatest good, the
chiefest fruit of all your work, who will allow you comfort; and take the glory
to himself: vow this day to the Lord and perform it Say, every soul, I am
the Lords, that it may be evident you have fasted to the Lord, Christianus
nisi bona opera fecerit, fidem suam penitus approbare non possit, Salv. de
Gubern. lib. 4.
prayed to the Lord, believed in the Lord, while you work for the Lord; then
the Lord will turn our Trouble into Peace, our Crosses into Comforts, our
Fasting into Feasting, our Prayer into Praise, our Sorrow into Joy, and our
Mourning into a good day.

FINIS.

