Parnassus Aboriens: OR, SOME SPARKS OF Poesy.

By R.W. Philomus.

Ovid: Trist: 5. Eleg: 1: Hic quoque talis erit, qualis fortuna Poetae,
Invenies toto Carmine dulce nihil. LONDON, Printed in the Year; 1664.

ITER ORIENTALE: Performed in April, 1662.
A Templar, who had's Littleton dissolved,
Eaten his Cook, and's Kitchen pawned, resolved
To take the air, and for his recreation
To grant his broken window's a vacation.
Leaving his fellow-Students for to eat
Their wheaten Trenchers in the stead of Meat:
The only heyrlome that is traduc't from Consump is hic forte aliis, ut vertere
morsus
Exiguam in Cererem penuria adegit edendi:
E^ violare man^, malisque audacibus orbem
Fatalis cr^sti, patulis nec parcere quadris. Virg: Aeu: 7.

those
Tr^jans, which they their ancestors suppose.
But first to Lealbare' a goes, where he
Was wont to meet with the Fraternity.
There found a Draper, who his shop had drunk,
And trusted all his Wares unto a Punk.
Him he engaged for sympathy of state
As convoy, to encounter sim'lar fate.
And, see the strange concurrence of their wills,
He, in his own, his friends desire fulfills.
As courtlike Gallants use to do, he meant
To wait upon a Lady into Kent
Then there in company, a pretty woman,
For disposit'on coy, and yet not common.
Well, time's prefixed, and we all provide
To take advantage of the morning tide.
Thus suffrages agreeing the debate
Was ended, and we p rt for it grew late.
Next morn' the Lady (who received a shot
Over night by the Paph'an Archer, but knew not
From whence it came, for the subtle boy did lie
Behind the Sable Curtains of an Eye.
Yet the symptoms were so poignant, that they broke
Morpheus his le de^ locks and burst his yoke.)
As soon as Phospher had his course begun
Arose and did anticip^te the ^un:
Hastens to the meetingplace, and there attends
The ^ppro^ch of her desiderated friends.
At last, but not so soon as she desired,
With longing expect^tion well near tired,
Through the Tralucent-glass she did espy
The blind Where Is Footbal's doomed for company.
Her surly p^ss ons being thus ^ppe^s^d
O res were at hand, to waft us when we pleased,
To Belines gate, and now twastime for Thames,
By the help of th retrogade aspiring streams,
Was at his Zenith, and would quickly wend
Along with the Pass^ge-boat toward Graves-end.
So off we thrun and stem the watery tract
But 't seems the Watermen were not exact
In calculat'on for before we can
Arrive at the Key from the almost singing Swan,
The Water ebbed so f^st, the Gravesend boat
Was put from th'stairs riding along a float.
And we, because the Barge was gone before's,
Were well content to trust our selves in Oars.
So down we hasted, and they would quickly born's
With a side wind beyond the Cuckold's horns.
But from that port, scarce half a mile had went,
Before the Reaches grew more turbulent.
So that the boat with lofty tolutation,
Struck fear in some, in others a vexation;
Because some feared, and the Lady was full loath
To lie invelop'd in the course Tilt-cloath.
Such is the nature of timidity
Though seeing caused it, yet she loved to see.
At last a long-wing'd Pinnace, which was bound
For some remoter bay, did more astound.
The lusty lazy lubbers cease to row,
And, having leave a little way to tow,
Crossed over to meet their Scyph, and here appears
Their utmost skill, and our extremest fears
For, had we gone too fast our boat h^d split,
Too slow, we could not have o'ertaken it.
Thus in a strange Dilemma we avoid
Scyll' and Charybdis and to the boat are tied.
And now with Eaglewinged speed we plow
The watery ridges, and can scarce tell how
We are so fast transported, but at last
Their Sails begin to flag, and we as fast
Release our prow which was fast bound to them,
And trust to the mercey of a r^ging stream.
Which sometimes throws us up into the Sky,
And sometimes lets us fall to hell well nigh.
Meanwhile we lie supinely on our backs,
One laughs, one sings, another fears a Wrack:
And therefore her ejaculations sends
To the supreme Director to defend's;
And so he did indeed, at last we land
All s^fe on the long wished for Kentish strand.
And here the Lion is the word, where we
Turned off Canary-bowls with jollitie.
Thus after storms of sighs, and showers of tears,
Joy, when it comes, most joviall appears.
But th'clock strikes One, and fourteen miles to ride,
It Is time for those to go that want a guide.
But you are most vile Exactors that ye are,
Five shillings for a double horse so far?
What is the reason that ye thus exact,
'Bove other Englishmen in each compact?
Is It cause those Travellors which touch your border,
May be deterred from proceeding farther?
Or that Exoticks which are outward bound,
May have cause to forswear the English ground?
Hereby you verify those Visam Bri^annos hospitib^s feros. Hor: Car: 3. Od: 4.
imputations
Imposed upon's of old by foreign Nations.
But we are for Rochester, where we survay
The stately Bridge, and Chatham's royal Bay.
And amongst the rest the Crown mu'nt be forgot,
Where we must needs alight and drink a pot.
There we are showed the Room which did contain
The Majesty of Britain's Sovereign:
And the great Bed he lay in as he went
Toward his Throne from direful banishment.
But we soon mount again, and fix our station
Nigh the Ham to which frogs give denomination.
Next day we traverse the enameled Fields,
And view the rarities Pomona yields.
Walk those Quincunc' all Cherry-orchards round,
From Stroma to the hoary-Rock renowned.
Able to glut Voluptas with delight,
And dull old Avariti's appetite.
It Is with exub'rant sweets so well endowed,
That, maugre opposit'on, I Will conclude
Kent is old Alb'on's Eden for delight,
And his Hesperides for all but site.
But what is this that thus disturbs my rest?
Sure Love has taken Seisin of my breast.
Celarent's Prodroma and I must be
Subjugated in sign of slavery.
Ah poor Medea, how I Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco. Virg: Aen: 1.
pity those
Whose reason does their love, like Sed trahit invitam nova vis; aliudque
Cupido,
Men's aliud suade; video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor -- Ovid: Metam: 7.

thine, oppose!
But I submit old boy, and will sit still
Let Hymen and the sisters work their will.
By this time Phoebus Patron of the Bays
Unlocked the Daisy five times with his rays.
So we return again, and take no care
Who must defray the fundling bill of fare.
THE CHRONICLE
Insulting Anna first posses't
The Elective Empire of my breast.
But she still kept me in such slavery,
I could not long admit her tyranny.
So I dethroned her, and a while
With her was monarchy exiled.
For Pegg and Sal years three or four
Ruled by a Consulary power.
But yet I seemed well amended now,
For these indulgent Queens did but allow
Me too much freedom, which provoked
My Rebell-heart to quit their yoke.
Then reigned Elizabeth the first
That bears that n^me, and most accursed.
^^^all the privileges that were done
(...) her for me were by compulsion.
And what man is there but believes
The will enhanceth what one gives.
Then Besse the second bore the sway,
Until the helm was plucked away
(...) of her hand by the admired Anne,
^^^^gh not the first yet second unto none.
And she had reigned until now
(...) that the Fates would not allow.
Then did deposed Besse arise
And first began to tyrannize.
Intending, but she was deceived, thereby
To frown a Rebel into loyalty.
For ANNE the third possessed the chair
Whom God grant Atr'pos long may spare.
Upon a Kiss.
Dialogue
Sylvanus. Cupid. Sylv. I Prithee Cupid tell me this,
What pleasure is there in a kiss?
I Have kissed our Mopsa's lips, but never
Could find one jot of sweetness there.

Cup. Poor silly swain 't no wonder is
Thou could not taste that subtle bliss.
It Is sublimated far above
All sense but what is inspired by Love.

Sylv. I cannot choose but laugh to see
A boy fraught with such subtilty.
To make's believe such sweets there dwell
Which naught but Ignorance can tell.

Cup. Peace daring mortal ruled by sense,
Blaspheme not mine omnipotence.
Least with this shaft, my thunder, I
Do burn thee for thy Haeresy.

Sylv. Alas blind boy do'n't think that I
Regard thy weak Artillery.
Go, shoot at Sparrows not at Hearts
Mine here defyes thy sharpest darts.

Cup. This bow made Phoebus yield to me,
And now, rash youth, it shall wound thee. --
Now go and see if thou can taste
The sweets of Lovers chief repast.

Novembris. 16.
Sylv. I Have been and seen and tasted more
Than ever I could discern before.
And now conclude no pow'r's above
That Oecumenick Monarch, Love.
Such kisses Oscala libavit natae. -- Virg: Aenead. 1.
Erycina gave
To Jove her father, when she would crave
A respite for her wandering boy
Escaping from the flames of Troy.
Nor were her namesake's ought behind
By the Lovers Alchymy refined.
The Magister all Non voluptaosim sicat Suavium, nec religiosum tantum vel^^
Osculum, nec fictiti^m ^anquam Basium, nec lasciv^m uti (...), sed Quinta
quaedam essentia hisce omnibus elimatior.
Quintessence
Of (...). Theo^: (...). 28
suavity and Innocence.
And now the Heptarchs of the skies
With us did seem to sympathize.
The King of Poets and the Queen
Of Love were in Nov. 16. Hor. 8. and in Conjunction from whence she became
Oriental. --
conjunct'on seen.
Hence, by a Praedesigne of Fate,
Her Or'entality bears date.
And my Ianthe shines to me
As bright a Morning Star as she.
Chorus. Let Rebels now his rule disclaim,
For my part I Love's Liegeman am:
And henceforth Orthodox will be
In worshipping his Deity.
Obeying his Poppoean law
Which keeps the Universe in awe.

The Parallel.
LEt Nature's Cabalists explore the cause
That Ignivomous mount' has stopped his jaws,
Who with his often eructat'ons hurled,
Such flames as used to terrify the world.
Those subterran'an fires, though there at rest,
Have broken out, I feel, within my breast.
My heart is now Vesuvius, that flame
Wherein I broyl, proves Vulcan is not lame.
Here Sirius still reigns, nor can I find
The least abatement by Etes'an wind.
That seeming Amphitheatre, where eye
Never saw ought personate but Vacancy,
Is here become the real place where lies
Both Scene and Stage of my long Tragedies
By Erycina acted; and beneath
Her Statue's fixed crowned with a victors wreath.
But here we differ, that fire used to be
Kindled to bode some dire Catastrophe:
And so was transient, or did admit
Respite for want of stuff to cherish it.
But these great Conflagrations which I
Endure (alas) do still receive supply
Of Fuel to augment them, while the same
Proves both Incendiary, and the flame.
Upon the Ides of March.
Onomasticon.
PErusing my old Kalend r, I find
This day to great Idibus est Annae festum geniale perennae, Hand procul a
ripis, advena Tybri, tuis. Ovid: Fast: 3.
Perenna's feast assigned:
Which hard by Tyber's banks was wont to be
Celebrated with much solemnity.
But since their Flamins left it in suspense
Who 'twas did merit such preeminence,
Whether the Moon, Themis, Elisa's sister,
Or her Jove made a Cow because he kissed her.
I hope I may without offense apply't
To one that more deserves that Epithet.
For all our Druids have long since forsook
These Woods wherein they once such pleasure took.
And no Remayns can show what Rituals
Served at these antiquated Festivals.
Here then I Will sit, and in my fancy raise
A Fane for Erycina's ann'all praise.
Wherein our Oreads and Hamadryads,
Our Seagreen Nereids, and our clearskin'd Naiads,
Shall yearly the new Operas recite
As was the custom in the Illic and cantant, quiicquid didicere Theatris.
Ovid: Fast. 3.
former rite,
Then 'tshall appear Ianthe does excel
The famous gossip of our Buxton well.
Then Decio shall be in more repute
Than she that Malta's Knights did institute.
She that tought Ladies first to ride aside
Shall be by Amaranta then outvy'd.
And Polyonoma more right shall show,
Then any other can pretend, thereto.
Then future ages may perhaps believe
The year, to which she Etymon does give,
Hence took Nec mihi parva fides annos hinc isse priores Anna quod hoc coep^a
est mense Perenna coli. Id: Ibid. (...)
beginning: While my Muse shall do
Her best to make this Anne Perenna too.
And I will unto nothing else aspire
But so much happiness as not to (c) Nil admirari, prope res est una, Numici,
Solaque quae possit facere and servare bea^u^ Hor: lib: 1. Ep: 6.
admire.
To Idonea
Upon her distrust of his constancy.
CAn Fishes live in the air? can Eagles creep
Along the caverns of the raging deep?
Can Salamanders change their Element?
Or can the lean Camel'on break up Lent,
Usurp old Amphitrite's proper ward,
And feed of the Nobles of the scaly herd?
Can Rivers lose their way, and backward run
Unto the Fountains where their Stre^ms begun?
Can Rocks forget their ponderosity,
And soar like atoms in the azure Sky?
Can Bladders sound the Cataracts of Nile,
Or the abyss of Canacus his hill?
Can the Needle turn to the South? Can Magnets fly
From Iron by innate antipathy?
Can the Orbs oth' Planets cease? Can fixed Stars fall,
And lie like Bristel-Diamends on this ball?
Can Fire descend? Can Water scale the cliff
Of Athos, or aspiring Tenariff?
Canth' Earth turn fluid, and expose to view
Her weighty treasure like the pearly dew?
Can Air condensed grow ponderous, and flit
Unto the Center as it is proper seat?
Can Nature abrog^te those laws which she
Confirmed to last to perpetuity?
If so, you have some cause to deem that I
Apostatize from vowed fidelity.
Oh no, my Dear, that wound, which in my heart
The winged boy made with his golden dart,
Is not so supersic'al to admit
Absence or objects for to pall'ate it;
Much less recure, what every SIGHT of thee
Does bruise, and every WORD does scarify.
What every TOUCH does venom and make swell,
What every KISS does make incurable.
What will it be then, when the -- (...). Hes. in (...).
Black-ey'd Queen shail squeeze
Into our cups the QUINTESSENCE of these?
That Quinta part sai Nectaris -- Hor: Carm: 1. Od: 13.
Qainque etenim sunt parts amoris, Aspectus, Colloquiu^, Tactus,
Osculum, Concubitus, disticho illo Ovidiano complexa,
Ut praesens spectem Cingram, tangamque, loquarque.
Oscalaque admoveam, si nil conceditur ultra. Metam: 10.

fifth part of her Nectar? Which may I
And thou long drink without satiety.
For while that Morta deigns to spare my thread,
By all the pleasures of thy Nupt'all bed
I will be thine, and common fairs detest,
And in this resolution IREST, etc.
An ELO / EGIE Upon the death of the Incomparable Violist FRANCES POLEWHEELE
deceased April, 12. 1663.
BUT can thou go great soul of Melody,
And not a Bard vouchsafe an Elegy?
No, that thou shall not, from my blooming years
Accept this tribute of a Sister's tears.
Methinks I see thee mount thy Pedestal,
And hear the Organs play the Gradual.
Methinks I see thee st ll possess thy chair
Running divis'on on thy Lyd'an Air.
While the attentive crowd amazed stand
At the Aspend'an touches of thy hand.
Whereby more men to virtue thou did call
Than the Author stones unto the Theban wall.
Had thous yl'd to Anticyra, thou might --
Have played a Motet in divinest rites.
They that went from thee discomposed in spirit
Do Pindar's heavy censure justly merit.
Thou made in^nimates extatick too,
Which Orpheus, nor Arion, never could do.
Their Agathon'an lightness made them dance,
But thine put every tree in^o a trance.
Na, Lachesis was so attentive grown
Unto thy part, that she forgot her own.
And so through inadvertency she left
Spinning, and wretch^d us of thee bereft.
Oh fatal Girl! had she known what she did
She would not have so soon put up thy thread.
Or had thou taken but thy Viol with thee,
Minos would have had nothing to say to thee.
That might the incorrupted bench have bribed,
And forced the Judges to have thee repriv'd.
But now expostulat'ons are in vain,
No hopes my Muse shall fetch thee back again.
Wherefore I Will dreyn the torrent of her eyes,
And leave the Sphoeres to sing thy obsequies.
To Erycina, Upon her retirement to Norwich.
Madam,
Since it is your pleasure to deprive
Us of that influence by which we live,
Permit your poor Devoto to recount
To what his infoelicities amount.
Which, though they be as Foelix qui patitur quae numerare potest. Ovid: Tr: 5.
El: 1.
numberless as true,
Are all summed up in this, his loss of you
Who only are not heaven, whilst his all
Of comfort left is that they are Quem fata cogunt, ille cum venia est miser.
Sen: Hip: Act: 2
Venial.
When first mine eyes these hidden flames revealed,
Which, to increase my woes my tongue Est aliquid fatale malu^ per verba
levare. Ov: loc: praecit:
concealed,
By misconstruction you did reprove
That silence which does Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Sen: Hip:
Ibid. Pervia dant vada plus mur muris, alta nihil. Incert.
magnify my love.
In modesty distrusting that tried dart
Your lightning eye, which, though it pierced my heart,
Yet I was forced to love and to endure,
With confidence in Telephus his Vulnus in Herculeo quae quondam fecerat host
Vulneris auxiliu^ Pelias hasta tulit. Ovid: Rem: Amor: lib. 1. -- Opusque meae
bis sensit Telephus hastae. Idem: Metam: 12.
cure.
But now that love, (alas) which used to be
Fed with his proper Spes est quae capiat, spes est quae pascat amore^ O^: Met:
9.
food, by Cachexy
Lives only on it is contrary despair
More subtle than the lean Camel'on's fare.
And yet he Quoque minor spes est hoc magis ille capit. Id: Fas: 2^ Iphis amar
qua posse frui desperate, and auget Hoc ipsam flammas -- Id: Metam: 9.
thrives upon it, although I try
All shifts for to evade's Vbiquity.
Now with some friends I taste of Tu potes insanae veneris compescere fastus,
etc Prop: ^: 3. El: 15 Saepe t^o cecidit m^nere vict^s amor. Tibul: lib: 3. El:
6.
Liber's wealth,
And drink the Poets Qui musas amat impares Ternos ter cyathos attonitus pe^et
Va^es -- Hor: Carm: 3. Od: 19.
Nonade to your health.
Then with Diana in the woods I cheer
My Vel tu venandi studium cole, saepe recessit Turpi^er a Phoebi victa sorore
Venus Ovid: Rem: Am: 1:
hounds in eager chase of Fox, or Deer.
Yet allin vain, my heart does still resent
Those fires your absence will, I fear, Phillida Demophoon praesens moderatius
ussit. Exarsit velis accius illa datis. Id: Art: Amat: 2.
augment.
Though had I kept them Occulte si quis amavit, amet. Id: Trist: 3. El: 4.
secret they might then
Have had the honor to have Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto in conjuge major,
Hanc Venus, ut vivat, ventilat ipsa facem. Prop: 4. El: 3.
greater been.
But cursed Anteloquia, whose tongue
First did your matchless innocence that wrong,
Was made a Make privy to your dealing as few as you may, For three may keep a
counsel if twain be away Chau: fo: 323
third, and cheated by her -- An and hae simulare docentur? Hae quoque habent
arres, quaque jabentur eunt. Ov: Heroid: 2.
tears
My hopes of their increase are turned to fears.
For which may all those miserable evils
That ever were contrived by Duns or Devils
Light on her: Or, what is worse, O let her be
Full as unhappy as she has made me.
Now, through my fancy's optics I perceive
The Trinobantine Virgins take their leave:
With what unwillingness they strive to spell
The parting lover's Shibboleth farewell.
Such as those matrons valedict'on, when
Pompey's -- Quam vix si castra mariti Victoris peteret, siccis dimittere
matres Jam poterant occulis; tanto devinxit amore Hos pudor, hos probitas;
castique modestia vultus. Luc: Ph: 8:
Cornelia left Mitylene.
And reason good, we by your absence have
Lost more of happiness than ever you gave.
For of all bad conditions his state
Is the most wretched who was fortunate.
How blessed, if their own happiness they knew,
Were those Icenians enjoying you!
Whose presence onely's able to exclude,
From the most wildring desert solitude.
And now to Norwich shall this glory add
To reinstate her in the place she Tertia insignis civitas appellatur Norvick,
etc.
Mu^st: Geog 2. Though Heylin and other our modern
Chorographers interpose Bristow betwixt York and Norwich
and reckon her as Drayton does, Polyolb: Song 20.
With Towns of highest account the fourth of all the land.

had:
Usurping Bristow from her throne detrude,
And seat her third of the first magnitude.
Nay, what devotion old Bards expressed
In standing with their faces toward the West
'Cause the Canary Isles, which by them were
So memoriz'd, are situated there.
Such and sarre more to her shall moderns show
That Is made more fortunate than Qu^^^olim fortunatae suerunt dictae ob nimiam
ea^am fertilitatem. Munst: Geog: 6.

they by you.
And with what Saint must that place be possessed
That makes the Poet thus to turn a Priest?
But may you not yet prove what some suspect,
Unless in the Norsol^'an Dialect,
A mother there; and so seem to beguile's
In your retirement with their famous Wyles.
Your pardon, Madam, if my love offends,
Which mine, as well as others, faith transcends.
It Is not the shrine, though chief in nature's store,
It is the Saint that I so much adore.
Which I hope still I may, in spite of Fame,
Without a Catachresis term the same.
It Is true were chastity entailed upon
Deformed persons by succession,
Whereby all those that would be perfect Nuns
Must be as ugly as the Colanians;
Perhaps I then might think those censures true
Which malice has so often cast on you:
But now I must regard their words no more
Then you did my neglected flames before.
Those flames which have consuted all that thought
You had no other beauty than you bought.
For, though Parrhasius his cloth might be
Exact enough to cheat a Zeuxis eye
As much as did his painted Grapes the birds,
Of such a thing no history affords
A president; Apelles never could turn
A painted fire so right to make it burn.
So that I cannot yet deny, what is due
From all unto Licet concupiscentiae amore puella pulchra amari
magis quam turpis desiderer; vi tamen Naturae, quae
complexio est temperantior, continentior atque moratior
erit. Aug: Niphi de Pulch: Cap: 59.

formosity and you,
A good opinion, although I know
Those many snares that -- Cuneis an habent spectacala totis
Quod securas ames quodque inde excerpere possis? Ju: sat: 6.
Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule ludos,
Cum juvit viduos rapta sabina viros. etc.
Scilicet ex illo solennia more theatra
Nunc quoque formosis insidiosa manent. Ov: Art: Amat: 1.

place subjects you to.
For, by the aid of your chaste (...). Phoeyl: in Nov.
soul, you scorn
All their assaults whether by mine or storm.
And, while some tugg at little Rumwald's shrine,
And others Wilfrid's needle think too fine
Because they cannot thread it, you defye
All these Criterions of chastity.
And, when you enter Hymen's bonds, and so
Shall have a Jointure of a double Vae nobis inquit conjux, at vae mihi coelebs,
Vae nostrum simplex ergo tuumque duplex. And: l: 1 Ep: 132.

woe,
Should he be blind again, I dare assure
Pheron might here obtain a second cure.
Nor need you fear the The Storke wreker of Advoutrie Chauc: fol: 235.
Stork, nor to try all
Your issue by the -- In terram parvus came deciditinfans,
Ne qua sit externae Veneris mistura timentes,
Laetifica dubios explorant aspide partus. Luc: Phars: 9.

Psylline Ordeal.
No, thither you remove to shun this noise,
And taste the sweetness of retired joys:
Secure in innocence to hate and pity
The toil and crowd of this unweildy city.
Whilst we the Orphan Theater frequent,
Deprived of the patronage your beauty lent.
Better than that which once love would not let
Ovid, Maugre his exile, to Eque domo rursus pulchrae loca vertor ad urbis,
Cunctaque men's ocalis praevidet illa suis;
Nunc fora, nunc aedes, nunc marmore tecta theatra. Ov^de Pont: 1. El 8.

forget,
'Cause from obscenity reformed; although
Our Zealots think it not reformed enough.
They threaten't with a through reformation
Taken according to the last translation.
And how that version did change the sense
Some of our Churches too much evidence.
Thus does the Ignis fatuus delude
That Bellua multorum es capitum -- Hor: lib: 1. Epist: 1.
many headed beast the multitude.
So have I seen a Monkey break a glass
Because it did reflect his ugly face.
But there you are exempt, and uncontrol'd
May laugh at the dotage of this aged world;
And in those Norvico veteri locas est conterminus urbi
Montosus, maltis umbrosis consitus ornis. Oc: Angl: Prael: 2.

Ashen groves these fools lament
That realize what you did represent.
O may the Marshland baily never arrest you,
Nor any other malady molest you.
But may your life, and that long, always be
As free from sorrow as dishonesty.
So wishes he who hopes in time to prove
His verse is far inferior to's love.
To Janus.
Upon the new year.
REview old Janus with thy backward face
All past years by time's footsteps thou can trace
Search his dull moldy Annals, try to find
An year like this which thou have left behind.
Such grand remarques as Phoebus never did see
Since he and's Sister slept in Me Chaos antiqui (nam res sum prisca) vocabant,
Adspice quam longi temporis acta canam. Ovid: Fast: 1.

Chaos thee.
At the last Session when all the Gods
Were summoned, Love, and Hymen were at odds
About a business then moved; which jars
Alarmed to these much more that civil wars,
Scarce to be reconciled; I wish that wine
Were not the cause and so the Trumpet Some Mythologists give the etymon of
Janus from (...)
wi^e; because, as Noah, he taught men the use thereof.

thine.
But they are resolved, although against her will,
Dunmow shall keep her stinking Bacon still.
Whilst I, supported on mine either hand
By hope and patience climb an Sicat ascensus arenosus in pedihas veterani,
sic malier
lingnata homini quieto. Siracides. Cap: 25.

hill of sand.
And now thou Turn-key to the Quicquid abique vides, cael^m, mare, nabila,
terras,
Omnia sant nostro clausa patentque manu. Ov: Fast: 1.

Universe,
Who do with thy al-seeing eye disperse
The mists of ignorance, (If over the fates
Thou have that power as over Praesideo foribus coeli cum mitibus horis,
It redit officio Jupiter ipse meo. Idem: Ibid:

Olympus gates)
See if in their Decretals thou can find
An end unto this amorous war assigned.
And when Portumnus thou do next survey
Thy Kingdom situate in the Belgic sea,
Before the rest let my beloved Yar
Receive a pledge of thy pecul'ar care.
Upon whose happy banks there does reside
Augusta's loss, and the Icen'an pride
My Amaranta, whom perhaps thou may
Encounter walking on the marine wast.
Going to see the wanton Nereids keep
Their Revels in the curled German deep.
If so, solicit her to grant a truce,
And let my heart, her long since captive, loose.
If she deny't (but speak as suppl'ants use)
Get thy beloved Carna to infuse
Some of her principles, her name alone
Applied can make her verify her Auna Heb. (...). Gratiosa, five misericors,
aut requiescens, vel donans. Stephanus in Etymolog.
own
And 'twixt these Gods a moderator be
To reconcile their dire hostility;
To which if she a per'ode please to put,
Tell her she must Love's Janus-Temple shut.
Satyricon.
PEace testy dotard, will thou still dispense
The rusty rules of thy experience?
Thy Axioms to us but only be
True signs of thy deceptibility.
For thou did once as much approve what now
Thou seem to us so much to disallow.
So that thy errour's plain, for it would be,
Monstrous should contradictorys agree.
And is it not reason we should now suspect
The Organs of thy purblnd Intellect.
A constant symptom of that Senectas ipsa est morbus -- Ter: Phorm: Act: 4.
Scen: 1.
malady
Which bends thee with its Sir. Nequeo me caster, tantum est oneris quod fero.
Dor. Quid oneris? Sir. Annos octoginta and quatuor. Pla: (Mer: Ac: 4. S: 1.

ponderosity.
Go to the Earth, whereto thou tend'st, and see
That Mans'on which must hold thy dross and thee.
For ye will never part while you are alive,
If when you are dead; a man as well may strive
To wean the Steel from the Agat as to hold
Thee from the embraces of thy God thy Gold,
Which still is worshipped though there is naught whereby
To prove the custom but the -- Vitium commune omnium est
Quod nimium ad rem in senecta attenti sumus.
Ter: Adelph: Act: 5. Scen: 8.

frequency.
Such a magnetic virtu's in that bed
To which thou'd'st have thy sons too married.
Notorious blindness to have Cupid be
Guided by Fortune who is as blind as he.
But what talk I of Cupid now? his bow,
Alas was broken many years ago.
There Is no such thing as love remains, those darts
Which wound the hardest adamantine hearts.
The dowry -- Veniant a dote fagittae. Juv: Sat: 6.
throws, and nothing's thought so bad
As that good Statute which Virgins sine dote nubere jussit, ut uxores non
pecuniae causa eligerenter, severiasque matrimonia s^a viri coercerent, came
nullis fraenis dotis tenerentur. Munsi: Geog: 4.
Lycurgus made.
O! what egreg'ous cow'rdise it is to be
Led captive by so weak an enemy!
Poor feeble bloodless trunk, where have thou lost
Those brave heroic streams which thou did boast
Ran in thy veins? Was It some Romantic strayn
Drew that Chimoera from thy towering brain?
I think so too, Nobility's naught else
But a mere name created by our selves.
But such a wench deserves not such a Lord
Because her rustic birth cannot afford
Enough Easterling thousands for to be
A counterpoize to his nobility.
Yet this is no embargo to his course,
Though It be a common Aphorism, the source
Of whose affection is true love, a mint
That has a mixture of the Platonic in it.
That man's pretended ardour's but desire
Which needs such fuel to maintain his fire.
And who would stand upon this word called birth?
Heroic souls often lodge in humble earth.
Si Natura negat facit indignatio versum
Qualemcunque potest -- Juv. Sat. 1.
A Map of the World.
THis World's a Theater whereon are acted
Blind Fortune's plays;
And it is so commodiously compacted
It serves always:
Sometimes she represents a Tragic scene
Then party ones;
And then instead of Coruses between
Chants Comic tones:
Thus by vicissitudes her wheel always
Degrades and elevates what spoakes she please.
Just now she will throw a man into the air
Of pop lar breath;
Then let him fall into the hell despair
And tempt his death:
Nay I observe those Dung-bred scarabyes
Which hate the light,
Hovering upon her wings aloof in the Skies
Ere it be night:
So blind is Plutus who promoting Braves
Dooms more deserving ones to be their slaves.
Here goes a Gallant hurr'ed on before's
In Fortunes lap,
Who talks of nothing but his hounds or whores,
Or else a clap:
At last he does repent, when it is too late,
That ever he see one;
When they have brought him to the currish fate
Of poor Acteon.
So Phoebus passing the Merid'an line
Admits no Remora but must decline.
There runs a Poet that is in need of Money
And so pursues him,
Begging for Patronage and Patrimony
Though he abuse him:
Yet still his fancy domineers in spite
And cares not for her,
But flouts at Fortune's foolish favorites
Who thus adore her.
And that is the reason why this purblind whore
Has Poets doomed inevitably poor.
Walk over the forked hill, I do not think
There is one there
But out of the horse's footing used to drink
For want beer.
They Will sing thy praise in hope to gain thereby
Exchange for verse;
Like those that waiting on the Chilterne lie
For passengers.
And when thou do return thou wilt say, I know it,
The way to begg'ry's to be first a Poet.
Here sails a Merchant with an eager chase
Pursuing wealth;
Who, so that he can stow it up a pace
Scorns ease or health:
Through stormy seas to both the Indies flies
To setch home's wares,
And when his Cue of Exit comes he dies,
And leaves it is heirs.
And they in recompense will let him ly
Perhaps within a tomb of Porphyrie.
There walks a plodding Student beating's brains
About a notion,
Another stands musing on lofty strains
Of Elocution;
A third consumes his oil and wealth to dive
Hermetick mysteries,
Till at the last perhaps he does perceive
His gross simplicities,
For the most learned only come to know
After all is done that they are nothing so.
Here wades a Farmer wearing time and leather
To fill his barnes,
Drives on regarding neither wind nor weather
Nor Nocturne harms;
Goes to bed late, and antedates the day
To look his sheep,
Where if he misseth one that is gone astray
He cannot sleep;
And after all his breath and labor's spent
Death tells him he must leave his tenement.
There sits a Miser hugging of his chest
Full fraught with treasure,
Who for anxiety cannot take his rest
Nor any pleasure;
But as he is casting up's accounts Death comes
And finds him set
And tells him he must lose his ill-gott' sums,
Pay Nature's debt,
And leave what he on Usury has lent
Unto his heyrs to be profusely spent.
Here lies a Sould'er clap in massy steel
Upon the ground
Who, when he wakes, for numness cannot feel
His deepest wound;
Then up he gets and toed'ous march assumes
To meet his foes,
Where he perhaps may get some costly plumes
Or else he goes
To bed with his fathers; Thus men strive to have
A toylsome life or honorable grave.
Such is this World which we may well compare
Unto a bubble,
Where every one that comes takes pains and care
To purchase trouble,
Thinking perhaps it will eternize them,
I cannot tell why,
Though they live Nestor or Methusalem
Yet they must dye.
And after the revolut'on of few years
Are quite forgot'as if they never were.
Thus we are sent upon this spac'ous stage
To act our parts,
Some go off Mutes, others sigh out an age
In ach and smarts.
The Earth is our Proscenium where we
Tire and retire,
Laudabam primum ego mortuos ipsos qui jam sine mortui prae vivis qui vivant
adhac: Sed melior postea utrisque visus est qui adhuc non fair, qui non vidit
malum istud pessimum quod sit sub sole. Solom. Eccles. Cap. 3. V. 24, 25.
Wherefore than th'living happy'r they that be
Long since expired,
And than them both such as have never been
Nor these innumerable evils seen.
FINIS

