A LETTER TO A Countrey-Gentleman: Setting forth the CAUSE OF THE Decay and
Ruin of Trade. To which is annexed A LIST of the NAMES of some Gentlemen who
were Members of the Last Parliament, and now are (or lately were) in Public
Employments.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. School.

A LETTER TO A Countrey-Gentleman, etc.
SIR,
YOurs I Received, bearing Date the 3d of the last Month, by which I find you
seem to be much afflicted to see the Trade of the Nation Ruined, and your
Native Country brought into so great Calamity as now it is; and desire me to
give you some account, if possible, How, and by what means, all these Evils
have been brought upon the whole Kingdom, which I shall endeavor to do, in as
brief a manner as I can, and in order to it shall relate to you some public
Transactions in relation to the Late War, and then leave you and all Rational
Men to Judge who it is has been the Grand Instruments of bringing all these
Evils upon us.

For the Situation of our Country and the Constitution of our Government, we
have always been esteemed the Happiest Nation in Europe: And no People in the
Universe ever enjoyed a longer series of Peace and Plenty than we have done.
Yet during the time of the Late War, we have seen the Trade of the Nation (some
Ages araising) almost totally ruined; and a general Poverty and Distress
brought upon the whole Kingdom, and that in the Reign even of the best of
Princes.

Trade has ever been the Universal Mistress of Mankind, Courted and Carrest by
all Civilized Nations, many Bloody Wars having been carried on by those that
have been Rivals for her favor, for she never fails to bestow unvaluable
Blessings upon her admirers, being always attended with Riches, Honor, Power,
and all other Earthly Blessings.

Those Nations that obtained her favor, and have not had the Wisdom and
Prudence to retain her, we see have grown Weak and Depiseable, and Lain
exposed a Prey to other Nations, which appears to be the present Case of Spain.

Our Forefathers enjoyed a large share of her favor, which they carefully
handed down to us, but we like unthrifty and undutiful Children have been so
far from following their Footsteps, that we have been (as appears by our
Actions) great Enemies to Trade, and used all manner of Violence to make her
fly the Nation, wherein she had long Cohabited with us, and seemed unwilling to
depart, till our continual Acts of Violence were such as they grew
insupportable; So that she has now taken her flight into the Neighboring
Nations, Viz. Holland The Dutch having grown Rich by the Late War, and improved
themselves 8 Millions; they are a wise People and (among themselves) strict
observers of Justice, never suffering any to grow great out of the Ruins of the
Public; as Sir William Temple well observes in his Memoirs, and which is the
true cause of the flourishing condition of their State.
and Ireland, by whom she is highly Carrest, and not like to return in haste;
and unless she do return, we can expect no other than to be a Miserable People
(Land it self having a dependence upon Trade, and Rises or Falls as that ebbs
or flows).

But before we can expect that, it is necessary to be known what way and means
it was we took to make her desert us; Unless we do so, we can never expect her
Return; for she is Coy and Nice, and will not bear the least Affront, but
cleave to those who treat her best.

The first ill usage Trade appears to have met withal from us, was at the
breaking out of the Late War. Ever since all manner of Persons, Things or
Matters, that have had relation to, or were interessed in Trade, have been evil
treated by those whose immediate Duty it was to have encouraged and protected
them.

It Is well known our Ships (under God) are our greatest Security and the Glory
of our Isle, and the Saylors our Mirmidons, whom we ought to cherish as the
Apple of our Eye; yet all the time of the Late War, they were most barbarously
treated, even as if they had not been of the Race of Mankind, but a sort of
Vermin fit to be rooted out; for what by their evil treatment on board Ship,
and frequent turning over without Pay, the unjust pricking them Run, and being
harrast with the uncertainty of Payments, many thousands of these poor Wretches
and their Families have been destroyed, and great Numbers constrained to leave
their Native Country, and betake themselves to Foreign Service, or (which is
worse) turn Pirates.

This evil treatment of the poor Saylors, tho in it self highly Wicked, seems
to have been one of the Least of the Crimes committed in the Government,
tending to the destruction of Trade For the first five years of the War it
appears we were seldom free from an Embargo upon Shipping; few or no Ships were
allowad to sail till they got Protections and Permits, to the great Charge of
the Merchants, and damage to Trade in general; as Little Care was taken to
protect our Shipping, not any one person having been so much as appointed to
examine Sea-Commanders Journals, all the time of the Late War; but they were
left to their own Genius to act and do as they pleased; and thus by the Lords
of the Admiralty's, and Commissioners of the Navys Wise Conduct, and Prudent
Management of Affairs, we Lost above 100 Ships of War, with many Hundreds of
Merchantmen, to the great Honor of the Nation.
; for it appears there was Articles brought into the House of Peers (the
Highest Court of Judicature in the Nation against the Lords of the Admiralty,
the Commissioners of the Navy, and the Commissioners for the Sick and Wounded
Seamen, by one Mr. Crosfield, in the year 1694.

Upon which their Lordships Examined diverse Witnesses at the Bar of the House,
and were very Zealous in the Matter; but it seems the Articles were drawn out
of the House by the Commissioners for stating the Public Accounts, who never
proceeded therein, though their Lordships issued out two successive Orders for
them so to do; but for your better satisfaction, and that Posterity may see the
Wickedness of the Age, I here give you a true Copy of those Articles, and which
are as follows:

Ar. 1. That the present Commissioners for Sick and Wounded Seamen, and
Exchanging Prisoners at War, depending on the Admiralty) not regarding
Instructions, or the Good of the Government, have committed gross Ennormities;
as Holding or Conniving at an unlawful Correspondence with the French, and
Wronging both the King and Subject in their Accounts, with other great
Miscarriages: All which has been about a Year since laid in Writing before the
Secretary of State by one Mr. Baston, and by the King's Command examined before
the Lords of the Admiralty, etc. And it will appear, that the said Commission
has been very injurious to the poor Sailors in particular, and very detrimental
to the Government in general.

Ar. 2. That the Lords of the Admiralty, and Commissioners of the Navy, have
acted contrary to the Public Good, by countenancing, supporting, and
preferring Criminals; and on the contrary, persecuting the Discoverers, and
turning just Men out of their Offices.

Ar. 3. That their Lordships have had great Discoveries laid before them of
Embezlements, and other great Frauds committed in the King's Yards, attended
with Forgery and Perjury.

Ar. 4. That it is manifest some of the Commissioners of the Navy have in that
Office advanced themselves from Salaries of 30l. per Annum to vast Estates,
having passed great Frauds, and totally discouraged the Discovery of embezled
Stores, to the great waste of the Public Treasure.

Ar. 5. That it has been a long Practice in the Navy to make out False Tickets
and Powers, suspending and delaying the poor Saylors in their Just Payments, to
the general Discouragement of them, and Starving their Families.

The Commissioners of the Post Office appear to have as much contributed
toward the Ruin of their Country, as any persons living, having all along
supported their Officers in all their Evil Actions, as Corresponding with known
Papists and others disaffected to the Government, stopping the King's Mail,
breaking open Persons of Qualities Letters, all along Countenancing and
Supporting a smugling Trade, by bringing in the Mail, and other ways vast
quantities of Flanders Lace, Indeed these Gentlemen have since been very
Instrumental in causing a Late Act to be made, the better to prevent the
bringing in Foreign Bone-Lace; as likewise have been the Lords of the
Admiralty, and Commissioners of the Navy, in procuring an Act to prevent the
Embezlement, and stealing his Majesty's Naval-Stores; and therein they have
done wisely, When the Steed's stolen to shut the Stable-door.
etc. being resolved, it seems, to make as plentiful an Harvest as they could,
so long as the War lasted. Withal they were not wanting to use all indirect
means to Ruin such of their Officers, or others, that detected the Crimes.

All these Matters relating to the foregoing Articles, and the Commissioners of
the Post Office, were long since published in Print, by diverse hands, wherein a
more large and ample account has been given of them; and they were Dedicated
and Presented to our late Representatives in Parliament, who took no more
notice thereof than if these things had been acted and done in the Great Moguls
Country.

Moreover there appears to have been laid before our Late Representatives, many
other matters of the greatest Importance. 1 st. In reference to the Touloun
Squadron getting into Breast. It having been declared by the House, the
Government had timely notice given whereby the said Fleet might have been
intercepted. 2dly. In Relation to the Mint, it did appear to the House the
Monyers in the Tower had committed foul Crimes, and that several Dies had been
Conveyed away for Coining false Money abroad. 3dly. In reference to the
Disbanded Troopers that served in Ireland and Flanders, who by their Petition
appear to have been most Barbarously treated contrary to His Majesty's express
Commands. 4thly. In reference to the Evil Actions of the Commissioners of the
Victualling Office. 5thly. In relation to the 27 Sail of Victuallers being
taken by the Dunkerkers, the House having declared, the Lords of the Admiralty
had timely notice given them, whereby they might have prevented their falling
into the Enemies hand.

These with a Multitude of other matters that lay before the House, were dropped
by our Late Representatives, who took no manner of Care to do the People
Justice Sad it is to consider how all Complaints af Abuses done in the
Government, have been stifled for want of a Committee of Grievances (according
to our ancient Laws and Customs) to be sitting during the Session of
Parliament, to hear the Grievances of the People; which is plain was not done
all the time of the late War.
; Indeed the House appeared vety zealous in the prosecution of Mr. Duncomb, who
(as they alleged) wronged the King of about 360 l. by the False Endorsement of
Exchequer-Bills; though at the same time it plainly appeared the King and
Kingdom had been wronged, by means of the Treasury The Public Treasure in all
Ages and Nations has ever been accounted as Sacred as the King's Person, and
those that have been found to purloyn, waste, or mispend the same, have been
severely chastized; and if it must be acknowledged (as every man will do, who
is not a professed Atheist) we are obliged by the Dictates of Nature, and that
Holy Religion we profess, to do all such Acts as tend to the good and benefit
of Mankind in General. What ground of Fear then can any man have that Lays open
Public Crimes, in order to their being Examined in a Judicial manner? and if
the Law (which Favors and countenances the Act) shall not be able to protect
him, Little Reason can any man have to flatter himself of being secure, the
Public Peace and Tranquillity not being Long to be maintained by any other
means than a due Administration of Justice.
, to the value of 20000 l. in relation to Exchequer-Bills. Yet all they did
therein, was to take care how to wash them white; and while the War was on
foot, our late Representatives seemed to be very zealous for an Act to be made
against the buying and selling of Employments; but when once we had obtained an
Honorable Peace, they soon dropped the Matter, as conceiving the People then
better able to bear their Pack Vide Englands Calamities discovered, sold by --
Fox in Westminster Hall, etc.
than they were before. There Is a matter wherein it appears the King has been
wronged several Thousand Pounds, that was designed to have been laid before the
Late House of Commons, but the Gentleman who intended to have done it, was
diswaded from doing it by a Member of the House; who plainly told him of all
their Members, they could not make above 100, or 110 at most in the whole House
that seemed to have any regard to the welfare of the Nation: Saying, one had
one Employment, another another, touch one and touch all, and said they did and
would support one another; Those Gentlemen that have been in Public
Employments, have had great opportunity to Execute their Malice against them
that Detected or Publicly laid open their Crimes, and have not been wanting to
use all Arts and Means whereby to bring them to Ruin; by which means several
Honest Ingenuous Gentlemen have died through grief, and many oteers through
grief and want; and who may all truly be said to have died Martyrs for their
Country.
and so by all means advised him to decline it. Now I conceive it is obvious by
what means, and by whom the Trade of the Nation has been brought to so Low an
Ebb, and so many Public Debts Contracted, by the Consequence of which many
Thousands of Honest Industrious Families in London, etc. Are reduced to extreme
Poverty, at the same time not knowing the true Cause from whence their Evils
have risen. These things are very harsh to Flesh and Blood, when we consider
how all our Calamity appears to have been brought upon us, by those very
Persons in whose hands we entrusted our Lives, Liberties and Estates.

We find King David Complained he could not do the Justice he would have done,
the Sons of Zurviah were too strong for him, no wonder then if we see our
Prince Whatever Englishman duly considers how Great and Glorious the Actions of
His Majesty have been, and to what hazard he exposed his Royal Person for our
sakes, and the great things he has done for us, cannot but be moved with Grief
and Anger to see how unfaithful (in his absence) he has been served, and his
People oppressed.
under the same Circumstance, who has had so many Sons of Zurviah to deall
withal, who were sensible of the great Interest they and their Friends had in
the several Corporations, and how they were able thereby to support one another
in whatever they should act or do, and put it out of the Power of any (even the
King himself) to call them to an account for their Actions. It Is evident ours
is a mixed Government, wherein the People have a large share, and if we will not
Act our Part (in reference to the Choosing of Members of Parliament) great Pity
it is we should ever be relieved, but remain as we are.

By this we may see what a great Duty there lies upon all Gentlemen that live
in, or near any Corporation and the Principal Inhabitants thereof, to inform
the meaner sort of People therein (who in most Corporations have Votes) the
absolute necessity there is of Choosing Gentlemen of good Estates to be their
Representatives, as have not been in any (or long since declined) Public
Employment, during the late War, there being no other means possible, whereby
to make them sensible of these past Miscarriages, or we to have such Members as
will be able to rectify them, and do the King and Kingdom Justice It Is hoped
the Citizens of London and Westminster (who correspond with all parts of the
Kingdom) will be so Just to themselves, their King and Country, as forthwith to
send this and other things of the like Nature, to the several Corporations; for
it will be as they make their Choice, we may conclude, we shall be either happy
or miserable.
, Public Leaks being not to be stopped by the hands that made them.

It Is sufficient to make any Englishman blush to consider how strenuously our
Forefathers withstood those who made a Breach of the Law, and how indifferent
and careless we appear to have been therein ever since the late happy
Revolution, not at all considering how Mankind are generally more liable, and
in greater danger of being Ruined by the Falsehood and Treachery of Friends,
than open Enemies; and that those who lay the Foundation of great Estates, for
the most part Raise themselves by Fraud, Oppression, and Injustice. And how in
all Ages them that were in Public Employments, or Ambitious of Honor and
Preferment, likewise generally have been found too ready to abuse their
Prince's Ear, and trample the Laws under their Feet.

We may see by the Bishop of Salisbury's Pastoral-Letter (burnt by the Common
Hangman) what Sycophants these sort of men are, who care not what Evils they
bring upon the rest of Mankind, so they may but Advance themselves; and Weeds
commonly are apt to grow so fast as to overtop the Corn.

Thus, Sir, have I given you a short Relation of such Matters of Fact, which
plainly appear, as I conceive, to have been the true Cause all the Blood and
Treasure spent in the late War, for want of Justice, in a manner has been lost,
like Water spilt on the ground.

Our Trade being in great measure Ruined, and the Nation miserably plunged in
Debt, and in danger of being involved in a New War, about the Succession of
Spain, in which (according to the present Circumstance, and Management of
Affairs) we are in no Condition to engage. So you may see the Fatal Consequence
that Attends the Actions of Men, when they leave the Paths of Virtue, and go
along with the Multitude to do Evil. I am, Sir, his Majesty's Faithful Subject,
a true Lover of my Country, and,

London, July 16th. 98. Your most Humble Servant, G. W.

A LIST of the NAMES of some Gentlemen who were Members of the Last Parliament,
and now are (or lately were) in Public Employment or Trust.
A.
SIR Edw. Askew, Knt. Commissioner of the Prizes, for Grimsby, Lincolnshire.
Sir Mat. Andrews, Knight. Gent. of the King's Bedchamber, and Mr. of
Trinity-House, Shafton, Dorsetshire. Math. Aylmer, Esquire a Flag-Officer in the
Fleet, Dover, Cinque-Port.
B
The Honorable Peregrine Berty, Vice-Chamberlain, Boston, Linc. The Honorable
Hugh Boscawen, Governor of St. Maws Castle, etc. County of Cornwall. Will.
Blaithwait, Esquire Secretary of War, one of the Council of Trade, and one of the
Clerks of the Council, Bath, Summers. Nath. Bond, the King's Sergeant at Law,
Dorchester. Will. Bridges, Esquire Secretary to the Commissioners for Paper and
Parchment, Liscard, Cornwall. John Burrard, Esquire Governor of Hurst- Castle,
Limington, Southampton. John Burington, Esquire Commissioner of the Victualing,
Oakhampton, Devon. Tho. Blofield, Esquire Receiver Genesis of the Excise for the
County of Norfolk, Norwich. The Honorable George Booth, Esquire late Commissioner
of the Customs, Bostney, Cornwall. The Honorable Chapter Bertie, Esquire Treasurer of
the Office of the Ordnance, Stanford, Lincolns.
C
The Right Honorable Lord Coningsby, late Lord Justice of Ireland, Lemster,
Herefords. John Conyers, Esquire one of his Majesty's Council at Law,
East-Grimsted, Snssex. Sir Robert Clayton, Knight. late one of the Commissioners of
the Customs, London. Edw. Clark, Esquire Commissioner of the Excise, Taunton,
Sommersets. The Honorable John Lord Cuts, Baron Gouram, Governor of the Isle
of Wight, and Colonel of Foot, Cambridgshire. Sir Robert Cotton, Knight.
Post-Master-General, Newport, Isle of Wight. Will. Culliford, Esquire Surveyor
General of his Majesty's Customs, Corfe-Castle, Dorsetshire. Will. Coward, Esquire
King's Sergeant at Law, Wells, Somersets. William Cooper, Esquire King's Council,
Hertford.
C
Edw. Dummer, Esquire Surveyor of the Navy, Arundel, Sussex. Tho. Done, Esquire Auditor
of the Impressed of the Exchequer. Tho. Door, Esquire Lieut. Col. to Col. Gibsons
Regiment, Limington, Southampton. Sir Robert Dashwood, Knight. and Bar.
Commissioner of the Excise, Banbury, Oxfordshire. Sir Ralph Delaval, late a
Flag-Officer in the Fleet, Great Bedmin, Wilts.
E
Sir Stephen Evans, Knight. Commissioner of the Excise, and Commissioner for Wine
Licenses, Bridgport, Dorsetshire. Tho. Earl, Esquire Major Gen of the Army,
Governor of Portsmouth, and Col. of two Regiments of Foot, Warhaw,
Dorsetshire.
F
Sir Stephen Fox, Knight. Lord of the Treasury, Westminster. Sir Tho. Felton, Bar.
Master of his Maj. Household, Orford, Suffolk. Sir Will. Forrister, one of the
Commissioners of the Greencloth, Nortdumberland. Will. Farrer, Esquire one of the
King's Council, Bedford. The Right Honorable Viscount Fitzharding, a Teller in
the Exchequer, VVinsor, Barkshire. Sir Tho. Frankland, Bar. Post Master
General, Heydon, Yorkshire. The Right Honorable Lord Fairfax, Col. of a
Regiment of Dragoons, York. Char. Fox, Esquire Play Master to the Army, Cricklade,
Wilsthire.
G
Sir Henry Goodrick, Lieut. Genesis of the Ordnance, Burrow Brig, York. John
Gauntlet, Esquire Clerk of the Signet; Wilton, Wilts. Charles Godolphin, Esquire
Commissioner of the Customs, Helston, Cornwall. Sir Rowland Gwyn, late
Treasurer of the Kings Chamber, Tiverton, Devonshire. Francis Gardner, Esquire an
Employ in the Mint at Norwich, Norwich. The Honorable Ralph Gray, Esquire Auditor
of the Exchequer, Barwick. Sir Bevil Granvil, Governor of Pendennis-Castle,
and Col. of Foot, Fowey, Cornwall. John Gibson, Esquire Col. of a Regiment of Foot,
and Deputy Governor of Portsmouth, Portsmouth.
H
The Honorable Sir Robert Howard, Knight. Auditor of the Exchequer, Castle-rising,
Norfolk. Henry Haveningham, Lieut. of the Band of Pentioners, Dunwich, Suffolk.
Robert Henly, Esquire Commissioner of Customs, Lime Regis, Dorsetshire. Tho.
Howard, Esquire a Teller of the Exchequer; Bleching in Surry. Sir Joseph Herne,
Patentee for Copper Halfpence, and Trustee for circulating Exchequer-Bills,
Dartmouth, Devon. Sir John Hawles, Knight. Solicitor Genesis Wilton, Wiltshire. Sir
Henry Hobart, Bar. Commissioner of Customs, County of Norfolk. James Herbert,
Esquire Treasurer of the Prize-Office, Alesbury, Bucks. Simon Hartcourt, Esquire
Secondary in the Crown-Office, Abington, Barks.
I
Sir Henry Johnson, Knight. a great Builder of Ships for the King, by Contract,
Aldborough, Suffolk. Sir Jonathan Jenings, Commissioner of the Prize-Office,
Ripon, Yorkshire.
K
James Kendal, Esquire Lord of the Admiralty, Port-Pighom, alias West Lo,
Cornwall. John Knight, Esquire late Auditor of the first Fruit, Weysmouth,
Dorsetshire. Sir Tho. Littleton, Bar. Lord of the Treasury, New Woodstock,
Oxfords. James Lowther, Esquire Clerk of the Stores of the Tower,, Carlisle,
Cumberland. Will. Lounds, Esquire Secretary to the Lords of th (...) sury, Seaford,
Cinque-Port Sir John Lowther, Bar. for many years past Lord of the Admiralty,
Cumberland. Chapter Mountague, Esquire Chancellor of the Exchenger Under-Treasurer of
the same, one of the Lords of the Treasury, etc. Westminster. Sir Tho.
Mompesson, Knight. one of the Commissioners of the Privy Seal, in the absence of
the Earl of Fembrook, New Sarum, Wilts. John Methwin, Esquire Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, Devizes, Wilts. Chr. Mountague, Esquire Commissioner for Paper and
Parchment, Northampton. Sir Chr. Musgrave, Bar. Master of the Robes to Q
Dawager, Appleby, Westmorland. Tho. Neale, Esquire Master of the Mint, and
Groom-Porter, Lurgeshall, Wilts. Foot Onslow, Esquire Commissioner of the Excise,
Guilford, Surry. Chapter Osbourn, Esquire Lieut. Governor of Hull, Hull, Yorks. Tho.
Pit, Esquire Master in Chancery, Old Sarum, Wilts. Tho. Pelham, Esquire Lord of the
Treasury, Le^vi^, Sussex. The Honorable Henry Priestman. Esquire Lord of the
Admiralty, Shorum, Sussex. Th. Papillon, Esquire Commissioner of the Victualing,
Land. The Right Hon. Lord Edw. Russel, Treasurer of the Chamber, County of
Bedford. Sir Rob. Rich, Lord of the Admiralty; Dunwich, Suffolk. The Right Hon.
Lord Rob. Russel, Clerk of the Pipe, Tavistock, Devons. The Right Hon. Rich
Lord R^^elagh, Play Master Genesis to the Army, and Governor of Chelsey-Colledg,
Chich^st^r, Sussex. The Right Hon. John Smith, Esquire Lord of the Treasury,
Andover, South^mpton. G. Sayer, Esquire Lieut. of the Yeoman of the Guards.
Canterb. Sir Cloudsly Shovel, Admiral of the Blue Commis. of the Navy, and Col.
of a Marine Regiment, Rochester, K^nt. James Slone, Secretary to the Chief
Justice in Air, Thetford, Norf. The Hon. James Stanly, Esquire Groom of the Kings
Bed Chamber, Secretary to the Household, and Col of Foot, County of Lancaster.
Sir W. Trumhall, Knight. late Principal Secretary of State, Oxford-Vniversity. Sir
Tho. Trevor, Knight. Attorney Genesis Plimton, Devon. John Tailor, Esquire, Book-keeper to
the Treasurer of the Navy, and Usher of the Receipt of Exch. Sandwich; Kent.
Charles Trelawney, Esquire* a Major Genesis in the Army, and Col. of a Redgement of
Foot, East-Low, Cornwall. Henry Trelawney, Esquire a Col. in the Army, East-Low,
Corn. Jo. Thurbarne, Esquire Kings Serj. at Law, Sand Kent. The Right Hon. J.
Vernon, Esquire. Principal Secretary of State, Penryn Cornwall. Sir Jo. Williamson
Keeper of the Records of State, Rochester, Kent. Sir W. Wogan, one of the Kings
Serj. at Law, Haverford-West, Wales. Rich. Wooll^ston, Esquire. Receiver Genesis for
the County of Hertford, Whit-Church, Southam. The Honorable Good Wharton, Esquire
Lord of the Admiralty, Cocker-mouth, Cumber. Edm. Webb, Esquire. Gent. Usher to the
Prince of Denmark, Crickl^de, Wilts,
etc.

