P. M. S. An Elegiac POEM IN Memory of that truly worthy and Loyal Gentleman
William Whitmore Esquire.
Late of Balmes in the County of Middlesex. Who being Wounded by the Casual
Discharge of his own Pistol departed this life July the 31th 1684.
VIVIT POST FUNERA VIRTUS.
When the loud Trump of Fame the News had spread
The Young, the Brave, the Generous Whitmor's dead.
One general groan tuned every gentle Breast
And flowing Tears from every Eyelid pressed.
The Hero that in chase of Fame had trod
The slaughtered Field, and Forded Streams of Blood
Flusht in the Arts of Death, yet wept to see
A Brother fall without a Victory.
Apollo's Sons forsook their Withering Bays,
Laid by their Books, forgot their tuneful Lays,
And Dumb with stupid grief, could only sigh
Mecenas their loved Patrons Elegy.
But must he then have none? If learned Verse
Be suffered only to attend his Hearse,
Raptures and Figures of the first degree
Strained to the highest Notes of Ecstasy.
Such as of old the Mantuan Bard inspired,
Or Athens in her Pride of Power admired
I must be silent; yet i have heard it said,
The meanest duties which to Heaven are paid
Are kindly taken, if devoutly made.
What if I then, cannot bring as others do?
With what I have, his Funeral Hearse Isle strew,
And to the Dust his dear remains Pursue:
Sad thought, and must he thither go? Ah Death!
Can nothing bribe thee to recall his Breath?
If hoards of Virtue saved in earliest Youth
Exalted Wit, Wealth, Loyalty or Truth
Are worth thy value, give us back this one
Of all the numerous Subjects of thy Throne.
From his own gatherd stock he will pay thee more,
Ten thousand times then what thou'st got before
A few dead bones alas are all thy store.
And where is the Booty, where is thy Treasure then?
Where thy Proud Conquests over the Sons of Men?
Vain death, and yet inexorable too!
They happiest are, that in a Camp pursue
Thy charged Bolts, and snatch a Fate from you.
Thus would, thus wished, our Hero to have fell
In a fair Field from Honors Pinnacle;
Amidst the ranks of Ranged Warriors crowned,
With Verdant Bays, in Rolls of Fame renowned,
Whilst Drums, and Ecchoing Trumpets through the Skies,
In doleful Dirges sang his Obsequies.
But spiteful Death this you denied him too,
And basely stole his life e're 'twas thy due:
His Blooming years scarce past and yet to come
Ages of Honor e're he reached a Tomb,
Fate promised him. But Murderer as thou art
Whilst in Persuit of these, thy Coward Dart
Unseen, and unexpected reached his heart.
Malicious Fact! yet done it is past redress
Thy Shaftes are spent, his Glory near the less,
Beyond the grave thy Power can never extend,
Thy Triumphs there, meet their Appointed end.
Whilst Mounted through the Spheres on Angels Wings,
He Is made a Courtier of the King of Kings,
And amongst his Peers the Songs of Glory sings
We only have the loss, that yet survive
We only mourn, who yet are doomed to live.
Life's Burden none on Earth would easily bear
The Whips of fortune, and the goads of Care,
The Oppressors Wrongs, the Laws delay, the Taunts
Of Great men, or the Poor man's starving wants.
Could they like him Disburthen'd of the Toil,
Be made Possessors of an Heavenly Soil,
Where in Immortal Joys with God above,
He tastes the Banquets of Immortal love.
by F. N. W.
London, Printed for L. Curtis. 1684.


