A POEM on the Corronation of JAMES II. of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith.

LONDON; Printed by D. Mallet for the Author, MDCLXXXV.

The Epistle DEDICATORY: To the Right Honorable Francis Lord North, Baron of
Guilford, Lord Keeper of the great Scal of England, and one of his Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Honor
I Am no Relative to those who court universal Favors and a flying Fame, with
Ostentation of their own Abilities (though I now appear on a public Stage) I
dare not presume to contend with any, but content my self in my own Sphaer,
with my own Language and my own Method, lest I should seem to aspire higher
than I can pretend, or falling too low be loaded with arising Wave, and my
aspiring Fantasy buried in a watery Grave. My Ambition is only to tell the
World that I will tread in the Footsteps of my former Loyal Ancestors; (some
whereof have ventured both Lives and Fortunes in the lage Rebellion) and that I
as well as they, have the same abhorrency of Rebels against my Prince. I am now
under the severe Censure of the Impartial Critic, yet I will not distrust the
overruling Providence of Heaven, but that some will excuse me in what. I have
done; and gather Fire from my Coal, to kindle the Noble Flames of Love of
Loyalty and Religion. For as it was with the Psalmist so it is with me, to
abstain from Good Words is Pain and Grief; but if the excellency of all
Presents should always equal the grandeur of those to whom they come, I might
justly shame or blush at my bold Oblation.

But being I am not unacquainted with some part of your Virtues whereby I am
able to give the World a taste more easy to be had in admiration than
imitation, I presume upon your Lordship's Goodness. Your Religion and Loyalty,
your Prudence and Learning, and whatsoever else is Praise Worthy, has rendered
you Eminent in one of the Noblest Employs of State wherein you Act with a
General applause of the whole Realm. But that which gives a Fragrancy to all
your Bed of Flowers, is that humility, which like the Violet (though the lowest
yet is the sweetest.) This makes me prostrate my forlorn Papers at your
Lordships Feet, beseeching your Goodness to condescend to the acceptance of
these poor expressions of my respects, and to give them your Patronage and
Protection, which will shield them from all Enemies, and that your happiness
may extend above the reach of all, that you either can desire or deserve, is
the hearty Prayer of

Your Lordship's most Faithful and most Obedient Servant, Stephen Willoughby.

A POEM, on the CORONATION of JAMES II, Of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith. etc.
ALbion; unveil thy mourning Shades be dressed,
With Laurel, Charles thy Atlas is at rest,
And James the Just thy Hercules is blessed
With Regal State, now may his Glories run
A Match with the breathed Courses of the Sun.
Weigh Mirth with Mourning nothing can destroy
Providence repels Ruin from our Troy,
Brings Peace, and makes us Citizens of Joy.
The blissful Powers of Heaven, designed
To call the best of Kings, and leave behind,
His Princely Brother in our wavering Isle,
To give us equal cause to weep and smile:
O happy Man! That has some Grief allowed,
Lest too much Joy should make thy Britain proud.
Mortal breaches immortal powers repair,
Elijah left Elishah in the Chair-
Death! Where Is thy sting, in thy Nocturnal Womb?
No; The Royal Trophies thou have made a Tomb:
Though the cold Icy Hands, the Throne or'e-spead;
Wounded the Realm, and touched our Monarchs Head,
Yet not our Peace the Darling of the Dead.
Tho deeps the Gash, behold, here is Gilead's Balm,
Is there a Boisterous Storm a timely Calm?
Thus Grief and Gladness two extremes appear,
The first weighs down, the last supports me here.
Revoke thy sighs the shaken Masbles cry;
Scepters and Crowns must fall, and Monarchs dye;
They dye to live, and live to rise on high,
As Godlike David, but Solomon is nigh.
Let sparkling Diadems the Worlds Renown,
Surround this living Offspring of a Crown
Rid on Triumphant Heavens rein spire
The Orbs with language like the Orphean Lyre:
To tell the gazing World o're-whelm'd with Care,
That April's Blossoms Spring in gentle Air;
And Flowers shoot forth against new Solemnities
To deck the Windows of our Paradise.
The Blissful Quire Ecchoing such Joys aloud,
Ravished my Soul, that I amongst the Crowd,
Crept in, to view the Solemn Pomp, and see
Our Monarch shining like some Deity.
Gazing about, behold the Noble Train
Bless me! fresh Glorys turned my wandering Brai^
My thoughts, I Slep'd or died and rose again
So decked with Splendours was the Ladys all
That the Earths Glory seemed Angelical
Of Royallty so darting was the Ray
That pierced my soul with joy as well as they
It Emblemed the Resurrection day.
These things surpised my dazzled Senses, I
Transported was beyond the starry sky
In Enoch's Chariot to Eternity
But being loaded with this sinful dust
Ah lass; I could not wing it with the just
Nor raise my Notes to reach the lofty string
That warbl'd Anthem'd Requiems to the King
I loosed the Reins and left the Pompous Throne
Returned with gladness and sanck gently down
To find new Royalty adorn our Sphaer
With Heavenly joys, that by a Metaphor are here.
Then what are they that would have veiled these days,
And hurled Confusion on great James's Rays?
Aimed at the Throne, yet in infernum slipped,
They could not soar so high their Wings were clipped:
Their Clamours could not Monarchy destroy,
Only obstruct an universal Joy:
Miscreants, our Seraphims immortal Eyes,
Shines through the Royal Chariot of the Skies;
To view the Loyal Actions of the Best,
By that the angry Heaven will know the rest,
Seperates their called; because they will draw back
From God, till Hell burst or the Gibbet Crack.
Sometimes like Judas, they will appear to be
True Protestants to James and Monarchy.
Pay Homage to the Royal Heir alone,
Leave him with Swords and Staves a deadly Groan,
Demolished Scepter and a ruined Throne,
But Monsters; why so cruel to defeat,
Majesty so legitimately great.
Their tottering Noddles are stifled with fears,
Anxieties and doubts their blear-eyed with Tears,
Trumpets and Drums stikes terrors in their Ears
Lest piercing cries of Blood should seem to rend
The Skies for Judgment on his Fathers End:
Whose Princely Head mourned under the black Yoke
And strangely strangled with a fatal Stroke.
Oh tell it not in Gath, nor let it come
Into the public Streets of Askelon.
Direful! let not the Sober Heathen see,
Pagans will blush at such Impiety.
If Nature mean to cleanse her Magazin
From all Sedition she must first begin
To root out Error that unseen let in
Rebellion; that same Leprosy of Sin.
Faction Transport, or let the hung'ry Wave,
swallow Rebels in one discenting Grave.
What if the Conquering Sword or Nero's Rod,
Should stain the Corners of the Land with Blood
They Are just Scourges of a displeased God.
In Rome Beloved Berenice must not Reign
While Roman Hatred, Envy and disdain,
The Royal Titus, and his Honor stain:
For he before he Reigned with Luxury,
Was charged with Auvarice and Cruelty,
^he Senate feared a Nero's Tyrany.
But his sweeet Prudent Government of things,
Wiped off Aspersions, he the best of Kings
A Mirror of Monarchs through Rome was wrote,
Mankinds Delight's an Eidemick Vote.
Jerus'lem's Conquest spread abroad his Fame
Though the besieged wallow'd in a Flame,
His pity Marbl'd an Eternal Name:
Whose tender Eyes watered his Cheeks with Dews.
To see the burnings of the stubborn Jews.
It Is true we have no Jerus'lem but a Rout,
Of Hect'ring Jews like Pharisees about
That would asperse sincerity of State
With Subtle Calumny that came too late:
But sure we are, his lofty mind is free
From the least Charge of hated Cruelty
And we will depend upon his Clemency.
A Temple to this Hero let our Land
Each City be an Altar ar command,
And every Man a Statue to set forth
His Noble Acts and truly Royal Worth.
As Majesty sits in his sacred Face
So mercy the Derivative of his Race,
Is no less splendent in his Acts of Grace:
Gaze on his brave Achievements they will command,
Active Obedience from a sinful Land;
Once from Invasion's ransomed with his hand.
They were no Grapples of a Cyclop's Arms,
No nor deluding Syren's canting Charms
That could surprise the Famous Grecian, he
Passed by Charibdis and Mortality:
Unmask the Tragic Scene that once over spread
Our British Valleys with a Foreign dread
Of horrid Ruin Epidemical,
Had not our Famous James high Admiral,
With Courage trampled on the Deep and stood
A Valient Victor in a Sea of blood.
Furnished with Wisdom as a Warrior ought
To be he Steers his Course for Triump, Fought
To defend's Right, and shield his Brother's Crown
From Invaders, now the Martial Camp's his own.
Thus Agamemnon Stout, (as Poets feign,)
If ten (like Nestor) Councillors remain
With Conquest would have breathed a Trojan vein.
And the World's Conqu'rour would enrich his Head
With the surviving Libraries of the Dead.
To show that Policy the Learned Pen
Marbles above the common force of Men.
Champion, thrice welcome let thy fragrant breath,
Inspire Dominions with a Second Birth
Of Gladness, you are the Cherub of the Earth.
Only with Virtues seed Agrippa's breath
Could make Octavians body blessed Earth:
In vain's the Attempt whilst Heaven's Golden Showers
Of Grace Blossoms the sacred Plant with Flowers;
The Fruit's for none but Immortal Powers.
It Is no such Fruit as sow'r'd our Fathers Age,
Else why with Swords should Seraphims Engage,
To Guard our Sion from usurping Rage.
VIVAT REX.
FINIS
Entered according to Order.


