Judicium Discretionis: OR A just and necessary APOLOGY, FOR The Peoples
Judgment OF PRIVATE DISCRETION, EXHIBITED Against the arrogant Pretenses and
imperious Suggestions of Tannerus, Valentia, Bellarmine, with other Advocates
of the Papal Tyranny; AND Tendered to the consideration of all those, who would
secure themselves against Antichristian impostures and delusions.

Basil. t. 2. Moral. Reg. 72. p. 372. (...).

LONDON, Printed for Elizabeth Calvert, at the Black spread Eagle in Duck-lane.
1667.

To all such in these Nations as are true hearted to the Protestant Interest,
especially those of the Laity.
SIRS,
AMONGST all the Controversies which at this day are agitated with so much heat
and vigor, in this litigious and unquiet world, there is scarcely any of
greater use, or higher importance than that which concerns the liberty and
power of the People, in judging and trying the instructions, assertions and
decrees of their Teachers. What Luther said of Justification, I may say of
this; it is doctrina stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, of such influence upon the
welfare, life, and being of the Church, that it cannot be secured without it.
And yet there are few, if any, that have in our Language treated singly, and
fully concerning it. I shall therefore, toward a supply of that defect,
discourse a while upon it, and endeavor from Scripture-grounds, to evince and
clear up the just extent and bounds thereof, that so Teachers may neither be
affronted by their People, nor People oppressed by their Teachers, but both the
one and the other may quietly enjoy the freedom and privilege proper to their
sphaere and station. And in order thereunto shall, before I go any further,
desire you to take notice, that there is a fourfold judgment in matters of
Religion. 1. A judgment of supreme legislation and decision; which is peculiar
unto God himself, the great Maker and Lord of the Universe, whose Prerogative
it is, to give Laws unto the consciences of men, and prescribe the rule,
matter, order and manner of his own Worship and Service, and to render unto
every one according as he does more or less conform thereunto. 2. A judgment of
civil inspection and moderation; and this pertains to the Magistrate, whose
office it is, not only to protect the Church from the rage and violence of
persecutors, but also to see that all Officers and Members thereof, do keep
their respective places, and perform their several duties, that so Religion may
flourish, and the work of God may go on and prosper. 3. A judgment of
ministerial direction and instruction; which belongs unto the Pastors of the
Church, who both as they sit in council, and also in the course of their
ordinary ministry, are to assert and defend the truth, teach their people out
of the holy Scriptures the good knowledge of God, admonish the scandalous, cast
out the obstinate, and restore the penitent to their former communion and
privileges. 4. A judgment of private examination and discretion; and this
belongs to every individual Christian, who for the certain information of his
own judgment, and the full satisfaction of his conscience, both may and ought
to try by the Word, not only the doctrins of particular Pastors, but likewise
the decrees of Councils, and so far as he finds them agreeable thereunto, he is
to receive them, and so far as they are otherwise he is to reject them. It is
the last of these that falls under our present consideration; concerning which,
Writers discourse variously, according as their principles and interests lead
them.

1. The Jewish Rabbi's, as they labor under lamentable blindness and
sottishness in other particulars, so they do in this; they are so far from
allowing their people the liberty belonging to them, that they do most cruelly
and unmercifully tyrannize over them, holding them in no less bondage than the
severe Egyptians did their afflicted Ancestors in times past. Instead of
permitting them the exercise of private, rational, self-directive discretion,
which there is all the reason in the world they should allow them, they tie
them up closely to their mouths, strictly charging them to believe them, and
that without the least hesitancy or scruple, let them say what they will. Nay,
such is their pride and arrogance, that they will have them to reverence and
observe all their doctrins and precepts, how absurd or strange soever they are,
as if they were no less than so many rays and beams of divine light, darted
down from the very face of God himself. Even in our Savior's time they were
got to such height of spirit, that (as the Scripture it self shows) they
ambitiously affected the title of Rabbi, and bound heavy burdens, Mat. 23.4, 7.
and grievous to be born, and laid them upon men's shoulders. And as if this
were not sufficient, they have since that time proceeded (in a way
proportionable to their defection from God and his truth) to greater lordliness
and oppression. R. Abhuhabh says, Menoras Hammaor p. 23. col. 1.
That what ever they teach and speak in their mystical and allegorical
explications, the people are bound no less firmly and certainly to believe
them, quam legi Moses, than the very law of Moses. And, That if they find any
thing that seems to them hyperbolical, or quite contrary to nature, or too high
for their apprehensions, they must ascribe the fault to their own defective
understandings, non autem verbis ipsorum, and not to their words. And he
likewise says, that all their words are the words of the living God; that not
one of them shall fall to the ground in vain; that the people stand bound to
believe all things that are writ by them, or in their name; that they must not
in the least reflect on them, either in word or thought; and that he that does
it shall not escape punishment. Whereby it appears, that they challenge an
absolute, uncontrollable power over their people; that they require them to
show the same respect to their Assertions, that they are to give to the
Scriptures themselves; that if they deliver any thing that seems strange or
harsh, they must not for all that offer to suspect them, or censure their
Doctrine; and, that if they do it, they hold they shall be punished for it. And
R. Selomoh Jarchi writing upon those words of Moses, Thou shall observe to do
according to all that they shall inform thee, Deuteronomy. 17.10.
thus glosses upon them; Thou must not decline from that which they shall tell
thee, though they say, de manu tua dextra quod sinistra sit, et de manu
sinistra quod dextra sit; of the right hand that it is the left, and of the
left, that it is the right. He looked upon their Authority over the people as
such, that though they should speak things never so incredible and ridiculous,
yet they might not either gainsay them, or withhold their assent. Auctor
Ikkarim l. 3.
Indeed one of his fellows who would seem milder than the rest, endeavors
somewhat to mollify the expression, but whiles he is doing it, having the same
proud blood running in his own veins, he affirms little less himself. For,
says he, If it happen that a private person know more than the wise men, and
do better understand the Truth than some of them, yet the constitution of more
ought to stand, Neque fas erit dissentire ab iis, neither shall it be lawful
for him to dessent from them, so as to do any thing of his own opinion. In the
judgment then of such amongst them, as pretend to greater soberness and
moderation than the rest, a private man though never so far above them in
abilities, may not dissent from them, let them say what they will, nor do any
thing of his own opinion, though he have never so good reason for it, except
they be pleased to allow of it. And Guil. Vorstius tells of their Rabbines that
they hold that their decrees do, Not. in Maim. de fund. leg. c. 6. p. 77.
non minori jure, with no less right bind their peoples Consciences to
obedience, than the Precepts of the written Law; that they must reverence them
as they reverence God himself; that he who disputes against them contends with
the Holy Spirit; that he who takes up a strife with them, is as he who takes up
a strife against the holy Ghost, that he who thinks evilly of them, is as he
who thinks evilly of the holy Spirit. And that they may the better deterr the
people from either contemning or violating their Precepts, they do, anathematis
fulmine ferire, excommunicate such as they find guilty thereof; nay they do
fustigare sine aestimatione and numero, beat them till they dye. Buxt. Synag.
Jud. c. 1. p. 62.
If you desire more instances of this nature, turn to the Authors quoted in the
Margent, Hoornb. cont. Jud. l. 1. c. 3. p. 99. Guil. Vorstius ubi sup. p. 76,
77.
and they will plentifully supply you. This you will say is severe dealing, and
such as can neither consist with the necessary liberty of Religion or reason;
and yet such is the miserable blindness and slavery of their deluded people,
Vid. Buxt. Synag. Jud. c. 1. p. 65.
that they readily submit to them. Luther in a Treatise which he wrote of the
authority and faithfulness of the Rabbi's and their writings, informs us that
the Jews say they ought to believe them, although (as you heard before) they
affirm the left hand is the right, and the right, the left. And for proof
hereof, he tells us of three Jews that being in his Company fell into discourse
with him, and as often as he urged them with a Text of Scripture, so often they
replied, quod Rabbinis ipsorum credere tenerentur, that they were bound to
believe their Rabbi's; and that as for the Bible they were free from it. And
thus do their Rabbi's and they most impiously and wretchedly combine together
to undo and ruin each other. For on the one hand, such is the height and
imperiousness of the Rabbi's that they challenge an absolute Authority and
Lordship over their poor peoples Faith and Consciences, so as to teach or
require what they will, without being either contradicted or disobeyed. And on
the other hand, such is the slavery and baseness of the people, that they
prostitute themselves to the wills of their Rabbi's, suffering them quietly to
exercise over them what power they please. And their Rabbi's having brought
them to this pass, whither cannot they lead them? what may they not do with
them? when the Philistims had bored out Sampsons Eyes, they lead him and did
with him what they pleased. And after the same manner deal these proud Usurpers
with their poor people: They first put out their eyes, by taking from them all
liberty of private discretion, and having got them into that condition, they do
at pleasure make a prey of them.

2. The same domination that the Jewish Rabbi's challenge and exercise over
their people, the same the Mohammedan Muphti's challenge and exercise over
theirs. They will by no means endure them to dispute any thing that is enjoined
them, but will have them to look upon their bare word as sufficient Warrant,
for their Faith and practice. This Mahomet himself laid a Foundation to; for
being conscious of the weakness of the grounds he proceeded on, he strictly
forbad all Expostulations, and Reasonings about the Religion he prescribed,
Azoar 13. Ed. 1. lat. 1.
declaring he would have it received without any scruple or examination
whatsoever. This our Writers do every where make mention, and complain of, as a
piece of highest insolency, usurpation, and tyranny. The learned Grotius in
that excellent Book which he wrote in defense of Christianity, De verit. l. 6.
p. 303.
gives this account of his Religion, That it is wholly framed for shedding of
blood; and that it challenges assent, nulla inquirendi liberate, without any
liberty at all of enquiry. Treatise of Relig. part 3. c. 3. p. 350.
And Amyrald in a discourse of the like nature speaks to the same purpose.
There is nothing (says he) he has so strictly forbidden as to dispute
conterning his Law. Turcop. l. 1. c. 6. p. 34.
Nay, such (as Dr. Sutclive shows out of Zigabenus) was his impatiency of
contradiction that he commanded his Vassals to destroy the Christians,
Ubicunque in ipsos inciderint, wheresoever they should light on them. And to
encourage them to the work, he told them that it was meritorious, and such as
should be recompensed with ample reward. And when some of his Disciples,
wondered he should deliver such harsh Doctrine, he answered, Se non cum
Spiritu, sed gladio venisse, that he came not with the Spirit but the Sword;
and that therefore those were to be destroyed that would not admit of his Law.
Specul. hist. l. 23.6.43.
And answerable hereunto is that which we have in Vincentius Bellovacensis, who
acquaints us how he caused an ancient man that was a Jew to be murdered, Quod
se ab eo reprehensum audivisset, for that he heard he had said somewhat by way
of reproof of him. This is no other than barbarous, nay beastly Tyranny; and
yet such is the reverence that his blind Proselytes bear to him and his
Alcoran, though a bundle of the grossest Nonsense and Vanity, that ever
impudent folly heaped up together, that they will not hear talk of having any
Questions or Controversies raised about it, or any part of it; but looking upon
it as the genuine and undoubted suggestions of the Angel Gabriel, who they
fondly imagine held familiar converse with him, close with it and observe it
without any reasonings or Jealousies at all concerning it. Were it worth the
while to turn to other Authors, I might multiply passages out of them to the
same purpose; but these few I have here recited may serve to intimate to you
what condition the Mahometans keep their people in, as to the business under
debate. They are so far from allowing them a liberty of private examination
(which yet their doctrine, of any other that lays claim to Scripture, or any
part of it, should for the absurdity and folly that attends it, admit of) that
they utterly decry and forbid it, nay persecute it with greatest rage and
violence, presently taking away the lives of such as offer to raise the least
doubts or scruples about it. And hereby it is (as Voetius observes) that they
uphold their Empire, Disput. part 2. de Muhammed. p. 668.
and keep their people from forsaking them, which they could never do, if they
allowed them the free exercise of that power and liberty which belongs to them.

3. The same course that the Jewish Rabbi's, and Mohammedan Muphti's take with
their people, the same the Popish Clergy take with theirs. Under color of
preventing popular oppositions and confusions, they deny them all power in
matters of Religion save that of assent and obedience, telling them it belongs
to the Church in her Representative to judge and determine what Doctrines are
found and what are not, what is to be done in the service of God, and what is
not to be done; and that they are to stand wholly to her judgment, acquiesce
in her sentence, and close with her Decrees how corrupt or unreasonable soever
they may seem to be, without either contradiction or censure. They hold that
their Prelates and Priests assembled in Council are the Church; and that they
sit not there as Doctors to teach and persuade, but as Praetors or Judges to
appoint and establish; and that whatever they define and determine, ought to be
believed and observed without any further examination or trial, scruple or
doubting. Nay they look upon their Authority and wisdom to be such that they
hold it no less than presumption and impiety to call in question what is agreed
upon and prescribed by them. That you may not think we father upon them those
opinions they never held (as they use to deal with us) I shall show you out of
their own approved Authors what they teach in this matter. Bellarmine tells us
that though Infidels and such as are out of the Church, may examine and try
those things which are delivered by them that preach the Gospel to them, yet
those who are within the Church, and understand the authority and privileges
of it, may not do it. t. x. de verb. l. 3. c. 10. Col. 155. imp. Paris. 1620.
Take his own words; they are in answer to our objection from the Beraeans.
Though Paul (says he) was an Apostle, and could not preach false Doctrine, yet
this appeared not in the beginning to the Beraeans, neither stood they bound
presently to believe, until they first saw Miracles, or other probable,
reasons of believing; Therefore when Paul proved Christ to them out of the
Oracles of the Prophets, they deserservedly searched the Scriptures whether
those things were so; but Christians who know that the Church cannot err in
explicating the Doctrine of Faith, tenentur eam recipere, and non dubitare an
haec it a se habeant, stand bound to receive it, and not to doubt whether these
things are so. So that in his judgment, as soon as a man comes to know the
Church, and understand who are the Pastors of it, he must then question no
further, but must stand to their judgments, and receive their dictates even in
matters of faith, without either trial or doubting. Though he may enquire after
the Church, and doubt till he know it, yet when he has once found it, he must
do so no more; he must then turn his trying and doubting into assenting and
obeying. But Bellarmine is not herein alone; Valentia speaks to the same
purpose. Anal. fid. Cath. l. 8. c. 7. p. 90.
Then (says he) do we sufficiently understand the spirit of the doctrine, when
we perceive it to be propounded by the lawful Pastors of the Church, especially
if a Council assent. Here, whosoever does not acquiesce, but going further
arrogates to himself judgment over his Judges, and questions whether those
things are truths, which are defined by such as are set over us in the Church,
by whom the holy Ghost would have us to be taught: non exequitur sed
transgreditur superbe ac contumaciter, he does not observe, but proudly and
contumaciously transgress the method of proving spirits prescribed by the
divine Law. Whereby you see he looks upon the power of judging as peculiar to
the Pastors of the Church, in whose sentence he will have us to acquiesce, and
from which he thinks it is so far from being lawful to depart, as that he
teaches, we may not without guilt of vain and sinful arrogance so much as take
upon us to call it in question, or pass censure upon it. This indeed is high
and stately doctrine, and yet as if this were not sufficiently correspondent and
uniform to the Roman pride and greatness, Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 9. p. 280.
Tannerus goes further, and tells us, that the people are so far under the
government of their superiors, that if they err in defining of any doubt, vi
talis regiminis errare possunt, imo debent They may by virtue of the said
government err with them, nay, they ought to do it. Upon the recital whereof,
I may well break forth into the Prophet's pathetical exclamation, and say, Be
astonished, Jer. 2.12.
O ye heavents, at this! How sad is it that ever Christian tongue should utter
such absurd and poisonous doctrine! What sons of meekness and tenderness do
these men sometimes seem to be, and yet what slaves and vassals would they make
of the people? though they have rational powers and discerning senses, yet they
must not use them. The gods of the Heathens have eyes and cannot see, Psalm.
115.5.
ears and cannot hear, mouths and cannot speak: but its far otherwise with
them; they have eyes and must not see, ears and must not hear, mouths and must
not speak, but must acquiesce in the judgment and sentence of their Masters,
without enquiring or busying themselves any further. 2 Pet. 2.16.
Though a filly Ass may in some cases reply upon her Master, rebuke and condemn
him, yet may not they in any case reply upon them, or in the least call in
question what is taught, imposed or done by them, but must stoop down under the
burden that is laid upon them, without any exceptions or debates whatsoever.
And such as is the doctrine of these men, such is their proof. They holy Ghost
in the History of God's dealing with Job, says, The oxen were plowing, Job
1.14. Aquin, 22. q. 2. a 6.
and the asses feeding besides them; from whence, for want of better evidence,
they infer, that there are two sorts of persons in the Church, Majores and
Minores; that is to say, the Clergy and the Laity; and that the latter, in
matters to be believed, are to depend upon the former. According to which rate
of arguing, I know no party engaged in a cause so desperate, that may not even
from Scripture furnish themselves with sufficient strength. If this kind of
reasoning may be allowed, I see not but the Curate, following the vulgar Latin,
might from that of Jeremy, Paveant illi, Jer. 17.18.
and non paveam ego, fairly enough infer, that the Parishioners were to pave
the Chancel, and not he.

4. Notwithstanding the harshness of this doctrine, against the peoples judgment
of private discretion, and the ridiculousness of the proof alleged for it, yet
are there some even amongst us, and such too as would be thought to be none of
the worst Protestants, who stand up for it and urge it. The Bishop of Edinburgh
determins, Epist. to the Pastors of the Church of Scotland.
that where a man has not a Law, his own judgment is the rule of his
Conscience; but where there is a Law, the Law must be the rule. Wherein he
asserts these two errors; the one is, that men may make Laws, and bind burdens
where Christ has not done it; which as it is contrary to Protestant doctrine,
Confess. Basil. art. 10. p. 137. Chamier. Panst. t. 3. l. 15. c. 8. sect. 6. p.
325.
so it is inconsistent with, and destructive of our Christian liberty. The
other is, That the Laws of men do preponderate and supersede the authority of
conscience, so that we must not appeal from them to it, but from it to them,
which amounts to no less than plain blasphemy, and leads to no other than down
right atheism. True Religion teaches, that all flesh must be silent before the
Lord; that the conscience is God's Vicegerent, deputed by him to rule in the
soul, and that the dictates thereof are sacred and inviolable; but this man
has found out other kind of doctrine: he will have the authority of humane Laws
to be superior to that of conscience, and that the former is not to stoop unto
the latter, but the latter unto the former; which indeed is a good device to
propagate Heathenism, Turcism, and such like prevailing impostures, but not
true piety and holiness, which though sometimes they have Kings for nursing
fathers, Isa 49.23.
and Queens for nursing mothers to them, yet for the most part they have the
powers and laws of the earth against them. Notwithstanding the Archbishop of
St. Andrews steers his course the same way, and tells us, that in things
indifferent, Sermon at Perth Assembly.
we must always esteem that to be best, and most seemly, which seems so in
the eye of public authority; neither is it for private men to control public
judgment. As they cannot make public constitutions, so they may not control
nor disobey them, being once made. Indeed authority ought to lock well to this,
that it prescribe nothing but rightly, appoint no rites nor orders in the
Church, but such as may set formard godliness and piety. Yet put the case that
some be otherwise established, they must be obeyed by such as are members of
that Church, as long as they have the force of a constitution, etc. But thou will say, My conscience suffers me not to obey, for I am persuaded that such
things are not rigth, nor appointed; I answer thee, in matters of this nature
and quality, the sentence of thy superiors ought to direct thee, and that is
sufficient ground to thy conscience for obeying. In things then of
indifferency, whether we have eyes or no, we must make no use of them, but must
see with those of authority. We must not, like creatures that have reason,
weigh things in the balance of our own judgments, but like such as are utterly
destitute of it, take them upon the recommendation of such as are over us. And
if (which is no unusual thing) it fall out, that they either through ignorance,
partiality, prejudice, or the like, appoint such orders, as are not only
against conscience, (which through mis-ifformation may err) but likewise the
holy Scriptures, yet we must obey, satisfying our selves with this, that it is
authority that does enjoin them. This, one would think, were doctrine too gross,
to gain advocates in a place of such light as England is; and yet Dr. Covel and
Dr. Burgess own it, and plead for it: they say, The precept of the superior
binds more than the conscience of the inferior can; See Dr. Ames Fresh suit,
p. 1. c. 7. p. 79.
and that the subject having the command of the King or Bishop for his warrant,
ought not to examine, but only to perform what he sees commanded. From hence
you may learn how much these men esteem of the precepts of superiors, and how
little of the dictates of conscience, though never so well instructed and
informed. In those things wherein the authority of superiors does not
interpose it self, by determining, commanding, forbidding, or such like acts,
it has some power; but in those things wherein it does interpose, it has none
at all, but must filently acquiesce. If superiors fay, that light is darkness,
or darkness is light; that good is evil, or evil is good; we must, though
conscience tell us quite otherwise, assent and believe. If they forbid us to do
what conscience says, God has commanded, or command us to do what Conscience
says, he has forbidden, we must without the least scruple or reluctance obey
them, looking upon this as sufficient warrant to us, that what we omit or do is
by their appointment. And what religion, faith, worship, or course of life is
so bad, that this doctrine, if reduced to practice, will not lead a man to?
nay, to maintain such kind of doctrine, what is it less than to justify all the
cruelty and wickedness that has been done at the appointment of higher powers,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, ever since they had an existence in the world?
Nay, what is it but to condemn the generation of the just, and throw dirt in
the face of the blessed Martyrs, and faithful servants of God in all ages, who
out of the entire zeal they have born to him, and the respect they have had to
their own consciences, have still, as occasion has been offered, withstood the
unjust commands of the Rulers under whom they have lived, and denied their
obedience to them? For those I here deal with, to pretend they give this power
to Rulers only in thins indifferent and lawful, Mr. Stilling fleel's Iren. p.
119.
does (as a good Author shows) avail little, whiles in the mean time they make
them the sole Judges of what is indifferent and what is not indifferent, of
what is lawful and what is not lawful. What difference (as to consequence) is
there betwixt saying, Rulers may enjoin us to worship an Idol, and it belongs
only to Rulers to judge what is an Idol? none at all. The same doctrine that
teaches it belongs only to Rulers to judge what is indifferent and what is not
indifferent, what is lawful and what is not lawful, and that we are bound to
stand to their appointment; teaches in effect, that if they enjoin us to
worship an Idol, we we must do it. And therefore it is sad, that men who
pretend respect to the Protestant interest, should allow of, much more that
they should broach doctrine of such ill influence and tendency. But they are not
without their followers. How ordinary is it at this day for men in all
companies and places we fall into, as soon as ever we begin to speak of matters
of Religion, especially those which concern Worship and Discipline, presently
to refer us to the Church, and tell us, that the Church requires and forbids us
to do so and so, and to ask who must be Judge, you or the Church, and what,
will you be wiser than the Church, and will you not obey the Church? And fuch
is their blind zeal, that though this be all the strength they have to urge,
yet if we will not thereupon comply with them, they forhtwith exclaim against
us, as proud, wilful, schismatical, seditious, nay represent and reproach us
as people unworthy to live. This is so common, that I believe there are few
that read these lines, but they know what I say to be truch. Now what
unreasonable dealing is this, how contrary to the Scriptures, and unsuitable to
the Religion we do profess? That in Italy, Spain, and such like places where
Antichrist bears sway, they should make such language the keeping of their
Song, is not much to be marvel'd at but that the people of England, which God
has made a Tabor of Gospel light and glory, should be guilty of so much folly
and baseness, is a thing more remarkable, and such, as if Providence prevent
not, may prove a business of very bad consequence. It Is to be feared that those
amongst us who so zealously cry up implicit Faith, and Obedience to our own
Church, will if the scales turn do it to another. I speak not this to detract
in the least from the just Authority of the Church, or to diminish either the
reverence or obedience belonging to her, but to obviate the foolish, vain,
servile disposition of some, who think they connot sufficiently evidence
themselves to be true Sons of the Church, unless they ascribe to her such a
transcendent, magisterial, uncontrollable power as Jesus Christ never invested
her with. As men should take care that they withhold not from her any respect
that Jesus Christ has appointed them to give her, so they should likewise take
care, that they give her no more than what he has allowed her. The same
Apostle that commands us to obey them that have the rule over us, Heb. 13.17. 1
Cor. 4.6.
forbids us to think of men above that which is written. We must neither so
honor God as to withhold or diminish the respect due to men, nor so respect
men, as to withhold or diminish the honor due to God, but following the advice
of our Savior, Mat. 22.21.
we must give unto God the things that are Gods, and unto Men the things that
are men's. But.

5. All Orthodox, Protestant Writers who adhere to the Scripture, and are
sincere to the reformed Interest, deliver other kind of Doctrine, teaching
that the people are nto such Idiots as those before mentioned would make them,
nor so little concerned in the business of Religion, but that they have
belonging to them a Judgment of private discretion, by virtue where of they
have power of examining and trying whatever is propounded to them by their
Leaders for their instruction, edification or use. As they allow unto
Magistrates a judgment of civil inspection, by virtue whereof they ought to
see that all things in the Church be done decently and in order; and unto
Pastors a Judgment of ministerial direction, by virtue whereof they may meet
together, debate and decree such things as are conducible to the more
acceptable, and successful carrying on of the work of Christ, so (because both
Magistrates and Ministers are but subordinate Jdges, bound up to the sentence
of God set down in his Word, from which it is possible they may err) they
allow unto all Christians a Judgment of private discretion, by virtue whereof
they not only may, but ought (as they tender their own sasety) to bring the
Constitutions and Decrees of fuch as are over them to the common Rule, and try
them thereby, e're they close with them. To this purpose writes Luther. Oper.
t. 2. p. 375.
The sheep (says he) ought to judge, utrum Praelati vocem Christi, vel
alienorum proponant, whether the Prelates speak the voice of Christ or of
Strangers. And, that Assembly, in which the veice of the Gospel sounds, has
not only power and commandment of judging of every Opinion, but even every
pious man ought to do it, and that sub periculo salutis, under the peril of
salvation. He did not only think that Churches taken conjunctly had power of
judging the Doctrines of their respective Prelates and Pastors, but hkewise
that every private Christian had power to do it, nay sood bound to do it, and
that under the highest penalty, even the forfeiture of Salvation. And with him
agree multitudes more of the most learned, orthodox and holy men that ever
engaged in the defense of the Protestant cause. It cencerns all the godly
(says Dr. Whitaker) that they take heed to themselves, Part 1. cont. 1. q. 6.
c. 8. p. 359.
et quamvis doctrinam diligenter examinant, and diligently examine every
Doctrine, lest they close with those things that are false for those which are
true. And, every man ought to lean upon his own Faith, and depend upon his own
judgment, non ex cujusquam hominis nutu, atque arbitrio, not the suggestion
and arbitrament of any men whatsoever. And, unusquisque sibi judex esse debet,
every one ought to judge for himself. The common Question that still occurrs in
all our debates, and which ever and anon we are put to answer, is who must be
judge? Why, here you have a clear and peremptory solution; Every man must judge
for himself. Though private men may not ascend either into the Magistrates
Throne, or into the Ministers Chair, so as authoritatively to judge or give
sentence for others, yet they may and ought to do it for themselves. To the
same purpose speaks Cappellus: These. Salm. de sum. jud. sect. 48. p. 110.
It is (says he) verily lawful, and ever will be lawful, unicuique fideli,
for every of the faithful by a tacit sense of the mind and internal
Judgment, to see and judge whether the sentence given in Ecclesiastical
Judicatories be just, and uttered according to the Law of God, or whether it be
given contrary, besides, or against the Scripture. The Law of God is the
Cynosure which not only single persons, but whole Synods, how wise, grave,
pious, or eminent soever they are, must have their eye upon, and steer their
course by; and when they have made decrees, private men must take them under
trial, and see whether they have kept to it, or not; if they have, then they
must observe and follow them, if otherwise, they must forsake and leave them,
choosing rather to possess and enjoy the Truth with a few, nay alone, than to
lie under the evil of Error and Deception, with the greatest multitudes. To
these, that I may not weary you with testimonies in so plain a case, I shall
only add somewhat of that which the Author a little before mentioned has said
on this subject; who has in a few words spoken the design and scope of the
following Discourse. If (says he) it be said, Mr. Stillingst. Iren. p. 118,
119.
that men are bound to be ruled by their Governors in determining what things
are lawful, and what not; to this it is answered: First, no true Protestant
can swear blind obedience to Church Governors in all things. It is the
highest usurpation to rob men of the liberty of their judgments. That which we
plead for against the Papists, is, that all men have eyes in their heads as
well as the Pope; that every one has a judicium privatae discretion is, which
is the rule of practice as to himself; and though we freely allow a Ministerial
power under Christ in the government of the Church, yet that extends not to an
obligation upon men to go against the dictates of their own Reason and
Conscience. Their power is only directive and declarative, and in matters of
duty can bind no more than Reason and evidence brought from Scripture by them,
does. -- The plea of an Erroneous Conscience takes not off the Obligation to
follow the dictates of it; for as a man is bound to lay it down supposing it
erroneous, so he is bound not to go against it, while it is not laid down.
Again, if men, are bound to submit to Governors in the determination of
lawful things, what plea could our Reformers have to withdraw themselves from
the Popes Yoke. -- Let men turn and wind themselves which way they will, by
the very same arguments that any will prove separation from the Church of Rome
lawful, because she required unlawful things, as conditions of her communion,
it will be proved lawful not to conform to any suspected or unlawful
practice, required by any Church Governors upon the same terms, if the thing
so required be after serious and sober enquiry judged unwarrantable by a man's
own Conscience. In his Judgment then, men are not to subject themselves to
their Governors in all things they please to determine and appoint, but to
consult their own Consciences, and follow the dictates thereof, which he looks
upon as a point so essential to true Religion, that he takes him to be no true
Protestant that does renounce it; and withal declares it to be the highest
usurpation that Governors can be guilty of, to deny their people liberty of
it. And yet he observes there are some even amongst our selves that think they
have no liberty of this nature; against whom he alleges the example of our
worthy Reformers, whose withdrawing from the Church of Rome cannot be
justified, unless such a liberty be acknowledged. If you would yet further see
what our Writers say concerning this matter, you may consult their discourses
against the Papists de interpretatione Scripturae, fide implicita, voto
obedientiae, and such like subjects.

And thus I have given you some account of the different apprehensions of men
touching the present case, whereby you see that such as are the enemies of the
Truth, and be addicted to domination and oppression, are altogether impatient
of the peoples having any judgment of private discretion, nay reproach and
persecute it, as a thing intolerable, and not to be endured. But the more
wise, orthodox and sober party are wholly for it, as an undoubted right, settled
upon them by Christ himself, which none may take from them without manifest
injury both to him and them. Now because the opinions and resolutions of men,
are no authentic determination of the matter, I shall therefore have recourse
to the Scripture, wherein the Holy Ghost has set down the liberty and power
both of Ministers and People, and distinguished their several Rights and
Privileges; and in particular I shall insist upon those words of Paul, Prove
all things; from whence I shall endeavor to evince against the forementioned
enemies of the Truth, but more especially the Papists and such amongst us as
comply with them, that though the people have not public power of judging for
others, as Ministers have, yet they have a private power of judging for
themselves, which none ought to withhold or deny them the exercise of.

But that you may not think that what I allege in the following discourse in
behalf of the peoples judgment of private discretion does only extend unto,
and concern what is delivered by their Teachers, know that the same arguments
that serve to prove a liberty in them of judging the Doctrines of their
Teachers, serve likewise (mutatis mutandis) to prove a liberty in them of
judging the Commands of the Civil Powers under whom they live. As the authority
of the former is subordinate and limited, so is that of the latter; and as the
former are subject to errors and mistakes, so likewise are the latter, and
therefore as the people in defense and pursuance of their own safety, are to
judge of the Doctrines of the one, so they are also to judge of the Commands of
the other. Though the Powers over them be never so lawful, wise, great, yet in
matters of Religion they must not rest upon their judgments, nor take what
they deliver upon trust, but must bring it to the Word, and with all boldness
and freedom examine it thereby, esteeming of it according as they find it more
or less agreeable thereunto. This kind of doctrine I know the fawning
Parasites of the times (that care not how high they ascend in extolling the
power of Rulers, so they may but insinuate themselves into favor, and drive on
their own private interests) will look upon as little better than fanatical and
seditious; but I hope all true Protestants have other kind of apprehensions of
it. I am sure it is such doctrine as the faithful servants of God (who were as
great haters of disloyalty as any of those unworthy flatterers that at this day
declaim the most against it) have in all Ages constantly both maintained and
practiced. Herein let the reverend and learned Davenant serve for a witness.
Praelection. in Coloss. 3.23. p. 255.
Subjects (says he) ought not, neither may they, judge of the decrees of
Superiors, judicio authoritatis, by a judgment of authority, but they both
may and ought to judge of the same, so far as concerns themselves, judicio
discretionis, by a judgment of disoretion. And (says he) this is confirmea
omnium piorum exemplo, by the example of all the godly; and he instances in
Daniel, the Apostles, and the Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, who, he tells us,
rightly judged that they ought not to believe those things which were
propounded to them to be believed, nor do those things which were commanded to
be done. And the truth is, the liberty and exercise of such a judgment is of
such use to the directing of the people in their duty, that it must needs be
acknowledged not only to be lawful, but indispensably necessary. For, if
Rulers; be subject to mistake, and to enjoin unlawful things, and people when
they do it, must (as all confess that are not downright Atheists) disobey
them, they must of necessity have liberty to judge of what nature that is which
they do enjoin them. For how is it possible, they should be able to distinguish
betwixt lawful and unlawful, close with the one and avoid the other, except
they be allowed the use of their own discretion to advise and direct them in
it? Suppose Rulers do with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.5.19.
command them one while to worship God another while, an Image, how shall they
do to know they must obey them in the one, and not in the other, unless they
may have liberty to take both to the Rule, and try them thereby. Upon which and
such like grounds, I believe there is scarcely any Prince in the World truly
pious, but he is content with all his heart to allow his people such a liberty.
Nebuchadnezzar though an Heathen Monarch, Dan. 3.28.
after he had duly weighed things, was so far from being displeased with
Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, for either censuring or disobeying his decree
(though done in the face of his whole Empire) that he himself blesses God upon
that account, and commends them for it.

To conclude, you understand, Sirs, the present state and condition wheresh we
are. The skies you see gather blackness round about, and look angrily upon us
on every side. The cloud that a while ago was but the bigness of a man's hand,
has now overspread the whole face of the Heavens, and armed them with
vengeance against us. As if all those sore Judgments God has of late years
inflicted upon us were too small a Scourge for the chastening of such a wicked
and provoking people, he now threatens us with the invasion of Forreigh Powers,
which how far they may prevail, and what violence and severity they may
exercise both upon the outward and the inner man, he only knows. Many prudent,
holy men (who as the Scripture it self shows, are the fittest of all other to
be consulted in a case of this nature) having diligently observed and
considered the aspect and motion of the Stars engaged in the present
Conjunction, Genesis 18.17. Prove. 25.14. Psalm. 22.3. Hos. 14.9. Mic. 6.9.
do presage from them great and sore trials. It concerns you therefore to
awake out of sleep, run to the Tower of David, Ephesians. 6.13.
and there arm your selves with spiritual armor from top to toe, that so you
may be able to hold out against the sharp assaults wherewith you are like to be
exercised. However God is pleased to deal with you, be sure you preserve your
Consciences inviolate and pure, suffering neither force, nor flatteries to
ravish or defile them. And in order thereunto, remember that you keep close
unto the Word of God as it is contained in the holy Scriptures, constantly
assert and maintain the authority, sufficiency, perspicuity and other
excellencies belonging to it, and (in compliance with the design of this
discourse) examine and try all matters of Religion thereby. Epict. Arrian.
tells us that the greatest and first work of a Philosopher is (...), l. 1. c.
20.79.
to examine and try what is before him, and to admit nothing without proof. And
the like I may say of every Christian; One of his first and greatest works, in
order to his necessary instruction, and the building of him up in Faith and
Holiness, is to bring all those things he has to do with in the business of
Religion to the Word, and examine them thereby, taking diligent care that he
receive nothing till he have first made trial of it. Nay, if it be the duty of
a Philosopher to be thus cautious in his undertakings, it is much more the duty
of a Christian to be so in his; by how much the undertakings of the one are of
greater concernment than those of the other, by so much it behooves the latter
to be more cautious than the former. What Is the reason wherefore so many are
upon all occasions seduced and lead aside? It is because they take not this
course; it is because they receive things upon trust, and venture on them
before they have by due trial found out what they are. The reason wherefore
men embrace so many unsound Doctrines, and betake themselves to such wild,
impious, pernicious practices, is because they do not sit in judgment upon
them, and make proof of them; but following the irregular motions of their own
misguided inclinations, give up themselves e're they understand what they do.
What was the reason that so many followed such silly Creatures as Theudas,
Judas of Galilee, and the like Seducers? Acts 5.36, 37.
It was because they did not take them to the Touchstone of the Word, which
would soon have showed they were but counterfeit Coin, and not what they
pretended to be. What Is the reason that so many fall in with Heathenish, Popish
ways, but because they neglect to bring them to the Scripture, which would
teach them better? And indeed its just with God, if, when he has given men
light to walk by, they will not make use of it, but still follow the bent of
their own hearts, to deliver them up to Impostures and delusions, as the just
recompense of their folly and wilfulness. And if we look into the method of his
proceedings, as they are set down in his Word, we shall find, he frequently
does do it. Thus he dealt with the Heathens; Romans 1.28.
when they did not like to retain him in their knewledge, he gave them over
(...), which our Translation renders a reprobate mind, but it properly
signifies a mind void of Judgment, that is disabled from examining of things;
such as Nebuchadnezzars was, when God had taken his understanding from him.
Dan. 4.34.
Behold here the goodness and severity of God goodness, in offering the
knowledge of himself to them; severity in punishing them thus for the contempt
of it. Because they employed not their minds in the search and study of the
Truth, but like ungrateful wretches, despised and made light of it, therefore
he smote them as he did the men of Sodom, with blindness, Genesis 19.11.
leaving them to grope for that way which otherwise they might have had eyes to
have seen. Thus likewise he dealt with the Jews, he blinded their eyes, John
12.40.
and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart. They were a people exceeding dear to him, insomuch
that he favored and privileged them above all people in the World. He
entrusted them with his holy Oracles, and the great things of his Law, with the
various advantages attending thereon, which had they faithfully improved, they
might have enjoyed to this day; but they made light of them, trampled them
under foot, and profaned them. And what is the issue of it? why, in just
indignation he tears them away from them, and shuts them up in darkness; since
which time they have been the most foolish, sottish people in the World. And
after the same manner he deals with those that live under the Rule of
Antichrist; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
because they receive not the Truth (offered to them) in the love of it,
therefore he sends them strong delusions, giving them up to believe lies. He
has by his good providence vouchsafed them his Word to be a Rule and Directory
to them, and has charged them to keep close to it as the best Guide they can
possibly follow; but they have neglected and forsaken it, and therefore he has
given them up to believe Monkish Traditions, and childish fables, whereby their
Teachers do lamentably beguile them, and lead them into perdition. From these
instances it appears what a dangerous thing it is for any people, how dean
soever they are to God, to neglect his Word. It does no less than expose them
to the danger of dereliction, and ruin. As therefore you desire to enjoy his
favor, and the continuance of the means of grace wherewith he has blessed
you, prize it at an high rate, be diligent in the study of it, and try all by
it; choosing rather to undergo all the hardship and misery imaginable, than to
swerve in the least from it.

Grindal, Zanch. vol. 3. t. 8. p. 305.
Bishop of London, and afterward of York, writing to Zanchy, tells him, It is
the property of a true Teacher to be tenacious of that faithful Word, which is
profitable for Doctrine, atque a veritate ne latum quidem unguem discedere, and
not to depart an hairs breadth from it. A good lesson for the Adiaphorists and
Latitudinarians of our present times, who think if they can but secure the
Foundation, they need not trouble themselves about lesser matters. Beware how
you comply with such, or join with them in their sinful practices. As it is
the duty of Teachers to be tenacious of the Word, so it is your duty likewise,
and therefore see that you keep close to it, suffering your selves by no means
to be drawn from it. Though you be tempted with smiles and frowns, promises and
threatenings, rewards and punishments, yet be not moved, do not forsake it, but
stoutly and constantly persist in the defense of it. Make it to appear that you
have higher spirits, and nobler principles than natural generation could help
you to; that you can trample upon the pride and glory of the World, and look
Prisons, Gibbets, and Flames in the face. Let Atheists and Papists see you have
such a God, and such a Religion, as you take to be worth the suffering for;
that England spent not all her Martyrs at once; that by a mystical and happy
transanimation, the souls of those deceased Worthies, who sacrificed their
lives in the witness of the Truth many years ago, do live in you; and that
notwithstanding all the slaughters which Antichrist that ravenous and
insatiable Wolf, has made among the Saints in these Nations, and the
detestable Neutrality of the present age, wherein we live, there are yet those
who (if the Truth need further testimony) can find in their hearts to part
with their Liberties, Estates, Lives, and all that is near and dear unto them,
in the behalf of it. Be not dismayed with any of those things that may befall
you. Though you see the ways of God (like the waters of Dimon) running down
with blood, Isa. 15.9.
yet be not moved, but stand your ground, and remain faithful. Think it not
below you to go to Heaven the same way that your dear Lord has done before
you. Be willing not only to conform to him in his works, but also in his
sufferings. You have many a time with delight read of the patience,
cheerfulness, and constancy of the faithful Servants of God in former times;
let your carriage in your approaching trials be such, that those who shall
come after you, may have occasion with the like delight to read of yours.
Leaving these things to your serious consideration, I shall close with that
saying wherewith Dr. Holland used to take leave of his Friends, Commendo vos
amori Dei, and odio Papismi: I commend you to the love of God, and the hatred
of Popery.

ERRATA, in the Margent.
PAge 7, and 10. for t. 3. r. t. 1. p. 14. for Inst. r. Hist. p. 19. for Luke
r. Luc, p. 90. for p. 166. r. col. 410.

In the Book.
Page 14. l. 28. for Scriptures r. Scripture, p. 38. l. 15. for pretatum r.
praelatum, p. 44. l. 20. in some Copies, for perfecta existent r. profecta
exstent, and l. 22. for Edesus r. Edesius, p. 68. l. 12. for 13 r. 14. p. 80.
l. 27. for equi r. aequi, p. 91. l. 16. add it.

1 THESE. 5.21. Prove all things.


IN the preceding Verse the Apostle disswades the Thessalonians from despising
of prophesyings. For the better understanding whereof, you are to note, that in
the Church of Thessalonica there were two sorts of persons, both of which
labored under an unhappy extreme, as to the preaching of the Word, here called
prophesying. The one through the unskilfulness, and vanity of some in
preaching, took up such a prejudice against it, that they despised all
preaching. The other being acted by an indiscreet, misguided zeal, were so far
from despising all preaching, that without any discrimination or exception,
they allowed and embraced all. We have sufficient exemplifications hereof
amongst our selves; diverse from the insufficiency, and scandalousness of some
that are employed in preaching, take up such a prejudice against it, that they
turn Seekers, Ranters, Atheists, and whatever Satan the common Impostor (who is
ready to improve all advantages and opportunities of promoting his own
interest) will have them to be. Others through a strange credulity and
facility, are so affected when they see men make specious pretenses of Piety
and Holiness, and hear them deliver things in the Name of God, with seeming
zeal and affection, that they presently conclude whatever they deliver is sound
and good, and worthy their approbation and acceptance. And thus, as the former
through a rash and obstinate prejudice turn their backs upon the common means
of Salvation, so these through an indiscreet and preposterous zeal run
themselves into miserable delusions. Thus it was amongst the Thessalonians,
some cried through prejudice, others through zeal, some liked No preaching,
others liked all. Now Paul being aware of these sad Exorbitancies and
Confusions, endeavors to reduce and fettle them in a mean betwixt these two
extremes: He would neither have them to like all, nor dislike all; neither
receive all, nor reject all, but to prove all, and then receive what was good,
and reject what was bad. The words imply as much as if he had said, My
Brethren, I see you are variously affected toward preaching: some out of
prejudice undervalue it, others out of zeal overvalue it; some so despise it
that they will receive nothing, others so affect it that they will receive
anything. Now there is danger in both these; the one leads to Atheism, the
other to Error: let it be your care therefore to avoid both. See that you
neither contemptuously despise all, nor credulously receive all, but like
prudent and sober Christians, bring all to the common Standard of the Word,
prove it thereby, and what you find contrary to it, that withstand and reject,
and what you find agreeable to it, that allow and follow.

Having thus briefly given you an account of the occasion of the Words, I
shall, as the general thesis I intend to insist on, and make out to you, raise
from them this Observation:

Though it be reasonable, that they should receive the Ministers of Christ, and
entertain them with respect answerable to the authority they are sent by, and
the nature of the Message they bring along with them, yet they must not look
upon them as infallible, but as subject to errors and mistakes, and therefore
must hear them with judgment and caution. Though they be never so able, pious,
conscientious, useful in the Church, dear to them, yet they must not take what
they deliver upon their credit, or authority, but must bring it to the Word,
and make proof of it thereby. This course God has prescribed as the means both
of their satisfaction and safety, and therefore they must neither upon one
account nor other neglect it, but with all care and faithfulness close with it
and follow it.

The Jewish Writers tell us, Perk. Aboth. cap. 5.
there sat at the feet of their Rabbi's four sorts of Hearers; some of which
had conditionem Spongiae, others Clepsydrae, others sacci foecinacei, and
others Cribri. Some were like to a Sponge sucking in all they heard, without
any discretion or distinction: Others were like the Hourglass, letting out at
one ear, what they took in at the other; others were like the Wine-sack letting
out the Wine, and keeping in the dreggs. And others were like the rieing sieve,
letting out the courser seed, and keeping in the Corn. Of which four sorts the
last is only to be approved of; for we must neither receive all, nor let go
all, neither retain that which is bad, nor let go that which is good, but
judging all, we must retain that which is good, and let go that which is bad,
which is the very thing the Apostle aims at here, when he says, prove all
things.

For the more methodical prosecuting of this point, I shall branch it forth
into several particulars, which I shall explicate and discuss by themselves;
and I shall show,

1. What is meant by proving. The Scripture mentions two kinds of proving, the
one belonging to God as the Efficient, the other unto man. It is only the
latter of them that I have now to to deal with; and of it we have three sorts.
1. Such as imports the demonstration, or confirmation of a matter in question.
And this kind of proving Paul used when he showed by the Scriptures that Jesus
was Christ. Acts 18.28
Though he were an Apostle, a man of rare abilities, and singular faithfulness,
yet he thought it not sufficient barely to assert the authority of Christ, but
he betakes himself to the Scripture, and from thence he fetches arguments
whereby he clearly and unanswerably proves him to be the Messiah. 2. Such as
imports approbation and allowance. And this kind of proving Paul would have
the Corinthians to use in the choice of the Messengers, 1 Cor. 16.3.
whom they were to entrust with the carriage of the Contributions, which they
were to make toward the relief of their distressed Brethren at Jerusalem. That
they might not throw away by their indiscretion, what they gathered by their
Charity, he wills them to deliver it into the hands of such as upon mature
consideration, they should approve of, as fit for the undertaking and
management of such a Charge. But it is not either of these kinds of proving
that he means when he injoyns the Thessalonians to prove all things; for as he
never intended to put them upon the making good of all things delivered to
them, so neither was it his mind that they should approve or allow of them,
but that they should upon a fair and equal weighing of them, have liberty to
take what was good, and leave what was bad. 3. Such as imports examination and
trial. And this kind of proving it is that Paul means, when he says, prove
all things. He would not have men to blindfold or hoodwinck themselves, or sit
down under a lazy, implicit Faith, closing with things merely upon the credit
of their Leaders, but to make use of their eyes, and by due proof satisfy
themselves of the lawfulness of them before they entertain them. The word in
the original is (...), which imports such a kind of proving as a man makes use
of, when he inquires and searches into a thing to find out the nature of it.
The Holy Ghost sometimes uses it as Verbum juridicum, nothing the process of
such as are in Authority, in trying of Candidates, or such as are to be chosen
into places of trust, whether they are fit for them. Thus Paul, who is very
frequent in the use of the word, speaking to Timothy, concerning Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.10.
says (...), they must first be proved. He would not have him to receive into
Church Offices all such as should think themselves fit, but whom he himself
upon due examination and trial should think fit. Sometimes he uses it as
Verbum aurificum, noting the method of Goldsmiths, whose manner is (...), to
prove and try their Gold, both by the Fire and the Touchstone, that so they
may discover the nature and value of it. One while they bring it to the Fire,
and thereby find out the dross; another while to the Touchstone, and so
discover what is counterfeit. And this kind of prudent circumspection and
caution, the Apostle would have the Thessalonians, and all Christians to use in
matters of Religion. He would not have them to take things upon trust, to think
that all is gold that glisters, that all is sound that is recommended to them
as such, or that at the first view seems to be such, but he would have them to
bring it to the Fire and Touchstone of the sacred and unerring Word, and then
close with it or reject it so far as upon due trial they shall find cause.

2. What those things be which are to be proved; and those are (...), all
things whatsoever. For though that which the Apostle here delivers were
occasioned by the contemptuousness of some, and the credulity of others among
the Thessalonians toward preaching, yet his words are universal and general,
and therefore (there being the same reason for proving of other things, as well
as preaching) they are not to be looked upon as referring only unto preaching,
but as extending unto all other ways, whereby Teachers may recommend any thing
to their people, for their belief and practice: which way soever it is that
they deal with them, whatsoever it is that they deliver to them, they must make
proof of it ere they embrace it. They must prove the Faith they would have them
to profess, the Worship they would have them to observe, the Discipline they
would have them to close with, the course of life they would have them to
follow, with all the particular Doctrines they would have them assent to, and
the several Duties they would have them perform. Bellarmine would persuade us,
t. 3. de Verb. l. 3. c. 10.
that the Apostle by all things intends only doctrinam dubiam, such Doctrine as
is doubtful and uncertain; which he would have us to think the Doctrine of
lawful Pastors is not, but aperte bona, manifestly good. Answ. 1. Did ever
man, that knew what the terms, Doctrine, and Pastor, meant, assert a grosser
untruth? Is all the Doctrine of lawful Pastors good, and manifestly good? What
did he think of the Scribes and Pharisees? did he not teach a little before, l.
3. c. 5.
that they were lawful Pastors? l. 3. c. 5.
And was all their Doctrine good, and manifestly good? Does not our Savior the
ablest in the World to judge, lay it to their charge, that they made the
commandment of God of none effect by it? Mat. 15.6.
Or what did he think of the Ancients, whose authority he does upon all
occasions urge us with? were not they lawful Pastors? And yet do they not
teach many errors? Do they not frequently contradict one another, nay
themselves? Nay, what did he think of many of his own Writers of greatest
credit and esteem? were not they lawful Pastors? And yet has not Dr. Morton
in his Appeal, produced multitudes of clear testimonies out of them, for almost
every point we maintain against the Church of Rome? Nay, does not Bellarmine
himself, ever and anon, after he has recited their opinions, reject them as
erroneous and unsound? 2. It is no new thing for lawful Pastors to degenerate
into Heretics, and oppose those Truths that formerly they have asserted and
defended. What would he have said to Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches?
Were not they lawful Pastors, and yet did they not fall into blasphemous and
dangerous heresies, and with both zeal and confidence preach the same? Now when
they preached them, was their Doctrine good and manifestly good, and such as
the people ought to receive without any scruple or censure? If so, then it was
their duty to blaspheme God, overthrow Religion, and undo themselves and
others. And thus you see whither these Principles lead, and what it is to cast
your selves upon the fincerity of men, and rest upon their authority. It
exposes to no less than the danger of blasphemy, ruin and confusion. To secure
us from which, God has propounded this remedy, that we should not caeca fide,
take things upon trust, but bring them to trial, and thereby inform our selves
of the nature of them. This every man ought to do, and this every good mand
does do; for as the Apostle says, He that is spiritual judges all things. 1
Cor. 2.15.
Whiles natural men, that is, carnal, unregenerate ones, who are blind, and
cannot discern; and careless, and will not discern, make no distinction of
things, but turning their souls into so many impure sinks, receive all that
comes, whether good or bad, he who is spiritual, that is, he who is acted,
enlightened and sanctified by the Spirit, and minds and lives upon spiritual
things, takes another course: he neither receives all, nor rejects all, but as
the Apostle says, he judges all, and then receives what is good, and rejects
what is bad.

3. Who they be that are to prove all things; and those are all Christians,
every one that is a member of the Church, every one that hears the Gospel
preached, nay, every one that would not fall into those delusions that attend
implicit faith and blind obedience. It does not only belong to Governors,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, Supreme or Subordinate; but unto all persons
whatsoever that would secure themselves against error and destruction. For the
Apostle does not in this place direct his discourse to Governors only in the
Church of Thessalonica, either of one sort or other; but to all the members
thereof without any exception, willing every of them, as they tendered their
own safety, to perform this necessary and important duty of Christian trial. l.
3. de verb. l. 3. c. 10.
Bellarmine indeed, that he may the better evade the force of this place, tells
us that when Paul says, prove all things, he meant not, ut omnes de ecclesia
id faciant, that all in the Church should do it, but that those should do it to
whom it belonged: As if one should write to an University to examine such a
book, it were not to be thought it were intended that every one in the
University should do it, but only the Doctors of that faculty whereof the Book
treats. But this is a frivolous shift; for 1. The Apostle does not direct his
Epistle to the Pastors of the Church of Thessalonica, but the Church there,
whom, without any exceptions or limitations, he advises to this duty, which is
a plain evidence that he intended it rather for the People than the Pastors.
For though I grant, that by the word Church in Scripture, we are sometimes to
understand the Pastors thereof, duly assembled, for the determining of the
differences that lie before them; yet we do not find that any of the Epistles,
the Apostle directed to the several Churches to whom he wrote, were intended
peculiarly for the Pastors, but that belonged to the People equally with them.
2. The whole scope and matter of the Epistle (which no doubt he suited to the
persons, whose instruction and use he intended in it) do equally concern the
People with the Pastors. Do but peruse his Salutations, Commendations,
Narratives, Doctrine, Exhortations, Thanksgivings, and you shall find, they are
accommodated to the People as well as the Pastors; nay, rather to the People
than them. Nay, 3. The Apostle, as if he had, de industria, designed the
anticipating of such an objection, and made it his business to assure us, that
he intended the People as well as the Pastors in this precept, as also in those
prefixed and annexed to it, does in the 12 and 13 verses openly address himself
to them: We beseech you, (says he) brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake. Here certainly, if he understood what he
said, he meant not the Pastors but the People. 4. As if all this were not
sufficient, he ushers in the words of the Text with a precept, that does
principally, if not only, concern the people, which he prefixes immediately
before them, Despise not prophesyings; whereunto, as an antidote against
running into the extremes before mentioned, he subjoyns, prove all things. Now
what reason can be rendered, wherefore the former precept (as well as those
which go before and follow after) should belong to the People and not this, all
the while it has nothing in its own nature, but what is proper and agreeable
to their state? none at all. And therefore rejecting this and such like vain
cavils, suiting neither with the design of the Spirit of God, nor the safety of
Religion, we are to look upon this duty as belonging, not only unto Pastors,
but likewise the people, who by virtue thereof stand bound to prove what is
delivered to them as well as they.

4. What it is by which all things must be proved. In all rational and orderly
trials there is still something supposed, to which we reduce what we are
trying, and if we find it agreeable thereunto, we approve of it; if not, we
reject it. And we must of necessity take this course, for it is impossible that
we should ever bring any trial to a fair issue, until we agree upon some common
rule to proceed by. To engage in a debate without premising certain (...), or
common principles, acknowledged on all sides, as the measure thereof, is to
follow an ignis fatuus, run after our own shadows, and create to our selves
fruitless as well as endless trouble. Since therefore it is the duty of every
one to try what comes before him, and that there must of necessity be some rule
to proceed by, I shall in the next place enquire what this rule is, by which we
must make this trial; and we need not to go far to learn tidings of it, Romans
10.6.
we need neither to ascend into heaven, nor descend into the deep; for it is
nigh us, even in our mouths, and in our hearts. It is, in plain terms, none
other than the word of God, contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, to which he has directed us to have recourse upon all occasions, as
the infallible measure of truth and falsehood, Isa. 8.20.
good and evil. To the law and the testimony, (says the Prophet) if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. In which
he plainly shows whither we must go with our doubts and scruples, with whom we
must consult, and of whom we must take advice: not of them that have familiar
spirits, not of wizards that peep and mutter; but of the law and the testimony.
There is all the reason imaginable, that he who made the world should rule and
govern it, and that in order thereunto he should give forth Laws containing his
sovereign will and pleasure, touching the obedience and service he expects from
his creatures; and this he has fully done in his word, whereby he has guided
his Church all along from first to last, though with some variation, ever since
she had a being. Before the fall, he guided her by it according as he had writ
it in man's heart; from the fall to Moses, according as he was pleased to grant
it forth and renew it by occasional revelations; and from Moses till this time,
according as he has, by his own Secretaries, set it down in the holy
Scriptures, with which he will have us in all cases to consult, and to which we
must constantly cleave, without warping or turning aside either one way or
other. And hither it was that our Savior, the Prophets, Apostles and Pastors
of the ancient Church, upon all occasions betook themselves; hereby it was that
they taught the Doctrine of salvation, defended the truth, refuted error,
established the weak, convinced gainsayers, and set up the Kingdom of God in
the world. Hereby it was that they subdued kingdoms, Heb. 11.33
wrought righteousness, stopped the mouths of Lions, out of weakness were made
strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of aliens.
Clemens of Alexandria speaking of the word, says, it is (...), Strom. l. 7. ad
fin.
the touchstone of truth and falsehood. So it is in it self, and so in the
primitive and purer times it was ever esteemed. Theodoret tells of Constantine,
Inst. l. 1. c. 7.
that he would have the Fathers in the Council of Nice to take the resolution
of things in question, (...), out of the divinely inspired writings. He would
not have them to trust to their number, learning, judgment, or any such
uncertain thing, but to the Scriptures, which he looked upon as fittest to
decide all controversies in Religion. And they readily complied with him, laid
the Scriptures before them, searched them, and determined all by them. There
was then no such crying up of Traditions, appealing to the authority of the
Church, and enquiring after the Oracles of the Porphyry Chair, as later ages
have been acquainted with; but they contented themselves with the lamp of the
Word, steered their course by it, and framed all according to it. And the same
method they used in succeeding Councils; when ever they assembled for the
deciding of any controversy, they still brought the Bible along with them, and
reverently laid it before them, as the only authentic rule whereby they were
to judge of the matters they had in hand. And thus we must do, hither we must
bring whatsoever is tendered to us to be believed, observed or done. Answerable
hereunto is that which we find contained in the Confession of the Church of
England, Corp. conf. p. 93.
The Canonical Scriptures (say they) is the certain rule, ad quam omnis
doctrina Ecclesiastica debet revocari, to which all ecclesiastical doctrine
ought to be reduced; against them neither Law, Tradition or Custom is to be
heard. Hither it is that we must bring, not only the Doctrine of single
Pastors, but the Decrees of Councils, and the Determinations of Kings and
Parliaments, how wise or just soever they are. Though they be high, and upon
that account are to have honor and obedience, yet there is one that is higher
than they, whose Authority and Laws we must prefer before all Authority and
Laws whatsoever; otherwise we should violate our allegiance, and forfeit our
souls into the hands of Justice. To be short, the Word is that whereby we must
try and judge all, and whereby we must rate and value every thing that is
presented to us, neither condemning any thing it allows, nor allowing any thing
it condemns, but esteeming of every thing according to the judgment and
sentence thereof. Herein we have the suffrage of some of our adversaries
themselves. Menasses Ben Israel saw so much, that he said, All writings are
true or false, De fragilit. hum. p. 109.
quatenus convenient cum divinis literis aut ab iisdem discrepant, so far as
they agree with the holy Scriptures, or differ from them. And Andreas Friccius
Modrevius, l. 4 de Eccl. c. 7.
a Popish Author, writes to the same purpose, All those things (says he) are
to be examined, ad scripturas divinas, by the holy Scriptures, that are to be
ratified and established in the Church of God. Had all Jews and Papists kept
close to the profession and practice of this Doctrine, they had not fallen into
that lamentable apostasy that they lie under the guilt of at this day, to the
drawing down of the just displeasure of God upon them, and the occasioning the
Church of Christ to separate from them.

5. How, or after what manner we must prove all things. For the better
understanding of this, we must note, that unto a regular and fair trial, some
things are necessary as antecedents, others as concomitants, and others as
consequents; to each of which I shall speak somewhat, taking them in order.

1. Unto a due trial, some things are necessary as antecedents, or
Preparatives, serving to dispose, and make way for a successful management of
the work. And,

1. We must humble our selves before God, under the sense of our great
darkness, ignorance, and folly, unfeignedly lamenting the loss of that light,
knowledge, and wisdom we had by our Creation, confessing with much sorrow and
brokenness of heart that we have thereby rendered our selves altogether
unworthy to come to the knowledge of the truth. When John saw there was no one
found worthy to open and read the little Book, Rov. 5.4.
or look therein, he wept much. It is a sad thing to be ignorant of the will of
God: It is sinful, uncomfortable and dangerous, and therefore we should humble
our selves under the sense of it, abhorring and despising our selves, that we
have sinned away our light, and thereby made our selves strangers to what we
were once acquainted with. One of the first things a man is to do in order to
the obtaining of true wisdom, is to acknowledge his own folly. 1 Cor. 3.18.
Hence that of the Apostle, if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. Not that he must give over
the use of his Reason, or utterly renounce what he knows, but he must look upon
himself as imperfect, and short of those seize he should arrive to; which
does much toward the preparing of him for further growth. Epict. Arrianus
writes an entire chapter of the beginning of Philosophy, l. 2. c. 11. p. 154.
and shows that the first thing a man is to do in order to his becoming a
Philosopher, is (...), or, the consideration of his own insufficiency and
weakness. As long as a man conceits he knows enough, he will care little for
knowing more. Many had found out the Truth, if they had not flattered
themselves with vain apprehensions of being already possessors of it. I speak
not this, as if I would have all turn Scepticks, or give up themselves to
irrational and groundless doubtings, the common Engines whereby Satan draws men
to error and apostasy, but that they should understand their own condition,
remember from whence they are fallen, consider what imperfections do attend
them, humble themselves before God, and mourn under the sense thereof, which is
the way to render God propitious, and prevail with him to reveal his mind to
us. Though he be willing to teach, yet before he does it, he will have us to be
sensible both that he is able to teach us, and that we stand in need of being
taught, and when we are thus qualified, we are fit to enter into his School,
and not till then. If we mean to find out the truth, we must not usher in our
enquiries after it, with high self-admiring thoughts, but throwing our selves
down at the feet of that Majesty we have offended, we must look upon our selves
as empty, foolish Creatures, wholly unfit to be acquainted, or have to do, with
Sacred things. And to encourage us hereunto, God tells us, Ps. 25.9.
that the meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.
Such is the respect that he bears to meek and humble men, that he has promised
when they sit in Judgment on such things as come before them, he will guide
and assist them, that so they may not pass an unjust sentence, but such as is
according to truth. While he suffers the proud and haughty to follow their own
imaginations and delusions, he will direct them in judging, and instruct and
teach them the way they are to go.

2. We must address our selves unto God in Prayer, and with all holy
importunity and earnestness entreat him to assist us in the business we have in
hand, reveal his mind to us, and help us to close therewith. Though we have
all outward advantages of finding out the truth, yet unless he be pleased to
open our eyes, and show us the evidence and beauty of it, we are never the
nearer. The doctrine of Religion is attended with so many abstruse and
stupendous mysteries, that its beyond the ability of any mortal man, without
the direction of supervenient, auxiliary light to understand it. This our
Savior teaches when he says, Joh. 3.19.
No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven. By
ascending into Heaven he means, not a going up thither in a proper sense, but a
perfect understanding of heavenly mysteries, which no man how great soever his
perspicacity or diligence was, Com. in loc.
did ever fully attain unto. And with this agrees that of the judicious Calvin,
ascending into Heaven (says he) signifies, puram mysteriorum Dei notitiam, and
spiritualis intelligentiae lucem, the pure knowledge of the mysteries of God,
and the light of spiritual understanding. Upon our Saviors asserting to
Nicodemus the necessity of Regeneration (a mystery he understood not) he breaks
forth into audacious and arrogant expostulations with him, demanding of him,
How can a man be born when he is old? can he outer the second time into his
mothers womb? and how can these things be? He pretended to come to him as unto
a Teacher sent from God, attended with his presence, and able to demonstrate
the truth of his Doctrine by Miracles, and yet instead of submitting to his
authority and wisdom, as he ought to have done, he thus proudly and vainly
reasons with him, behaving himself as if he thought nothing could be truth but
what he apprehended to be so. And thus while he seems to contradict our
Saviors Doctrine, he unawares verifies it, declaring to us by his own example,
that the greatest Masters of Learning are unable to receive the things of the
Spirit of God, till he help them to do it. Com. in Luke 14.
Theophilact speaking of the Carnal man, says, (...), he believes nothing
above Nature. He measures the arm of the Creator by the arm of the Creature,
the abilities of Divine Power by the abilities of Nature, and what will
overmatch the latter, he thinks will also overmatch the former. And after this
manner Nicodemus (who, one would have thought, being a Master of Israel, should
have known better) carried himself: Though he acknowledge our Savior to be
come from God, yet he will not take his word. He must either know how and by
what means, a man should be born again, or else he will not believe there can
be any such thing. Now our Savior the better to repress this his vain and
foolish arrogance, and thereby make way for his own Doctrine, acquaints him
with the utter inability of men by their own power to understand Heavenly
Truths, and withal lets him know it was his Prerogative who came down from
Heaven, and at that time in respect of his Divine Nature, was in Heaven to do
it. It is as easy for a man in a proper sense to climb up to Heaven, as by
his own power fully and savingly to understand the Doctrine of Religion. Now
this consideration, as it was a proper antidote for the self-conceitedness of
Nicodemus, so it may serve as a strong argument unto us, both to humble us
under the sense of our insufficiency, and also stir us up to seek unto him
who is able to relieve us. As we must not judge our selves sufficient to
understand heavenly truths, so neither must we content our selves with our own
insufficiency, but we must seek unto him for direction and help. This course
David took, Ps. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes (says he) that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
Law. Though he were a man of eminent knowledge, wiser than his Teachers, yet he
was sensible of his own imperfection, and runs to God for a supply thereof. And
this course likewise the Apostles took; when ever our Savior delivered any
thing that exceeded their capacities, they entreated him to expound it to them.
Declare unto us (say they) the Parable of the tares of the field. Mat. 13.36.
And when he had showed them what defiles a man, they desired him to tell them
the meaning of it, saying, Mat. 7.17.
declare unto us this Parable. And when he had spoken to them of the
destruction of the Temple, they came to him privately, saying, Tell us when
shall these things be. Mat. 24.3.
And the same course they took themselves, the same they prescribed unto
others. If any of you (says one of them) lack Wisdom, Jam. 1.5.
let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not;
and it shall be given him. Though we want Wisdom, there is enough in God: he is
the Father of Lights, the only wise God, infinite in understanding; and he is
ready to communicate to his Creatures. As the Sun offers its light unto the
World, so does he offer his assistance to us; and therefore we should neither
allow our selves in darkness, nor stand complaining of it, but run to him for
light. Whenever we find our selves at a loss, we must run presently to him, and
desire him to enlighten our darkness, resolve our doubts, and make our way
plain for us. When men urge upon us New Doctrines and Canons, we must take them
as Hezekiah did Rabshakeh's Letter, and laying them before the Lord, say, Lord,
Isa. 37.14.
shall we believe or shall we not believe? shall we obey or shall we not obey?
since thou would not have us err, keep us that we may not do it. Such
behavior will both please him, and conduce to our own safety. Calvin writing
upon the Text has this passage. If (says he) we perceive our selves to be
destitute of the faculty of proving aright, ab eodem spiritu qui per Prophetas
suos loquitur petenda est, we must beg it of the same spirit which speaks by
the Prophets. He is the author and Fountaion of Truth, and is only able to open
the eyes to see it, and persuade the heart to close with it, and therefore it
concerns us and all those who be desirous of it to seek to him for it.

3. We must lay aside and banish from us all prejudice, which way soever it
has been occasioned, resolving freely close with whatsoever God shall make out
to be truth to us. We must not bring our Religion to the Scriptures, but
receive it from them. We must not, as most do, first take up such opinions, as
our own interests shape out to us, and then bring them to the Scriptures,
rather to confirm than examine them thingking then as simple people do of the
Bells, that whatever they say, is for us, but discharging and stripping our
selves naked of all prejudicate apprehensions and opinions, we must go to the
Scriptures, with minds ready to embrace whatever God shall thereby reveal to
us, resolving with Micaiah that what the Lord says unto us, 1 Kings 22.14.
that we will close with, being equally content to follow his voice which way
soever he shall call us. Prejudice is a preposterous judgment whereby we pass
sentence upon things before we have duly informed our selves concerning them,
and so come to approve what we should condemn, and condemn what we should
approve. Ad frat. in Erem.
Augustine says, it is inauditi addictio, the condemning of a person or thing
unheard. Now this we must by all means beware of; we must neither approve nor
condemn things before we hear them, but we must grant them a fair trial, and
then deal with them as we shall thereby find cause. We must neither judge
persons nor things, indicta causa, before we have heard them: that was not only
disallowed, Joh. 7.51.
as Nicodemus shows, among the Jews, but likewise, as Tully shows, among the
Romans, Orat. pro Cluent.
who punished such as they found duilty of it. Though what we have before us be
a truth, yet we sin, if we close with it, ere we have made trial of it. The
Judge that passes sentence before he has heard both parties, arrs, though his
sentence be in it self just, because through his preposterousness it might have
proved otherwise. And so it is in this case; he that takes up an opinion,
before he has made proof of it, errs, though it be in it self good, because
through his inconsiderateness and rashness it might have proved evil. It is not
enough that we take up the Truth, except we take it up upon mature
consideration, and good grounds, sufficient in their kind to satisfy us that
it is the Truth, which we have before us. But such is the indiscretion and
rashness of most, that they espouse Opinions and ways, and are ready to
persecute all that will not join with them therein, before they have made any
trial of them, or can give any rational grounds for their so doing. Thus did
the Jews and Ephesians; they were both full of heat and rage; Luk 23.23. Acts
19.32
the former against Christ, the latter against his Servants, but neither of
them knew why. And there are more than a few of such as these amongst us, who
have a zeal, but not according to knowledge. Romans 10.2
They are very forward in their way, but can render little more reason for it,
than they can for the ebbing and flowing of the Sea at its appointed times.
Perhaps they can allege such things as education, custom, carnal interest, the
example of the multitude, the command of Superiors; but alas, what uncertain
silly things are these for men to build their Religion upon? Psalm. 62.9.
To be laid inthe balance they are altogether lighter than vanity. Now for the
preventing of the may evils attending on this precipitant course, it behooves us
to enquire, what opinions we like and what we dislike, and upon what grounds we
like the one and dislike the other; and if opon enquiry we find, that we have
through prejudice, that is to say, immature hasty judgment, or otherwise, taken
up al liking of what we should dislike, or a disliking of what we should like,
we must not only, for the repairing of the honor of the truth, which we have
sinfully violated, but also for our own safety, return again, and steer a new
course.

2. Having thus spoken of such matters as are necessary to this proof of things
as antecedents, or preparatives, I shall now speak of such as are necessary, as
concomitants or adjuncts. And,

1. We must prove them carefully, as things that concern our souls, and
everlasting happiness, and wherein we cannot mistake without danger of utter
ruin. We must not run over the work heedlesy and slightly, (that is the way to
favor error and wrong the truth in as much as we are by nature prone to the
former, and averse to the latter) but we must manage it with all holy
circumspection and caution, as those who are indeed zealous of the truth, and
desirous to find it out. We read, Numb. 9.8. that when certain men came to
Moses for resolution in a case, he was so cautious, that though it were but a
business of a ceremonial nature, yet he would not presently give judgment in
it, but he first goes and enquires of the Lord concerning it. And some of the
Jewish Writers tell us, Jonath. Targ. in loc.
that there were four sorts of causes that came before Moses, two of which were
of less moment, the other of greater; in the former he hastened, in the later he
delaid; but both concerning the one and the other he said, (...), I have not
heard, namely, from the Lord, teaching us thereby, that deliberation and
consultation with God, ought to be used in all matters before sentence be
given. In our enquiries after the nature of those things which come before us,
we must not, Joh. 18.38. Luke 2.48. Heb. 12.17.
with Pilate, carelessly demand, what is truth, and so dismiss the work; but we
must seek it as Joseph and Mary did Christ, and as Esau did the blessing, with
care, sorrow and tears. As it is no small blessing to find the truth, so it is
no small judgment to miss of it, and therefore it concerns us to use care in
our enquiries after it. Such is our proneness to mistake, that we must keep a
jealous eye upon our selves, and even when our grounds seem fair and plausible,
proceed with caution, lest with Ixion we embrace a cloud instead of Junto, and
with Diomedes, take up with weapons of brass for weapons of gold.

2. We must prove them diligently, choosing rather to be at any pains than
remain ignorant of the truth. The Judicial Law required, that when the Judges
sat upon their Tribunal, and had a controversy before them, they should make
diligent inquisition. Deuteronomy. 19.18.
They were not to run over the business superficially or negligently, but to
make through enquiry into it; and the reason was, that they might not give a
false and groundless, but a just and equal sentence. And if it be a duty to
make such diligent inquisition in matters of secular and temporal concernment,
it is surely much more a duty to do it in matters of spiritual and eternal
concernment. By how much the soul is more to be accouted of than the body, and
eternity than time, by so much we should be more diligent in our enquiry in the
latter than the former. And therefore we must see that we go through with the
work, not leaving off till we have been at the bottom, know the state of
things, and found where the truth lies. This the word (...) imports, which,
part 1. p. 691.
as Dr. Whitaker notes, (whose Cygnea Cantio was on this subject) signifies so
to prove as not to desist, till we have found out (...), or the thing we are in
pursuit of. God has prescribed diligent enquiry after the truth, as the means
of finding it, and has promised his blessing to it: Prove. 24.5.
If thou seek her (says he) as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures: then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Such is the excellency of truth, that it is worthy our
greatest diligence, and upon that account we should spare no pains in the
search of it. The reason wherefore it is hid from many, is not because God is
unwilling to reveal it, but because they are not diligent in their enquiries
after it: would they but take that pains for it which men do for silver and
gold, they might soon come to the knowledge of it; but they slight it, and are
slothful in the search of it, and so go without it. And indeed its just with
God to let them seek and not find, till they have learned to value and seek it
at another rate. If ever we mean to find the truth, and escape the delusions
that others perish by, we must labor and take pains for it, nay, and count our
selves happy, if in so doing we may attain to the knowledge of it.

3. We must prove them faithfully, weighing the evidence on both sides, and
giving sentence according thereunto. We must not judge of things according to
what our carnal interests would have them to be, nor according to what at the
first sight they may seem to be; but according to what upon due examination and
search we shall find them. God does every where in Scripture prohibit and
condemn partial and unequal judgment, as that which is highly drspleasing and
hateful to him, witness that of Moses to his Judges, Hear the causes between
your brethren, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.
and judge righteously between every man, and his brother, and the stranger
that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but ye shall hear
the small as well as the great: ye shall not be afraid of the face of man, for
the judgment is gods. With which agrees that of our Savior, Judge not
according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Joh. 7.24.
It must be our care then that truth may take place, and therefore waving all
motives and inducements to the contrary, we must give sentence for it. The
Thebans painted Justice without hands, Plut. de Isid.
and without eyes; teaching by the one, that such as sat in judgment must
receive no bribes; and by the other, that they must not respect persons. From
whence we who are Christians may gather this useful instruction, That in our
judicial proceedings, whether more public or private, we must not suffer any
sinister respects to sway or corrupt us, following the free and impartial
dictates of our own judgment and reason, we must give a just and equal
sentence. Error has commonly many advocates to plead for it, as riches,
honor, and the like, that like Galeacius his children, follow the soul with
passionate and vehement importunity; but stopping our ears at the foolish
blandishments and vain suggestions thereof, we must give the truth its deserved
pre-eminence. We must not allow of this opinion, because it wears scarlet, nor
dislike that, because it goes in rags. We must not close with the one, because
it tends to our worldly making, nor reject the other, because it tends to our
undoing; but waving all such trivial considerations, as adding nothing to the
true and real worth of them, we must judge of both according as the light of
the word, whereby we are to try them, does represent them to us.

3. Having likewise spoken of such matters as are necessary to the proof of
things, as concomitants or adjuncts; I shall now in the last place pass to such
as are necessary as consequents, that must follow thereupon. And,

1. When we have made this proof, and have thereby, both according to God's
promise, and our own desire and expectation, discovered the truth, we must
bless and praise him for it, as knowing that without his concurrence and
direction, our endeavors, how great soever, would have been altogether
ineffectual. Such is the unhappiness of some, that they do not so much as seek
for truth, and so deservedly remain strangers to it; others seek it, but
through want of help from Heaven do not find it. What cause then shall we have
to bless God, if it shall please him not only to put us upon the seeking it,
but by his special assistance enable us to find it? It is a mercy to put us
upon seeking it, but more a mercy in seeking it to help us to find it. Oh,
truth is a desirable and sweet thing, worthy of our greatest endeavors till we
have it, and our highest praises when we have it; witness that golden dictate
of truth it self; Prove. 8.35.
Whosoever finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor from the Lord. Though
ignorant carnal men, that converse with nothing but dunghills, see no form or
comeliness in it, yet in the judgment of all those, who are worth taking notice
of, it is most amiable and lovely. Such was the esteem the Platonist had of it,
that he said, That if Almighty God would be pleased to assume a composition, he
verily thought he would take Light for his Body, and Truth for his Soul. It is
a fruitful bough, a pearl of great price, a rare blessing: and therefore when
ever God is pleased to discover it to us, we should be thankful for it. Herein
our blessed Savior has lead us the way. How thankful was he to his Father for
revealing it to his Disciples? I thank thee, (says he) O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, Matthew. 11.25.
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes. He gives not thanks because God had hid the mysteries
of his Kingdom from the wise and prudent, for he would have had all to have
been acquainted with them, but that whiles, as a just recompense of their pride
and contempt, he hid them from them, he was pleased out of his great mercy and
compassion to reveal them unto babes. And if he be thus thankful to his Father
for revealing hsi truth to us, how thankful should we be our selves? If
Pythagoras were so affected with his finding out the mystery of the Triangle,
Laert. ejus vit. p. 575.
that he did (...), sacrifice a whole Hecatomb, how should we be affected, when
God is pleased to reveal to us the mysteries of his Kingdom, and make us
partakers of that knowledge which leads unto everlasting lefe? These. ep. Lect.
p. 7.
Such was the ingenuity of Erastus, that he protested, that whoever would show
him his error, Coram Deo and hominibus gratias acturum, he would give him
thanks before God and men. Truth is the light, glory and safety of the foul,
that which does direct beautify and secure it: and therefore when ever God is
pleased to bestow it, we should not only receive it, but render him thanks for
it.

2. When we have made this proof, and have thereby found out the truth, we must
faithfully preserve and retain it, suffering neither fraud nor violence to
wrest it from us. Till we have it, it must be our care to get it; and when we
have it, it must be our care to keep it. This the Apostle shows, when he says,
Hold fast that which is good. In our discussion of things, we shall meet both
with gold and dross, wheat and chaff; and as we must let go the one, so we must
retain the other. We may be sure, that as soon as ever we have got the truth,
Matthew 13.19.
the wicked one will be catching at it; but we must not upon any terms suffer
him to bereave us of it. Though he should deal with us as he dealt with our
Savior, Matthew. 4.8.
offer us all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them in exchange of
it, yet we must not part with it. We must lay it, as Mary did the sayings of
our Savior, Luke 2.51.
in our hearts, and not upon any account whatsoever let it go. This is
Solomon's advice, Prove. 4.13.
Take fast hold (says eh) on instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she is
thy life. The life! what more precious than life? what will not a man part with
rather than his life? though he love outward enjoyments never so well, yet he will
let them all go rather than part with his life. The wary Mariner, that gets
what he has with so much toil and hazard, will throw all into the sea to save
his life. And Satan spoke no other than truth, Acts 27.19.
when he said, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life. Job 2.4.
A man will give the skins, not only of his cattle and servants, but of his
own dear children and nearest relations, to save his own. Why, truth is our
life, and therefore according to rules of self-preservation, which of all other
have the deepest rooting in nature, we should rather part with any thing than
let it go. When God has once revealed it to us, and committed it to our
custody, he looks that we should keep it, and will call us to an account for
it; and therefore it concerns us to look to it, and preserve it. It were far
better for us not to have it, than when we have it to let it go. This the Holy
Ghost is clear in. 2 Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment, delivered to them.
The sin of Apostasy is greater than that of bare Infidelity. It is a less sin
not to come into Christ, than after we are come in, to turn our backs upon him
and leave him. A man can scarcely be born to do Religion greater injury, than
for a season to profess it, and afterward, forsake it. As it does highly
aggravate his sin, so it will his punishment. And therefore it concerns every
one that has searched for the Truth, and attained to it, to hold it fast,
otherwise his latter end will be worse than the beginning.

3. When we have by our proof found out the Truth, we must communicate and
reveal it to others, that they being enlightened by it may serve God with us,
and receive the rich blessings that do attend it. When God is pleased to
deliver the Candle of his Word into our hands, it is not that we should put it
under a bushel, Mat. 5.15.
but on a Candlestick, that it may give light to all that are in the house.
When he put light into the Sun, Moon and Stars, it was not that they should
shine utno themselves, but that they should enlighten the World; so when he
reveals his truth to any of his servants, it is not that they should imprison
it within the private walls of their own bosoms, but that they should lift it
up, and hold it forth to others. One great Office of the Church in relation to
the Truth, is to publish it, and make it known. Though it belong not to her,
Whit. part. 1. cont. 1. q. 3. c. 2. p. 316.
to decree what shall be Truth, and what not, yet when God who is the essential
and eternal Truth, has decreed it, and made it known to her, she ought to make
it known to others. As the Crier publishes the Decrees and Edicts of the King,
so is she, and every member thereof, in his place, and calling, to ppublish it.
And indeed such is the nature of saving Truth, that wheresoever it comes, it
provokes, nay constrains the sold to make it known. When God had revealed his
mind to Jeremy, what a scorching Fever was he in till he had published it?
His word (says he) was in mine heart, Jer. 20.9.
as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay. And when Christ had committed the Gospel to the Apostles, what
an holy force did they find themselves under? We cannot (say they) but speak
the things which we have seen and heard. Acts. 4.20.
They were like old Bottles filled with New Wine, till they had delivered the
Message wherewith they were entrusted. As soon as ever a man is savingly
acquainted with Christ, he presently endeavors to bring in others to him.
Andrew no sooner finds him. Joh. 1.42, 46^ l. 29.
but he brings in Peter to him; Philip no sooner finds him, but he brings
Nathaneel to him; and the Woman of Samaria no sooner finds him, but she will
have the whole City to come out to him. So that you see, Truth is no dull or
sluggish, but a lively and active Principle, and such as does incite the Soul
wherein it seats it self, to publish it and make it known. If therefore we will
make it to appear we have received the Truth, and will perform that service, we
owe to it, we must so far as our places, abilities and opportunities will
extend, acquaint others with it.

6. Having thus told you, the manner how this proof must be managed, not only
in respect of the antecedents, but likewise in respect of the concomitants and
consequents. I shall now come to the main business, which I have all this while
been but making way for, and that is, to evince to you, That there does by a
divine right, belong to all Christians, a private, discretive, self-directive
Judgment, by virtue whereof they not only may, but ought to prove those things
that are recommended to them by their Teachers; which I shall endeavor. to do
by these arguments. And, 1, God himself, whose Word is a sufficient warrant for
all their undertakigs, out of the respect he bears to their safety and welfare,
does in express terms empower, nay charge them to do it. It was never his mind
that they they should pin their Faith upon their Teachers sleeves, captivate
their Judgments to theirs, or believe and do whatever they think is meet, but
that they should take their instructions, defintions, and conclusions, to the
rule of the Word, and try them thereby, and then close with them according as
the reeason they find attending them shall persuade and induce them. This
plainly apperas by these words of the Apostle, Prove all things; which are so
clear and full to the point, that nothing but wilful blindness, or obstinate
prejudice, can gainsay them. And yet as if what he says here, were not
sufficient, he speaks elsewhere to the same purpose; witness that passage to
the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 10.15.
I speak (says he) as to wise men, judge ye what I say. Here, as Estius
confesses, Com. in loc.
he speaks de judicio discretionis, of that Judgment of private discretion we
are discoursing of, but then to avoid the force of the place, he tells us that
the Corinthians were persons of extraordinary gifts and abilities, and
therefore thoug the Apostle do in these words empower them and such like, to
judge of the Doctrine of their Pastors, yet it does not follow that he does
empower all to do it. Answ. The Corinthians indeed were excellently gifted,
they had arrived to very high seize, by reason whereof they were fitter
to judge of what the Apostle was about to deliver to them, and tgherefore he
urges it as an argument to them to do it. But yet we must not think that he
only aimed at them, or such as have made the same proficiency with them, in it,
for though every Christian have not the same degree of Wisdom that they had,
and in that respect be not so fit for the work as they were, yet he has (as I
shall show anon) that measure, that by prayer, diligence, and the assistace o
the Spirit in the use of means, does render him so far fit for it, as is
necessary to his own Salvation. And therefore we must not think that the
Apostle does urge it as a Privilege or Duty, pertaining only to men of
eminent Wisdom, such as many in the Church of Corinth were (as the Schoolman
would have us understand him) but as belonging to all Christians what soever.
One would think those quick eyes that can, In thou art Peter, read the Popes
power of deposing Princes, discharging Subjects of their Allegiance, the
translating of their Kingdoms from them, with many suchrare mysteries, should
in these and such like places, read the Peoples power of judging of Doctrines.
But what can be so plain, that interest and prejudice will not contradict?

2. He lays upon them several important Duties that do necessarily suppose it,
insomuch that unless they be allowed the liberty of Christian proof, they
cannot perform them. As,

1. He will have them to use caution about their Teachers. They must carefully
distinguish betwixt the true and the false, betwixt the Messengers of Christ
and the Messengers of Antichrist. Beware (says our Savior) of false Prophets
which come to you in. Sheeps clothing, Mat. 7.15, 16.
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. And what course will he have e them to
take that they may distinguish betwixt the true Prophets and the false? why, he
tells them; ye shall know them by their fruits: And what are these fruits? are
they their Lives? No; those are no sure Rule to go by: for Hypocrites and
Deceivers can make as great shows of piety and holiness as the best men
whatsoever. And therefore these Fruits whereby the People must distinguish the
false Prophets from the true, Part. 1. cont. 1. q. 5. c. 8. p. 359.
are rather (as Dr. Whitaker shows) their interpretations, expositions, and
doctrines, than their lives. Thereby it is that all those who would inform
themselves concerning them, must try what they are. And agreeable to this
Precept of our Savior, is that other of the Apostle; Beloved, believe not
every Spirit, 1 John 4.1.
but try the spirits, whether they are of God. It is to be observed, he speaks
this to those whom he terms (...), little children, De Jud. c. 27. p. 162.
which (as Davenant well notes) does far better agree privatis fidelibus, to
private Believers, than to Doctors and Rulers. It belongs then to private
Believers, even to such as the Holy Ghost thinks meet to speak of under the
appellation of little children to make trial of their Teachers. And whereby
must they come to know what they are, but by their fruits, which as you have
herard, are their Doctrines? When the Holy Ghost therefore does in these places
admonish the faithful to use this prudent Caution a out their Teachers, and
does propound their Doctrine as that wheregby they must distinguish them, he
does in effect bid them prove their Doctrine.

2. He will have them to see that they suffer not themselves to be poisoned or
corrupted bby such Doctrines as are erroneous and unsound. They must not only
distinguish betwixt Teachers and Teachers, but betwixt Doctrines and Doctrines,
taking care they receive what is good, and avoid what is bad. Mat. 24.4. Ephesians.
^. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
This the Holy Ghost insists much upon. And Gratian tells out of Isidorus, that
if be who is over the People, teach or command any thing besides the will of
God, Cause. 11. q. 3.
or besides what is evidently required in the Holy Scriptures, they are to look
upon him tanquam falsus Dei testis, aut sacrilegus, as a false Witness of God,
or sacrilegious. It is then past doubt, that the people must use
circumspection, and not suffer themslves to be deceived; but since there are so
many false Teachers in the Would, and so much unsound Doctrine broached by
them, how is it possible they should escape being deceived, unless they be
allowed to prove what is delivered to them before they close with it.

3. He will have them, when their Teachers fall into Errors, grow negligent, or
fail in their Duty to admonish them and exhort them. Paul will have the
Colossians to say to Archippus, Col. 4.17.
take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, 22. q. 33. a.
4.2.
that thou fulfill it. Aquinas says, this Archippus was the Bishop of Coloss;
and propounding this Question, Vtrum quis teneatur corrigere Prelatum situm,
Whether any man be bound to reprove his Prelate; he determines it
affirmatively, urging this very place for what he asserts, inferring from it,
that the People, when there is occasion may reprove their Prelates, so they do
it cum reverentia, and honor, ac mansuetudine, with reverence, Cause. 2 9.7.
honor and meekness. And Gratian shows from Pope Eusebius, that people may
reprove their Pastors in case they do a fide exorbitare, depart from the Faith.
In the Judgment then of the very Papists themselves, and those too, who are of
greatest account, if Ministers, nay the Prelates, miss in their proceedings,
the People not only may but ought to tell them of it, and admonish them about
it. And how shall they do this, unless they may have liberty to censure and
make a Judgment upon what they say and do.

4. When the Church wherein they live, does apostatize and decline, he will
have them to sit in judgment upon her, and protest against the corruptions they
find her guilty of. This appears by the charge the Prophet gives, Hos. 2.2.
Plead (says he) with your mother, plead, where observe,

1. Who they be he gives this charge to; and those are the godly ones in
Israel, who remained faithful and steadfast in that time of general Apostasy
that the Prophet in this book refers to. Though the body of the Nation followed
Jeroboam, nd gave up themselves to superstition and idolatry; yet there were
some that stood their guound, and ocntinued upright; and those the Prophet in
this place directs his speech to.

2. Who it is that he means by Mother, and that (as Zanchy, Rivet, Com. in loc.
and others show) is Israelitica Ecclesia, the Church of Israel, consisting of
Magistrates, Ministers and People, as she lay in her corrupt state, polluted
with idolatry, which she fell into by walking after the commandment of the
wicked Princed before mentioned, whom God has for ever stigmatized with this
mark of infamy, that he made Israel to sin.

3. What it is he will have them to do, and that is, Plead with her; the word
in the original is, (...), which interpreters do variously render; the vulgar
Latin turns it, judicate, judge her; Pagnine contendite, contend with her;
Vatablus, expostulate, expostulate with her; Calvin, and others, litigate,
plead with her. The Prophet would have them to enter into judgment with her,
censure her, and deal with her by such arguments, reproofs and admonitions, as
might best serve to convince her of the sin she stood guilty of, and bring her
to repentance.

4. The repetition, plead, plead, whereby he does nto only hold forth the
necedssity and importance of the work, but likewise intimates, that they must
do it speedily, boldly and vigorously, as those that were troubled to behold
the honor of God suffer by her apostasy, and desirous to see it repaired by
her return. So that the words imply as much as if he had said, Ye pious and
faithful ones in Israel, who adhere unto God, and stand up for his pure worship
and service, you see how lamentably your Mother the Church, that should have
been an example to you of piety and constancy, is revolted and fallen to
idolatry: as ever you will make it to appear you have any zeal or love to the
truth, take her case into consideration, tell her of her fault, reprove her for
it, reason with her about it, and do all you can to reduce her int those holy
ways she heretofore walked in, and in compliance with the commandment of her
wicked King has so unworthily forsaken. We see then the Church,
notwithstanding the uncontrolable height that some advance her to, is no such
tremendous thing, but that even private men may, by divine allowance, freely
censure her, and expostulate with her about her proceedings: and how shall they
do this, unless they exercise a judgment of discretion to direct and guide them
in it?

5. He will not have them to do any thing rashly, or with doubting, but
thoroughly to inform and satissie themselves of the lawfulness of it, Romans 14.5.
ere they undertake it: Let every man (says Paul) be fully persuaded in his
own mind. Before they close with any doctrine, or set upon any service, they
must enquire into it, and be persuaded, nay, fully persuaded of the
warrantableness of it. They must not go upon slight probabilities or
conjectures, but must be at a certainty, so that they may say with Peter, in
the name of himself and the rest, Joh. 6.69.
We believe and are sure. But how is it possible they should attain to this
full persuasion and certainty of the nature and state of things, unless they
make proof of them? what, is the testimony of others sufficient security to
them? Then what error is so great or dangerous, that they may not be fully
persuaded and assured of?

6. He would have them to decline evil and choose good, 1 Pet. 3.11. Isa. 1.16,
17.
forsake the one and hold fast the other. This is set down as plainly in
Scripture as if it were written with a beam of the Sun. But unless they may
bring things to trial, how shall they be able to do it? How shall they
distinguish betwixt good and evil? how shall they know what to choose and what
to refuse, when to stand and when to go?

7. He will have them to clear up their evidences for heaven, and ascertain
themselves of their salvation. This the Apostle aims at when he says, 2 Pet.
1.10.
Give all diligentce to make your calling and election sure. There is a
twofold certainty of a man's calling and election; there is certitudo objecrti,
and certitudo subjecti; a certainty of the thing it self, and a certainty there
of to a man's own soul; the one results from the sincerity and truth of grace,
the other from the reflection or manifestation of it. It is the latter of these
the Apostle aims at in this place; which how is it poslible any one should
attain to, unless by his own personal enquiry he make proof of what he believes
and does. And thus you see God requires of the people several unquestionable
duties which do necessarily suppose this power of trial, so that it must either
be granted, that he intended it for them, or else that he has put them upon
insuperable difficulties, which to affirm were no less than blasphemy.

3. He impowers them to do diverse things in Religion that are of a more eminent
nature, and call for greater abilities than the judging of Doctrines for their
own private use does. He allows them in a charitative, private way to teach,
exhort and warn one another, for their mutual edification and furtherance in
the faith. Paul charges the Thessalonians to warn the unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, etc. And in answer hereunto we
find, Acts 18.24, 26.
that Aquila and Priscilla, seeing Apollos (though an eloquent man, and mighty
in the Scriptures) short in some points in Christianity, they took him and
expounded the way of God to him more perfectly. And he does not only allow
them to do it thus in a private way, but likewise upon special occasions, when
the necessities of the Church do require it, in a more public. The Scripture
makes mention of several, who though they were but private Christians, yet
embracing the call given them by God, they publicly appeared in the behalf of
the truth, openly asserted it, and pleaded for it. Acts 6.10.7.2.
Stephen, though but a Deacon, ordained to serve tables, yet being called in
question by the Jewish council for his faith in Christ, he owns him before them
all, teaches him, and disputes for him. And Apollos, Acts 18.25.
though he were but a private man, and knew only the Baptism of John, yet he
disputed with the Jews, and spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord.
Nay, and all the Disciples, scattered abroad upon the death of Stephen, Acts
8.4.
went every where preaching the word. And if we consult succeeding times, we
shall find, that the Christians of those days did both challenge and practice
the like liberty. Origin, before he entered into holy Orders, catechized, Eusebius.
eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 20. gr.
expounded, disputed, and that publicly, both before the Clergy and People.
Its true, Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria excepted against it, alleging it was
without president that laymen should teach in the Church in the presence of
Bishops; but Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Cesarea,
took him roundly up for it, charging him with a manifest untruth, and telling
him, that several others as well as Origin, though but private men, had taken
upon them to teach in public Assemblies, even at such times as diverse learned
men were present; and that the Bishops of those places did not only allow it,
but desire them to do it. And they instance in Evelpis at Laranda, requested to
it by Neon; in Paulinus at Iconium, requested to it by Celsus; in Theodorus at
Synada, requested to it by Atticus. And they also add, that it was like that
this course was practiced in other places, Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 30. gr.
though unknown to them. And Socrates tells of Ambrose, that whiles he was
Lieutenant of Millain, and Consul, even before he was baptized, the people
unexpectedly making choice of him to succeed Auxentius their deceased Bishop,
and the Bishops present allowing of it, he without any more ado took upon him
the place. And Chamier, out of Jerome, Panst. t. 1. l. 28. c. 2. sect. 21. p.
585.
makes mention of Aristides, Agrippa, Hegesippus, Justinus, Musanus, Modestus,
the two Apollonii, Heraclius, Maximus, and diverse others, who though they were
never ordained to any office in the Church, yet wrote Apologies and
Disputations in behalf of the Christian Religion, against Heathens, Heretics,
and the enemies thereof. And he also instances in Arnobius and Augustine, who
fell to write before they were baptized; and in Leo the Emperor, whose
Homilies, Gretzer, though an angry and fierce Jesuit, published a while ago,
giving them this commendation, that they were by so much the more to be
esteemed, quo pauciora in hoc genere monumenta, ab imperatoribus profecta
existent; by how much the monuments of Emperors of this kind are the more rare.
Hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 23, 24.
And what will our adversaries say to Edesius and Frumentius, two Merchants,
and young men, that preached the Gospel to the Indians; nay, to a Woman, that
did the like among the Iberians, which Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus has inserted
in his History, not letting fall so much as one word by way of reflection or
disallowance? By these instances it does in part appear what power private
Christians have heretofore challenged as to matter of teaching, and what
liberty the Churches wherein they lived granted to them. They did not limit
them only to a liberty of assent and obedience to the Doctrines of their
leaders, but they allowed them both to judge and teach the things of God: nay,
they gave way that such of them as were able, should upon special occasions
publicly catechize, expound, dispute, write Treatises. And the Bishops were so
far from being displeased with it, that they moved them to it, and defended
them against the cavils of such, as out of error or prejudice excepted against
it. In answer hereunto, Stapleton says, these were rare and extraordinary
instances, and so not to be drawn into example. But how can they be said to be
rare, when there were so many of them almost in every age? and as for their
extraordinariness, t. 1. l. 28. c. 2. sect. 23. p. 585.
Chamier says, Catholici negant quicquam in iis exemplis fuisse extra ordinem,
That the Protestants deny there was any thing extraordinary in them. But admit
they were both rare and extraordinary, yet this we may certainly infer, that
private men in like cases may take upon them such services; which yet I doubt
his Holiness will hardly give way to.

And thus much for the liberty God allows them as to teaching. Were it needful,
I might, Acts 6.3.13.2. 2 Cor. 8.19. Col. 4.17. Acts 11.2.15.2.18.27. 1 Cor.
5.4.12. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7. Acts 15.23.
for the further proof of the point in hand, add, that he allows them to choose
their several Officers, and, when there is occasion, to admonish them, (as you
heard before) reason with them, send them upon messages, recommend them by
their Letters; and that likewise he allows them to interpose with their Pastors
in Ecclesiastical Censures, judge of offenders, cast out the obstinate, restore
the penitent; nay, to sit in council, hear, debate, and give suffrage with
them. All which I might have spoken of fully, but it is done already by diverse
learned men, who have employed themselves in asserting their interest in the
government of the Church; G. Bucer. Dissert. p. 165 D. Blondel. apolosect. 3.
p. 379. De jure, p. 14. G. Voetius Desp. cause. l. 2. sect. 2. c. 21. p. 268.
and I conceive I have said enough for the clearing of the present particular,
and therefore shall forbear to speak any further of them. Now to argue a
majori, ad minus; if it be the pleasure of God that they should be allowed a
power to teach, write, interpose in judicial proceedings, and exert acts of
government, which require higher abilities, then it is surely his pleasure that
they should be allowed a power of private judgment, which may be managed with
lower abilities; what can be more unlikely than that he should think them fit
for greater matters and not for less, allow them to judge for others, and not
for themselves?

4. The truth hereof does also appear from the multitude of intruders,
usurpers, and false lights that are in the world, who abusing the vain
credulity of people, lead them into miserable delusions. Had all those who
intermeddle in Religion a due call, sound principles and good designs, then
people might go on with greater confidence, and take things upon trust on
better grounds; but its far otherwise. Ever since the Truth first showed it
self, the world has even swarmed with Impostors and Deceivers, who pretend to
it, with no less boldness than the faithfullest maintainers of it. Mat. 24.5.
Many (says Christ) shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ. And, (says
Peter) there were false prophets also among the people, 2 Pet. 2.1.
even as there shall be false teachers among you. 1 John 2.18.
And, (says John) Even now are there many antichrists. The devil is God's Ape;
for as he has his Angels, so the devil has his; and as he has his Ministers,
so the devil has his, who compass sea and land that they may deceive. Now this
even in the judgment of the holy Ghost himself, is a proper argument to move
all those who would not be deceived, to prove those things that are delivered
to them before they close with them; witness that of the Apostle last
mentioned, Beloved, believe not every spirit, 1 John 4.1.
but try the spirits whether they are of God, because many false prophets are
gone out into the world. Were there never a false prophet in the world, then
men might with more safety lay by their jealousy, draw the Curtains about
them, shut their eyes, and betake themselves to rest: but while there are such
legions of them attending on them, they may not do it, without exposing
themselves to apparent hazard.

5. It does likewise appear from the condition even of those who are faithful
Pastors and Teachers; they are subject to mistakes. Though their call,
principles and designs be better than those of the former, yet they are not
exempted from error: though in regard of their authority, abilities,
experience, holiness, they are far fitter to teach and rule than others, yet it
must still be remembered that they are but sinful men, subject to the same
passions and infirmities that others are, and therefore must be attended to
with circumspection and care. He that in good earnest thinks there is on earth
either any single person, or any society or order of persons, guided in all
things by an infallible spirit, so as that they may, in whatever they deliver
challenge our assent and obedience, without any contradiction or censure, shows
he is little acquainted either with Scripture, or what has happened in the
World. Paul cries out, let God be true, and every man a liar; Romans 3.4.
not that he desired that every man might be a Liar, but that they indeed are
so, and that the World may take them to be so. What mere mortal man was ever
blessed with greater light than this Apostle? who more abounded with
Revelations than he? and yet (as he himself confesses) he knew but in part. 1
Cor. 13.12.
Those who attain to the highest perfection, a state of mortality is capable
of, do fall far short of what they should be. As the brightest Stars have in
them some darkness, and the clearest days some Clouds, so the wisest men have
in them some Folly and Error. Herein Davenant is free and peremptory. If (says
he) thou leave God, and the divinely inspired Prophets and Apostles, De Jud. c.
27. p. 166.
there is not any man or Society of men, qui non and fallere and falli potest
in doctrina fidei tradenda, who may not both deceive, and be deceived in
delivering the doctrine of Faith. And shall people go and give up themselves to
the conduct of those who are subject to Error as well as they? Were they
priviledg'd from mistake, then they might cast themselves upon their Veracity,
and receive their Dictates as so many sacred Oracles; but being it is far
otherwise, they may not do it without the guilt of vain confidence and rashness.

6. It does yet further appear from the lyableness, nay proneness that is in
people to be deceived. Were it so that there were no false Lights in the World,
or that those who are lawful Teachers could not deceive, or that the People
themselves could not be deceived, then they might be more secure, but since it
is otherwise as to each particular, it concerns them to be more circumspect.
What is to be thought of the two former has been showed already, and as for
the latter, the Case is no less plain. Ever since the Eclipse in Eden, the sons
of men have all along from first to last, lien in darkness; and not only so,
but they have had in them an unhappy aversness to Truth, and proneness to
error. There was a time when there was a sweet union betwixt the Soul and
Truth, so that they seemed to lie fast in the sincere embraces of each other;
but now the stream is turned. The respect that the Soul heretofore bare to
Truth, it now bears to Error, and the hatred that heretofore it bore to Error,
it now bears to Truth. This was it which made our Savior when he was on Earth
complain, Joh. 3.19.
that light was come into the World, and men loved darkness rather than light.
And as it was then, so it is now. How much are men in love with Error, and how
little with Truth! Truth, she cries without, Prove 1.20.
she utters her voice in the streets, she cries in the chief places of
concourse, in the opening of the Gates, in the City she utters her words,
saying, How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity -- turn you at my
reproof: And it falls out to her as it did to Baals Prophets, there is neither
voice, 1 King. 18.29.
nor any that answers, nor any that regards; but Error no sooner speaks, but
people run to it and receive it. Truth comes and knocks at the door of their
hearts, Cant. 5.2.
saying, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night: and they sit still
making Excuses, and saying, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on, I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? But Error no sooner knocks but
they open to it and let it in. How ordinarily does Truth that was once so dear
unto the Soul stand by despised and rejected, while Error is entertained and
embraced! How familiarly do People take up Error into the bed of Truth, and
there most unworthily suffer it to ravish them and defile them, to the high
provoking of Jesus Christ, who has strictly charged them to keep themselves
unspotted from the World! Jam. 1.27.
Now since men are thus prone to be deceived, what madness is it to take things
upon trust, without making trial of them? What is it less than a tempting of
God to forsake them, and a prostituting themselves to the pleasure of every
Seducer?

7. For the people to take things from their Teachers upon trust, without any
proof is to give them more respect than is due to them; It is no less than to
set them in the room of God, make them Lords of their Faith, found their
Religion upon their Authority, and so render themselves the mere servants of
men, which the Holy Ghost does every where declare against, and condemn, as
prejudicial to his Interest, and their own necessary liberty. There was none of
the Apostles who preached up the authority and honor of Ministers more than
Paul, yet would not he have people to yield up their Faith to them, or assent
to whatsoever they shall deliver; he was so far from laying on them any such
duty, that he does in express terms forbid it, saying, Be ye not the servants
of men. 1 Cor. 7.23.
As he forbids Ministers to challenge an arbitrary, lordly power over people,
so he forbids people if they through pride and arrogance do challenge it, to
yield it to them. Though he will have them to reverence and encourage them, as
they are the Messengers of God, and such as do watch for their souls, yet he
will not have them to look upon them as infallible, or take all upon their
word. To be believed merely upon the credit of his own Word, is peculiar to God
himself, and may not be given to any of his Creatures how excellent soever,
without manifest alienation of his right, which by all means must be maintained
and kept inviolable. When we have to deal with God, our Enquiry must not be
whether that be true which he says, but whether it be he that says it, being
assured if he say it, it cannot but be true. But when we have to do with men,
we are to proceed far otherwise; our enquiry then must not only be, whether it
be Man that says it, but whether that be true which he says, as knowing from
the consideration of his Nature it may be otherwise. God being Truth it self,
his bare word is sufficient evidence and security in the most arduous and
difficult Cases whatsoever; but it is not so with man: he is not only a
Creature, but a lapsed and degenerate Creature, subject to Error, and therefore
we must receive his Dictates and Precepts with suspicion, closing with them no
further than he makes it to appear they are conformable to the Divine Law.

8. God has furnished them with various privileges and helps, whereby he has
qualified and fitted them for the work.

1. He has given them his Word as a certain Rule and Measure to direct and
guide them, that so they may not make a false Judgment, but such as is
according to Truth. That the Scripture, and the reading thereof, does belong to
the people, Chamier, Whitaker, and other Protestant Writers have copiously and
unanswerably proved. And to what end should they either have it, or read it,
unless they be allowed tojudge of the sense of it, and the Doctrines of their
Teachers by it? God does not diliver it into the hands of any, to lay it by
them as a thing of no use, or wherein they are not concerned, but that they
should acquamt themselves with it, and frame their ways and doings according
to it. The reason wherefore he puts it into the hands of Magistrates,
Ministers, People, is that they may each of them thereby come to know their
duty, and perform it. The reason wherefore he would have Joshuah to meditate in
it, Josh. 1, 8.
was that he might observe todo according to all that was written therein. And
the reason wherefore he would have Timothy to be conversant in it, 1 Timothy 3.14,
15.
was that he might know how to behave himself in the house of God. In like
manner, Acts 17.11.
the reason wherefore he would have the Beraeans to search it, was that they
might see whether the things delivered by their Pastors were so. And it is not
reasonable to thing, that God, who is the wise, righteous and merciful
Governor of the world, should give Laws to men to live by, and yet should not
allow them power and liberty, as to their own private use and practice, to
judge of the sense of them, and what is agreeable to them, and what is not.

2. He has endued them with reason, judgment, wisdom, and such like
accomplishments, whereby he has competently enabled them to do it. There are
two things necessary to the begetting of faith; an outward notification, or
declaration of the Doctrine to be believed; and an inward illumination and
persuasion of the mind, to see the evidence and truth thereof, and to close
with it and embrace it. The former he vouchsafes in his Word, the latter he
works by his Spirit; and the faithful having these two, they have all things
necessary to this judgment. That they have the former, appears by what I have
alleged already, and that they have the latter is no less manifest. God has
promised his Church, that he will teach her children; Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33,
34.
and that he will put his law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, infomuch that they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know him, from
the least of them unto the greatest of them. And what he thus graciously
promised in the Old Testament, he has eminently performed in the New, pouring
forth his Spirit in such a plentiful manner upon his people, that according to
his own language they have senses exercised to discern both good and evil; nay,
Heb. 5.14.
they have such an unction, 1 John 2.20, 27.
that they know all things, and need not that any man teach them, but as the
same anointing teaches them. Which yet the Apostle speaks not, as if those he
wrote to knew all things, in a strict and proper sense, for that is God's
prerogative; or that they really knew so much, that they needed no teaching at
all, for then to what purpose did he send to them this Epistle? but that they
knew all the principles and grounds of Religion, and all things that were
absolutely necessary for them to know, (especially as to that business he wrote
to them about) so that the work of their Teachers was rather to exhort them to
perseverance, and build them up higher in the Truths they knew, than acquaint
them with new onew. And it is well known, Syntag l. 1. c. 7. p. 216.
which Lud. Crocius tells us, that even among private Christians, there have
been some, who by prayer, and the diligent reading and meditating of the
Scripture, have obtained the gift of interpretation and trial of spirits,
ampliori mensura quam nonulli pastores, in a larger measure than some pastors.
Not to turn back so far as the times of the Ancients, which yet yielded great
plenty of eminent men of private capacity, what will our adversaries say to
Laurentius Valla, the two Earls of Mirandula, Capnio, Fagius, Erasmus, Faber,
Mercer, both the Scaligers, Drusius, Casaubon, Tilenus, Grotius, Heinsius,
Seldom, Salmasius, (...), and diverse others of later times, who though they
never entered into holy Orders yet were men of such high abilities, that their
names are famous throughout a great part of the Christian world? And to what
end does God bestow all this light and wisdom on private persons, that it
should lie by them as a thing of no use? no, but that they may thereby, as he
himself shows, 1 Cor. 2.12. Phil. 1.10.
know the things that are freely given them of God, and approve things that are
excellent. As Nature does nothing in vain, so neither does God. When he
delivers Talents unto his servants, it is not that they should napkin them up,
but that they should, as his Factors by negotiation, improve them for him.
Zanchius speaks an undoubted truth when he says, Dona Dei in sanctis non sunt
otiosa, Com. in Phil. 1.10.
The gifts of God in his saints are not to no purpose. When he bestows them
upon them, it is not that they should let them lie idle by them, or convert
them to a private use, but that they should lay them out for him in the
services proper to them. This he takes to be so reasonable, that upon his
conferring abilities upon them, he expects that they should, without looking
for any particular commission, immediately fall to work, and improve them for
him. We need not then go far for arguments to evince the peoples power of
judging of doctrins; their qualifications slew it was intended they should do
it. As the shape of Anaxagoras his body showed he was made (...), to
contemplate the Sun, so the abilities wherewith God has fitted them for this
judgment, shows he intended them the liberty of it. The very constitution and
frame of things, does commonly declare and express their work and office. The
figure of a Bowl shows it was made for circular motion; that of an Arrow shows
it was made for flight. In like manner the faculties and abilities wherewith
God has endued the People, show he never intended they should be governed like
beasts, or stones, but as creatures that have power of judging betwixt good and
evil.

9. If it be the duty of the people to close with the doctrines and commands of
their Teachers, upon a mere implicit faith, without making proof of them, then
it is sometimes their duty to close with that which is unlawful and sinful, to
omit what God has required, and commit what he has forbidden; nay, to deny
him, worship idols, and give up themselves to all manner of wickedness; which
to maintain is impiety so gross, that one would think, none who besieve the
Seriptures should be guilty of it. And yet I see not how those, who are for the
forementioned implicit faith, can avoid it. Perhaps they I say, when they
plead for peoples obeying the dictates of their teachers, without any examining
them, they mean only in lawful things. As long as they command lawful things,
they must obey them, but when they do otherwise, they must not. But this is a
miserable subterfuge; for how without examination shall they do to know,
whether the things they enjoin them be lawful or not lawful? Their Teachers
will have them subscribe to such and such points, and practie such and such
observations; if they are lawful, they must do them; if otherwise, they must
not. Now how (as I said) without examination shall they know whether they be
lawful or not lawful, whether they may be done or not done? There is no way but
two; either they must take them upon the word of their Teachers, or not; if
not, then they must necessarily examine, which is the thing contended for; if
they must, then, I say, they must (sometimes at least) necessarily sin, which
yet is altogether indispensable and unwarrantable.

10. If it were the pleasure of God, that people should embrace and submit to
the doctrins and precepts of their Leaders, without any examination or
doubting, then he would certainly excuse them, if they should thereby fall into
error and profaneness. For it may not consist with his justice to require them,
without any examination or doubting, to follow the guidance of their Leaders,
and then be displeased with them for so doing; this were no less than to render
them evil for good, and punish them for doing their duties. But he will be so
far from excusing them, if upon their embracing and submitting to the doctrins
and precepts of their Leaders, without examination or douting, they fall into
error and profaneness, that he will call them to an account, and punish them
severely for it. Their obedience unto men shall not excuse their disobedience
unto him. Tannerus indeed, Colloqu. Ratif. Sess. 9.
according to his wonted orthodoxness and modesty, that he may the better
persuade and encourage the people to follow their Teachers whither they please
to lead them, affirms the clean contrary; but they had best take heed how they
trust to such doctrine. As he will punish their Teachers for leading them into
sin, so he will punish them for following them into it. Mat. 15.14.
According to that of our Savior, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall
into the ditch. He will punish both the one and the other; the one for leading,
the other for following; the one for deceiving, the other for being deceived.
He will not only punish the deceiving Prophet, but him likewise that is
deceived by him. They shall bear (says he) the punishment of their iniquity,
Ezekiel. 14.10.
the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that
seeks nuto him: that is, both the one and the other shall be guilty, and
undergo the penalty justice shall assign them for the same. Number. 25.8.
Zimri shall not excuse Cosbi, nor Cosbi Zimri, but they shall both die
together. And it is a righteous thing with God, when people out of a slavish
wilful credulity follow their Leaders into bypath, to make them smart for it,
and that for this reason, because he has made sufficient provision to secure
them against it. He has told them, that notwithstanding their high office in
the Church, yet they have in them some darkness, are liable to error, and upon
that account has warned them to hear them with caution, and to beware of being
deceived by them. Take heed (says Christ) and beware of the leven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadduces. Mat. 16.6.
And he is so far from tying them up to their lips, that he does in express
terms charge them, when they require unlawful things to disobey them. Jer.
23.16.
Hearken not (says he) unto the words of the prophets that prophecy unto you.
And that they may know what things are lawful, and what are not lawful, he
has, as I have showed, delivered his Word to them, commanding them to read and
study it: and for their better understanding of it, he has given them a
competent measure of his Spirit, strictly charging them to keep to it, and not
suffer themselves to be drawn away from it by any inducements or temptations
whatsoever. Now if after all this they will yet shut their eyes, inslave
themselves to their Leaders, and follow them into sinful courses, who will not
look upon them as worthy to suffer? I may say to them in this case, as David
did to Readiness soldiers, As the Lord lives, 1 Samuel 26.16.
ye are worthy to die.

11. If they must submit to the dictates and precepts of their Leaders, merely
upon their authority, without any examination or trial, then they must, as to
the matter of obedience, give as much honor to them as to God himself. For
when he is pleased to give forth his Laws, what greater honor can they give
him, as to the yielding of obedience, than do what he enjoins, merely upon his
authority, without enquiring after any other reason to authorize or oblige to
it? And therefore I say, if they must submit to what is delivered by their
Teachers, merely upon their authority, without any examination or trial, they
must in respect of the absoluteness of their obedience, give as much honor to
them as to him. Now this he will not allow; for in all those duties we are to
perform, which are common to men (as the objects thereof) with him, he still
reserves to himself a peculiar pre-eminence, which we may neither withold nor
diminish without denying him his undoubted right. As to instance in faith; we
must believe both God and men, but with this difference, that we must assent to
what he says simpliciter, merely upon the credit of his own Word: but we must
assent to what they say, only secundum quid, or so far as it is agreeable to
what is delivered by him. In like manner we must obey both him and men, but
with this difference, that we must obey him absolutely so far as he commands,
but them with a reserve, that is, only so far as what they command, is
agreeable to what is commanded by him. These are the bounds of the honor he
allows us to give to men, and if we go any farther, we render them more than
belongs to them, which we cannot do, but we shall entrench upon his right, and
go against the Scripture, which forbids us to give His glory to another. Iso.
42.8.


12. The faithful servants of God, out of the zeal they have born to the Truth
and their own safety, have all along from first to last, exercised a power of
private discretion in matters of Religion, and that without any disallowance or
contradiction, save what they have met with from the open Enemies of the Truth.
Though the persons they have had to deal with, have been never so eminent
either in Church or State, either for their authority or abilities, yet have
they not captivated their Judgments to them, but have freely and boldly taken
their Doctrines and Precepts under examination, and tried them by the Rule; and
so far as they have found them answerable to it, they have embraced them, and
so far as they have found them repugnant, they have rejected them. And whiles
they did thus, they judged they did no more, than what did as well consist,
with the respect and duty they owed to them who were over them, as tend to
their own necessary safety. Exo. 1.16.
When the King of Egypt required the Midwives to kill the male children; 1 Samuel
22.17.
and when Saul commanded his Soldiers to slay the Priests; 1 Kings 21.3.
and when Ahab willed Naboth to let him have his Vineyard; and when
Nebuchadnezzar enjoined the three Children to worship his Image; Dan. 3.18.6.10.
and when Darius forbad Daniel to pray to his God; and when the Scribes and
Pharisees urged the Disciples to wash hands before Meat, Mat. 15.2.
and when the Jews forbad the Apostles to preach Christ; Acts 4.19.
they all exercised this judgment, doing, not what was required, but what they
in their own private apprehensions and preswasions took to be their duty. Act
17.11.
And when Paul and Silas preached the Gospel to the Beraeans, they took their
Doctrine to the Scriptures, and tried it thereby. They did not like a company
of blind, credulous Zealots, immediately receive it upon their recommendation,
without any more ado, but like wise and sober men, that desired Truth rather
than Novelty, they brought it to the Touchstone, and made proof of it thereby.
And this the Holy Ghost was so far from disliking that he commends them for it,
nay bestows upon them a title of special honor, which he has inserted in
their story, to be read in all the Churches to their perpetual praise. And
after this manner the Saints and Martyrs behaved themselves in after ages. They
closed not with things upon the credit of those who delivered them to them, how
eminent soever they were, but according to the liberty allowed them by the
great Prophet and Lawgiver, they took them under Examination, and then judged
of them and received them according to what they thereby found them.

13. That Christians may and ought to use a judgment of private discretion, in
enquiring into those things which are offered to them, for their own
information and satisfaction, does appear from the testimony of the Ancients,
who have in their Writings plainly, and fully given their judgments concerning
it. I know Truth, and especially such as that is we have now before us, shines
with its own beams, and needs no testimony from men, yet because our
adversaries in this, as well as in other cases, use to charge us with
singularity and novelty, I shall a little enquire into what they have said in
this particular. And I shall begin with Clemens of Alexandria, a man of polite
and exquisite learning, who speaking on the present Theme, says, (...), Strom.
l. 7.
We must distinguish by serious meditation, and diligent reasoning, the Truth
from that which appears to be so. And a little after, speaking of the manner of
the Christians of his times, he adds, We believe not men absolutely affirming,
to whom it is lawful to affirm the contrary. It is not sufficient for them
absolutely to say that which seems good to them, but it behooves them to prove
that which they say. Neither do we expect the testimony which is given of men,
but we prove that which is enquired after, by the voice of the Lord. According
to him then, there is not any mortal man of such credit, as that we should
presently by a blind, Pythagorean Faith assent to what he delivers, but we
must call upon him for proof, and that out of the Holy Scriptures; and even
then when he has produced it, we must not presently submit, until that by
serious consideration and diligent reasoning, we have distinguished Truth from
Error. Hom. 2. in Ezekiel.
And hence it was that Origin who was his Scholar, advised his Hearers,
Diligently to attend, and receive the grace of the Spirit, from whom proceeds
the discerning of spirits, that so as good bankers they might observe when he
taught Error, and when that which is pious and true. He would not have them to
take all he delivered upon his Word, but as those that were both empowered, and
qualified for the trying of Spirits, to use their own reason, and thereby
observe when he was in the right, and when in the wrong. Instit. l. 2. c. 8.
And herewith agrees that of Lactantius; It behooves (says he) that in that
wherein the reason of life consists, every man should rather trust himself, and
rest on his own judgment, and his own senses, in finding out and weighing of
the Truth, than going upon trust, (as one destitute of reason) be deceived by
the errors of others. Wherefore since it is innate to all to be wise, that is,
to seek the Truth, those bereave themselves of wisdom, that without judgment
approve of the inventions of their Ancestors, Et more peeudum, and after the
manner of Beasts are lead by others. In the business of Salvation he would have
people to be serious, and to employ themselves in the study of Truth; and
because men are subject to Error, he thinks it not safe for them to rely upon
them; and shows, that in his apprehension it is no better than to act like
those that are destitute of reason, nay, to turn themselves into beasts, and
therefore he will have them to use their own judgment and senses, and to rest
on them. And answerable hereunto is that of Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem; Catech.
4.
Believe me not (says he) in whatsoever I shall simply deliver, unless thou
shall find the things which I shall speak demonstrated, (...), out of the
divine Scriptures; for the safety of faith depends not on the eloquence of
language, but on the proofs that are brought out of the divine Scriptures. In
which words he expressly dissuades us from taking things upon trust, and he
renders a substantial reason for it, which is, that the establishment of faith
hangs not upon the pretenses or flourishes of men, but upon the Word of God, by
which we must see every thing confirmed ere we give entertainment to it. And
Ambrose Bishop of Millain, was so far from being against this liberty, that he
declares himself pleased with such as made use of it. Ego beneficio annumero,
l. 7. ep. 47.
etc. I take it for a favor (says he) when any one that reads my Writings,
gives me account of what doubts he there meets with, first, because I may be
deceived in those very things which I know. And besides, many things escape us;
and some things sound otherwise to some, than perhaps they do to me. He knew
himself subject to Errors and Mistakes, and therefore he would have such as
should read his Writings, to use their own Judgment, and when they met with
any thing they doubted of, to make their Exceptions, which he professes he
should be so far from looking upon as any kind of arrogance, that he should
take it as a kindness. And Jerome, writing of the Religious Marcella, says,
Proaem. in Epist. ad Galat.
When I was at Rome she never met me so hastily, but she still asked me
something concerning the Scriptures; neither did she, after the manner of the
Pythagoreans, think, whatsoever I answered was right: neither did authority
without reason satisfy her, sed examinabat omnia, and sagaci mente universa
pensabat: but she examined all, and with a skilful mind weighed every thing; so
that I took my self rather to have a judge of her than a learner. Though he
were a man so eminent for his learning and piety, yet such was her discreet and
holy caution, that she would not take things on the credit of his word, but
sat her self, as it were, in judgment upon them, examined and weighed them;
and he knowing it to be no more than her just and necessary liberty, allowed
her in it, nay, commended her for it. Hereunto likewise belongs that of
Augustine Bishop of Hippo; De Unit. eccl. c. 10.
I shall (says he) impute it to my self, if upon the words of men, I yield to
Error, and be seduced from the flock of Christ, especially since he has
admonished me, saying, My sheep hear my voice, and follow me. Let no man say to
me, O what does Donatus say, or what does Parmenianus, or Pontius, or any other
of them, quia nec Catholicis Episcopis consentiendum est, because we must not
consent to the catholic Bishops themselves, if at any time it happen they be
deceived so as to hold any thing against the divine Scriptures. Wherein he
teaches, that since Christ has called us to attend his voice, we must not
leave him; that if upon the specious pretenses and fair words of any, we should
do it, we should be without excuse; that the most Catholic and Orthodox
Bishops are liable to mistakes; and that therefore we must not take what they
or others say for Truth, till we have first tried it by the Word, wherein the
Voice of Christ sounds, and found it consonant thereunto. To these testimonies
I shall only add that of Chrysostom, Hom. in. Mat. 24.
who descanting on those words of our Savior, When ye shall see the
Abomination of Desolation, etc. thus delivers himself: When ye shall see
impious heresy, which is the host of Antichrist, standing in the holy places
of the Church, then, let those which are in Judea flee to the mountains: that
is, let those which are Christians betake themselves to the Scriptures. But
wherefore does he command all Christians to betake themselves to the
Scriptures? because in this time wherein heresy has prevailed upon the
Churches, there can neither be any proof of true Christianity, nor any other
refuge of Christians, willing to know the truth of Faith, but the divine
Scriptures. Before time it was manifested diverse ways which was the Church of
Christ, and which was Gentilism, but now it is known no way but by the
Scriptures. The people then in time of prevailing heresy, must not stand
waiting upon the lips of their Teachers, but must betake themselves to the
Scriptures, which they are to look upon as their refuge, and make use of as the
only sure Compass, they have at such a time to steer their course by. Were I
minded to add more testimonies of this nature, Colloquium Ratisbonense, or
Davenant, nay Gratian, to trouble no better friends, would plentifully supply
me; but I suppose it is needless. Those I have already mentioned may suffice to
show you the difference betwixt the language of the godly Pastors of the
ancient Church, and the present Masters of the Roman Synagogue. The former
teach, that the people in matters of Religion must seriously examine and
diligently consider things; the latter say, they must not stand to examine or
consider, but must without any more ado assent and obey. The former say, they
must not believe their Teachers any further than the reasons they bring along
with them serve to convince and persuade them; the latter say, they must
believe them upon their bare word, without any reason at all. The former say,
they must use their own reason; and that acting otherwise they play the beasts;
the latter say, they must not use it, but believe. The former say, the word of
men, how wise or holy soever they are, is no good bottom for their Faith; the
latter say, it is sufficient. The former commend such for their discretion as
refuse to take up with the words of their Teachers when they carry not reason
along with them; the latter censure and condemn them for so doing, as guilty of
no less than incredulity and perverseness. The former teach, that they must not
regard what men say, but what the Scriptures say; the latter, that they must
not enquire what the Scriptures say, but what they say. The former teach, that
the Scriptures are their only Refuge and Security; the latter, that the reading
of them is dangerous, and tends to no other than Heresy and confusion. And now
I appeal to all persons that have the least grain of judgment and sincerity,
whether the Ancients are for us or our adversaries; whether they are for the
peoples trying the Doctrines of their Teachers or against it. He that has the
face to gainsay such clear testimonies as these, shall by my consent, as an
obstinate enemy to truth and evidence, be left to dispute with himself, whether
he be in his wits or no.

13. The case is so plain, that diverse of the more grave and sober sort of the
Papists themselves, concur with us, and plead for a power in the people to
judge of Doctrines as well as we. Those of latter times judging it inconsistent
with the honor of their Clergy and the safety of their Religion, which they
maintain by keeping their people in ignorance, are utterly against it; but
diverse that lived in the ages past, before the mystery of Iniquity attained to
its full stature, are peremptory for it, as a certain right belonging to them,
without which they can neither act like reasonable creatures, nor make due
provision for their own happiness. I shall instance in some few; and begin with
Aquinas, the angelick Doctor, whose Judgment, amongst those against whom I now
dispute is (to use the words of the Holy Ghost touching the Counsel of
Ahithophel) as if a man should enquire at the Oracle of God. Vid. Davenant. in
Col. 3.23. p. 255.
Every one (says he) is bound to examine his own actions, by the knowledge he
has of God, whether it be natural, acquired, or infused: Omnis enim homo debet
secundum rationem agere, for every man ought to do according to reason. Whereby
it appears that notwithstanding his zeal and devotion to the Sea of Rome, yet
he thought that every man should make proof of his own performances of what
nature soever they are, whether enjoined by Superiors or taken up of his own
free choice, ere he set upon them, and that to proceed otherwise, is contrary
to reason. To him I shall add the famous Picus, De fide and ord. cred. Theor.
22. p. 307.
Earl of Mirandula, the Mirror of his time and Nation. If (says he) doubtings
do arise which of the differing parties does more rest upon Evangelical Verity,
the sentence must by no means be given precipitantly; but the Truth that
commits it self to the minds of the faithful, is to be expected, librato
judicio, from a poised judgment, and in the mean time God is to be entreated
for the discerning of spirits, and the holy Scriptures to be consulted. A
passage so full against the Popish implicit faith, that I could wish it were
engraven on all the doors and Pillars in Rome, that so they might see that that
man who was born, brought up, and so much admired amongst them, has given his
testimony against them. He would not have people be such fools, as to take
things upon trust, but to weigh them in the balance of their own private
Judgments, pray to God for direction, search the Scriptures, and then give
sentence according thereunto. Lud. Vives is of the same mind: De Verit. sid.
l. 3. p. 457.
Diligence and enquiry (says he) avail to the finding out of Truth, but
slothfulness and negligence bring forth Error. If you neither enquire nor
search concerning any matter, you will easily be deceived, but if you look and
enquire into the causes and reasons, Veritas sese proferet, the truth will show
it self. His opinion is, that careful and diligent enquiry into the grounds and
reasons of things, is the ready way to discover and find out the truth; whereas
a credulous slothfulness, that will rather take up with any thing than be at
the pains of trial, leads to nothing but errors and mistakes. And indeed it is
a thing so obvious, that had not men almost renounced their reason, it would be
needless to produce testimonies to evince it. De vanit. scient. c. 100. de
verb. dei. p. 475.
Cornelius Agrippa is very plain and full, We ought (says he) to examine all
the disciplines of sciences, and all opinions, by the word of God, as the
Lydius Lapis or touchstone thereof, and in all things flee unto it, ceu ad
solidissimam petram, as unto a most sure rock, and by it only judge of all
opinions and ways. He thinks it not safe for us to close with sciences and
opinions as soon as they are offered to us, or upon the first view we take of
them, as most do; but he would have us to prove and try them. And the
touchstone whereby we must do it, is the Word of God; we must not try them by
carnal reason, humane authority, or any such deceitful thing, but we must take
them to the Word, and try them by it, and by it solely, as being the only sure
rock our faith has to rest upon. Prefat. in qunt. lib. sentent.
Durand speaks not without some indignation, He that captivates (says he) his
reason to humane authority, incidit in insipientiam bestialem, falls into
beastly folly. Of Wisd. l. 2. c. 2. p. 218.
And Charron speaks to the same purpose, To go about (says he) to deprive a
man of this right, is to make him no more a man but a beast. And if we ask
Silvester the Inquisitor, he will tell us, In verb. scrupulus.
that to interpret the precepts of men by a judgment of discretion in the court
of conscience, pertinet ad quemlibet pro facto suo, belongs to every one for
his own practice. And to trouble you with no more, this was one thing that
Paulus Venetus Fulgentius, Tract. de Interdict. Paul. 5.
and the other Venetian Divines, stood upon, That every man might and ought to
discern of every superiors precept, even the Popes himself, whether it were
lawful and convenient, or no. Now do but observe what difference there is
betwixt the doctrine of these men, and that of Bellarmine and such like; the
former following the Scriptures, and treading the steps of the ancients, say,
that the people may judge and try such things as in the business of Religion
are tendered to them, before they close with them; nay, that in pursuance of
their own safety, they ought to do it, and that if they do otherwise, they let
go their necessary liberty, and do no less than turn beasts. The latter say,
that they neither may nor ought to do it; that their business is to hear their
Teachers, in doing whereof they provide sufficiently for their safety; and that
to question what they deliver, is no other than needless scrupulosity and vain
arrogance. Whether of the two is in the right, I leave you to judge by what
has been spoken.

7. Having in these foregoing particulars evinced to you, that the people have
the power of judging contended for, I shall in the next place show you the
lightness and vanity of those objections and pretenses, that are made by
Tannerus, Valentia, Bellarmine, and others, against it, which though I shall
not mention either in their own words or order, yet I shall give you the scope
and sense of them. And they allege,

Obj. 1. It is the pleasure of God, to whom it belongs to determine the rights
and duties of men, that the people should consult their Teachers, and not like
or dislike, choose or refuse, as they themselves shall think meet, but as their
Teachers shall instruct and direct them. Deuteronomy. 17.8-12. Mal. 2.7. Mat. 23.2, 3.

Answ. That people ought in doubtful cases to consult their Ministers, and take
instructions from them, these places evince, and we never denied it; but that
either their Ministers should be infallible, or that they should assent to all
they say as truth, or obey all they command as lawful, without exercising any
private judgment for their own satisfaction, they afford no proof at all. Deuteronomy.
17.9. De Jud. c. 21. p. 123.
As for those words, They shall show thee the sentence of judgment, they are
not (as Davenant notes) verba promittentis sed mandantis, words of promise, but
of command; showing not what the Priests would do, but what in pursuance of
their office they ought to do. And shall we reason, a jure ad factum, from what
they ought to do, to what they would do? what more ordinary than for men to
neglect what they ought to do, and instead thereof do what they have a mind to
do? But admit they were not words of command, but promise, yet were they not to
be taken in an absolute sense, but cum condition annexa, with a condition
adjoined, viz. if they should consult the Law, follow the direction of it, and
teach according to it; Reynolds Conf. chapter 7. div. 4. p. 262.
then they should indeed give the sentence of judgment, otherwise not. This
Heart acknowledges, and rejects the Rabbi's gloss upon the place for absolute
obedience, as absurd and foolish. As for those words, Mal. 2.7.
The priests lips should keep knowledge, the same answer may serve; they hold
not forth what they would do, but what they should do. The holy Ghost was so
far from intending to signify any unerring power in the priests by them, that
he does in the very next words show their liableness to mistake, and how
lamentably they had even already done it, in departing from that rule they were
appointed to walk by. Ye are departed (says he) out of the way, ye have caused
many to stumble at the law, ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi -- Ye have
not kept my ways, but have been partial in my Law. And is it then to be
imagined that he took these to be infallible, or that he would have the people
to believe all that they said, or do all that they required? In like manner,
when our Savior says, The scribes and pharisees sit in Moses seat; Mat. 23.2.
his meaning is not that they did orthodoxly, sincerely and truly expound the
Law, but that it was their office and duty to do it. And whereas the holy Ghost
does in these several places require the people to betake themselves to the
priests, hear them and observe them, his meaning is not that they should do it
in all things, without exception, but only when they taught according to the
Law, which they were appointed to expound and interpret. As for instance, the
Scribes and Pharisees taught, that our Savior was a deceiver, Mat. 27.63. Joh.
9.22.
and forbad the people to confess him; now I demand whether they were bound to
believe and obey them herein, yea or no? If they were, then they were bound to
believe a lie, gainsay the truth, and undo their souls. If not, then these
words are to be taken in a limited sense, which is the thing contended for. The
sum of all then is this, That it is the duty of Ministers to teach the truth,
and require nothing but what is according to Scripture; which so long as they
do, the people are to believe and obey them; but when they do otherwise, they
must neither believe nor obey them.

Obj. 2. There is a belief due to all men in their own profession; we believe
Lawyers, Physicians, and others, even when we do not understand them: Religion
therefore being in a peculiar manner the profession of Ministers, in the study
whereof they have employed themselves all along, it seems to be no more than
reasonable that private persons should rather confide in them, than rely upon
their own judgments.

Answ. 1. There are some private persons, who though they profess not Law,
Physic, or any such faculty, yet by their study and industry have attained to
such skill in them, that they are able to instruct many that do; and that these
either believe or ought to believe such as do profess them in all they say,
without so much as enquiring after the grounds they proceed on, none will
affirm. 2. The reason wherefore the people do commonly believe such as profess
these faculties, upon their bare word, is not because they may not exercise a
judgment of discretion toward what they deliver, but because they are utterly
unstudied in such matters, and so are unable to do it. But it is not so with
them in the business of Religion; for as the knowledge of it is more attainable
than the knowledge of other faculties, (I mean so much as is necessary to
salvation) so they look upon themselves as more concerned in it, and upon that
account take more pains in the study of it. 3. There is a great deal of
difference to be put betwixt the things of the world, and the things of
religion and salvation; in the former, people may go upon trust, Joh. 6.69. 2
Pet. 1.10.
and content themselves with uncertain probabilities; but in the latter, they
must, as the Scripture shows, make sure work. Were salvation as frivolous a
thing as those of the world are, they might better venture upon humane
authority; but being it is a matter of such high importance, they must, as I
say, make sure work, not resting until they have attained to a well-grounded
certainty, and such as may support them in an hour of temptation. Now how can
they do this, while they take things upon trust, and that from those who are
subject to error as well as themselves?

Obj. 3. But the common people, for the most part, are so ignorant, that they
know little or nothing what belongs to Religion, and therefore it is not fit,
that when Teachers in pursuance of their office have delivered to them
doctrines and precepts, they should have liberty to judge them.

Answ. 1. There be few worthy the name of Christians so ignorant, but they are
pro modulo suo, in some competent measure able to do it, at least in all things
of necessity to salvation. Nothing is more certain than that many private
persons do in knowledge, understanding, judgment, and other abilities, far
exceed their Teachers; and many amongst the common people have possessed the
truth, and stoutly defended it, when their Teachers have either been ignorant
of it, or forsaken it. Diverse of our adversaries themselves (as Tostatus shows)
hold, Prolegom. in Evangel.
that from the time of Christ's suffering, until his resurrection, fides in sola
remansit beata Virgin, the faith remained in the blessed Virgin alone. So that
according to them, though she were a weak and frail woman, one of that sex,
which is the more ignorant as well as timorous; yet she stuck to the truth,
when her Teachers had relinquished and forsaken it. But, 2. admit that some be
altogether unable to exercise such a judgment, must their inability destroy the
liberty and privilege of others? Some want eyes, must not those therefore who
have them use them? Some have no understanding, must those therefore who are
endued with it be dealt with as if they were in the same condition? that is
unreasonable.

Obj. 4. But to allow all that will to judge the doctrines and decrees of their
Teachers, is the way to confusion; this is it that fills the Church with
endless disputes; whereas if they would acquiesce in what they deliver, all
would be in peace.

Answ. 1. There is not any liberty or privilege belonging to any order or
degree of persons in the Church, nay, in the world, but through the depravation
of man's nature it is capable of being abused, and made serviceable to bad ends
and purposes; which yet is no sufficient reason wherefore it should be thought
unlawful, or being thought lawful should be abolished and laid aside. Kings and
Princes have an undoubted liberty of exercising civil policy and government
over their people, and is there any Nation in the world that cannot witness it
has been abused to arbitrariness and tyranny? and yet our adversaries will not
say that this is a sufficient reason wherefore it should either be thought
unlawful, or laid aside. And if the liableness of Kings and Princes to abuse
the liberty they have to govern their people, be no sufficient reason wherefore
it should be thought unlawful, or being thought lawful, be laid aside; then
wherefore should the liableness of the people to abuse the liberty they have to
judge doctrines, be looked upon as a sufficient reason, wherefore it should
either be thought unlawful, or being thought lawful should be laid aside? 2.
God knows how to frame a Charter for his Church without any direction from men;
and therefore since he has (as I have already showed) granted the people such
a liberty, those who are over them should, without any gainsaying, allow it
them, let the issue be what it will. He foresaw from the beginning, when he
sat in counsel about this liberty, the inconveniences as well as the
conveniences that would attend it, which yet he looked not upon as any
sufficient reason wherefore he should withold it from them. And if he thought
not the inconveniences which he foresaw a sufficient reason, wherefore he
should, before he had granted it, withold it from them; much less should men,
how great or eminent soever, think the inconveniences, which they find
attending it, a sufficient reason wherefore they should withhold it, after he
has granted it to them. 3. Admit God had not granted this liberty, yet common
prudence, notwithstanding the inconveniences pretended, would have prompted the
people to claim and exercise it. For where inconveniences do occur on both
sides, the less are still to be chosen; and sure it is a far less evil for the
people to labor under some disputes, which God oftentimes overrules for his
Churches good, than that they should follow their Teachers into error, heresy
and profaneness; nay, into Hell it self, which they must needs expose
themselves to the certain danger of, unless they maintain and exercise this
liberty. But 4. If Implicit Faith be such a notable Antidote against divisions,
how comes it to pass, that our adversaries, who urge it with so much severity,
have so many amongst them, which all the Magic of the Papal Chair cannot
conjure down? Whence is it that their Bells do in the hearing of all
Christendom, ring such clamorous and angry discords? Whence came the
difference betwixt the Dominicans and Franciscans, about the immaculate
Conception of the Virgin Mary; betwixt the Jansenists and Molinists about
Grace; betwixt the Italian and French Papists about the head of the Church? If
blind obedience be such a notable means to maintain unity, and secure the
peace, how comes it thus to pass, that they have such diversity of Opinions
amongst them, agitated with so much heat and vehemence, that they are every day
thundering out their Anathena's against each other? I know they persuade their
deluded followers, that all the differences are amongst the Proiestants (which
they tell them arise from our suffering the people to read the Scriptures,
exercise this liberty of judging. and the like) but as for them there is
nothing but unity and peace; there is not so much, as the noise of an hammer,
or any jarring to be heard amongst them. But this is so notoriously false, that
there is not any save those who are as ignorant as their people whom they keep
in such Lamentable darkness and bondage, but they know the contrary.

Obj. 5. If people may call in question the definitions and conclusions of
their Teachers, then they may judicare judices, judge their Judges, which is
contrary to reason, and inconsistent with that Order God has set up and
established in the World.

Answ. Though it be granted that their Teachers may in some respects be termed
their Judges, yet they may notwithstanding, without offering any injury to
Reason or Order, call in question what they deliver to them. For the
understanding whereof you must note, there is a twofold Judgment. 1. There is
judicium forense, See Voetius polit. eccl. p. 1. l. 2. tract. 3. c. 3. p. 897.
a public Judgment, which belongs to those who have Authority and
Jurisdiction over others, by virtue whereof they may make Constitutions and
Decrees for the directing and regulating of their practice. 2. There is
judicium rationale, a private Judgment; and this belongs to every individual
person, who is endued with a power of judging the Decrees of the highest Court
on Earth, quantum ad se spectant, so far as they belong to him, and concern his
own particular duty. The difference betwixt these two Judgments lies in this;
in the former a man judges, propter alium, for the direction of others: in the
latter propter se, for the ordering of his own duty. Now if the people should
take upon them the former of these, they would indeed do that which is contrary
to the rules of Reason and Order, but their taking upon them the latter, is no
more contrary thereunto, than is their opening of their eyes, that they amy see
their way as they go in the streets. In exercising this Judgment upon the
Decrees of their Superiors, if they find them according to the rule, they
close with them, if not, they decline them; yet withal submit to the penalty
of their disobedience. And what is there in this contrary to Reason or Order?
These. Salm. de sum. Jud. sect. 49. p. 120.
this is not (as Cappellus shows) to overthrow good Order, or introduce into
the Church any confusion, but to maintain the right and liberty planted in the
heart of man by Nature it self, namely, that none be compelled to renounce his
Reason, and contrary to the dictate thereof by a blind and brutish motion, to
follow and embrace whatsoever it shall please certain men out of mere humor to
command, adversus perfectissimam omnis very justi, and equi normam, against the
most perfect rule of truth, righteousness and equity, namely the Word of God
contained in the sacred Scripture. This is certainly the course that the
faithful servants of God have observed all along under the several powers they
have had to do with; and if ever we mean to be found faithful we must do the
like.

Obj. 6. But in all well governed Commonwealths, it is thought fit, that
Subjects should submit to the sentence of the Magistrates that bear rule
therein, without contradiction or censure; and if so, why should not the peoplw
in like manner submit to the sentence of their Teachers?

Answ. It is usual with our adversaries in this controversy to confound
public and private Judgment; and hence it is that most of their arguments are
nothing at all to the purpose. The Judgment we contend for, is a private,
rational, discretive Judgment, allowed by God for the directing of every man
in his own particular practice. That which they mainly dispute against, is a
public, ministerial, authoritative Judgment serving to determine and limit
others, which we never challenged to any priveate person, how well qualfied
soever. And this they seem to understand when they say, that in all well
ordered Commonwealths, it is thought fit that Subjects should submit to the
sentence of the Magistrate; else they speak most falsely, and belie the World;
for there is not any Commonwealth therein, that is indeed well ordered, but
they allow their Subjects to read, study, and judge of the sense and equity of
their Laws, for their own private use, and to do otherwise is to deal with them
rather like Beasts than Men. Besides, it were absurd for Magistrates to direct
commands against those actions of men which fall not under their observation
and cognizance. Now the private judging of their sentence is a thing of this
Nature (for after they have done all they can, their subjects will judge of it
as they shall find it by the light of their own reason, and they be never the
wiser) and therefore it seems not to be proper for them, to deliver commands
against it. And thus I have given you an answer to the most material
objections, our adversaries urge against us in this particular. Some others
they have, but what I have already alleged will supply with answers; and
therefore I shall not spend more time in making particular returns to them.

8. Lest any should take occasion from what has been said, to misinterpret the
Apostle, or conceive that to be meant by him which he never intended, I shall
here, before I enter upon the Uses, propound somewhat by way of caution.

1. Though he thought it not convenient that we should receive the Doctrinie of
our Teachers, till we have first made proof of it, yet we must not think that
this does evacuate or make void their function. The imperfections and
infirmities that attend them in their Ministrations, do not nullify their
Office, no more than those that attend the Magistracy do nullify it; but
rather serve to set forth the wisdom and power of God, that can by such weak
and despicable Instruments accomplish such high and eminent effects; that can
by such broken Vessels convey the Oil of Grace into the hearts of his chosen.
Their calling and work determine not with every Error, they may through
ignorance or inadvertency be guilty of, but are to continue throughout all
Generations. They are entrusted and that solely (unless some extraordinary case
occur) with the dispensation of perpetual Ordinances; Mal. 28. 20.
they are under perpetual Promises; 1 Cor. 11.26.
the Churches necessity of them will be perpetual; Acts 8.30. Rev. 2.5.
the removal of them is threatened as one of the sorest Judgments that can
befall a people; all which, with many other particulars that might be
mentioned, do plainly show, it is the pleasure and design of God that their
Office shall be perpetual, that is, continue to the end of the World. However
things go, yet Christ will keep up a Ministry in his Church, Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Cor.
15.24.
that shall remanin until be have perfected his Saints, and shall deliver up
the Kingdom to his Father.

2. Though he forbid us to rest upon their authority yet he would not have us
to forsake them, and overrun their Ministry. Their being liable to mistakes
does not disoblige us from attending on them, and hearing them, but from
confiding in them; and that in such a degree, as to take whatever they say for
truth, without enquiring any further. His admonishing us to prove what they
deliver, does not forbid the hearing them, but suppose it, nay, command and
enjoin it; for how could he think we should be able or fit to bring their
Doctrine to trial, and pss our Judgment upon it, unless we be present, and
hear it? This I speak of such as are lawful Ministers of the Gospel, and
answer the end of their Calling; as for intruders and usurpers that neither
regard their own, nor others souls, I have nothing to say for them.

3. Though he be against our making them Lords of our Faith, yet he would not
have us to slight them, or carry our selves irreverently or contemptuously
toward them. No, he will have us, (as you may see in the preceding verses) to
know them, and esteem thim very highly in love for their works sake. And he
still gives it in charge to those to whom he either preaches or writes, that
they be mindful of their Teachers, look upon them as the Ministers of the
Gosopel, and yield them such respect as may encourage tehm to the cheerful
discharge of their duty, and the laying out of themselves for their good. Admit
our Teachers be guilty of mistakes in Doctrine, and miscarriages in Life, yet
we must remember they are the Ambassadors or Christ, whom he has entrusted
with the Ministry of reconciliation, and as such we are both to receive and
respect them.

4. Though he call upon us to prove what they deliver, and satisfy our selves
concerning the lawfulness of it, ere we entertain it, yet he does not mean that
we must take nothing at all upon trust from them. In those things wherein we
have no reason to suspect them either of weakness or falsehood, or wherein we
are altogether incapable of making a Judgment our selves, we not only may but
ought to trust them, as the best security we have to rest upon. Such as are
wholly illiterate are to believe it is a Bible wherein the Minister reads, and
that he reads true and not false; and such as have attained further, are to
believe, that the Bible wherein he reads is rightly translated out of the
Originals; that the Copies were authentic out of which the Translation was
made; that (as credible Authors mention) there were such things done in ages
past, and such customs and observations among the Jews, and other Nations,
which do greatly serve to the clearing of many dark places of Scripture, nay,
which are so necessary to be known, that without acquaintance with them, many
places cannot be understood. Herein as we trust our Lawyers and Physicians, so
we maust them; not but that we may, if we have ability and opportunity, enquire
into those things our selves, or if we have reason to suspcet our own Teachers,
consult with others; but that in case we want ability and opportunity, or have
no reason of suspicion, we then may and ought to trust them, as the best light
and security we have. We must distinguish betwixt matters of doctrine, and
matters of fact; or betwixt doctrins, and such things as are subservient
thereunto. To believe the former upon the credit of our Teachers, is to resolve
our faith into humane testimony; but to believe the latter, such as the
trueness of Copies or Translations, upon their word, is no more a resolving of
our faith into humane testimony, than the Apostles believing what they saw with
their eyes, resolved their faith into sense.

5. Though he enjoins us to prove all things, yet he would not have us to run
after every new light, or hear every one that of his own accord, without any
just call, shall take upon him to preach to us: this he was so far from either
commanding or allowing, that by the spirit of prophecy, foretelling the
disorders and miscarriages some Christians should be guilty of in after ages,
he mentions this one, that having itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3.
they should heap to themselves teachers: and what is the issue of it? why, for
saking the truth, they turn unto fables. And what he foretold, we our selfves
see abundantly accomplished in our days; for such is the indiscretion and
levity of people, that they are ready to go forth at the shaking of every reed,
answer the call of every Bell, and sit down at the feet of every one that has
the confidence to open his mouth to them. What is this but (as Calvin well
notes upon the Text) ad omnes errorum ventos, se temere exponere, rashly to
expose themselves to all the winds of errors, which out of a due sense of their
own frailty they should carefully shun and avoid. For a man to forsake his own
Teacher, and the wholesome food he is inured to, and has by the blessing of
God happily grown under, and run after strangers, is no other than to tempt God
to deliver him up to delusions, and encourage Impostors in their work.

6. Though he would have us to try things ere we close with them, yet he would
not have us turn Academicks or Scepticks, call in question received princ
iples, and doubt of every thing which comes before us; that is to run from one
extreme into another, dissolve the very fabric of Religion, and put an
absolute stop to the duty and service we owe to God. As we must not believe all
things, so neither must we douht of all things, but we must walk in a mean
betwixt these two extremes. As for new matters, we must first try them, and
then if we see cause, maintain them; but for old, standing, tried points, that
have clear foundation in Scripture, and which we have upon good grounds
received long ago, we must rather maintain than try them. The Apostles advice
is, that what is new and doubtful that we should try; and what we have tried
and found good, that we should hold fast.

9. Having thus handled the doctrinal part of this discourse, and therein
showed what is meant by proving, what is to be proved, who are to make this
proof, what it is by which it must be made, after what manner it must be
managed; given you some arguments for it, answered the objections against it,
and propounded some cautions: I shall now pass to the Uses, and therein show
how far this point concerns the world at this day, and what improvement is to
be made of it.

prove all things, then it may serve for the confutation and conviction of all
those proud Masters, who deny the people have any liberty allowed them by God
to try the doctrines and prescriptions of their Superiors. Of this sort are
the Jewish Rabbis, the Mohammedan Priests, the Popish Prelates, with some
others, who think the people are so far in subjection to them, that they ought
to receive their determinations, and impositions, let them be what they will,
without any scruple or exception whatsoever. They take themselves to be no less
than absolute Lords, and therefore as they look upon it as their work to teach
and command, so they look upon it as the peoples work to believer and obey; and
upon their refusing to do it, they presently fall upon them and persecute them,
as rebellious against good order and government, and upon that account worthy
of the greatest severity that can be inflicted on them. Now what horrible
tyranny and cruelty is this? 1 Pet. 5.3.
what lording it is this over Gods heritage? how contrary to the light of
nature and common reason? how dissonant to the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, and in particular to that of Paul in this place, prove all things.

prove all things, then it may be useful by way of informaaation, to acquaint
us, 1. what respect we are to show to the doctrins and precepts of such as
dispense the Gospel to us. We must not look upon all their words as Oracles,
proceeding from an infallible spirit; but we must receive them with suspicion,
as coming from those that have darkness in them as well as light, and so may
speak error as well as truth. Acts 12.22.
We must not, like Herod's flattering hearers, as soon as they speak, cry out,
it is the voice of God and not of a man; but out of the respect we bear, both
to the truth and our own safety; we must take what they say to the rule,
examine it hereby, and then judge of it according to the agreement it has
therewith. We must indeed be peaceable and charitable, yet we must not put out
our eyes, or hood-wink our selves, and so like a company of blind fools and
idiots, suffer men to lead us whither they please; but whiles we have eyes we
must make use of them for our necessary direction and security. That we must
reverence such as are our Teachers is granted, yet we must not think that
Christ is every where, he is said to be; or that every one speaks truth that
pretends to it: but we must try, and then conclude as we find cause. The
Apostle indeed discoursing of charity, says, it believes all things; 1 Cor.
13.7.
but we must not think his meaning is, that we should be so charitable as to
give credit to impostors, or assent to what ever is delivered to us; then we
must believe the Jews, when they tell us, that the Gospel, which he took so
much pains in preaching, is a mere fable; but that we should be so charitable
as not to rejeet things out of prejudice, or groundless dislike, or withold
our assent when we have no cause or reason for it. If upon due examination of
those points which are delivered to us we find they have no foundation in the
Word, we may without any violating of charity, or falsifying the Apostles
doctrine in the least, not only withold our assent from them, but reject them
with indignation and contempt.

2. If Christians must prove all things, then Religion is no trivial business,
but such as calls for skill, care and diligence. Carnal men, that know little
of the nature of it, look upon it as a plain, easy, homely thing, that has
little intricacy in it: but it is not so; it has that in it that will find
work for the ablest parts and greatesty diligence. As it is a most desirable
and honorable, so it is a most ingenious and accurate thing to be a sound,
well principl'd, sincere Christian. There are in it many deep mysteries to be
dived into, many intricate cases to be resolved, many temptations both from
within and without to be withstood, which no such things as ignorance,
carelessness or slothfulness are sit to encounter with. He that will be a right
Christian, and faithfully perform his Masters work, must have a good eye, use
circumspection and take pains, else he will never attain the ends he aims at.
The Disciples gathered from the discourse of our Savior concerning rich men,
Luke 18.26.
that it was an hard matter to be saved. And if it be an hard matter to be
saved, then it must needs be an hard matter to be a Christian, in as much as a
man must necessarily be so ere he can be saed. But if all other things were
silent, the point we have before us would evince it: for if a man, in order to
his being a Christian, must prove all those things he has to do with in the
business of Religion, before he close with them, and must accurately
distinguish bewixt good and bad, taking the one and leaving the other, (as you
have heard he must) then it must needs be an hard thing to be a Christian.

prove all things, then it may serve for reproof to two sorts of persons.

1. To all such as are Teachers, more especially Popish Prelates, with such as
comply with them, and do not allow the people this liberty, but urge doctrings
and precepts upon them with as much peremptoriness and severity, as if they
thought their bare word were sufficient to satisfy their peoples consciences,
and legitimate whatsoever they shall judge meet to offer to them. Bellarmine
makes mention of one Abbot, t. 2. l. 2. c. 21. p. 166.
that enjoined a Monk at his command to enter into a flaming furnace; and of
another that enjoined a Monk at his command to cast himself upon the waters.
And there are multitudes surviving of the same spirit, who impose what they
please upon the people over whom they are, without allowing them liberty to
make proof thereof, though it be but in order to the directing of their own
particular practice. Now, Sirs, what mean you thus to afflict the heritage of
the Lord, vex your poor people, and trample them under your feet? Wherefore do
you thus blindfold and enthrall them, not suffering them to exercise the power
and freedom belonging to them, when as it is so evident, that it is the
pleasure of Jesus Christ, who knows better how to teach and govern his Church,
than either men or Angels can tell him that they should do? Is this to imitate
your Lord and Master, who exercised so much mildness and tenderness toward the
people he had to deal with, who was so ready upon all occasions to dispense
with their infirmities, comply with their weaknesses, resolve their doubts,
satisfy their scruples, and clear up his truth to them? Is this to gather the
Lambs in your arms, carry them in your bosom, Isa. 10.12.
and deal gently with those that are with young? Is this, with the Apostles, to
be gentle among them, 1 These. 2.7.
even as a nurse cherishes her children? Is this the way to make them thrive
in knowledge, grace and holiness? Isa. 52.7.
Is this the way to render your feet beautiful, and make those over whom you
are in love with you? Or is it not rather the way to make them weary both of
you and your Ministry, and cause them with the rest of the Creation to groan
and travel, Romans 8.21, 22.
that they may be delivered from the bondage wherein they are, into the liberty
of the children of God? For this very thing (as Luther told you long ago) you
deserve tanquam lupi and tyranni, Oper. t. 2. p. 375.
as wolves and tyrants to be driven out of the Church of God. But I shall sum
up what I have to say to you, into a few Queries, which I shall offer to your
consideration. 1. Has God any where given you power to exercise this rigor
thwards your people? If you think he has, tell us where and how to reconcile
it, with that liberty which he has, as I have showed, granted to them. If he
has not, how dare you claim it, or make use of it? Do you not acknowledge your
selves to be under his dominion? must you not be account able for all to him?
How dare you then do that which you have not warrant for from him? 2. Whether
do you take your selves to be nfallible? If you do, let us know upon what
ground you do it, and how you came to be so. The whole world sighs and groans
under crrours and mistakes, and therefore you must not think it much if we look
for good evidence from you, ere we acknowledge you to have any such privilege.
If you do not, then how dare you be so confident of your own opinions, as to
urge them with such severity upon others, who perhaps have as much, if not more
reason, to be as confident of their own? 3. Whether do you think you may justle
up your Maker, and challenge the same power over your people that he himself
does? If you may, communicate your reasons, and show how it comes about that
you may do that which Angels tremble at the thoughts of. If not, then with what
Justice can you require your people to yield you absolute assent and obedience,
and punish them for refusing? What can God himself do more, than require them
to believe and obey him upon the authority of his bare word? and what do you in
this your rigid behavior toward them, less? 4. Whether may you fall in with
Antichrist and do his work? If you may, then wherefore do you pretend to disown
him and be against him? If not, how will you ever defend this your imperious
dealing with the people? Certainly, if there be any thing in the World, that
incroaches upon the Prerogatives and rights of the Son of God, See Ames Bell.
Enerv. l. 1. p. 241.
and breaths forth down right Antichristianism, this is it. 5. Whether are you
to rule your People as you rule Beasts, and expect obedience upon the same
terms, from the one, as you do from the other? If you are, then tell us for
what end God endued them with reasonable souls, and placed them so near the
Angels? If not, then wherefore do you require obedience, without allowing them
to judge of the nature and equity of that you demand from them? wherein do you
deal worse with Beasts? 6. Whether would you be content that others should deal
with you, as you deal with them? If you would, then before you appear any more
in the World, go and learn to be men. If not, then wherefore do you exercise
such severity toward the people, since the very light of Nature teaches you
not to do unto others, what you would not have them to do unto you? What is
this but to tempt us to think you are of the race of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 23.4.
who laid those burdens upon others that they would not endure to bear any part
of themselves? Let the consideration of these things soften your hearts toward
your people, and prevail with you to allow them the liberty belonging to them.
But if you refuse notwithstanding all that can be said, to do it, know that he
who is the Protector of the Innocent, will in time deliver them out of the
hands of such Oppressors.

2. If may be likewise useful by way of reproof to such among the people as
take all upon trust from their Teachers, believe all they say, and do all they
require. There are many who instead of standing up for and maintaining their
undoubted and necessary liberty, do out of an unmanly, servile fear, bow down
before them, and inslave their Reason, Judgment, Consciences, and all to them.
Now, Sirs, wherefore do you thus despise the bounty of God, and slight the rich
purchase of Jesus Christ your Savior? Wherefore do you thus let go the liberty
he has required you to stand fast in, and give up your selves to the wills of
unreasonable men? what is this but to entitle your selves to the doom of
Issachar, Genesis 49.14.
and like so many Asses couch down under your burdens? What is this but to tell
the World that you are neither Men, nor expect the Privileges belonging to
them, but that you are Beasts, and are content to be taught, governed and dealt
with accordingly, than which what can be more unbecoming your reasonable
Natures, or the Gospel which you do profess? But in compliance with the method
of the former Branch of this Use, I shall sum up what I have to say to you in a
few Queries. 1. Whether do you in good earnest think that the bare word of your
Teachers is a sufficient bottom for you to ground your Faith upon, and such as
you may with cheerfulness and satisfaction acquiesce in? If you do, show us
what grounds you have for it. Both Scripture and Experience tell us, they
labor under much darkness and ignorance, and are subject to errors and
mistakes. If you do not, wherefore do you lay such stress upon it, as to
venture the glory of God, and the peace and happiness of your Souls thereon?
These are things of such importance, that you should provide better security
for them than the word of any mortal man can be. 2. Whether do you think Christ
will look upon this your believing and doing all that your Teachers would have
you, without any examination and trial, as a due answer to all those Cautions
and Warnings he has given you to beware of letting men deceive you? If you do,
then tell us what it is to be credulous, secure and negligent; wherein it
consists, who they be that are guilty of it, and when it is that men expose
themselves to the danger of being deceived. If you do not, then why do you not
awake and reform, and by due examination and trial of things provide better
for your own safety? 3. Whether may you take to your selves other Masters
besides Christ, become their servants, and pay homage and obedience to them? If
you may, then show us what the Scripture means, when it says, One is your
Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Mat. 2 38. 1 Cor. 7.23.
And, be not ye the servants of men. If you may not, then wherefore do you
grant such Magisterial power to your Teachers, suffer them to give Laws to your
Consciences, and receive their Assertions as the very Dictates of Christ
himself? What is it for one to make a man his Master, but (as Pythagoras his
Scholars dealt with him) to receive his Documents merely upon the credit and
authority of his word; whithout enquiring any further? And when you give up
your selves to the command of your Teachers, and look upon all they say as
truth, and all they command as duty, without making any proof or trial, what
do you less? 4. Whether is it wisdom to be at an uncertainty in the business of
Religion? If it be, wherefore does the Holy Ghost spend so many words in
exhorting us to make things sure? If it be not, then wherefore do you build
upon the sandy foundation of the doctrines and commandments of men, for whom it
is as ordinary to err, as it is for the Stars to twinckle, or the Clocks to
miss the hour of the day? 5. Whether do you mean to hold out in Religion? If
you do not, wherefore do you make a profession of it? do you think it worth the
while to mock God, and dishonor the Gospel? If you do, then wherefore do not
you satisfy your selves better concerning the truth of it, than by taking the
Word of men? you know Religion has ever met with opposition, and so it is like
to do still, and therefore if you mean to hold out, you had best get better
evidence for the truth of it, than the word of a frail man can be. So long as
the voice of the Country goes for it, there is no great danger of forsaking it,
but what will you do when all are against it, nay, when you shall see more
against it than ever you saw for it? Now the great and learned, and all the
people are for it, which perhaps is the ground whereon you have closed with it,
but what will you say, if you see them all against it, nay and carried forth
with greater zeal against it, than ever they were for it? It may be Religion
for the present is your Interest, but what will you say to it when it will be
your undoing, when it will lead you to prison and to death? Do you think the
bare word of your Teachers that perhaps disclaim all that ever they said
before, will bear you up? Do not persuade your selves it will. It may be even
now upon your meeting with some small trials, you begin to stagger and shake,
what then will you do, when you shall come to encounter with Gibbets and
Flames? If you run with the Foot, Jer. 12.50.
and they weary you, how will you contend with horses? and if you are not able
to abide the still-flowing streams, what will you do with the swellings of
Jordan? 6. Whether do you think, if out of observance to your Teachers you
follow them into Error, they shall answer for you? If you do, you lie under a
gross mistake, for the Apostle tells us in plain terms, Rem. 12.12.
that every on of us shall give account of himself to God. Its true, they shall
in a sort answer for you, but not with any advantage to you. Their being
accessory to your delusion and ruin will implead themselves, but not excuse
you, who were warned to prove what they should deliver to you, and follow them
no further than they should bear the light of the Word before them, which if
you had done you had been safe, but doing otherwise you must look to perish. If
you think they must not answer for you, then wherefore do you make their will
your rule, and prostitute your Faith and Obedience to their pleasure? Wherefore
do you follow them with so much boldness and security? Do you think it a small
matter to run your selves into snares, and arm divine Vengeance against you?
Have a care what you do, and be not so merciless and injurious to your Souls.
And thus I have given you the Queryes I thought fit to offer to you, which if
upon due consideration you find weight in, you may improve them for your
direction; if otherwise, enjoy your thoughts, but withal be ware, lest you be
found rebelious against the light, Job 24.13.
and enemies to your own safety.

prove all things, then it may likewise be useful by way of Exhortation to all
you who are private Christians, to set upon the practice of it. As ever you
will endeavor your own welfare, improve the liberty Christ has bestowed on
you, and evidence your selves to be men, receive not things upon trust, but by
prudent and serious enquiry, inform your selves of the nature, equity and
soundness of them e're you close with them. Take heed of being drawn into the
Error so expressly condemned by the Apostle, Jud. v. 16.
of having men's persons in admiration, or suffering your selves to be swayed
and overruled by them. Let them be what they will, in respect of birth, parts,
place, wealth, honor, power, interest, or any such like worldly advantages,
yet do not captivate your Faith, Consciences or Reason to them, but by your own
personal enquiry, satisfy your selves in whatever you undertake or do,
preferring Truth from the meanest before Error from the greatest. Such was the
integrity of Panormitan, a famous Lawyer, who lived about 230 years ago, that
he said, Tit. de elect. C. significat.
Laico verum dicenti cum Evangelio magis credendum, quam consilio falsum
dicenti contra Evangelium, a Lay man speaking truth with the Gospel, is to be
believed before a whole Council, speaking false against it. You must not
measure Doctrines and Opinions, by the quality of the persons delivering them,
but by the evidence accompanying them. It is not worldly greatness that can
make Error Truth, or Worldly meaness that can make Truth Error, but when all is
done, Error will be Error, and Truth will be Truth. And therefore let not the
pompous and splendid condition, wherein at any time you find Error, cause you
to esteem or embrace it as Truth; nor the despicable and low condition wherein
you find Truth, cause you to dislike or decline it as Error, but waving all
such outward considerations, give both the one and the other the respect
belonging to them. A Pearl though lying in the dirt, is of far more value, than
a Pebblestone in the richest Cabinet: And the like is to be said concerning
Truth; it is of more worth in the plainest and homeliest dress, than Error in
all its paint and garnish. The head of Truth is worthier your respect under a
Crown of thorns, than the head of Error under a Crown of Gold. And therefore
notwithstanding all the ignominy and contempt that foolish and ungodly men may
cast upon it, suffer not your selves to be wrought out of conceit with it, but
yield unto it its deserved esteem.

Now that you may manage this trial of things, with more advantage and
success, and be the better able to distinguish betwixt Truth and Error, and
pass a just sentence, forbearing to use any more words to press you to the
work, I shall in the next place propound some rules to direct you in it. And
here I shall not insist upon those which our Writers preseribe in order to the
due Interpretation of the Scripture, such as the consulting the scope of the
Text, Whitak. part 1. cont. 1. q. 5. c. 9. p. 361. Rainolds Conf. chapter 2. div.
2. p. 45.
comparing one place with another, adhering to the Analogy of Faith laid down
in the Creeds and Confessions of the Churches, with such like, which yet are
very worthy your observation, but shall pitch upon such as are more particular,
and as I conceive more suitable to the present subject.

1. While you are managing this Trial, be sure you beware of such Doctrines as
interfere and clash with the greatness, sovereignty and majesty of God, and
tend to the diminishing of the honor and service due to him. The Papists as if
they envyed the pre-eminence of God, and were minded to jumble Heaven and Earth
together, and level all into a common equality, make many insolent, and strange
divisions. They divide adoration betwixt him and Images; invocation betwixt him
and Saints; and absolute obedience betwixt him and the Church. Now what gross
and horrible Sacrilege is this? what is this but to divest him of his Royalty,
and give his Glory unto another, which yet is a sin so great and heinous, that
one would think they should tremble at the thoughts of it? Beware how you fall
in with these men; keep up the honor of God entire, and reject all Doctrines
that tend either to alienate or diminish it. It is he that made this
stupendous Fabric of the World, set it upon its Pillars, upholds it in its
place, and by his supreme direction, influence and conduct, orders and disposes
of all persons, actions and events that are therein. It is he only that has
absolute sovereignty, glory, and wisdom, and therefore it is he only that you
must religiously adore, invocate and obey.

2. Beware of such Doctrines as tend in the least to disparage the Scripture,
or bring it into contempt with you. It is the candle of the Lord, the Guide of
the Soul, and the Rule and Judge of all Controversies in Religion whatsoever;
and therefore suffer it by no means to go out of esteem with you. Such
Doctrines as tend to honor and credit it, close with them; but as for those
which tend to disparage and disgrace it, reject them as pernicious and
dangerous blasphemies. The Papists, because it never speaks well of them, and
that they may the better bring it into disesteem, say almost all manner of evil
against it. They teach that the authority of it depends upon the Church, that
it is obscure and imperfect, that the Apocryphal Books and humane Traditions,
deserve as much reverence as it. And what is this but to reproach the wisdom of
God, and requite all the care and love he manifests to us in his Word with
ingratitude and contempt. When you meet with any that preach such doctrine, if
you cannot convince them, avoid them as the Agents of Satan, and such as seek
to subvert and undo you.

3. Beware of such doctrins as tend to the dethroning of Christ, the
disparaging of his undertakings and performances, or the diminishing any way of
the honor and praise belonging to him. The Papists not thinking it sufficient
to rob God, do likewise rob him, taking from him, and leaving with him what
they think fit. They divide his Sovereignty and Headship betwixt him and the
Pope, Satisfaction and Merits betwixt him and Saints; Invocation and
Intercession betwixt him and dAngels. And what is this but to tell him, he
shall not reign over them, nor have the honor belonging to him? Take heed how
you join with them in any such proceedings. As he is the undoubted Lord and
King of his Church, so he has undertaken the reconciling of God and Man, and
the making of atonement betwixt them; and in order thereunto, he did in his
death offer a valuable consideration unto Justice for the offense done, which
he now pleads in Heaven, (where he sits at his Father's right hand interceding
for us) and that so effectually, that to bring in the performances of any of
his creatures, is to light a candle before the Sun, and carry water to the
Ocean.

4. Beware of such doctrins as tend to the extenuating of God's free grace, and
the exalting of man's free will. To exalt the former, and extenuate the latter,
is to give unto God the things that are Gods, and into man the things that are
man's; but to extenuate the former and exalt the latter, is to give unto God the
things that are man's, and unto man the things that are Gods. Notwithstanding
the Papists divide the work of conversion betwixt the grace of God, and the
will of man, making them partners in the effecting of it. And what is this but
to take away the praise due unto God, and ascribe it to a silly impotent
creature, that is as far from having power to convert himself, as he was from
having power to make himself when he had no existence, or redeem himself when
he was fallen. Be not you thus injurious to the grace of God, but seek unto him
to work your conversion; and when he has done it, give him all the praise. If
you do err, let it be on the right hand; do it rather in giving grace too
much, than too little.

5. Beware of such doctrines as are against the power of godliness, and tend
either to profaneness or lukewarmness. Acquaint your selves with, and yield
obedience to all Gods commandments; serve him not only with the outward, but
the inward man. What ever ordinance or duty you undertake, besure you engage
the soul in it. The Papists (at least many of them) that they may at the last
stab Religion to the heart, and fill up the measure of their sins, divide man
into soul and body; and then according to their wonted justice, speak, as if
the one, and worser part thereof, were enough for God. He himself does every
where in Scripture call upon us to manage his work with affection, seriousness,
diligence, nay, with all our might; but they say, all this is not needful,
persuading their credulous people, that the opus operatum is enough, that the
celebrating of certain offices and rites, which they themselves have thought
fit to prescribe, and the performing of some external trivial solemnities will
serve the turn, without any more ado. And thus as they divide Faith betwixt
Scripture and Tradition; Worship betwixt God and Images, Reconciliation betwixt
Christ and Saints; Conversion betwixt Free Grace and Free Will: so likewise
they divide Man into two parts, Soul and Body; and when they have done, they
order God only some superficial service, consisting in a company of empty
childish Rites, from the latter, leaving us in the mean time to employ the
former as our own prudence or inclinations shall direct us. And hereby we see,
notwithstanding the flourishes and pretenses that these men sometimes make to
Religion, what friends they are to it. As if they thought it not sufficient
injury unto God to detract from the authority of his Word, Worship, the
performances of his Son, his free grace, they have at the last adventured to
take from him the far better part of his creature, without the concurrence of
which, the services of the other, how splendid and costly soever, are no more
pleasing to him, than the noisome evaporations of a stinking carcass are to us.
Have a care how you entertain such doctrins, or have to do with such men.
Maintain and keep up the sovereignty of God, the authority of the Scriptures,
the offices of Christ, the workings of divine grace, with the practice of
godliness in their highest strength and glory, shunning all those as the
enemies of God and true Religion that are adversaries thereunto.

Now because the nonperformance of this duty of Christian trial proceeds from
certain impediments that lie in the way. I shall therefore in the next place
mention some of them, that so being acquainted with them, you may avoid the
influence and danger of them. And the

1. Is a vain credulity or proneness that is in men, to credit what ever is
propounded and tendered to them, especially if it come from such as they bear
reverence and respect to. Such is the confidence that the generality of
children have in their parents, servants in their masters, people in their
Teachers, and one relation and friend in another, that they are ready, without
any scruple or enquiry, to subscribe to what ever they deliver to them. The
Psalmist observed in his time, that though the principles and courses of
ancestors were never so absurd and foolish, yet their credulous successors, out
of the indiscreet reverence they bore to them approved of them; This their way
(says he) is their folly, Psalm. 49.13.
yet their posterity approve their sayings. They did not weigh things as they
ought to have done, and as wise men would have done, but looking upon the
credit of their ancestors as a sufficient foundation to their faith and
confidence, they assented to what ever they held or practiced as sound and
good. Now this is a dangerous course, and leads to no other than delusion and
misery. And therefore let men be what they will as to their places, abilities
or pretenses, take not every thing for truth that they deliver, but use your
eyes, and satisfy your selves before you give your assent. This God himself
does in express terms require; Jer. 12.6.
Even thy brethren (says the Prophet) and the house of thy father, even they
have dealt treacherously with thee, yea, they have called a multitude after
thee, believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee. Here he
dissuades the Jews from the credulity he saw them addicted to, admonishing
them, that though the persons they had to deal with were never so near and dear
to them, though they were their brethren and kinsfolk, though their pretenses
were never so specious and plausible, yet they should not without better
evidence than their own word confide in them.

2. Is an unadvised presuming upon their own sudden apprehensions of what comes
before them, as if they could by the cast of an eye fathom the depth of it, and
pass a right judgment upon it. There is scarcely any man so illiterate or
unskilful in Religion, but he thinks he may judge of things according to what
at the first prospect or view they appear to him, and so looks upon all further
enquiry as superfluous and needless; which is a dangerous as well as a
groundless conceit, and may no better consist with our safety, than it may with
those humbling and abasing thoughts, we ought to have of our selves. Had we
retained our primitive light and innocence, we might better have leaned upon
our own wisdom, and confided in sudden apprehensions; but alas, its far
otherwise with us. The highest Angels in the Church have in them some folly,
and those whom God has blessed with profoundest wisdom, know but in part.
Their sight in the mysteries of salvation, is even like his who saw men walking
like trees. Mar. 8.24.
What then shall we say of the common people, who fall almost as far short of
them, as they do of perfection? May it then stand with their safety to trust to
the first view of things? what is it else but to venture all (as it were) upon
a die, and with the Jesuits, aleae lusu contendere, cast lots whether they
shall do their duty or not, Vid. Ames Bell: Ener. t. 2. p. 234.
and consequently whether they shall be saved or damned?

3. Is carelessness and regardlesness of truth, which they are so far from
esteeming and thirsting after as they should, that they do not much matter
whether they have it or not. So they can but secure their worldly happiness,
and enjoy their honor, wealth and pleasure, they matter not whether they are
in the right or wrong, or what kind of Religion takes place. Such a one was
Gallio the Proconsul, Acts 18.17.
or Deputy of Achaia, who though he saw the Gospel persecuted, and the servants
of Christ trodden under foot, yet he cared not. And this is the disposition of
the generality of people; so they can but dwell in their cieled houses, and sit
under their own vines and fig trees, they regard not the honor of God, nor
care what becomes of his cause and truth.

4. Is laziness and slothsulness in the business of Religion, which indisposes
them for all exercises and duties of this nature. Such is the temper of most,
that though they are convinced the work is necessary, and ought by all means to
be done, yet rather than they will be at the pains of it, they let it alone,
and expose themselves to the danger that unavoidably attends the neglect of it.
Though they can speak well of it, and wish it were done, yet out of mere
slothfulness, instead of falling upon it, and managing it with life and vigor,
as they ought, they lie stretching themselves upon their beds, saying with
Solomon's sluggard, Prove. 6.10.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.
And what is the issue of it? why, their poverty comes as one that travelleth,
and their want as an armed man. As corporal slothfulness brings poverty and
want upon the body, so spiritual slothfulness brings it upon the soul.

5. Is multitude of worldly businesses, which wholly take up their thoughts,
cares and parts, and engage them to such attendance on them, that they cannot
spare time to look after things of a spiritual nature. Acts 24.25.
Felix might have conversed with Paul, and have had the truth, which he was a
stranger to, from him; but his hands were so full of other matters, that he
could not be at leisure to do it. The story of Antipater King of Macedon is
well known; when one presented a book to him treating of happiness, his answer
was, (...), I am not at leisure. And so likewise is that of the Duke of Alva,
who when Henry the 4. of France asked him whether he had observed the Eclipses,
he answered, No; withal adding, That he had so much to do upon Earth, that he
had not leisure to look up to Heaven. And the reason wherefore many thousands
omit to enquire after the truth, is, because they have already filled their
hands so full of other matters, that they cannot without the neglect of them
(which of all things they are loath to be guilty of) be at leisure to do it.

6. Is a desperate unmovable resolution to proceed and go forward in the ways
wherein they are, let them be good or bad. Though they can render no reason at
all for it, yet they like them so well, and are so in love with them, that they
resolve to continue in them, let the issue be what it will. Thus the Jews in
Jeremy's time carried themselves; let God and his Prophets say what they would,
they were resolved to do what was good in their own eyes, and persist in the
way they had propunded to themselves to walk in: We will certainly (say they)
do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, Jer. 44.17.
to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto
her, etc. They resolve not to do that which comes out of the mouth of the Lord,
as once they pretended to do, when they said to Moses, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Speak unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will
hear and do it; no, but to do that which comes out of their own mouth. Neither
do they do it with necessary limitations and restrictions, but with greatest
absoluteness and peremptoriness, as those that had none to control or question
them for it. And what is that particular thing that they thus resolve to do?
why, to worship the Moon, here called (as diverse Expositors think) the Queen of
Heaven. Vid. A Lapid. com. in Jer. 7.18.
Notwithstanding the many high, and eminent obligations that they lay under, to
worship the true God, and him only, yet they resolve, and that with greatest
peremptoriness, without rendering any good reason for it, that they will do
otherwise. Their words imply as much as if they had said, notwithstanding all
that we have heard and seen of God, and the many and various ties that lie upon
us to adhere and cleave to him, yet it is come into our minds to go after other
Gods, and let what will be said to the contrary, we are resolved to do it. And
after this manner the rude multitude carried themselves toward Christ. Though
they had nothing to allege against him, Luke 23.14.
yet they cry out, Let him be crucified. Though, after all the advantageous
hearing Pilate could afford them, they could urge nothing where of they might
accuse him, yet they cry out, Let him be crucified. Nay, though Pilate told
them in plain terms that neither he nor Herod could find any fault or cause of
death in him, yet they still cry out, Let him be crucified. q.d. Whether he be
guilty, or not guilty, faulty, or not faulty, we are resolved to have his Life,
and therefore stand no longer reasoning with us, but let him be crucified. So
we read how above forty impious and bloody Wretches bound themselves under a
Curse, Acts 23.12.
that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. Though he was
one that had lived in all good Conscience amongst them, so that they had no
just action in the World against him, yet having taken up a malicious prejudice
toward. him, they stand no longer to consult Justice, or Equity, but resolve
to be his death. And thus it is with many in our days; having taken up (they
know not how) a dislike of such a way, they are resolved to be against it,
though evidence for it be never so plain and full. The reason wherefore diverse
will not be Protestants, is because they have taken up a Purpose against it;
and having done that, they think it may not consist with their honor to comply
and fall in with them. And when men are once got to this, they are so far from
being persuaded to bring things to trial, that they do but despise all motions
leading thereunto.

And thus I have laid before you some of the impediments that tend to hinder
you from the duty I have in this Discourse cleared up and recommended to you.
Let it now be your care to break through them, and overcome them. Give your
selves no rest till you have found out what it is that God would have you to
believe and do. 2 Samuel 23.16.
Even as David's three mighty men broke through the Host of the Philistims to
get to the Well of Bethlehem; so do you break through these and other
impediments and difficulties that lie in your way, that so at last arriving at
the Well of Truth, you may drink of the pleasant and wholesome streams that flow
therefrom, and be for ever satisfied.

FINIS.

